INVESTIGATIO Jurium Antiquorum, ET RATIONALIUM REGNI, SIVE Monarchiae Angliae,
In Magnis suis Conciliis, SEU PARLIAMENTIS: ET Regiminis, cum iisdem in suis
Principiis, optimi.

OR, A Vindication of the Government of the Kingdom of England under our Kings
and Monarchs, appointed by God, from the Opinion and Claim of those, that
without any Warrant or Ground of Law or Right Reason, the Laws of God and Man,
Nature and Nations, the Records, Annals and Histories of the Kingdom, would
have it to be originally derived from the People, or the King to be Coordinate
with his Houses of Peers and Commons in Parliament.

Per Fabianum Philipps J. C. Socium Medii Templi, London.

Jerome. c. 6. v. 16. State super vias Antiquas and inquirite veritatem.

The FIRST TOME.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Charles Broom at the
Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

VIRTUTE ET FIDE
Robert Harley of Bramton Castle in the County of Hereford Esqr.



To the Sacred Majesty of James the Second, King of great Britain, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
WHen the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (the greatest Ties and Obligations
that can be imposed upon the Generations of Mankind) have so little prevailed,
as that the giddy and mad-headed Multitude, prone to all wickedness, and evil
Examples, have under an Hypocritical pretense of Holiness; and Reformation of
that which was good, and needed it not, introduced an abundance of unclean
Spirits, and brought forth that which was altogether like their Tutors and
Masters of Impiety, and with great impudence, pertinacity, secret and subtle
contrivances after His late Majesty's happy Restoration, continued their
Machinations and Rebellious Principles until his Death, who notwithstanding his
great Clemency, and many Plots discovered by Gods mercy, by the continual
vigilance of his Guards with all the care that could be taken, was for a long
time hardly preserved from Assassination, which Villainies and Dangers consorted
so well with their Ambitions, and Envies, Rapines, Plunderings, Sequestrations,
Decimations, and pillaging of three Kingdoms, especially of England, besides
the sad account to be made of the Massacre in Ireland, destruction of many
Thousands in England with their Families and Estates, in the defense of your
Majesty's blessed Father the Martyr, with that horrid, and ever to be abhorred
Addition of his Murder, and the long continued Miseries, Calamities and
Troubles, put upon their Late Sovereign your Royal Brother, and your Majesty,
and the rest of the Royal ^rogeny, as they, or too many of them, or their
Seditious and Rebellious Party, may not improbably an thought only to watch or
enforce an opportunity of playing the same, or a worse game of Rebellion over
again, and if they can, to a more impious advantage, bed plant a sovereignty
inherent in the people, whom they intend to govern as arbitrarily and wickedly
as they had done before, which a lamentable many years Experience has taught
the people to believe it to be abundantly Tyrannical and Slavish enough to
those that were made so unhappy as to endure and Experiment it, which to
prevent, is, and should be certainly the duty of every good Subject and I over
of his King and Country.

In order whereunto, having made my Observations and Remarks, from the
Commencement of the grandest Rebellion that ever troubled and harassed England,
in the years 1640, 1641. until his present year of the Lord 1685, now the 83
year and an half of my yet (Deo gratias) vividae senectutis, many years before
for the most part written, and as well digested as many disturbances, and
worldly troubles would permit, which could notwithstanding never alienate or
withdraw my mind from those my first Enquiries or Observations; And my careful,
and I hope, industrious and impartial Recherches into the Original and true
power of Parliaments, will show how the Encroachments of a miselected House of
Commons therein, have since the Raigns of Qu. Elizabeth and K. James, made it
their principal and only business by Petions, Ungrateful Lurches, and Artifices
and catching Advantages of our Kings and Princes, necessarily enforced want of
Money, for the defense of themselves and their People, to undermine and bring
into an Anarchy, or Insulting Poliarchy, this your heretofore more flourishing
Monarchy, strongly built and founded upon the Feudal Laws, derived unto your
Majesty by and from your Royal Ancestors and Predecessors, from the British,
German, Saxon, Danish and Normans Feudal Laws and Customs, the best
Establishers and Supports of a truly (not counterfeit) Monarchick Regal
Government, and doubt not but that my Labors and Travel therein, with what
other Light and Confirmations may be justly added by such as will well Weigh
and Consider it, may truly Manifest and Prove the same, and without the
suspicion of an over-credulity, well believe that the Reverend Judges and Sages
of the Law (whom our Kings have Commanded and Ordained to be greatly
reverenced, administering Justice under you to your people, many of whom, and
the professors of the Law, pleading before them, were only Educated, and
practiced as Lawyers in the time of the late misguided Parliament,) might have
been easily misled by the Minores Gentium, the Lawyers and Officers pleading
or practicing in the Courts of Justice, by rejecting the Council of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Stare super vias Antiquas and inquirere Veritatem, which his
lamentations after their destruction, might have taught them after sooner to
have believed, and not to have the original of your Majesty's Government, to be
as Inscrutable as that of the River Nile, or to forget their Common Parent or
Original, as in many things to make or render our Laws to have no Resemblance
thereof, but to be quite contrary thereunto, or as some Children, in the
Stories or Tales of easily believing old Women changed in their Cradles; all
which should put every good Subject in mind neither to be ignorant of your
Rights, or negligent in the maintenance of them, it being of no small
concernment to your People, to preserve yours with as much care as their own,
being comprehended therein, and when he shall hear the Ship wherein his King
is, struggling with the rage and fury of the Winds and Seas, and every minute
like to be destroyed and swallowed up, ought to make have tenui sua Cymba, and
do all he can to relieve and preserve him, of what Judgment and Disposition
soever he be, though not at all under those great obligations, of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and of the bonds of gratitude, must exuere
humanitatem, that will not endeavor to rescue him, and in these my feeble, but
true hearted endeavors, found those that instead of saving the Ship, were only
careful to Sacrifice to their own designs, and divert and steer her from the
right Port of Monarchy, whilst they labored all they could to save her by
bringing her only into the Curses rather than Blessings of an Anarchy or
knavish self-enriching Poliarchy, and ruin all those that really and heartily
wishout any other ends than that of duty and endless Loyalty, came to help her;
and not by so many Plots and Conspacies against your Government and Monarchy,
and the lives of your Majesty and Royal Brother, give a far greater disturbance
thereunto than the unhappy severely punished Corah, Dathan, and Abiram did to
the Government of Moses and Aaron, who did but only murmr against them,
saying, Ye do take too much upon you, but did not plot or contrive Treasons,
Conspiracies or Rebellions against, or to Assassinate or Murder them; From all
which disturbances and troubles, that God will be pleased whilst you are on
Earth, enjoying a happy life amongst an unquiet (as unto too many of them)
never to be contented people to free your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors
shall (as it has ever been) be the prayers of

Your Majesty's always Constant and Obedient Subject FABIAN PHILIPPS.

THE PREFACE TO THE READERS.
THey that have read and duly considered, though but with an ordinary
compassion and sense of humanity, the dismal Effects of Wars, Rebellions and
Discords in Kingdoms and Republics, and the little gain more than a Sacrifice
to the Devil, and the Ambition, Revenge, Self-Interest, and the Ruin of
Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Families and Estates, might, if there had been no
other evidence, have clearly and lamentably seen it in those once very famous
Republics of Athens and Sparta in the Peleponesian Thucidides.
Wars, engaging most of the little Republics of Achaia to run the adventure
with them, and did in the conclusion bring them all together under the Tyranny
of the Ottoman Empire; in those also of the Merciless Proscriptions of Sylla
and Marius at Rome, and the bloody Pharsalian Fields or Battles fought betwixt
Julius Caesar and Pompey, too nearly allied to have made such a quarrel or
bustle to disturb so great a part of the World for Empire: that of the Guelphes
and Gibelines happening near about the time of our King John, when the Pope so
domineered over him, as he constrained him to do homage unto him for England
and Ireland, and pay him a then great yearly Tribute; that of our two great
contending Families in England, York and Lancaster, under the several Badges or
Liveries, of the White Rose and the Red, to the destruction of many of the
Nobility and Gentry taking their several parties, that of the German Wars
betwixt the Duke of Saxony and the Emperor Charles the 5th, that of the
Sicilian Vespers, that of the King of Spain and the Netherlands or united
Provinces of the Holy League in France, and the cruel Massacre of so many
thousand Protestants in Ireland, and that our Incomparable late Rebellion of
all the Rebellions the Devil had ever abused and Cheated a Nation withal, the
most hypocritical, horrid and abominable, and the just care that every pious
and good man ought to have of his King and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and the Blessings of God to attend his posterity, might cause them to make as
much have as the dumb Son of King Craesus did to save the life of the King, and
therein prevent the Ruin of his Country.

And therefore I may hope that a Minimus Apostolorum, one of the least
Professors of the Law, though of an ancient standing, may be permitted without
the reproach of Arrogance or scribbling quiddities or Impertinences, or
troubling the World with the Idea's of Plato, Aristotle, Solon, Licurgus or the
unquiet Commonwealth of Rome, until they were after the Experiments of diverse
sorts of Governments constrained to be more quiet and content with that of the
Empire and Monarchy or Theocracy ordained by God, be permitted to lay or bring
before the Reverend Judges and Sages of the Laws of England, and the Professors
and Students of the Laws therein, what may be found in the Records, Annals, and
approved Authors and Historians concerning the ancient Feudal and Monarchick
Government thereof, without any Additions, Omissions, wtested Interpretations,
Forgeries, Impostures, or the fond and often abused credulity of Monkish and
feigned lying Manuscripts, and may incite others to approve and like better of
it than they have done, that have to the hazard of their Estates in this World
and the World to come, done all that they could to pull in pieces that ancient
Government upon which all our Laws, reasonable Customs and Constitutions with
Remedies for public grievances have been built and founded, which Sir Edward
Coke has (before the dissolution of our Tenures in Capite, the Ligaments of
the Crown of England, and the nerves, sinews and strengths thereof, when he was
better pleased with his Sovereign) not unjustly called the Quintessence of all
Laws, expended very near 1000 l. Sterling in my labors and travails therein,
and other matters concerning the Government without any penny profit or
recompense either from or by the Stationers, or any others more than an
Employment as Deputy Comptroller of the Law Tax, wherein I endeavored all I
could to serve his late Majesty and the Farmers thereof, and may hope it was
acceptable when his Majesty not long before his departure out of this World,
was by his principal Secretary of State Sir Leoline Ienkins Knight, graciously
pleased to declare that he had a particular regard for me, and was sensible of
the many Services which I had done unto the Crown, which in the greatest of
truth, humility and modesty, I might have said was done by me one of the
smaller sort of the Atoms in his Kingdoms as an oblation of Duty, when besides
my no small loss and damage in the late horrid Rebellion I did adventure with
the late learned George Bate Dr. of Physic, and Mr. Nicholas Odeart sometimes
Secretary to Sir Edward Nicholas principal Secretary to the murdered King,
did, when the Rebels had refused to allow him in his own defense the assistance
of his own or any other Council learned in the Law, at that they falsely called
his Trial, and when the Intercession of the French and Dutch Ambassadors, the
Scots their Rebel partner Commissioners, and some of the London factious
Ministers could not prevail to rescue his sacred life, did with great danger
and hazard of our lives and Estates cause a small paper of Advice to be
secretly delivered unto him not to acknowledge any jurisdiction to be in their
highly wicked misnamed Court of Justice, never before heard of or made use of
in England or in any other Nation of the World. And I did also after that
wicked of wickedest sentence of death pronounced against my Sovereign, Write
and cause to be Printed and affixed upon the Posts and public places, in or
about the Cities of London and Westminster a Protestation in the name of all
the Loyal people of England against that most abominable sentence, and did
within a short time after Print and publish a Book in Justification and defense
of him, and the first as I believe that in print justly styled him a Martyr for
his people, with some assurance to my self, that our seri Nepotes some others
hereafter walking recto tramite in the like search and path of truth as I have
done, might add more assistance thereunto, and may be permitted to say, as St.
Paul in another case did of himself, that if I have had in so long an age and
perambulation of time any acquaintance or conversation at all with my self,
mine own heart and Actions, which many that have known me so long in my various
careful and sorrowful passages of life (occasioned by many the ingratitudes and
ill dealings of some great families and others that should have dealt better
with me in) may testify my always constant and adventurous Loyalty to my
Sovereigns, without any the least fainting or haesitation, will or may believe
that I have neither lied or sought for preferment, or any thing that could look
otherwise than the sincerity of my heart, and an unshaken and unbiassed love to
Truth and Loyalty to my King and Country.

And can truly say and aver with many witnesses to confirm it, that my long
observations ever since the year 1628. until now, completing almost full 46
years of the said persecutions, disloyalties, misusages, and sufferings of King
Charles the Martyr in order and design to his Murder, and the many Plots
afterward intended against his late Royal Majesty, King Charles the second,
and his now Sacred Majesty, and my Researches into the Records and Antiquities
of this and other Nations concerning the Just Rights and Praerogatives of our
Kings and Princes, for the public good, and the avoiding the manifold miseries
and damage that attend the Witchcraft and Madness of Rebellion, and to the end
that I might recall into the right way of truth those very many Noble, learned,
grave and pious men, that perfectly hated Rebellion and yet by fear or force
going along with the Tide to secure themselves and Estates as well as they
could, and with the Vulgus and Rabble that had cut the reformed Church of
England into no less than 160 Sects or new fashioned Religions, and so far
strayed from their Mother the reformed Church of England, as they ran out of
their Wits as much as their Religion, so that they could not stop themselves in
that their mad Career until they came to an opinion that it was Religion to be
Rebellious, and that Rebellion or Sedition for any thing called Religion was,
or at least ought to be warrantable by some or other word of God, when by his
new light they should be enabled to discover it, has given me, like old
Barzillai, no quiet until I had done my duty unto God, my King and my Country
and posterity, and brought what help I could unto our much injured and
persecuted David, in these now published Truths, wherein I have as carefully as
I could without the purchase of other men's Writings or Manuscripts at Auctions,
as too many our Lurching, yet Learned enough Authors have done, weighed all
particulars in the Balance of Truth, Law and Right Reason, and without any
opiniatrete have left my self to the Judicious thoroughly impartial Readers and
Tryers of those my carefully considered Labors, wherein I shall be willing to
rectify and submit to any truths, when justly and rationally proved, and be
ashamed in the least to imitate those impudent Contrariants of truth and Right
reason our Laws, Annals and Records, who although in their Books and Writings
against our ever maintainable truths, whilst they are in the acting and
perpetrating the greatest Injuries imaginable unto them, can offer to forsake
their evil Impostures, grounded Fancies and Opinions, yet can after they have
been publicly examined, tried and convicted of several gross Impostures and
falsifications by the undeniable evidence of the Records themselves, which they
cited and referred themselves unto, not like to those better men of Confessions
and Retractations, but being unwilling it seems either to perform their
promises to their Readers, or imitate the more honest examples of better men,
have thought it to be more correspondent unto their evil designs not to
discourage their Disciples to persist in their egregious falsehoods, and
unlearned, foolish, reasonless, senseless and inconsequential arguments,
because they have wickedly made it their Interest and business to advocate the
Devils cause by his and their evil Methods and Impostures. And may find that
they have by a Factious and Seditious Ignorance, and overbold adventure enticed
many good men and Lawyers out of the paths of truth into an horrid Confusion
and Rebellion, for which they may suffer in the next World, unless they can
furnish their gross mistakes with some invisible or misinterpreted Record that
every man may fancy, and frame a new and better Government of the Kingdom, and
carve and make his own Religion, and Idocize and propagate their own vain
imaginations and selflreated ignorant Fancies instead of Laws and Records. And
should do better to stand and consider that the advice of the Prophet Jeremy,
that should not be thought to have spoken vain, untrue or foolish Council, to
stand upon the old ways and enquire after the ways of truth, was not to do what
you can to blind or sophisticate truth, put her into disguises, and transform
her into as many shapes as may consort with the ugly designs of Faction and
Rebellion, and call to mind better than they do how diffusive and infectious
the sin of Rebellion is, that every of our evil Examples. Doctrines or
Persuasions tending thereunto, such an evil especially as Sedition or
Rebellion, are by God chargeable also upon their account. And that at the great
Audit before an all knowing God there will be a multitude of consequential
Evils besides their own particular sins, which may be enough charged upon them,
when it will be too late to say one unto another as St. Paul did to his
Innovators, O ye foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you?

And amongst those many motives and obligations of Duty and Loyalty, Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy to my Sovereign, and compassion unto those multitudes
that have erred and gone astray, to the end that I might give an account of the
trust reposed in me particularly, and solely by his late Majesty, under his
sign Manual, bearing date the 30th day of September, in the 28th year of his
Reign, with full power and Authority to search and take Copies of all or any
might be found concerning his Royal Rights, which was seconded by an order of
the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey then Lord Privy Seal, Mr. Henry
Coventry, and Sir Joseph Williamson, his then Secretaries of State, and Sir
George Carteret being all of his Majesty's Privy Council, who did by their
order dated the 3d. of July 1677. direct and authorize Sir William Dugdale,
since Garter King at Arms, Elias Asbmole Esquire, and my self in pursuance of
his Majesty's Order dated the 23. of February 1675. authorizing the aforesaid
Lords of his Council, to examine the State and Condition of the Records in the
Tower of London, and consider what is wanting and necessary to be done for the
prefervation thereof, Authorizing us to examine the present State and Condition
of the said Records, and peruse as well the Orders for regulating of the Orders
of the Keepers of the said office of Records, as the Orders made by Sir
Algernon May, Keeper of the said Records the first day of December then last
past, and to consider what additions and allowances they shall judge fit to be
made, either in the said Orders or Queries, or what otherwise occurs to them
fit to be offered for the better ordering, methodizing, preservation and safe
keeping of the said Records, and that they make report thereof unto us with all
convenient speed, and their opinion what is necessary to be done in order to
the attaining the ends asoresaid, in obedience whereunto Sir William Dugdale
and I have not only made a Certificate and report unto their Lordships what we
had done under our hands, but afterward at the aforesaid Office of the
Records, have given a meeting to some that were appointed by their Lordships,
and after that in the absence and sickness of the said Sir William Dugdale, by
the Command of the said Earl of Anglesey, I did attend his Lordship and the
Lord Chancellor, and diverse of the said Lords of his late Majesty's
Privy-Councel, to the said Office of Records in the Tower of London, those
Scrinia Sacra Publicae Tabulae which our Great Seldom faith is a Religio to
preserve, and the Commons in Parliament in the 42 year of the Reign of King
Edward the 3d petitioned to have a free access unto, because they contain the
peoples evidence, and might also have said their Kings and Princes Rights and
Power to protect them, and therefore to have them well looked unto and
preserved, must needs be an universal concernment both unto our Kings and their
People, and though here in England, in the time of our long and factious
Parliament Rebellions and Miseries, when I first began to search into the
Original of our before happy Government and continuance of our Laws, Peace and
Plenty, and the excellent frame and constitution of our Government founded upon
no other than the Feudal Laws, which, unto any that will take the pains to
peruse and examine them, will make it easily appear, that our British, Saxon,
Danish, and Norman Laws, and those of all our succeeding Kings and Princes, and
the Process, Proceedings, Maxims, Rules and Methods in and through all the
parts thereof, have until our late unfortunate, Factious and Seditious times,
and Parliament Rebellion (the tricks of Attorneys, unskilful Clerks, and
subordinate and corrupt Officers, since those times of unhappiness only
excepted) had no other source or fountain; and that the Civil and Caesarean
Laws being long ago accounted to be the universal reason of the World, are and
have been in their Patroni and Clientes near allied to our Feudal Laws, whereof
the learned Craguis wrote his Book de Feudis in the year 1655. applicable to
his own Country of Scotland, where they yet remain, notwithstanding our
unthrifty exchange of the Nerves and Ligaments of our Kings Crown and Dignity,
for an Excise upon Ale, Beer and Syder, would not permit me to stand still and
let my King and Country be destroyed by suffering our Feudal Laws, the basis
and foundation of our Government, to be drencht or washed in the River Lethe, or
lake of Oblivion, or the wild Boars and Foxes to destroy and lay wast, and
cause our once flourishing Kingdom under the Guard and protection of those
Laws, to be more transformed and abused than many of the sacred Laws of God,
given to his once beloved people of the Jews have been by their Masorites, when
they had a better excuse and Apology to make by their captivity of seventy
years in Babylon, until they had forgotten the language in which their Laws
were written, than our Gentlemen of Innovation or Reformation, as it has been
Nicknamed or miscalled of Good into Bad, or Better into Worse for their own
only advantage here upon earth, happen what will when they shall be able to
attain unto or provide for themselves.

And in these my Labors and impartial observations, with no little danger and
sorrow to see my King and Country so ill used, have been as tender as the res
Acta, or matters related or inquired into, would permit without praeprejudice
or hurt unto the truth, or my Loyalty unto my Sovereign, with all due Reverence
unto the Judges, many or the most of whom, when the fire of that Rebellion
which had lain kindling and smoking in its Embrio's in the years 1637, 1638,
1639, and 1640. began every where almost discernably to flame, and be very
apparent and visible, were either then in prima Lanugine, or had but scarcely
saluted the Ostia or Limina Legum, stepped over the Treshold or Door of it, as
the vulgar term it, and intend as I have never failed to do, not only to do,
but write and speak of them with all Reverence becoming me, and all others
according to the Reason and Rule which the great and prudent Prince King Edward
the first ordained, when he declared in these words, Et quia sunt honor and
Reverentia quae ministris ipsius Regis ratione officii sui fiant ipsi Regi
attribuuntur, sic dedecus ministris suis eidem domino Regi infertur, Regale
Necessarium per Fabian Philipps.
and in my Relations concerning that high and very honorable, very useful and
profitable for the weal public Houses of Parliament no man should think
Plowdens Commentum.
or speak dishonourably so long as they permit Parliaments to be what
Parliaments, according to their right use and Institution were, nor ought to be
no more than Colloquium or Commune Concilium, as may be further evidenced by
that great Princes severe punishment of Fabian Philipps Regale Necessarium etc.
Mich. 18. E. 3. coram R^gt.
that great Baron William de Breause for contumelious words spoken to a Judge.

And King Edward the 3d had such a care of his Justices and their authority, as
he punished severely the Bailiffs of Ipswich by the loss of their places,
caused their Staves of Office to be broken in the Court of Kings Bench, and
their Liberties to be seized and forfeited because they had suffered an unruly
multitude to feast and revel with certain malefactors, who had Mich. 19. E. 3.
coram Rege To. 161.
been there condemned by the Justices of Assise, and after their departure made
a kind of mockgame or interlude to be Acted upon the Tribunal, where the Judges
had sitten, and in mockery fined and amerced the Justices and their Clerks.

And for that I would willingly be, as much as I could, Instrumental to recall a
factious, seditious and Rebellious party out of their Errors, that they may
neither persist therein themselves, or by erecting Schools of rebellion magnify
and think themselves to be no small persons in the propagation thereof, and in
those my travails not having the help as the learned Dr. Brady has had of the
public Libraries of the University and Collegiate Libraries of the University
of Cambridge, but of such Assistance as his Majesty's and the public Records
of the Kingdom, unto which for more than 45 years I have been no Stranger, and
my own private Library could afford me, wherein I cannot be without hope but
something considerable may appear in my Labors that do not in his, but walking
together in the inquiries after our Fundamental Laws have not contradicted, but
concurred with each other in the Rescue and discovery of the truth of our
Ancient and excellent Government, and that which I have done might have been
more exact if I had not by the no small disturbances of my own affairs and the
common Falsehoods and Delays of most of the Printers been greatly hindered, so as
I was in some part thereof to endure the disadvantage of writing as the
Printing Press went, and therein also could not escape several discouragements,
and can, as Livy that grand Historian of the Roman Empire has truly said of
his Enterprise, that it was res magna and Ardua, with great sincerity say with
the learned Bracton, perpetuae memoriae commendium postulans a Lectore ut
diligenter legate and been Bracton in pro^^io.
consideret, and si quid super fluum aut perperam in hac opere invenerit illud
corrigat aut emendet cum omnia habere in memoria; Et in nullo peccare divinum
sit potuis quam humanum. And with the learned Dr. Barlow Bishop of Lincoln to
the like purpose as unto what he wrote against the Church of Rome, that if he
had miscited or quoted, added or omitted any thing or matter willingly against
the truth, (Errors of misinterpretation or definition and of the Printers only
excepted) I shall be willing to reform any humane frailties or frrors of that
kind that shall so appear unto any considerate impartial Reader that do not
read it here and there a little, running over as the Irish do their Bogs, or as
some others do after dinner and in afternoons Nap or Slumber, or by Indexes, so
as I may not prejudice that grand truth concerning the Just Rights of the
Imperial Crown of England, and the Doctrine of the reformed Church of England
against all the Engines of Rebellion, Falsities, Cavillations and Impostures
that have been made use of against it and all their Loyal and Learned
Propugnators that have done so worthily in our Israel to defend them.

Wherein if any shall object and think I have been too copious, and fewer words
and more labor might have been spared, they that have been conversant with
Books or the learned, or be themselves learned, should know that a little may
be enough to some when a great deal will not be so for others, especially where
the Arch Enemy of Mankind has sown and planted Weeds, such as Henbane and
Night Shade in our G(...) dens amongst our wholesome Herbs and Flowers, the
Lillies of the Valleys, and the Roses of Sha^on, which will require much time
and labor, and more than a few words to eradicate or pull them up, or a few
most clear demonstrations to a numerous party, the more is the pity, that for
the space of almost Fifty years last past have been strangely effascinated and
infatuated, and yet like well of it, because they have enriched themselves by
turning Religion into Rebellion, and Rebellion into a part of that which never
was any part of Religion, extravagant Religion is now made Liberty, and Liberty
and Religion too much turned into Rebellion.

And our Laws and long approved good Monarchick Government, having by a
seditious party of Rebels abusing the Right power and use of Parliaments
diverted our Ancient, Just and True Laws out of their proper course and channel
wherein they had blessed both our Kings and their People, I am not unlike to
escape the rash or envious censure of some that either have not read thoroughly
as they ought, or misread, or not understood our genuine, proper and true Laws,
therefore should be content with the duty of those that have made it their
endeavor either to vindicate the Rights of their King, or relieve a too much
neglected unvalued truth, and be as much blamed as the Bishop Elect of
Winchester was in the time of the troubles and Imprisonment of King Henry the
3d. by some of his overgrown Nobility, when they wrote unto the Pope as
bitterly as they could against him for maintaining the justice of his Kings
cause, and when it may be heard of or read by some of our long missed Lawyers
that have for almost 50 years been suckled or nursed up in a contrary practice,
may take it to be a bet ter way, and more agreeable to their genuine, at least
Additament. Mat, Paris. and Dr. Brady in Histor. H. 3. in Appendix 221. and 222.
to their profit and humor of the present times to do as Demetrius the Silver
smith did unto St. Paul's Doctrine, rather cavil and say something against it to
no purpose then any thing concerning truth or cogent Arguments yet it must be
adventured with a melioraspero, and that the errors and mistakes of too many of
our men of Law, and others may no longer as it were successively afflict our
Nation, that the subjects may learn, understand and practice the duty of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and not be so much out of their w^es as to believe
that there ever was a Treason committed by a King or Emperor against their
people, or that the Members of the House of Commons in (...) proceeding beyond
their Limits, and the King (...) ^oples Commission, ought to be accounted the
reasion of the People, but that so many Advocates and Lawyers as England is and
has been abundantly replenished with, should rather make it their business
strongly upon all occasions to defend their ^ings Rights, which every man would
expect of his stipended Lawyer, as the Advocates of other Kingdoms never failed
to do.

Or can any man adventure to say or think, that the All-knowing Never-erring
God did not intend to keep his word, but made one Vicegerent after that he had
made, or promised it unto another, or ever made the Common People his
Vicegerent, or any King, or Prince subject to their ignorances, mutabilities
and Passions to be Arraigned and Murdered when they pleased at the suit of the
People for Treason committed against them, or if any Nation, Record or History
did or could ever furnish out such an example, when the Murder of our Prince
did so stink, and was more than ordinarily abhorred and detestable, as besides
many learned men in Foreign parts, publicly writing and declaiming against it
the Czars or Czar of that great Empire of Russia or Moscovia were so sensible
of it, as he banished and seized many of the English Merchants, and their goods
and effects to the ruin of many of them, for no other cause than that as he
said they had been Traitors unto their King, and had Murdered him, though they
were then men of great Loyalty, and were not then Resident in England, and see,
and read Milton over much learned in the School of his Master the Devil, and
our infatuated Regicides publishing in print in our own and some Foreign
Nations, a never to be believed or proved justification of the Murder of their
most Pious Prince, sub forma and sigura judicii, and no English men, but the
Learned and Loyal Dr George Bate and my self with our names subscribed, and
another without publicly vindicated his worth and innocence, and not a Lawyer,
or man of the militia togata could find either a conscience or care calamum
e^igere to defend the honor of their King and Country, when they were bound
by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy not to have omitted it, when as
Advocati they should as Linwood has told them in the case of an ordinary
Client, tanquam Athletae in Campo justitio pugnare, and not stand still and
hearall our Neighbor Christians speak of such a villainous Murder with horror
and detestation, and the learned Zeiglerus a Forreigner besides Salmasius, who
had never taken our Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, have publicly declared
against, it.

And do hope that our learned Lawyers of England who were not before our now
almost fifty years Parliamentary Rebellion willing to be outdone or believed to
be less learned in omni scibili, or matter of learning in the Laws of their own
or other Nations, (witness our Great Seldom and many others) will not suffer
our Laws which want nothing to illustrate their very ancient original, to be so
lost and eclipsed, as there will be nothing of our Fundamental Laws left to
furnish their practice in the Temples and Courts of Justice, than such
fragments as the Attorneys Seminaries shall be pleased to furnish them withal
when they have squeezed the profit into their own advantages of all manner of
Champerties and Ambodextryes, by clipping our venerable, just and ancient Laws
into such parcels as may seem most for their wicked and reasonless advantages,
and should be more than praemunired, and not to be reckoned much less peccant
than the Clippers of Caesar's Coin or Image, or false Foreign Coin introduced
into the Kingdom, in their daring to attempt to vitiate or violate their Kings
Laws, and suffer Milton that understood no more of our Laws of England, than
that which he had purposely Metamorphosed to delude a silly part of the People,
or Rabsheka it, defie^ the Host of Israel; and John Goodwin a factious Minister
with his Flambeau or Torch in the Pulpit, to entice all that could be so mad as
to believe them, that King Charles the Martyr was justly accused, condemned and
beheaded at the suit of a few infatuated Rebels, and so many men of the long
Robe not have Loyalty, care or Conscience enough to hasten to the brook to find
some stones to sling at, and convince those or any of their Goliahs, or hear a
Judge deservedly displaced by his late Majesty King Charles the 2d. declare in
the Court of Kings Bench, tell not us of old Records and Antiquities, but of
the Law or Practice in or since 1641. And a Bencher of an Inns of Court
persuades himself that he had hit the mark, when he had said that Antiquities
were no more to be valued than old Iron picked up out of the Channel in London
Streets, and sold for a penny in the pound.

And Mr. Milton that would have all men have a liberty to be divorced from
their Wives as much as himself was from true Learning and Reason, having done
all and more than he could to blast and disparage that most excellent Pious
Prince King Charles the Martyr, and make his ever to be accursed Murder to be
according to the Laws of England, could not forbear persecuting his Manes,
whilst he magnified the Populum Anglicanum, when all men had abhorred it, and
Bedingfield and Chresheld had voluntarily laid down their Commissions, and
forsook their Offices and places of Judges, and the greatest Rebellion did ride
in its triumphant Chair, shall the Gentlemen of the long Robe, who might be
very able to do, and should be well acquainted with all manner of Learning, be
so little concerned in it as to leave two Doctors of Physic to do what they
could themselves, for there were a Lion in the way, whilst Mr. Milton cried out
as Tully in another case, O fortunate nate me Consulo Roma.

And it would be a pity that so many Learned People in England, of several
conditions, should not rightly understand the Constitutions and Government
thereof, but be so much mistaken as to believe they are honest and Loyal enough
if they can but get what they can from their King, and sacrifice it to their
humors, when the fear of God, and right understanding of our Laws may teach
us, that our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy do signify much more than the
ordinary Oaths of the smaller sort of the common people, who have as little wit
as Estate, and a great deal less of Religion, and that our Laws from Age to Age
have resided in our Kings, who have always been accounted to be tanquam Lex
viva.

Could there be so great a thirst after learning and honor, and esteem for it
gained, could the Queen of Sheba travel so far to hear the Wisdom of Solomon,
and Pythagoras to hear Plato, Philip of Macedon give his Gods thanks that he
had found out such a Tutor as Aristotle for his Son Alexander? have men of
learning, and richer Souls than ordinary been invited and gladly welcomed into
other Cities and Countries, as our King Alfred did Asser Menevensis, Edward the
First, Accursius, and our King James the First, the generally learned Causabon,
Peter du Moulin, and Gerardus Vossius; and believed it to be a great part of
their honor and glory to be the Incouragers of learning and virtue? Tacitus
says, that amongst the Romans, the Sons of Nobility did dare operam Studiis
liberalibus; The Emperor Valence appointed for the public Library at
Constantinople Dr. Stillingfleets Origines Brittannicae.
seven Antiquaries to look after the Books, four for the Greek, and three for
the Latin who were to have a public allowance; and must we that may stand
upon our Forefathers Shoulders, and may with great ease do rather greater than
lesser matters not be ashamed to be Children of yesterday, when they that have
arrived but unto a small parcel of learning, must in spite of their Teeth
acknowledge that experience is commonly upon earth one of the most trustiest
guides, and neglected the Mistress of Fools when posterior dies should never
fail to be discipulus prioris, and it can portend no less than a sad fatality,
and ruin to a Nation to have learning put under no better a Character than that
of a Fop, or a grave thinking Coxcomb, when a Knave, though a Fool, is believed
to be a Man of Parts and Ingenuity, and an honest man, a simple fellow, or an
Ass fit only to be banged or rid upon, and whilst we mourn and lament with the
Prophet Jeremiah, the forecasted ruin of our Jerusalem, and with our long ago
Gildas the Excidium Britanniae, should cease to pour contempt upon our Kings
and Princes, and not cause them to wander in the Wilderness where there is no
way, but offer up our daily Prayers unto God to send help to our Jacob in all
his many difficulties.

Elenchus Capitum, OR, THE CONTENTS Of the Sections or Chapters.
. 1. THat our Kings of England in their voluntary summoning to their Great
Councils and Parliaments some of the more, Wise, Noble and Better part of their
Subjects, to give their Advice and Consent in matters touching the public good
and extraordinary concernment, did not thereby create or by any Assent, express
or tacit give unto them an Authority, Coordination Equality or share in the
Legislative power, or were elected by them. page 1. 2. Of the Indignities,
Troubles and Necessities which were put upon King John in the enforcing of his
Charters, by the Pope, and his then domineering Clergy of England joined with
the Disobedience and Rebellion of some of the Barons encouraged and assisted by
them. p. 7. 3. Of the succeeding Iealousies, Animosities, Troubles and
Contests, betwixt King John and his over-jealous Barons, after the granting of
his Charters and his other transactions and agreements with them at their
tumultuous meeting at Running Mede, with the ill usages which he had before
received of them during all the time of his Reign. p. 26. 4. The many Affronts,
Insolences and ill Usages suffered by King Henry 3. until the granting of his
Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta. p. 29. 5. Of the continued unhappy
Jealousies, Troubles and Discords betwixt the Discontented and Ambitious
Barons, and King Henry 3. after the granting of his Magna Charta, and Charta de
Foresta. p. 36.. 6. That the Exceptions mentioned in the King of France's Award
of the Charter granted by King John could not invalidate the whole Award or
justify the provisions made at Oxford, which was the principal matter referred
unto him. p. 58. 7. Of the evil Actions and Proceedings of Simon de Montfort
and his Rebellious partners in the name of the King, whilst they kept him and
his Son Prince Edward, and diverse of the Loyal Nobility Prisoners, from the
14th of May in the 48th year of his Reign until his and their delivery by the
more fortunate Battle at Evesham, the ^th day of August in the 49th year of his
tormented Reign. p. 66. 8. Of the Actions of the Prince after his Escape, his
success at the Battle of Evesham, Release of the King his Father, and restoring
him to his Rights. p. 98. 9. Of the proceedings of King Henry 3. after his
Release and Restoration until his death. p. 100. 10. That these new contrived
Writs of Summons made by undue means upon such a disturbed occasion, could
neither obtain a proper or quiet sitting in Parliament, or the pretended ends
and purposes of the Framers thereof, and that such an hasty and undigested
constitution could never be intended to erect a third Estate in the Kingdom
equal in power with the King and his great Council, the House of Peers or
consistent with the pretended Conservatorships, or to be coordinate with the
King and his Great Council of Peers, or to be a Curb to any of them, or
themselves, or upon any other design than to procure some money to wade through
that their dangerous Success. p. 108. 11. Of the great Power, Authority,
Command and Influence which the Praelates, Barons and Nobility of England had
in or about the 49th year of the Reign of King Henry 3. when he was a Prisoner
to Simon Montfort ^d these Writs of Election of some of the Commons to
Parliament were first devised and sent to summon them. And the great power and
Estate which they afterward had to create and contain an Influence upon them.
p. 122. 12. That the aforesaid Writ of Summons made in that Kings name to elect
a certain number of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses and the probos homines,
good and honest men, or Barons of the Cinque Ports to appear for, or represent
some part of the Commons of England in Parliament, being enforced from King
Henry 3. in the 48th and 49th year of his Reign when he was a Prisoner to Simon
de Montfort Earl of Leicester, and under the power of him and his party of
Rebellious Barons, was never before used in any Wittenagemots Mikel-gemots or
great Councels of our Kings or Princes of England p. 147. 13. That the Majores
Barons Regni, and Spiritual and Temporal Lords with their Assistants, were
until the 49th year of the Reign of King Henry 3. and the constrained Writs
issued out for the election of Knights Citizens and Burgesses whilst he was a
Prisoner in the Camp or Army of his Rebellious Subjects, the only great
Councels of our Kngs. p. 151. 14. That these enforced Writs of Summons to the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, accompanied with that then newly devised Engine
or Writ to Elect Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to be present in Parliament,
were not in the usual and accustomed form, for the summoning the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal to the Parliament. p. 204. 15. That the Majores Barons,
or better sort of the Tenants in Capite, Justly and Legally by some of our
Ancient Kings and Princes, but not by any positive Law that of the enforced
Charter from King John at Running Mede, being not accounted to be such a Law)
were distinguished and separated from the Minores or lesser sort of the Tenants
in Capite. p. 207. 16. That the General Councels or Courts mentioned before the
Rebellious meeting of some of the English Baronage, and the constraint put upon
King John at Running Mede, or before the 49th of Henry 3. were not the Magna
Consilia, or generale Consilium, Colloquium, or Communia Consilia, now called
Parliaments, (wherein some of the Commons as Tenants in Capite were admitted)
but only truly and properly Curiae Militum, a Court summoning those that hold
of the King in Capite to acknowledge Record, and perform their Services, do
their Homage, and pay their Releifs, etc. And the Writ of summons mentied in
the Close Rolls of the 15th year of the Reign of King John. was not then for
the summoning of a great Council or Parliament, but for other purposes, viz.
Military Aids and Offices. p. 218. 17. That the Comites or Earls have in
Parliament or out of Parliament, Power to compel their Kings or Sovereign
Princes to yield unto their ^onsults, Votes or Advices, will make them like the
Spartan Ephori, and amount to no more than a Conclusion without praemisses, or
any thing of Truth, Law or Right Reason to support it. p. 229.. 18. Of the
methods and courses which King Edward the first held and took in the
Reformation and Cure of the former State, Diseases and Distempers. p. 286.. 19.
That the Sheriffs are by the Tenor and Command of the Writs for the Elections
of the Knights of the Shires, and Burgesses of the Parliament Cities and
Burrough-Towns, the only Judges under the King, who are fit and unfit to be
Members in the House of Commons in Parliament, and that the Freeholders and
Burgesses more than by a just and impartial Assent and Information, who were
the fittest, were not to be the Electors. p. 371.. 20. Of the small numbers of
Knights of the Shires and Burgesses, which were Elected and came in the Reign
of King Edward the first, upon his aforesaid Writs of Election; and how their
numbers now amounting unto very many more, were after increased by the
corruption of Sheriffs, and the Ambition of such as desired to be Elected. p.
382.. 21. Who made themselves Electors for the choosing of Knights of the Shires
to be Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, after the 21st year of the
Reign of King Edward the first contrary to the Tenor of his aforesaid Writs of
Summo(...) made in the 22 year of his Reign, for the Election of Knights of the
Shire, and Burgesses to come to the Parliaments and great Councils of several
of our Kings and Princes afterward. p. 387.. 22. Of the Actions and other
Requisites by the Law to be done by those that are or shall be Elected Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to attend our King in their great Councils or
Parliaments, praecedent and praeparatory to their admission therein. p. 388..
23. That the Members of the House of Commons being Elected and come to the
Parliament as aforesaid, did not by virtue of those Writs of Election sit
together with the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in one and the same
Room or Place; and that if any such thing were, as it never was or is likely to
be proved, it cannot conclude or infer that they were or are coordinate, or
had, or have an equal power in their Suffrages and Decisions. p. 393.. 24. What
the Clause in the Writs for the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to
come unto the Parliament, ad faciendum and consentiendum do properly signify,
and were intended by the said Writs of (...) to be Members of the House of
Cowmons in Parliament. p. 398.. 25. Of the many variations and alterations of
our Kings Writs of Summons to their great Councels or Parliaments, excluding
some, and taking in others to be assistant in that high and Honorable Court,
with its Resummons, Revisions, drawing of Acts of Parliament, or Statutes die
the Judges, or the Kings learned Council in the Laws, and other Requisites
therein necessarily used by the sole and individual authority of our Kings and
Princes. p. 411.. 26. What is meant by the word Representing, or if all, or how
many of the people of England and Wales, are or have been in the Elections of a
part of the Commons to come to Parliament Represented. p 548.. 27. That no
Impeachment by all or any of the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament,
or of the House of Peers in Parliament, has, or ever had any authority to
invalidate, hinder, or take away the power, force, or effect of any the pardons
of our Kings or Princes, by their Letters Patents, or otherwise for High
Treason, or Felony, Breach of the Peace, or any other crime or supposed
Delinquency whatsoever. p. 573.. 28. Of the protection and privilege granted
unto the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, by our Sovereign Kings
and ^rinces, during their Attendance and Employments in their great Councils of
Parliament according to the Tenor and purport of their Commissions. p. 607..
29. Neither they claim, or ever were invested by any Charter or Grant of any of
our Kings or Princes, or otherwise of any such Privilege or Liberty, nor was,
or is in England any Law, or Usage, or Custom, that a Parliament sitting cannot
be Prorogued or Dissolved as long as any Petition therein exhibited remains
unanswered, or not determined. p. 633.. 30. That in those Affairs peculiar only
to so great and venerable an Assembly, which should not be trivial or proper to
lower and lesser Jurisdictions, assigned for the determining of lesser matters
for the public ease and benefit, our Kings and Princes have a greater burden
and care upon them as Gods Vicegerents, besides that of Parliaments, to manage
and take care of the Kingdom, for the benefit and good of themselves and their
people. p. 637.. 31. That our Great Councils or Parliaments, except anciently
at the three great Festivals, viz. Christmas, Easter and Pentecost, being ex
more summoned and called upon extraordinary emergent occasions, could not
either at those grand and chargeable Festivals, or upon necessities of State or
Public Weal and preservation ex natura rei continue long, but necessarily
required Prorogations, Adjournments, Dissolutions or endings. p. 641.. 32. That
Parliaments or Great Councels de quibusdam arduis concerning the defense of the
Kingdom and Church of Enggland, neither were or can be fixed to be once in
every year or oftener, they being always understood and believed to be by the
Laws, and Ancient, and reasonable Customs of England ad libitum Regis, who by
our Laws, Right Reason, and all our Records and Annals, is and should be the
only Watchman of our Israel, and the only Judge of the necessity, times and
occasion of Summoning Parliaments. p. 650.. 33. That all or any of the Members
of the House of Commons in Parliament are not properly, or by their original
constitution intended, or otherwise entitled, or properly, truly, justly
lawfully seized, or to be styled or termed Estates; neither are to be so
understood or believed to be; and being to be no otherwise than subject to a
Temporary Election, and by the Authority of their Kings Writs paid their Wages
and Charges, by those that sent and elected them, can have no Just or Legal
Right thereunto. p. 656. 34. A Series or account of the many Seditions,
Rebellions and Discords that have successively happened since the beginning of
the Reign of King Henry 2. to our succeeding Kings and Princes until this
present Age wherein we now live, by mistaken and never to be warranted
principles. p. 717.
A Vindication of the Ancient and Present Established Government of the Kingdom
of ENGLAND under our Kings and Monarchs appointed by GOD, from the Opinion and
Claim of those that without any Warrant or ground of Law, or Right Reason, the
Laws of God and Man, Nature and Nations, and the Records thereof, would have it
to be Originally derived from the People, Coordinate with the Houses of Peers
and Commons in Parliament, or by their Election.

SECT. I.
That our KINGS of ENGLAND in their voluntary Summoning to their Great Councels
and PARLIAMENTS some of the more Wise, Noble and better part of their Subjects,
to give their Advice and Consent in Matters touching the Public Good, and
Extraordinary Concernment, did not thereby Create, Or by any Assent, Express or
Tacit, give unto Them an Authority, Co-ordination, Equality or Share in the
Legislative Power, or were Elected by Them.

THe Laws of GOD, Nature and Nations, our Laws of England, and the Records
thereof, (no Strangers at all unto them, but much in League and Friendship with
them) did never deny our Kings and Princes to make use of the Councels and
Advice of such of their Subjects, as were fit and able to give it.

Nor did any of our Kings, by such applications unto their Subjects for their
advice and councels, either in general, or particular, common, public, or
private Councels, or any of their Laws, Grants, Charters or Customs, ever allow
them any coordinate or equal Authority with Them, or over any of their
Actions, in the giving of their Approbation, Advice, or Consent; Or otherwise,
if we may believe (as we ought) those Records and Accounts which the World, and
its aged Companion, TIME, have from their Infancies left, and recommended unto
us: no such Liberties, Customs, or Privileges at all ever appearing to have
been granted, or of right appertaining unto them, by any Warrant, Foundation,
Law, Act of Parliament, Reason, Prescription or Custom.

In the time of our Ancestors the Britains, Dr. Duck De authoritate Juris
Civilis Romanorum Lib. 2. Spelman. Conal 35. c. 8. Sect. 14. and 16. Chronicon
Io. Brompton 956. Seldom Dissert. ad Fletam, c. 4. sect. 4.
Qui Legibus Romany, (not of the Senate, but the Emperors) Caesareis, seu
imperialibus, paruerunt quamdiu sub Imperio Romano; which Mr. Seldom has
asserted to have continued 360 years, or thereabouts, from the time of Claudius
the Emperor, to that of Honorius; and that Severus the Emperor kept his Court
for several years at York, where Papinian, that great and famous Lawyer, sat
Praetor, or Lord Chief Justice, under him.

Which could not but introduce much of their Laws and Usages amongst us, and
the near succeeding Ages were so unwilling to part with them, as they would
never after be altogether Strangers unto them; Sir J. Spelman de vita Aelfredi
Regis 8. and R. Ep. Chal^edon. Nich. Smith appendix 190. and doctissimae Annot.
in lib. ejusdem John Spelman 6.
For King Aethelulph traveled with his Son Aelfred to Rome, and Aelfred,
whilst he was there, and likewise after his return, and being King, Librorum
omnium notitiam habebat, says William of Malmsbury; and was very learned, as
Asser Menevensis, who was his Contemporary, and privy to most of his Actions,
and Hoveden, and Ingulsus, have recorded it to Posterity; Plurimam partem
Romanae Bibliothecae Anglorum auribus dedit. And Offa King of the Mercians had
in the year of Christ 790. before the time of Aethelulph, sounded, erected and
maintained in Rome a Schola Saxonica, which could not be either constituted or
continued, without some Commerce with the Latian Language and Laws: the one
being likely to be an effectual means to convey the other, and by a constant
intercourse continue the course and knowledge of some part of these Laws and
Customs in England.

Or in any of those Laws which Dunwallo Molmucius, cujus Leges Molmucianae
dicebantur, ordained.

Or in those which Mercia Regina, Britonum Uxor Gurtheli a qua Provincia
Merciorum, containing Gloucester shire and seven other Counties, putatur
denominata edit, as an authentic Historian says, discretione and justitia
plenas quae Lex mercia dicebatur.

Of King Ethelbert, Chronicon J. Brompton 788.
Circa annum salutis 588, or 613. qui sub Heptarchia Saxonum, (as venerable Bede relates it) decreta judieiorum inter subditos suos juxta exempla
Romanorum, Consilio sapientum constituit, and decreta judiciorum scribi fecit
genti suae.

Et sub Saxonibus, and Danis, Dr. Duck lib. 2. c. 8. sect. 14. and 16.
quamvis pauciora Legum Romanorum vestigia reperiamus. The learned Dr. Duck,
seconded by Dr. Langham, in observationibus de antiquitatibus and legibus
Romanorum in Britannia exercitatissimus, have not indiligently noted, constabit
tamen Reges eorum qui reliquis pietate, virtute, and gloriae cupiditate
praecelluerunt in judiciis, and jure dicundo inter subditos suos ad exempla
Romanorum saepius se composuisse.

In the Laws of King LL Inae Reg. in legib. Saxon per Ab. Whelock and W.
Lambard, Latin. reddit.
Ina, who, about the year 712 after the Redemption of Mankind, suesu and
instituto Cenradi Patris sui Heddae and Erkenwaldi Episcoporum suorum, omnium
Senatorum suorum, and natu majorum and sapientum populi sui in magna servorum
Dei frequentia: commanded, ut justa judicia per omnem ditionem suam fundita
stabilitaque sint, at que ut nulli liceat in posterum Senatori Chronic. Joh.
Brompton, 700.
sive alteri cuivis in ditione sua degenti sua antiquare judicia and
institutiones sive Leges genti suae condidit solempnes.

Of King Alured, LL Alluredi Regis.
who about the year 871. prudentissimorum e suis consilio, declaring that many
of the Laws of his Ancestors, quae sibi minus commoda videbantur ex consulto
sapientum partim antiquanda partim innovanda curavit, and quaecunque in actis
Inae gentilis sui Offae Merciorum, Regis vel Ethelbert (qui primus Anglorum
sacrotinctus est Baptismato) observatu digna deprehensus fuit, ea collegit
omnia, reliqua plane omisit, atque in istis discernendis prudentis simorum e
suis consilio usus atque iis omnibus placuit editi eorum observationes.

Or in the League made betwixt King Alured and Guthrun the Dane, or afterward
betwixt King Edward and Guthrum, a sapientibus recitata sepius atque ad
commodum and Regni utilitatem aucta and amplificata.

Or in or by any of the Books, if they were extant, and now to be seen, said to
have been collected and written by that great King, viz. Breviarium Balaeus and
J^. Spelm. de vita Aelfredi Regis 166.
quoddam collectum ex Legibus Trojanorum, Graecorum, Britannorum, Saxonorum,
and Danorum. 2o. Visi Saxonum Leges. 3o. Instituta quaedam. 4o. Contra judices
iniquos. 5o. Dicta sapientum. 6o. Acta Magistratum. 7o. Collectiones
Chronicorum.

Or by the Laws of King Edward, LL Edward^ Regis.
about the year 900. where iis omnibus qui Reip. praesunt etiam atque etiam
mandavit ut omnibus quoad ejus facere poterint aequos se praebeant judices,
perinde ut in judiciali libro scriptum habetur, nec quicquid formident jus
commune audacter libereque dicant, ac litibus singulis dies quibus dijudicentur
condictos statuit.

Of King Athelstan, LL Aethelstani Regis.
about the year 924. (the Heptarchy being then reduced to its pristine estate
of Monarchy) Consilio Ulfhelmi, Archiepiscopi aliorumque Episcoporum, and
servorum Dei.

Or in his Laws not long before made in a Council held at Exeter, where he was,
as they mention, sapientibus stipatus.

Of King Edmond, LL Edmunds Regis
made in a Council at London, about the year 940. tam Ecclesiasticorum, quam
Laicorum, cui interfuerunt Oda and Wolstanus Archipraesul, plurimique alii
Episcopi.

Or in or by the first written Laws of the Britains, Dr. Duck de authorit.
Iuris civilis Romans li. 2. c 8. sect. 16. n Sammes Brit* Antiq. i^^str. 100,
101, 102, 103.
about the same time, in the Reign of their King Howel Dha, styled the Good,
(the Bards and Druids, Sammes Brit* Antiq. i^^str. 100, 101, 102, 103.
men of great veneration, power and esteem amongst them, not before
recommending to posterity, or committing to writing any of their Laws, Customs
or Memorials) qui convocati Episcopis and Laicis doctissimis Leges antiquas
correxit and novas condidit.

Or in the Laws which King Eldred Jo. Spelman in vita Aelfredi, 124. ex Ingulfo
made about the year 948. in festo nativitatis beatae Mariae, when universi
magnates Regni, per Regium edictum summoniti tam Archiepiscopi totius Regni
quam proceres, and optimates Londoniis convenerunt ad tractandum de negotiis
publicis totius Regni.

Of King Edgar, LL Edgari Regis Cook in Praefat 4. relat.
who about the year 959. (favente Dei gratia) not of the People, stiling
himself totius Angliae (...) and Imperator, frequenti lenatu proposuit leges
populo servandas.

Of K. Ethelred, LL Ethelredi Regis.
about the year 980. made sapientum consilio.

Or in the Senatur consultum, Agreement, or League, made between him and the
monticuli Walliae, or men of the mountainous parts of Wales, Angliae
sapientibus, and Walliae consiliariis.

Of or by the Laws of King Canutus, LL Canuti R
constituted about the year 1018. ex sapientum consilio.

Of King Edward the LL Edwardi Reg. Confess.
Confessor, who reigning about the year 1042. and stiling himself Monarcha and
Vicarius summi Regis, collected out of the Mulmucian, Mercian, Saxon, and
Danish Laws, and other reasonable Customs used until his time, ordained Laws,
concilio Baronum Angliae, and Leges 68 annis sopitas excitavit, excitatas
reparvit, reparatas decoravit, deboratas confirmavit, confirmatae vero vocantur
Leges Regis Edwardi, Tit. l. x Noricorum and Danor. in Britann^a.
non quod ipse primo ad invenisse eas, sed cum praetermissae fuissent, and
oblivioni penitus deditae a diebus avi sui Edgari qui 17 annis regnavit, ipse
Edwardus, quia justa erant and honesta a profunda abysso extraxit, eas
revocavit, and ut suas observandas contradidit.

And were afterward by William Chron. Lech. seldense.
the Conqueror, upon the tears and intercession of the English, consilio
habito and praecatu Baronum per universos Angliae consulatus nobiles and
sapientes and sua lege eruditos, upon the Oaths of twelve men in every County,
granted and confirmed unto them.

Of the Laws which he made, LL Guilielmi Regis Conqu.
Universo populo Angliae post subactam terram, (a time when new Laws are
usually made or given) and giving much of that Conquered Land Commilitonibus
Matt. Paris
suis, being for a great part the same Laws which King Edward the Confessor had
before caused to be observed.

Amongst which Laws, Tit. 95.
said to have been the Laws of William the Conqueror, there remains one in
these words, viz. Statuimus and sirmiter praecipimus ut omnes liberi homines
totius Regni nostri sint fratres conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram, and ad Regnum
nostrum pro viribus suis and facultatibus contra inimicos pro posse suo
defendendum and viriliter servandum, and pacem, and dignitatem Coronae nostrae
integre observandam and ad judicium rectum and justitiam constanter omnibus
modis pro posse suo sine dolo and sine dilatione faciendam.

Or in or by his Laws and Charters Seldeni notae and spicilegium ad eadmerum
167.
made and granted, tam Francigenis quam Anglis communi Consilio
Archiepiscoporum, Abbatum, and omnium principum Regni sui, for and concerning
the separation and dividing the Ecclesiastical Laws and Jurisdictions from the
Temporal and Common.

Or in or by the Spelman gloffar. in legib. Reg. H. 1.
codex Legum, compiled by King Henry I. ex legibus Salicis, Ripuariis, Danicis,
and aliarum gentium antiquis.

Or in or by his Charter granted unto the Baronage and People of England, so
much approved, as when Stephen Langton, b Mat. Paris 240, 241.
Archbishop of Canterbury, had produced it unto some of them that were
quarrelling with King John, for infringing some parts of their Liberties, they
did swear, That they would live and die in the defense and maintenance thereof.

Or in a Council holden Mat. Paris 21.
Anno Domini 1095. in the 8th. year of the Reign of King William Rufus at
Pedred, coram Rege and Archiepiscopo Dorobernensi atque Primatibus totius Regni
judicantibus ubi terminata fuit controversia inter Thomam Archiepiscopum
Eboracensem, and Ulstanum Episcopum Wigornensem.

Or the Charter of King Stephen, who granted omnibus Baronibus and hominibus
suis de Anglia omnes libertates and bonas leges quas Henricus Rex Angliae
avunculus suus eis dedit and concessit, and omnes bonas Leges, and bonas
consuetudines eis concessit, quas habuerunt tempore Regis Edwardi.

Or in the agreement made afterward between him and Maud the Empress and her
Son, touching the succession of the Crown of England.

Or in any of those which King Spelman glossar. in diatriba de Mag^^ Charta.
Henry II. granted, restored, and confirmed, Deo and sanctae Ecclesiae, and
omnibus Comitibus Baronibus, and omnibus hominibus suis omnes consuetudines
quas Rex Henricus avus suus eis dedit and concessit adjecta sanctione, ut
libere, quiet, and plenario tenerentur.

Or in the Letter or Epistle Balaeus de scriptorib^^ Anglix 93.
which he wrote unto Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury; which, probably,
if it were extant, would not contradict the Rules and Laws of his Government.

Or in the great Council of Clarendon, holden by the same King, where a
recognition of many of the ancient Laws and Customs of the Nation,
concurrentibus Episcopis and Proceribus congregato clero and Dugdale's Origmes
Juridiciales 17.
populo tunc praecepit Rex universis Comitibus, and Baronibus Regni.

Or when he held a great Council at Northampton, Chronicon Jo. Bromton 62.
coram Epilcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus terrae Assisaw fecit, and eam teneri
praecepit, scilicet quod Regnum suum divisit in sex parts perquarum singulas
tres Justicias constituit.

Or that of King Spelman's glossor,
Richard I. holden at London, congregatis Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus
Regni sui.

Or by King John's permitting the Speech or Oration which Hubert Walter
Archbishop of Canterbury made unto him at his Coronation, after the Death of
King Richard I. at London, in praesentia Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, and Baronum, and aliorum omnium qui ejus Coronationi interesse
debuerant, ubi stans in medio omnium, dixit, audite universi, noverit discretio
vestra quod nullus praevia ratione alii succedere habet Regnum nisi ab
universitate regni unanimitur invocata spiritus electus, Mat. Paris 197.
and secundum morum suorum eminentiam prae-electus ad exemplum and
similitudinem Saul primi Regis in uncti quem praeposuit Dominus Populo suo non
Regis filium, nec de Regali stirpe procreatum, similiter post eum David Jessae
filium hunc quia strenuum and aptum dignitati Regiae, illum quae sanctum and
humilem, ut sic qui evectus in Regno supereminet strenuitate omnibus praesit in
potestate and regimine verum si quis ex stirpe Regis defuncti aliis
praepolleret, pronius and promptius in electionem ejus est consentiendum, haec
idcirco diximus pro inclyto Conite qui praesens est fratre illustrissimi Regis
nostri Richardi jam defuncti, qui haerede caruit ab eo egrediente, qui providus
and strenuus and manifest Nobilis, quem nos invocata spiritus sancti gratia,
rationi tam meritorum, quam sanguinis Regii ananimiter elegimus universi.

Whereupon, says Daniel, Daniel 127.
(agreeing therein with Matthew Paris) the Archbishop being after, by some of
his Friends, questioned for so doing: confessed, that he foresaw whatsoever
blood and mischief it should cost, (his Title by Succession, in the life of his
Nephew Arthur, his elder Brother Geffry's Son, being at that time not able to
carry it) he would endeavor to obtain the Crown; and therefore, the safer way
to prevent confusion, was, that the Land should rather make him King than he
make himself, and that the Election would be some tie upon him.

Or in or by the Books (if extant) which that King is said to have wrote,
entitled Leges pro Republica. 2d. Statuta l Balaeus de scriptoribus Anglicis.
102.
Regalia 3d. in the Epistle which he wrote, Ad Innocentium Papam, contra
Stephanum Langton, Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem. 4th. Ad Stephanum
Cantuariensem Episcopum 5th. Ad Innocentium Papam, contra Barons. 6th. Ad
Londinenses pro Praetor. 7th. Super Charta Obligatoria.

Which (if the devouring teeth of Time, or corruptions of their Originals, have
not met with them) might, if perused, be believed to make no opposition to that
which should be in a well-ordered Regal Government.

Or in or by the Charter at Running Mead, called Magna Charta, and Charta de
Forestae, wrested and enforced from him by a mighty Army of too many of the
Barons of England, with their innumerable adherents, upon Sam. Daniel in the
Life of King John.
their Oaths solemnly taken upon the Altars, never to desist, until they had
obtained a grant of their Laws and Liberties, which they pretended to have been
violated; which, says Daniel the Historian, might be wished to have been
gained by those unruly Barons in a better manner.

Or by any of our Laws, or any of the Charters or Liberties granted by any of
our Kings or Princes before or after.

SECT. II.
Of the Indignities, Troubles and Necessities which were put upon King JOHN, in
the enforcing of his Charters, by the Pope, and his (then) Domineering Clergy
of England, joined with the Disobedience and Rebellion of some of the Barons,
encouraged and assisted by them.

THat unfortunate Prince, so ill used by Hubert Walter, Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the beginning of his Reign, and as bad by Philip King of France,
who had given the Honor of Knighthood unto Arthur the Son of King John's elder
Brother, and taken his Homage for Anjou, Poicteau, Touraine, Maine, and the
Duchy of Normandy, with an endeavor to make it the most advantageous for
himself, in regard that King John had neglected to do his Homage for those
Provinces, being Members of the Crown of France.

And in the third year of his Reign Daniel 129.
imposing 3 s. upon every Plough-land, for discharge of a Dowry of 30000 Marks
to be given in marriage with his Niece Blanch, the collecting whereof the
Archbishop of York opposed in his Province; for which, and refusing to come
upon summons to his Treaty in France, seizing his Temporalities, the Archbishop
Interdicted the whole Province of York, and Excommunicated the Sheriff; Into
which County the King, with his Queen Isabel, afterward making their Progress,
in their Journey toward Scotland, and exacting great Fines of Offenders in his
Forests, the Archbishop his Brother refused him Wine, and the Honor of the
Bells at Beverly. A reconciliation was notwithstanding made betwixt them, by
the mediation of four Bishops, and as many Barons, with a great sum of money,
and a promise to reform excesses on both parts: When the King, upon Easter
after his return from the North, was again Crowned at Canterbury, and with him
his Queen, by the Archbishop Hubert; and there the Earls and Barons of England
were summoned to be ready with Horse and Armor, to pass the Seas with him
presently after Whitsontide; but they holding a Conference together at
Leicester, by a general consent, sent him word, that unless he would render
them their Rights and Liberties, they would not attend him out of the Kingdom;
whereupon he required of them security, by the delivering up unto him the
principal of their Castles, and began with William de Albany, for his Castle of
Belvoir, who delivered unto him his Son as a Pledge, but not the Castle.

And the King, with the King of France, being after solicited by the Popes
Legate, obtained a Subsidy of the fortieth part of all their Subjects Revenues
for one year, by way of Alms, to succor the Holy Lands; for the levying
whereof in England, Geffery Fitz-Peter, Justiciar in England, sent out his
Writs by way of request and persuasion, (not as of due, or by co-action) to
avoid example.

Howsoever, the King of France declared for Arthur, to whom he married his
youngest Daughter, required King John to deliver up unto him all his Provinces
in France, and by a peremptory day summoned him to appear personally at Paris,
to answer what should be laid to his charge, and abide the Arrest of his Court,
which he refusing, was by sentence adjudged to lose all which he did hold in
France of that Crown; who thus beset with the King of France on the one side,
and his Nephew Arthur and the Barons of Daniel 130.
Anjou on the other, who laid siege to Mirabel, defended by Eleanor Mother of
King John, who by her intermedling, turbulent, and unquiet spirit, had done him
no good: with great expedition relieved it, by defeating the whole Army;
carrying away Prisoners Earl Arthur, Hugh le Brun, all the Barons of Anjou, and
200 Knights.

Whereupon, Arthur being shortly after murdered in Prison, and the deed laid to
his charge, with the cruel execution of many of his Prisoners, it so
exasperated the Nobility of Britain and Poicteau, as they all took Arms against
him, and summoned him to answer in the Court of Justice of the King of France;
which he denying, was condemned to forfeit the Duchy of Normandy, which his
Ancestors had held by the space of 300 years: and of that, and all his other
Provinces in France, became wholly dispossessed.

And with that disastrous success returning into England, charged the Earls and
Barons with the reproach of his losses in France, and fined them to pay the
fourth part of all their Goods, for refusing their aid, to which the feudal
Laws and their tenures had obliged them.

Neither spared he the Church or Commonwealth in the like Imposition: of which
Geffery Fitz-Peter, Justiciar of England, was Collector for the Laity, and
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury for the Clergy.

Which being not enough to supply his occasions for War in France, (where great
Estates of many of the English Nobility then lay) a Parliament was convoked at
Oxford, wherein was granted two Marks and a half of every Knights F^e for
Military Aid; the Clergy promising to do the like on their part.

In anno 8o. of his Reign, another Imposition was laid, of the 13th. part of
all the movables of the Clergy and Laity, which was again opposed by the
Archbishop of York, who solemnly accursed the Receivers thereof Daniel 131.
within his Province, and departed out of the Kingdom.

Unto which also was added a miserable breach betwixt Legiance and Authority;
for Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury being dead, a great controversy happened
betwixt the King and the Pope, upon the Monks of Canterbury's (who were sent
about it to Rome) election of Stephen Langton a Cardinal; who, though an
Englishman born, had been bred in France, and an adhaerent to that King; Being
thus elected, and consecrated by the Pope at Viterbium in Italy, the election
of the Bishop of Norwich, whom the King had procured to be elected, being made
void, and those Monks and the rest of the Agents sent home, with the Popes
Letters, exhorting the King benignly to receive Stephen Langton; and charging
the Monks remaining at Canterbury, by virtue of holy Obedience, to obey the
Archbishop in all Temporal and Spiritual matters: With which the King being
greatly displeased, seized upon all which the Monks had, who with their Prior
hasted away to Flanders.

And writing a sharp Letter to the Pope concerning the wrong done unto him, in
making void the election of Gray Bishop of Norwich, and advancing Stephen
Langton, a man unknown to him; and which was more to his prejudice, without his
consent: gave him to understand, that he would stand for the liberties of his
Crown to the death; constantly affirming, that he could not revoke the election
of the Bishop of Norwich, and that if he were not righted therein, he would
stop up his passages of his Subjects to Rome; and, if necessity required, had
in his Kingdom of England, and other his Dominions, Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Prelates, of so sufficient Learning, as they needed not to beg Justice
and Judgment of Strangers. Unto which as angry a Letter being returned, and two
Monks, who were staid at Dover, having been sent from Rome to demand his assent
for the election of Stephen Langton, admonished him to endeavor to give him
and the Church their Right, and not to cast himself into those difficulties
from whence he could not easily release himself: since He in the end must
overcome, to whom all knees bow in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, whose Vicegerency
here below he exercised; Neither was it safe for him to repugn God and the
Church, for which the glorious Martyr and Bishop Thomas Becket shed his Blood:
especially since his Father and Brother, late Kings of England, have in the
hands of the Legates of the Apostolic See, abjured (which the Records and
Memorials of England do with great clearness contradict) that (as he pleased to
call it) Impious Custom.

And when he was Ibidem 132.
informed how the King had proceeded against the Church of Canterbury sent his
Mandates to the Bishops of Ely, London, and Worcester, to exhort him to reform
himself; and if they found him contumacious, to interdict the whole Kingdom;
and if that would not correct him, would lay a severe hand on him.

Which they being ready to obey, with tears beseeching him that he would call
home the Archbishop and the Monks of Canterbury, and avoid the scandal of
interdiction: The King in a great Passion against the Pope and Cardinal,
interrupting their Speech, Swore, that if they, or any other, should dare to
put the Kingdom under Interdiction, he would presently send all the Clergy of
England to the Pope, and confiscate their Goods; and that if any of Rome should
be found within any part of his Land, he would cause their Eyes to be put out,
their Noses cut, (over fierce punishments long before usually and indifferently
inflicted upon offending Criminals, Laics and Clergy, by our Saxon and Norman
Ancestors, much before, and sometimes, since the time of our William the
Conqueror) and so sent home, that by those marks they might be known of other
Nations; charging the Bishops moreover, presently to avoid his presence, as
they would avoid their own danger.

Of which the Pope being certified by those Bishops, the whole Kingdom was
shortly after interdicted, all Ecclesiastical Sacraments and Offices (except
Confession, Extreme Unction, and Baptism of Children) seized, and Dead were put
into the Earth without Priest or Prayer; the King by his Sheriffs and Ministers
commanded all Prelates and their Servants to depart the Kingdom, confiscated
all the Revenues of the Bishoprics, Abbyes and Priories; many of the Prelates
getting into the Monasteries, as places privileged.

And not forgetting the Indignities, Hardships, Necessities, and ill usages,
which had been undutifully put upon him by some of his Barons, with the
Domineering of the Pope, his Legates and Clergy, whilst like a Tennis-Ball he
had been betwixt them tossed from one hand, Wall and Racket to another, with the
great oppressions which had been laid upon him by the Clergy of one part, and
some of his unruly Barons on the other; the discords of the former more
encouraging the latter by the Popes Excommunication, and Interdicting his
Kingdom, did the better to prevent the revolt of his Subjects, which might
follow upon his breach with the Church, send with a Military power to all the
great men of the Kingdom to give Pledges for the assurance of their Fidelity;
wherein some of them gave satisfaction by sending their Sons, Nephews, or
nearest of Kin; amongst whom William de Brause a great Baron being sent unto,
his Lady too sharply giving an answer, before her Husband could do it, That the
King should have none of her Son to keep, that was so ill a keeper of his own
Brothers Son Arthur; but her Lord reprehending her for it, returned his answer,
That he was ready if he had offended, to satisfy the King without any Pledge, r
Daniel 135.
according to the judgment of his Court, and that of his Peers.

The King displeased with the Londoners, removed his Exchequer to Northampton,
marched with an Army to make War against the King of Scotland; and that
business appeased, in his return back caused all the Enclosures in his Forests
to be laid open.

The Pope seeing that he would not yield, proceeded to an Excommunication of
his Person, which did put him into a desperate rage against the Clergy, who
durst not execute the Popes Mandate for many days after; which Excommunication
of the King was accompanied with that of the Emperor Otho his Nephew, and all
the Estates of Germany and the Roman Empire were absolved from their Obedience
and Fidelity: But the King having gained great Treasure from the Jews made a
Voyage into Ireland, where receiving the Homage of many, and reducing much of
that Country to his obedience, ordained the same to be governed by the Laws and
Customs of England (the contests whereof were not then fully settled) making
the Coin and Money thereof to be there Current, and leaving John Gray Bishop of
Norwich to be Justiciar, and there after three Months stay returned into Wales,
which had Rebelled; reduced them to Obedience, taking 28 of the Children of
their best Families for Pledges: Whence returning in the 13th. year of his
Reign, he required, and had of every Knight that attended not his Army in that
Expedition, two Marks; and at Northampton received the Popes Agents, Pandulphus
and Durandus, who were sent to make a Peace betwixt the Kingdom and Priesthood,
(too many of whom in matters against the King were seldom at odds) by whose
exhortation, and the consideration of the State of the Kingdom, he consented
that the Archbishop, and all the exiled Bishops, and Monks of Canterbury,
should in peace return to their own; but refused to make satisfaction for their
Goods taken away.

They depart unsatisfied, which made the Pope more Imperious to constrain him
to do whatsoever he desired; and to that end Absolved all his Subjects upon
what occasion soever from all their obedience, strictly forbidding them under
pain of Excommunication Board, Council and Conference.

Who preparing to suppress an Insurrection of some of the Welsh, had
intelligence, that if he proceeded therein, he would either be killed or
betrayed; whereupon he returned to London, required Pledges of the Nobility,
and had them; Eustace de Vescy, and Robert Fitz-Walter, being accused of the
Conspiracy, fled, the one into Scotland, the other into France; and the Pope
pronouncing the Kings absolute Deposition from the Regal Government of the
Kingdom, wrote to the King of France a perfidious dangerous enemy of King
John's; That as he looked to have remission of his Sins, he should take the
charge upon him to expel him out of the Kingdom of England, and possess the
same to Him and his Heirs for ever; and sent Letters to the Daniel 137.
Princes and great Men of other Nations, That they should aid the King of
France in the dejection of that contumacious King of England, in revenge of the
Injuries done to the Universal Church: granting like remission of their Sins,
as if they undertook the Holy War.

The King of France thereupon making great preparations against him, and with
that Commission the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other exiled Bishops,
with Pandulphus the Popes Legate, being sent unto him: private instructions
were given by the Pope to Pandulphus, his juggling Legate, at his returning
into England out of the King of France's great Army prepared against him, that
if, upon the Preparation and Forces gathered by the King of France for his
dejection, he could work the King of England to such conditions as he should
propound, Absolution and Restoration should be granted unto him; Who, thus
distressed, Daniel 138.
not only granted restitution and satisfaction of whatever had been taken from
the Archbishop, and Monks of Canterbury, and the Bishops of London, Bathe, and
Lincoln, (who were fled into France to the Archbishop) but also laid down his
Crown, Scepter, Sword, and Ring, the Ensigns of his Regality, at the feet of
Pandulphus, as a Livery and Seizin of the Kingdom of England to the Pope, and
submitted himself to the judgment and mercy of the Church; which being, two
days after, or, as some have written, six, restored unto him, upon an agreement
made at the receiving thereof upon his Oath, Matt. Paris 134. 235.
Non sine dolor, (says Matthew Paris) tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, in
praesentia Pandulphi, se judicio sanctae Ecclesiae pariturum, and sexdecim cum
eo Comites and Barons ex potentioribus Regni in animam ipsius Regis
juraverunt: Quod si forte facti paeniteret, ipsi eum pro possibilitate
compellerent; And thereupon, convenerunt decimo tertio die Maii, apud Doveriam,
(viz.) die Lunae, proximo ante Ascensionem Domini Rex, and Pandulphus, cum
Comitibus, Baronibus, and turba multa nimis (no House of Commons certainly) ubi
in pacis formam unanimiter consenserunt; And in the King's Name, and under his
Seal, it was declared by the Title of Johannes Dei Gratia, (not of the Pope, or
People;) and four of the Barons, (viz.) William Earl of Salisbury, his Brother,
Reginald Earl of Boloigne, William Earl of Warren, and William de Ferrariis,
juraver ant in animam suam, (i. e. Regis) That they should, bona side, in every
thing observe that Peace and Agreement.

And he did likewise solemnly and absolutely swear, stare mandato Domini Papae,
to stand to the will and command of the Pope, and his Legate or Legates
aforesaid, in all things; for not doing whereof, he was excommunicated by him;
and that he should not molest Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, William Bishop
of London, Eustace Bishop of Ely, Giles Bishop of Hereford, Iosceline Bishop of
Bath, Hubert Bishop of Lincoln, the Prior and Monks of Canterbury, Robert
Fitz-Walter, (whose Castle of Baynard, in or near London, the King had before
seized, with all his other Lands and Estate, proclaiming him a Traitor) and
Eustace de Vescy, with all other Clarks and Laics, which had adhaered unto
them, but continue in a firm peace and good accord with them; and should
publicly take his Oath before the said L gate or his Delegate, that he should
not hurt, or cause them to be molested in their Persons, Lands, Goods, or
Estates; but should receive them into his grace and favor, and pardon all
their Offenses; not hinder the said Archbishops and Bishops in their
jurisdictions and execution of their Office, but they might fully execute their
Authority as they ought; and should grant to the Pope, Archbishops, and
Bishops, his Letters Patents thereof, upon Oaths to be taken by the Bishops,
Earls, and Barons, and their Letters Patents given, that they would firmly and
truly hold and keep the said Peace and Agreement; and if he by himself, or
others, should infringe it; they in the behalf of the Church, should oppose the
Violators of the said Peace and Agreement; and he should lose the benefit of the
Custody of their Churches, in the vacancy thereof: and if he could not persuade
others to keep the last part of the Oath, that is to say, by himself, or others
should contradict or go against it, they should put in execution the power of
the Church, and Apostolic Command; and did by his Letters Patents, further
oblige himself to quit and renounce all his Rights and Patronage, which he had
in any of the Churches of England; and the said Letters Patents, should be
transmitted and delivered to the said Archbishop and Bishops, before their
coming into England; the said Archbishop and Bishops, with a Salvo honor Dei
and Ecclesiae, giving caution by their Oaths, and Letters Patents that, neither
they, nor any on their behalf, should attempt or do any thing against his
Person or Crown, whilst he observed and secured unto them the Peace and
Agreement as aforesaid; And as to what was taken from them, should make unto
them full Restitution, with Damages for all that had been done as well to
Clerks as Laics, intermedling in those Affairs, not only as to their Goods and
Estates, but all Liberties which should be preserved unto them, and to the
Archbishop and Bishop of Lincoln, from the time of their Consecrations, and to
all others from the time of the aforesaid Discords; nor should there be any
hindrance to the living or dead, by any of his grants or promises before made;
neither should he retain any thing by way of Service due unto him, but only the
Services which should hereafter be due unto him; all Clerks and Laics,
imprisoned upon that occasion, should be restored to Liberty: And the King
should presently after Absolution given to him, by him that should do it, cause
to be delivered to the said Archbishop, Bishops, and Monks of Canterbury, 8000
l. Sterling, in part of Restitution of what had been taken from them; and pay
their Debts and Charges, in returning to England, that is, unto Stephen
Archbishop of Canterbury, 2500 l. William Bishop of London, 750 l. Eustace
Bishop of Ely as much, Iosceline Bishop of Bath, and Hubert Bishop of Lincoln,
the like several Sums of Money; and to the Prior and Monks of Canterbury, 1000
l. That as soon as the Peace should be allowed, and accepted by them; he should
restore unto them all the Movables which he had taken from them, publicly
revoke the Interdict or Outlamry so called, made and pronounced against
Ecclesiastical Persons, and protest that it did not at all belong unto him so
to do; And that therefore he should not do it, but revoke the Outlawing of any
of the Laity that had taken their part, and remit all that he had received from
any Ecclesiastical man: praeter Regni consuetudinem and Ecclesiae libertatem;
and that if any questions should arise concerning the Damages done, it should
be determined upon proofs by the Legate or Delegate of the Pope: All which
being done, the Popes Sentence and Interdict should be taken off and
discharged; And if any doubts should arise touching any other parts of the
Articles of Agreement, and any which were material, or substential, should
happen, that could not be determined by the Legate or Delegates of the Pope; by
the Peoples consent, they should be referred to the Popes Arbitration; and that
whatsoever he should Decree, might be observed. Dated 13 die Maii apud Doveram.

Rebus sic expeditis, and the matter so ended and agreed upon; convenerunt
iterum Rex Mat Paris 236, 237.
Anglorum and Pandulphus cum' proceribus Regni apud domum militum Templi juxta
Doveram decimo quinto d^e Maii in vigilia Dominica Ascensionis, ubi idem Rex
juxta quod Romae fuerat sententiarum resignavit Coronam suam cum Regiis Angliae
and Hiberniae in manu Domini Papae cujus vices tum gerebat Pandulphus memortus
facta autem resignatione dedit Papae et ejus Successoribus Regna praedicta quae
and Charta confirmavit, in these words, viz.

Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. omnibus Christi fidelibus hanc Chartam
inspecturis, salutem in Domino; Universitate vestrae per hanc Chartam sigillo
nostro munitam, volumus esse notum, quod cum Deum and Matrem nostram sanctam
Ecclesiam offenderimus in multis, and perinde divina misericordia plurimum
indigeamus, nec quid digne offerre possimus pro satisfactione Deo, and
Ecclesiae, debita facienda nisi nosmet ipsos humiliemus and Regna nostra;
volentes nos ipsos humiliare, pro illo qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad
mortem, gratia sancti spiritus inspirante, non vi interdicti, nec timore
coacti, sed nostra bona spontaneaque voluntate, ac communi consilio Baronum
nostrorum conferimus, and libere concedimus Deo, and sanctis Apostolis ejus
Petro and Paulo, and sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Matronae nostrae; ac Domino
Papae Innocentio, ejusque Catholicis successoribus, totum Regnum Angliae, and
totum Regnum Hiberniae, cum omni jure and pertinentiis suis, pro remissione
omnium peccatorum nostrorum, and totius generis nostri, tam pro vivis quam pro
defunctis, and amodo illa ab eo and Ecclesia Romana, tanquam secundarius
recipientes and tenentes, in praesentia prudentis viri Pandulphi, Domini Papae
Subdiaconi and familiaris. Exinde praedicto Domino Papae Innocentio, ejusque
Catholicis Successoribus, and Ecclesiae Romanae, secundum subscriptam formam
fecimus and juravimus, and homagium ligium in praesentia Pandulphi: Si coram
Domino Papa esse poterimus, eidem faciemus: Successores nostros, and Haeredes
de Uxore nostra in perpetuum obligantes, ut simili modo summo Pontifici qui pro
tempore fuerit, and Ecclesiae Romanae; sine contradictione debeant sidelitatem
praestare, and homagium recognoscere. Ad indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae
obligationis and concessionis, volumus and stabilimus, ut de propriis and
specialibus redditibus nostris praedictorum Regnorum, pro omni servito and
consuetudine, quae pro ipsis facere debemus salvis por omnia denariis beati
Petri, Ecclesia Romana, mill marcas Esterlingorum percipiat annuatim; in Festo
scilicet Sancti Michaelis quingentas marcas, and in Pascha quingentas;
septingentas scilicet pro Regno Angliae, and trecentas pro Regno Hiberniae.

Salvis Nobis and Heredibus Nostris, Iustitiis, Libertatibus, and Regalibus
Nostris. Que omnia sicut superscripta sunt, rata esse volentes atque firma;
obligamus Nos and Successores Nostros, c^ntra non venire; and st Nos vel
aliquis successorum Nastrorum contra hec attentare presumpserit, quicunque ille
fuerit, nisi rite commo^itus resipuerit, cadat a jure Regni. Et he charta
obligationis and concessionis Nostre. Test meipso, apud domum militum Templi
juxta Doveram, coram H. Dublinensi Archiepiscopo, Johanni Norwicensi Episcopo,
Galfrido filto Petri, W. Comite Sarisberiae, Willielmo, Comite Penbroke, R.
Comite Bononiae, W. Comite Warenne, S. Comite Winton, W. Comite Arundel, W.
Comite de Ferrariis, W. Briwere, Petro filio Hereberti, Warino filio Geroldi,
15o* die Maii, anno Regni Nostri quarto decimo.

Charta itaque Regis in scriptum, ut dictum est, redacta, tradidit eam Rex
Pandulpho, Romam Papae Innocentio deferendam; and continuo cunctis videntibus,
homagium fecit subscriptum. Ego Johannes, Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Dominus
Hiberniae, ab hac hora and in antea, fidelis ero Deo and beato Petro and
Ecclesiae Romanae and Domino meo Papae Domino Innocentio, ejusque successoribus
Catholice intrantibus, non ero in facto, in dicto, consensu vel consilio, ut
vitam perdant vel membra, vel mala captione capiantur, eorum damnum, si sic
vero, impediam, and remanere faciam, si potero; alioquin eis, quam citus
potero, intimabo, vel tali personae dicam, quam eis credam pro certo dicturam.
Consilium quod mihi crediderint, per se vel per nuntios suos seu literas suas,
secretum tenebo; and ad eorum damnum nulli pandam me sciente. Patrimonium beati
Petri, and specialiter Regnum Angliae, and Regnum Hiberniae adjutor ero ad
tenendum and defendendum, contra omnes homines pro posse meo. Sic meo adjuvet
Deus, and haec sancta Evangelia. Amen.

Acta autem sunt haec, ut praedictum est in vigilia Dominicae Ascencionis,
praesentibus Episcopis, Comitibus and Magnatibus supradictis. Pandulphus autem
pecuniam, quam in Arrham subjectionis Rex contulerat, sub pede sua conculcavit;
Archiepiscopo dolente and reclamantis.

After which the Nobility refuse to aid the King in his wars to assist the Earl
of Flanders Daniel 139. and 140.
against the King of France, until he were absolved, and had confirmed unto
them their Liberties; whereupon the King (much against his will) was
constrained to submit to the present pressure and necessity, sent to the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the other Bishops, who were yet in France,
promising them present restitution and satisfaction, under the Hands and Seals
of 24 of his Earls and Barons, undertaking for the performance thereof
according to the form of his Charter and Agreement made and granted in that
behalf; and the better to prepare them R^claus 15 Johannis part 2. m 8. dorso.
to give him their assistance, directed the ensuing Letter to meet them in
these words: Rex Venerabili in Christo Patri, S. Dei gratia Cant' Archiepiscopo
totius Angliae Primati, and sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinali, and omnibus
suffraganeis suis Episcopis, cum eo existentibus Johannes eadem gratia Rex
Angliae, etc. mandamus vobis quod cum veneritis in Angliam scientes quod jamdiu
vos expectavimus, and adventum vestrum desideravimus, unde in occursum vestrum
mittimus fideles nostros Dominum H. Dublin' Archiepiscopum, J. Norwici
Episcopum, W. Com' Arundel, Mattheum filium Herberti, W. Archidiaconum
Huntindon, rogantes quatenus ad nos venire festinetis, sicut praedicti fideles
nostri vobis dicent T. meipso apud Stoaks Episcopi, primo die Julii.

Whereupon Pandulphus, with the Archbishop and the rest of the exiled Clergy,
(upon his confiscation of their Estates) forthwith came over and found him at
Winchester, who Matt. Paris 226, and 239. Daniel. 139.
went forth to meet them, and on his knees with Tears received them, beseeching
them to have Compassion on him, and the Kingdom of England; and being thereupon
Absolved with great Penitence, Weeping and Compunction, accompanied with the
Tears of the many Beholders; did Swear upon the Evangelists to Love, Defend and
Maintain Holy Church and the Ministers thereof, to the utmost of his Power;
that he would renew the good Laws of his Predecessors, especially those of King
Edward, abrogating such as were unjust; would Judge all his Subjects according
to the just Judgment of his Court (which was then, and for many Ages before,
composed only of the King and his Nobility, Bishops, and Lords Spiritual, with
his great Officers of State, and such Assistants as he would please to call
unto it) and that presently upon Easter next following he would make plenary
satisfaction for whatsoever had been taken from the Church.

Which done, he went to Portsmouth, with intention to pass over into France;
committing the Government of the Kingdom to the Bishop of Winchester, and
Jeffrey Fitz-Peter Justiciar, a man of a Generous Spirit, Learned in the Laws,
and Skilful in Government; who were also to take the Council of the Archbishop
of Canterbury.

The Soldiers being numerous, and wanting Money to attend him, desired to be
Supplied out of his Exchequer; which he refusing to do, or wanting it, in a
great rage with his private Family, took Shipping, and put forth to the Isle of
Jersey; but seeing none of his Nobles and others followed him (according to
their Tenures and Homage) was forced, having lost his opportunity of the
Season, to return into England, where he gathered an Army, with intention to
Chastise the Lords, who had so forsaken him, having for the like Offense some
years before taken by way of Fine a great sum of Money: a Matt. Paris 212.
Quod noluerunt eum sequi ad parts transmarinas ut haereditatem amissam
recuperaret. But the Archbishop of Canterbury followed him to Northampton,
urging him that it was against his Oath taken at his Absolution, to proceed in
that manner against any man without the Judgment of his Court; to whom the King
in great wrath replied, that he would not defer the business of the Kingdom for
his pleasure, seeing Lay Judgment appertained not to him; and marched to
Nottingham.

The Archbishop followed him, and plainly told him, that unless he would
desist, he would Excommunicate all such as should take Arms against any before
the releasing of the Interdiction, and would not leave him until he had
obtained a convenient day for the Lords to come to his Court, which shortly
after they did.

And a Parliament was assembled at St. Paul's in London, wherein the Archbishop
of Canterbury produced the said Charter of King Henry I. whereby he granted the
ancient Liberties of the Kingdom of England, according to the Laws of King
Edward, with those emendations which his Father, by the counsel of his Barons,
had ratified: upon the reading whereof, gaudio magno valde, says Matthew
Paris, they greatly rejoiced, h Matt. Paris 240. 241. and Daniel 140.
and swore in the presence of the Archbishop, that for those Liberties, viso
tempore congruo si necesse fuerit decertabunt usque ad mortem Archiepiscopus
promisit eis fidelissimum auxilium suum pro posse suo and sic confederatione
facta inter eos colloquium solutum fuit.

The Pope, advertised of those disturbances, by his Bull directed Baronibus
Angliae, (but not to those Bishops displaying t Pat. 16 Johannis m. 1. Dorso.
the Banner of his supposed Authority, which had encouraged, and animated, and
caused them to persist therein) stiling those Quaestiones noviter suscitatas
grave dispendium parituras, did prohibit, under the pain of Excommunication,
all Conspiracies and Insurrections, from the time of the Discords inter Regnum
and Sacerdotium, which had been quieted Apostolica autoritate, admonished them
Regem placare and reconciliare exhibentes ei servitia consueta, which They and
their Predecessors had done unto Him and his Predecessors; and if they had any
thing to require of him, they should not ask it insolenter, sed cum reverentia,
preserving his Regal Honor and Authority, that so they might the more easily
obtain what they desired; and assured them that he would desire the King that
he should be kind to them, and admit their just Petitions.

But the Barons persisting in their armed Violence and Rebellion against the
King, notwithstanding that weather-beaten Prince had, for shelter, taken upon
him the Cross and War for the recovery of the Holy Land, (then so called) the
Pope in July following sent his Bull to the universality of the Anno 16
Johannis in Alba Turre London.
Barons, Bishops, and Commonalty of England; wherein reciting, that the Barons
had sent their Agents unto him, and that he had commanded the Archbishops,
Bishops and Archdeacons ut conspirationes and conjurationes praesumptas, from
the the time of the discords inter Regnum and Sacerdotium, that they should
Apostolic a autoritate forbid them by Excommunication to proceed any farther
therein, and enjoin the Barons to endeavor to pacify the King, and reconcile
themselves unto him; and if they had any thing to demand of him, it should be
done, conservando sibi Regalem Honorem exhibendo servitia debita quibus ipse
Rex non debebat absque Judicio spoliari.

And that he had commanded the King to be admonished and enjoined, as he would
have remission of his sins, graciously to give them a safe conduct, and receive
their just Petitions, ita si quod forte non posset inter eos concordia
provenire in curia sua per Pares eorum secundum Regni consuetudinem atque Leges
mota deberet discordia Barons ipsi sua non expectata responsa, should not
presume contra Dominum suum arma movere temeritate nefaria, seeing the King had
taken upon him the Cross for the recovery of the Holy Land, so as it might seem
quod conspirationem inhierint detestandam ut eum taliter de Regno possint
ejicere and violare, their homage and fidelity sworn to the King, quod quam
crudele sit, actu and horrendum auditu cum pernitiosi materia sit and causa
suis temporibus in audita manifest cognoscit quicunque judicis utitur ratione;
and therefore, as he ought to make peace for the King of England, who was his
Vassal, and specially needed his protection, commanded the Bishops and their
Suffragans, that unless the said Barons and their Adherents should within eight
days after the receipt of his Bull, or Letters, omni cavillatione postposita,
surcease their doings, they should excommunicate them omni appellatione remota,
interdict their Lands, Churches and Estates, and every Sunday publish and
declare it, and ne igitur propter quosdam perversos universitatis sinceritas
corrumpatur, commanded and exhorted them in remissionem peccatorum injungentes
quatenus praefato Regi adversus perversores hujusmodi, they should give all
fitting aid and favor scientes pro certo quod si Rex ipse remissus esset aut
tepidus in ea part nos (i. e. Papa) Regnum Angliae non pateremur in tantam
ignominiam deduci cum sciamus per Dei gratiam, and possumus talem insolentiam
castigare.

But the Quarrels going on A. 16 Johan. in turre Land.
more and more, the King sent his Procurator or Agent to Rome, and the
discontented Barons theirs, who did urge, says John Mauclerc, the King's
trusty Agent, in a Letter written from thence unto him, that the Magnates
Angliae scilicet Boreales, and ut praedicti Nuntii dicunt Papae omnes Barons
Angliae instanter supplicant, quod cum ipse sit Dominus Angliae, he should
diligently admonish, and, if need should be, compel him to observe the ancient
Liberties grantted by Him and his Ancestors Charters, and confirmed by his
Oath; and did likewise allege, quod cum ille a praedictis Baronibus inde
requisitus fuisset in Epiphania Domino apud London spreto proprio juramento non
tantum libertates suas antiquas and consuetas eis concedere, contemptuously
refused, unless they would promise and etiam per Chartas suas darent quod
nunquam de caetero tales libertates, from Him vel Successoribus suis exigerent,
quod omnes Barons praeter Dominum Winthon, and Comitem Cestriae, and
Willielmum Brewere hoc facere renuerent.

Supplicaverunt autem Domino Papae quod ipse super his eis provideret cum satis
constet ei quod ipsi audacter pro liberate Ecclesiae ad mandatum suum, would
oppose the King, and quod he had granted, an annum redditum Domino Papae and
Ecclesiae Romanae, and exhibited and done, alios honores, and ei Romanae
Ecclesiae non sponte nec ex Devotione, imo ex timore and coactione: who, thus
perplexed, assayed all he could to pacify Pope Innocent by his Letter written
unto him, complaining, that the Barons of England, who were devoted unto him
before he had Ro' pat. 17. Johannis in 16. in dorso 3.
surrendered and subjected his Realm unto him, had since, for that very reason,
as they publicly alleged, (when it mentioned it to have been done Consilio
Baronum suorum, and many of the principal of them had been witnesses to that
dishonorable Grant) taken Arms against him, as he expressed it in these words,
cum Comites and Barons Angliae, nobis devoti essent antequam nos and nostram
terram Dominio vestro subjicere curassemus extunc in nos specialiter ab hoc
sicut public dicunt violenter insurgent, earnestly desired his protection, aid
and assistance, and sent his Agents unto him, to confirm his Charters granted
to Queen Berengaria, Widow of King Richard I. ( Ro' pat. 17 Johan. in 16; in
dorso.
not to deliver or grant any new Charter of the Kingdom of England, wherein
Samuel Daniel may be understood to have been mistaken, Pryn's History of K.
John, 34, and 35.
for Mr. Pryn in his late Historical Collections of that King's Reign, and
Matthew Paris, Mat. Paris, ad annos 14, 15, 16, and 17 Johan.
do give no such account of it;) whereupon Nicholas Bishop of Tusculan being
sent into England, congregavit consilium in urbe Londinensi apud Sanctum Paulum
ubi congregatis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, and aliis ad interdicti negotium spectantibus, Forty Thousand Marks
were agreed to be paid to the Archbishops, and Monks of Canterbury, and the
rest of the exiled Clergy: and the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich Sureties
for Thirteen Thousand Marks of it remaining unpaid. Mat. Paris 249.
The King being absolved, the Interdict (which had continued six years, three
months, and fourteen days, to the great damage and loss of the Church and
Clergy) was discharged and Daniel 140, 141.
taken off. The Barons, notwithstanding that Clergy-pacification, assembled
themselves at St. Edmundsbury, where they consulted of the late produced
Charter of King Henry I. and swore upon the High-Altar, That if the King
refused to confirm and restore unto them their Liberties, they would make war
upon him until he had satisfied them therein; agreed, that after Christmas they
would petition him for the same, and in the mean time would provide themselves
of Horse and Arms, to be ready if he should start from his Oath made at his
Absolution for the confirmation of those Liberties, and compel him to satisfiee
their demands. After which time they came in a Military manner to the King,
lying at the New-Temple, urgeing their desires with great vehemence: who seeing
their inclinations and resolution, answered, he would take consideration
thereof until Easter following. Howsoever, these Lords continued their
resolution, mustered their Forces at Stamford, (wherein were said to have been
2000 Knights, besides Esquires, with those that served on foot) and from thence
marched toward Oxford: From whence the King sending unto them the Archbishop
of Canterbury, William Marescal Earl of Pembroke, to demand of them, What were
those Laws and Liberties which they required? whereof a Schedule being showed,
and by the Commissioners delivered to the King, he, after the reading thereof,
in great indignation asked, Why the Barons likewise did not demand the Kingdom?
and swore, that he never would grant those Liberties whereby to make himself a
Servant; Upon which answer returned, those Barons seizing some of his Castles,
marched toward Northampton, which they besieged, constituted Robert
Fitz-Walter their General, (whom they styled Daniel 143.
Marshal of the Army of God and Holy Church) took the Castle of Bedford,
whither the Londoners sent their private Messengers with offers to join with
them, and deliver up the City to be guarded by them; unto which they repairing,
were joyfully received, and had it delivered unto them, ubi Baronibus favebans
divites, pauperis obloqui, says Matthew Paris, metuebant, Matt. Paris 244. and
255.
from whence (daily increasing in the number of their Confederates, and a
Civibus accepta securitate) they sent their Lettess to all the Earls, Barons
and Knights which yet adhered to the King, exhorting and threatening them, as
they loved Themselves, their Lives and Estates, they should forsake a perjured
King, and join with them to obtain their Liberties, otherwise they would take
them for public Enemies, turn their Arms against them, destroy their Castles,
burn their Houses, and spoil their Lands and Estates: The greatest part
whereof, upon those threatenings, did so think it to be their safer way to
forsake Him and their Loyalty, as they joined with them.

The King finding himself fere derelictum ab omnibus, and but seven Knights ex
omni multitudine Regia abiding by him timuit valde, lest the Barons in castra
sua impetum facientes illa sine difficultate sibi subjugarent, especially when
they should find nothing to hinder them, sent William Marescal Earl of Pembroke
and others to treat with them (being then at London) for a Peace, with an offer
to grant the Laws and Liberties demanded; and thereupon statuerunt Regi diem ad
colloquium in pratum inter Stains and Windleshores, 15o. die Junii, where Rex
and Magnates being met, and treating concerning the Liberties, and a lasting
Peace, (there being with the King, besides Pandulphus and Stephen Archbishop of
Canterbury, his double-dealing Friends, and some few others, in all but
Twenty-five) tandem cum in varia sort tractassent the King vires suas Baronum
viribus impares intelligens sine difficultate Leges and Libertates coneessit,
and Charta sua confirmavit data per manum suam in prato, quod vocatur
Running-Mead, inter Stains and Windleshores, decimo quinto die Junii, anno
Regni sui decimo septimo.

Which (as Matthew Paris, a Monk of St. Albans, living not only at the same
time, but being Historiographer unto King Henry III. his Son, privy to many of
his affairs, and wrote in the 57th. year of his Reign, has faithfully related
Charta Reg. Johannis in Mat. Paris 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260.
those passages and proceedings) was, as to the preamble thereof, (the exact
and full tenor thereof being with it truly mentioned in his Book) in these
words: Intuitu Dei and pro salute animae meae and Antecessorum omnium, and
Haeredum suorum ad honorem Dei, exaltationem sanctae Ecclesiae, and
emendationem Balaeus de scriptoribus Angliae, 102. and Polydor vir gil. lib. 15.
Regni sui per concilium Stephani Archiepiscopi Cantuarensis, (who prepared
them, and had incited the Pope and Barons against him) and aliorum Episcoporum
ibi nominat, Pandulphi Domini Papae Subdiaconi and familiaris, Willielmi
Marescali Comitis Pembrochiae, Willielmi Comitis Sarisberiensis, Willielmi
Comitis Warrenniae, etc. and aliorum fidelium mera and spontanea voluntate pro
Me and Haeredibus meis Deo and liberis hominibus Cokes 1 part Institut, 108,
159.
Angliae habendas and tenendas eis and Haeredibus suis de Me and Haeredibus
meis; which our Laws (no other tenure being specified) will interpret to be in
capite.

And more at length, as Matthew Paris has recorded it, with a salvis
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Templariis, Hospitalariis,
Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus aliis tam Ecclesiasticis personis,
quam Secularibus Libertatibus and Liberis consuetudinibus quas prius habuerant;
which gave them a better security in their former Liberties than they could
claim by the forced and indirect gaining of the latter; and concluding in the
perclose with his Testibus, etc. has these words subjoyned, Libertates vero de
Foresta, and liberae consuetudines quas cum libertatibus praescriptis in una
schedula pro sua capacitate continere nequiverimus in Charta subscripta
continentur, says Matthew Paris.

In which, not in the modern Language, and style of our Acts of Parliament, but
as Charters in the dictates of Regal Authority, as that of William the
Conqueror to the Citizens of London, and that of dividing the Temporal and
Spiritual Jurisdictions, and those of King Henry I. King Stephen, and Henry II.
and all the Charters of Liberties and Privileges granted by our Kings before
and since to Cities, Boroughs, Corporations, and Lords of Manors; as, the
Charter of King Edward I. to the Citizens of London in the 6th. year of his
Reign, and of King Edward III. in the 14th. year of his Reign to all the people
of England, to be governed by the English Laws, in case he should obtain his
Right to the Kingdom of France, and all our preceding Laws have used to be. He
granted away many of the ancient Rights of the Crown, made and ordained new
Laws, as that (amongst others) of Communia placita nan sequantur Curiam
nostram, sed teneantur in certo loco; and that of recovering the King's Debts,
etc. Enlarged some, abrogated others, and gave Vide L. I. Edwardi Confessor,
and cart and L. L.
unto the people greater Liberties and Immunities then the Laws of King Edward
the Confessor, and the Charter of King Henry I. put altogether, had allowed
them; the Original whereof (or the Magna Charta of King Henry III.) remaining
in the Library of the Archbishops of Canterbury at Lambeth, at the time of the
Imprisonment of that martyred great Anti-Papist, William Laud, Archbishop of
that See; and the ransacking of it preceding his Murder, in the Reign of that
Blessed Martyr King CHARLES I. by Hugh Peter's, Mr. Pryn, and some others,
thereunto appointed by their Rebellious Masters the then miscalled Parliament,
was never after found; and by it self in a distinct paragraph did follow, as it
were, a Bond or Security given by King John in these words: Cum autem pro Deo
and ademendationem Regni nostri, and ad melius sapiendam discordiam inter nos
and Barons haec omnia concessimus volentes in integra and firma stabilitate
gauderi facimus and concedimus securieatem subscriptam, (viz.) That the Barons
should elect Twenty-five Barons of the Realm, who should be Conservators
thereof, and pro totis viribur suis observare, tenere, and facere observari
pacem and libertates quas eis concessimus, and correct the King's defaults in
Government.

Of which number Matt. Paris 161. 162.
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, was one, with a power, that
if the King or his Chief-Justiciar, should trangress in any Articles of the
Laws, it should be lawful for any Four of them, after Forty days notice given
to Him, or his Chief-Justiciar, and no amendment, to complain to the rest, and
joining with Them and the People, to distrain and compel him, with a salva
Persona Regis only, and Reginae, and liberorum suorum. Et isti 25o. Barons
juraverunt in animabus suis Rege hoc disponente quod omni instantia his
obsequerentur, and Regem cogerent si forte rescipisci vellet tenere sequentes,
(and the Earls of Gloucester, Arundel, and Warren, with Thirty-four other
Barons, and great men) juraverunt to obey the commands of the Twenty-five
Barons, and all that would might swear to assist them and the people, cum
communia totius terrae might gravare eum cum eis, and to that end those
Conservators should have his Castles of Killingworth, Northampton, Nottingham,
and Scarborough, and the Castellanies or Governors sworn to obey them; and
after a general pardon granted to them, and all their adhaerents, mutual Oaths
should be taken on both sides, in solemn manner, for the inviolable observing
the Articles, and the King's Letters Patents sent to all the Sheriffs of the
Kingdom, to cause all men (of what degree soever) within their several Shires
to swear to observe those Laws and Liberties granted by his Charter, and was
compelled so far to suffer those Conservators to proceed in their
Conservatorships, as in the same yearthey took their Oaths to perform those
their new Offices, the Earls of Arundel, Gloucester, and Warren, with Hubert de
Burgh, and many Barons and great men, took their Oaths also to obey and assist
them.

But in the mean time Gloucester and Spencer, being the chief of the
Twenty-four Conservators, did draw the entire managing of the Kingdom into
their own hands, compel the King to summon a great Council at London, where the
authority of the Twenty-four Conservators was delivered over unto themselves,
and it was ordained, that Three of them at the least should attend at the
Court, to dispose of the custody of the Castles, and other business of the
Kingdom, with those of the Chancellor, Justiciar, and Treasurer, and of all
Offices great and small, and bound the King to loose and renounce to them their
legal Obedience, whenever he should infringe his Charters; which might, as
unto a great part of them, be certainly believed to have been the very spawn
and breed of those (long-after-reviv'd) high and mighty Nineteen Propositions
which were endeavored to have been enforced upon the late Blessed Martyr King
CHARLES, and of the late designed Association in the Reign of His Son King
CHARLES II.

But that hoped pacification being made (says the Historian) Jealousies and
Discontents did again kindle, and break out on both sides; the one part to keep
what they had undutifully gained, and the other to get loose of what for fear
he had too much yielded unto; the King wanting none to inflame the
perturbations, and anguish of his mind to tell him, that he was now a King
without a Kingdom, a Lord without Dominion, and a Subject of his Subjects, the
Discords, like a Wound or Sore ill-cur'd, fester'd again, and broke out.

SECT. III.
Of the succeeding Jealousies, Animosities, Troubles and Contests betwixt King
John and his over-jealous Barons, after the granting of his Charters, and his
other Transactions and Agreements with them at their tumultuous meeting at
Running-Mead, with the ill usages which he had before received of them, during
all the time of his Reign.

HE retired into the Isle of Wight, whence by Agents sent to Rome he procured a
definitive Sentence to condemn and nullify what was done, and the Pope's
Excommunication of the Barons, who kept about the City of London, and under
color of Tournments, and other Martial exercises, invited as many other as
they could to their assistance, but did not seek to surprise his Person, or
intercept his Agents, although they had strength to do it, but only to enjoy
those Liberties which they had spoiled and discredited by gaining them by
violence: wherein the fear of the power of an enraged Prince made them the more
desperately careful to defend themselves, and finish their designs, whilst the
King tarried three months in the Isle of Wight; whence the Bishop of Worcester,
Chancellor of England, Bishop of Norwich, with others, were sent with his Seal
to procure Foreign Forces, and to bring them to Dover; whither, after some
small prizes taken by him, and he returning, his Agents abroad brought him an
Army of Foreigners from Gascony, Lovaine, Poicteau, and Brabant, (many of them
being his French Subjects, with whose help, notwithstanding the loss of 40000
Men, Women and Children, who were drowned at Sea as they were bringing unto him
by Hubert de Burgh from Calice. He besieged and took Rochester Castle, marched
over most part of the Kingdom, and within half a year got in all the Barons
Castles even to the borders of Scotland, and was Master of all England except
the City of London, which he would not adventure upon, in regard of the Barons
united Forces which lay near unto it; marched to St. Albans, Daniel 145.
where he proclaimed the Pope's Excommunication of the Barons; who seeing
Themselves and their Wives and Children like to be ruined, and deprived of
their Estates, (which were given away to strangers) desperately fell into
another extreme, solicited Lewis the French King's Son to take upon him the
Crown of England, wherein they promised by a free Election to invest him, and
to send Pledges for the performance; which Message being well received, a
Parliament was called at Lions by Philip the Father of Lewis, and the business
resolved upon, whilst Lewis, besides the hop'd-for the title of Election, (by
those trusty Conservators of the Peoples Liberties, for their own particular
Interest more than the Peoples) supposed that he had another title from his
Wife Blanch, Daughter of the Sister of the prosecuted King.

In whose behalf the Pope wrote to the King of France, not to invade the King
of England, but rather to defend him, in regard he was a Vassal of the Roman
Church, and the Kingdom, by reason of Dominion, appertaining unto it; whereunto
the King of France answered, (probably by the advice of the contending English
Baronage) That the Kingdom of England never was, nor is, nor ever shall be, the
Patrimony of St. Peter; That King John was never lawful King thereof; and if
he were, he had forfeited it, by the Murder of his Nephew Arthur, for which he
was condemned in his Court, and could not give it away without the consent of
the Barons, who were bound in an Oath to defend the same; and if the Pope
should maintain this error, it would be a pernicious example.

Wherewith the Pope's Agents Daniel 149, 147.
departing unsatisfied, Lewis sent his Commissioners to Rome to declare his
Rights, and justify his undertaking; sets forth from Callis with 600 Ships,
and 80 other Vessels, and landed with his Army at Sandwich, King John being
then at Dover; who upon notice of his great power, and distrusting his
Mercenaries, committed the keeping of Dover Castle to Hubert de Burgh, forsook
the Field, and with it himself, and retired, first to Worcester, and after to
Gloucester; whereby Lewis having subdued the whole County of Kent, (Dover
excepted) came to London, where he was joyfully received of the Barons, and
(upon his Oath taken to restore their Laws, and recover their Rights) had
Homage and Fealty done unto him.

Guallo the Pope's Agent followed the King to Gloucester, shows him the Pope's
care of him, pronounced Excommunication against Lewis, and all that took part
with him; Notwithstanding which small comforts, in so many and great
extremeties pressing hard upon him, most of his Mercenaries left him, and
either returned into their own Countries with such spoils as they had gotten,
or betook themselves to the service of their Contrymen; But he was not yet
so forsaken, for that he had power enough to infest, though not to subdue his
enemies, and some faith was found amongst many of his Subjects, that well
executed their trusts. Dover Castle, with a small company, held out against all
the Force which Lewis could bring against it; Windsor Castle did the like
against the Barons; Nottingham and Lincoln Castles made resolute resistance.
The most fertile places of the Kingdom, as about Gloucester, the Marches of
Wales, Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent, and all
about London, were the stages of the War, and the Ruins of the Kingdom were
every where heard and felt; which continuing all that Summer, about the
latter-end of October then next following, that distressed King, oppressed with
as many sorrows as enemies, and a grief conceived for the loss of his
Carriages, and other necessaries of War, sunk in the Sands passing the Washes
betwixt Lyn and Boston, fell sick of a burning Fever, taken (as some writers
have recorded it) by a surfeit of eating Peaches, and drinking new Ale out of a
Cup, with the Venom pricked out of a Toad put into it, given him by a Monk at
Swinsted Abbey in Lincolnshire; who, after leave given by the Abbot, and
assoiled or absolved from the doing thereof, was content to poison himself, as
he did; and bringing the Cup unto the King, sitting at meat, said, Wassail, for
never in all your life drancke ye of so good a Cup; To whom the King said,
drink Monch; which he doing, and the King having drunk a great draught, did
set down the Cup. The Monk retired into the Infirmatory, where his Bowels brake
assunder; The King finding himself ill at ease, and his Belly beginning to
swell, and being told that the Monk was dead, commanded the Ranulphus
Cestrenfis, Henry de Knighton, Caxton's Chronicle, and
Table to be taken away, and a Truss to be provided for him; of which, vulgata
fama, Ranulphus Cestrensis, Henry de Knighton, the Book of St. Albans, printed
by Caxton in the year Pryns history of the Pope's Usurpation in England in the
Reign of King John, 36.
1502. in his Chronicle, and Mr. William Pryn in his late History of the Pope's
Usurpations in England in the Reign of King John, have given a probable
account, though many of the Monks, and the then Romish Clergy, fatned and grown
great by the Pope's and their extravagant and never-to-be-proved Authority over
Kings and Kingdoms, were so unwilling to acknowledge it, as they did all they
could to stifle and over-cast with Lies the Truth of it. Whence, in great
weakness, he (who was so little inclined to Paganism, or the Religion of
Miramolin King of Africa, Morocco, and Spain, or guilty of sending Ambassadors
unto him (after or before the surrender of his Kingdoms to the Pope) with an
offer to be his Tributary, y Pryns Animadversions upon the 4th. part of Cokes
Instit.
and of his Religion, of which, says Mr. Pryn, upon a most diligent search, no
vestigia or manner of evidence is to be found amongst the Records of this
Kingdom, it being a mere scandal and slanderous invective forged against him,
to make him odious) was conveyed to Newark; where, after he had received the
Eucharist, and taken order for the succession of his Son Henry, he departed
this life, and was buried at Worcester; and such a care was taken by the Abbot
of Swinsted for the safety of the poisoning Monk's Soul, as five Monks (until
the dissolution of that Abbey, which was 300 years after) were from time to
time stipended to sing a Requiem for it.

SECT. IV.
The many Affronts, Insolences and ill usages suffered by King Henry III.
until the granting of his Magna Charta and Charta de Forestae.

WHich tragical end of King John, although it much altered the state of the
Kingdom, yet not as to the miseries and troubles thereof; for King Henry his
Son being solemnly crowned, as a King by Succession, and not Election, was
committed to the care and tutelage of Marescal Earl of Daniel 148, 149.
Pembroke, as Good and Wise as he was Great, a main Pillar of the Father, and a
Preserver of the Crown to his Son; who, with Guallo the Pope's Legate, the
Bishops of Winchester, Bath and Worcester, did work all means to bring the
Barons to an accord, excommunicated Lewis and his adhaerents; and caused great
satisfaction in the minds of some who before were disgusted with the insolency
of the French, and the more upon the confession of one of the Nobility of
France, who upon his deathbed (touched with compunction, revealed the intention
of Lewis to enslave or extinguish the English Nation, whom he thought not fit
to be trusted, in regard that they had forsaken their Sovereign Lord; which
wrought so great an aversion in the English, as they who before were afraid for
the shame of inconstancy, and the danger of their Sons and Pledges carried into
France, and there remaining, did now resolve to relinquish their Homage and
sworn Fidelity, and forsake him, and made as much have to send him out of
England, as they did to call him into it: So as after a years trouble with his
Wars and Depraedations, and all the help the City of London could give him, he
was enforced to come to an accord, quit the Kingdom, take 15000 Marks for the
charges of his Voyage, abjure his claim to the Kingdom, promise by Oath to
procure (as far as in him lay) his Father to restore all such Provinces in
France as appertained to the Crown of England, and when he came to be King, to
resign them in a peaceable manner.

King Henry taking an Oath, and for him the Legate and Protector, to restore to
the Barons and other his Subjects all their Rights and Heritages, with their
Liberties, for which the Discords began between the late King and his People;
whereupon a general Pardon was granted, and all Prisoners freed on both sides.

Lewis, after so long abode with his Army in England, being honorably attended
to Dover, departed the Kingdom, and about Michaelmas after, upon the death of
his Father, was received, and crowned King of France; and Guallo the Legate
(well paid for his Negotiation) returning to Rome, carried with him 12000
Marks, (a great sum of money in those times;) And no sooner had that provident
Protector of the Kingdom the Earl of Pembroke Daniel 150, 151.
quieted the many troubles of the Nation, but (as much wanted as greatly
lamented by the People) he dyed.

The Bishop of Winchester, with many other great Counselors, being made
Protectors of the young King and his Kingdoms, but the King of France being
after requested to make restitution of what he had usurped, answered, That what
he had gotten by the forfeiture of King John, upon an accusation of murdering
his Nephew Arthur, right Heir to the Crown of England, he would hold.
Howsoever, Peace being made with Scotland, to whose King the King's Sister
being married, Wales revolted, and an Insurrection being made in Ireland, did
put the King to much trouble and charge; who being come to some years of
understanding, was in a Parliament holden at London put in mind by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the behalf of the State, of his Oath made, and
taken by others for him, upon the Peace made with Lewis, for confirmation of
the Liberties of the Kingdom, for which the War was begun with his Father,
without which the whole State would again fall assunder; and they would have
him to know it betimes, to avoid those miserable inconveniences which might
happen: William Brewere a Councellor urging it to have been acted by
constraint, and therefore not to be performed; Notwithstanding which, it was at
that time (being the 7th. year of his Reign) promised by the King to be
ratified, and a Commission was granted by Writs unto Twelve Knights in every
Shire, to examine, What were the Laws and Liberties which the Kingdom enjoyed
under his Grandfather, and return the same by a certain day; which (says the
learned and judicious Sir Henry Spelman) were never returned, or could not be
found. In the mean time, the Earls of Albemarl, Chester, and diverse of the
Nobility, assemble together at Leicester, with intent to remove from the King
Hubert de Burgh Chief-Justiciar, and other Officers, that hindered their motion;
but the Archbishop of Canterbury by his Spiritual Power, and the rest of the
Nobility, being careful to preserve the Peace of the Kingdom, stood to the
King, and would not suffer them to proceed therein: so as they were constrained
to come in and submit themselves; And the King in Parliament resumed such
alienations as had been made of the Lands appertaining to the Crown by any of
his Ancestors, to the end he might live of his own, and not be chargable to the
People.

The next year after (being the 8th. year of his Reign) M. Par. 323.
another Parliament was holden at Westminster, where the King required the
Fiftieth part of all the movables both of the Clergy and Laity, (but Mat. Paris
more probably says the Fifteenth) for the recovering of those parts in France
which had been held from the Crown, being one and the same which is said in
Magna Charta to have been granted as a grateful acknowledgment for the grant of
their Liberties; which, though it concerned the Estates of most of the Nobility
that had Lands therein, would not be yielded unto, but upon confirmation of
their Liberties, atque his in hunc diem prosecutis Archiepiscopus and concilio
tota Episcoporum, Comitum and Priorum habita deliberatione Regi dedere
responsum quod Regis petitionibus gratunter ad quiescerent, si illas diu
petitas libertates concedere voluisset, annuit itaque Rex cupiditate ductus
quod petebant Magnates Chartisque protinus conscriptis and Regis sigillo
munitis, (in the next year after, 9 H. 3.
for the Charters themselves bear date in the 9th. year of his Reign;) And the
several Charters, or Copies thereof, were sent to the Sheriffs of every County,
and Twelve Knights were out of every County chosen to divide the Old Forests
from the New, and lay open all such as had been afforested since the first
Coronation of King Henry II.

Although at the same time, or a little before or after it, some of the
Nobility who had formerly crowned Lewis of France King, and had been the cause
of King John's death, (for which they were banished the Realm) endeavoring to
return into England, and to set up again the French King's Interest, and
domineer over the King and his faithful Counselors, Pryns history of the
Pope's Usurpation in England. 6, 8.
by circumventing Pope Epist in turre Land. inter Record. ibid.
Honorius; Hubert de Burgh, Chief Justice of England the Earl of Chester, and
seven other of the King's Counselors, sent an Epistle to the Pope, desiring
him to assist the King and them, and prevent those dangerous Plots and Designs.

And the King having sent also his Proctors to Rome upon the like occasion,
they returned him an account of a new Confederacy ibid. fo. 61.
betwixt his discontented Barons and the French King to invade England; and
dispossess him of the Crown thereof; adding thereunto, quod Gallici
praedicabant omnibus quod majores Angliae Inter recordd anno 8 H. 3. in turre
^ondon.
obsides offerebant de reddendo si^i terram ^um primo venire curaret ad illam
adjicientes. Si a^iquid in curia Romana contra voluntatem Regis Franciae
attemptaretur incontmenter Rex transfretaret in Angliam.

Nor could any such authority accrue to them, in or by those Charters called
Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, granted by King Henry III. his Son, which
were in very many things but the exmeplaria or patterns of that of King John in
the like method and tenor, containing very many Liberties and great
Privileges which were by King Henry III. (as those Charters do declare) of his
own free accord granted and confirmed in the 9th. year of his Reign, Magna
Charta 9 H. 3.
to his Subjects, and People of England, Liberis hominibus, Freemen or
Freeholders, (for otherwise it would have comprehended those multitudes of
Villains, Bondmen and Bond-women which the Nation did then and long after
employ and make use of, and those very many men accounted by the Laws of
England to be as dead men, viz. Monks, Friars, Priors and Abbots) to be holden
to Them and their Heirs of Him and his Heirs for ever.

But in those Charters, or his confirmation of them, in the 21st. and 28th.
year of his Reign, could not procure to be inserted or recorded those clauses
which they had by their terrors gained from his Father in these words, viz.
Nullum scutagium vel auxilium ponam in Regno nostro nisi per commune consilium
Regni nostri ad corpis, nostrum redimendum and ad primogenitum filium nostrum
militem faciendum and ad primogenitam filiam nostram semel maritandam and ad
hoc non fiet nisi rationabile auxilium simili modo fiat de auxiliis de Civitate
Londinensi quod omnes aliae Civitates, and Burgi and Villae and Barons de
quinque portubus and omnes portus habeant omnes libertates and omnes liberas
consuetudines suas.

Et ad habendum commune concilium Regni de auxiliis assidendis aliter quam in
tribus casibus praedictis and scutagiis assidendis submoneri faciemus
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and majores Barons Regni
singillatim per literas nostras.

Et praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali per Vicecomites and Ballivos
nostros omnes alios qui in capite tenent de nobis ad certum diem scilicet ad
terminum quadraginta dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum in omnibus literis
submonitionis illius causam submonitionis illius exponemus, and sic facta
submonitione negotium procedat ad diem assignatum secundum consilium eorum qui
praesentes fuerint quamvis non omnes submoniti.

Nos non concedimus de caetero alicui quod capiat auxilium de liberis hominibus
suis nisi ad corpus suum redimendum, and ad faciendum primogenitum filium suum
militem, and ad primogenitam filiam suam semel maritandam and ad hoc non fiat
nisi rationabile auxilium; but were constrained to omit altogether, and forgo
those clauses and provisions, which being crowded into King John's Charter,
were never either granted or confirmed by King Henry III. Edward I. or any of
our succeeding Kings; nor, as Spelman's glossar' 376.
Sir Henry Spelman, repeating the same omissions, says, is therein that of
paying the Debts of the Deceased, (probably of those that died leaving their
Heirs in Ward) to the Jews and others; although Matthew Paris so much mistakes,
as to affirm that those Charters of King John and his Son Henry III. were Mat.
Paris.
in nullo dissimiles.

Which well-interpreted could signify no more, than that King John in his
great necessities and troubles pressing upon his Tenants in capite, the great
Lords and others, by taxing them proportionably according to their Knights
Fees, they endeavored by those Charters all that they could to restrain him
from any such Assesments which should go further then a reasonable aid, unless
in the cases there excepted; and aimed at no more, then that a Common Counsel
(which was not then called a Pryn's Animadversions upon Coke's 4. part of the
Institutes.
Parliament) should be summoned (not annually) of all Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, and greater Barons; and all the Tenants in capite, being those
that were most concerned therein, (nor as our Parliaments now, but only as to
their aids and services, as Tenants in capite) were upon forty days notice to
appear at the same time and place, given in general by the King's Sheriffs and
Bailiffs, and sic facta submonitione negotium procedat ad diem assignatam
secundum M. Par. 257.
consilium eorum qui prae sentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint,
and could not be intended of our now House of Commons in Parliament, many years
after (first of all, and never before) introduced or constituted: that
praefiction of Forty days probably first creating that opinion, which (can
never arrive unto any more then) that every summons of such a Council or
Meeting was to be upon so many days notice or warning; which Mr. Pryn, upon an
exact observation of succeeding Parliaments, has found to be otherwise: Pryn's
Animadversions upon Coke's 4. part of the Institutes.
much of the boisterousness, haughty, and long after unquiet minds of some of
those unruly Barons being to be attributed to the over-strained promises and
obligations of William the Conqueror, (before he was so) to his Normans, and
other Nations that adventured with him, upon an agreement and Ordinance made in
Normandy before his putting to Sea, (which the King of France had in the mean
time, upon charges and great allowances made unto him, undertaken to guard) and
long after, by the command of King Edward III. then warring in France in the
20th. year of his Reign, was by Sir Barth. Burghersh and others sent from
thence in the presence of the Keeper or Guardian of England, and the whole
Estate declared in Parliament as a matter of new discovery, and designs of the
French happened in the traverse and success of those wars; which probably might
make the Posterity of some of them (although the Ancestors of most of them had
been abundantly recompensed by large shares of the Conquest, Gifts and Honors
granted by the Conqueror, to a more than competent satiety, extended to the
then lower Ranks of his Servants, Soldiers, or Followers; as, that to de
Ferrariis, the Head afterward, and chief of a greater Estate and Family in
England than they had in Normandy; and might be the occasion of that over-lofty
answer of John de Warrennis Earl of Surrey, in his answer to some of the
Justices in Air, in the Reign of King Edward I. when demanded by what warrant
he did hold some of his Lands and Liberties? he, drawing out a rusty Sword,
(which he did either wear, or had brought with him for that purpose, said, By
that which he helped William the Conqueror to subdue England) so greatly to
mistake themselves, as to think (which the Lineage of the famous Strongbow Earl
of Pembroke, and some eminent Families of Wales in the after-Conquest of
Ireland, never adventured to do) that the Ancestors of them and others, that
left their lesser Estates in Normandy, to gain a greater in England to be added
thereunto, had not come as Subjects to their Duke and Leige-Lord, but
Fellow-sharers and Partners with him; which they durst not ever after claim in
his lifetime, or the life of any of his Successors before, in the greatest
advantages they had of them, or the many Storms and Tempests of State which
befell them; but might be well content, as the words of the Ordinance it self do
express, Tabulae censuales Angliae, Or Dooms-daybook. Dugdale's Baronage, (...)
^ome ^it. Warren. Earl of Surrey, and Ferrers Earl of Derby; and his Preface to
the Antiquities of Warwickshire illustrated.
That they and their Progenies should acknowledge a Sovereignty unto the
Conqueror, their Duke and King, and yield an Obedience unto him and his
far-fam'd Posterity, as their first and continued Benefactors.

And those their Liberties and Privileges freely granted by those Charters,
and not otherwise to be claimed) were so welcome, and greatly to be esteemed by
the then Subjects of England Magna Charta 9 H. 3. c. 31.
as they returned him their gratitude and thankfulness for them, in a
contribution of the fifteenth part of all their Movables, with an Attestation
and Testimony of the Wiser, more Noble, and Powerful part of the Kingdom, (viz.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Eleven other Bishops, Nineteen Abbots, Hubert de
Burgh Chief Justice, Ten Earls, John Constable of Chester, and Twenty-one
Barons, men of Might and great Estates; amongst which there were of the
contending and opposite Party, Robert Fitz Walter, (who had been General of the
Army raised and fighting against his Father) the Earls of Warren, Hereford,
Derby, Warwick, Chester, and Albemarl, the Barons of Vipont and Lisle, William
de Brewere, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, who
afterward fought against that King, and helped to take him Prisoner,) That
those Charters were given and granted unto them, and other his Subjects the
Freemen of his Kingdom, of his own free will and accord.

And as to that of being not 9 H. 3. c. 29.
condemned without Answer or Trial, (which in the infancy of the World was by
the Creator of all Mankind recommended to its imitation, as the most excellent
Rule and Pattern of Justice, in the Trial and Sentence of Adam and Eve in
Paradise) are not to be found enacted or granted in King Edward the Confessor's
Laws, or the Charters or Laws of King Henry I. the people of England having no
(or little) reason much to value or rely upon the aforesaid Charters of King
John, gained indirectly, by force, about two years after his as aforesaid
constrained Resignation of his Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Ireland, to
hold of the Pope, and Church of Rome, by an yearly Tribute, being not much
above Thirty years before, and not then gone out of memory.

SECT. V.
Of the continued unhappy Iealousies, Troubles, and Discords betwixt the
discontented and ambitious Barons, and King Henry III. after the granting of
his Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta.

ALmost two years after which, the King in a Parliament at Oxford declaring
himself to be of full age, and free to dispose of the affairs of the Kingdom,
cancelled and annulled the Charter of the Forests, as granted in his Nonage,
when he had no power of Himself, or his Seal, and therefore of no validity;
caused a Proclamation to be made, that both the Clergy and Laity that would
enjoy their Liberties, should renew their Charters, and have them confirmed
under his new Seal, paying for them according to the will of Hubert de Burgh,
his Chief-Justiciar, upon whom was laid the blame of that matter; and shortly
after, the King and his Brother, Richard Earl of Cornwall, being at discord
about the Castle of Barkhamstead, which the Earl claimed to belong to his
Earldom; and the Earl being threatened to be arrested, fled to Marlborough,
where the discontented Lords joining unto him, did cause an Insurrection, and
required restitution to be made, without delay, of the Liberties of the
Forests, cancelled at Oxford; otherwise he should be thereunto constrained by
the Sword.

In anno 12o. of his Reign, a Parliament was assembled at Northampton, where an
agreement was made, and the Lands of the Earls of Britain and Bologne restored
unto them.

In the 16th. year of his Reign, although he put out Hubert de Burgh,
Chief Justice of England, (in which Office much of the business of the Lord
Treasurer were in those times concentered) and severely called him to an
account for Debts due to him and his Father, Mat. Paris 380. Spelman glossar'
331, 332.
Rents and Profits of all his demesne Lands, since the death of William
Marescal Earl of Pembroke, in England, Wales, Ireland and Poicteau, of the
Liberties of Forests, Warrens, County-Courts, and other places, qualiter
custodiae sint vel alienatae, de priis factis pro jure suo relaxando tam in
terris quam in Nobilibus, of wastes made sine commodo ipsius Regis tam per
guerram quam alio modo, of Liberties given unto him, Bishoprics and Custodies,
without Warrant, quae pertinent ad Dominum Regem, of wrongs and damages done to
the Pope's Legates and Clarks, contra voluntatem Domini Regis per auctoritatem
ipsius Huberti tunc Iusticiarii qui nullum concilium voluit apponere ut illa
corrigerentur quod facere tenebatur ratione officii sui, de pace Regis qualiter
sit custodita, as well concerning homines terrae suae Angliae, Hyberniae,
Gasconiae, and Pictaviae, quam alios extraneos, de scutagiis, carucagiis,
donis, and xeniis, sive custodiarum exitibus spectantibus ad Coronam de
maritagiis; which he had by grant of King John the day that he dyed, and de
aliis maritagis sibi traditis tempore suo and de ipsis quae ipse Rex amisit per
negligentiam ipsius Huberti; And so fiercely prosecuted him, as he caused him
by force to be dragged from the Altar in the Sanctuary, Imprisoned, and, as Sir
Henry Spelman says, did afterward charge Stephen Segrave with many of the
like, and displaced him: Yet the Lords threatened, not to come to his Council,
unless he would reform his errors.

And in the 17th. year of his Reign, a Parliament was summoned at Oxford,
whither they likewise refused to come, because they were despised by Strangers;
whereupon it was decreed that they should be a second or third time summoned,
to try if they would come.

After which, those refractory Lords were summoned to come to a Parliament at
Westminster, whither they denied also to come, unless he would remove the
Bishop of Winchester, and Daniel 154.
the Poictovins from his Court; otherwise by the Common Counsel of the Kingdom,
they sent him express word, they would expel Him and his evil Counselors out
of the Land, and deal for the creation of a new King; whereupon Pledges being
required of the Nobility, for security of their Allegiance, no Act passed in
that Parliament, though diverse Lords came thither, as the Earls of Cornwall,
Lincoln, Ferrers, and others; But in regard that the Earl-Marshal, the Lord
Gilbert Basset and others were not present, Writs were sent to all that held by
Knights-Service to repair to the King at Gloucester by a certain day; whither
the Earl-Marshal and his Associates refusing to come, the King, without the
Judgment of their Peers, caused them to be proclaimed Outlaws.

Anno 19o. of his Reign, after two years troubles and misery, a Parliament was
assembled at Westminster, where the King consented to call back the dis-herited
Lords, upon the Bishops threatening to excommunicate Him and his evil
Counselors.

Anno 20o. Henry III. a Parliament was assembled at London, which the King
would have there to be holden, but the Barons would not come, unless it might
be another place; whereupon a place of more freedom was propounded, where many
things were proposed, and order taken that all Sheriffs should be removed from
their Offices upon complaint of corruption, and others of more Integrity put in
their rooms, upon their Oaths not to take any gifts.

When the King offering to take away the great Seal of England from the Bishop
of Chichester, Daniel 157.
he refused to deliver it, saying, He received it by the Common Counsel of the
Kingdom, and without their assent he would not resign it.

A Parliament was held at London, anno 21o. Henry III. wherein he required the
Thirtieth part of the Movables as well of the Laity as Clergy; But it was
alleged, that the people were unwilling to have it given to Aliens; whereupon
the King promises Anno 21 H. 3.
never more to injure the Nobility, so that they would relieve him at the
present, for that his Treasure was exhausted; Daniel 157.
To which they plainly answer, That the same was done without their counsel;
neither ought they to be partakers of the punishment, who were free from the
fault. Howsoever, after four days consultation, the King promising to use the
counsel of his natural-born Subjects, and freely granting the inviolable
observation of their Liberties under pain of Excommunication, had yielded to
him the Thirtieth part of all their Movables, (reserving their ready Coin,
Horse and Armor, to be employed for the defense of the Commonwealth) which was
ordained to be collected by four Knights of every Shire, who should upon their
Oaths receive and deliver the same into some Abbey or Castle, there to be
reserved, that if the King should not perform his promises, it might be again
restored; upon condition often annexed, That the King should leave the counsel
of Aliens, and only make use of his natural Subjects. Yet, although he caused
the Earls Warren and Ferrers, and John Fitz-Geffry, to be sworn of his Council,
that could not reach to a satisfaction of those that were not so willing as
they ought to be satisfied: when the King also, in performance of his promise
to the Bishops and Nobles, had in that Parliament, for the salvation of his
Soul, and exaltation of the Church, (being of full age) re-confirm'd the great
Charter of the Liberties of the Forests, attested by twelve ^Ro' Cart. 21. H.
3. m. 7.
Bishops, eight Earls, and Simon de Montford, and William Longspee, twenty-six
Barons and great Men, notwithstanding they were granted during his minority:
complaints were made of the wast and profusion of his Treasure, and great sums
of money raised in his time; and that the Orders concluded in Parliament were
not observed, in the levying and disposing of the Subsidy; and overstrict
courses had been taken in the valuation of men's Estates; William Valence, the
Queens Uncle, was grown the only man with him, and nothing was done without
him; the Earl of Provence, his Father, (a poor Prince) was invited to come into
England, to participate of the Treasure and Riches thereof; Simon de Montfort,
a French- man born, banished out of France by Queen Blanch, was entertained in
England, preferred secretly in marriage with the King's Sister; Widow of
William Earl of Pembroke; the great Marshal made Earl of Leicester, (and
Steward of England) in the right of his Mother Amice, Daughter of Blanchmains
Earl of Leicester: Which incensing many of the Nobility, and in them not a few
of the common people, did begin to raise a Commotion, wherein they procured
Richard Earl of Cornwall, Brother to the King, and Heir-apparent, (the King
having then no Child) to head their Party, and manage their Grievances; which,
amongst many pretended, were, That he despised the counsel of his natural
Subjects, and followed that of the Pope's Legate, as if he had been the Pope's
Feudatory; Upon which harsh Remonstrance, the King having sent to sound the
affections of the Londoners, found them to be against him.

Summoned a Parliament in the 22d. year of his Reign at London, whither the
Lords came armed, both for their own Safety, and to constrain him, if he
refused, to the keeping of his promises, and reformation of his courses;
wherein, after many debatements, the King taking his Oath to refer the business
according to the order of certain grave men of the Kingdom, Articles were
drawn, sealed, and publicly set up, under the Seals of the Legate, and diverse
great Men; But before any thing could be effected, Simon Montfort working a
Peace for himself with the Earls of Cornwall and Lincoln, with whom he and the
other Barons had been before displeased, the Earl grew cold in the business;
which the other Lords perceiving, nothing more was at that time done. Simon
Norman, called Master of the King's Seal, and said to be Governor of the
affairs of the Kingdom, had the Seal taken from him, and some others whom the
Nobility maligned, displaced.

And in the same year an Assassinate attempting to kill the King as he was in
Bed, instigated thereunto by Mat. Paris 458, 459. Matthew of Westminster 249
Pryn's hist. of the Pope's Usurpation in England.
William de Marisco the Son of Jeffrey de Marisco, was for the Fact drawn in
pieces with Horses, and afterward hanged and quartered. And some years after,
the King having a Son born, (his Brother the Earl of Cornwall having likewise
Issue) did, by permission of the State, which before he could not obtain,
undertake the Cross, and with him the Earl of Salisbury, and many other
Noblemen. The Earl of March, the Queen Mother, and certain Lords of Poicteau,
incited the King to make a War with France; to which some of the English, who
claimed Estates therein, were very willing; but the matter being moved in
Parliament, a general opposition was made against it, the great expenses
thereof, and the ill suceess it lately had; and it was vehemently urged, That
it was unlawful to break the Truce made with the King of France, who was now
too strong for them; notwithstanding, many of the Peers, in the hopes of
recovering their Estates, so prevailed, as an Aid demanded for the same was
granted; but so ill resented by others, as all the King's supplies, from the
beginning of his Reign, were particularly and opprobriously remembered, as the
Thirteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth, Thirtieth and Fortieth part of all men's
Movables, besides Carucage, Hydage, Escuage, Escheats, Amerciaments, and the
like, which would, as they said, be enough to fill his Coffers; in which
considerations also, and reckonings, with the Pope's continual exactions, and
the infinite charge of those who undertook the Holy War, were not omitted;
besides, it was declared, how the Thirtieth lately levied, being ordered to be
kept in certain Castles, and not to be issued but by the allowance of some of
the Peers, was yet unspent, the King no necessary occasion for it for the use
of the Commonwealth, for which it was granted; and therefore resolutely denied
to grant any more; whereupon he came himself to the Parliament, and in a
submissive manner craving their aid, urged the Popes Letter to persuade them
thereunto; but by a vow made unto each other, all that was said was not able to
remove their resolutions, insomuch as he was driven to get what he could of
particular men, by Gifts, or Loans; and took so great a care of his poorer
Subjects, at or about the same time, as he did by his Writ in the 23d. year of
his Reign command William de Haverhul and Edward Fitz-Odo, That upon Friday
next after the Feast of ^Ro'clause 23 H. 3. m 14. and 18 and 80.
St. Matthias, being the Anniversary of Eleanor Queen of Scotland his Sister,
they should cause to be fed as many Poor as might be entertained in the greater
Hall of Westminster; and did in the same year by another Writ command the said
William de Haverhull to feed 15000 Poor at St. Peter's in London on the
Feast Day of the Conversion of St. Peter, and 4000 Poor upon Monday next after
the Feast of St. Lucie the Virgin in the great Hall at Westminster; And for
quiet at home whilst he should be absent in France, contracted a marriage
betwixt his youngest Daughter Margaret, and Alexander eldest Son of Alexander
III. King of Scotland; but his expedition in France not succeeding, his
Treasure consumed upon Strangers, the English Nobility discontented, and by the
Poictovins deceiving his Trust, in their not supplying him with money: he was,
after more than a years stay, (the Lords of England leaving him) constrained to
make a dishonorable Truce with the King of France, and to return, having been
relieved with much Provisions out of England, and Impositions for Escuage, a
Parliament was in the 28th. year of his Reign assembled at Westminster, wherein
his Wars, the revolt of Wales and Scotland, who joined together, and the
present occasions of the necessary defense of the Kingdom, being pressed,
nothing could be effected without the assurance of Reformation, and the due
execution of Laws; whereupon he came again himself in person, and pleaded his
own necessities; but that produced no more than a desire of theirs, Daniel 161.
to have ordained, that four of the most grave and discreet Peers should be
chosen as Conservators of the Kingdom, and sworn of the Kings Council both to
see Justice observed, and the Treasure issued, and ever attend about him, or at
least three or two of them: That the Lord Chief-Justiciar and Lord Chancellor
should be chosen by the general voices of the States assembled, or else be of
the number of those four; and that there might be two Justices of the Benches,
two Barons of the Exchequer, and one Justice for the Jews; and those likewise
to be chosen by Parliament, that as their Function was public, so should also
be their Election. At which time the Pope sending his Legate with a large power
to exact money for himself, his Agent was disgracefully returned, with an
answer, That the Kingdom was poor, the Church in debt, and it was of a
dangerous consequence to the State to be exposed to the will of the Pope; and
therefore seeing a General Council was shortly to be held at Lions, if the
Church would be relieved, it were fit to be done by a general consent of that
Council.

And the Emperor Frederick at the same time, by his Letters to the King, which
were openly read, desiring, as he had often before, That the Pope might have no
supplies ou of England; for that therewith he did oppress him, by seizing upon
his Castles and Cities appertaining to the Empire: notwithstanding his often
submissions, desire of Peace, and offers to refer the cause to the arbitration
of the Kings of England and France, and the Baronage of both Kingdoms; and
entreating that he might not receive a detriment, whence as a Brother and
Friend he expected a favor, added, that if the King would be advised by him,
he would by power free the Kingdom from that unjust Tribute which Pope Innocent
III. and other Popes had laid upon it; Which pleasing the Assembly, the
business took up so much time, as (the design of a share in the Government,
something like, if not worse then a Co-ordination, meeting with no concessions
or effect) they only granted an Aid to the King for the Marriage of his
Daughter, 20 s. of every Knights Fee, not without much ado, and repetition of
all his former Aids; although at the same (or much about that) time they could
not be ignorant that he had by his Writ commanded Hugh Gifford and William le
Brun, that Ro' claus. 28 H. 3.
upon Friday next after the Epiphany they should cause to be fed in the Hall at
Windsor, ad bonum focum omnes pueros pauperes and egenos quos invenire
poterint, ita quod aula impleatur si tot inveniantur.

The Charters were again ratified, which confirmation is printed in the
perclose or latter-end of those in the 9th. year of that persecuted Prince,
after a proposal of Conservators, and election of Judges and Lord Chancellors,
rejected, which was urged, and much insisted upon.

After which, and his return from an expedition with great charges into
Scotland, a Parliament was summoned, where he moved for an Aid against an
Insurrection in Wales, and for money to supply his wants, and pay his Debts,
which were so great, as he could not stir out of his Chamber for the clamor of
those to whom he owed money for Wine, Wax, and other necessaries of
Housekeeping: which wrought so little, as to his face they denied to grant him
any thing; and enquiry being made what Revenues the Romans and Italians had in
England, they found them to have been annually 60000 Marks; which being
notified to the General Council at Lions, the Pope was so vexed therewith, as
he was said to have uttered these words, The King begins to Frederize, it is
fit that we make an end with the Emperor, that we might crush these pety
Kings; for the Dragon once destroyed, these lesser Snakes will soon be trodden
down.

In the 32d. year of his Reign a Parliament being convoked, he was upon
requiring another aid sharply reproved for his breach of promises; and it was
alleged, that his Judges were sent in Circuit under pretense of Justice to
fleece the people; that his needless expenses amounted to above 800000 l. and
advising him to recall the old Lands of the Crown, and pull them from his
Favorites, enriched with the Treasure of the Kingdom, told him of his Oath
made at his Coronation.

Complained, that the Chief-Justiciar, Chancellor and Treasurer were not made
by the Common Counsel of the Kingdom, according as there were in the time of
his Magnificent Predecessors; although they could not at the same time deny him
that Right which was justly due unto him; that he had by his Writs Ro' claus.
32 H. 3. m. 15.
commanded the said William de Haverhul and Edward of Westminster, quod
singulis diebus a die natalis domini usque ad diem circumcisionis, computatis
illis duobus diebus, impleri faciant magnam aulam Regis de pauperibus; and in
the same year by his Writ commanded William de Haverhul his Treasurer, and
Edward Fidz-Odo, to feed upon the day of Edward the Confessor, pauperes in
magna aula Westmonasterium, sicut fieri consueverunt and ipsis Monachis
Pittanciam eodem die sicut consueverunt faciant.

The King promised redress, but nothing was effected: so that after sundry
meetings, and much debate, the Parliament was prorogued until Midsummer
following; and at the next Session he tells them, that they were not to impose
a servile condition upon him, or deny him that which every one of them might
do, to use whom they pleased as Counsel; Every Master of a Family might place
or displace what Servants he pleased; Servants were not to judge their Masters,
nor Subjects their Prince, or hold them to their conditions; and that he that
should so incline to their pleasures, should not be their King, but as their
Servant.

And being constrained to furnish his wants with the sale of his Plate and
Jewels, his Crown of Gold, and Edward the Confessor's Shrine, and with great
loss received money for them, enquired who had bought them; whereunto answer
being made, that the City of London had bought them; Daniel in the life of K.
H. 3. 164, 165.
That City (said he) is an inexhaustible Gulf: if Octavius' s Treasure were to
be sold, they would surely buy it.

Howsoever, being besides constrained to borrow 20000 l. of the City of London,
he wrote to every Nobleman and Prelate apart, to borrow money, but got little;
the Abbot of Ramsay lent him 100 l. but the Abbot of Burgh could not spare him
so much, although the King told him, It was more Alms to give unto him, than to
a beggar that went from door to door.

The Lords in the, 4th. year Daniel 165. Ro' pat. 35 H. 3. m. 6.
of his Reign assembled again at London, and pressed him with his promises,
that the Chief-Justiciar, Chancellor, and Treasurer should be constituted by
the general Council of the Kingdom; but by reason of the absence of the Earl of
Cornwall, nothing was done therein.

The King demanding Mat. Paris 580, 581, 583.
aid of his Prelates and Nobility assembled in Parliament, they by agreement
amongst themselves stoutly denied it; which greatly troubling him, he showed
them the Note or Roll what moneys some few Abbots had lent unto him, with an
Ecce, how little it was! with which not being able to remove their fixed
resolutions, he with some anger expostulating, told them, Ero ne perjurus?
juravi sacramento intransgressibili transfretans jura mea in brachio extento a
Rege Francorum reposcam, quod sine capioso thesauro qui a vestra liberalitate
procedere debet nequaquam valeo; and that not prevailing, called aliquos sibi
familiares affatus eos dit quid perniciosius exemplum aliis praebetis? vos qui
Comites and Barons, Milites strenui, estis non deberetis etsi alii timeant,
scilicet, Praelati Ecclesiae trepidare; avidiores caeteris deberetis jura Regni
resposcere and contra injuriantes Martia certamina potenter experiri, nostram
partem solidare and consolari tenetur jus nostrum quod habemus; and qua front
poteritis dominum vestrum ad tam arduum negotium Reipublicae procinctum
relinquere pauperem and desolatum, cum tenear promissa de transitu meo
adimplere jurejurando strictius obligatus? All which proving ineffectual, made
the King to be more angry; insomuch as jurans cum sanctorum attestatione, quod
nullo revocaretur terrore nullis verborum ambagibus circumventus ab incepto
proposito revocaretur, quin' in Octavis Paschae naves ascendens fortunam belli
in partibus transmarinis contra Francos imperteritus experiretur: and sic
solutum est concilium, utrobique reposita sed occulta mentis indignatione.

Dispositis igitur navalibus armamentis commendataque Regni custodia
Archiepiscopo Eboracensi Idus Maii, dispositis legionum suarum agminibus and
repletis triginta Cadis desideratissimis Esterlingis Comitante Regina fratreque
suo Richardo Comite cum aliis septem Comitibus, 300 Circiter militibus Naves
ascendens versus Burdegalinos iter direxit prospere velificando.

After which, and many other troubles and distresses accumulated and thronging
in upon him one after another, he did in the 34th. year of his Reign send his
Precept to the City of London, requiring them with all their Families, even to
a Child of 12 years old, to come upon the Sunday next after the Feast Sanctorum
perpetuae and felicitatis unto him in the great Hall of his Palace of
Westminster, where appeared such a multitude, as the Hall and Yard were
wonderfully crowded, Quibus congregatis Dominus Rex humiliter quasi lachrymis
abortis, did supplicate them, that every one of them would with heart and mouth
pardon the anger and ill will which they had against him, confessed that He and
his Ministers had often wronged them in their Goods, Estates and Liberties, and
prayed them to pardon him.

Which wrought so much compassion (for the time) in them, as, although they had
no restitution, they did not think fit to repeat their Sufferings: that Design
availing the King as little as the pity of the Men, Women and Children of
London did, when those that were fit and able to bear Arms did not long after
fight as well as they could against him at the Battle of Jews, where he was
taken Prisoner, and suffered him to be carried a year and a quarter together by
an Army of Rebels, to London and Westminster, and to several other parts of the
Kingdom, and never offered to Relieve or Rescue Him.

In or about the 35th. year of the Reign of King Henry III. Mat. Par. 812, 15.
Henry de Bathenia, miles literatus legum terrae peritissimus Regis
Justiciarius and Conciliarius specialis, being in Parliament, diffamatus and
graviter accusatus, quod sibi unimim amicus quod in unum annum Domini Regis
subdolus supplantatur in officio Justiciario sibi commisso crumenas aliorum and
suas impregnatas non erubuit nec formidavit hinc inde delinquentes recipere
ambidexter; In brevi ita illico ditabatur in redditibus maneriis auro and
argento; ut nulli Justiciariorum secundus videretur; and grew so haughty in the
strength and assistance of the Families of the Bassets and m^fords, as he
almost scorned and despised every man: insomuch as the King being very angry
with any that interceded for him, answered John Mansel, Clerk, (much employed
and favored by him, who had offered to be his Bail) that he should stare
Justiciae; that non oportet aliquem Clericum pro eo fide-jussorem in tali Casu
reputans causam hanc esse crimen laesae Majestatis, accedente igitur Episcopo
Londinensi, and quamplurimis intercessoribus admissus est custodiae and plegio
viginti quatuor militum qui pro ipso Henrico responsionem and justificationem
rite and just facerent dato termino factorum. Whereupon the said Henry de
Bathenia, vafer and circumspectus, making all the Friends he could to pacify
the King, and finding nothing could prevail, made an Address to the Earl of
Cornwall the King's Brother: who not prevailing, was heard to say unto some of
his friends, Non possumus deesse Nobilibus in jure suo, nec paci Regni
turbantis.

After all which, in the same year, by adjournment, the business of Henry de
Bathe coming again into question in Parliament, and debate, Rex persequebatur
undique, graviter ab adversariis suis fuerat impetitus and accusatus, Rex autem
ira maxima accensus contra eum qui venerat multo stipatus milite de genere
Uxoris suae and amicis and suis propriis accusavit ipsum gravius caeteris,
imponens eidem inter caetera quod totum Regnum perturbavit and barnagium
universum contra ipsum Regem exasperavit, unde seditio generalis imminebat
fecit igitur acclamari voce praeconia Londini, and in Curia ut si quis aliquid
haberet actionis vel querelae adversus Henr' de Bathenia, veniret ad Curiam
ante Regis praesentiam, ubi plene exaudiretur; Insurrexerunt igitur multi
queruli contra eum, ita quod unus etiam sociorum suorum, scilicet and
Iusticiarius, palam protestaretur quod unum faconirosum Convictum and
incarceratum abire permisit impunitum sine judicio opinus respectus muneribus
quod factum est in Regis praejudicium and justiciariorum Comitum suorum
periculum and discrimen.

Rex igitur magis inde provocatus ascendit superius, exclamavitque dicens, si
quis Henricum de Bathenia occiderit quietus sit a morte ejus and quietum eum
protestor; and sic propere recessit Rex. Et fuerunt ibi multi qui in ipsum
Henricum irruissent, nisi Domini Johannis Mansel prudentia eorum impetum
temperans refrenasset; Dixit enim, Domini mei and amici, non est necesse quod
in ira prepropere dicitur prosequamur, paenitebit enim forte Dominum nostrum
jam elapso irae tempore haec jutonuisse; praeterea si aliquid violentiae ipsi
Henrico intuleritis, ecce Episcopus Londinensis, qui spiritualem and alii amici
ejus militares qui vindictam exercebunt materialem; and sic in magna part
cessavit. Extunc igitur procurante efficaciter Comite Richardo and Episcopo
memorato nutius actum est cum eo, dictum enim est Domino Regi secretius quod
mirum est quod aliquis ei curet servire cum eis post ministerium etiam mortem
mittitur infer, promissa igitur quadam pecunia summa a mortis discrimine
recessit liberatus. Which the King was so unwilling to be cozened of, as he
took a care to have paid in this manner, as the Record thereof will evidence,
viz. Rex omnibus, etc. universitas vestra Ro' clause 37, and 46 H. 3.
(noverit) nos de bono cord penitus remisisse dilecto and fideli nostro Henr'
de Bathenia, and propriae familiae omnem indignationem and omnem rancorem quem
erga ipsum Henricum pro quibuscunque transgressionibus usque ad diem Dominicam
proximam post festum translationis beati Thomae Martyris, anno, etc. tricesimo
quinto, ita tamen quod pro remissione illa dabit nobis praedictus Henricus duo
millia marcarum, unde solvet nobis ducentas marcas per annum, videlicet, in
Festo Sancti Michaelis anno eodem cent' marc', and ad Pasch' prox' sequen'
cent' marc', and sic de anno in annum ad eosdem terminos cent' marc' donec
praedicta duo millia marc' nobis fuerint persoluta and si forsitan contigerit
quod praefat' Henr' medio tempore in fata concesserit, antequam praedicta
pecunia nobis fuerit persoluta, haeredes sui eandem solutionem facient ad
eosdem terminos sicut praedictum est and perdonationis eidem Henr'
amerciamentum in quod incidit per attinctam quam Thomas de Muleton arramavit
versus ipsum de ten' in Holbech and Querpilan' idem etiam Henr' juri omnibus de
eo conqueri volentibus etiam nobis in Curia nostra, secundum Legem and
Consuetudinem Regni nostri, in cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Wodestock, octavo
die Julii, T. Johanne Mansel, and Richardo Fill Nicholai.

In the mean time, Lewis King of France warring in the Holy Land, and being
taken Prisoner, the Pope solicited him to take upon him the Cross to rescue
him, Alphonsus the King of Castile undertaking to accompany him, and the
captive King offering to restore Normandy to the King of England for his
assistance; which the French disdaining, and undertaking themselves to procure
his Ransom, upon the Pope's granting a Tenth to be leavied upon the Clergy and
Laity for three years: the King undertakes notwithstanding the Cross, upon the
hopes of getting the money, (which, Mat. Paris.
says Matthew Paris, being collected, would have amounted unto 600000 l.) as
was then believed, more than to perform his promise.

Whereupon shortly after a Parliament was holden about the Tenth granted by the
Pope for the recovery of the Holy Land: where the Bishops, notwithstanding that
he had for the ease of his Subjects severely accused in Parliament Henry de
Bathonia, one of his Justices, for receiving of Bribes, were first dealt
withal, absolutely denied it; and the Lords alleging they would do as the
Bishops did, the City of London was again compelled to the contribution of 2000
l. The Gascoigns likely to revolt, if a speedy remedy were not provided,
general Musters were made, and command given, that every one that could dispend
13 l. per annum, should furnish out an Horseman; which, together with his
extreme wants, occasioned another Parliament, who finding it to be better for
the people to do it in the usual way, than force him to those extravagant (as
they called them) courses which he took, were, after fifteen days consultation,
in the 37th. year of his Reign, (although they could not be then ignorant that
he had but lately grievously punished and expelled the Caursini, the Pope's
Bankers, or money-Collectors and Brokers, and could not deny his own wants,
which appeared in the pawning of his Jewels and Ornaments; and in the end, as
Sir Robert Cotton (if he were the Author of the short view of that King's Life
and Reign) has recorded it, had not means to defray the diet of his Court, but
was constrained to Mat. Paris 758, 811, 812. Ro' claus. 37, 46 H. 3.
break up Housekeeping, and (as Mat. Paris says) with his Queen, cum
Abba^ibus and Prioribus satis humiliter hospitia and prandia quaerere) to
satisfy the King's necessities: but so as the reformation of the Grievances,
and ratification of their Laws, might be once again solemnly confirmed. A Tenth
was granted by the Clergy for three years, to be distributed by the view of
certain Lords; and three Marks Scutage for every Knights Fee to be charged upon
the Laity for that year: insomuch as those often-confirmed Charters were again
agreed to be ratified in the most solemn and religious way that Relion and
State could ever devise to have it done, Pryns hist. col. of the Pope's
Usurpation in England, 107. Daniel in the life of K. H. 3.
after this manner, viz. the King, (who in all Excommunications was, with the
Lords Temporal, by the Laws and reasonable Customs of England, to give their
assent before it could sortiri effectum, or have any validity) with many of the
great Nobility of England, all the Bishops and chief Prelates in their Reverend
Ornaments, with Candles or Tapers in their hands, walking in a direful
Procession through Westminster hall into the Abbey-Church of Westminster, there
to hear the terrible Sentence of Excommunication pronounced against the
Infringers of the aforesaid Charters granted by him. At the lighting of which
Candles the King having received one in his hand, gave it to a Prelate that
stood by him; saying, It becomes not me, being no Priest, to hold the Candle,
my heart shall bear a greater Testimony; and withal laid his hand upon his
breast the whole time that the Sentence was reading, which was pronounced
autoritate de omni potentis, etc. Which done, he caused the Charter, of King
John his Father, granted by his free consent, to be likewise openly read, and
the rest of the company throwing away their Candles, which lay smoking on the
ground; all cried out, So let them who incur the Sentence, be extinct, and
stink in Hell: The King with a loud voice, saying, as God me help, I will, as I
am a man, a Christian, a Knight, a King Crowned and Anointed, inviolably
observe those things; which Ceremony ended, the Bells rung out, and all the
people shouted with joy.

But it is not to be forgotten (although Matthew Paris, Samuel Daniel, and all
other Writers but Mr. William Pryn make no mention of it) in this astonishing
and dreadful Ceremony, in the like whereof never were Laws (says Mr. Daniel)
amongst men (except the Decalogue from Mount-Sinai) promulgated, and pronounced
with more Majesty of Ceremony, to make them heeded, reverenced, and respected,
than were those that wanted Thundering and Lightning from Heaven: acompanied
with an Earthquake shaking the very Foundations thereof.

The King did not desert his own regal Rights, and Preheminencies; but did at
the same time, when in that dreadful manner, he joined in the Pronunciation of
that Sentence of Excommunication with his own mouth publicly, except out of it
all the Ancient and Accustomed Liberties of the Realm, and the Dignities and
Rights of the Crown; and the same day caused a Record thereof to be made, yet
extant in the Tower of London in these words, viz.

Noverint Universi quod Dominus Henricus Rex Angliae Illustis l Ro' pat. 37 H.
3. m. 12. in dorso.
R. Comes Norf. and Marshallus Angliae, H. Comes Horeford, and Essex, J. Comes
de Warren, Petrus de Sabaudia, caeterique Magnates Angliae concesserunt in
sententiam Excommunicationis generaliter latam apud Westmonasterium tertio
decimo die Maii Anno Regni Regis predicti 37. in hac forma, scilicet, quod
vinculo praefatae sententiae ligentur omnes venientes contra libertates
contentas in ehartis communium libertatum Angliae, and de foresta, and omnes
qui libertates Ecclesiae Angicanae temporibus Domini Regis and Praedecessorum
suorum Regum Angliae optentas and usitatas scienter and malitiose violaverint
aut infringere praesumpserint, and omnes illi qui pacem Domini Regis and Regni
perturbaverint and similiter omnes qui jura and libertates Domini Regis and
Regni diminuere, infringere, seu immutare praesumpserint and quod omnes
venientes contra praemissa vel eorum aliqua ignoranter and legitime moniti
infra quindenam post monitionem praemissam dictam transgressionem non
emendaverint ex tunc praedictae sententiae excommunicationis subjacebunt ita
tamen quod Dominus Rex transgressionem illam per considerationem curiae suae
faciat emendari, sciendum autem quod si in scriptis super eadem sententia a
quibuscunque confectis seu conficiendis aliud vel aliter appositum vel adjectum
fuerit aut articuli aliqui alii in eis contenti inveniantur, Dominus Rex and
praedicti Magnates omnes and communicatas populi protestantur public in
praesentia venerabilium patrum B. Dei Gratia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi totius
Angliae Primatis, nec non and Episcoporum omnium in eodem colloquio
existentium, quod in ea nunquam consenserunt, nec consentiunt, sed de plano eis
contradicunt, praetere a praefatus Dominus Rex in prolatione praefat'
sententiae omnes libertates consuetudines Regni sui autiquas and usitates and
Dignitates, and jura Coronae suae ore proprio specialiter sibi and Regno suo
salvavit and excepit. In cujus rei memoriam, and in posterum veritatis
testimonium, tam Dominus Rex, quam praedicti Comites, ad instantiam aliorum
Magnatum and Populi, praesenti scripto sigilla sua apposuerunt.

Gascoign, a great Province in France, having been, before the King had any
Son, granted by him, by the counsel of the Lords, to his Brother Richard Earl
of Cornwall, who was there received as their Lord, and so continued, until the
King had Issue of his own: after which, revoking his Grant, and conferring it
upon his Son Edward, the Earl, though he were deprived of his Possession, not
being willing to forgo his Right, the King in great displeasure commanded him
to resign his Charter: which he refusing to do, the Citizens of Bordeaux were
commanded to take and imprison, but would not adventure thereon;
Notwithstanding, money being offered, and like to effect more than his command,
the Earl, in danger to be surprised, came over into England; whereupon the King
assembled the Nobility of Gascoign, promised them 30000 Marks to renounce their
homage and fealty to his Brother; which being not accepted, he sent Simon
Montfort Earl of Leicester, (a rough and martial man) in revenge thereof, to be
their Governor under him for six years, and furnished him with 1000 Marks in
order thereto: whom Montfort, by a stern Government, so discontented, as they
and the Archbishop of Bordeaux accused him of heinous Crimes, which was a cause
of Montford s sending for over. And the King, resolute in maintaining the
Gascoigners, that sturdy Earl Montfort, who had forgotten that he was an Alien
himself, and had received of the King large Gifts, Preferments, and Honors
both in France and England, (unto whom the Earl of Cornwall, with the
discontented part of the English Baronage, joining) complained as much of the
Aliens, viz. William of Valence, Earl of Pembroke, Guy de Lusignan, the King's
half-brothers by his Mother, and the many French and Poictovins, that overmuch
governed him, and his Counsels, as they did again complain of the breach of the
Great Charter, which was seldom omitted out of the Rear of their grievances;
which at last came to such an undutiful contest, as Montfort upbraiding the
King with his expenceful service, wherein he alleged he had utterly consumed
his Estate, and said that he had broken his word with him: the King in great
rage told him, That no promise was to be observed with an unworthy Traitor;
wherewith Montfort rose up, and protested, that he lied in that word; and, were
he not protected by his Royal Dignity, he would make him repent it. The King
commanded his Servants to lay hold of him, which the Lords would not permit;
wherewith Montfort growing more audacious, the King told him, He never repented
of any thing so much, as to have permitted him to enter into his Kingdom, and
to have honored and instated him as he had done.

But shortly after, the Gascoigns being again encouraged by the King against
Montfort, and that Province given to his Son Edward, and Montfort sent thither
a Governor again, though with clipped wings, grows enflamed as much, as the
Gascoigns were one against another; but Montfort, by his great Alliance with
France, overcame them: who in the 38th. year of the King's Reign, being
discharged of the Government, retired from thence, and refusing an offered
entertainment by the French King, returned into England; where the King,
besides Gascoigny, having given Ireland, Wales, Bristol, Stamford, and Grantham
to the Prince, and consumed all that ever he could get in that and the former
expeditions which he had made, which was reckoned to have cost him Twenty seven
hundred thousand pounds, which were said to have been more than the Lands
endeavored to have been regained were worth, if they were to be sold.

A Parliament was called in Easter-Term following, which brought a return of
grievances, and complaints of the breach of Charters, and a demand for former
pretended rights in electing the Justiciar, Chancellor, and Treasurer;
whereupon, after much debate to no purpose, the Parliament was prorogued until
Michaelmas next after, when likewise the King's motion for money was
disappointed, by reason of the absence of many Peers, being not (as was
alleged) summoned according to Magna Charta. In the mean time the Pope, to
destroy Manfred Son to the Emperor Frederick, who was in possession of the
Kingdom of Sicily and Apulia, sent the Bishop of Bononia with a Ring of
investiture of the Kindom of Sicily to Edmond the King's second Son, (with the
hopes of which his Praedecessor Innocent IV. had before deluded the King
himself.)

And the King being offered to be absolved from his Oath of undertaking the
holy Wars, so as he would help to destroy Manfred the Emperor Frederick's Son,
who being Victorious, had no mind to be so ill used. The Legate returned with
great gifts, and a Prebendary of York, but could not obtain his design of
collecting the Tenths in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the use of the Pope
and the King; for that the Clergy growing jealous, m that the (...)g and the
Pope were confederate therein, protested rather to lose their Lives and
Livings, than to be made a prey to either: the Pope in the mean time having
upon that vain hope, cunningly wrapped him in an obligation of 15000 Marks.

Upon complaint of the Gascoigns, who were under the Government of the Prince,
that their Wines were taken away by the King's Officers, without due
satisfaction; and the Prince thereupon addressing himself to his Father in
their behalf; and the Officers, in excuse of themselves, informing the King,
that the Prince took upon him to do Justice therein, when it belonged not to
him: the King was put in a great rage, and said, Behold, my Son and my Brother
are bent to afflict me, as my Grandfather King Henry II. was. And being put to
his shifts to supply his necessities, came himself into his Exchequer, and with
his own mouth pronounced and made Orders for the better bringing in of his
Revenues, Farms, and Amerciaments, under severe penalties, that every Sheriff
which appeared not yearly there in the Octaves of St. Michael, with his money,
as well of his Farms and Amerciaments, as other dues, for the first day should
be amerced five Marks, for the second ten, for the third fifteen, and for the
fourth should be redeemed at the King's pleasure; all Cities and Freedoms to be
amerced in the same manner, and the fourth day making default, were to lose
their Freedoms; the Sheriffs amerced five Marks for not distraining upon every
man that having 20 l. Lands per annum, came not to be made Knight, unless he
had before been freed by the King: And by examinations of measures of Ale and
Wine, Bushels and Weights, got some small sums of money; and about the time of
Richard Earl of Cornwal's going to Germany, (where he was, by the privity and
approbation of the Council of State in England, elected King of the Romans)
called a Parliament: where bringing his Son Edmond clad in an Apuleian-habit,
he said, Behold my Son Edmond, whom God has called to the dignity of Regal
Excellency: how fitting and worthy is he of your favor; and how inhumane were
it, in so important a necessity, to deny him counsel and aid! and showed them
how, by the advice and benignity of the Pope and the Church of England, he had,
for the obtaining of the Kingdom of Sicily, bound himself under the penalty or
covenant of losing the Kingdom of England, in the sum of 150000 Marks; and had
obtained the Tenth of the Clergy of all their Benefices for three years,
according to the new rates, without deduction of expenses; besides their
first fruits for three years: whereupon, after many excuses of poverty, they
promised, upon the usual condition of confirmation of Magna Charta, to give him
32000 Marks; But that not satisfying,

The next year another Parliament was holden at London; where he pressing them
again for money to pay his debts, the Lords told him plainly, They would not
yield to give him any thing; and if he unadvisedly bought the Kingdom of
^icilly, and was deceived in it, he was to blame himself therein; And repeating
their old grievances, the breach of his promise, contempt of the power of the
Church, and the Charter which he had solemnly sworn to observe, with the
insolency of Strangers, (especially of William de Valence, who most
reproachfully had given the lie to the Earl of Leicester, for which he could
not, upon complaint to the King, have right done him) how they abounded in
Riches, and himself so poor, as he could not repress an Insurrection of the
Welsh: The King thereupon promised, by his Oath taken upon the Tomb of St.
Edward, to reform all his errors. But the Lords, in regard the business was
difficult, got the Parliament to be adjourned to Oxford; and in the mean time
the Earls of Gloucester, Hereford, the Earl Marshal, Bigod, Spencer, and other
great men, confederated and provided by strength to effect their desires.

The King Mat. Par. 977. and in additament is.
driven into necessities, did, the better to appease those often-complain'd-of
grievances, when his own were burden enough, by his Writs or Commissions sent
into every County of England, appoint quatuor milites qui considerarent quot
and quantis gravaminibus simpliciores a fortioribus opprimuntur and inquirent
diligenter de singulis querelis and injuriis a quocunque factis, vel a
quibuscunque illatis a multis retroactis temporibus and omnia requisita sub
sigillis suis se cum Baronagio ad tempus sibi per breve praefixum certificent;
which by any Record or History do not appear (says Spelmans Glos(...).
Sir Henry Spelman) to have been ever certified.

And to obtain money, procured the Abbot of Westminster to get his Convent to
join with him as his surety in a Bond for 300 marks; sent Simon Paslieu, his
trusty Councellor, with Letters to other Monasteries to do the like, but they
refused. And the Prince participating in the wants of his Father, was for want
of money constrained to mortgage the Towns of Stanford, Benham, and other
Lands, to William de Valence. So that upon the aforesaid adjournment, and
meeting of the Parliament at Oxford, in the 42d year of his Reign, brake out
those great discontents which had been so long in gathering; whither the Lords
brought with them great numbers of their Tenants by Knights-Service, Mat. Parit.
(which were many) followers, dependants, and adhaerents, upon a pretense of
aiding the King, and going against the Welsh: where, after they had secured the
Ports, to prevent Foreign aids, and the Gates of the City of London, with their
oaths and hands given to each other not to desist until they had obtain their
ends, began to expostulate their former Liberties, and require the performance
according to the Oaths and Orders formerly made; the Chief-Iusticiar,
Chancellor and Treasurer to be ordained by public choice; the twenty four
Conservators of the Kingdom to be confirmed, twelve by the election of the
Lords, and twelve by the King, with whatsoever else might be advantageous for
their own security; Whereupon the King, seeing their strength, and in what
manner they required those things, did swear again solemnly to the confirmation
of them, and caused the Prince to take the same Oath. Of which Mat. Westminster.
Treasonable Contrivances, Matthew of Westminster, (an ancient English
Historian of good credit) has recorded his opinion in these words: Haec de
provisionibus imo de proditionibus Oxon* dicta sufficiant. And here yet they
would not rest, the King's Brethren, the Poictovins, and all other strangers,
were to be presently removed, the Kingdom cleared of them, and all the Peers of
the Land sworn to see it done. The Earl of Cornwal's eldest Son refusing to
take the Oath without leave of his Father, was plainly told, That if his Father
would not consent with the Baronage in that Case, he should not hold a Furrow
of Land in England. In the end, the King's Brethren and their followers were
despoiled of all their fortunes, and banished by order under his own hand, with
a charge not to pass with any Money, Arms or Ornaments, other than such as the
Earls of Hereford and Surrey should allow and appoint; with an injunction to
the City of Bristol, or any other Ports, not to permit any strangers, or
Kinsmen of his, to come into England, but such only as the King and the Lords
should like.

The Poictovins landing at Boloign, had much-a-do to gain passage into their
own Countries, by reason that Henry de Montfort, Son to the Earl of Leicester,
whose power was very great in France, had followed them thither. Rumors were
spread amongst the people in England, that the Earl of Gloucester was attempted
to have been poisoned; and one of his Servants executed, upon no other proof
but presumption; and every one that would complain of the Poictovins, wanted no
encouragement.

Richard Gray, whom the Lords had made Captain of the Castle of Dover,
intercepted as much as he could of what the Poictovins carried over, and
enriched himself thereby. The new Chief Justice Hugh Bigod, Brother to the Earl
Marshal, being chosen in the last Parliament by public voice, procured an
order, that four Knights in every Shire should enquire of the poor oppressed by
great men, and certify the same to the Baronage under their hands and seals;
which were never found to have been certified; And made an Order, that no man
should give any thing (besides Provisions) for Justice, or to hinder the same;
and that both the corrupter and corrupted should be grievously punished.

Notwithstanding which pretended care, the Lords enforceing the service of the
King's Tenants which dwelt near unto them, were as totidem Tyranni, furnished
the especial Fortresses of the Kingdom with Garrisons of their own, sworn to
the common State; and took the like assurance of all Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Coroners, and other public Ministers, with strict Commissions upon Oath to
examine their behavior.

And to make the King and his actions the more odious, and their own more
popular, it was rumoured, that the King's necessities must be repaired out of
the Estates of his people; and he must not want, whilst they had it.

Whereupon the King, to defend himself from such scandals, was constrained to
publish his Declaration, to desire the people to give no credit to such false
suggestions; for that he was ready to defend all Rights and Customs due unto
them.

Howsoever, Montfort, Gloucester and Spencer, who had by the late constitution
of the twenty-four Conservators drawn the entire managing of the Kingdom into
their hands, enforced the King to call a Parliament at London, where the
authority of the twenty-four Conservators was placed in themselves, and order
taken that three at the least should attend at the Court, to dispose of the
custody of Castles, and other business of the Kingdom, of the Chancellor,
Chief-Justiciar, Treasurer, and all other Officers great and small, and bound
the King Daniel 177.
to release to them their legal Obedience, whenever he infringed his Charter.

In the mean time, the Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, being dispossessed of
that Kingdom, or not well liking it, returning into England, the Barons send to
know the cause of his coming, and require of him an Oath before he should land,
not to prejudice their late established Orders of the Kingdom; which he sternly
refused, saying, He had no Peer in England, being the Son and Brother of a
King, and was above their power; and if they would have reformed the Kingdom,
they ought first to have sent for him, and not so presumptuously have attempted
a business of so high a nature. The Lords, upon return of such an answer, sent
to guard the Ports, came strongly to the Coast, prepared to encounter him, and
the Mat Paris 983.
King, Queen, and their Son Edmond, in a more loving manner go to Dover to
receive him; but neither they nor the Earl of Cornwall were by them permitted to
enter into the Castle, for that it was the chief Fortress of the Kingdom. But
finding the Earl of Cornwal's Train small, they suffered him to land; and did,
upon his promise to take the propounded Oath, bring him and the King into the
Chapterhouse at Canterbury: where the Earl of Gloucester. standing forth in the
midst, in the presence of the King, called forth the Earl, not by the name of
King, but Earl of Cornwall; who in reverend manner coming forth, took his Oath,
That he would be faithful and diligent with the Barons to reform the Kingdom,
by the counsel of wicked persons overmuch disordered; and to be an effectual
Coadjutor to expel Rebels, and disturbers of the same, under pain of losing all
the Lands which he held in England. After which, both parties strengthening
themselves all they could, the King for the assurance of the King of France, ex
praecepto and consilio Domini Regis Angliae, and totius Baronagii, sent the
Earls of Mat. Paris 986. Daniel 178.
Gloucester Leicester, Peter de Subaudia, John Mansel, and Robert Walerand, to
the Parliament of Paris, de arduis negotiis Regna Angliae and Franciae
contingentibus, carrying with them a resignation of the Duchy of Normandy, and
the Earldoms of Anjou, Poicteau, Turaine, and Main, for which the King of
France was to give him three hundred thousand pounds, with a grant of all Guyen
beyond the River of Garonna, all the River of Xantoigne to the River of
Charente, and the Counties of Limosin and Quercy, to him and his Successors,
dong his Homage and Fealty to the Crown of France, as a Duke of Aquitain, and a
Peer of that Kingdom.

After whose return, Montfort, as he had incensed others, so had he those that
animated him against the King; as, Walter Bishop of Worcester, and Robert
Bishop of Lincoln, who enjoined him upon the remission of his sins, to
prosecute the cause unto death; affirming, that the peace of the Church of
England would never be established, but by the Sword.

But the people being oppressed and tired at length with those commotions,
part-takings and discords, which, by the provisions wrested from the King at
Oxford, and so many mischiefs and inconveniences, had harassed, and almost
ruined them, and did help to increase rather than decrease those troubles and
controversies which afflicted the Nation: it having never been easy to bring
those that were to be governed, to rule with any modesty or moderation those
that had enjoyed a governing power in authority, established and appointed by
God, in a well-tempered Monarchy, and succession for many Ages; or those that
were to govern, to obey the giddy and unjust dictates of those who were to obey
them; or to unite in any contenting harmony the various ambitions, envies,
revenges, hatreds, partialities, self-interests, and designs of many, or a
multitude; or such enforcements and contrivances to be lasting, durable, or
pleasing; and that all could not well rule, or agree how to do it.

M. Paris 992
The King and Queen keeping their Christmas in the Tower of London, cum suis
consiliariis, (says Matthew Paris) elaboratum fuit tam a Regni Angliae
pontificibus quam a Regni Franciae, ut pax reformaretur inter Regem Angliae and
Barons, ventumque est ad illud, ut Rex and Proceres se submiserunt ordinationi
Regis Franciae, in praemissis provisionibus Oxoniae, nec non pro
depraedationibus and damnis utrobique illatis, who had been so good a friend to
the rebellious Barons, and so great a favourer of them, as after his expulsion
out of England, whither they had invited him, toaid and assist them against K.
John, and an agreement made with K. Henry III. his Son, to restore unto him the
Duchy of Normandy, and the other Provinces which he had from him in France, as
he denied to re-deliver them, until the Liberties claimed by the English
Barons, his old Friends, should be confirmed unto them, by whose Quarrels with
their Sovereigns, he had gained many great advantages, to the wrong and damage
of the Crown of England.

And was all the while a very great enemy both to the King and his Father, who
notwithstanding was with the Prince his Son. Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of
the Romans, with others of the Loyal Nobility of the Kings part; and the
contending Rebellious Lords of the other side, by mutual Oaths, tactis
sacrosanctis Evangeliis, in the 47th. year of his Reign, did undertake to
perform and abide by his award, so as it were made and pronounced betwixt that
and the Feast of Pentecost then next ensuing: unto which none of the Commons of
England do appear to have been parties. Whereupon the Mat. Paris 992.
King of France taking upon him the said arbitration, congregato in crastino
sancti Vincentii Ambiomis populo pene innumerabili coram Episcopis, and
Comitibus, aliisque Francorum proceribus solemniter dedit sententiam pro Rege
Angliae contra Barons Statutis Oxoniae, provisionibus, ordinationibus, ac
obligationibus penitus annullatis, hoc excepto quod antiquas Chartas Regis
Johannis Angliae universitati concessas per illam sententiam in nullo
intendebat penitus derogare.

And made his award accordingly in writing: an exemplification or Inter Recor^
in recept' scienti apud Camerar.
authentic Copy whereof is yet to be seen amongst the Records in His now
Majesty's Treasury at Westminster.

Quae quidem exceptio Comitem Leicestriae, and coeteros qui habebunt sensus
exercitatos (says Matthew Paris) compulit in praeposito tenere firmiter
Statuta Oxoniae que fundata fuerant super illam Chartam.

Et eo tempore redierint a Francia qui Parliamento, Regis Francia interfuerant,
Rex, videlicet, Angliae Henricus, and Regina Eleanora, Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis Bonifacius, Petrus Herefordensis Episcopus, and Johannes Mansel;
qui Baronibus, (says that Monk of St. Albans) mala quanta potuerunt, non
cessabant machinari.

Which exception could neither absolve them from their Oaths so solemnly taken
to perform the award which the King of France had made, or purge them from
their former and after Rebellions against King Henry III. or their ill usage of
him.

SECT. VI.
That the Exceptions mentioned in the King of France's award of the Charter
granted by King John, could not invalidate the whole award, or justify the
provisions made at Oxford, which was the principal matter referred unto him.

FOr that the contrivance of the twenty-four Conservators, and what else was
Mat. Paris 261.
added thereunto by the aforesaid Provisions and constrained Ordinances made at
Oxford, was never any part of the Magna Charta, or the Charta de Foresta,
enforced from King John, but a security separate and collateral thereunto,
framed and devised at the same time, for the better observation and performance
of those Charters, which the preamble of that security, (of which Matthew Paris
has at large left unto posterity an exemplar) may abundantly evidence, in the
words following, (viz.) Cum autem pro Deo and ad emendationem Regni nostri and
ad melius sopiendam discordiam, inter nos and Barons nostros, haec omnia
concessimus volentes ea integra and firma stabilitate gaudere facimus and
concedimus eis securitatem subscriptam, viz. quod Barons eligant viginti
quinque Barons de Regno nostros quos voluerint, etc. and does greatly differ,
both in the material and formal parts thereof, from the provisions afterward
enforced at Oxford, as by a just collation and comparison of that collateral
security with those provisions, may appear: where care is taken but for
twenty-four Conservators, twelve to be chosen by the King, and twelve by those
factious Lords, who would likewise engross to themselves and their party the
nomination of the Chancellor, Treasurer, two Chief-Justices, two of the
Justices of both the Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer, and have the making
of the Chief Justice of the Jews; to which the King and his Son the Prince were
sworn; but to the Running-Mead unkingly shackles or security, the King and
those masterly Barons were only sworn, and that not thought sufficient, without
some principal Castles of the Kings were to be put into hands of those
Conservators; and that upon complaint made to the King or his Chief Justice, if
reformation were not made within a time limited; the Conservators and the
common people were to distrain, and gravere eum, (which would amount to a
licensed Rebellion) with a salvis personis only of the King and his Queen and
Children; all the great men of the Kingdom, and the common people, and as many
as would, being also to take their Oaths to be aiding and assisting to those
Conservators, (in a kind or much resembling the late ASSOCIATION) who were
themselves to take their Oaths well and truly to execute their multiplied
Kingships, and clip, as much as they could, the more just Authority and Rights
of their Sovereign: But in those of Oxford there was so much kindness showed to
themselves, and care taken of their own tender consciences, as not to be sworn
at all, and must needs be an excellent contrivance for the invisible good of
the Kingdom, and a rare performance of their Homage, Fealty, and Oaths of
Allegiance, to take the power and authority from a King, which should enable
him to perform his Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, freely granted unto
them, and put it into their own hands to break those Charters and his Oaths,
and to protect and do Justice unto his people, as often as their malice,
ambitious envies, avarice, revenge, interests, designs, corruptions, or
domineering passions of themselves and their Wives, (being not a few in number)
and their numerous adhaerents, should incite or persuade them unto; and were so
confident of their overruling party, no provision being at all made in those
which were made at Oxford, if any discords should arise in the election of the
one twelve, or the other; or in the continuance of their agreements together,
shares, or parts in the Government of their King and Fellow Subjects, as
believing that the power of the twelve Barons chosen by themselves, would be
either praedominant over the twelve which were to be named by the King, or
their newly-usurped authority would be so complaisant and well-pleasing unto
all the twenty-four, as flattery, fear or interest would so quiet any (to be
supposed) discords, as they should not need to fall out at a Feast, or divide,
disturb, or destroy themselves by Factions: the security given at Running-Mead
ordaining only twenty-five Conservators, without any election of a part or
moity of them by the King, and to be upon occasion of any breach or offense
done by the King or his Justiciar, erga aliquem in aliquo, vel aliquem
articulorum pacis vel securitatis, (which clearly divides the security or
Conservatorships, from the Articles of Peace and Charters compelled at
Running-Mead, as far asunder as a disjunctive, or matters of another nature,
sense, or purpose could effect) reduced to four, and that which was referred to
the King of France, neither King John's Charter, nor the collateral enforced
security, by the power of a Rebellious and unruly Army, when he had but seven
Knights to stand by him, and was over-awed by a Clergy claiming to be
independent of him, and out of the power and coertion of his Laws; had the
Pope's. Legate at their elbow, and his afrighting pretense of God-like
Omnipotency, with their threatening to excommunicate him and his Counselors,
and all that should adhere unto him; And, as if that had not been enough,
practicing and plotting with a discontented powerful party of the Barons
against him: But singly and seperately, that which was the present
Controversy, and cardo quaestionis, were the provisions made at Oxford, where
per mensem integrum persistebant consilits and armis; of which, and the Hen.
Knight. de eventibus Anglia.
reference to the French King thereupon, Henry Knighton (an Author much
inclined to the contending part of the Baronage) gives us an account in these
words: Publicatis Statutis and executioni demandatis, displicuerunt multa Regi
and paenituit eum sic jurasse sed quia resistere non potuit, ex arrupto
dissimulavit ad tempus, cumque elapso anno non videret se ut promiserant a
debitis relevari, (which Henry Knighton affirms they promised) sed magis
Onerari, in multum condoluit, and missis ad Papam Nuntiis quoad sacramentum
praestitum absolutionis beneficium consecutus est, and quoad se and suos omnes
absolvit et^am Papa indifferenter omnes ab eodem juramento, ut citius inter se
in vinculo pacis unirent, siatimque absolutione optenia resilivit Rex a
praemissis, and convocato Parliamento suo Oxoniae quaestionem movit magnatibus
suis, se quantum ad provisiones tenendas callide quidem inductum and seductum,
in super quod ad sacramentum praestitum, and pro se and suis universaliter
omnibus absolutionis benificium generaliter impetrasse unde petiit se ad omnia
restituti, sicut antiquitus esse consuevit.

At illi qui convenerant Comes, scilicet, Leicestrensis Simon de Montforti,
Comes Gloucestriae Gilbertus de Clara, Humfridus de Boun juvenis, Comes
Ferarensis; Barons etiam quam plurimi, scilicet, Dominus filius Johannis,
Dominus Henricus de Hastinges, Dominus Galfridus de Lucy, Johannes de Vescy
juvenis, Dominus Nicholaus de Segrave, Hugo le Spencer, and Robertus de
Vesponte, (no Commons) pro se siquidem and suis sequacibus unanimiter
respenderunt quod provisiones ad quas juramento astricti fuerant usque in finem
vitae tenere voluerunt eo quod pro utilitate Regis, and Regni communiter editae
fuerant and confirmatae.

Dumque vota Men. Knight. l. 2. inter histor. antiq. scriptur. Anglic. 245, and
246.
sua sic mutassent in varia impacata recedere voluissent, quidam Episcopi
aderant qui interposuerunt parts suas ita quod ipsis and aliis amicis
communibus sic cum difficuliate mediantibus compromiserunt parts utrimque se
velle stare in omnibus arbitrio Regis Franciae.

Qui quidem Rix auditis hinc inde propositis and diligenter ponderatis decrevit
in fine Regi Angliae exhaereditationem fieri manifestam, unde Statuta eorum
quasi omnia reprobavit, and eidem Regi statum pristinum restitui, imponens
aliis silentium quantum ad jura Regalia ordinanda.

Motique Magnates and indignantes necesserunt stare nolentes ejus arbitrio, ^o
quod pro Rege omnia Rex ipse adjudicavit.

Wherein the Charters of King John, either as to the Forests, or concerning the
other Lands, Liberties and Estates of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons and Freemen of England, or any the controversies raised thereupon, do
not appear to be any part of the matters referred to the King of France's
arbitration, neither are in his award thereupon mentioned, in the transcript
thereof, remaining amongst His Majesty's Records, or declared by Matthew Paris,
or Henry Knighton) to be any parcel of the controversies referred unto him, or
inducing the same; for the Charter of King John, therein by Matthew Paris said
to be excepted, is in the singular number, and distinguishable from that of the
Forests, and cannot howsoever, in any probability, be intended to be the
aforesaid collateral over-binding security, nor could that be comprehended
under that notion; for the Charters granted by King John have nothing therein
of the after-provisions made at Oxford, which were not in his said Charters
mentioned, nor can be accounted the same, when they were not then existent, but
were framed, hatched and brought forth forty-three years after the Charters
gain d at Running Mead, which were not the same with that separate and
collateral bond, or unfitting security, wherein the King, besides those
Charters, did covenant to expel all aliens and strangers out of the Kingdom,
and omnes ruptarios, breakers of the peace thereof, (some of which were therein
particularly named) qui sunt ad nocumentum Regni, granted a general pardon
omnibus Clericis and Laicis, of all offenses committed by reason of the said
troubles and discords from Easter before, (which was in the ^6th. year of his
Reign) to the making of that pacification; and moreover, gave unto them the
Letters Testimonials and Patents of the Archbishops of Canterbury and Dublin,
Pandulphus the Pope's Legate, and other Bishops, super securitate ista
concessionibus praedictis, the Charters being only a grant of the King's to to
the Bishops, Earls and Barons, and the rest of the Freemen and Subjects of
England, not as if they were before free and exempt from the just Monarchical
and Regal Government, but contra-distinguished from Bondmen and Bond-women,
Copyholders, Servants, etc.) which needed no Oaths from the Grantees, or those
which might be glad to receive the Benefits and Liberties granted thereby.

For the contrivance of that fatal and too-long-lasting Seminary of Sedition
and Discord betwixt the King and those Barons, and that unfitting security to
pacify their unbecoming jealousies, being no part of the Charters granted by
King John, were but as covenants and promises extorted from an over affrighted
and distressed Prince, and were not the same upon which the provisions of
Oxford were founded, nor incorporate in them.

So that the provisions made at Oxford must needs be those, and none other,
which the King of France and his Parliament and great Council, upon so grand
and deliberate a hearing, declared to be null and void, as derogatory to Kingly
Government, and amounting to a total dis-herison of the King therein; and if
they were not those provisions, the maintainers of any such opinion are to show
what other provisions made at Oxford in the Reign of King Henry III. were
referred unto him, or condemned by him.

It being not to be understood by any, that will not make their ignorance,
self-conceitedness, designs and evil purposes to be the rules of their reason,
that the exception of King John's Charter was to be extended to the collateral
security, and when they have sweat and labored at it beyond any the rules of
Reason and Learning, will never be able to entice or draw any religious, good,
wise or learned men to subscribe to such a paradox, That twenty-five
Conservatorships should be intended or understood to be only Twenty-four, and
those subcommitted to Four; that the King's putting into his rebellious Barons
hands four of the strongest Castles which he had, as pledges and security, with
power for all that would to take Oaths, to distrain and take arms, and set the
common people upon him: were, or are within the true meaning or construction of
that Magna Charta; or that it was ever within the meaning, intention, or words
of that Magna Charta, granted by him unto his Subjects, to be holden of him and
his heirs in capite, that the word or notion of Liberties mentioned therein,
should or could beget a Law, Rule, or Custom, that those that were the
Grantees, and to be governed, should rule their Governors, (which no where
appears to be consonant to that Reason, Justice and Order which God Himself
praescribed, and gave as a rule for the better ordering of the Sons of men and
all their Generation;) or that the granter of those Liberties in those
Charters, did thereby ever intend, or so express, or understand, that by the
grant of those Liberties and Benefits, the Subjects of England were entitled
to a Right or Authority to govern their King; and if he do not therein behave
himself according to the Interests or Votes of a giddy multitude, (who are as
seldom to be pleased, as they are to be brought into one and the same opinion,
humor, interest, or design) should be vested with a power or authority to
compel him.

When no Histories, Annals, or Records of the Nation, or Writer new or old,
(except such as had been fooled and infatuated by Jesuitical Principles, fitted
and dressed up for some wickedly silly Presbyters and Fanatics, in the time of
that popular Frenzy in England, betwixt the years 1640 and 1661, and drank deep
of that Circaean Cup, and intoxicated themselves with the ungodly gains of
Rebellion against their Sovereign, by Murder, Plunder, and Sequestration of
Him, and their more loyal and honest Fellow Subjects) can tell us any News of
such Rights and Liberties, or inform us where any such were granted, duly
registered or authenticated, other than in or by the Records or Memorials of Wat
Tyler, Jack Cade, Ket, and their Rabble-rout.

Nor was it probable that so great a Council of wise or learned men should in
the penning or wording the King of France's aforesaid decree or award, in or
with the exception of King John's Charter, so much err, if they had understood
that it had made void the whole award, or that the Pope would have confirmed a
nothing, or such an award as should signify no more; or that the opposite
Barons would have taken it so ill, or believed that it had been so much against
them, as Henry Knighton related it, That the King of France had awarded all for
the King, if they had not understood the aforesaid provisions made at Oxford to
have been, ipso facto, null and void; neither can it by any men of Law, Reason
or Learning be adjudged, that that award could be as to the whole a nullity, by
reason of that exception, when the civil or Caesarean Law, that excellent
method of universal reason, by which the greatest part of the world was then,
before, and ever since contented to be guided, has taught us, that l. 2. ff.
de except.
exceptii est quaedam exclusio quae interponi actioni cujusque rei solet ad
excludendum id quod in intentionem, condemnationem ve deductum est; For, l. 1.
labeo scribit ff. de fluminibus. l. Tiriae text' pr'ff. de legat' Bart' in lib.
1. ff. de except'. l. de aetat' nihil interest ff. de interrog'.
excipere proprie est detrahere, and exceptio est quae partem aliquam de
universo Actoris jure detrahat; And these Laws have declared, that exceptio
obscura nihil est momenti; and obscure excipere, est nihil excipere; And our
English Laws and reasonable Customs have allowed us to say and believe, that
exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non exceptis, that a matter or thing not
excepted, is the more strengthened and confirmed, by what is excepted and
severed from it.

But it seems, says Mr. Pryn, that that award of the King of France was not
full and satisfactory to all parties, (although the King's permission thereupon
afterward made, charge the dissatisfaction on the Barons part) whom to
content as well as he could, he and the Barons, by mutual consent, did by their
Letters Patents, submit (as he said) that award to H. Bishop of London, H. le
Despencer, Justiciar of England, Bartholomew Earl of Anjou, Cousin-jerman to
the King of France, and the Abbot of Beck, to amend or correct, by way of
addition or detraction (in or to the said award) whatever they should judge
meet for the settling and securing of Peace.

And the King was so great a lover of Peace, and wellwisher of the good of his
people, as after he had granted unto them more Liberties than they could claim,
and in modesty could ask of a Sovereign that would preserve that Superiority,
and those Rights which God had given Him, for His own and the Peoples good,
which can never be, without an Obedience of Subjects, and a care of a Prince to
protect them, by doing justice to Himself as well as to Them; and was so
willing to give them satisfaction in any thing just or reasonable to be
desired, as he was content to wave and lay aside the advantage which he fairly
gained by the aforesaid award or ordinance of the King of France, in defense
and maintenance of his own just Rights, and therein of his means to govern and
protect them, (which no Prince in Christendom at that time would have done) and
at the same time adventure the censure or ill will of a neighbor Potent
Prince, that would not take it kindly to have an award made with so much
Justice, Judgment, and care, to be reviewed by a part of his People, and such
as were no friends to the Rights of Kings, and had been long in opposition to
their King, and encouraged a long and lasting Rebellion against him, and by
such a new reference or review, subjecting himself to the Excommunication and
Ecclesiastical Censures of the Pope's Legate, by which He and his Kingdom had
already so greatly suffered.

Yet, in that so great a Storm and Tempest of State would not so much injure
Himself, his Dignity, and occasional or necessary emergent affairs of
Government, as not to provide that they should not so much as speak, treat, or
ordain any thing, circa emendationem ordinationis, seu pacis praedictae per
quod Regnum Angliae, per alios quam indigenas gubernetur, nec castrorum
custodia, seu alia balliva Regno praedicto aliis quam indigenis fidelibus non
suspectis committetur, (which with a clause next following, might also probably
be inserted to please the Earl of Leicester, and to secure him from after or
former objections, that he was himself an Alien, or that such allegations might
not be any hinderance to him or William de Valence to have the custody of any
of the King's Castles, who had yet some Provinces in France, and was not
without Subjects that (as to England) were Aliens, as the ensuing Commission,
or Letters Patents in order thereunto, will demonstrate.

Rex Angliae, Pat. 48. (...). 3. m. 4. dorso,
S. de Monteforti Comes Leicestr', Gilbertus de Clare Comes Gloucestr' and
Hereford', Johannes filius Johannis, Johannes de Burgo senior, Willielmus de
Monte Canisio. Henricus de Hastings, Gilbertus de Gaunt, and caeteri Barons
and Magnates Angliae, (no COMMONS) universis Christi fidelibus ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem in Domino; cum super praeteritis
guerrarum discriminibus in Regno Angliae subortis, quaedam ordinatio seu forma
pacis de nostro Praelatorum, and totius communitatis Regni praedicti, unanimi
voluntate and assensu provida deliberatione inita fuerit, quam nuper Domino
Regi Franciae fecimus praesentari, and quam Deo gratam, nobis and Regno nostro
credimus opportunam, ac quidam ut intelleximus facti veritatem minus plene
intelligentes, ordinationem ipsam seu pacis formam minus sufficientem
asserentes, de quibusdam articulis in eddem insertis non fuerint contenti. Nos
ad pacem and tranquilitatem Regni praedicti totis vi(...)us, sicut tenemur,
laborare volentes ut justitia nostra and fac(...)ritas patefaceat and singulis
before innotescat, plenam damus po^estatem venerabili Patri H. London'
Episcopo, and Nobili viro Hugoni le Despencer Iustic' Angliae, and Nobilibus
viris Bartho' Com' Audeg praedicti Regis Franc' germano, and Abbati de Beccon,
inspiciendi and examinandi formam ordinationis seu pacis praedictae addendi and
detrahendi eidem, and emendandi, si quid addendum, detrahendum, seu corrigendum
viderint, and providendi omnem securitatem quam viderint opportunam, and ea
omnia quae ordinanda seu statuenda duxerint, firmiter observandi Nos autem
omnia and singula quae ipsi ad emendationem and observationem pacis ejusdem
ordinaverint, rata habebimus, and accepta subjiciendo nos jurisdictioni and
coertioni venerabilis Patris G. Sabin' Episcopi Apostolicae sedis Legati; ut
ipse per sententiam excommunicationis, and omne genus censurae Ecclesiasticae,
nos and omnes and fingulos compellere possit, si forte ordinationem
praedictorum in aliquo praesumpserimus contrahere, and si praedictus Com'
Audeg' praesens non fuerit, vel negotium istud in se assumere noluerit, volumus
quod Dominus de Neele, vel Dominus Petrus de Camberleng', loco ejusdem Com'
subrogetur; quod si praedicti quatuor in aliquo articulo pacis praedictae
discordes fuerint, judicio majoris partis eorundem stetur, and si Pares in
discordia fuerint, volumus ut venerabilis pater Archiepiscopus Rothomag' eis
associetur, and quod a majori part eorundem quinque concorditer fuerit
ordinatum, firmiter ob^^rvetur. Nolumus autem quod aliquid liceat eis dicere,
ordinare, seu statuere circa emendationem ordinationis seu pacis praedictae,
per quod Regnum Angliae, per alios quam per indigenas gubernetur, nec castrorum
custodia, seu alia balliva in Regno praedicto aliis quam indigenis fidelibus
non suspectis committetur: volumus etiam modis omnibus quod pax inter nos Regem
Angliae and praefatum Com Leicestr' super personalibus and specialibus
Querelis, questionibus, and contentionibus quas contra eundem Comitem habemus,
and ipse adversus nos, and de quibus posuimus nos in praedictum Regem Franc'
fiat and assecuretur antequam pax seu ordinatio praedicta finaliter compleatur.
In cujus rei testimonium huic scripto nos Rex Angliae, Com Leicestr' and
Gloucestr', Jo. Johannes, Willielmus, Henr' and Egidius, pro nobis and caeteris
Baronibus, and communitate Regni Angliae, sigilla nostra apposuimus, Dat' apud
Cantuar' die Jovis prox' post festum Nativ' beatae Virginis, an' Dom' 1263.

In assistance whereof, says Pryn's 2 tome of the History of King John, and
Henry 3.
Mr. Pryn, the King and the Barons having by common consent entered into
Articles of agreement under their hands, concerning the reformation of the
Realm of England, and referred themselves therein to the determination of the
King of France and the Pope's Legate, he did constitute three Procurators, to
conclude and consent on his behalf to whatsoever should be therein agreed, with
submission to the Legate's Ecclesiastical Censures and Excommunications, to
compel him to the performance thereof, in these words following, (viz.)

Pat. 48 H. 3. m. 13. juxtus.
Rex Angliae, omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem, Noverint universitas vestra, quod
nos ordinamus and constituimus venerabiles Patres W. Wygorn' and J. Winton'
Episcopos, and Nobilem virum Petrum de Monteforti, Procuratores and Nuntios
nostros solempnes, dantes eis potestatem tractandi in praesentia magnifici
principis Domini L. Dei gratia Regis Franc' illustris, and venerabilis Patris
G. Sabin' Episcopi Apostolicae Legati, vel alterius eorum, super reforma, tione
status Regni Angliae, and quod in hac part provisum fverit acceptandi, and
firmandi, seu etiam compromittendi super hoc in certas personas si viderint
expedire, ac omnem securitatem faciendi quam negotii qualitas requirit, and
quam nobis seu Regno praedicto viderint optimum dantes in super praefato Petro
potestatem jurandi in animam nostram, quod nos quicquid ipsi tres in praemissis
nomine nostro duxerint faciendum, ratum habebimus and acceptum, subjiciendo nos
jurisdictioni and coertioni praedicti Legati, ut ipse per sententiam
excemmunicationis, and omne genus censurae Ecclesiasticae nos compellere
possit, ad observatlonem praemissorum. In cujus, etc. Dat' apud Cantuar' die
Jovis praedicta, anno praedicto.

Wherein i^^s to be observed, that that was but (upon the matter) a
re-referrence to the King of France, the change being only in the assistant
Council, the most part whereof were French under his obeisance; and it was to
be but as an emendation, correction, or altering of some part, not all of the
award, which was made before, which was not by this latter referrence found or
declared to be void, or so much as contradicted, in any of the particulars of
the provisions made at Oxford adjudged against the Barons, or any thing to be
defective or redundant; nor was there any addition, correction, or
explicacation mad therein: So as that meeting and re-referrence proved to be
only an essay for a pacification.

For that haughty Earl Montfort hated the King, and endeavoring all he could
his destruction, so thwarted all his actions, and domineered over him, as the
King told him openly, That he feared him more than any Thunder or Tempest in
the world. Being not pleased with what had been proposed at that revisionary
Treaty, for what concerned his own particular interest and satisfaction, would
rather bleed and embroil the Nation, than acquiesce in those excellent Laws and
Liberties which the King had granted in his Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta,
(which, like two Jewels of inestimable price in her ears, did help to bless,
secure and adorn our BRITANNIA, whilst She sat upon Her Promontory, viewing
and guarding Her British-Seas) and did therefore draw and entice as many as he
could to go along with his envy, malice, ambition, and designs.

With which Ordination, Sentence and Award of the King of Daniels hist. in the
life of K. Henry III.
France against the Barons, many were notwithstanding so well satisfied with
the King, and so ill with Simon Montfort's proud and insolent demeanor, as
they withdrew themselves from the rebellious part of the Barons; and although
some for a while staggered in their Opinions and Loyalty, because (though the
King of France condemned the provisions made at Oxford, yet) he allowed King
John's Charter, whereby he left, as they pretended, the matter as he found it,
for that these Provisions, as those Barons alleged, were grounded upon that
Charter.

But a better consideration made many to dispense with their ill-taken Oaths,
and return to their Loyalty; as, Henry Son of the Earl of Cornwall, Roger de
Clifford, Roger de Leybourne, Hamo L'Estrange, and others.

And it is worthy a more than ordinary remarque, that that King of France and
his Council, upon view and hearing of so many Controversies and Tronsactions
betwixt our King Henry III. and his rebellious Barons, could not be strangers
to the former and latter attempts, ill-doings and designs of that Party of the
English Baronage, did so little approve thereof, and of their Parliamentary
Insolences, and Oxford Provisions, as his Grandchild or Successor, Charles
l'Oyseau des ordres Romans, c. 2. 24
Philip le Bell King of France, who reigned in the time of our Edward I. did
within less than forty years after, Pour oster (says l'Oyseau, a very learned
French Author) de la suitte le Parliament (qui lors estoit le conseil ordinaire
des Roys, voir leur faisoit Test bien sauvent) and luy oster doucement la
cognossance des affairs d'Estat, to the no great happiness, as it afterward
proved, of the French Nation) erigea un cour ordinaire, and le rendit
sedentaire a Paris don't encore il a retenu ce test de son ancienne institution
qu'il verify and homologue les Edicts du Roy.

And now the doors of Janus Temple flew quite open; the Prince, with Lewellin
Prince of Wales, Mortimer, and others, invade and enter upon the Lands of
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and some of the opposite Nobility; and the
Earl of Leicester was as busy on the other side, in seizing Gloucester and
Worcester.

Whereupon the King doubting Montfort's approach to London, i Daniel 179.
(being not yet ready for him) works so, as a mediation of Peace was assayed,
upon condition that all the Castles of the King should be delivered to the
keeping of the Barons, the provisions of Oxford inviolably observed, all
strangers by a certain time should avoid the Kingdom, except such as by a
general consent should be held faithful and profitable for the same. Here,
says the Historian, was a little pause, which seemed but a breathing in order
unto a greater rage; The Prince fortifies, victuals, and garrisons Windsor
Castle.

And the King, to get time, summoned a Parliament at London, where he won many
Lords to his party, and with them Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother, King of
Almaine, Henry his Son, William Valence, with the rest of his Brethren; marches
to Oxford, whither diverse Lords of Scotland repair unto him; as, John Common,
John Baliol, Lords of Galloway, Robert Bruce and others, with many English
Barons, Clifford, Percy, Basset, etc. from thence with all his Forces went to
Northampton, took Prisoner young Simon Montfort, with fourteen other principal
men; thence to Nottingham, spoiling the Possessions appertaining to the Barons
in those parts.

The Earl of Leicester draws toward London, to recover and make good that part
of his greatest importance, and seeks to secure Kent and the Ports; which
hastens the King to stop his proceedings, and to succor the Castle of
Rochester which he besieged: whereby Success and Authority growing strong on
the King's side, the Daniel 180.
Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, in behalf of themselves and their Party,
write unto the King, humbly protesting their Loyalty, allege, that they
opposed only against such as were enemies to Him annd the Kingdom, and had
belied them; unto which the King returned answer, that Themselves were the
perturbers of him and his State, enemies to his Person, and sought His and the
Kingdoms destruction, and therefore defied them; the Prince and the Earl of
Cornwall sending likewise their Letters of defyance unto them; who doubting the
hazard of a Battle, send the Bishops of London and Worcester (their former
encouragers) unto the King, with an offer of 30000 Marks for damage done in
those Wars, so as the Provisions of Oxford might be observed.

Which not being condescended unto, or thought fit to be allowed, Montfort with
his Partners seeing no other means but to put all to the hazard of a Battle,
made himself more ready than was expected, placed on the side of an Hill near
Lewis, where the Battle was to be fought, certain Ensigns without men, which
seemed afar off to be Squadrons ready to second his men, (whom he caused all to
wear White Crosses, both for their own notice, and signification of the candor
and innocence of his cause, which he desired to have believed to be only for
Justice.) And, as Rebels, first assaulting their King unexpectedly, began to
charge his Forces, who were divided into three parts; The first whereof was
commanded by Prince Edward the King's Son, William de Valence Earl of Pembroke,
and John Warren Earl of Surrey and Sussex; the second by the King of Almaine,
and his Son Henry; and the third by the King himself. The Forces of the Barons
ranged in four parts; whereof the first was led by Henry de Montfort, and the
Earl of Hereford; the second by Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford; John Fitz-John, and William of Mount-Chency; the third by the
Londoners, and Richard Segrave; and the fourth by Simon de Montfort Earl of
Leicester himself, and Thomas de Pelvesion; Walsingham ypodigma Neustriae, 469,
and 470.
And both sides fighting with as great manhood as fury, the Prince and his
Batalion, cum tanto impetu in hosts irruil, so beat and routed those that
stood against him, as he made them give back; many were slain and drowned, and
the Londoners put to flight; whom the Prince over-charging, and pursuing by the
space of four miles, and putting many of them to the Sword, was so out of
sight, and far gone from the King's Army, as made them weaker than otherwise
they would have been; Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle.
but at his return, instead of a Victory, found about 5000 of his Fathers Army
slain, the King of Almaine, Robert de Bruce, and John Common (who had brought
many Scots to the King's aid) taken Prisoners, with twenty-five Barons and
Bannerets on the King's party, and the King himself having his Horse killed
under him, made a Prisoner, and shut up in the Priory; Ita reversus Edwardus
gravi praelio excipitur; So as the Prince at his return was freshly set upon by
the prevailing party. The Earl Warren, William de Valence, and Guy de Lusignan,
and Hugh Bigod, with forty armed Knights, fled to Pevensey; And the Prince,
when he was returned to the Town of Lewis, sought his Father in the Castle; but
not finding him there, went to the Priory, where he found him. In the mean time
the conquering Barons assault the Castle, which they that were within so
stoutly defended, as the besiegers withdrew; which heartned the Prince, so as
he, recollectis suis voluit iterum praeliari, recollecting his Forces, had a
mind to try his and his Fathers fortune again, and fight it out, quo cognito
miserunt Barons mediatones pacis; which the Barons understanding, sent unto
him mediators to treat of a Peace, promising the next morning to do it with
effect; at which time the Friars, Minors and Mar. Paris 996.
Praedicants passing and laboring betwixt both parties, the matters were
adjourned until feria sexta some days after, when Prince Edward, and Henry the
King of Almaine's Son, were given as Hostages for their Fathers the Kings of
England and Almain, and sub spe pacis and quietis delivered to Earl Simon de
Montfort, in the hopes of a peace and agreement, ita ut cum deliberatione
tractaretur quae Provisionum and Statutorum essent pro utilitate Regni tenenda
and quae delenda; so as they might at leisure, and with deliberation, treat and
consider what Provisions and Statutes (probably those which had been made at
Oxford, the Darlings of their designs) were for the good of the Kingdom to be
kept, or what Laws were to be abrogated, such in all likelihood as might clip
the King's Regalities, and make them to be as much, if not more, King then
Himself.) And that in the mean time the Prisoners on both sides should without
any Ransom be set at liberty; Insomuch as the Sunday following all that had
been taken on both sides were licensed to go to their own habitations; and the
King, as the said Simon de Montfort had directed him, did write to those which
were in the Castle of Tunbridge in Kent, to deliver it up to Earl Simon, which
they did very unwillingly.

SECT. VII.
Of the evil actions and proceedings of Simon de Montfort and his rebellious
partners, in the name of the King, whilst they kept Him and his Son Prince
Edward, and diverse of the Loyal Nobility, Prisoners, from the 14th. of May in
the 48th. year of his Reign, until His and Their delivery by the more fortunate
Battle at Evesham the 4th. day of August in the 49th. year of his tormented
Reign.

THe old Lion thus taken and imprisoned, by the misfortune of his gallant
Whelp's over-chasing and pursuing of a part of his enemies in the day and
extremity of the Battle, his Rebels, when they had him, were at a stand what to
do with him: They durst not let him loose, for that would but restore him to
his strength and power, which his liberty might have regained: If they should
have murdered him, that would have been so wide from a fixed accomplishment of
their wickedness, as, though it might have gained them a quiet, or for some
time continued possession of a Kingdom, yet it was not at all likely to have
been settled to them and their heirs, whilst there was so wise and valiant a
Prince, and so many descendents of the Royal Line in remainder, which would
have been always wrestling and contending for it, by the aid and assistance of
a numerous, Loyal, and Potent Nobility, and the common people, who would be
able easily to distinguish betwixt right and wrong, would be more likely to
love the former, hate, and bend all their forces and ill wishes against the
latter, and mock and take all opportunities of revenge in the redemption of an
immured Sovereign, his Crown, Dignity and Lineage: And therefore it would
better suit with their wickedly-begun enterprises, and already-gotten
advantages, to make use of crafts and policy, and render his own power the
means the faster to ensnare and entangle him, by putting Him and his friends in
hope of a peace, which they would not be very hasty in, until they had gotten
his Castles and Strength into their hands, and drawn unto their party that part
of his Subjects that had not intermeddled in the quarrels betwixt them, but
like men amazed stood at a gaze, wondering at it, and might well distrust, and
be jealous of their former pretenses and promises, when the Prince, that had
made himself a Pledge and Hostage for his Father, that he might have his
liberty, found it was never intended but to keep him, with all his hopes and
fortunes, as much a Prisoner as himself.

And by those and other arts and contrivances, with their rebellious Army not
disbanded, but kept on foot to serve themselves and their Prisoners, carried
the King about with them from place to place, to countenance, against his will,
their evil designs and actions: the people (not of their party) not daring to
come either unto Him or Them, without Letters of safe conduct, which in the
King's name, whilst they played Rex with it and his Seal, they could grant and
write what they pleased in the language of their own design, with which the
Patent and Close Rolls of that year and the next, with their Dates and Test,
when they had him in their custody, are well stored; and in the mean time made
it to be a great part of their care and business, to cause to be delivered up
unto them, such Castles and places of strength, as either they feared, or had
not in their Possession, as Windsor, Notingham, Bamburgh, Carlisle cum multis
aliis, etc. Of which amongst many, one to to Drugo Barentyn, (who had then in
Windsor-Castle, the custody of Peter de Moutfort taken in Arms against the
King) may serve for instance, viz.

Rex Drugoni de Barentyn To. Paten 48 H. 3. m. 22.
Constabular: castri de Windsor salutem, quia specialia negotia vobis
communicanda habemus, vobis mandamus in fide qua nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quatenus omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad nos London hoc
instante die Mercurii ad ultimum nobisnm locutum, and hoc nullatenus omittatis,
nos enim praesentibus ad hoc vobis and his quos vobiscum ducetis salvum and
securum conductum (as much as a Prisoner could aford) praebemus in cujus, etc.
Test Rege apud Sanctum Paulum London Sexto pie Junii.

Upon the twenty seveneth day of July, Anno 48o. of his Reign, being at To.
claus. 48 H. 3 in 4 in Dorso.
St. Paul's in London; a Letter was written to the King of France, in these
words, Regi Franciae Rex Angliae Salutem; serenitatis vestrae Literas per
Willielmum Charles militem nostrum nobis porrectas receperimus inter caetera
contimentes quod vobis multum complaceret, quod firmam and utilem pacem nobis
and Regno nostro ad honorem Dei and nostri cum Baronibus nostris haberemus, and
quod aliquos de concilio vestro usque Bonon mittetis ad diem Veneris ante
assumptionem beatae Mariae and quod ipsis tunc intendentes sitis prope,
celsitudini vestrae quantas possumus gratiarum referimus actiones, per hoc
manifest perpendentes quod circa commodum and honorem nostrum, nec non
tranquillitatem and pacem Regni nostri solliciti estis and intenti, nos autem
die Jovis prox: post festrum Sancti Petri ad vincula erimus apud Dover, ita
quod nuntii nostri and Baronum nostrorum dicta die Veneris (...)ud Bonon Domino
concedente ad tractand and faciend de dict^ pace p^^^^ nobis significastis; and
quia negotium istud tam coeteros Principes quam Nos tangit in ordinatione pacis
praedict' ad honorem Dei nostri and Haered' nostrorum honori and indempnitati
ac tranquillitati Regni nostri liberaliter and benign si placet providere
velitis. Test Rege apud Sanctum Paulum, London Vicesimo septimo die Julii.

Within three To. claus. 48. H. 3. in 4 Dorso.
days after, being the Thirtyeth of July in the same Year, a Letter was sent
in the Name of that Captive King, to Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, and
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, (who were the Chief of the
Party, who had subdued, taken, and kept him Prisoner) in the Form following,
viz. Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Simoni de Monteforti Com' Leicestr', and
Gilberto de Clare Com' Glocestr' and Hertford' Salutem. Cum nupertr anscriptum
literarum Domini Regis Franciae quod vobis pridie transmisimus manifest
perpendere possitis, quod si cum praesato Rege (a special friend of their own
Party) and aliis de partibus transmarinis tractatum pacis habere debeamus,
oportet quod solempnes Nuncii de Concilio nostro and vestro (as if they were
Partner Kings) sint apud Bonon' die Veneris prox. post festum Sancti Petri ad
vincula scilicet die Veneris ante Assumptionem Beatae Mariae in occursu
Nunciorum praesati Regis, and quod Nos ipso die vel die Jovis praecendenti
simus apud Dover, sicut praefato Regi de concilio Magnatum qui sunt nobiscum
litteratorie significavimus, and vos propter brevitatem temporis and distantiam
locorum personaliter vix adesse possitis tempestive, vos rogamus, quatenus
statu Regni nostri mandato praesati Regis Franciae, and periculis quae nobis
and Regno nostro ex prorogatione dicti negotii poterunt imminere, diligenter
pensatis visis literis provideritis de Nuntiis solempnibus and idoneis usque
Bonon' mittendis ad d^em Veneris supradictum, and cum eis ad Nos mittatis
dilectum and fidelem nostrum Petrum de Monteforti (the Earl of Leicester's near
Kinsman, a most insolent domineering Adversary) cum forma and potestate
tractandi and firmandi pacem melius and salubrius fuerit faciend', mittatis
etiam ad Nos aliquos ad eundum nobiscum usque Dover, and ad concilium
impendendum, and responsum Nuntiis euntibus and redeuntibus nobiscum de
concilio vestro faciendum, quousque personaliter veniatis; and quia praesens
negotium summam et inestimabilem requirit Celeritatem, eo quod tempus breve est
ultra modum, vos ambo, si quomodo fieri possit, vel alter vestrum statim visis
literis ad nos veniatis, et si Edwardus filius noster et Henricus de Almaine
nepos noster nobiscum essent apud Dover, certi sumus quod celerem et satis
bonam pacem haberemus, et ideo si placet ipsos tanquam Obsides in statum quo
nunc sunt, ib'. venire Fac. T. etc. XXX die Iulii.

Upon the 4th. day of September, in the same year and time of the King's
Imprisonment, all that he could do was upon his Petition, as the Record
slovenly and undutifully intimates, to get license that Henry the Son of
Richard King of Almaine, (who was kept as a Prisoner in Dover Castle, as a
Pledge for his Father) might go into France, to treat with that King (their Old
Confederate and Friend) for a Peace to be made 48 H. 3. m. 3.
betwixt the King and his Barons, upon his Oath to do no prejudice to the
disloyal Barons, and that he might abide there until the Nativity of the
Blessed Virgin at Night, or within two or three days after, upon a new License
of those Barons, and Bayl given by the Envoys or Ambassador of the King of
France resident in England, that he should not be detained in France; upon an
undertaking also of the said Henry de Alemannia to forfeit all his Lands and
Possessions which he had or might have in England by Inheritance or otherwise,
and to be utterly deprived thereof, and the several Bonds or Recognisances
severally given of the Bishops of London, Lincoln, Worcester, Winchester,
Chichester, Coventry and Lichfield, with the Bishop Elect of Bath, in 20000
Marks in Silver a piece that he should return and rende^ himself a Prisoner as
aforesaid, as the Record thereof in the Words ensuing does testify.

Rex omnibus, etc. Cum dilectus et fidelis noster Henricus filius Regis
Almannia Germanus noster Charissimus sub custodia dilecti et fidelis nostri
Henrici de Monteforti Constabularis castri nostri Dovoriae, sub certa forma
Obses constitutus suisset pro pace Regni nostri conservanda et ad Petitionem
nostram pro pace inter Nos et Barons nostros praelocuta tractanda before et
finienda ad Dominum Regem Franc. Illustrem in parts proficisceretur
transmarinas idem. Henricus Almannia obtenta ab eis quibus Obses datus fuerat
super praedictis transfretandi licentia in praesentia nostra et venerabilium
Patrum H. London. R. Lincoln. W. Wigorn'. J. Winton'. S. Cicest'. R. Covent'.
et Lich'. W. Say'. Episc. et W. electi Bathon'. promisit bona fide et tactis
sacrosanctis Evangeliis juravit quod cum omni studio et diligentia pacem
praedictam procurabit, et nihil omnino faciat vel proponat verbo vel facto vel
aliquo alio modo clam vel palam, quod possit esse contra pacem praedictam seu
per quod pax ipsa impediri possit quoquomodo vel differri ubi praedicti Barons
gravari, et quod sive pacem procurare possit, sive non quod omni occasion et
dilatione postposita usque ad festum Nat'. beatae Virginis prox. futur'. tota
die ipsa sibi data revertetur ad castrum Dovor'. et ibi ponet se in manibus
praedicti Henr'. de Monteforti tanquam Obsidem eodem modo et sub eadem forma,
sicut erat ante recessum suum, ita tamen quod si pro negotii consummatione
ultra terminum praedictum per duos aut tres dies ad pius moram ipsius longior
necessaria fuerit pro tanti temporis mora dummodo Baron'. infra tempus
praedictum super hoc premuniverit, and post biduum and triduum redierit
nullatenus occasionetur, Dominus vero de Nigol and Dominus P. le Chamberlens
and Magister Henricus de Verdel' Nuntii praedicti Domini Regis Franciae. Manu
coeperunt, quod dictus Henricus de Almannia in regno Franciae quo minus termino
predicto libere reverti possit a quoque non detinebitur invitus; voluit autem
Henricus de Almannia and concessit express, quod si praedictae non
observaverit, vel contra ea vel eorum aliquod quoquomodo venire praesumpserit,
hoc ipso terras suas omnes tenementa and possessiones, quae in regno nostro
habet vel habere poterit, jure hereditario vel quovis alio modo, totaliter
perdat, and eisdem ipso facto perpetuo privatus existat, nullo jure Sibi aut
Haeredibus suis in posterum competente: In eisdem ad haec praedicti Domini
Episcopi and electus immo and Episcopus Bathon', pro praefato Henrico de
Almannia manu coeperunt, quod infra terminum praedictum revertetur, and in
eodem statu se reponet, in quo erat tempore recessus sui nisi casu fortuito and
inevitabili fuerit praepeditus, and hoc promiserint sub poena viginti millium
Marc' argenti singuli insolidum commitend' praefat' Henrico de Monteforti
Custodi ejusdem Henr' de Almannia, and cum effectu ab eisdem Episcopis
exigend', si infra praedictum tempus reversurus non fuerit and obsidem se
reddiderit ut praedictum est. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Cantuariam quarto
die Septembris.

And in their Marching to and fro with their King a prisoner, in a victorious,
powerful, undisbanded and undisturbed Army, thought it would be convenient for
their evil Purposes to attract, as much as they could, the good Will and Hopes
of the Clergy, by an Embrio or Promise (made amongst themselves the Sixth day
of October in the Forty-eighth year of that overpowered King's reign) of some
Act or Order of Parliament, when they should be at leisure to obtain it, in
these words, viz.

Purveu est To. Pat. 48 H. 3. m. 2. dorso.
per comun assentement du Roi and des Prelaz des Contes, and des Barons de la
tere ke les trespass ke fait sont contre seinte Eglise en Engleterre par acheson
de trublement and de la guerre ke adeste en Reaume de Engleterre soient amendez
en ceste form.

Soint esluz des Contes and des graunz gentz de la tere, par la volente and
l'assentement des Prelaz trois Evesques ki des amends resnables ke sont a
foire pur les avantditz forfez ke ont este fait contre seinte Eglise, aient
plein poeer de establir and de purver kanqe bone sera and renable chose ceusque
escomenge seront trovez soient assous en form de Droit par ceus qui Poeer
averont.

La Poeer des Prelaz soit affirmee en ceste manner, promis soit en bone fai des
Contes e de la Justice and des autres lais qui sont du Counseil le Roi e autres
graunz Barons du Reaume, ke totes les chooses ke les Prelaz ke eleus seront
purverunt renablement en nun des amends garderont pur soi e metteront peine e
bone fei de fere garder des autres and de ce ^ndoign^nt ^or lettres overtes
Derechef as Prelaz, puis kill seront esluz, soit done pleine poeer du Roi e de
la Communaute des Contes and des Barons and de graunz honmes de la tere, a
purver les chooses kee besoignables sont e profitables a plein Reformement dec
Estat de seint Eglise al Honur deu a la Foi nostre Seinur le Roi e au profit du
Reaume, and cco soit premis en bone soi par le Roi and par les Contes and les
avantdiz Barons, and par les autres graunz hommes de la tere, si en facent lec'
lettres overtes, cest assaver des chooses ke unt este faites pus la Pasch'
dereine don't un an ce est assaver le an nostre Seignor le Roi.

Si null soit trove, ke ne voile ester al ordenement e la purveiaunce des
avandiz Prelaz en les chooses avont dites, e selom les forms avaunt dites, sont
destreint par sentence de seinte Eglise: E si mester est soient destreint per
la Lay force, E que ceste chose se puisse meuz fair eit la justice cent ou
plus Chevalers ou Seriaunz Soudeers eluz a destreindre les meffesours, quant il
serra requis par les avanditz Prelaz Citens Soudeers de bens Communs de seinte
hglise soient sustenuz taunt com il sont en cele besoine. E cest ordenement
durge sovans a un an ou a deus Dekes les chooses soient ben en pes, e les
purveaunces de Prelaz and la pes de la tere bien meintenue.

Purveu est, ke les bens des Benefits de seinte Eglise des aliens e des autres
ke ont est contre la tere soient celui e sauvement guard par les mains des
Prelaz deserves a taunt ke soit purveu par comun Conseil ke leu devera fair. E
a fermete en tesmoinaunce de ceo le Roi and les hauz Homes de la tere ont mis
lur seus a cest escrit, Test Rege apud Cantuar' Sexto die Octobris.

The 30th. day of that October To. claus. 49. H. 3. m. 12. dorso.
Anno. 49. of his sorrowful Reign which began October 19. Annoque Domini. 1216.
they caused a Letter to be written in his name to the King of France for a safe
Conduct for the King's Envoyes with the Messengers of the Barons to treat of a
Peace with him, and the Pope's Legates, concerning the State of the Kingdom, as
follows,

Egregio Principi Domino, and Consanguineo suo karissimo Domino Lud. Dei gratia
Regi Franciae, Rex etc. Cum nuper quosdam de fidelibus Nostris ad praesentiam
vestram and ad venerabilem Patrem G. Sabin' Episcopum Apostolicae sedis
Legatum, nec non ad alios amicos nostros in partibus illis ad tractandum de
Reformatione and Pace status Regni nostri destinavimus, quibus eundo illata
fuerunt enormia Dampna, de quibus anxiati (with some indiscernable grief)
fuistis ut intellexerimus, propter quod alii periculis huiusmodi se committere
minus ausi sunt, Serenitatem vestram recipimus affectione qua possumus
ampliori, quatenus Nuntiis nostris and Baronum nostrorum ad praesentiam vestram
and ad Legatum supradictum, nec non ad alios amieos nostros partium illarum in
brevi destinand' pro nego^^is antedictis Salvum and Securum Conductum vestrum
in eundo, ibidem morando, and inde recedendo, concedere velitis Literas vestras
inde patentes per latorem praes^ntium Nobis si placet transmittentes, and ad
ipsos tutius conducendos aliquos de fidelibus v stris usque Witsand. in Octabis
instantis sancti Martini obviam nostro amore sibi mittatis. Test Rege apud
Westminster tricesimo die Octobris Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo nono.

The 3d. day of December, in the Year aforesaid, they being in want of Money to
maintain and keep their Army together, To. claus. 49. H. 3. m. 12. in dorso.
carry on their Designs and their Royal Prisoner, caused a Writ to be sent to
the Bishop of Norwich for some Supply, Sub hac forma.

Rex Norwicensi Episcopo Salutem; Cum per Praelatos and Magnates Regni Nostri
provisum esset unanimiter and conc^ss^m, quod Decimae proventuum omnium
beneficiorum in Regno Nostro darentur ad communem utilitatem eiusdem Regni and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and quod huiusmodi Decimae per locorum Episcopos
levarentur, and ad Nos mitterentur, and tunc vobis mandaverimus, quod juxta
Provisionem praedictam in vestra Diocesi de beneficiis Ecclesiasticis huiusmodi
Decimas levari and ad Nos mitti faceretis indilate convertendas in communem
Utilitatem Regni Nostri and Ecclesiae praedictae, quod huc usque facere
distulistis, de quo miramur quam plurimum and movemur, vobis iterato mandamus
firmiter injungentes quatenus huiusmodi Decimas sine omni dilatione levari, and
eas usque London modis omnibus transmitti faciatis liberand' venerabilibus
Patribus H. London, and W. Wygorne Episcopis, quibus injunximus, quod eas
recipiant and salvo custodiant, donec aliud inde preceperimus, ita quod cas
habeant in vigilia Epiphaniae Domini proxime futuri ad ultimum, and hoc sicut
vos and honorem vestrum diligitis nullo modo omittatis, scituri, quod nisi
feceritis mandavimus Vicecomiti nostro Norff. and Suff. quod usque ad
septingentas Marcas (A Mandate which the Bishops of London and Worcester would
not have been content with, if the King had been at liberty, and had not been
as then he was a Prisoner to their Rebellious Party) in partem Solutionis
praedictae de Bonis and catallis vestris in Comitatibus praedictis sine
dilatione levari and ad Nos mitti faciat sine mera per Rad' de Camois, Egidium
de Argen' Londini and Wigorniae Episcopos. Test Rege apud Oxon 3o. die
Decembris.

The 14th. day of that December next following, having carried him in their
victorious Army to Worcester, they caused a Writ to be made in his Name and
under his Seal, directed to the Bishop of Durham, in these words, viz.

Elsings Ancient and Present manner of holding Parliaments in England. 7 and 9.
and To. claus. 49. H. 3. in dors in Schedul x Mat. Paris 995. 996. and 255.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae
venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Episcopo Dunelmensi salutem; Cum
post gravia turbationum and discriminum dudum habita Regno, Charissimus filius
Edwardus primogenitus noster, pro pace in Regno Nostro assecuranda and
firmanda, Obses traditus exstitisset, and jam sedata (benedictus sit Deus)
turbatione x praedicta super deliberatione ejusdem salubriter providenda and
plena securitate and tranquillitate pacis ad honorem Dei and utilitatem totius
Regni Nostri firmanda and totaliter complenda, ac super quibusdam aliis Regni
Nostri negotiis, quae sine concilio vestro and aliorum Praelatorum and Magnatum
nostrorum nolumus expediri cum iisdem Tractatum habere Nos oportet, vobis
rogantes in fide and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini, quod omni excusatione
postposita and negotiis aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos London in Octabis
sancti Hillarii proximi futuri Nobiscum and cum praedictis Praelatis and
Magnatibus nostris quos ibidem vocari fecimus super praemissis tractaturi and
concilium impensuri, and hoc sicut Nos and Honorem nostrum and vestrum, nec non
and communem Regni Nostri Tranquillitatem diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test
Meipso 14. Decembr' Anno Regni Nostri 49o.

In forma praedicta subscribitur Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus subscriptis,
etc.

In forma praedicta mandatum est Comitibus nostris and aliis subscriptis. Dat.
apud Woodstock 24o. die Decembris praedicti, viz.

Comiti Leicester, Comiti Glouc. Comiti Norff. and Marescallo Angliae, Comiti
Oxon, Comiti Derby, Rogero de Sancto Johannis, Hugo de Spencer Justiciar'
Angliae, Nicholao de Segrave, Johanni de Vescy, Roberto Basset, G. de Lucie and
Gilbert de Gaunt, which were notoriously known to be of their Party and like
Inclinations, in number 25 or 23, a Blank yet remaining upon the Record for the
names of those more Loyal that were not of their Conspiracy, which were very
many, the Writ it self to Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester and his Consorts in
that ungodly Enterprise being not to be found at all entered.

And of the same date sent out Writs, in the Kings Name and under his Seal,
directed to all the Sheriffs of the Realm, wherein signifying the Kingdom to be
then in peace and quiet, and the King's desire to establish the same to the
honor of God and benefit to his People, to send to the Parliament, which was
to be holden at London in the Octaves of Saint Hillary then next Dugdales
Origenes juridiciales tit. Parliament. 1^.
ensuing, two Knights Elected for each County, and of the Cities and Boroughs
two Citizens or Burgesses, to treat with the King, Praelates, and Barons, and
give their Counsel.

Which Writs of Summons (in the framing whereof their Wits could not be at
leisure to think of an Election of Burgesses or Procurators for the two
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as if those Seminaries of Learning had
been incapacitated and merited a procul ite prophani) made in and by the Name
of a captive King, whilst he was a Prisoner of War, not taken by Surprise or
Ambuscado, but Fighting in a Battle against a mighty Army of Rebels, that
should have been his Subjects, had it seems no other effect, than an Attempt to
summon their contrived new-fashioned Parliament; for that by a general
Disturbance (none of the many Boroughs in Cornwall being then likely to come,
for that the Earl of Cornwall was on the King's Party and a Prisoner) and
Commotion of the Kingdom in their Minds and Estates, Discontents of the
vanquished Nobility, Absence and feared Insurrections of that and a great part
of the Baronage and People that were not in the Battle on either side, and the
Decov cunningly inserted in their Writs of Summons to a kind of Parliament of
their own framing, that Pax Reformata fuit betwixt him and the Barons,
Benedictus sit Deus, enticed many, that either Fear or Flattery persuaded to be
on the Stronger and Prevailing Side, to make their Peace with them; and either
to Join with them, or stand aloof off, and enjoy as well as they could, their
large Possessions and Estates, which in those times could draw many Tenants and
Followers after them.

And being Jealous of the Affections, Power, and Strength of John Balioll, and
Peter de Brus, with certain other Lords of Scotland, Robert de Nevil, and some
of the Northern English Barons, a Writ in the King's Name was also the 24th day
of that December, sent unto them to come to London, (but without any certain
Day, or mention that they were there to Treat cum Praelatis, Comitibus, or cum
coeteris Magnatibus de arduis negotiis Regni, and not mixed with other Affairs,
as the former or after Form of Summons to Parliament, or those great Councils,
were accustomed to be) with a more than ordinary safe Conduct for their
Persons, and Security in the interim for their Lands and Estates in the form
following, viz.

Rex Johanni de Bailol To. Pat. 49 H. 3. m. 26.
, Petro de Brus, Roberto de Nevil, Eustachio de Bailol, Steph. de Menill,
Gilberto Haunsard, Rad' filio Ranulphi Ad' de Gensenr', Roberto de Stotevil de
Atton' and sociis suis partium borealium Salutem; Cum Karissimus filius
Edwardus primogenitus noster pro Pace in Regno nostro assecuranda Obses
deputatus extitisset, and jam sedata (benedictus Deus) turbatione praedicta
super liberatione ejusdem salubriter providenda and plena securitate
tranquillitatis and pacis ad honorem Dei and utilitatem totius Regni Nostri
firmanda finaliter and complenda, per quod vobiscum volumus habere tractatum
super praemissis and aliis negotiis Nostris arduissimis, and pluries vobis
mandaverimus quod ad Nos veniretis, Nobiscum super specialibus negotiis Nostris
colloquium habituri, quod hucusque facere distulistis, de quo miramur and quam
plurimum movemur; vobis iterato mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus
negotiis praetermissis ad Nos London sine omni dilatione veniatis Nobiscum
super praemissis locuturi, and hoc sicut Nos and Honorem Nostrum and vestrum
diligitis, nullo modo omittatis; and ut securius ad Nos venire possitis
mittemus dilectum and fidelem nostrum Johannem de Burgo seniorem ad conducendum
vos salvo and secure, sicut in Literis nostris patentibus quas idem Johannes
super hoc habet before contin^tur; mandavimus etiam dilectis and fidelibus
nostris Johanni de Vescy, Henrico de Hastinges, Joh' de Eynill, Adi de Novo
Mercato and aliis fidelibus nostris cum eis in partibus illis existentibus,
quod a gravaminibus, molestiis, dampnis, seu injuriis vobis aut hominibus vest
is si ad Nes veneritis inferendis penitus desistant. In cujus, etc. Test Rege
apud Wodest' vicesimo quarto die Decembris.

And the 26th day To. Claus. 49 H 3. m. 11. dorso.
of that December, Simon Montfort and his Confederates, wanting the Council and
Assistance of the Bishop of Norwich; and not knowing what to do either with the
Old Lion or the Young, directed a Writ unto him in the King's name in these
words, viz.

Rex Episcopo Norwicen', Cum post gravia turbationum discrimina dudum habita in
Regno nostro karissimus filius Edwardus Primogenitus Noster pro Pace in Regno
Nostro assecuranda and firmanda Obses traditus extitisset, and jam sedata
(benedictus Deus) turbatione praedicta super deliberatione ejusdem salubriter
providenda and plena securitate tranquillitatis and pacis ad honorem Dei and
utilitatem totius Regni Nostri firmanda and totaliter complenda, ac super
quibusdam aliis Regni Nostri negotiis quae sine consilio vestro and aliorum
fidelium and Magnatum nostrorum nolumus expediri cum eisdem tractatum habere
Nos oporteat, vobis mandamus rogantes in fide and dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemint, quod omni occasion postposita and negotiis aliis praetermissis sitis
ad nos London in Octabis Sancti Hillarii proxime futuris, Nobiscum and cum
praedictis fidelibus and Magnatibus nostris quos ib^dem vocari fecimus super
praemissis tractaturi and concilium vestrum impensuri, and hoc sicut nos and
honorem nostrum and vestrum nec non ad communem Regni Nostri tranquillitatem
diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Wod' vicesimo sexto die
Decembris.

And believing it to Pryn's Brev. Parliamentaria Rediviva 242.
conduce much unto their naughty purposes to have the Cinque Ports, who were by
their Tenures obliged to furnish out yearly a certain number of Ships for the
safeguard of the Kingdom and Seas appertaining thereunto, to be so much at
their Devotion and Command, as to hinder any Aid which might come from any of
the King's subjects and dominions in France, for the Rescue of the King and
Prince out of their Imprisonment and Captivity, from which they never intended
to Release them, until they had Despoiled him of all, or the greatest part of
his Regalities: The Writ following was the 20th day of the then next following
Month of January, directed unto the Barons and Bailiffs of the Cinque Ports to
do that which they never did before, as follows, etc.

Rex Baronibus and Ballivis portus sui de Sandwico salutem. Cum Praelati and
Nobiles Regni Nostri tam pro negotio Liberationis Edwardi Primogeniti Nostri
quam pro aliis Communitatem Regni Nostri tangentibus ad instans Parliamentum
nostrum quod erit London in Octabis Sancti Hillarii convocari fecimus, ubi
vestra sicut and aliorum fidelium nostrorum praesentia plurimum indigemus,
vobis mandamus in side and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis mittatis ad Nos ibidem quatuor de
legalioribus and discretioribus Portus vestri, and quod sint ibidem in Octabis
praedictis Nobiscum and cum Praelatis and Magnatibus Regni Nostri tractaturi
and super praemissis concilium impensuri, and hoc sicut honorem nostrum and
vestrum and communem utilitatem Regni Nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis:
Test Rege apud Westm' Vicesimo die Januarii.

Similiter mandatum est singulis Portubus; being within the very Octavies of
St. Hillary.

The First day of February, in the year and time of the King's Imprisonment as
aforesaid, some discords and disturbances continuing in the University of
Cambridge amongst the Students and Scholars, which was begun three years
before; and some Endeavors used to remove that University, or constitute and
set up another at Northampton; a Writ was as follows, sent in the Name of the
King, to the Mayor and Citizens of Northampton to prohibit it, viz.

Rex Majori and To. claus. 49 H. 3. m. 10. Dorso.
Civibus suis Northampton' salutem; Cum occasion cujusdam magnae Contentionis
in villa Cantabr' triennio jam elapso subortae nonnulli Clericorum tunc ibidem
studentium unanimiter ab ipsa villa recessissent se usque ad villam vestrum
praedictani Northamp' transferentes and ibidem studiis inherendo novam
construere Universitatem cupientes, Nos illo tempore credentes Villam illam ex
hoc posse meliorari, and Nobis utilitatem non modicam inde provenire votis
dictorum Clericorum ad eorum requisitionem annuebamus in hac part, nunc autem
ex relatu multorum fide dignorum veraciter intellexerimus, quod ex hujusmodi
Universitate si permaneret ibidem municipium nostrum Oxoniae quod ab antiquo
creatum est and a Progenitoribus Nostris Regibus Angliae confirmatum, ac ad
commoditatem Studentium communiter approbatum Speeds Hist. of Engl. in the life
of H. 3. 638
non mediocriter lederetur quod nulla ratione vellemus (the rather probably,
for that Simon Montfort and his Partners had but a little before tasted of the
seduced Friendship of that University, when many of its Students, under a
Banner of their own, came to the Seige of Northampton, and Fought stoutly for
them against their King) maxim cum universis Episcopis terrae nostrae ad
honorem Dei and utilitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae and proficui Studentium
videatur expedire, quod Universitas amoveatur a Villa praedicta, sicut per
Literas suas patentes accepimus, vobis de consilio Magnatum nostrorum firmiter
inhlbemus, ne in villa vestra de coetero aliquam Universitatem esse nec aliquos
Students ibidem manner permittatis aliter quam ante Creationem dictae
Universitatis fieri consuevit. Test Rege apud Westm' primo die Febr'.

The 8th day of that February, Urianus de Sancto Petro, and others of the
County of Chester, submitting themselves ad pacem of the King, (as they were
willing to have that Rebellion called) they did in the King's Name give order
for a Restitution of his Lands, and a Protection for the future in these Words,
viz.

Rex Rogero de Lovetot To Claus. 49 H 3. m. 10. dorso.
salutem; Cum Urianus de Sancto Petro, sicut and alii de Comitatu Cestriae ad
Pacem Nostram venerit, per quod de consilio Magnatum nostrorum, qui sunt de
Consilio Nostro, ipsum and omnes terras and tenementa sua in protectionem and
defensionem Nostram suscepimus, and jam de Consilio Nostro praedicto sit
provisum, quod omnes terrae and tenementa ipsius Uriani occasion turbationis
in Regno Nostro uuper habitae per quoscunque occupata sibi restituantur, ac vos
terras and tenementa praedicti Uriani in Comitatu Hunted'. occupaveritis and ea
detineatis occupata occasion turbationis praedictae ut accepimus, vobis de
Consilio nostro praedicto mandamus in fide and homagio quibus Nobis tenemini
firmiter injungentes, quod omnes terras and tenementa praedicta per vos and
vestros sic occupata sine dilatione restituatis eidem, and hoc nullatenus
omittatis. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium 8o die Februarii.

The Fifteenth day of the same Month and Year reciting, That the King had
caused two of the discreetest Knights of every County of England, to be at his
Parliament (as the Barons that kept him Prisoner were desirous to Style it) ad
tractandum with the King and his Council, de liberatione Edwardi filii Nostri,
etc. And being informed, that two Knights for the County of York had tarried
long, (not much above three weeks) been at great Expenses, and paid great Loans
and Taxes toward the defense of the Kingdom, and Maritime parts against the
Invasion of Alien Enemies (the men that they so called, being only the King's
French subjects) they did in the King's Name command, That the said two Knights
of that County, de consilio, by the Advice and Aid of four Knights of the said
County, should Leavy the said Knights expenses in their coming to that so
called Parliament, tarrying and return, which was either but a few days before
ended, if it did either sit or do any thing at all in such a time of public
and general Distraction, with a proviso, and under a condition, that the
Commonalty should not be Ultra modum oppressed thereby, in words ensuing.

Rex Vicecomiti To claus. 49 H. 3. m. 10. dorso.
Eborum salutem. Cum nuper vocari secerimus duos de discretioribus Militibus
singulorum Comitatuum nostrorum Angliae quod essent ad Nos in Parliamento
nostro apud London, in Octabis Sancti Hillarii proximo praeteritis ad
tractandum Nobiscum and cum Consilio Nostro super deliberatione Edwardi filii
nostri karissimi and securitate inde facienda, nec non and aliis arduis Regni
Nostri negotiis ac iidem Milites moram diuturniorem quam credebant traxerint
ibidem, propter quod non modicas fecerint expensas, cumque Communitates
dictorum Comitatuum varias hoc anno fecerint praestationes ad defensionem Regni
Nostri and maxim partium maritimarum contra hostilem adventum Alienigenarum,
per quod aliquantulum se minimum sentiunt gravatas, tibi praecipimus, quod
duobus Militibus qui pro Communitate dicti Comitatus praefato Parliamento
interfuerunt de consilio quatuor legalium Militum ejusdem Comitatus
rationabiles expensas suas in veniendo ad dictum Parliamentum ibidem morando
and inde ad parts suas redeundo provideri, and eas de eadem communitate levari
facias: Proviso quod ipsa Communitas occasion praestationis istius ultra modum
non gravetur. T. R. apud Westm' 15o die Februarii.

Which may warrant a Belief, that either no other came, or that new-invented
kind of Parliament did not at all Sit, there being upon diligent search of all
the Records of that greatlytroubled Year, none other to be found of that
nature. Wherein, though no care was taken of other Countyes, or of any the very
many Burgesses of that County, or of any other County intended to have been
sent to that newly and first-of-all devised kind, or manner of an English great
Council or Parliament, it appears to have been the first and only Writ for
Parliament Men or Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, that had or
did bear any Resemblance with that allowance of Wages to any Members of
Parliament in the House of Commons (howsoever much different) after a long
interval of Time, used for Wages allowed for Parliament-Members of the House of
Commons, King Henry the Third having never after his Release from that
Imprisonment allowed any.

The 16th day of the same Month of February, in the Year aforesaid Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, absenting himself from the Army upon
some Discontent in a Dislike of the said Earl of Leicester's actions and
courses, a Writ was sent unto him in the King's Name as follows.

Rex Gilberto Anno 49 H. 3. m. 23. To. claus.
de Clare Comiti Gloucestr' and Hertford' salutem. Cum hac instante die Jovis
in Crastino Cinerum super liberatione Edwardi Primogeniti Nostri finalem habere
velimus tractatum, vobis mandamus in fide homag. and dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, Quod omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos
die Jovis praedicta Nobiscum super hoc tractaturi and consilium vestrum
impensuri, ne retardatio liberationis ipsius vobis per moram and absentiam
vestram ad diem illum merito possit vel debeat imputari, quod nullatenus velle
deberetis, and hoc sicut Nos and Honorem nostrum and vestrum ac tranquillitatem
Regni Nostri noc non praedicti filii Nostri Liberationem diligitis, nullo modo
omittatis. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium decimo sexto die Februarii.

The 25th. day To. claus. 49. H. 3. m. 9.
of that February a Memorandum was entered in the form following, viz. Die
Mercurii. prox. post festum S^i Petri ad Cathedram recepit Dominus. Rex
sigillum suum a Magistro Johanne de Chishull Archidiacono London, and illud
commisit Thomae de Cantilup sicut continetur in Rotulo patentium hujus anni.
Test Rege apud Westm' 25. die Februarii.

The 3d of March next following Roger de Mortuomari for a small time pretending
to submit ad pacem Domini Regis, as they that had disturbed it would have it to
be believed, had Writs to the Subjects of Herefordshire and Shropshire not to
molest him, or his Tenants, viz.

Rex Vicecom' Heref. To. claus. 49. H. 3. m. 9.
salutem, Cum Rogerus de Mortuomari nuper ad pacem nostram venerit, and propter
hoc hominibus suis in guerra in Regno Nostro super mota secum existentibus
gratiam sacere velimus, tibi praecipimus quod omnes homines praedictos quos pro
eo quod in guerra praedicta cum ipso fuerunt capi vel attachiari fecisti sine
dilatione deliberari fac: Nec ipsos de caetero ob causam praedictam occasionari
fae, nisi ipsos pro aliquo delicto ante Guerram vel post Guerram praedictam seu
pacem Nostram proclamatam ab eisdem commisso ccperis vel attachiari feceris,
pro quo secundum consuetudinem Regni Nostri deliberari non debeant. Test Rege
apud Westm' tertio die Martii. Eodem modo mandatum est Vicecomiti Salop. pro
hominibus ejusdem Rogeri. Per Regem and consilium.

Robert de Ferrers Earl of Darbie, a man of great Power and Revenue, not
keeping pace with their designs, but falling roughly upon some of his Tenants
that adhered unto them, Ada de Tybetot complaining, had by the King concilio
Baronum the Manor of Thorpe in Leicestershire restored unto her, for that it
was never the Intention of the Barons, as they said, that any Women, especially
Widows, not being guilty, should suffer in that War, by a Writ sent unto
Nicholas de Hastings who held the Lands of the said Earl of Darby upon seizure
and sequestration, sub hac forma of the date aforesaid, viz.

Rex Nicho. de Hastings Custodi terrarum Roberti de Farrar Com. Derb. salutem.
Monstravit nobis Ada de Tibetot graviter conquerendo, quod praefat' Com.
occasion Turbationis habitae in regno Nostro Manerium praedictae Adae de
Thorp. cum suis pertinentiis in Com. Leic. occupavit and sibi detinuit ad ejus
grave dampnum and jacturam manifestam; quod quidem Manerium una cum aliis
terris praefat' Com. nunc est in manu Nostra, ut dicitur, quia vero Nostrae
nunquam extitit intentionis aut Baronum nostrorum, quod aliquae Mulieres, and
praecipue Viduae, dampnum aliquod vel jacturam incurrere deberent occasion
Turbationis praedictae, nisi illae quae turbationis illius Participes
extiterint, vobis de Concilio Baronum praedictorum mandamus, quod inquisita
super hoc before veritate si praefatam Viduam de Manerio suo praedicto per
eundem Com. ejectam inveneritis, ut praedictum est, and si ipsa de praedicta
turbatione in nullo culpabilis extiterit, tunc eidem Viduae de eodem Manerio
cum suis pertinentiis Sesinam suam rehabere fac. Test Rege apud Westm' 3. die
Martii per Justice. P. de Monteforti, R. de Sti Johanne, and Adam de Novo
Mercato.

The 5th. day of that March the like Writ was sent to the said Nicholas
Hastings, to restore the Princess Elianor Wise to the Prince the Manor of
Ashford in the Peake, which being assigned to her, the said Earl had entered
upon, for that it was never the King's and the Barons intentions, that Women
not guilty should suffer by these Wars in which they had not offended, in the
form following.

Rex Nicho' de To. claus. 49 H. 3. m. 8.
Hastings Custodi suo terrarum Roberti de Ferrar Comitis Derb. Salutem. Cum
Edwardus filius noster karissimus dudum ante turbationem habitam in Regno
Nostro Manerium suum de Arkeford in Pecco cum pertinentiis Elianor' Consorti
suae ad cameram suam assignaverit, quod quidem manerium praefatus Comes
occasion turbationis praedictae nuper occupavit, ac Nostrae nunquam extitit
Intentionis vel Baronum nostrorum, quod Mulieres quae participes non extiterint
praedictae turbationis dampnum vel jacturam aliquam debeant incurrere; cumque
praedicta Elianora in nullo culpabilis sit de turbatione praedicta, vobis de
Consilio praedictorum Baronum mandamus, quod eidem Elianorae de Manerio
praedicto quod una cum praedictis terris praefati Comitis nunc est in manu
Nostra, ut dicitur, Seisinam suam rehabere fac. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium
quinto die Martii. Per Consilium.

The 16th day of that March Mandates were sent by the King to Roger de
Shurland, Guncelin de Badylmer, Simon de Crey, and quibusdam aliis, to come to
him upon Palm Sunday, wheresoever he should then be in England, viz.

Mandatum est Rogero de Shirland, in fide and dilectione quibus Regi tenetur
firmiter injungendo, quod modis omnibus sine omni dilatione veniat ad Regem, it
a quod sit ad R. die Lunae prox. ante instantem diem dominicam Palmar' ad
ultimum ubicunque tunc Rex fuerit in Anglia cum Rege locutur', and hoc nullo
modo omit. Test Rege apud Westmon' 16. Martii.

Eodem modo mandatum est Gunselmo de Badilmer, Simoni de Crey, and quibusdam
aliis.

Roger de Mortuo Mari and other Lords of the Marches of Wales, being by the
King at his being at Worcester de Consilio Baronum qui sunt de consilio Regis,
ordered to go into Ireland at Christmas next following, according to the
Instructions given by the King, and his Barons, which time was afterward
Prorogued until Mid-Lent, and from thence until Eight days after Easter, the
King commanded them all business laid aside to be at Chester, ready to go
thither as the Writ ensueing required, viz.

Rex Regero de Mortuomari Salutem. To. clans. 49 H. 3. m. 7.
Cum nobis nuper existen' apud Wigorn' de Concilio Baronum qui sunt de Concilio
Nostro prefixerimus vobis and aliis Commarchionibus vestris vicesimum diem post
Festum natale Domini Annoque etc. 49. ad transfretand' in Hibernia in forma per
Nos and Barons Nostros and vos provisa ibidem and ob certas causas terminum
illum postmodum prorogaverimus de gratia nostra speciali usque ad mediam
quadragesimam proximo sequentem and similiter terminum dictae mediae
quadragesim' prorogavimus usque ad Octabis Paschae prox' futur', ita tamen quod
tunc parati sitis proficisci ad parts Hiberniae informa supradicta, Nos hijs
quae honorem and commodum vestrum contingunt prospicere cupientes in hac part
vobis mandamus firmiter in jungentes, quod omnibus negotiis praetermissis modis
omnibus sitis apud Cestr' in Octabis praedictis parati proficisci ad parts
Hiberniae in forma supradicta, and hoc sicut honorem vestrum diligitis nullo
modo omittatis. Test R. apud Westm' 190. die Martii.

Per totum Concilium.

John the eldest Son of the Duke of Britain, having Married the Kings Daughter,
and sent his Ambassadors unto him upon some Propositions made unto the King,
an Answer was returned thereunto, That as the King intended to show unto him
all Affection and Favor, that could be expected from him, in which Resolution
terrae suae Magnates were willing to be consenting, so as he would manifest
himself Faithful in its defense cum Magnatibus praedictis, which will require
his presence which was much desired with a safe Conduct, or otherwise that he
would send his Procurators, sufficiently instructed to that end, as the Writ
declared.

Rex. To. claus. 49. H. 3. m. 8.
J. Primogenito Duci Britan' salutem. Auditis and before intellectis hijs quae
Nuntij vestri nuper cum Literis vestris de Credentia ad praesentiam Nostram
destinati ex part vestra proponere voluerunt coram Nobis supere isdem cum
Magnatibus terrae Nostrae deliberatum concilium and tractatum habuimus
diligentem, porro in hoc Nostra resedit deliberatio, ut Nos qui promissa Nostra
seu conventiones vobiscum habitas irritas facere non intendimus, non solum in
hiis quae juris vestri sunt vestra cum affectu exaudiamus desideria, sed and
ultra cum facultas se optulerit etiam de proprio gratiam vobis facere debeatis
specialem ad quae per filiae Nostrae copulam affinitas dudum inter Nos
contracta, nec non and vestra merita Probitatis specialiter Nos inducunt in quo
etiam affectionis Nostrae proposito praedictos terrae Nostrae Magnates Nobiscum
consentientes invenimus and concordes; dum tamen Regni Nostri fidelem vos
exhibere and ad ejusdem defensionem cum Magnatibus Nostris praedictis manum
viriliter extendere volueritis adjutricem, sicut praedicti Nuntii vestri vobis
before refer poterunt una voce quod negotium consummandum simul and
roborandum, vestram prout citius hoc commode facere poteritis, desideramus
praesentiam, Nostras de securo Conductu vobis Literas transmittentes, quod si
quo minus personaliter hoc facere possitis, quod nollemus casu aliquo fueritis
impediti tales and tam sufficienter instructos loco vestro Procuratores
transmittatis, qui in omnibus quae negotium requirit, eandem quam si ibi
praesentes essetis a vobis habeant potestatem. T. R. apud Westm' 27 die Martii.

Per Regem and totum Concilium.

Idem J. habet Literas de Conductu prout patet in rotulo Patentium sub eadem
Data.

Henry de Boreham (a Judge) being Excommunicated by the Bishop of London, the
King by the Writ following commanded him not to intermeddle in any business,
until he should be absolved.

Rex Henrico de Boreham Salutem. To. claus. 49 H. 3. m. 5.
Quia Nobis esset verecundum et vobis minime tutum, si alicui ministerio quod
ad regiam Dignitatem vel Regimen regni Nostri pertineat immisceritis ad
praesens, cum ad denuntiationem venerabilis Patris H. London Episc.
intellexerimus, quod meritis vestris exigentibus sententia, Excommunicationis
estis innoditi, vobis mandamus, quod ad prudentius quod poteritis vos ab
hujusmodi ministeriis substrahatis, donec beneficium Absolutions obtinueritis.
T. R. apud Gloucest. 20 Die Aprilis.

Per Justic. et al' de Consilio apud Gloucest.

The Castle of Bamburgh, with other Castles, being as Pledges for Prince
Edwards true Imprisonment, put into the custody of Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford and Robert de Neville, and the said Earl having
promised to deliver up the said Castle, and to cause the said Robert de Neville
to appear in the Kings Court, and answer his not doing it, and the Earl being
afterward commanded to deliver up the said Castle, returned answer, That he
could not do it, for that he was in Wales, defending his own Lands and Estate,
against his Enemies; the King notwithstanding commanded him to come unto him,
and render the Castle, or give order to some that might do it, as the Writ
bearing date the 6th day of April, in the year aforesaid, directed.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Gilberto de Clare Comiti Gloucest. and Hertford
Salutem, To. claus. 49 H. 3. m. 6.
Cum vos and Robertus de Nevill eui Castrum Nostrum de Bamburgh dudum
commissimus, quod Edwardo primogenito Nostro una cum quibusdam aliis Castris
Nostris jam commisimus tradenda in Ostagium, tam pro ipso quam pro Pace in
regno nostro tenenda, prout in forma inter Nos and Praefatum Filium nostrum and
Barons praedictos provisa and concessa before continetur, in praesentia
Nostra and Magnatum nostrorum qui sunt de Consilio Nostro bona fide super omnia
quae in Regno Nostro tenetis permiseritis reddere nobis castrum praedictum, and
habere praefatum Robertum coram Nobis ad standum recto in Curia Nostra sicut
vos ipsi before nostis, per quod vobis nuper mandavimus, quod omnibus negotiis
praetermissis aliquem de vestris plenam potestatem habentem reddendi Nobis
Castrum praedictum ad Nos indilate mitteretis, and jam Nobis rescripseritis,
quod hoc facere nequivistis propter Moram vestram in partibus Walliae ad
defensionem terrarum vestrar', contra Wallen' inimicos vestros Nos excusationem
illam minus sufficientem reputantes, maxim cum aliquem de vestris qui ad arma
non intendit ad Nos misisse potuissetis, qui nomine vestro and praesati Roberti
plenam haberet potestatem reddendi Nobis Castrum praedictum, vobis iterato
mandamus, in fide and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes,
quod vos ipsi in propria persona vestra ad Nos sine omni dilatione accedatis,
Castrum praedictum nobis reddituri, vel talem loco vestro mittatis plenam
habeat potestatem reddendi Nobis Castrum praedictum in forma supradicta, and
hoc sub poena praedicta mullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Westm' 60 die
Aprilis, per Com. Leic. Justic. P. de Monteforti, R. de Sti Johanne, and alios
de Consilio.

The first day of May in the Year aforesaid, the said Henry de Borham not
abstaining from the Office and business of a Judge, whilst he continued under
the sentence of Excommunication aforesaid, the King commanded him not to
intermeddle therein, until he should be absolved, as the Writ following
signified.

Rex Henrico de Borham salutem. To. Claus. 49 H 3. m. 5.
Quia per Assertionem venerabilis Patris H. London Episc. intelleximus, quod
meritis vestris exigentibus Excommunicationis sententia estis innodati, per
qued ab omnibus arctius vitari debetis, nolumus quod Placitis Nos sequentibus
aut aliis quibuscunque placitis Nostris intendatis, nec quod de aliquo quod ad
Justic. pertinet vos intromittatis, donec beneficium Absolutionis merueritis,
and aliud a Nobis receperitis in mandatis. Test Rege apud Gloucester primo die
Maii. per R. Com. Leic. Justic. and omnes de Consilio tunc aqud Gloucester
existentes.

The 5th day of that May a Memorandum was entered upon the close Rolls of the
Chancery in these words, viz.

Die Jovis prox. post festum Sti Johannis ante portam Latinam hora prima
Magister Thomas de Cantilup Cancellarius Regis tradiderit Rand' de Sandwic.
custod' de Garder. Regis sigillum Domini Regis in praesentia ipsius Domini
Regis assistentibus Hug. Le Despencer Justic. Angliae and Petro de Monteforti
custodiend' usque ad reditum ipsius Thomae sub hac forma, viz. Quod idem Rad'
sigill. in Garder' Regis custodiat sub signo alicujus infrascript' P. de
Monteforti, Rogero de Sto Johanne and Egidii de Argentin vel alicujus eorum. Et
quod Signo signantis fracto signabit idem Rand' brevia illa quae sunt de cursu
in ipsius praesentia, si abesse voluerit, ea tamen quae sunt de praecepto non
nisi in praesentia Signantis sigillabit, and de ejus assensu and brevibus tam
de cursu quam de praecepto sigillum Regis sub sigillo suo and eodem sigillo
Regis subsignato idem Rand' tunc reportet in Garder' praedict. and sic illud
usque ad reditum ejusdem Thomae custodiet in Garder' Regis, and ista facta
fuerit apud Gloucester 5o die Maii.

The Prince having the Command of the Judaisme or Bank of the usuring Jews, as
also the Manor, Town, and Castle of Stamford assigned unto him, and being
about the 30th day of May in the Year aforesaid escaped out of the Castle of
Hereford, where he had been long a Prisoner, the King continuing a Prisoner to
his Rebel-Barons, to save his own life did command the Treasurer and
Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, that taking with them Thomas Cantelup his
Chancellor, they should collect for his use the Tallage (or Tax) lately laid
upon the Judaisme, and to remove Adam de Winton and Thomas de Cropp two of
their Justices, and put into that Office William Haselbeck and command the said
Justice not to obey the Prince his Son, and prohibit all the Jews in England
to do the like, for that the Prince his Son, Spreto concilio of the King and
his faithful Barons, subito and inopinato had joined himself to the Rebellious
Party to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

Rex Thesau. and Camerariis To. Pat. 49 Hi 3. m. 4.
suis salutem. Quia Edwardus Filius Noster cum Judaismum vestrum sicut nostis
ad tempus commisimus, Nostro prorsus and Magnatum and fidelium Nostrorum spreto
Consilio Subito and ex inopinato jam recessit ad quosdam Rebels Nostros se
transferendo, qui Nos gravare and pacem Regni Nostri perturbare proponunt,
dictum Judaismum cepimus in manum Nostram, and ideo vobis mandamus, quod
assumpto vobiscum Magistro Thom' de Cantilupo Cancellario Nostro, si adhuc
London existit, Talliagium nuper assessum super Judaismum praedict: per Thomam
de Ippegrave ad hoc assignatum per praedictum Filium Nostrum videri and illud
ad opus Nostrum colligi and salvo custodiri fac. donec aliud inde praecipimus,
Adam vero de Winton socium Roberti de Cropp' ab Officio suo amoveatis, and loco
suo Will' de Haselbech substituatis, ita quod iidem Will'. and Robertus Officio
Justiciariae Jud' a modo intendant donec aliter inde duxerimus ordinandi and
eisdem Justic. firmiter injungatis ex part Nostra, ne praefato Filio Nostro
vel suis in aliquo intendant, and quod ab omnibus Judaeis Angl. hoc idem scire
faciant, and hoc non omittatis. Test Rege apud Herefordiam tricesimo die Maii.

And the same day, having been enforced to style his Loyal Barons Rebels, sent
his Writs to the Sheriffs of Herefordshire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire to
proclaim, that no Faires and Markets should be kept within their Liberties, and
Baylewicks, until he should give further Order, and that all Victuals to be
sold should be brought to Hereford, or wheresoever the King should be, in these
words.

Rex Vicecom' Hereford salutem. To. Pat. H. (...). 49. m. 4.
Praecipimus tibi firmiter injungentes, quod per totam Ballivam tuam firmiter
inhibere fac. ex part Nostra, ne aliquae Feriae vel Mercata de caetero
teneantur in Balliva praedicta, donec aliud inde mandavimus, sed ubique
proclamari fae. ex part Nostra, quod omnia Victualia venalia ad Nos usque
Hereford veniant, and exinde Nos sequantur. and taliter te habeas in hoc
mandato Nostro exequendo, quod diligentiam tuam merito commendare possimus. T.
ut supra. Eodem modo mandatum est Vic. Salop. and Staff.

And directed another Writ for the seizing of the Town and Castle of Stamford
which was the Princess's as follows, viz.

Rex Thomae de Blund Custodi terrarum Thomae de Ferrar' salutem, To. Pat. 49 H.
3. m. 4.
Quia Edwardus filius Noster cui villam de Stamford una cum Castro ejusdem
villae nuper comm^s^^us (...) ^d (...)Nostrum, sicut nostis, Nostro prorsus and
M(...) (...)Nostror' spreto consilio Subito and inopinato jam (...)Rebels
Nostros se transferendo, qui Nos gravare and (...)Nostri perturbare propo(...),
v^bis Mandamus (...) (...), quod Villam praedictam sine dilatione capiatis in
ma(...) (...)and came salvo custodiatis, ita quod de exitibus inde prove(...)
No^is respondeatis. Test, ut supra.

The King being enforced to make ^
in his name ((...) and Clam' as it were) an Hue and Cry against his own ^on
upon his fortunate Escape, sent the same day notice unt^ John de Eynill, a
Judge and a man much adhering to the Barons and trusted by them, of the
Prince's Escape from his Imprisonment at Hereford, and believing that he would
apply himself to John de Warren, William de Valence and others disaffected in
Pembrokeshire and the Marches of Wales (as in the Language of some in those
Rebellious times they were then phrased) and thence to go beyond the Seas
unless prevented, commanded him in fide and homagio, and under the Forfeiture
of all that he had, that cum equis and armis, and toto posse suo sub omni
festinatione, he should come to Him at Worcester to march against his Enemies.

Et eodem modo commanded all that held of him in Capite, as well Earls, Barons,
Knights, as Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, those only excepted which were of the
Earl of Gloucester's Party, in manner following, viz.

Rex Johanni de Eynill salutem. Cum Nos and quidam Magnates and Fideles Nostri
in partibus Hereford To. claus. 49 H. 3.
circa tranquilli^atem and pacem Partium illarum jampridem agentes pro viribus
laboravimus, prout status part^on earundem requirit, sperantes Edwardum filium
Nostrum ad hoc Adductorem praecipuum and serventiorem prae caeteris invenisse,
Idem Edwardus die Jovis in Ebdomade Pentecostes circa horam vespertinam a
militum Comitiva quos secum adspaciandos extra Hereford duxerat, cum duobus
Militibus and quatuor Scutiferis propositi sui consciis Spreto concilio Nostro
and Magnatum and fidelium Nostrorum praedictorum Subito and ex inopinato
recessit, volens nt pro certo credimus se ad Johannem de Warrennia and
Willielmum de Valencia and Accomplices suos qui nuper absque conscientia Nostra
and voluntate, and contra pacem Nostram applicuerunt in partibus Pembrochiae,
ac etiam ad quosdam Marchiones Rebels Nostros and pacis Nostrae Perturbatores
transfer, ut exinde parts ad^at transmarinas vel alios illue mittat, qui
adventum Alienigenarum in regnum Nostrum per parts Pembrochiae, cum alibi non
pateat eis aditus, ad Nostram and Regni Nostri confusionem procurent; and quia
praefati Rebels Nostri, licet adhuc pauci existant, per hoc potestatem and
vires suas augere possent, nisi ^orum insolentia antequam ulterius invaleseat
citius reprimatur, Nos de vestra and aliorum fidelium Nostrorum fidelitate and
constantia specialiter confidentes, vobis Manda^us in fide, homagio, and
dilectione quibus Nobis estis astricti, and sub periculo amissionis omnia quae
in Regno Nostro tenetis, ac sub debito Sacramenti quo omnes and singuli de
Regno Nostro sunt ad hoc specialiter obligati, and quod volumus and firmiter
observari injungentes, quatenus statim visis Literis istis ^mnibus aliis
praetermissis, cum equis and armis and toto servitio vestro Nobis debito, nec
non and toto posse vestro sub omni festinatione de die and nocte usque
Wygorniam veniatis, parati exinde in manu forti ire Nobiscum super inimicos
Nostros praedictos, and hoc sicut Exhaeredationem Nostram and vestram and
perpetuam Regni Nostri Confusionem vitare volueritis, and vitam propriam
diligitis, nullo modo omittatis, nec de summonitione exercitus brevitatem
temporis allegetis, quia urgentissima necessitas tempus non patitur ulterius
prorogari, ne inter moras per adventum Alienigenarum quos iidem Rebels Nostri
expectant, eorundem vires in Nostri and Regni Nostri perniciem augeri
contingat, qui adhuc dum pacisci existunt de facili Nobis poterunt subjugari.
Test Rege apud Hereford tricesimo die Maii.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Tenentibus de Rege in Capite tam videlicet
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, quam Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and
omnibus aliis, exceptis illis qui sunt pro part Comitis Gloucestriae.

Robert de Ferrers Earl of Darby, having threatened to burn and spoil the Lands
and Estate of the Abbey of Bildwas, and made the Abbot to pay him a Fine of 100
Marks for the Redemption thereof, a W^it was sent to Thomas le Blund, who had
in Sequestration the Lands of the said Earl of Derby, that he should out of the
Issues and Profits thereof pay unto the said Abbot and Covent the aforesaid 100
Marks in these words, viz.

Rex Thomae le Blund Custodi terrarum Roberti de Ferrar' Comitis Derby salutem.
To. Pat. 49 H. 3. m. 4.
Cum tempore turbationis nuper habitae in Regno Nostro praefatus Comes minatus
fuerit Abbati and Conventui de Bildewas de incendio domorum and depraedatione
bonorum suorum, per quod idem Abbas and Conventus metu ducti finem fecerunt per
centum Marcas cum Comite predicto, quas eidem solverunt, ut accepimus; Nos
little paupertati pio compatientes affectu, and eis gratiam facere volentes in
hac part vobis mandamus, quod de exitibus terrarum and tenementorum
praedictorum eisdem Abbati and Conventui centum Marcas habere facias, in
recompensationem centum Marcarum praedictarum, and hoc nullatenus omittatis, T.
R. apud Hereford 1^ dic Junii.

The same first day of June, the King being carried along with the Rebel-Army
Captive to Hereford, and having commanded all that held of him in Capite to
attend him there cum equis and armis, issued out his Writ or Proclamation to
Gilbert de Preston, and the rest of the Justices of the Court of his Bench, to
Surcease all Pleas and Proceedings, to the end that none be damnifyed in any
Actions at the present depending before them, Super Brevia, and that all things
may remain as they were before, until the King should give further Order, as
the Writ or Proclamation imported.

Rex Gilberto de Preston' To. claus. ^0 H. 3. m. (...)
and sociis suis Justiciariis suis de Banco salutem, t Quia pro arduis and
urgentissimis Nostris and Regni Nostri negotiis jam vocari fecimus omnes qui de
Nobis tenent in Capite, quod cum equis and armis, cum servitio suo Nobis
debito, nec non and toto posse suo quod perquirere poterunt ad Nos omnibus
aliis praetermissis in partibus ubi nunc agimus festinanter accedant, factu^i
quod eisdem duxerimus injungendum, propter quod ipsi persecutioni vel
defensioni Loquelarum suarum quae sunt coram vobis per Brevia Nostra ad
praesens intendere non possunt, Volumus quod omnia Placita de Banco remaneant
in eodem statu in quo nunc sunt, donec aliud inde praecepimus; and ideo vobis
Mandamus quod hoc public proclamari faciatis. Test Rege apud Hereford 1o die
Junii per ipsum Regem, Justiciarium, and alios de Consilio.

Test Rege apud Heref. 1o die Junii.

The fourth day of that June in the year aforesaid, a Writ or Commission was in
the imprisoned Kings Name sent unto the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Citizens of
Bristol, mentioning, That the Prince his Son, contemning the Council of him
and his Barons, had joined with his Rebels (for so they would style his more
faithful Subjects) and endeavored to go beyond Seas to bring in Foreigners,
and to make out Warrants and Precepts in the Name of the King, pretending it to
be well pleasing unto him, quod absit, (say that distressed Kings Commanders
and Tutors against his will) and make him break his Oath and Peace made for the
good of the Kingdom, and to withdraw his Subjects from their Obedience,
commanded them to Obey his well beloved and faithful Simon de Montfort Earl of
Leicester and John la War' Subconstable of the Castle of Bristol, or their
Substitutes, cum equis and armis and toto posse suo, as they tendered his Good
and their own Estates, and in no manner of way to yield any Obedience to the
Prince his Son contrary to his command; and for that he had been given to
understand, that some ill-minded People have falsely suggested, that he has
not been made privy to what has been done in his Name required them to send
10. or 12. of their di^^r^^t^st and most honest Citizens to him to be better
informed of his Will and Pleasure therein, and that in the mean time strongly
guarding the said Town and Castle, they do not suffer his said Son or any on
his behalf to enter therein, as the Writ hereunto Subjoyned dated at Hereford
will declare, viz.

Rex delectis and sidelibus suis, Maiori, Ballivis and probis Hominibus ^
suis Bristoll. salutem. Cum Edwardus filius Noster Nostro and Magnatum
Nostrorum spreto Consilio se ad quosdam Marchiones ac etiam alios inimicos and
Rebels Nostros trans^^derit, ut sic parts adeat transmarinas, vel alios
illuc mittat qui Alienigenas in Regnum Nostrum ad Nostram and ejusdem Regni
Confusionem introducant, nisi ipsius temeraria Praesumptio citius reprimatur;
ac idem Edwardus nomine Nostro diversa facit Mandata fingendo ^a Nobis
complacere, quod absit quod hujusmodi Mandata contra Sacramentum Nostrum and
suum, and pacem in Regno Nostro co(...)iter ^uratam existant, ut sic corda
vestra and aliorum fidelium Nostrorum a fidelitate Nobis debita avertant, Nos
de vestrae fidelitatis constantia quam erga Nos ^actenus inde^esse gessistis
plenam gerentes fiduciam vobis Mandamus in fide and dilectione quibus tenemini
rogantes and firmiter injungentes, quatenus dilecto and fideli Nostro Simoni de
Monteforti Comiti Leycestriae and Johanni la War' Subconstabulario suo Castr^
praedicti vel Ballivis suis ibidem tam equis and armis and toto posse vestro in
omnibus quae ad custodiam Castri praedicti pertinent auxiliantes sitis and
consulentes, ita quod fidelitatem etiam commendare debeamus, and hoc sicut
honorem Nostrum and vos and corpora vestra and omnia quae tenetis in regno
Nostro diligitis nullo modo omittatis, Mandatis praesati Filii Nostri in nullo
obtemperantes contra mandatum Nostrum praedictum; and quia intelleximus quod
aemuli quidam Nostri vobis falsa suggerunt, quod hujusmodi mandata Nostra a
Nostra conscientia non emanant placeret Nobis, quod december vel duodecim de
probioribus and discretioribus hominibus Villae Vestrae ad Nos accederent
Voluntatem Nostram super hoc before audituri, nihilominus etiam circa
custodiam Villae vestrae praedictae tam virlit^r and stre^^e vos habeatis prout
alias vobis mandatum, quod nec praesatus Filius Noster nec aliqui ex part sua
Villam praedictam ingrediantur, seu aliquatenus in Villa praedict' receptenter,
T. R. apud Hereford quarto die Junii.

The King being at Hereford the 12th day of that June in the year aforesaid,
complaining that his Son adhered (as Simon Montfort and his Partners
constrained him to say) to his Rebels, and did publish themselves to be
zealously willing to keep the Peace and Agreement which had been made by the
Consent of him and the whole Commonalty of the Kingdom, (which if not
comprehended in the Nobility, which certainly they believed, was then a great
Untruth neither possible or probable) and in regard that the Bishop of London
was a Witness to the said Agreement, and best acquainted with his actions
therein, which might manifest who has been most desirous of a Peace, commanded
him and all the rest of the Prelates without delay to come to advise with him
at Glouc. The like Writ being sent unto the Bishops of Winchester, Ely,
Chester, Salisbury, Coventry, and Lichfield, Bath and Wells with this addition,
viz. And because under a color of Truth they did all that they could to draw
unto them the hearts of the People, and that by the Testimony of the King
himself, and of them and the rest of the Praelates, although the truth will
appear, that it was not the King but those Rebels (for so in dread of his own
and of his Son's Murder and Death he was necessitated to call them) that caused
those Troubles and Discords, concerning which they were to make all have, as
the Writs themselves Sub hac forma did import.

Rex Episcopo London salutem. Quot and quantos labores Nos and vos and alii
Praelati ac etiam Magnates Nostri pro pace Regni firmanda, To. claus. 49. H. 3.
m. 3.
and liberatione Edwardi filii Nostri sustinuerimus, been nostis, per cujus
siquidem liberationem tumultuosis credamus pacem dedisse negotiis quae jam
majori strepitu recidivant, idem enim Edwardus Nostro and fidelium Nostrorum
spreto consilio, sicut vobis and Praelatis praedictis jampridem significavimus,
quibus Rebellibus Nostris jam adhaeret qui se Regii Honoris nec non
Tranquilitatis and Pacis totius Regni praecipuos dicunt esse Zelatores, and
Ordinationes nuper London (which have been yet invisible) de Nostro, and dicti
filii Nostri ac totius Communitatis Regni Nostri Assensu unanimi confectas
concorditer and approbatas in omnibus ut asserunt observare volentes, (...)
Voce praedicant, and aliud Opere manifestant; and quia de Nostro Proposito and
Voluntate, and etiam de Actibus ipsorum circa praemissa vobis qui Ordinationum
praedictarum conscii estis and testes esse debetis, ac etiam praecipui Pacis
Amatores veritatem patere volumus, evidenter vobis Mandamus sub debito
Fidelitatis quibus Nobis estis astricti firmiter injungentes, quatenus omni
dilatione and excusatione postpositis ad Nos sub omni festinatione usque
Gloucestriam accedatis, super praemissis (which shows that supposed Parliament
had no long continuance) Consilium vestrum impensuri; and hoc sicut honorem
Nostrum and vestrum diligitis and indempnitati totius Regni prospicere
volueritis nullo modo omittatis, Nos enim hoc idem caeteris Praelatis duxerimus
injungendum. T. R. apud Heref. 12. die Junii.

Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopis Lincoln, Winton, Cestr', Elyen', Sarum,
Coventry and Litchfield, Bathon', and Wellen' cum adjectione subscripta, and
quia tantam eorundem Malitiam sub fictae veritatis color per diversas parts
praedicari faciunt, ad com^^ovenda corda populorum vestrum s(...)o cordis
affectu peroptamus adventum, ut nostro, vestro, and aliorum Praelatorum
medianti Testimonio veritas praevalere possit, and evidenter pateat non Nos sed
praefatos Rebels nostros subortis jam dissentionibus clam praefecisse; ut
igitur ad honorem Dei nostram and vestram and communem Regni Utilitatem vestro
mediante Consilio quo uti intendimus, possint ipsa negotia procedere, gressus
vestros in quantum poteritis versus Nos maturetis, ne per moras dictas
dissentiones augeri contingat, ut sic exitium consequantur duriorem.

But whilst that great Rebel Montfort, Brother-in-law to his King and one of
the Godfathers to the Prince his Son, taking himself to be too great to be a
Subject, and not being able to contain himself within the limits of Gratitude
and Allegiance, or to resist the Intreagues of the King of France, a long
before dangerous and professed Enemy to his KING and Sovereign, and altogether
unwilling to lose the Opportunity of a Factious and discontented part of the
English Baronage, driving his Chariot, furiously like Jehu, though not with so
good an Authority, empowered as he thought, to make every one come behind him,
and believing himself to be in so firm a league with his Fortune and Security,
and assisted by Lewelline Prince of Wales, who had confederated with him to
raise a Disturbance upon the Lands and Estates of Mortimer, Clifford, the Earl
of Gloucester, and other Barons Marchers, so as they might not be in a
condition to Aid or Relieve the King; and he needed not dread any danger of
losing the Prey which he had gained, but might make what use he would of his
haughty and domineering Spirit, give Laws to his Assisting Partners, and not be
obliged to keep his Agreement with Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford, about the Dividend of the spoil or share of the Regal Power, became
Taxed for doing more for his own Particular than the Public Good, usurping the
Redemption of Prisoners at his pleasure, and to prolong the business did not to
use the means of a Parliament to end it; his Sons also, and Peter de Montfort
his Kinsman (presuming upon his Success and Greatness) growing Insolent, which
made the Earl of Gloucester to desert him and his Party; and the more Loyal
Barons not well pleased to have their King led about Captive; and those who had
so deeply engaged with Montfort, Dugdales Baronage in Tit. Petri de Montfort,
407, 408. 409. and Clifford 337.
for the Provisions extorted from the King at Oxford, could not well digest so
great an Affront put upon him and themselves, and to have the King and Kingdom
Mat Westminster. 1263
governed at the Discretion of Twenty-four Conservators, after reduced to a
much lesser number, into which every one could not be admitted, calmely
considering the great Confusions, Envies and Ambitions, which would happen by
so (like to be so) dangerous and unquiet an Innovation, were content and
propounded, That those Ordinances or Provisions should be made void, and the
King restored to his former Rights and Condition; but Peter de Montfort a
Principal Rebel as well as a near Kinsman of Simon de Montfort's with four
others opposed it, and was made Governor of Hereford not long before the
Prince's escape from his Imprisonment there.

Which was principally contrived by the means of Roger de Mortimer, who seeing
His Sovereign in so great a distress, and nothing but Ruin and Misery
attending himself and all other the King's Loyal Subjects, could take no rest
until he had by his Intelligence and Correspondency held with Gilbert de Clare
Earl of Gloucester, William de Valence Earl of Pembroke, newly returned into
England, the Lord Clifford, and other the Loyal Barons Dugdale's Baronage. tit.
Mortimer 142. Monastic. Anglic. vol. 2. 223. an 40. 50. 60. and 223. b. m. S.
Oxon' in bibl. Bod. med. 20. 120. b.
Marchers, wrought some way for the Deliverance of the Prince, in order to that
of the King.

Which was in this manner effected; A swift Horse was sent, as a Present to the
Prince then Prisoner in the Castle of Hereford, whither the Army had afterward
brought the King in no better a condition, with intimation that he should
obtain leave to ride out for a Trial, or for Recreation, into a place called
Widmersh, and that upon sight of a Person mounted upon a White Horse at the
foot of Culington Hill, and waving his Bonnet (which was, as it was said, the
Lord of Croft, an Ibidem. 223. n. 10.
Ancestor of the now Bishop of Hereford of that Surname and Ancient Family) he
should have toward him with all possible speed; which being so accordingly
done, as he (though all the Country thereabouts were thither called to prevent
his Escape) setting spurs to that Horse out-rid them all, and being come to the
Park of Culington was met by Roger de Mortimer with five hundred armed men, who
turning upon the many Pursuers, chased them back with a great slaughter to the
Gates of Hereford; Hen. Knighton, de Even^ib^s Angliae.
but by Henry Knighton and others it is related, that Roger de Mortimer having
sent the Prince a swift Horse for that purpose, which he obtaining leave of
Peter de Montfort to try, if he were of use for the great Saddle, first wearied
out other Horses, and then got on the swift Horse (a Boy with two Swords whom
the said Roger de Mortimer had sent being near with another Horse) and turning
himself to Robert de Ross then his Keeper, and to others Bystanders said, I
have been in your Custody for a time, but now I bid you farewell, and so rode
away; the said Roger de Mortimer with his banner displayed receiving him at a
little Hill called Dinmore conveyed him safe to his Castle at Wigmore.

Which did put Montfort and his Fellow-Rebels into such a Consternation and
Care of themselves and the Custody of their Royal Prisoner, as besides their
many Cautions to watch his motions, and stop the Princes passage into the parts
beyond the Seas, a Writ was sent to the Sheriff of Herefordshire in the King's
Name, commanding the most of the Gentry of that County (amongst whom Hugo de
Croft To. claus. 4^ H. 3. in dorso.
was mentioned) to come Cum equis and armis and toto posse suo ad desensionem
villae de Hereford, and to the King wheresoever he should be, under the pain of
Forfeiture of all that they had, and for ever to be disherited.

SECT. VIII.
Of the Actions of the Prince after his Escape, his Success at the Battle of
Evesham, Release of the King his Father and Restoring him to his Rights.

PRince Edward being thus at liberty, did by the help of Mortimer, Du(...)es
Baronage Tit. Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester. 757.
Clare Earl of Gloucester, the Earl Warren, William de Valence Earl of
Pembroke, the Lord Clifford, and other the Lords Marchers, soon raise a
powerful Army, multitudes of the Counties of Hereford, Worcester, Salop and
Chester coming to his aid, took the Castle and City of Worcester, had the
Castle of Monmouth delivered unto him, which he demolished; surprised the Town
of Kenilworth in Warwickshire, whither young Simon de Montfort had brought up
many of the Northern Barons of that Party to the number of 20 Banners, took no
less than Thirteen of the chief of them, young Simon and others escaping into
the Castle.

In the mean time the said Simon Earl of Leicester, carrying the King along
with him as his Prisoner, upon Lammas day being the first day of August,
receiving intelligence that the Prince was at Worcester, and not knowing that
Kenilworth was taken, marched toward Evesham about break of the day, on
purpose to meet with those Barons, which his Son had brought out of the North,
of which the Prince being advertised, advanced speedily after him, and got
betwixt him and Kenilworth, Mortimer and the Earl of Gloucester so disposing
the Forces which they commanded, as that he was almost environed.

Seeing himself therefore in that straight, he forthwith drew out his men, and
prepared for Battle, it being then the Nones of August, and ascending the Hill
discovered Prince Edward and his Army on the top thereof, which was divided
into three parts; the first led by Himself, the second by the Earl of
Gloucester, the third by Mortimer, the business being so ordered, that no other
Colors appeared then the Banner of young Simon and the rest taken at
Kenilworth, which caused the Earl to suppose, that many of them had been of his
own Party, but upon further View he understood the contrary, for the Prince
afterward took down those Colors, and instead of them erected his own and the
Earl of Gloucesters Banners on the one side, and Mortimers toward the West,
which unexpected sight caused such a Discouragement in the Army of the Barons,
as that the Welsh betook themselves to flight, and the rest being over-powerd
were totally routed, so that few escaped the Slaughter: Of those who were Slain
and not taken Prisoners, were as to the Principal Persons Simon de Monfort Earl
of Leicester himself (whose Head, Hands, and Feet being cut off, were sent to
the Lady Mortimer then at Wigmore Castle) Henry de Montfort his Eldest Son,
Hugh le Dispencer then Justice of England, Ralph Basset of Drayton, Thomas de
Astely, Peter de Montfort, William de Mandeville, John de Beauchamp of Bedford,
Guy de Baliol, and diverse other persons of Quality, with a multitude of the
common Sort: Of those that were wounded and taken Prisoners, the Chief were,
Guy de Montfort a younger Son of the said Simon de Montfort, John Fitz-John,
Humphry de Bohun the younger, John de Vescy, Peter de Monfort Junior, and
Nicholas de Segrave; And it was said that when the Earl of Leicester discerned
the Form of the Princes ^ Mat We(...)-
Battalia, he swore by the Arm of St. James (his usual Oath) they have done
discreetly, but this they have learned of me, let us therefore commend our
Souls to God, because our Bodies are theirs; Mat. Pari^.
and encouraging his men told them, they were to Fight for the Law of the Land,
yea the Cause of God and Justice, and advising Hugh le Despencer, Ralph Basset,
and some others to fly, and reserve themselves for better times, they refused
so to do, but rather chose to die with him.

Who although he was an Arch-Rebell, and in that a Pest or Plague unto the
Nation, yet the deluded People could not think ^.
it enough to honor and follow him in his Life time, but would in the Fame of
his supposed Miracles have worshipped him for a Saint after his Death, if the
King had not prohibited them.

SECT. IX.
Of the Proceedings of King Henry the Third after his Release and Restoration
until his Death.

THE long imprisoned and sadly misused King thus happily released out of his
Thraldom, but yet with the Loss of some of his Own, as well as too much of his
Subjects Blood, by a Wound casually received in the battle, was now rid of his
Jailer, whom he feared and hated, as he said himself more than any man living,
and he that before was forced to write and speak as Montfort and the rebellious
Barons would dictate unto him, obey their Orders as soon as they were proposed,
declare his Son and Loyal Subjects Rebels, and the Rebels his most faithful
Council, could like a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler, when he was at
liberty, and had escaped their Tyranny, give them their proper Names and
Titles, call their whole business a Rebellion, and made them glad to receive
their Pardons, under the Character of his Enemies, To. claus. (...)in dorso.
and To. Pa^. (...)(...).
as in the Pardons of John Fitz-John, Basset, and others, and with the
Victorious Prince, the Redeemer of him and the Kingdom, went to Winchester,
where a Parliament being convoked, all who adhered to Simon de Montfort, were
disinherited, and their Estates conferred upon others at the King's pleasure,
the Liberties of London forfeited and taken from them; in which year that
valiant Prince his Son, as M^t. Paris. (...)^^^0.
Mat. Paris has recorded it, fought a single Combat with Adam de Go^rdon the
Outlaw near Farneham, where finding him in the Woods, and personally engaging
with him, the fight continued so long, and with such Animosity and Courage on
both sides, as they as well as the Spectators marvailing at each others
extraordinary unwearied Valor, the sturdy Outlaw was at last content, upon
the Prince's offer to procure his Pardon, to throw down his Arms, and was
restored to Favor and his former Estate.

And the King notwithstanding the Success at the Battle of Evesham, and his
Advantages gained thereby, continuing his Endeavors to free his Kingdom from
the Danger, Damage, and Disturbance of any further Rebellion, having gathered
together a formidable Army, treated upon Hostages given with young Simon de
Montfort, for a Peace to be granted unto him as to his own particular, and for
the delivering up of the Castle of Kenilworth, wherein he had despitefully
behaved himself by cutting off the hand of one of his Courriers whom he had
intercepted, and sending it unto him in a ridiculous jee^ing manner, not only
from himself, but some of his Accomplices that were forfeited and disherited.

But they that were in the Castle denying to surrender it, either to the King
or Simon, in regard that they were entrusted by the Countess of Leicester, who
was beyond the Seas, and without her Order they would not do it.

In the mean time, whilst the King besieged Killingworth Castle, which held out
half a year, a great Party of those that were disherited growing desperate,
retired to the Isle of Ely, which they did begin to fortify, and from thence
making Incursions into the adjacent parts did great Mischief.

Which to repress, ^aith Mat. Paris.
Matthew Paris, citantur Communium Communes ad ^os vallandos and eorum egressum
impediendum, which in great numbers they endeavored to do, but were
overreached by the Military Arts and Stratagems of the Montfortian Party, the
King having the Castle of Kenilworth surrendered unto him.

Simon and Guy de Montfort Sons to the Earl of Leicester, with the disinherited
Barons who escaped from the Battle of Evesham, defending the Isle of Ely, the
King and the Prince going with an Army against them straightly besieged them,
and tendered them afterward gentle Conditions, wherein the King's Privy Council
were divided, for that Mortimer To. Pat. 49 H. 3.
having the whole Earldom, Honor, and great Estate of the Earl of Oxford, after
the battle of Evesham granted unto him, and many others who had great
Quantities of the disherited Parties Lands given unto them, were unwilling to
forgo what the King had for their Valor and Fidelity bestowed upon them, and
therefore would hold what they had; but Gloucester and the Twelve Ordained to
deal for the Peace of the State, and other their Friends, which were many,
stood stiffly for a Restoration.

Which raised new Displeasures, so as Gloucester retired from the Court, and
sent a Messenger to require the King to remove Strangers Daniel in the life of
Hen. 3. 182 and 183, 184.
from his Court, and observe the Provisions made at Oxford, according to his
last Promise made at Evesham, otherwise he should not marvel, if himself did
what he thought fit; whereupon in the one and fiftieth year of his Reign at
St. Edmunds-Bury was a Parliament summoned, unto which were cited Comites and
Barons, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and Abbates (...) Paris 10. 2.
and all who held by Knights Service were to appear with Horse and Armor for
the vanquishing of those disherited Persons, who contrary to the Peace of the
Kingdom held the Isle of Ely.

John de Warren Earl of Surrey and William de Valentia were sent to the Earl of
Gloucester (who had leavied an Army upon the Borders of Wales) to come in a
fair manner to that Parliament, which he refused to do, but gave it under his
hand, that he would never bear Arms against the King, or his Son Edward, but to
defend himself and pursue Roger Mortimer and other his Enemies, for which he
pretended to have taken Arms. The first Demand in that Parliament which was
made by the King Danoel's History in the life. of King H. 3 and Matthew Paris.
1002. 1003.
and the Legate, was, That the Clergy should grant a Tenth for three Years to
come, and for the Years past, so much as they gave the Barons for defending the
Coasts against the Invasion of Strangers:

Whereto they answred, That the War was begun by unjust Desires, which yet
continued, and it was more necessary to treat of the Peace of the Kingdom, to
make use of the Parliament for the benefit thereof, and not to extort Moneys,
considering the Land had been so much destroyed by the War, as it would never
be recovered.

When it was required, That the Clergy might be taxed by Laymen according to
the just Value:

They answer, It was neither Reason nor Justice that they should intermeddle in
collecting the 10th, which they would never consent unto, but would have the
Ancient Taxation to stand.

It was desired, That they would give the 10th of their Baronies and Lay-fees
according to their utmost values:

They answered, That they were impoverished in attending the King in his
Expeditions, and their Lands lay untilled by reason of the Wars.

It was moved, That in liev of a 10th they should give among them 30000 Marks
to discharge the King's Debts, contracted concerning the Kingdom of Sicily:

They answered, They would give nothing, in regard that all those Taxations and
Extortions formerly made by the King, were never converted to his own Use, or
the Benefit of the Kingdom.

Demand being made, That all the Clergymen which held Baronies or other
Lay-fees, should personally serve in the Wars:

They answer, They were not to sight with the Material Sword, but the
Spiritual, and that their Baronies were given of mere Alms.

Being required to discharge the 9000^ which the Bishops of Rochester, Bath,
and the Abbot of Westminster stood bound to the Pope's Merchants, for the
King's Service at their being at the Court of Rome:

They answered, That they never consented to pay such Loan, and therefore were
not bound to discharge it.

Then the Legate from the Pope required, That without delay Praedication should
be made throughout the Kingdom, to incite men to take the Cross for the
Recovery of the Holy Land:

Whereunto Answer was made, That the greatest part of the People were already
consumed by the Sword, and that if they should undertake that Action, there
would be none left to defend the Kingdom, and the Legate seemed to desire to
extirpate the Nation and introduce Strangers.

Lastly, when it was urged, That the Praelates were bound to yield to all the
Kings Demands by their Oath at Coventry, where they did Swear to aid him by all
means possible they could:

They answered, that when they took that Oath, they understood no other Aids
than Spiritual and wholesome Council.

So nothing but Denyals being obtained in that Parliament, the Legate employed
some to Solicit the disherited Lords, that held the Isle of Ely, to leave off
their Robberies, and return to the Peace of the King, the Faith and Unity of
the Church, according to the Form provided by the Dictum de Kenilworth, made by
a Commission of the King (no Dict or Act of Parliament) to 12 of the Peers, for
the Redemption of their Inheritances, given away by the King for Five say some,
other Seven, years Profits.

They who had no Lands were to give their Oaths, and to find Sureties for their
Peaceable Behavior, and make such Satisfaction and undergo such Penances, as
the Church should appoint; they who were Tenants should lose their right to
their Farms, Dictum de Kinilworth anno. 51. H. 3.
saving the right of their Lords; they who did instigate any to Fight against
the King, should forfeit the Profit of their Lands for two years; and if any
Person should refuse those Conditions, they should be de Exhereditatis, and
have no power of recovering their Estates; in which Composition or Dictum, some
Persons, and particularly Simon de Montfort himself and his Heirs, were
excluded.

To which they answered, That they hold the Faith received from their Catholic
Fathers, and their Obedience to the Roman Church, as the Head of all
Christianity, but not to the Avarice and wilful Exactions of those who ought to
Govern the same. And that their Praedecessors and Ancestors, whose Heirs they
were, having Conquered the Land by the Sword, they held themselves to be
unjustly Mat. Paris. 1003 and 1004.
disherited, and that it was against the Popes Mandate they should be so dealt
withal:

That they had formerly taken their Oaths, to defend the Kingdom and Holy
Church (all the Prelates thundering the Sentence of Excommunication against such
as withstood the same) and according to that Oath they were prepared to spend
their Lives; and seeing they Warred for the benefit of the Kingdom and Holy
Church, they were to sustain their Lives by the Goods of those that detained
their Lands, which the Legate ought to cause to be restored to them.

Besides, they declared to the Legate, That they had irreverently ejected out of
the Kingdom the Bishops of Winchester, London and Chester, whereby the Council
of the Kingdom was in great part weakened; willed that they might be restored to
their Lands, without Redemption; that the Provisions of Oxford might be
observed, and that they might have Hostages delivered unto them into the
Island, to hold the same peaceably for five years to come, until they might
perceive how the King would perform his Promises.

But this Stubbornness so exasperated the King, as the next year following,
with a mighty Army he did so beset the Isle, as he shut them up, and Prince
Edward with Bridges made on boats entered the same in diverse places, and
constrained them to yield.

And in the 52d. year of Mat. Paris. 1005.
his Reign devastavit, says Matthew Paris, per totum Regnum de Comitatu in
Comitatum, qui stabilem contravenientibus intentarent, ut videlicet, si quid
Possessiones alienas, sive Ovium, vel Boum, vel aliquid usurparet injuste,
subiret Sententiam capitalem.

In the mean time the Earl of Gloucester with his Army marched to London, where
by the Citizens he was received; But the Legate residing in the Tower so
prevailed with him, as he rendered himself to the King, and was shortly after
reconciled by the Mediation of the King of the Romans, and the Lord Philip
Basset, upon the forfeiture of 12000 Marks if he should ever raise any
Commotion.

Which being effected, the King went with an Army into Wales against Lewellin
their Mat. Paris. 1005 and 1006.
Prince, for ayding Simon Montfort and the Earl of Gloucester against him; but
his Wrath being for 32000l. Sterling appeased, a Peace was concluded betwixt
them, and four Cantreds which had been taken from him by right of War restored.

Whereby those bloody, long, and ruining Controversies betwixt that unfortunate
Prince King Henry the Third, and a great ill disposed part of his Subjects, led
and managed by some of his overgrown Nobility, and haereditary great Officers
of his Crown and Estate, (which had in and from his Infant age to Fifty-Seven
vexed and disquieted him and his Government) were drawing toward an end.

And whilst ^e labored to repress those Disorders which the Wars had
produced, issued out his Writs to all the Sheriffs To. Pat. 56 H. (...). m. 29.
intus.
and Justices Itinerants, to leavy 400^ with all speed out of the extract Rolls
of Fines and Americaments, to be paid into the Exchequer for the expenses of
William de Beverlaco Prince Edwards Chaplain, sent to Rome about his Affairs.

And in the same year beholding with tears the Ruins of the burnt and deformed
Mat. Paris 1009 and 1009. and peed's Hist. of England.
Church of Norwich, after the Bishops Excommunication of all that had consented
unto it:

And Trivet the Judge punishing the Offenders, he fined the City in 3000 Marks
of Silver, toward the repairing of that Church, and a Cup of Gold of the value
of one hundred pounds.

In the 54th year of his Reign, Parliamentum tenuit apud Marleburgh in quo de
Assensu Comitum and Baronum (no mention at all being made of the Commonalty, as
well high as low, in the Record, but is justly to be charged as a fault or
mistake upon Mr. Pulton's Translation of our Statutes into English) edita sunt
statuta.

The Legate Ottobon signed with the Croysado both the King's Sons Edward and
Edmond, the Earl of Gloucester and diverse other Noble men undertaking a War for
the Recovery of the Holy Land, Prince Edward in that long and Perilous Journey
carrying with him his beloved Consort Elianor then young with Child, and
Mortgaging Gascony to the King of France for 30000 Marks, who was also
personally engaged in the same Expedition, and left his aged Father the King,
broken with the cares and toils of War, and Imprisonment, who after his Son
Prince Edward's departure, being in the Fifty-fifth year of his Reign, having
borrowed Moneys of his Brother Richard King of Almaine, to help to set forward
his Son Edward, and falling desperately sick and past all hopes of Recovery,
assigned unto his said Brother all the Revenues of the Crown, except Wardships;
To. Pa^. 55 H. 3. intus.
Marriages, Releifes, Escheats of the Counties, Eyres of the Justices, and the
Juries, which he retained in his own hands to his own use.

A Nostre soustenance (as the words of the Record are) and de Nostre Reyne e de
Nos mesnees e a Nos de Nos dettes aleger.

And shortly after being doubtful of his Recovery from that sickness, whilst
Prince Edward his Son and Heir to the Crown was engaged in that so called Holy
War, Wrote his Letter of Advice unto him speedily to return into England upon
his Fatherly Blessing, notwithstanding his Vow and Engagement in that affair,
in such manner as might be most for his Honor in these words, viz.

Rex Edwardo Primogenito suo karissimo salutem and paternam Benedictionem;
Tenore Literarum vestrarum Nobis super vestro Comitivae Vestrae statu prospero
and jocundo, benedictus Deus, transmissarum audito before and intellecto laeti
efficiebomur To. claus. 5^ H. 3. m. 8. intus
and hilares in immensum, and ettam ante receptionem ipsarum Literarum tanta
and tam gravi infirmitate detinebamur, Mat Westminster de anno (...) 1270.
quod onmes and singult existentes Physici and alii de vita Nostra comm^^iter
desperabant, nec tempore quo later praesentium a Nobis recessit de Nostra
Convaltscentia spes aliqua habebatur, verum tamen prout Altissimo de statu
Nostro placuerit ordinare vos inde per Nostros Nuntios reddemus frequentius
certiores, unde cum vos in Haereditatem (not by Election) Regni Nostri tanquam
Primogenitus and Haeres Noster post Nos succedere debeatis, vos post
receptionem praesentium ad parts remotiores nullatenus transferatis, ante quam
de statu Nostro certitudinem habueritis pleniorem, tum quia si Papa crearetur
and mandaret charissimo fratri nostro Regi Alem illustri Avunculo vestro, cui
custodia Regni praedicti de concilio vestro commissa fuit, oporteat ipsum pro
statu sui Regni Alem' ad Curiam Romanam modis omnibus personaliter accedere,
ita quod ad depressionem quorundam male volorum infra Regnum Nostrum
existentium sicut nostis intendere non posset, ut expediret, tam quia si
occasion mortis Nostrae (quod absit) vos oporteat ad propria remeare causa
Regiminis Regni praedicti recipiendi cum Rege Franciae, qui ad parts Franciae
in brevi reversurus est (ut dicitur) honest redire poteritis and decenter,
super quibus omnibus tale concilum habeatis, quale vobis and honori Vestro ac
ipsi Regno, and paci, and tranquillitati ejusdem Magis videritis expedire; and
hoc sub obtentu paternae Benedictionis nullatenus omittatis, and ut vobis de
voluntate Nostra constet in praemissis consulimus bona fide, quod ad propria
redeatis sine mora, quia vestris and Regni praedicti Negotiis ad votum
ordinatis and dispositis poteritis cum praefato Rege Franciae redire versus
Terram Sanctam in subsidium ejusdem prout Magis noveritis convenire; Test Rege
apud Westm' 6o die Februarii.

And tired with the many Troubles, with which the Rebellious and unquiet
Spirits of too many of his Subjects had from his Infancy never ceased to
torment him, exchanged his earthly Habitation for a better before his Son could
hear of his Death, or return to take possession of his Kingdom and Inheritance.

And although he against his Will left behind him the first Original or Draught
of a Constitution or Design of an House or Convocation, now called an House of
Commons in Parliament, which can claim no better an Extraction then it is Birth
and first Procreation from a Force and Duress of Imprisonment, put by a
Rebellious Army upon their vanquished Sovereign, whilst he was in dread of the
life of Himself and his Son, and his Brother and his Son, for more than a year
and a quarter, and led about, and made to say, and do, and yield unto every
thing, which they would have him.

That afflicted Prince did not after the battle of Evesham, during all the Time
of his Reign, which continued about Eight years after, make use of that kind of
Writs of Summons, or of that Form for the Election of Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses to let in the Tide of the Vulgar with their Ignorance, upon his
highest and greatest Council.

And those new-contrived Writs of Summons could not in all probability obtain a
quiet Sitting, or accommodate the pretended Ends and Purposes of the Framers
thereof, neither be intended to erect a third Estate, nor agree with the
constrained Conservatorships, or other their Designs, otherwise than to
maintain those Rebellious Barons in the Powers that they had usurped.

SECT. X.
That those new contrived Writs of Summons, made by undue Means upon such a
disturbed Occasion, could neither obtain a proper or quiet Sitting in
Parliament, or the pretended Ends and Purposes of the Framers thereof, and that
such an hasty and indigested Constitution could never be intended to erect a
third Estate in the Kingdom, equal in power with the KING and his great Council
the House of Peers, or consistent with the pretended Conservatorships, or to be
coordinate with the KING and his great Council of Peers, or to be a curb to
any of them, or themselves, or upon any other design, then to procure some
Money to wade through that their dangerous Success.

IN regard that very many of the Counties, and a great part of England, as most
of the Northern, much of Wales, and the Marches thereof under the Influence and
Power of Valence Earl of Pembroke, Mortimer, Clare Earl of Gloucester,
Clifford, Le Strange, and other Welsh Lords Marchers, and of John Balioll, and
other of the Northern Barons joined to the Power and Influence of Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester after his forsaking of Montfort, neither could or were
like to come unto that so packed Parliament; for Richard Earl of Cornwall had
very many Borough Towns in that County; Wales and its thirteen Shires, and the
largely privileged Earldom of Chester sent no Knights or Burgesses to sit in
the House of Commons in Parliament, either then, or before, or since, until by
an Act of Parliament made 26 H. 8. 26. 34 H. 8. ca. 13 35 H. 8. 11.
in the later end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, they were Authorized
to be Elected for that Purpose; Warren Earl of Surrey, and Sussex was not in
those Counties destitute of many, Ferrers Earl of Darby falling off from
Montfort could not but in the large extent of his Estate drew away very many of
their well-Wishers, Followers, Friends, Allies, Tenants, or Dependants, and
such as held of them by Knights Service, and in Soccage or Burgage, and many
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to be so elected (except those in London and
Westminster, if any did then appear to have been chosen) as not dareing to come
to that kind of New Parliament without a Convoy; Although the Power of the Earl
of Oxford one of their Associates in the County of Essex was then very great,
whilst they were almost daily and hourly haunted and tormented in their minds
and Estates with Jealousies, Fears and Dangers, and the often sad and dolorous
tidings of Devastations, Slaughters, Plunders and Sequestrations; that misused
King himself not being able to have any of his Servants or Subjects that he
had, sent for to come unto him, without a Convoy to defend them from Spoil and
Pillage.

And the exactest Search, that has been or can be made, cannot find any formal
or certain Sitting of a Parliament, any Writs or Indentures returned, any
Session, Act or thing done in that so newly framed Parliament, when the minds
of the Rebels themselves were so tormented and distracted with Fears and Cares
to preserve themselves and their Royal Booty, as they could neither be safe in
keeping of him, or restoring him to his Liberty; for that the abused Lion,
patient for a while against his Will, once let loose might remember past
Injuries, and tear them in Pieces; and no Act or Memorial can be seen of any
more, than the Petition of two of the Knights Elected for the County of York,
and their Allowance of Wages, where the Rebellious Party seemed to be most
powerful, (no Burgesses of the many Towns and Boroughs in that large County at
all, it seems, then Appearing or Petitioning) by a Tax or Levy made upon that
County, which created the first President or Custom of giving Wages unto
Knights of the Shires (no other Knights of the Shires or Burgesses of Towns,
if there were or had been any Elected, then demanding the like Allowance) and
that which was allowed the said Yorkshire Knights was, partly for Expenses
supposed in their helping to guard the maritime parts to keep out Strangers, or
the Kings own Subjects in his several Provinces of France, from coming from the
parts beyond the Seas to assist him, no Journal or Record of any Petitions
made, or Grievances exhibited, Conferences, Debates, Decisions, Acts, Orders or
Ordinances, and that one that was made was only to engage and cozen as many as
they could of the Bishops and Clergy into their own Design.

And therein none of the Commons, or men of that Election, do seem at all to
trouble their Heads, or be named as Actors or Consenters therein; for it is
expressly said to be provided, Per Commun assentement du Roy and des Prelaz des
Contes and des Barons de la tere, and a fermete en tesmoinaunce le Roy and les
hauz Hommes de la tere ont mis leur Seus; neither does there appear to to have
been any Prorogation or Adiournment thereof.

And there was like to have been no small want of Money, when Simon de Montfort
and his Partners, especially after the Earl of Gloucester's Sullennes and
Departure from them, to maintain and keep together so instable a People, and so
great a number for the guard of their Royal Prisoners and their own evil
Doings, marching and maintaining their Army from place to place, Ungarrisoning
and Garrisoning diverse of the King's Castles and Places of strength, together
with the no small Charges of their disloyal Contrivances, Envoys, and
Ambassadors to their good Friends, the King of France, and the Pope.

Their great Necessities appearing very demonstrable, in their harshly pressing
the Bishops for some Arreares of the Clergy, Tenths, Seizing and Sequestration
of the Rents and Estates, as much as they could come at, of the Loyal Party to
the pretended Use of the King, taking away the Tax and Tallage of the Judaism
or Banks of the Jews (the then, besides the Caursini the Popes Bankers or
Brokers, only Usurers of the Kingdom,) which had been assigned to the Prince;
not omitting the getting into their hands the Tolls and Profits of the Markets
and Fairs appertaining to his Manor of Stamford, who until the very instant
of his Escape from the Castle of Hereford, where he had long lain a quiet
Prisoner under their Persecution, had enjoyed them.

All, or but some, of which might have given them a Temptation and Opportunity,
if they had had the mind or least Inclination to it, to have taken those few
Commons that were with them into their Association, and molded them into a
neverbefore-used Form or Figure of a Parliament (ever since so mistakenly
called,) or Constitution of a third Estate and House of Commons therein, when
anciently and long before our Kings great Councels or Parliaments consisted
only of such Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as they should please to advise
withal, and those Commons which they had with them do not appear to have made
any Act of Parliament or Ordinance for the raising of Money to support the
charges of their Rebellion.

But that part of the Baronage appeared to have been so unwilling to take them
into their Company, or give them any occasion to contemn or lift themselves
above their former condition, as when in the Difficulties with which they
wrestled, upon the Prince's denying his Consent ever to have been given to a
supposed Ordinance then lately (as they would have as many as they could make
believe it) to have been made at London, by the Prelates and Barons, by the
unanimous Assent of the King and his Son the Prince and totius Communitatis
Regni, concerning the settling of Peace in the Kingdom, the freeing of the
Prince from his Imprisonment, and the Discharge of the ill Opinion which many
of the People had of their Actions, they were constrained to send Writs in the
King's Name the 12th. of June in the same year of that imprisoned King, dated
at Hereford, unto the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Salisbury, Chester,
Coventry and Lichfeild, Bath and Wells, and the rest of the Prelates, who may
then be understood to have been absent to come omni festinatione to advise with
him at Gloucester, to assist him with their Councels, and be a Means to take
off those Rumors which had been raised, that by the Testimony of the King
himself and the rest of the Prelates, the Truth might appear, that it was not
the King himself, but the Rebels (as whilst he was in their Power he was made
to style his Son the Prince and his Loyal Party.) But none of the Commons
before summoned, or designed to have been summoned, had any new Writs sent unto
them for that purpose to meet at Gloucester, which would have been very
necessary, if they could have born any Testimony to that supposed Ordinance,
(which is not in any of the Records of that year, or any other year, those
monumenta vetustatis and veritatis, to be seen;) or if they had had any Vote in
that imaginary Parliament, it would not have been said in that King's Writ,
dated at Westminster the first day of February in the year aforesaid, and in
the Close Rolls of that year, That although upon some Discords arising amongst
the Scholars in the University of Cambridge, the King had given leave, that
there might be an University established at Northampton, yet being informed by
all the Bishops of the Kingdom, that it would greatly inconvenience the
University of Oxford, he did de concilio magnatum strictly forbid it.

But if there had been any Proceedings upon those Writs, for the Election of
Members to constitute an House of Commons, for that or any long time expended
in the duration thereof, few of whom either came, or were willing or dared to
be present at that new-fancied Parliament, which could not be believed to have
had any Duration or long Continuance, if it had at all gained a lawful
beginning, or could have overcome those many Obstructions, which lay before
them, those two Knights of the Shire sent out of Yorkshire, who had obtained a
Writ for their Wages or Charges in coming, tarrying, or returning, and were
possibly gone homeward, or shortly going, would not have made such have to be
gone.

It being always to be remembered, that although King Edward the First had so
subdued Wales as to make them obedient unto such Laws as he would have them
obey, yet King Henry the Eighth was the first that removed the Bar and
accustomed distances and Enmities, that had long continued between the English
and the Welsh, when in the 27th. year of His Reign he did incorporate his
Dominion of Wales with his Kingdom of England, and ordained that All that were
born, or to be born in ^7 H. (...). 26. (...) H. (...). 11. and ^4 H. 8. 1^.
Wales should enjoy the Laws of the Realm, which and no other be willed should
be used in Wales, and that two Knights should be chosen to be Knights as
Members in the House of Commons in Parliament for the County, and one Burgess
for the Town of Monmouth: Knights and Burgesses shall be chosen in every Shire
and Borough of Wales to come unto the Parliament, and have the allowance of
Wages, as others used to have, and there should be two Knights for the County
of Chester chosen, and two Burgesses for the City, to be Members of the House
of Commons in Parliament: Which rendered it to be not only improbable, but
impossible that any Knights or Burgesses for Wales, and the Counties of Chester
and Monmouth, and the Boroughs thereof, in that so New-created Parliament of
Simon de Montfort's own framing, in Anno 49 of King Henry the Third, or in any
other Parliaments better authorized, until the aforesaid Reign of King Henry
the Eighth: And it is also remarkable, and to be observed; that the County
Palatine of Durham, and the Borough of Newark in the County of Nottingham, had
no Authority to send 25. Car. 2.
Burgesses to Parliament, neither did, until His now Majesty's Happy
Restoration.

Or if that (so would be called) Parliament could by any stretch of Fancy have
been supposed to have been itinerant with the Army, it could never come up to
any Probability, that that King so governed against his Will by it, would the
fourth day of June by his Writ, dated at Hereford directed to the Mayor and
Bailiffs of Bristol, have commanded them to send unto him Ten or Twelve of
their most honest and discreet Citizens, to satisfy the rest of the City, that
He had been privy unto all that had been done in His Name, and to the end that
they might be better informed of his Will and Pleasure, if there had been any
Members of Parliament for the City there already with him Elected or Attending.

For certainly they that had strugled so much and contended to blood for a
Twenty-four Conservatorships, reduced during the Kings Imprisonment to Nine,
after to Four, of the more special Rebellious Undertakers, would be loath to
part with that Power and false Authority which they had so desperately gained.

And the business for which the Knights and Burgesses were desired by them to
be elected and called together to treat with the Prelates and Nobles of the
Kingdom, whom the King, as they would have it believed, had caused to be
summoned and called to a Parliament which was to be holden in Octabis Sti
Hillarii then next coming, as well concerning the Delivery of his Son Prince
Edward out of Prison, where he remained a Pledge or Hostage for the King, as
for other matters touching the common Good of the Kingdom, in which the
presence of them, and other Loyal men, as the Writ said, was requisite, and
were in fide and dilectione in which they were bound unto the King to be there,
to treat of such things, as the King, by the Advice of his Prelates and Barons,
should for the common Profit of the Kingdom ordain, as they tendered his and
their Honors (a word by the Customs and Curialities of England not in these
or many ages after usual or appropriate to the Commons and Burgesses or
Tradesmen of England). And was an Import beyond the understanding and reach of
the Capacity of the Vulgar, and if it could have been thought to have been
fitting or necessary for that instant Emergency, could not with any Reason or
true Judgment be supposed, to have been proper Advisers for any afterward
Matters of State, weighty or grave Deliberations, upon which the Safety and
Welfare of the whole Nation was to have any dependence; as if that Prince
Edward or any other Prince, our Kings Eldest Son, had for all Ages to come been
supposed to be Prisoners, or Hostages for their Father. Neither could such a
device be in any Probability long, or any thing near everlastingin, the very
Design it self, or Meaning of the Contrivers; for that even after they were to
a Despair utterly overthrown at the battle of Evesham, and the Dictum, Pardons,
and Compositions made at Kenelworth, the Earl of Gloucester upon a renewed
Discontent raised Forces and demanded the Observation of the Provisions made at
Oxford, (which amongst other things for the Conservatorships) which he alleged
the King had promised at the Battle of Evesham, (and very likely, if at all,
after the battle ended) and some of the disherited Lords that had fled to the
Isle of Ely, and forcibly withheld the possession thereof from the King, did
amongst other their Demands make it to be one of their Propositions, that the
Provisions of Oxford might be observed.

And that kind of Summons made in and by the Name of a Captive King, when He
was a Prisoner could not by any Rule of Law or Reason, have been then added to
our ancient fundamental Laws, and made to be a fundamental Law, as ancient as
the Government, upon which the House of Peers, and a great part of the Monarchy
was built; nor such a third Estate or Constitution of a different Nature, and
after so long an Interval of time made to be coordinate with it, which the
Provisions at the forced Parliament at Oxford, (if any such thing as a
Co-ordination in a House or Society of Elected Commons had then been in Actu or
rerum natura, or in any Being or Existence before the framing of those
Provisions) did annihilate, and seem never to intend.

And if such a Novel, great Council, Parliament, or Convocation could have met
with any Success, which in regard of Discords, Rebellions, Hostilities,
Jealousies, and Fears then busying and disturbing the Kingdom, was every where
embarassed, and encumbered with Dangers and Troubles, the King and His Brother,
the Prince His Son, with many of the Loyal part of the Baronage imprisoned, and
the remaining part of them either Fled, or under the power of their and the
Kingdoms Enemies, could have taken Root or gained any Fixation; no small
Contests and Dissentions arising betwixt the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester,
and their several Adherents, two of the greatest Supports Sam, Daniel in the
Life and Reign of King Henry 3d. 180. 181.
of the Faction (as it usually happens, says Daniel, in Confederacies, where
all must be pleased, or all the knot will break) about their Dividends, private
and particular Agreements.

It could not easily, or at all receive any Entertainment in the Reason or
Understanding of Mankind, or which is much less any color of it, or less than
that in any Man's Imagination or Conjecture not mad or distempered, that such a
numerous part of the Commons, as to the Burgesses to be elected out of the
vulgar, rude, rash, giddy, and apt-to-be-partial, and easily misled,
affrighted, or flattered sort of the People, should produce any good Effect,
either to themselves or the public, when too many of them were, or would be
likely to be, most commonly altogether illiterate, and of such as could escape
that unhappy Character; but few that had ever looked in at the Threshold or
Door of good Learning and Policy, and fewer that had spent any or much of their
time in it; but addicted themselves, or employed most of their Thoughts upon
the Cares of managing their own Estates, Husbandry, Trade, or other necessaries
of Livelihood, more proper for the common and inferior Ranks of the People,
upon whom very many sad and often Experiments have for many Ages and Centuries
before, deservedly fixed, and imposed the indeleble Marks of Mobile, prosanum,
and scelestum Vulgus, and given Us a lamentable Account of many of their mad
and reasonless Advices, willful, and headlong Actions, to the Destruction, not
only of their Superiors, and those that would or should guide them, but of
themselves, and all that have had to do with them, or any ill governed
Assembly, Sr let-loose Multitude of Men. Which, without good Accidents, and
much Difficulty to boot, are seldom Governed, or brought within the bounds or
compass of well digested Reason and Prudence; especially, if they sit for any
long time to hatch or brood Factions or Partialities, Envies, Ammosities,
Self-interests, over-strained Liberties, Authorities, Privileges, and taking
too much upon them.

And there could not be any or much good Event expected to happen to the
Councels of Princes, or the Weal public, either as to the Secrecy (the life of
Councels) Consultive or Active part of them. Or to those rebellious Lords
themselves, who as the Case then stood with them, were concerned to order the
business as much as they could for their own Preservation and Advantage, and to
take care that there should be some Bridle or Method to restrain them.

And there being besides Twenty-Four Cities in England, where two Citizens were
to be chosen out of each, by the direction of that novel Writ, and a great
number out of as many Boroughs, and Corporation-Towns then in England, at the
arbitrary and corrupt Power of the Sheriffs, as it after proved and happened,
with its Thirty-Nine Shires, and two Knights to be chosen out of each, (the
Counties and Boroughs of Wales not being at that time to be put into the
Account) and Four out of every of the Cinque Ports, the number would so swell
and increase, as might very much exceed that of the Peers and Barons, which in
the largest Estimate would not then arrive unto Two Hundred and Eighty, and
according to the then more common Account; and they then summoned ad libitum
Regis, not many more than Sixty, in which high and honorable Court, and House
of Spelman's diatriba de Baronibus.
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, should that very great surpassing number of
Commons have their equal Suffrages, as it may be believed they never were
intended to be allowed, the lesser number would be overpowered by the greater;
the more noble prudent and concerned, by those that were little at all, and
introduce a Community or Vassalage upon themselves and their Posterity, which
the Roman Senators and Patritii in a Commonwealth, made out of a Monarchy for
fear of Tyranny, were unwilling to admit, and when they were seditioned and
mutinyed unto it, left their Chiland Seri nepotes to endure the dire Effects of
their often Changes from Kings to Consuls, from Decem-virates unto Tribunes of
the People, Censors, Tribunes-Military, bloody Proscriptions, and Wars betwixt
the Patritii and Plebeians, pacified and succeeded by a Dictator, after that a
Trim-virate, after that an Emperor and semper Augustus Caesar, with an
arbitrary Power, until good and wholesome Laws of their own making gave an Allay
unto it.

For such a Miscellany of Imis cum Summis of Inferiors with Superiors could
not be deemed to be either more or better enabled than the Prelates and
Baronage of the Nation, the Moratiores bomines Men of better Extraction and
Education, the ancient extraordinary grand Council of our Kings and Princes not
meanly, but eminently skilled in matters of State and Policy, Religion, War,
foreign Languages, and Affairs of their own State and others, and in the
quieting the Troubles of it.

Nor could that their Device at that time have much Assurance of any good
Success therein, when the Prince was a Prisoner and Hostage for his Father,
(who was long after in no better a condition) against the Laws of Wars, and
Rules of Hostages, and the Tenor of those Writs of Summons carried nothing in
them of a perpetual Constitution, or any thing more than pro hac vice, and for
that only time and purpose. Or that such a Parcel of the lower ranks of People
could be more knowing and intelligent, than the King of France, assisted by his
grand and learned Nobility, Clergy, and Wisdom of his Parliament of Paris were
not long before, when they determined those grand and long-depending
bloodily-agitated Controversies, betwixt that persecuted King, and some of his
then ungovernable Barons, concerning the disloyal and unhappy Provisions
enforced from Him at Oxford some Years before.

And such a novum and inauditum betwixt a Monarch and King (no Feudatory) and
his rebellious Subjects, referred to the Advice of themselves, or their
Partisans, touching the Claim of their Pretenses in their own particular Cases,
being not easily to be found in any the Annals, Histories, or Records of this
or any other Kingdom or Nation.

For many of the Milites or Knights in that new Contrivance to be Elected, were
at that time, as to their Estates, of so general and lost Esteem, as Twenty or
Fifteen pounds per Annum, was by the Statute of the First Year of the Reign of
King Edward the Second, which was not much above Forty Three Years after,
conceived to be no contemptible Rate, or Proportion of Livelihood for a Knight;
when Placita apud Northamptou coram Galfrido le Scroope and sociis juis Justie.
itener' An. 3. E. 3.
William de Felton, an Ancestor of a Family now of good Note, in the County of
Suffolk, being in the Third Year of the Reign of King Edward the Third,
presented before the Justices itinerant, to be seized of the Mannot of
Botingdon, quod valet per Annum Twenty Pounds, and to be Thirty Years Old, and
nondum Miles ideo in misericordia, and many Gentlemen of good Extractions and
Families did heretofore appear, to have been long after retained under Earls
and Barons in the Wars, and Service of their Prince, and not seldom as
Domestics, and more especial Servants in their then large and honorable
Families, and have been their Receivers, Stewards or Feodaries, worn their more
special Livings, and taken Wages, Diet, and Allowance for themselves, and a
limited Number of Men and Horses, although some of them have been Gentlemen of
good Value and Descent, and very many of those which have been since Elected,
are not denied to have been Persons of ancient and worshipful Families.

The Citizens and Burgesses (Merchants excepted) such as did Sordidas arts
exercere, as the Civil Law styles a Sir John Ferne's Glory of Generosity.
them Men that usually made their Gain, or manner of Living by Deceits and
Lying, and were as our Common Law above Two Hundred Years after declared them,
says Littleton, to be Men with Littleton's Tenuries, Cokes 1. Instit. super
Littleton.
whose Daughters to Marry would be to a Gentleman such a Disparagement, as the
Parents and Kindred might Legally complain of it; and the Testimony, says the
Caesarean or Civil Law, of a Gentleman was to go as far, or to be valued, as
two of them. And how unequal they were like to be in their Births, Reputations,
and requisite Parliamentary Abilities, who being to be very Burgesses, and City
or Town-Trading Inhabitants, according to the Intention of those Writs, could
not be expected to be other, than such as were only bred and instructed in the
Arts, Tricks, Deceits, and Mysteries (as they have been since well called) of
Trade, and the most of their Estates and Livelihood gained by it, being much
more wickedly than Honest, as their Apprentices and Journey-men, who know the
Secret thereof, can Witness; nor to be able or serviceable to their Prince in
any thing, more than to attend Him (if He should need or call him) as a
Merchant to some great and public Mart or Fair, to help him to buy or sell
such Things as should be there Marchantable, or that the Knights to be chosen
in the Shires, who in those times made the Military Exercises to be their
greatest Care and Employment, would not be more necessary and fit to attend
their Sovereign, to perform the Office and Intention of those Writs, to defend
their King, themselves, their Country, Friends and Neighbors, and to do that
which every Gentleman, and such as were e meliori luto of the more refined
Clay, better born and bred, than the rude Vulgus, or common sort of People,
would of themselves, if not commanded, or otherwise by their Tenures obliged,
be willing to do; as that Learned French Lawyer Barn. Brisson. in Basilic. Lib.
6. Tit. 23.
Brissonius well observes, Qu'en la necessity de Guerre toutes les Gentilz
hommes sont tenus de prendre les Arms pour la necessity du Roy; which by our
Laws of England is so to be encouraged, as it is Treason to kill any Man, that
goes to Aid the King, and is no 21. E. 3. 2^. 45. E. 3. 21.
more than what the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy do bind every Englishman
unto, although they should tarry in the Camp more than Forty Days, or not have
Escuage or any Allowance of their Charges from their own Tenants.

And the People of the Counties and Cities, as well as the smaller Towns or
Boroughs, which were to delegate or commission them, and make them wise enough
to give their Assent in that great and solemn Assembly and Council of the King
and His Prelates, Baronage, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, unto what they should
ordain in quibusdam (not in omnibus) arduis, high and extraordinary Matters
concerning the King, Church, and Kingdom, not in ordinary or common, were only,
or more especially, to take into their Consideration, and inform the State,
Commerce, Interest, and Affairs, Abilities, or Disabilities of the Countries,
and Places to supply their Sovereign's occasions; and some of those Burgesses
Elected, and sent from poor Fisher-Maritime-Towns (the most prudent Observers
of whom might have done Aristotle good service in his Enquiries (not of the
Politics, but) of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, or some of the lesser
Genery, or overgrown Yeomanry, as might instruct Varro or Columella in the
design of writing their Books de Re Rustica, or the well lined plausible
Dweller in some inconsiderable Villes, or a small number of Houses, little
better than Cottages, with a fair Inn, with two carved or gilded Sign Posts,
and a St. George on Horseback unmercifully killing the Dragon, and the
Inhabitants, Men of no more Language, Wit, or Learning, than was scarcely
sufficient to manage their vulgar mechanic Employments) might have been more
useful in the Parliament of the Twenty-Seventh Year of the Reign of King Edward
the Third, when the Statutes of the Staple, and the Staple Cities, and Towns so
greatly concerning the after happening Golden-Fleece-flourishing-wollen-Trade,
and Manufacture in England, and the enriching those Cities and Towns, were made
and enacted.

And the Consent or Advice therein of the vulgar or ignoble part of the
Freeholders, might have been more requisite in the making and framing the Act
of Parliament in the Twenty-Third Year of the Reign of the aforesaid King,
touching Laborers and Servants; or that long after made by Queen Elizabeth, in
the Fifth Year of her Reign, limiting the Wages of Servants, Artificers, and
Workmen, as being likely to be more sensible, and to give good Instructions in
their own Concernments, than in those of their Superiors, their Landlords,
viz. The King, Nobility, Bishops, Gentry, irelgious Houses, Colleges,
Universities, Deaneries, Praebendaries, Hospitals, Corporations, and Companies
of Trades, etc.

Those that were Boroughs were not then so many or half so big, as they have
been since by our King's Royal Favors, in the granting of Fairs and Markets
unto them, with diverse other Immunities and Privileges, etc. Nor had gained so
great Additions to their Buildings, and former extent by their Situation or
Neighborhood to some great Town or City of Trade; and the Inhabitants of them
Men only conversant in the evil Arts of Trade, and with Demetrius the
Silver-Smith ready to do more for Diana's Temple, than St. Paul's Preaching,
and lay out that little Understanding that they have, in taking some Lands to
Farm near adjoining; and being as little acquainted as may be with
State Policy, or any thing out of the reach of their Neighborhood, will be as
unfit to know or discern wise Men, as the Corydons, Hobby-nolls, country
Carters, or Mechanics are, or would be, to Elect or give their Votes or
Suffrages, for the taking of the degrees of Doctors, Masters, or Batchelors of
Arts in our Universities; or as Brick-laiers would be to give their direction
and advice in the Building, Rigging, Tackle, Steering, and Sailing of a Ship.

Or to give a liberty to the Boys to choose their Schoolmaster, and direct
what Methods he should use in the governing of them; or to the Common People,
to elect and choose the King's Privy Council, or to have Votes or Suffrages in
the making or repeal of such Laws, as the variety of their Humors, Interests,
Envies, Ambitious Ignorances, and Whimsies should persuade them to obey or be
ruled by, or such as may consist with all of them together, or as much as for
that very instant or moment of Time may agree with every Man's particular
Fancy, Interests, Occasion, Advantage, Will, or Pleasure; or of those that
shall awe, flatter, bribe, delude, fool, or seduce them.

Or in the Hurry and Distraction which Rebel-Armies and Gatherings of, a misled
or cheated Part of, the People in such a Collection use to be, might probably
think it necessary and greatly conducing to their present self Advantages, to
procure them that were under the influence of their Power, then very
formidable, or of the Tenancy or dependence of themselves, or the rest of the
Baronage, whom they were laboring by Force, Fear, Flattery, or other seducing
and evil Arts, to entice and draw into their Party, to consent for the present,
to the Advice or Petitioning for the Confirmation or Establishment of the
constrained Provisions made at Oxford; and their Conservatorships which the
King of France had not long before solemnly in his aforesaid Arbitration
condemned and annulled.

For the Dugdales Baronage. Tit. (...) and Petri (...) Montfort.
Engine or Knack of the Twenty-Four Conservators to govern them and the King
and Kingdom, Twelve as it was sometimes proposed to be chosen by the King, and
Twelve by the victorious Rebels, after confined to a much smaller Number, as
their Power and Hen. (...).
usurped Authority in a short Daniel in Life of
time after gave them the Liberty and Occasion, could never be thought to be
with any intention to continue that new Model or Frame of Parliament any longer
than pro hac vice, until the imprisoned King and Prince should be released, and
the Disturbances of the Kingdom quieted, as those Writs of Simon and Peter de
Montfort's own framing and putting under the King's Name and Seal did, if they
might be credited, seem to import.

But were rather convened for Simon de Montfort's particular Ambition, and
Establishment, nor could otherwise be interpreted to amount to any more, than
the most likely to have been the dismal Effects thereof, the Destruction of the
King and his Family, Subversion of the ancient fundamental Laws and Customs of
the Nation, and Change of our ancient Monarchy into an Oligarchy.

And must either be understood not to have known at all the fundamental Usages,
Customs, Privileges of the Praelates, Nobility, and Great Men of the Realm in
their King's great Councels, or Parliaments, when they were thereunto Summoned;
and that long after both by the Feudal, and common Laws of this Kingdom, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal were in Parliament to Assess a proportionable
Escuage Cokes, 1 Institutes, Tit. escuage.
upon such of their Tenants, who held any Capite Lands, and did not go with
them in Person to serve their King and Country, and were not to be their own
Assessors, but submit unto what they should in those great Councels,
subordinate to their King's, determine; and as they anciently were used to do,
when Taxes were laid upon Knights Fees, when the Common People that were to pay
them were not all present, or any for them.

Or never to intend to introduce such a Party of the Common People into a
Co-ordination or Fellowship with them, in a Subordination to their Sovereign,
which might, as they did afterward entice them to, encroach and believe, that
a License of Petitioning for Redress of any Grievances which might happen, and
a Liberty to give an Approbation and Obedience to what should be there ordained
by the King, by the Advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal for the public
Good, should be in, or unto them, or their Successors an Authority or original
Power, to control what their Kings by the Counsel of their Lords Spiritual and
Temporal should there find necessary to Enact; when they could not forget, that
even in the time of the Imprisonment of King Henry the Third, they did in his
Letters, Rescripts, Writs, and Edicts, written and sent about the Kingdom in
his Name, To. pat. and claus 48, and 40. H. 3.
amounting to no fewer than Sixteen, mention that his said Orders, Acts, and
Commands were done by the Counsel and Advice Procerum and Magnatum suorum, and
in some of them his Prelates, Barons, and hautes hommes, but nothing at all of
the Commons.

And that Rebellious part of the Baronage might the easier be led into that
they never meant, when they had some reason to think or assure themselves, that
such an Election of Members, or the parts of the common People, would much
advance the fixing and settling their Designs, when they could not but
acknowledge, that they owed much of their Liberties and happiness under their
Kings and Princes unto them, and their Ancestors, as in particular, unto an
Earl of Oxford, in procuring of the King Three Hundreds in the County of Essex,
to be diaforrested, and might be glad to entail and perpetuate their
Assistances, Dependencies, Hospitalities, Privileges, and Favors upon their
Posterity, and after Generations; and rather return a submissive Compliance
unto them well accepted, than to endeavor to prejudice, or in the least to
make themselves equal unto them, or Mastors of them, but would be content to be
ruled by them, and not endeavor to govern or domineer over them.

With which does accord that well founded Opinion and Answer of that Exact
Collection of all Remonstrances, Petitions, Messages, Declarations, and Answers
betwixt the King and Parliament from the 1st. of December. 1642. until 24 March
1652. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament to be printed.
excellent Prince, and very Martyr King Charles the First, our late gracious
and pious Sovereign, in his Answer to the haughty and undutiful Nineteen
Propositions, sent unto Him by the rebellious and misled Parliament, the Second
Day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Forty Two, That the House of Commons was
never intended for any share in the Government, or the Choosing of them that
should Govern, and were not likely, in those early and troublesome times, to
get any Root or Foundation for such an unwarrantable Pretense. And might have
believed, that the Prelates and Baronage of England had heretofore Power and
Influence sufficient, to have kept them in a better Order, both toward them
and their Sovereign.

SECT. II.
Of the great Power, Authority, Command, and Influence, which the Prelates,
Barons, and Nobility of England, had in or about the Forty-Ninth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the Third, when he was a Prisoner to Simon de Monfort, and
those Writs of Election of some of the Commons to Parliament, were first
devised and s^nt to Summon them: And the great Power and Estates which they
afterward had to create and continue an Influence upon them.

WHen the then Prelates, by the Papal great and exorbitant Power over the
Bodies and Souls of the People of England, as well high as low, rich or poor,
their Power of certifying Illegitimations, Bastardy, or Ne unques loyalment
accouplis en Matrimony, with their Fulminations, Excommunications, Curses,
Interdictions, Confessions, Absolutions, Pardons, and Dispensations, Denial of
Christian burial, Affrights of Purgatory, undeniable Commands over the
inferior Clergy, and they over the People; together with the great Authority
which their Episcopal Function and Dignity inseparably conjoynt with their
Temporal Baronies had given unto them in the Parliaments of England, the
greatest and highest Councels and Assembly of the Nation, were in the time of
King Henry the Third's Imprisonment, so much allured and drawn by some of their
factious and naughty Incitements to Simon de Montfort's Party, by a kind of
Ordinance and Agreement before mentioned of the then over-ruling-Power of the
rebellious Victors, as there was an undertaking to preserve from Plunder and
Spoil, all the Lands and Estates of the Holy-Church, affirm their Authorities,
and all that they should have reasonable Order for, amends should be performed,
and full Power granted unto them by the King, or Generality of the Earls,
Barons, and great Men of the Land, to provide things profitable for the
bettering the Estate of the Holy-Church to the Honor of God.

And with their temporal Baronies, unto which many Manors of a great Extent,
and yearly Value were annexed, and some other Barons holding of them, and had
their many Milites for service of War, and Multitudes (...) L Edwardi Confessor
(...).
of Tenants by Tenure, Lease, and Copy-holding of them.

And the regular and monastic part of the Clergy of England, many of whose
Abbots and Priors were admitted to sit amongst the Peers in Parliament, were so
envied for their great Revenues and Estates, as the Sir (...). (...) Chronicle.
Commons in a Parliament in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, wherein Lawyers
were prohibited to be elected Members, and therefore styled indoctum
Parliamentum, did petition the King to confiscate, and take into his own
Revenue, all their Lands which they had calculated to be sufficient to maintain
One Hundred and Fifty Earls (no small Estate in those times, being enough to
satisfy the honorable Yearly expenses of one Earl, and his numerous Retinue,
after the rate of their then living) One Thousand Five Hundred Knights, Six
Thousand Two Hundred Esquires, and erect Two Hundred Hospitals for the Relief
of maimed Soldiers.

And in that new Frame of a great Council or Parliament, wherein a part of the
Commons of England were to be Assembled, which can find no other Original than
the Fate of that unhappy King in the battle of Lewis, as the close Roll To.
claus. 48 H. 3. Part uni^a. m. 6. in dors. Schedul^.
of the Forty Eight of that King will tell us, there were no fewer of the then
well-wishing Clergy to Simon de Mortfort, Summoned unto that new modelled
Parliament, than One Archbishop, Fourteen Bishops, Thirty-Five Abbots, Two
Priors, their good Friends and Confederates, and for Companies sake in such an
hopeful and popular Project, Four Abbesses to help them to Cordials in that
languishing State of Loyalty they then were in.

The Earls, and Barons were then, and long after, Great and Noble by Descent,
Birth, Extraction, Lands, Estate, Alliance, Command, Power, and Authority, not
a few of them by Consanguinity or Affinity, deriving their Progeny from the
lines of several of their Kings and Princes, and much of their Honors and
Support from their Bounty and Munificence, as they were pleased to dispense
them by their influence, favors, or bounty, for great and heroic Actions and
Services done for them and the Weal public; and their Authority could not be
small, either in the Fear or Force of it, when at the time of the Norman
Conquest all the Lands and Services thereunto belonging of the Kingdom, were
either the Kings in Demesne, or in the Possession of those Great Men and
Commanders, unto whom he had granted them, Dugda^e^ preface in his Survey of
Warwick shire. Liber censualis vocat. Doomsday Lib. rub. in S^^c.
and that again distributed by them to their Servants, Friends, or Followers to
hold by Knights Service, Soccage, Copyhold, Leases for Years or Villenage,
with some Services imposed, as going in Person to War to defend them and their
Sovereign, Castle-guard, Carre and Manuopara, and the consented unto
Reservations or willing Oblations of doing much of their works of Husbandry, in
the hopes of their Justice in their little Courts or petit Soveraignties,
Protection, and Assistance against the injuries and oppression of wrong Doers,
and the Comfort of a large and free Hospitality, and Charitable uses, together
with the Foundation and Endowments of many Abbeys, Priories, and religious
Houses, which obliged both the secular and regular Clergy to love and honor
them, Dugdale' s Minas tum Anglicanum, 12. 3. Tom.
and the liberi homines or Freeholders were, as unto many of them, only such as
had been manumissed, and had from the condition of Servants or Villains,
attained unto the degrees of libertini or ingenui, or so fortunate as to have
some small Parcells of Lands in Fee simple or Tail or for life by Gift,
Purchase, Marriage, or Copyhold, granted and given by them; most of the Saxon
race being so unhappy, as to be content to become Tenants to the Conquerours of
their own Lands, whilst the Nobility and Great Men being more desirous of
Service, than Money or Rents, granted the Service of Men or Tenants, that held
by Knights Fees or Service, or parts thereof, one unto another, which in those
times were in so high Esteem, and of such a Value, as Ten Knights Fees were
reckoned a Satisfaction for a Release of the Claim of that great Office of High
Steward of England, in Fee by Roger Bygott Earl of Norfolk, and his Heirs, to
Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, Seven and a half whereof being paid, King
Henry the Third upon a Reference of the Controversy betwixt the said Earls
unto him, made his Award. That the said Simon should Execute the said Office of
High Steward, and the said Roger York and Vincent Catalogue of Nobility.
should bring his Action for the other Two Knights Fees and a half; and the
English Nobility having all the great offices and places of Honor of the
Kingdom, and about the Persons of their Kings, with their Influence, Power, and
Authority in their great Councels or Parliaments, and thereby the Opportunities
of pleasing and displeasing, hurting or helping whom they would, were, as to
many of them and not a few of the common People, like the righteous Job. ca. 29.
Job in his Prosperity, when they came out to the Gates of the City, the Ears
that heard them blessed them, the Eyes that saw them gave Witness unto them;
they delivered the Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and them that had none
to help them; the Blessing of those that were ready to perish came upon them;
they caused the Widows hearts to sing for joy; were Eyes to the blind, Feet to
the lame, and Fathers to the poor; brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked
the Spoil out of their Mouths, their Root was spread out by the Waters, and the
Dew lay all night upon their Branches, they gave ear unto them, waited and kept
silence at their Council.

And could not be slighted or taken to be Benefits of a small size or esteem,
but to be very great and worthy the seeking and obtaining, when Threescore and
Ten Thousand Knights Fees, every one of which being then no small Estate,
either as to the extent of the Sir Edward Cokes 1 part Institutes tit. Escuage.
51^. Et Ordericus Vitalis.
Lands, or the Value thereof, as Ordericus Vitalis, who lived in the time of
the Conqueror, has numbered them, or but about Thirty two Thousand, as Mr.
Seldom believes, were given by William the Conqueror to his Nobility, Great
Men, and Followers to be holden of him, his Heirs, and Successors in Capite,
and all the other Lands of the Kingdom, except those large quantities which
were King Edward the Confessor, as appertaining to the Crown of England, and
what else he kept in his own Possession and Demesne, and besides what he
endowed and founded diverse Abbys, Monasteries, Priories, and Nunneries withal,
to hold of him and his Heirs and Successors in Capite, and by Knights Service,
were again, as unto a great part thereof, distributed and granted by his
Nobility, great Men, and Followers to their Dependants, Servants, Tenants, and
Friends to hold of them by Knight Service. Which drawing to it by the Feudal
Laws, part of the fundamental Laws of England, and incorporated therein,
Wardships (no Slavery, Burden, or Grievance, if rightly used or understood but
a Protection, Comfort, and Benefit, as well public as private) Reliefs,
Education, Protection, and Marriage of their Heirs in their Minority, which was
the greatest Concernment of their Families, did put and render the Commonalty
under the Patronage and Tutelage of the Nobility, and great Men Subordinate to
the King their Sovereign, and common Parent, which many other Nations, and the
greatest Pretenders, and Enjoyers of Liberties in the Christian World, have not
only deemed, but experimented to be an Happiness.

Insomuch as if it were to be tried by the Suffrage and Experience of our
English Ancestors, if they could from the Dead be produced and heard to speak
in the Affairs and Case of England, and a due Consideration had of the Security
had, and long enjoyed by the Northern parts thereof by the Tenures by Cornage,
assisted by that of Knight Service and Capite, and the Residence of the
Baronage of those Countries, against the daily and nightly Incursions, and
Spoil of their then ill Neighbors, the Picts and Scots, which amounted unto as
much or more than the costly Wall and Fortifications, which the Romans built
and provided against them, together with the Safety and Guard, which a great
part of England has been often defended by the Lords Marchers, against the
Hostilities and Unquietness of the Welsh, it is former Owners, would bring us in
a verdict of O felices! bona si sua norint.

Which must needs attract the Love, good Will, Fear, Awe, and Obedience of the
People, who so well understood their own conditions, and that of the Nobility,
as to believe that, to quarrel or be disobliging unto any of them, was to fall
foul, or out of the favor of all their great Alliances, Friends, Kindred,
numberless Tenants, Servants, Retainers, Dependants, and well-Wishers; many of
which being their own Relations, Friends, or Kindred, might either help on, and
bring upon them a most certain and inevitable Ruin, or put their small and
fainting Estates into a languishing Condition, when any, the least, Offenses
taken or given, would be sure to effect it, in the Displeasure of those, who
until the Reign of King Edward the First, and some Ages after, were so high and
potent.

As that Ferrers Earl of Darby, an Opposite to King Henry the Third, in the
Baron's Wars, had Twenty Lordships in Barkeshire, Three in Wiltshire, in Essex
Five, in Oxfordshire Seven, in Warwickshire Six, in Lincolnshire Two, in
Buckinghamshire Two, in Gloucestershire One, Herefordshire Two, Hantshire
Three, Nottinghamshire Three, Leicestershire Thirty-Five, Derbyshire One
Hundred and Fourteen, Staffordshire Seven, of which was Chedley a parcel,
whereunto that part of Staffordshire appertained; and besides had the Castle
and Borough of Tudbury in that County, together with many Advowsons, Dugdale' s
Baronage. 1 Tom. 257.
Patronages, etc. and Knights Fees holding of him in those and other parts of
England.

An Ancestor of Gilbert de Gaunt, a partaker of the Norman Conquest, another
Opposite of King Henry the Third, had in the Conquerors Survey One Lordship in
Barkshire, Three in Yorkshire, Six in Cambridgeshire, Two in Buckinghamshire,
One in Huntingtonshire, Five in Northamptonshire, One in Rutland, One in
Leicestershire, One in Warwickshire, Eighteen in Nottinghamshire, One Hundred
and Thirteen in Lincolnshire, with Folkingham, which was the Head of his
Barony; besides Knights Fees of those that held of him Patronages, and
Advowsons, Fairs, Markets, Assize of Bread and Beer, Pillory, and Tumbrel, etc.

Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester was in the right of Amicia, one of the
Sisters and Coheirs of Robert Fitz Parnel, a Norman Earl of Leicester, Lord
high Steward of England, in Fee, an Office of Large Dugdale' s Baronage. 1 Tom.
83.
Authority and Esteem, had in Warwickshire Sixty-Four Lordships, in
Leicestershire. Sixteen, in Wiltshire Seven, in Northamptonshire Three, in
Gloucestershire One; besides many Knights Fees of those that held of him,
Advowsons, Patronages, Fairs, Markets, and the privileges of Pillory, Tumbrel,
and the Assize of Bread and Beer.

The Earl of Gloucester Idem. 207. 213, 214.
and Hartford had Thirty-Eight Lordships in Surrey, Thirty-Five in Essex, Three
in Cambridgeshire, Halling and Bermeling Castle in Kent, Haresfeild in
Middlesex, Sudtime in Wiltshire, Leviston in Devonshire, Ninety-Five in
Suffolk, besides Thirteen Burgages in or near Ipswich, of which Clare was one,
from whence that Family took their Surname, or it from them, had the Town and
Castle of Tunbridge in Kent, the Castle of Brianels in the County of
Gloucester; and whilst the King and his Son Edward were Prisoners at Lewis,
obtained a Grant under the Great Seal of all the Lands, and large Possessions
of John Warren Earl of Surrey, to hold at the King's Pleasure, except the
Castles of Rigate and Lewis, was one of the Chief that extorted a Commission
from the King, authorizing Stephen Bishop of Chichester, Simon Montfort, and
himself, to nominate Claus 2 part 48 H. 3. m. 10.
Nine, as well Prelates as Barons, to manage all things according to the Laws
and Customs of the Kingdom, until the Determinations should be made at Lewis
(and others which they better liked should take Effect.)

Awbrey de Vere Dugdale' s Baronage 1 Tom. 188.
in the general Survey of William the Conqueror, had Cheviston now Kensington,
Geling and Emingford in com Hunt. Nine Lordships in Suffolk, Fourteen in Essex,
whereof Colne, Hengham, and Bentley were part, in Warwickshire Six, in
Leicestershire Fourteen, in Northamptonshire Six, in Oxfordshire Two, and in
Wiltshire Ten; a Descendant of whom had in the Reign of King Stephen, together
with Richard Basset Justice of England custodiam Comitatus, and executed the
Sheriffs Offices of Surrey, Cambridge, Huntington, Essex, Hartford,
Northampton, Leicester, Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham, and Bedford, had by the
Grant of Maud the Empress, and King Henry the Second her Son by inheritance,
the Earldom of Oxford, granted unto him and his Heirs, and Manor and Castle of
Caufeild, in the County of Essex, and the Office of Lord Great Chamberlain of
England in Fee, with the Castles of Hengham or Hedingham, and Camps to be
holden by that Service, and diverse other Lands, and Possession of a great
yearly Value, had before the Fourth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third,
by the Marriage of the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Bulbeck, many Manors and
Lands in the Counties of Buckingham and Cambridge, and by the Marriage of the
Daughter and Heir of Gilbert Lord Sanford, the Inheritance of diverse Manors
and Lands in the Counties of Essex and Hartford, and a Grant in Fee to be
Chamberlain to the Queen die Coronationis suae, with diverse Privileges, and
One Hundred Knights Fees holden of them, one whereof was by the Heirs of
Mordaunt for Lands in Essex, to come completely Armed, as Champion to the Heir
of the Family, and Earls of Oxford, in the great Hall of Hedingham Castle upon
the day of his Nuptials, to defy and fight with any that should deny him to be
Earl of Oxford; and another for the Manor of Horseth in the County of
Cambridge, holden by the Family of Allington, now the Lord Allington of the
Kingdom of Ireland, by the Service of holding the Earl of Oxford's Stirrup die
nuptiarum, which was actually performed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the day
of the Marriage of Edward Earl of Oxford with the Daughter of the Lord Burghley.

Roger Bygod in the Conquerors Time, did possess Six Lordships in Essex, and
One Hundred Seventeen in Suffolk, had a Grant in the Reign of King Henry the
Second, of the Manors of Ersham, Walsham, Alvergate, and Aclay, and the Honor
of Eye, in the County of Suffolk, the Custody of the Castle of Norwich, and a
Grant of the Office of high Steward of England, to hold and enjoy in as ample
manner, as Roger Bygod his Father had held it in the time of King Henry the
First, was Earl Marshal of England by Inheritance, and had thereby a great
Command and Authority in the King's Armies, and all his Martial Affairs,
registered in his Marshals Rolls those many Thousands, who as Tenants in Capite
came into the Army to Spelman' s Glossard. and in libro rubro de Scac.
perform their Service, by which also they were enabled to receive Escuage
after of those that were their Under-tenants, and held of them, and did not
come to do their Service, was in times of Peace as in War, to appease Tumults,
to Guard the King's Palace, distribute Liveries, and Allowances to the Officers
thereof, attend at the doing of Homages, have a Fee of every Baron made a
Knight, and to receive of every Earl doing Homage, a Palfry, and Furniture.

Hugh de Montfort Ancestor of Peter de Montfort, one of the Twenty-Four
enforced Conservators for the Kingdom, in the said Reign of King Henry the
Third, had in the general Survey Twenty-Eight Manors in Kent, besides a large
proportion of Rumney Marsh, Sixteen in Essex, Fifty-one in Suffolk, and
Nineteen in Norfolk, a Descendant of whom had in 12. Henry the Second, holden
of him Ten Knights Fees, and a Fourth part de veteri feoffamento, and was
seized of the Manor of Wellesborne in com Leic, which Peter had in 12 Henry
the Third, the Manor of Beldesert in Comitat' Stafford, in Anno 35 Henry the
Third, was Governor of Horeston Castle in Derbyshire, in Forty-One Warden of
the Marches of Wales toward Montgomery, and also of the Castles of Salop and
Bruges, was Sheriff Dugdale' s Baronage. 1 Tom. 407. 408. 409.
of the Counties of Salop and Stafford; and so likewise for the next ensuing
Year had the Custody of the Castles of Bruges, and Ellesmere, in Anno 47. Henry
the Third was Governor of the Castles of Corff and Shirburne, and of the Castle
and Manor of Seggewick; and was in Anno 49. Eiusdem Regis made by that King's
Imprisoned Seal, Governor of Whittenton Castle in Shropshire.

Gilbert de Segrave the Son of Hereward held the Manor of Segrave in Com'
Leic', with the Fourth part of a Knight's Fee, had a Grant of the King of the
Lands of Stephen de Gaunt, in the Counties of Lincoln and Leicester, in the
5th. of Henry the Third was Sheriff of the Counties of Essex and Hartford, and
the Two next ensuing Years, in the 6th. of Lincolnshire for Three parts of the
Year, and to the 8th, in 11th. Henry the Third Sheriff of Buckingham and
Bedfordshire, and continued until the 18th, in the 10th. of Henry the Third was
a Justice itinerant for Nottingham and Derby-shires, purchased Mount Sorrel in
the County of Leicester, in the 16th. Henry the Third, had the Custody of the
Castle of Northampton, and of the Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, Warwick, and
Leicester for the term of his Life, taking the whole Profits of all those
Counties for his Support in that Service, excepting the ancient Farms which had
been usually paid in the Exchequer, with the Increase which in King Henry the
Seconds time Dugdale's Baronage. 1 Tom. 671. and 672.
had been answered for them, was Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in
2d. Henry the Third, when upon the removal of Hubert de Burgh he was made Chief
Justice of England, and had likewise the Manor of Almonsbury in com'
Huntington.

Hugh Despencer idem ibidem 389.
was in the Eighth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, constituted
Sheriff of the Counties of Salop and Stafford, Governor of the Castles of Salop
and Bridgenorth, in the 10th. of Henry the Third, Sheriff of Berkshire, and
Governor of Wallingford Castle, and in the 17th. of Bolsoner Castle in com'
Derby, in 44th. was by the rebellious Barons made Chief Justice of England,
after the Battle of Jews Governor of Oxford Castle in Suffolk, the Devises in
Wiltshire, Oxford, and Nottingham Castle, Bernard in the Bishopric of Durham,
and one of the Twenty-Four Conservators for managing the Affairs of the Realm,
was seized of the Manor of Ryhal in com' Rotel', Leghere and Wykes in com'
Essex, Bernewell in com' Northampton, Wycomb in com' Buck', Soham in com'
Cant', Berewick, Winterborne, Basset in com' Wilts, and Speak in com' Berk,
whose Grandchild Hugh le Despencer in the Reign of King Edward the Second, was
possessed of no less than Fifty-Nine Lordships in several Counties,
Twenty-Eight-Thousand Sheep, One Thousand Oxen and Steers, Twelve Hundred Kine
with their Calves, Sixty Mares with their Colts Two Years old, One Hundred
Sixty draught Horses, Two Thousand Hogs, Three Hundred Bullocks, (...). ^9^.
and ^^7.
Sixty Tuns of Wine, Six Hundred Bacons, Eighty Carkases of Martilmas Beef, Six
Hundred Muttons in the Larder, Ten Tuns of Cider, with Arms, Plate, Jewels,
and ready Money to the value of Ten Thousand Pounds, Thirty-Six Sacks of Wool,
besides a Library of Books.

Humfrey de Bohun, whose Descendant joined with the Barons against King Henry
the Third, had in Anno 12. Henry the Second, Thirty and a half Knights Fees, de
veteri feoffamento, and Nine and a half de novo, was Earl of Hereford, and
Constable of England by descent from his Mother, his ibid. 180. and 181.
Son Henry de Bohun answered Fifty Marks, and a Palfre^ to the King for Twenty
Knights Fees, belonging to the Honor of Huntington, had the Earldom of Essex,
and a very great Estate of Lands belonging thereunto, descended unto him by
Maud Countess of Essex his Mother, together with a great Estate of Lands, which
came unto her from Isabel third Daughter and Coheir of William Earl of
Gloucester, had likewise Lands in Haresfeild in com' Glouc' holden by the
service of Constable of England, the Manors of Shudham and W^tnorst, Kineton
in com' Hunt', and Walden in com' Essex.

Vescy, one of the Barons against King Henry the third, was at the time of the
Norman Conquest seized of one Manor in com' Northtamp', two in ibid 89. and 90.
Warwickshire, seven in the County of Lincoln, nine in Leic', the Castles and
Baronies of Alnewick in com' Northumberland, and Multon in com' Eboru', had
besides vast Possessions bestowed on him by King Henry the first, the Mills of
Warner, Bodele, and Spilsham with eleven Manors, diverse Lands, and Tenements
in the City of York, and whatsoever he held of David King of Scotland, and
Henry his Son, the Archbishop of York, Bishop of Duresme, of the Earl of
Richmond, Geffry Estcland, and Richard fitz Pain, Roger de Moubray, William
Fossard, William Paganell, the Earl of Albemarle, Roger de Clare, Gilbert de
Gant, Roger de Beauchampe, Henry de Campaine, Ralph the Son of Bogan, the Earl
of Chester, Abbess of Berking, William de Sailley, and of all the Fee of
Thurstane the Son of Robert de Mansfeild, had likewise the Manors of Ellerton
and Cansfeild, and was Governor of the Castle of Bamburgh, in com' Northum',
seized of the Manors of Brentune, Propertime, Pecheston, and Sornneston,
Burgh, and Knaresburgh, in the County of York, Barony of Halton, and
Constabulary of Chester, a Descendant whereof had in the Reign of King Henry
the Second, twenty Knights Fees de veteri feoffamento, and many de novo, that
held of him had in 32d. Henry the third in the Right of Agnes his Wife, one of
the Daughters of William de Ferrers Earl of Derby, partition of the Lands in
Ireland, which did belong to William Marshal Earl of Pembroke.

Whose Ancestor had in the 2d. Henry the Second, Lands of a great Yearly value
in Westcombe, ibid. 599.
Marleburgh, and Cri^l in com' Wilts' given unto him by the King, with the
Office of Earl Marshal, and all other Lands holden of him in England or
elsewhere, had a Grant of the Manor of Boseham in com' Suff', with the
Lastage and Hundred, the Lordships of Westive and Bodewin, with the Hundred of
Bodewin, all the Lands which the Earl of Eureux held in England (except the
Manor of Marlow) all the Lands of Hugh de Gournay lying in the Counties of
Norfolk and Suff', Kaule and Castre, and all the Lands of Hugh de Air in com'
Norf', the Office of Marshal of Ireland in Fee, with the Cantred within which
the Town of Kildman was Situate, was Warden of the Marches of Wales, Sheriff
of Lincolnshire, and Governor of the Castles of Oswastre and Shrawardine, had
the Manor of Hengham in com' Norf' with the Advowsons of the Church thereof,
in Anno 16th of King John executed the Office of Sheriff of Lincolnshire, for
three parts of that Year, and likewise in the 17th. in which he was associated
with John fitz Robert, of the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk; as also in the
Custody of the Castles of Norwich, Oxford, and Dorchester, was Sheriff of
Warwickshire, and Governor of the Castle of Worcester in the time of the
Barons Wars, in the first Year of the Reign of King Henry the third made
Sheriff of Hantshire, and Governor of the Castle of Devizes in com' Wilts',
had a Grant of all the Lands of William de St. John, who in the 49th. Year of
Henry the third, took part with the rebellious Barons.

William de Percy, descended from Manfred, a Dane, coming Dugdale's Baronage
Tom 1. 269.
out of Denmark, with the fierce and famous Rollo into Normandy, and thence
with William the Conqueror into England, and much beloved by him, had granted
unto him by him vast Possessions in the Realm, as appears by the General
Survey in Doomsday Book, viz. Ambledune in Hanshire, diverse Lordships in
Lincolnshire, and in Yorkshire eighty-six, whereof Topoline in the North Riding
was one, and Spofford in the West Riding another.

Camois, a Baron against King Henry the Third, was in Anno 26th. of his Reign
for that half Year Sheriff of the Counties of Surrey and Sussex, and from that
time until the one half Year of the 30th. of his Reign seized of the Manor of
Wodeton in the County of Surrey, Ditton in com' Cantabr', Burwel in com' Oxon',
Torpel in com' Northamp', and of diverse Knights Fees in other Counties.

D'Eynill ibid 59^.
was in 41. and 44. Henry the third, Justice or Warden of all the Forests
beyond Trent, in Anno 47. Governor of the Castle of York, and in 48. of the
Castle of Scarborough, from Michaelmas 48. was Sheriff of Yorkshire, until the
Battle of Evesham, where he was against the King.

Monchensey was one of the rebellious Barons at the Battle of g ibid. 561.
Jews, had great Possessions in the Counties of Essex, Norfolk, Glou', Kent,
and Northampton.

The Lord Lovetot, ibid 57^.
one of the rebellious Barons, was in the last half Year of 39th. Henry the
third Sheriff of the Counties of Nottingham and Derby, and Governor of
Bolsaver Castle.

Henry Hastings, sideing ibid. 575.
with the Barons, was in the 48. Year of the Reign of Henry the third, made
Governor of the Castle of Scarborough in com' Eborum, and of the Castle of
Winchester.

Bobert de Roos ibid 545.
had great Possessions, amongst others the Castle and Barony of Helmesley or
Hamlake in Yorkshire, the Castle and Barony of Warke in Northumberland, and the
Barony of Trusbut, being of the part of the rebellious Barons was for some time
Governor of Hereford Castle, when Prince Edward was there detained Prisoner,
in 42. Henry the third, answered for four Knights Fees and an half, and an
eighth part in Lincolnshire, fifty-two Thirds, a twelfth and a twentieth in
Yorkshire, ten for his Barony of Trusbut, four and a fourth and third part of
Warter.

Adam de Novo Mercato, ibid. 435. and 436.
descended from Bernard de Newmarch, one of the followers of William the
Conqueror, subdued to himself three Cantreds being the most part, if not the
whole, of the Country of Brecknock in Wales, had in 8th. Henry the third the
Barony of Bayeux, and in the 47th and 48th diverse Lands in the County of
Lincoln, and the Manor of Wilmaresly, Campshall, Thorn, Bentley, and Archley
in com' Ebor'.

Colvile ibid. 626.
was seized in the Reign of King Henry the third, against whom he took Arms, of
the Castle of Bitham in the County of Lincoln, and of his Purparty of fifteen
Knights Fees in the said County.

Roger Bertram ibid. 544.
had the Castle and Barony of Mitford, with thirty-three Manors belonging unto
it, in the County of Northumberland, and was in rebellion against King Henry
the third.

Robert de Nevil, ibid. 2^7.
a great Baron and Lord of Raby in the Bishopric of Durham, was Sheriff of
Norfolk in 2d. Henry the second, Captain General of the King's Forces beyond
Trent, in 47. Henry the third, Sheriff of the County of York, Governor of the
Castle thereof, and of the strong Castle of the Devises in the County of Wilts,
and in 48th. Henry the third, Warden of all the Forests beyond Trent, and
Governor of the Castle of York, was against the King at the Battle of Jews.

Fitz Alan of Clun, ibid 315.
from whom the Earls of Arundel descended, enjoyed a great Estate, and was
against the King at the Battle of Jews.

Robert de Vipont, ibid 347.
one of the rebellious Barons of King Henry the third, had by the Grant of King
John the Castles of Appleby and Burgh in the County of Cumberland, together
with the Baylewick or Shrievalty of the County of Westmorland, to him and the
Heirs of his then Wife, unto which Barony belonged the said Manors of Appleby
and Burgh under Stanemore, Flaxbridge-Park, Forests, and Chases of Winefell,
and Mallerstang, Brougham Castle, with fifty-seven Manors more in the County
of Cumberland and Westmoreland, in the first, second, and sixth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the third, was Sheriff of Cumberland, and Governor of
Caerlisle, in the tenth one of the Justices itinerant in the County of York,
and in the eleventh one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

Henry de Neuburgh Dugdale's Baronage. 1 Tom. tit. Warwick 72.
in Normandy, a younger Son of Roger de Bellomont Earl of Mellent, had the
Castle and Borough of Warwick bestowed upon him by William the Conqueror, with
the large Possessions of Turketill de Warwick, who had the Reputation of Earl
of Warwick, although he was but in the nature of a Lieutenant to the Earl of
Mercia, had Wedgenock Park with the Castle of Warwick, Manors of Tamworth,
Claverdon, and Manton Mauduit in com' Warr', the Manors of Gretham, and
Cotes-more in com' Rotel', with some Lands in the County of Worcester, the
Manor of Chadworth in com' Glou', in 12. or 13. Regis Johannis, Henry Earl of
Warwick certified one hundred and two Knights Fees, with a third part of a
Knights Fee, and had by the Gift of that King the Seigneury of Gowerland in
Wales, which an Ancestor of his is long before said to have Conquered, was
Owner of the Castle, Manor, and Priory of Kenilworth in com' Warwick, gave to
Geoffry de Clinton the Sherivalty of the County of Warwick to him and his
Heirs, to be holden of him and his Heirs; and in Anno 25. Henry the third, Earl
Thomas gave a Fine of a hundred and eighty Marks to the King over and above his
Scutage, that he might be discharged from his Attendance upon him in his
Expedition into Gascoigne, and that he might levy the like upon his Tenants
gave One Hundred Twenty Pounds more.

And of no less Power and Authority with and over the Common People were the
rest of our English Nobility, which took up Arms with the King, or stood
Dugdale's Baronage. 1 Tom 44.
Neutrals, or at a Gaze, until they saw what would become of him; witness that
of the Earl of Chester, who executed the Office of Sheriff by his Deputies, for
the Counties of Salop and Stafford, in the 2d. 3d, 4th, 5th, 7th, and part of
the 8th. of Henry the third, for the County of Lancaster in the 3d. 4th, 5th,
6th, and the latter end of the 16th. was seized of the whole Dugdale's
Baronage. 1 Tom 32 and 34.
County and Lands of Chester, with Royal Jurisdiction, Tenenda per Gladiune it
a libere sicut Rex ipse tenebat Angliam per Coronam, at the time of the general
Survey of the Conqueror was Count Palatine thereof, had nine Manors in
Barkshire, in Devonshire two, in Yorkshire seven, in Wiltsshire six, in
Dorsetshire ten, in Somersetshire four, in Suffolk thirty-two, in Norfolk
twelve, in Hantshire one, in Oxfordshire five, in Buckinghamshire three, in
Gloucestershire four, in Huntingtonshire two, in Nottinghamshire four, in
Warwickshire one, in Leicestershire twenty-two; fifteen great Men of Estate in
Cheshire, his Barons, holding Lands of him and his Heirs, as Willielmus
Malbane, Gislebertus de Venables, Rad Venator, etc. and was seized of that
Mountainous part of Yorkshire and Westmoreland called Stanemore.

Unto one of whose Descendants, or Family, King Stephen gave the City and
Castle of Lincoln, with License to Fortify the Town thereof, and to enjoy it
until he rendered unto him the Castle of Tickhil in Yorkshire; granted likewise
unto him the Castle of Belvoir, with all the Lands thereunto belonging; all the
Lands of William de Albini, Grantham with all its Soke thereunto belonging,
Newcastle in Staffordshire, with the Soke of Roely in com' Leic', Corkeley in
Lincolnshire, the Town of Derby with the appurtenances, Mansfield in com'
Nott', Stonely in Warwickshire with their appurtenances, the Wapentake of
Oswardbeck in com' Nott', and all the Lands of Roger de Busty, with the Honor
of Blythe, and all the Lands of Roger de Poictou, from Northamptom to Scotland,
(excepting that which belonged to Roger de Montbegon in Lincolnshire) all the
Lands betwixt the Rivers of Ribble and Merse in Lancashire, the Lands which he
had in Demesne in the Manor of Grimsby in com' Lincoln, and all the Lands
which the Earl of Gloucester had in Demesne in that Manor, the Honor of Eye,
Nottingham, Barony, and Castle, Stafford, and the whole County of Stafford
(except the Fees of the Bishop of Chester, Earl Robert Ferrers, Hugh de
Mortimer, Gervase Paganel, and the Forest of Canoc, the Fees of Alan de
Lincoln, Ernise de Burun, Hugh de Scoteny, Robert de Chalz, Rafe Fitz Oats,
Norman de Verdun, and Robert de Staford.

Odo, Bishop of Dugdale's Baronage. 1 Tom. 24. 72.
Baieux, William the Conquerors half Brother, had one hundred eighty-four
Manors given him in Kent, thirty-nine in Essex, thirty-two in Oxfordshire,
Seldens Titles of honor.
in Hartfordshire thirty-three, in Buckingham thirty, in Worcestershire two, in
Bedfordshire eight, Northamptonshire twelve, in Nottinghamshire five, in
Norfolk twenty-two, in Warwickshire six, in Lincolnshire seventy-six, amounting
in the whole to Five Hundred Forty-Nine, whereof two hundred eighty he gave,
says Mr. Seldom, to his Nephew de Molbraio.

Earl John, Daniel Hist. in the Life of King R: 1.
afterward King of England, had in the Life time of King Richard the First his
Brother, the Earldomes of Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset, Nottingham, Derby, and
Lancaster, with the then large Possessions thereof, and had in Marriage with
Isabel Daughter and Heir to the Earl of Gloucester, that Earldom, together with
the Castles of Marleburgh, Ludgersel, Honors of Wallingford, Tickhil, and Eye.

John Earl of Surrey, and Sussex, had in Yorkshire the great Lordship of
Connigsburgh in the Dugdales Baronage. 1 Tom. 74.
Soke, whereof were near twentyeight Towns and Hamlets, Westtune in Shropshire,
in Essex twenty-one Lordships, in Suffolk eighteen, in Oxfordshire Maple,
Durham, and Gaddington, in Hantshire Frehinton, in Cambridgeshire seven, in
Buckinghamshire Brotone, and Cauretelle, in Huntingtonshire, Chevevaltone, with
three other Lordships, in Bedfordshire four, and in Norfolk one hundred
thirty-nine, and the Castle of Rigate in Surrey, Yale, and Bromfeild, with
their large Extents in Shropshire, and was at the Battle of Jews on the King's
part.

Ralph de ibid. 139. and 142.
Mortimer had given him by the Conqueror in Berkshire five Manors, in
Yorkshire eighteen, besides diverse Hamlets, in Wiltshire ten, in Hantshire
thirteen, in Oxfordshire one, in Worcestershire four, in Warwickshire, one, in
Lincolnshire seven, in Leicestershire one, in Shropshire fifty, in
Herefordshire nineteen, besides the Castle of Wigmore.

And Roger de Mortimer, Earl of March, a Descendant of the same House and
Family, was in the Raigns of King Edward the First and Second, besides their
former large Estates in Lands, seized of the Town of Droitwick, and Chase of
Malverne in com' Wigorn', the Chase of Cors in com' Glou', the Castle of Trym
in Ireland, with its large Territory and Appurtenance, and in Wales the
Castles of Kentlies, Dominion of Melenith and Comott, of Duder, Castle of
Radnor, with the Territory of VVarthre, and Manors of Prestmede (or
Presteigne) and Kineton, Castles of Ruecklas, and Pulith, Castles and Lordships
of Bledleveny and Bulkedinas, Castle and Manor of Nerberth, Comots of Amgeid,
and Pennewick, Castles and Dominions of Montgomery and Bulkedinas, Manor and
Hundred of Cherbury, Castle of Dolvaren, and Territory of Redevaugh, Town and
Territory of Ewyas, Castles of Kery and Rodewin, Castle of Dynebegh, Castle and
Cantred of Buelch, Comots of Ros, Rowenock, Konuegh, and Diomam, and in
Somersetshire the Castle of Brugwater, with three Manors, Bayliwick of the
Forests of North Pederton, Exmore, Noreech, Chich, Mendip, and Warren of
Somerton, three Manors in Kent, one in com' Buck', and one in Staffordshire,
and kept in his House a constant Table, in imitation of King Arthurs Round
Table, for one hundred Knights.

King Henry the Third, after the Battle of Evesham, gave unto his Son Edmond to
hold to him and the Heirs of his Body the Earldom, Honor, and Lands of
Leicester, and Stewardship of England, the Earldom, Honor, and Lands with the
Castles, Manors, and Lands of Robert de Ferrers Earl of Derby, and Nicholas de
Segrave, the Custody of the Castles of Caermarden and Cardigan, and Isie of
Lundy, the Castle of Sherborne in com' Dors', the Castle of Kenilworth in com'
Warwick, with all the Lands thereunto belonging, the Honor, Earldom, Castle,
and Town of Lancaster, and was Count Palatine thereof, with their
Appurtenances, together with the Castle of Tutbury, with its great
Appurtenances in the County of Stafford, the Honor and Castle of Monmouth, the
Honor, Town, and Castle of Leicester, with all the Lands and Knights Fees
which Simon de Montfort had.

Whose Son and Heir Thomas Earl of Lancaster, having as an addition to the
great Estates in Lands, remaining unto him after his Father, diverse other
Manors, Lands, and vast Possessions in the Right of Alice Daughter and Heir of
Lacy Earl of Lincoln, appertaining to that Earldom, gave costly Liveries of
Furrs, and Purple to Barons, Knights, and Esquires attending in his House, or
place of Residence, and paid in the 7th. Year of the Reign of King Edward the
Second, Six Hundred Twenty-Three Pounds, Sixteen Shillings, Six Pence, (when a
little Money went as far as a great deal now) to diverse Earls, Barons, Knights,
and Esquires for Fees, and being in great Discord with King Edward the Second
his Nephew concerning Gaveston, the two Despencers Heary (...) Knighton (...)
eventibus Angliae. Lib. (...) p. 23^^. and 25^4.
Father and Son his Favorites, and some Grievances of the Nation complained
of, and the Pope having sent two Cardinals into England, to endeavor a
Pacification betwixt them, they with the King, Queen, Archbishop of
Canterbury, all the Bishops Cum Comitibus, Baronibus and Magnatibus Regni went
to Leicester to have an Enterview and Treaty with the said Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, whither the King being come, says the Historian, Occurrit ei Thomas
Comes Lancaster die ei ex hac part praefixo apud Sotisbrig stipatus
pulcherrima multitudine hominum cum equis, quod non occurrit quempiam
retroactis temporibus vidisse aliquem Comitem duxisse tam pulchram multitudinem
hominum cum equis sic been arraitorum scilicet 18. mill, cumque Rex and Comes
obviarent, sine magna difficultate osculati sunt, and facti sunt chari Amici
quoad intuitum circum astantium.

In Anno 46. Henry the Third, the King Dugdale's Baronage 1 Tom. 45. 50, and 51.
granted to John Earl of Richmond the Honor and Rape of Hastings in com'
Sussex, and in Anno 29. the Honor of Eagle and Castle of Pevensey in com'
Sussex, to whose Ancestors William the Conqueror had before granted all the
Northern part of the County of York called Richmond, being formerly the
Possessions of Earl Edwyn, a Saxon.

Percy, a Ibid. p 269, 272.
great Baron in Northumberland, and the Northern parts, had thirty-two
Lordships in Lincolneshire, in Yorkshire eightysix, besides Advowsons, Knights
Fees, free Warrens, etc. and was on the King's part at the Battle of Jews.

Richard Earl of Cornwall had in the 11th. of Henry the Third, a Grant of the
whole County of Rutland, in Anno 15. of the Castle and Honor of Wallingford,
with the Appurtenances, and the Manor of Watlington, all the Lands in England,
which Queen Ibid. 262. 76^.
Isabell the King's Mother held in Dower, the whole County of Cornwall with
the Stanneries and Mines, the Castle and Honor of Knaresburgh in the County of
York, the Castle of Lidford, and Forest of Dertmore, the Castle of
Barkhamsteed, with the Appurtenances in the County of Hartford, with many
Knights Fees, Advowsons, free Warrens, Liberties, etc.

In the Reign of Henry the Third, William de Valence, afterward Earl of
Pembroke, was seized of the Castle of Hartford with the Appurtenances, of the
Manors of Morton and Wardon in com' Glouc', Cherdisle, and Policote in com'
Buck', Compton in com' Dors', Sapworth, Colingborow, Swindon, Jutebeach, and
Boxford in com' Wilts', Sutton, and Braborne in com' Kanc', and of diverse
Manors and Lands in the Counties of Surrey and Sussex.

Robert de Todeney, Ibid. 111.
Father of William de Albini, built the Castle of Belvoir, and had seventy-nine
Manors with large Immunities and Privileges thereunto belonging.

Beauchamp of Elmeley, of whom the Earls of Warwick of that Name were
descended, had by the Grant of King Henry the First bestowed upon him all the
Lands of Roger de Wircester, with many Privileges to those Lands belonging,
and likewise the Shrievalty of Worcestershire to hold as freely as any of his
Ancestors had done, had the Castle of Ibid. 225. and 999.
Worcester by Inheritance from Emelin de Ubtot, the Manors of Beckford,
Weston, and Luffenham in com' Rutland, executed the Shrievalty of Warwickshire,
in 2d. Henry the Second, so also in Gloucestershire, from the 3d. to the 9th.
Inclusive for Herefordshire, from the 8th. to the 16th. certified his Knights
Fees to be in number Fifteen, had by Marriage and his Inheritance, the Honor
and Castle of Warwick with Wedgenock Park, and all those vast Possessions of
the Earldom of Warwick, enjoyed by Earl Walleran or Mauduit Baron of Hanslap
his Heir.

Bolebeck of the County of Buckingham, at the time of William the Conqueror's
Survey, was seized of Ricote in com' Oxon', Waltine in com' Hunt', and of
Missedene, Elmodesham, Cesteham, Medeinham, Ibid. 451, and 452.
Broch, Cetedone, Wedon, Culoreton, Linford Herulfmede, and Wavendon in com'
Buck', and in 11th. Henry the Third, one of that Family certified his Knights
Fees holden of the King to be eight, of the Earl of Buckingham twenty.

Another of the same Name and Family, in the County of Northumberland, was
enfeoffed of diverse Lordships by King Henry the First, one of whose Descendants
in 12. Henry the Second, certified his Knights Fees de veteri feoffamento to be
four and a half, and three and two Thirds de novo, and left Issue by Margaret
his Wife, one of the Sisters and Coheirs of Richard de Montfichet, a great
Baron of Essex, Hugh de Bolebeck, who in 4. Henry the Third was Sheriff of
Northumberland, and possessed of twenty-seven Manors in that County, with the
Grange of Newton, and the Moiety of Bywell.

The Lord Clifford and his Descendants was then and not long after seized of
the Borough of Hartlepole in the Bishopric of Durham, three Manors in
Dugdale' s Baronage. Tom. 1. 340.
Oxfordshire, three in Wiltshire, Frampton, and part of Lece in com' Glouc',
seven in com' Heref', Corfham, Culminton, and three other Manors in com'
Salop', the Castle of Clifford in com' Heref', Manor of Temedsbury or Tenbury,
and five other Manors in com' VVigorn', Castle and Manor of Skipton in
Craven, Forest of Berden, the Chase of Holesdon, the Towns of Sylesdon and
Skieldon, with the Hamlets of Swarthowe and Bromiac, third part of the Manor
and Priory of Bolton in com' Eborum', Manors of Elwick, Stranton, and Brorton
in com' Northum', Castles and Manor of Apleby, Burgh, Pendragon, and Bureham,
the Wood of Quintel, twenty-four Manors, and the Moiety of the Manor of
Maltby in the County of Cumberland, the Manor of Duston, and eighteen other
Manors in the County of VVestmoreland, together with the Shrievalty of that
County to him and his Heirs, descended unto him from the Baron of Vipont.

William de Peverell, an illegitimate Son of William the Conqueror, had in
the 2d. Year of his Reign (when all places of Trust and Strength were committed
to the King's chiefest Friends and Allies) the Castle of Nottingham, then newly
Built, given unto him, and with it, or soon after, diverse Lands in several
Counties of a large Extent; for by the general Survey it appears, that he had
then forty four Lordships in Northamptonshire, two in Essex, two in
Oxfordshire, in Bedfordshire two, in Buckinghamshire nine, in Nottinghamshire
fifty-five, with forty-eight Trades-Mens Houses in Nottingham, at Thirty-Six
Shillings Rent per Annum, seven Knights Houses and Bordars (of which the Honor
of Peverell did consist) in Derbyshire fourteen, and six in Leicestershire.

Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury, had in the Reigns of William the
Conqueror, and his Son William Rufus, besides great Possessions in Normandy,
in Wilsthire three Lordships, in Surrey four, in Hantshire nine, in Middlesex
eight, in Cambridgeshire eleven, in Hartfordshire one, in Gloucestershire one,
in Worcestershire two, in Warwickshire eleven, in Staffordshire thirty, in
Sussex seventy-seven, with the City of Chichester, and Castle of Arundell,
Dugdale' s Baronage. 26. 1 Tom.
and in Shropshire very many, near all that County, with the Castle and Town of
Shrewsbury.

Odo, Earl of Albermarle and Holderness, had shortly after the Conquest, given
him by William the Conqueror, the large Territory of Holderness, with fifteen
Manors or Lordships in other Counties that would bear Wheat, because he
alleged that of Holderness would bear only Oats, and had in the Reign of King
Henry the Third, the Barony of Skipton in Craven, Dugdale's Baronage. 60. and
64. 68. 1 Tom.
with sixteen Knight-Fees, a Moiety of the Forest of Allerdale Caldebec, with
the Manor of Cockermouth in the County of Cumberland, the Bond Service of the
Tenants in Freston, a Member of Brustwick in Holderness, and in the right of
Isabell his Wife, the Castle of Carisbrooke and Isle of Wight.

Robert Ibid. 156.
de Stafford was shortly after the Conquest seized of two Lordships in Suffolk,
one in Worcestershire, one in Northamptonshire, twenty in Lincolneshire,
twenty-six in Warwickshire, with eighty-one in Staffordshire.

Walter Ibid. 174.
de Eureux had shortly after the Conquest two Lordships in Dorsetshire, three
in Somersetshire, one in Surrey, one in Middlesex, two in Hantshire, two in
Hartfordshire, two in Buckinghamshire, and thirty-one besides the Manors of
Saresbury and Ambresbury in Wiltshire, and as Sheriff of that County received
in Rent one hundred and thirty Hogs, thirty-two Bacons, two bushels and sixteen
gallons of Wheat, and as much in Barley, bushells and eight gallons of Oats,
thirty-two gallons of Honey or sixteen Shillings, four hundred and forty-eight
Hens, one thousand and sixty Eggs, one hundred Cheeses, fifty-two Lambs, two
hundred Fleeces of Wool, having likewise one hundred and sixty-two Acres of
arable Lands, and amongst the Reves Lands, to the value of Forty Pounds per
Annum.

Baldwin Ibid. 254.
de Molis, second Son to Gilbert Crispin Earl of Beton, Son of Godfrey Earl of
Eu, natural Son of Richard Duke of Normandy, great Grandfather to William the
Conqueror, was one of the principal Persons of the Laity, that won much Fame at
the Conquest, and Marrying Aldreda a Neice of the Conqueror, had shortly after
the Castle of Exeter granted unto him, and besides Mola and Sappo had given
unto him Werne in Dorsetshire, Apely, Portlock, and Mundeford in Somersetshire,
one hundred and fifty-nine Lordships in Devonshire, and nineteen Houses in
Exeter.

To whose eldest Son Richard was also given the whole Honor and Barony of
Okehampton, with the Shrievalty of the County of Devon.

Geffry Mandeville Ibid. 260.
had given him by the Conqueror in Barkshire four Manors, in Sussex
twenty-six, in Middlesex seven, in Surrey one, in Oxfordshire three, in
Cambridgeshire nine, in Hertfordshire nineteen, in Northamptonshire seven, in
Warwickshire two, in Essex forty, with Hurley and the Woods in Barkshire.

Alan Surnamed Ibid. 46.
Rufus, or Fergaint, Son of an Earl of Britany in France, had given him by
William the Conqueror the Northern part of the County of York called Richmond,
which with what he had in Yorkshire made one hundred and sixty-six Lordships,
besides the Castle of Richmond, one called the Devises in Wiltshire, in Essex
eight, in Hartfordshire two, in Cambridgeshire sixty-three, with ten Burgages
in Cambridge, in Herefordshire twelve Manors, in Northamptonshire one, in
Nottinghamshire seven, in Norfolk eighty-one, and in Lincolneshire one hundred
and one. Together with many others of the Norman Nobility, and Adventurers, who
had great quantities of Lands and Possessions given unto them by that
Conqueror of England.

And some of our English Nobility were so Great, Magnanimous, and Munificent,
Weavers Funeral Mon. 456. ex veteri. M. S.
as at the Coronation of King Edward the First, when Alexander King of Scotland
his Brother-in-Law came from thence to Westminster, to be present and do him
Homage, Sir Edmond Earl of Kent the King's Brother, the Earls of Cornwall,
Gloucester, Pembroke, and Earl Warren, each of them by themselves, Led on their
Hands one hundred Knights disguise in their Arms, and whame they weren alyght
of their Horse, they let them goo whedyr they would, and they that cowd them
take had them stylle at their own lyking.

The great Ancestors of whom, as well as those that stood with or against King
Henry the Third, or were but as sad Spectators of those tragic Wars, had in
their Hospitalities, and huge quantities of Lands holden of them, as may appear
by their Certificates of Knights Fees recorded in one part of the Book called
the Red-Book of the Exchequer, happily preserved from the Conflagration or
great London Fire, several Forests, Parks, and Chases, with multitudes of
Castles in some of their Possessions, had been the Procurers of many of their
own and the common peoples Liberties and Privileges in the often confirmed
Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, with diverse great Privileges, Fairs, and
Markets, and had given unto them large Commons of Pasture and Estovers, and by
their Grants of Markets and Fairs, and likewise by their very many Advowsons,
and Patronages of Churches of a great part of which they had been the Founders,
Builders, and glebe Endowers, had to their Spiritual Estates laid upon the
Commonalty as great Obligations of Gratitude, as they had in the before-recited
Temporal Favors and Benefits; besides their granting of Leases of part of their
demesne Lands at small Rents, with reservation of some Service, in permitting
their Charity and good Will in Copyhold Lands to Tenants or Servants, or their
Widows or Children, which at the first was but at the Will of the Lord, or for
Life or Years to continue and breed into a custom of Inheritance, Secundum
consuetudinent manerii, and enfranchised and made many of them Freeholders,
permitted many Copyhold Fines uncertain to be made certain, where they had
been anciently at the Will of the Lord, and to be limited by the Chancery or
Courts of Justice, to the Rent of two Years improved Value, and when they do in
these later times demise any part of their demesne Lands to a Tenant for
twenty-one Years, now that the legal Usury or Interest for Money is but six per
cent. for ten Years purchase do take, (as many Landlords do now Money before
hand at a chargeable Interest) and next to the manifold reiterated Blessings of
the God of Heaven and Earth, together with the favors and benefits of the
Elements, and superior Regions, and astral Influences, by and under the divine
Providence, were as much Blessed and Happy under their Kings, Princes, Bishops,
and Nobility, as any Nation or common People of the World could be, or expect
to be, in their Properties, Liberties, Protection, and Privileges, whom those
great Barons, and Lords Spiritual and Temporal could not imagine, would ever be
able either to forget the Good, which they and their Forefathers had received,
and they and their after-Generations were like to enjoy under them; or get
loose from those many great Ties and Obligations of a never-to-be-forgotten
Gratitude, which they had upon them, but thought themselves very secure from
any danger that might happen by any of their Encroachments or Usurpations, by
placing any Power, or but a Semblance of Authority for once in the lower Ranks
of the People; nor could have believed, that the common People of England,
after their solemn Protestations to preserve them, and the Government, could
after the Murder of their King in their last horrid Rebellion, have Voted them
to be useless and dangerous, and being unwilling to leave any of the Devils
their Masters business unfinished, did solemnly enforce the deluded Seditious
People, under as many severe Penalties as they could lay upon them, not any
more to submit to any Government by a King and House of Lords, to whom our
Kings had given no Power to make their own Choice, but lodged and only
entrusted it in the Sheriffs, many of which the rebellious Barons had by
Usurpation To. Pat. 45. H. 3. M. 3. and 8.
of the King's Authority provided before hand to be at this present of their
own Party, or were like to be so, or under their Awe and Guidance, wherein they
were perceived by the King some Years before, upon their ill-gained Provisions
at Oxford, to have been very diligent in making Sheriffs of their own Party,
those great Offices being in those times and many Years before, and some few
Years after, always put into the Hands and Trust of the Baronage, or Men of
great Estate and Power.

Whose Number by Tenures, and Summons by Writs to our King's great Councels or
Parliaments, Creations or Descents, accounted in the Reign of King Henry the
Third, to be no less than Two Hundred and Forty, if not many more, and like the
tall and stately Cedars of our Nation might well deserve the Titles of Proceres
and Magnates, especially when many or most of them were in their Greatness,
Goodness, and Authority in their several Stations, like the Tree which
Nebuchadnezzar Prophet Daniel 4. ver 11. and 1^.
saw in his Vision high and strong, The height whereof reached to the Heaven,
the leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, the beasts of the field had
shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and
as ex pede Herculem, the Length and Greatness of Hercules's Foot, declared the
vast Proportion and Magnitude of the residue of his Body, it was easy to
compute, how little were then the Common People, how great the Nobility, whom
the Britains ancient Inhabitants of our Isle, as the Learned Francis Junius
the Son of the no less Learned Francis Junius has observed, justly styled them
Lhafords Lords, and their Wives Lhafdies Ladies, because they usually gave
Bread and Sustenance to those that wanted it, gave License of Marriage to the
Widows of their Thanks by Knight Service, punished their Tenants, so holding
their Lands by Writ Cessavit per Biennium, and a Forfeiture if not redeemed was
Entitled to a Writ of Contra formam Collationis for not performing the Duties
and Offices of their Endowments, and the large Revenues and Emoluments
appropriated thereunto.

And with the many Accessions, and Devolutions of other Manors, Lands,
Revenues, Estates, Baronies, Titles of Honor, and Offices of State, by
Marriages, Descents in Fee, or remainders in Fee-tail, munificent Gifts and
Grants of their Kings and Princes, upon Merit and great Services done for them
and their Country, or by Purchases guarded by the strength of the Statute De
donis 13. E. 1.
Conditionalibus, made in the 13th. Year of the Reign of King Edward the First,
with the Tie and Obligation of their Tenures, and the Restraints of Alienation,
made them to be such Grantz and Magnates, as the common People did in their
Disseisins, Intrusions, and Outrages done one unto another, which in the elder
times were very frequent, color and Shelter Daniel 200. Sir Richard Bakers
Chronicle. 211.
those Injuries by or under some Title or Conveyances made unto some of the
Nobility or great Men of the Kingdom, which caused some of our Kings to grant
out Commissions of Ottroy le Baston, vulgarly called Trail Baston, to find out
and punish such Evil doings, and by the making of some of our later Laws, to
restrain the giving of Liveries, so as until the Writs of Summons granted by
King Edward the First, in the 22d. Year of his Reign, to Elect some Knights of
the Shires, Citizens, and Burgesses, to give their Assent in Parliaments to
such Laws and Things, as by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal
should advise, should by him be ordained (there having been an Intermission of
those, or the like kind, of Writs of Summons from the first Contrivance
thereof, in the time of the Imprisonment of King Henry the Third, in the 49th.
Year of his Reign) it was and ought to be believed, as a matter or thing
agreeable to Truth, right Reason, and the Laws and Records of the Kingdom, that
the Commons and Freeholders of England were long before, and for many Ages
past, as ancient as the British Empire and Monarchy, were to be no part of our
Great Councels or Parliaments, were never Summoned or Elected to come thither,
but had their Votes and Estates, and well Being, as to those great Councels,
included in the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and as to their assent or
dissent, good or ill liking represented by them, and retaining their well
deserved Greatness, were so potent and considerable, as Gilbert de Clare Earl
of Gloucester, could after the Battle of Evesham, where he had Fought for the
King, March with a formidable Army, composed for the most part of his own
Servants, Tenants, Reteiners, and Dependants from the Borders of Wales to
London, quarrel and capitulate with his King, that had been but a little before
extraordinary Victorious, and with John Warren Earl of Surrey, did after the
Death of King Henry the Third, before the Return of his Son Prince Edward from
the Wars in the Holy Land, to take the Crown upon him, at the Solemnization of
the Funeral of the deceased King, in the Abbey-Church of Westminster, Matthew
Westminster and To. Claus. 1. E. 1. M. 1.
with the Clergy and People (there Assembled) without their License and
Election, go up to the high Altar, and swear their Fealty to the absent King
Edward the First his Son.

So beloved, feared, and followed, as the great Earl of Warwick was said in
some of our Histories to have been the Puller down, and Setter up of Kings,
could with the Earl of Oxford in the dire Contests betwixt King Henry the
Sixth, and Edward the Fourth, for the Crown of England, rescue and take by
force King Henry the Sixth out of the Tower of London, where he was kept a
Prisoner, attend him in a stately and numerous Procession to the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul, the one carrying up his Train, and the other bearing the
Sword before him to the Church, where they Crowned him, and after a Frown of
Fortune, did stoutly, by the help of the Lancastrian Party, give Battle to King
Edward the Fourth at Barnetfield, where but for a Mistake of Oxford's and
Warwick's Soldiers, and their Banners and Badges, fighting one against the
other in a Mist, instead of King Edward the Fourth's Men, they had in all
Probability prevailed against him.

And the Interest, Alliance, and Estate of that Earl of Oxford was so great
notwithstanding shortly after in the Kingdom, as although he had very much
adventured, suffered and done for King Henry the Seventh, led the Vanguard for
him at Bosworth field against King Richard the Third, and eminently deserved of
him, as the Numbers and Equipage of his Servants, Reteiners, Dependants, and
Followers did so asfright that King, and muster up his Fears and Jealousies, as
being sumptuously Feasted by him at Hedingham Castle in Essex, where he beheld
the vast Numbers, goodly Array, and Order of them, he could not forbear at his
Departure telling him, That he thankt him for his good Cheer, but could not
endure to see his Laws broken in his Sight, and would therefore cause his
Attorney General to speak with him; which was in such a manner, as that
magnificent and causelessly dreadful Gallantry did afterward by Fine or
Composition cost that Earl Fifteen-Thousand Sir Francis Bacon's History of King
H. 7. 211.
Marks.

Did notwithstanding their great Hospitalities, Magnificent manner of Living,
founding of Abbeys, Monasteries, and Priories, many and large Donations of
Lands to Religious Uses, and building of strong and stately Castles and
Palaces, make no small addition to their former Grandeurs, which thorough the
Barons Wars, and long lasting and bloody Controversies betwixt the two Royal
Houses of York and Lancaster, did in a great Veneration, Love, and Awe of the
Common People, their Tenants, Reteiners, and Dependants, continue in those
their grand Estates, Powers, and Authorities, until the Reign of King Edward
the Fourth; when by the Fiction of common Recoveries, and the Misapplied use of
Fines, and more then formerly Riches of many of the common People, gathered out
after the middle of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, by the spoil of the
Abbey, and religiously devoted Lands, in which many of the Nobility by Gifts
and Grants of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth, in Fee or Fee-tail had very great shares, brought those great
Estates of our famous English Baronage to a lower condition, than ever their
great Ancestors could believe their Posterities should meet with, and made the
Common People, that were wont to stand in the outward Courts of the Temple of
Honor, and glad but to look in thereat, fondly imagine themselves to have
arrived to a greater degree of Equality than they should claim, or can tell how
to deserve.

And might amongst very many of their barbarously neglecting Gratitudes
remember, that in the times in and after the Norman Conquest, when Escuage was
a principal way or manner of the Peoples Aides, especially those that did hold
in Capite or of Mesne Lords under them, to their Sovereign for public Affairs
or Defense, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being then the only parts of the
Parliament under their Sovereign, and the sole Grand Council of the Kingdom
under him, did not only Assess in Parliament, and cause to be leavied the
Escuage, but bear the greatest part of the Burden thereof themselves, that
which the common People did in after times in certain proportions of their
Movables, and other Estates, or in the Ninth Sheaf of Wheat, and the Ninth
Lamb, being until the Dissolution of the Abbeys and Monasteries in the latter
end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, when they were greatly enriched by
it, did not bear so great a part of the Burdens, Aides, or Taxes, or much or
comparable to that which lay upon the far greater Estates of the Nobility,
there having been, in former Times, very great and frequent Wars in France and
Scotland; and no Escuage, says Sir Coke 1. Institut. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. Tit.
Escuage Mat. Paris.
Edward Coke, has been Assessed by Parliament since the 8th. Year of the Reign
of King Edward the Second.

Howsoever the Commons, and Common People of England (for all are not certainly
comprehended under that Notion) their Ancestors before them and their
Posterities and Generations to come after them, lying under so great and
continued Obligations, and bonds of an eternal Gratitude and Acknowledgement,
to the Baronage and Lords Spiritual and Temporal of England and Wales, for such
Liberties and Privileges as have been granted unto them, with those also which
at their Requests and Pursuits have been Indulged or Permitted unto them by our
and their Kings and Princes successively, will never be able to find and
produce any Earlier or other Original for the Commons of England, to have any
Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, admitted into our Kings and Princes great
Councels in Parliament, until the aforesaid imprisonment of King Henry the
Third, in the 48th. and 49th. Year of his Reign, and the force which was put
upon him by Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and his Party of Rebels.

SECT. XII.
That the asoresaid Writ of Summons made in that King's Name to Elect a certain
Number of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and the Probos homines, good and
honest Men or Barons of the Cinque Ports, to appear for or represent some part
of the Commons of England in Parliament, being enforced from King Henry the
Third, in the 48th. and 49th. Year of his Reign, when he was a Prisoner to
Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, and under the Power of him, and his Party
of rebellious Barons, was never before used in any Wittenagemots, Mikel-gemots,
or great Councels of our Kings or Princes of England.

FOr, says the very learned and industrious Sir William Dugdale Knight, Garter
King of Arms, unto whom that Observation by the dates of those Writs is only
and before all other Men to be for the punctual, particular, express, and
undeniable Evidence thereof justly ascribed, which were not entered in the
Rolls (as Dugdale's Origenes juridiciales. 13. cap. 4, and 5.
all or most of that sort have since been done) but two of them, three says
Mr. William Pryn's Animadversions upon Sir Edward Cokes 4. part of the
Institutes.
Pryn, instead of more in Schedules tacked, or sowed thereunto:

For although Mr. Henry Elsing, sometimes Clerk to the Honorable House of
Commons in Parliament, in his Book Entitled, The ancient and present manner of
holding Parliaments in England, Elsing's ancient and present manner of holding
Parliaments of England.
Printed in the Year 1663. but Written long before his Death, when he would
declare by what Warrants the Writs for the Election of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, and the Writ of Summons of the Lords in Parliament were procured,
says, That King Henry the Third, in the 49th. Year of his Reign, when those
Writs were made, was a Prisoner to Simon de Montfort, and could not but
acknowledge, that it did not appear unto him by the first Record of the Writs
of Summons now extant, by what Warrant the Lord Chancellor had in the 49th.
Year of the Reign of that King, caused those Writs of Summons to Parliaments to
be made.

Howbeit most certain it is, says Sir William Dugdale, That those Writs of
Election, made in the Name of King Henry the Third, to send Knights and
Burgesses to the Parliament, were by a Force put upon his Great Seal of
England, as much as upon himself, when they had him as a Prisoner of War in
their Custody, and kept him so, as our Chronicles, Historians, and Annals Sir
Richard Bakers Chronicle. 96. Sam. Daniel Hist. 180. Dugdale's Baronage tit.
Mortimer 141 in margin.
have Recorded it, for an Year and a quarter, carrying him about with them to
countenance their rebellious Actions; for the Battle of Lewis, wherein he was
made a Prisoner, was upon the 14th of May in the 48th. and that of Evesham,
which released him, the 4th. day of August, in the 49th. Year of his Reign.

And there is no Testimony To. claus. 22. E. 1. m. 4. in dorso.
or Record to be found of any other the like Writ of Election made afterward,
until the 22d. Year of King Edward the First, although there were several
Parliaments, or Magna Concilia convocated, and held in the mean time; and if
our Ancestors had not been so misled and abused by the Rebels in the Reign of
King John, and his Son King Henry the Third, there are enough yet alive, who
can sadly remember, how a more transcendantly wicked hypocritical Party have
since adventured to make out and frame, until they had Murdered him,
counterfeit Writs, Commissions, and Summons of Parliament, in the Name of our
Religious King CHARLES the Martyr, and make as much as they could His Royal
Authority to Fight against His Person.

And there is no Certainty or pregnant Evidence, says Mr. William Pryn, who
being a Lawyer, and a long and ancient Member of the House of Commons in
Parliament, did so much adore the Power and Pre-eminence thereof, as
adventuring the Loss of his Estate, Body and Soul with them therein, could find
no better a Foundation or Pedigree to bestow upon them, than the Captivity and
Imprisonment of a distressed unfortunate King, but says, That there were not
any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or House of Commons, in the Confessors, or
Conquerors Raigns, or any of our Saxon or Danish Kings; nor before the latter
end of King Pryns Animadversions upon Sir Edward Cokes 4 part of the Institutes
p 2. and in his Register or Survery of Parliamentary writs 304.
Henry the Third's Reign; for although Polydore Virgill, and others do refer
the Original of our Parliaments to the Council holden at Salisbury in the 16th.
Year of King Henry the First, there is not one Syllable in any of our ancient
Historians concerning Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses present in that Council,
as says the Learned Sir Henry Spelman, in these words, viz.

Rex perinde qui totius regni Dominus est Supremus, regnumque universum tam in
personis Baronum suorum quam e subditorum Ligeancia ex jure Coronae suae
subjectum Spelmaus Glossar' tit. Parliament.
habet, Concilio and assensu Baronum suorum Leges olim imposuit universo regno,
and consentire inferior quisque visus est in persona Domini sui Capitalis,
prout body per Procuratores Comitatus vel Burgi, quos in Parliamento Knights
and Burgesses appellamus, Habes morem veteram quem Mutasse ferunt Henricum
Primum Anno regni sui sextodecimo, plebe ad concilium Sarisberiense tunc
accita, haec vulgaris opinio, quam typis primus sparsit Polydorus Virgilius,
acceptam subsequentes Chron^graphi, nos ad authors illius seculi prouocamus.

And refuting that Opinion Neubrigensis.
by Neubrigensis (who lived about that time, and relates the purpose of that
Great Council in these words, Facto concilio eidem Filiae suae susceptis vel
suscipiendis ex eis nepotibus ab Episcopis Comitibus Barombus and omnibus qui
alicujus videbantur esse momenti; and likewise by Florentius Wigorniensis,
Eadmerus and Huntington, further says, Ludunt qui Parliamenta nostra in his
quaerunt sine ut sodes dicam collegisse mecentenas (reor) conciliorum
coitiones, tenoresque ipsos plurimorum ab ingressu Gulielmi 1mi ad excessum
Henrici 3i existentium, nec in tanta multitudine de plebe uspiam reperisse
aliquid, ni in his delituer it Seniores, sapientes populi, which he conceives
to be only Aldermanni, Sapientes or Barons, and Magnates regni, not the
Commons.

And it has been well observed by the learned Author of the Notae and
Adversaria in historiam Mathaei Parisiensis, That in the ancient Synods, before
the subduing of England by William Duke of Normandy, conficiebantur chartae
donationum publicae and de gravaminibus Reipublicae breviter inter Regem and
Magnates, Episcopos and Abbates consultabatur, id enim tunc dierum erat Synodus
quod nunc fere Parliamentum, nisi quod non rogabantur leges per plebiscita, nec
sanciebantur Canones per suffragia minoris Cleri.

And was as novel and new, as it was unexpected, no such Writ having ever
before been framed or made use of, to such or any the like purpose.

And Mr. Seldom likewise says, That the Earls and Barons mentioned or directed
by those compelled then Writs of Summons, to come to that pretended Parliament,
were only the Earls of Leicester, Gloucester, Oxford, Derby, Norfolk, Roger de
Sancto Johannis, Hugh le Despencer, Justiciar' Angliae, Nicholas de Segrave,
John de Vescy, Robert Basset, G. de Lucy, and Gilbert de Gaunt.

Of which the Earls of Leicester, Gloucester, Norfolk, Oxford, and Derby, were
notoriously known to have been in open Arms and Hostility against the King.
The whole Number of the Temporal Lords therein named, not amounting unto more
than Twenty-Three, with a Blank left for the Names of other Earls and Barons,
which have not been yet inserted or filled up.

And all the other, which were in that constrained Writ of Summons particularly
and expressly named, were no other than H. de le Spencer, Justicar' Angliae,
John Fitz-John, Nicholas de Segrave, John de Vescy, Rafe Basset de Drayton,
Henry de Hastings, Geffery de Lucie, Robert de Roos, Adam de Novo Mercato,
Walter de Colvill, and Robert Basset de Sapcott, which together with the then
Bishops of London, and Worcester, Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, and
Steward of England, H. de Boun juvenis, Peter de Monteforti, and S. de
Monteforti juvenes, Baldwin Wake, William le Blond, William Marescallus, Rafe
de Gray, William Bardolff, Richard de Tany (or Tony) and Robert de Veteri
Ponte, made up the Number of the opposite Party to that King in the aforesaid
Reference to the King of France.

And Mr. Seldom Mat. Paris. 41. H. 3. p 1283. and Seldom. tit honor 716, and
719.
has observed, That the Preambles of the ancient Parliament-Writs, for the
Snmmoning of the Baronage, sometimes so varied, that some eminent occasions of
the calling of the Parliament were inserted in the Writs Dors. To. Claus. 2. E.
1. Dors. claus. 50 E. 3. part 2. m. 6.
to the Spiritual Barons, that were not in those to the Temporal, and often
times no more than a general and short Narrative of our King's Occasion Elsings
ancient and present Manner of holding Parliaments, ca. 2. p. 22. 23, and 24.
of having a Parliament with much variation in the Writs of that nature, with
many differences of slighter Moment expressed, and sometimes in all a Clause
Against coming attended with Arms, and that until the middle of the Reign of
King Richard the Second, when the Dukes, Earls, and Barons, were Created by
Letters Patents of our Kings; the Names of the Barons to be Summoned in
Parliament, were Written from the King's own Mouth at his Direction and
Command; and in that agrees with Mr. Elsing, who says, It was ad libitum
Regis, for surely none but the King can Summon a Parliament, and that was the
reason that Henry the Fourth, having taken King Richard the Second his Liege
and Lord Prisoner, the 20th. day of August, in the 21st. Year of his Reign, did
cause the Writ of Summons for the Parliament, wherein he obtained the Crown to
bear Date the 19th. day of the same Month, for the Warrant was Per ipsum Regem
and Concilium, and himself to be Summoned by the Name of Henry Duke of
Lancaster.

SECT. XIII.
That the Majores Barons regni, and Spiritual and Temporal Lords with their
Assistants, were until the 49th. Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, and
the constrained Writs issued out for the Election of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, whilst he was a Prisoner in the Camp or Army of his Rebellious
Subjects, the only great Council of our Kings.

FOr the Barons of England, viz. the Lords. Spiritual and Temporal, with some
other wise and selected Men, which our Kings did anciently, and upon Occasions
call into that Assembly, were the Great Council of the Kingdom, and before and
from the Conquest, until a great part of the Reign of King Henry the Third (in
whose days, says Mr. Elsing, it is thought the Writs for Election of Knights
and Burgesses were framed) made the Great Council of the Kingdom, and under the
name of Barons, not only the Earls, but the Bishops also were comprehended, for
the Conqueror Summoned the Bishops to those great Councels, as Barons; and in
the Writ of Summons (made as aforesaid in the Captivity and Troubles of King
Henry the Third) we find the Bishops and Lords with some Abbots and Pryors to
be the Counselors, and the Commons only called to do, perform, and consent
unto what should be ordained.

And Mr. Seldom, and Sir Henry Spelman have by diverse Instances, and
warrantable Proofs declared unto us, That the Bishops, and Lords only were
admitted into the Wittenagemots, or great Councels, which were wont in and
after the Raigns of the Hist. Eadmeri.
Saxon Kings to be kept at the three great Festivals in the Year, viz. Easter,
Whitsontide, and Christmas, Spelmani concilia Ecclefiastic. 347.
when the Earls and Barons came to pay their Respects and Reverence to their
Sovereign, and give an Account of what was done, or necessary to be known or
done in their several Provinces and Charges, and what was fit to be Consulted
thereupon, and were then accustomed to meet, and Assist their Kings and
Sovereigns with their Advice and Counsel.

Which Placita. Coron. 21. E. 1. To. 27. Kanic.
was so constantly true, as Antecessores Comitis Arundel solebant tenere
manerium de Bylsington in com' Kanc. quod valet per Annum 30. l. per
Serjeantiam essendi Pincernam Domini Regis, in die Pentecostes, and Ela
Comitissa Warwick tenuit manerium de Hoke Placita Coron. 13. E. 1. To. 80.
Norton in com. Oxon, quod est de Baronia de Oyley de Domino Rege in capite per
Serjeantiam scindendi coram domino Rege die Natalis Domini and habere Cultellum
domini Regis de quo scindit.

Roger de Britolio Farl of Heresord, being in Arms and open Rebellion against
King William the Conqueror taken Prisoner, and Condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment, wherein though he frequently used many scornsul, and contumelious
words toward the King, yet he was pleased at the Celebration of Faster in a
solemn manner (as then was usual) to send to the said Earl Roger then in Prison
his Royal Robes, who so disdained the Favor, that he forth with caused a great
Fire to be made, and the Mantle, the inner Surcoate of Silk, and the upper
Garment lined Dugdale' s Baronage. 1 Tem. 27.
with precious Furs to be Burnt, which being made known to the King he became
displeased, and said, Certainly he is a very proud Man, who has thus abused
me, but by the Brightness of God he shall never come out of Prison, as long as
I live; which was fulfilled.

In Anno 1078 William Rufus tenuit curiam in natali domini apud London and Rex
Anglorum Willielmus, cognomento Rufus, gloriose curiam suam tenuit ad Natale
apud Gloverniam, ad Pascham apud Wintoniam, and apud Londonias ad Pentecosten.

Et hic Concessus Ordinum regni, says Sir John Spelman, Sive totius regni
Repraesentatio (quod intelligere convenit) ab Alfredo certis quidem vicibus,
and ijs ordinariis, Johannes Spelman filius Henrici Spelmani eraditissimus in
vita Alfredi Regis, lib. 2. 115. and 116. Mat. Paris 1453.
non quasi ejusdem formae and celebritatis esset, cujus and hodierna Comitia,
quae Parliamentum vulgo dicuntur, sed ut quantum est in Anglia terrarum tunc
aut unum omnino Regis erat, aut Comitun ejus atque Baronum, and qui sub illis
agros colerent eos Clientelari atque precario jure possederint, ut qui toti ab
nutu dominorum penderent, ita quicquid ab isto tempore ab Rege, Comitibus ejus
atque Baronibus constitutum est, toto regno sancitum erat, velut ab ijs
transactum quibus in caeteros suprema and absoluta potestas esset, adeoque
reliquorum seu clientium and mancipiorum jura includeret.

Episcopos quod attinet hi magnis hisce Concilijs nunquam non intersuerunt
suisque suffragijs leges sanxerunt, nam praeterea illud quod ob seculares
fundos Barons vel ob ipsum sacerdotis honorem sacrosancti censebantur, ea
infuper sapientia plerumque praestabant, ut non tantum suffi agia Procerum
aequipararint, sed and actis omnibus venerationem atque pondus addiderint, ab
hoc Regis instituto manavit (uti videtur) mos ille posteris Saxonibus non
inusitatus, ut concilia Episcoporum atque Magnatum ter quotannis celebrarentur,
nempe ad Domini Natales, Pascha, atque Pentecosten, ad consultandum de arduis
regni negotijs, neque id uno semper eodemque loco, sed ubicunque res posceret
licet fere ubi Rex cum Aulicis ageret praesens.

And in our Parliaments, as well Modern as Ancient, had a deliberative Power,
as the most Learned Seldom has informed us, Seldom tit Honor 3 part ca. 5.
632. Sect. 6. Hist Eadmeri.
in advising their Kings in Matters of State, and giving their Assent in the
making of Laws, and a judicial subordinate Power to their Kings in giving of
Judgment in Suits or Complaints brought before them in the House of Lords, or
that Magna Curia and Universitas regni, Bracton delegibus and con suetudinibus
Angliae. Elsings ancient and present manner of holding Par liaments in England
22^
as Bracton styles it; and whither in his time Causes were for difficulty
adjourned from the other Courts of the Kingdom, unto which no Remedies could
otherwise be given, and says Mr. Elsing, All Judgments are given by the Lords
as aforesaid, and not by the Commons.

And that very ancient, long experimented and well approved Custom, appears
not to have been discontinued or forgotten, when in the Parliament holden in
the first Year of the Reign of King Henry 1. H. To. Parl. m. 79.
the Fourth, the Commons showing to the King that Comme les Juggements du
Parliament appurteignont seulement au Roy and as Seigneurs and nient as
Commones; si noun en case que sil plest au Roy de sa grace especile leur
monstrer ses ditz Juggements pur ease d' eux, que null record soit fait en
Parliament encontre les ditz Communes, que sont ou serrent parties as escunes
Juggementz donez ou adonees ou apres en Parliament.

A quoi leur feust respondu per l' Ercevesque de Canterbire de commandment du
Roy, (...)meant mesmes les Commones sont Petitioners and demandeurs, and que le
Roy and les Seigneurs de tout temps ont eves and averont de droit les
Juggementz en Parliament, en manner come mesme les Comones ount Monstrez, sauvez
quen Statutz Affairs ou en Grauntez and subsides ou tiel chooses Affairs pur
common profit du Royalme, le Roy voit avoir especialment leur Advys and Assent,
and que cel order de fait soit tenuz and gardez en tout temps adveniz.

And the Earls and Temporal Barons, were by Seldens Tables of Honor.
virtue of their Tenures and Summons of Parliament, since the beginning of the
Reign of King Richard the Second, said to be Conciliarij nati of the King and
Kingdom, and the Bishops to sit there then, and long before, by reason of their
Baronies (which no Member of the House of Commons is, or can claim to be) in
our King's great Councels or Parliament, until the framing of that aforesaid
novel Writ to Elect Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the time of the
Imprisonment of King Henry the Third, and after his Release was discontinued,
and no more made use of, until the 22d. Year of the Reign of King Edward the
First his Son, and the Heirs by ancient Customs of that Court, under and by
the Kings Authority, do exercise in Causes and Complaints brought before them a
judicial and decisive Power.

And in the preceding Times and Ages, until that new Writ of Elections was
contrived and imposed upon that distressed and much injured Prince; Certissimum
est, says that learned and judicious Antiquary Sir henry Spelman, that the
Nobility and Barons, which did hold immediately of the King in Capite, judicijs
praefuere Aulae Regiae, did usually sit and determine Causes or Controversies
in the King's Court or Palace, as the Barons Spelmans Glossar in verbo Baro.
of the Coife in the Exchequer, who were heretofore Earls and Barons, do at
this day judge and determine of Matters touching the King's Revenues.

And as the Lords Seldens tit' honor 639. 2 part ca. 5. Sect. 28.
of Manors in their Courts Barons do admit none to be Judges in those their
little Courts, but their Tenants, who are Freeholders, and do hold of them,
and being styled and said to be of the Homage, do subserviently manage the
Affairs of their Lords therein, who did very anciently use to act therein,
Concilio prudentum hominum and militum suorum by their Presentiments, Advice,
and Judgments, and are therein not much differing from the Customs and Laws of
the Longobards, where their Emperor commanded LL Longobard l. 3. tit. 8. l. 4.
Conrad. imper. in Knilenbrogio.
that Nullus Miles (nobiscum says Sir Henry Spelman Liber homo) sine certa and
convicta culpa suum beneficium perdat, nisi secundum consuetudinem Antecessorum
nostrorum et judicium Parium suorum.

In which, says Sir Henry Spelman, Th(...) is an Idea of our x Spelman in
verbo Pares
Magna Charta, the Freeholders in the Hundred Courts being thither also called.

Conformable to the League made by King Alfred with Guthrun the Dane, wherein
Homicide sive de crimine alio quod quatuor Foedus Aelfredi cum Guthrun
marcas excederet postularetur per duodecim ex paribus, reliquos autem subditos
per 11 Pares unumque ex Baronibus Regis fore judicandos.

And to the Laws of our King Henry the First, wherein it was ordained, That
Unusquisque per Pares judicandus est, si quis in Curia sua vel in quibuslibet
agendorum locis placitum tractandum LL Henrici. 1. ca. 31. 33. 57.
habet, convocet Pares and vicinos suos, si inter compares vicinos sint
querelae conveniant ad divisas terrarum suarum, and qui prior queremoniam
fecerit, prior rectum habeat, and si alias ire oporteat in Curiam domini sui
eant, si unum dominum habeant, and Soca sit ejus, and illic eos amicitia
congreget, aut sequestret judicium.

And may seem to be derived from the Laws and Customs of the Germans, Scholia
Jacobi Spiegel. in lib. 2. Ligurini Guntheri. 301. 302
where by the Court of Peers are understood Causarum feudalium Judices a
Caefare constituti, qui sine provocatione cognoscebant, to be Judges appointed
by the Emperor to hear and determine without appeal Matters concerning their
Lands Lim^oeus de jure publici imperii Romano Germanici 1 Tom. ca. 9. Sect. 49.
51. 52.
and Territories; where the like usage and term of Peers in their Judicatures,
Great Councels or Diets, is at this day used (the Princes of the Empire being
Paribus cu(...)ae) and such are those of our House of Peers in Parliament,
being the highest Court of the Kingdom of England, where none were admitted or
did administer Justice, Nisi qui proximi essent a Rege ipsique arctioris fidei
and homagij vinculo conjuncti, but such as were near unto the King, and held of
him in Capite; which kind of Tenures howsoever they were most unhappily
Dissolved by a late Act of Parliament in His now Majesty's Reign, for
converting Tenures in Capite into free and common Socage, were by an Exception
and Proviso in the said Act of Parliament, as to the Rights and Privileges of
the Peers in Parliament, specially saved and reserved unto them, who were
heretofore Capitanei regni, as Sir Henry Spelman says, Captains of the
Kingdom, and Peers obliged and bound unto their Kings by Homage and Fealty in
that highest and most honorable Court Spelman glossar' in verbis Baro Pares
and Parliament.
of the Kingdom; wherein the Judicative Power of Parliament under their King,
their Head and chief Resides, which high and honorable Assembly reverencing
and taking Care for their Head and Sovereign, the only, under God, Protector of
themselves, the Church, and all their worldly Concernments and Liberties.

Was so much used in France, as says Harmanus Conringius de imper' German' 14.
15.
Conringius, Proceres temporibus Francorum, temporibus antiquissimis Concilio
interfuisse plurimis quidem testimonijs in proclivi est; and cites a Book
written per Theganum Chorepiscopum Trevirensem de gestis Ludovici Imper' Ca. 6.
ubi de Carolo Magno Imperatore legitur, Cum intellexisset appropinquare sibi
diem obitus sui, vocavit filium Ludovicum ad se, Episcopis, Abbatibus, and
Comitibus loco positis, and habuit grande colloquium cum ijs Aquisgravi, and
eodem spectat procul dubio Hinckmari (who was a Bishop and Councellor of
Charlesmaynes) illud concilium Lodovico Baldo datum epistolam, ut rempublicam
administret, ex Procerum aut Principum consensu (nusquam Plebis mentione facta)
unde and epistolam illam claudens Ca. 10. Scribit de generalibus Ecclesiae and
Regni negotijs fine generali Procerum regni consensu and concilio secretum dare
concilium nefas etiam consensum deliberare nolo.

The King of Scotland has as a Feudatory to our Kings of Elsingss ancient and
p(...) lent manner of holding Parliaments in England, 16 17. and al(...).
England in fide and ligeancia Sat in the House of Peers in Parliament, by the
Summons of King Edward the Third, in the 22d. and 25th. Years of his Reign, in
a Chair of State set upon his Left hand.

The Archbishops and Bishops do enjoy the Privilege and Honor of being
present, by reason of their Baronies, which howsoever (some of them, not all)
were given at the first in Frank Almoigne, and as Eleemosynary are holden in
Capite, and debent Seldom tit Honor 795. part. 2. ca. 5. Sect. 8.
interesse judicijs Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, and are not to be absent, says
the Constitution made at Clarendon in the 10th. Year of the Reign of King Henry
the Second; and that honorable Tenure of Servitium militare was accounted to
be such a Tie and Duty of Service incumbent upon the Bishops, as well as the
other Baronage, as any Neglect thereof was so poenal unto them, as Thomas
Beckett, the then ruffling and domineering Archbishop of Canterbury,
notwithstanding Mat. Paris. 200.
all the Pleas and Defenses which he could make, wherefore he came not to that
great Council or Parliament when he was Commanded, was Condemned in a great Sum
of Money, the Forfeiture of all his moveable Goods, to be Guilty of High
Treason, and be at the King's Mercy, and the reason was given of that Judgment,
for that Ex reverentia Regiae Majestatis, and ex astrictione Ligij, Homagij,
quod Domino Regi fecerat, and ex fidelitate and observantia terreni Seldom tit.
Honor. 795. part. 2. ca. 5. Sect. 20.
honoris quem ei juraverat, he ought to have come, but did not.

For such kind of Courts and Councels, where Kings and Princes, with the Lords
Spiritual and Temporel, as their greater Tenants in Capite, did for mutual Aid,
Assistance, and Counsel assemble and meet together, have been no Novelty or new
Device amongst the Cimbri, Germans, Goths, Francks, Longobards, Saxons, and
several Fabian Philips tenenda non tollenda.
other Northern Nations, were brought unto us from them; amongst whom Tenures
in Capite, and by Knights-Service, more agreeable to Humanity, were justly
esteemed to be a better Foundation and Subsistency of the right Power and
Conservation of Sovereignty and Government, than that of the Eastern and
Southern Princes was, where Dura erit servitus Dominorum, the condition of
Servants was hard, and the severity of Masters, who had Potestatem vitae and
necis, Power of Life and Death over their Servants, very great and rigorous,
and having nothing which they could call their own, but Misery, were put to
maintain their Masters Luxury out of their Labors, and enduring Vilissima
ministeria, all manner of Slaveries, ab omni militia arcebantur, were not
suffered to know or have the use of Arms; but amongst the Northern Nations
there was a more just and gentle Usage of the better part of their Servants,
for that they did divide a great part of their Lands and Conquests amongst
those their Servants and Soldiers, Pactionibus interpositis inter Dominum and
servientem de mutua Tutela, with an especial care to have those Feudal Lands to
remain to their Primogeniture Heirs Males, or the next Survivor of them, and
says l' Oyseau, ce fut un Droict commun, que L'Oyseau des Off(...) (...)* aux
ca. 2. 231. and 232.
les Enfans masles succederoient au fief du Pere lous ensemble, and tell est le
Droict des Lombards, amongst whom the Tenants were to redeem their Lords taken
Prisoners with the Expense or Loss of half their Lands; and says Martinus
Martinus Magerus a Schomberg de armata militia 15. 316. 8^4.
Margerus a Schomberg, Vasallus juramento fidelitatis tenetur, non solum Domino
damnum per se and alios in rebus non dare, sed etiam concilium and auxilium
praestare, ne damnum ab alijs incurrat.

Vasallus Domino contra fratrem succurrere tenetur. idem. ibidem. 13. 268. 999.
idem. ibidem. 221. 222. 596 idem. ibidem. 13. 245. 598.


Et contra Filium pro Domino arma suniere debeat.

Et Patriam pro Domino etiam contra Filium defendere.

And the Feudal Laws were so well known here in England in King Edward the
Confessors Reign, as it was accounted in LL. Edward (...) Heretochi^^* ^^7.
his so greatly reverenced and beloved Laws, to be consonant to Justice and
right Reason, that Qui sugit a Domino vel Socio suo pro timiditate belli vel
mortis, in condictione Heretochij in expeditione navali sive terrestri perdat
onme quod suum est, and suam ipsius vitam and manus mittat Dominus ad terram
quam ei antea ded^rat, and si terram haereditariam habeat ipsa in manus Regis
transeat.

And the Spelmane gloffar 216. tit Feodum sive feudum.
Nobility and Magnates, Great and Rich Men, having received those ample
Favors, and Bounties from their Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and reserved
some of their Gerardus Niger and Obertus de O^^o de Feudis. Herbert van
Beaumont de origin feudi Hollandioe Frisiaeque Occidentalis. 2. 3. 4
Paurmester de jurisdictione imperii Rom' 40. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. Craig de
feudis; Cuiacius lib. 8. Coldendorp. Vulteius. Wesenbachius. 17. E. 2.
Demesne Lands to themselves for their own Housekeeping, were so willing to
Communicate it to others, as they distributed their other great quantities of
Lands, and Tenements in like manner, Colonis and hominibus inferioris notae, to
their Friends, Servants, and followers under the various Tenures of in Capite
by Knights Service, Soccage, Castle-Guard, and Copy-holds, Burgage, grand and
petit Serjeanty, and were also to attend their Lords, and Donors in the Service
of their Prince, which was wont to be carefully excepted, in all their Oaths of
Homage and Fealty made unto their Mesne Lords, and Antiquissimo tempore sic
erat Spelmans glossar. 217.
in Dominorum potestate connexum, ut quando vellent, possunt auferre rem in
Feudum a se datam; and such an Harmony, and great Obligations of Bodies, Souls,
and Consciences, Lands, Estates, Dependence, and Protection could be no other
but a very great Safety, and constant kind of Defense to this Kingdom, and all
the Subjects and People thereof.

For In feudalibus Consuetudinibus (say the Civil or Caesarean Laws) Joannes
Joachimus a Rusdorff.
Jura regnorum, Ducatuum Marchinatuum, adeoque totius Imperij leges
fundamentales, ac nervi quibus Monarchiae Romanae cum ipso senescente Resent^al
in Synops' Feud in prefat' ad let.
mundo lanquescentes inter pedes Feudorum materiam privatim and public utilem,
and in ea hodie totius Christianae reipublicae, Jus publicum magna ex part
Consistere, and vires nervos and robora tam togatae quam armatae militiae sita
esse. Johannes Calvin I. C. in Epist. dedicat. Jurisp. seudal. feuda feudorum,
quae Jura inquit fidelitatem ac fidem publicam pacem and Incolumitatem communis
patriae firmavit, Imperiosam Principum and Magnatum dignitatem amplificant,
firmissimum militiae contra Communes Reipublicae hosts nervum ac praesidium
subministrant, adeoque fulcra Germanico Romani Imperij nun^upari desiderant,
and have received the Respect Reverence and Approbation universally, and almost
every where allowed, and not denied unto them, in the Labors and Studies of
very great and eminent Civil Lawyers, as Zasius, Wesenbechius, Vulteius,
Harrisanus, Corvinus, Bronkhorsius, Rosenthalius, Gothofedus, Schwedecus, and
multi alij, Ac etiam in Belgio Fridericus Feltman de feudis in Epist.
Sand, omnesque qui non tantum severa Lege proficere Cupit, and in foro rideri
non vult. Feltman de Feudis Sect 2.


Feuda a Germanis principio rerum gentium nationumque ad vires Imperij augendas
atque conservandas quidem statim quid inventum fuit quod valde cum Feudo
convenit Genes' 14. 4. 2. paralip. 36. 13. Jerem. 52. 3. Xenophon Cyropaid' l.
2. pr' Nec tamen Feudum fuit sed Clientela res apud Turcas hodie notissima, qui
non alio modo multos Reges and principes sibi nexos cogunt, de Germanorum
moribus Predidit Tacitus lib. 1. 14. Quod principem defendere tueri praecipuum
Comitum fuerit saramentum, Et hi Exigunt principis sui liberalitate illum
bellatorem Equum illam Cruentam victricemque frameant.

Feudum vetus and feudum novum, Vetus quod ab abscondentium aliquo, Ca' and 9.
Novum quod ipse ab aliquo adquisivit.

Caesar intelligitur apud Germanos in hoc feudo semper Exceptus 2. F. 56. apud
Gallos Rex in Ligio pater non exceptus, quia id datur ab eo qui Superiorem non
agnoscit, cui si insidiatur, vasalli pater Domino subiectus crimen
perduellionis Principibus comittit.

Vasallus Domino Reverentiam and Honorem debet ejusque Commodo augere, atque
damna infecta avertere obligatus est.

In Feuda Concedendis Ordo hominum non attenditur, nam and Superiores ab
inferioribus Feuda accipiunt, Et per vicariam personam Insiurandum Feltman in
teat de feudis 127. 25. 26.
accipiunt, inter politicos Caesar and Reges Feuda dare possunt, Duces
Marchiones Principes Comites and Barons Feuda dare possunt, etiamsi Caesari
aut Regi subjecti sunt; Maiora sunt autem Regalia quae ad statum reipubl'
administrationem nec non summi Principis decus pertinent, and a Cicerone are
said to be Iura Majestatis, a Livio Jura Imperij, sunt autem majora Regalia
Leges condere easque si dubia sint Interpretari Lib. 8. Sect. 1. C. Duces,
Principes, Comites, and Barons, Equites and Nobiles Creare l. 5. de Dignat'
facere Notarios, Doctores, Comites, Palatinos, Spurios facere Legitimos, Novel
89. 9. veniam oetatis indulgere, constituere summum tribunal Justitiae, a quo
appellari non potest, Jus vitae and necis pardonare, Jus Civitatis dare,
Monetam cudere, plenissimam Tuitionem tribuere quam Sauvegard dicunt,
instituere Cursores publicos, qui Celeriter dispositis Equis Epistolas ferunt
nunc Postas vocant, Bellum indicere, Pacem cum host and foedus cum Exteris
pangere, Academias vel Vniversitatem literarum condere, Legatos mittere ad
alios principes, Magistratus creare eosque confirmare, and Jurisdictionem atque
Imperium tam merum quam mixtum dare, Comitia universorum Imperij aut reipub'
ordinum Indicere l. 1. pr' F. Religionis Orthodoxae tuitio, Concilia and
Synodos cogere, Ecclesiae Ministros Instituere and confirmare, male viventes
removere, indicere ^^rias.

Habent etiam Regalia Minera, quae sunt Commoda quae ex rebus publicis and
ratione Imperij capiuntur, Armandia, id est, Potestas fabricandi arma and
armamentariorum cogendi, viae publicae cum ratione Tuitionis contra Latrones,
tum ratione Refectionis, tum ratione Jurisdictionis, tum quoque ejus quod in
illis nascitur, Flumina publica navigabilia and ex quibus fiunt navigabilia
modo quo viae publicae ad regalia pertinent, Portus vel Vectigal quod pro
Ingressu in portum aut portus transitu pendunt, Ripatica sive vectigalia pro
riparum earumque munitione, vectigalia quae hodie Tollen Conveyen and Licenten
dicuntur, quae praestantur pro mercibus exportandis and importandis, bona
vacantia, bona damnatorum ob Perduellionem aliud^e crimen, ex quo hodie
publicatio eorum fit, Angariae and Parangariae, id est, Praestationes operarum
and Currum, nec non navium quae ad usum publicum rusticis and subiectis
imperantur, extraordinaria Collatio sive Contributio Argentariae (id est) auri
Argentique fodinae, quae in provincia sunt, Piscatio in flumine publico, nec
non Venatio, and utriusque concedendi Potestas, Decimae ex Carbonum lapidumque
fodinis, Salinarum reditus, omnis Thesaurus vbique repertus, Judaeos recipere,
Fodrum pro Exercitu principis Anergariae sive hospitium Militum and Aulicorum,
and condere Illustria, Gymnasia condicere.

Dividitur Feudum in Ligium and non Ligium, illud est quando vasallus Feltman
Tract de feudis p. 14 Capit. 8. 9.
domino fidem adpromittit contra omnes, nullo excepto mortali.

Non Ligium est, si Excipiuntur nonnulli contra quos dominum adiuvare non
cogitur.

De Jure Domini directi Dominus directus Jus ratione seudi, tam in Idem page 125
ca. 16.
re quam ad rem, sed and amplius personam habet.

Vasallus operas praestare suis sumptibus debet, si a Domino monitus Ibm. p.
133. ca. 6. p 134. ca. 7.
fuerit ad Jus dominij Laudemium pertinet est honorarium, quod principis
dominio administris penditur.

All which Regalia and Prerogatives of our Kings and Sovereign Princes, have
been founded upon the feudal Laws, attending the Monarchy of England.

And so greatly were our Kings and Princes in this our Monarchy of England
sollicitously careful, to maintain and conserve their Subjects Tenures of their
Lands, immediately or mediately holden of them, and the Dependencies and
Obedience of their Subjects unto them, and therein their own as well as their
Sovereigns Good and Preservation, as King Henry the Second caused throughout
the Kingdom a Certificate to be made, not by the Hearsay or slight Information
of the Neighborhood, or partialities of Juries, but by the Tenants themselves
in Capite, or by Knight Service, whether Bishops, Earls, Barons, and great or
smaller Men, by how many whole or parts of Knights Fees they held their Lands,
and by what other particular Services, and what de veteri and novo Feoffamento,
and caused those Certificates to be truly Recorded in the Court of Exchequer,
in a particular Book, called the Red-Book, which either as to its Original, or
several exact and authentic Copies thereof, as Sir William Dugdale has
assured me, were not burnt or lost in the dreadful Fire of London in Anno 1666.
and those Tenures and Engagements of those Tenants, were so heedfully taken
Care of, as our Kings ever since the Reign of King John, had Escheators in
every County, (the Lord Mayor of London being always therein the Kings
Escheator) who amongst other particular Charges and Cares appertaining to their
Offices, have been Yearly appointed to look after them; and the Bishops, Earls,
and Barons especially, since the Constitution and Election of the Court of
Wards and Liveries by King Henry the Eighth, were not without their Feodaries
in the several Concernments of their private Estates, as our Kings had in every
County, as to their more universal or greater; which together with the respites
of Homages, which the Lord Treasurers Officer of the Remembrancer in the Court
of Exchequer was to Record, as appears by a Statute or Act of Parliament made
in the 7th. Year of the Reign of King James; and our Learned and Loyal
Littleton, who was a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in the 14th. Year of
Littletons Tenures and Coke in his Comment thereupon ca. 1. tit Homage Sect. 85.
King Edward the Fourth, with the allowance of Sir Edward Coke his justly
adoring Commentator, has taught us, That Tenures in Capite do draw and bring
along with them, as incidents thereunto, Homage which is the most humble and
honorable Service and Reverence that a Tenant can do unto his Lord; when upon
his Knees with his Sword ungirt, and his Head uncovered, holding his hands
between the Hands of his Lord, he swears and professes to be his Man of Life
and Limb and earthly Worship, and to bear him Faith for the Littletons Tenures
tit' Escuage.
Lands and Tenements, which he holds of him, saving the Faith which he
holds to his Sovereign Lord the King, together with Fealty, Service in War,
or instead thereof Escuage, Socage, Franck Almoigne, Homage Auncestrel, Grand
Serjeanty, Petit Serjeanty, Tenures in Burgage and Villeinage; and then the
Lord so sitting Kisseth him: And where the Service is not done by the Tenant in
Capite, or by Knight Service in Person, the Escuage Money or Fine, that is to
be paid in recompense thereof, is to be Assessed by Parliament; and if any
Controversy do arise, whether the Service were done personally or not, it shall
be tried says Littleton by the Cokes 1 part Institutes tit. Fee simple Ca. 11.
Sect. 1.
Certificate of the Marshal of the King in Writing.

And Tenant, says Sir Edward Coke, is derived from the word Tenere, and all
the Lands in England in the hands of S. H. 7. 11, 19. E. 3. 35, 24. E. 3. 65,
66, 44. E. 3. 5. 48. E. 3. 2.
Subjects are holden of the King immediately or mediately; for in the Law of
England we have not properly any Alodium, that is, any Subjects Lands that are
not Holden, unless (says he) you will take Allodium for a Tenant in Fee
Simple, as it is often taken in the Book of Doomsday; and Tenants in Fee
Simple are there called Alodii or Alodiales, and he is called a Tenant, because
he holds his Lands of some Superior Lord by some Service; and therefore the
King in this Sense cannot be said to be a Tenant, because he has no Superior
but God Almighty, and Praedium domini Regis est directum Dominium, cujus nullus
est Author nisi Deus.

And Alodiarius and Alode seu Alodium, says Sir Henry Spelman, Spelmans glosar.
est Praedium liberum nulli Servituti obnoxium (but were never so free as to be
no Subjects, or exempt from Obedience to our Kings, in whose Land and Dominion
they lived) Ideoque Feudo oppositum, quod hoc semper alicui subiacet servituti,
Feuda enim antiquo dicuntur Servitii and Fidelitatis gratia, proprietate feudi
penes dantem remanente, and usu fructu tantummodo in accipientem transeunte, ut
ex C. de feud. cogn' collegit Barat ca' 1. Quamobrem nec vendi olim poterant
invito Domino, nec ad haeredes Vassalli transiunt, nisi de ipsis nominatim
dictum esset, sed and laesa fidelitate adimerentur, dicitur a Saxon' Leod,
quasi populare dicitur Alodium ab a Privitiva and Leed Gallice Lewd pro
Vassallo, quasi sine Vassallagio and sine Onere, quod Angli hodie Load
appellant, Alodium feudo opponitur in antiqua versione LL Canuti ca' 73. Ubi
Sax' Bocland dicitur, quod in Aluredi LL ca' 36. tota Haereditas vocatur, and
idem esse videtur quod hodie Fee Simple.

Dicitur etiam Alodium terra libera quam quis a nemine tenet nec Le grand
Custum de Normandy and in additione.
recognoscit, licet sit in alieno Districtu and Jurisdictione, Ita quod solum
est sub Domino districtus, quoad Protectionem and Jurisdictionem.

And believes the Aloarii mentioned in Doomsday Book do signify no more, than
our Sockmanni or Socage Tenants, Cum Germanis Liberos and Gallis Nobiles, qui
militiam ex arbitrio tractantes nullius domini Imperio evocati, nulloque
sendali gravamine Coerciti, sui Juris homines non Feudales, seil qui dominium
tamen agnoscerent (ut locus ille e Domesday citatus plane evincit) and qui
fidelitatem apud nos Jurarent Censum quantulumcunque augebunt, si^t etiam qui
de nomine eos ten^isse asserunt, ac si Hunnoniorum more, adeo and sole suum
accepissent patrimonium.

And du Fresue Etymologizing the word Alodiarias says, It is Du Fresne
gloffar. Tom. 1. p. 147. in verbo Alodiaiii.
Praedium etiam domino obnoxium possidet tenens Domesday, quando moritur
Alodiarius Rex inde habet Alleniationem terrae (a releife) excepta terra
sanctae Trinitatis, Gulielmus Gemeticensis Lib. 3. Ca. 8. Abbatique locum cum
tota villa quam ab Alodiariis auro redemit, Thomas Walsinghamus, p. 419.

Et in definitione Alodialis, which he says is Idem quod Tenens, mentions
Chartam Gulielmi ducis Normanniae p. 1042. In Monasticon Anglicanum Tom. 2. p.
959. Dedi etiam Ecclesiam Radulphi villae and umon Allodialem in ipsa villa,
and dedi quoque unum Allodialem in Amundevilla quietam ab omni Consuetudine.
Bignenius dicit, quod significat Haereditatem and paternam Terram, Et Dominicus
de Prorogat' Allodiorum dictum oppinatur, quasi Alo Leuden, id est, sine
Subjectione, a voce Leuden quae Germanis pa^i subire fignificat, sicut and
subjectionem and servitium; Spelmannus derivat a Leod populare Saxonice, Ita ut
Aleod sit idem quod Praedium populare oppositum Feudo, quod est Praedium
dominicale; And the Learned du Fresne, amongst the various Opinions mustred up
by him, Concludes with a Denique plerique e doctioribus existimant vocem esse
primogeniam Gallicam vel Francicam quae Praedium ac rem proprietario Jure
possessum denotat.

Feudum novum absque domini Concensu alienatum revocari potest a Domino, Decis.
14. Feudum in dubio praesumitur esse haereditarium, and Jo. Koppen in
Rangensdorff in decisionibus question, Illustrium in Germania.
non ex pacto and providentia, Decis. 30. n. 22. Feudum antiquum absque
concensu domini alienatum ex communi D. l. sententia a filio revocari potest.
n. 11.

And the Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, were of so high an Esteem
and Value amongst the English, whereby to do unto their Kings and Country that
Honor and Service, which was due, and might be expected from them, in their
several Degrees and Stations, as the great Lords and other Men of Note did many
times purchase or obtain of each other, the Homages and Servitia of so many
Men, or parts of Knights Fees by Deeds or Charters; and so much beyond any
Money or other kinds of Estate, Lands, or Offices, as Robert Earl of
Leicester's Ancestor, having at the Coronation of King John agreed to pay unto
Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk's Ancestor, Ten Knight's Fees for the Purchase of
that great Office of High Steward of England, of which Seven and an half were
paid, and a Controversy arising afterward betwixt the said Earls, for the
Satisfaction of the Remainder, in the 31st. Year of the Reign of King Henry the
Third, the King undertaking to make an Accord betwixt them, adjudged Simon
Montfort (who afterward ill requited him) to have and execute the said Office
of Vincent and York Catalogue of Nobility tit. Norfolk.
High Steward; and that Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk (who afterward joined in
the Rebellion with Montfort against him) should bring his Action for the other
Two Knight's Fees and an half.

From which most necessary and excellent Feudal Laws, have proceeded those
grand Honors fixed and appurtenant to our ancient Monarchy of England, in our
Kings and Princes Grant to several great Families in England, in Fee or
Fee-Tayl, as to be Constable of England, Earl Marshal of England, Lord Steward
of England, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Chamberlain of the Queens of
England Die Coronationis suae, Butler to our Kings at their Coronations, etc.
And likewise the Statute de Donis or Entailes, the neglect whereof, in leaving
all the ruined Families of the Nobility, Gentry, and better sort of the English
Nation to feigned Recoveries, introduced about the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth, by an unhappy and unjust Trick of Law, to make the Losers believe that
they shall recover the Value of their Lands so Lost, amounting in the whole
unto the greatest part of all the Lands in England, of the Bagbearer of the
Court of Common Pleas, who in the Conclusion is only Vouchee to Warrants, and
to make it good out of his own Land, and by the small Fees and Profits of his
Office, was never yet known to Inherit, or to have been a Purchaser of ten
Acres of Land, yet walks about and is never molested or called to Account for
those vast Sums of Money, or his Land (if he ever had or was re vera intended
to have had any) was to be liable by his being a Common Vouchee in all the
Common Recoveries which are suffered in that Court.

It being in those more Obedient and Loyal Times esteemed no small Honor to
serve our Kings, or hold Lands by such a Kind of Tenure, as it may be believed
to have occasioned that Adage or Common saying in England, before the ever to
be lamented taking away of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service and
Pourveyance, No Fishing to the Sea, no Service to the King; and those Royal
Services, affixed unto Lands and Territories, have been so immutable amongst
other our Neighbor Nations, as in the Aurea Bulla, fastened upon the Empire of
Germany, about the 30th. Year of the Reign of our King Edward the Third, the
Three Spiritual Electors, viz. the Archbishops of Mentz, Cologne, and Triers
or Trevers, do hold their Lands and Territories by their several Tenures, of
being Arch-Chancellors, the First of Germany, the Second of Italy, and the
Schwed^r^s part special' ca. 5. de Electoribus Germ' Imperii.
Third of France; the King of Bohemia to be Archipincerna, Duke of Bavaria or
Count Palatine of the Rhine Archidapifer, Duke of Saxony Archimariscallus, Duke
or Marquess of Brandenburgh Archicamerarius, of that Empire, and might be with
or amongst them exampled from our Pattern, which was long before; as also from
the Scots, who have to this day some of the like official Dignities annexed to
their Lands and Estates, and as in the Reign of our King Henry the First, Count
Tankervile was, by Inheritance and Tenure of his Lands, Chamberlain of Normandy.

And although not so ancient as the Customs of the Patroni and Clientes, in the
beginning of the flourishing of the vast Roman Empire, which was so greatly
advantageous both unto the greater and lesser part of the People, the Patroni
in their Popularities and Ambitions to gain and please them in their way of
Advancements to Annual Magistracies, not seldom exercising their Eloquence in
pleading their Causes or Suits in Law, before the Lawyers had for another kind
of Advantages by the Gratifications of Fees and Rewards, made it to be the
greatest part of their Profession, which before were principally employed upon
seldom Occasions in matters of Difficulty, in Jurisconsults Forsterus de
Advocatis.
and Decisions; some of the more eminent sorts of them having, about the Reign
of the Emperor Augustus Caesar, obtained Licenses of him ad respondendum; Yet
after the Irruption Livy and Plutarichs lives.
of the Goths, Vandals, Longobards, and Hunnes, with other Northern Nations
into that Empire, they found it to be more beneficial, to do as the Germans,
and many other Northern Nations have done, to be Feudalists, and to have Lands
given unto them and their Heirs, to hold by Service of War, and other
necessaries under those grand Obligations of Interests, Oaths, Gratitude,
Homage, and Fealty, which proved to be better more certain and beneficial, both
for the Patroni and Clientes, the poorer sort of the People always or very
often wanting the Aid and Protection of the greater, from Wrongs and
Oppressions like to be put upon them. And the Patroni and Greater, procuring to
themselves thereby a more constant Observance of Duty, Honor, and Additions to
their former Grandeur, the greater and lesser thereby mutually supporting and
assisting each other, which in the Consequence was (as it did) likely to prove
much better, than the charge and trouble the Patroni were used to be; as in the
frequent courting and Humoring of the common People with their costly Epulae's
and Ludi's, not only to gain their own Preferments in their Annual poursuites
of Offices of Magistracy, but to keep the popular Votings from Mutiny, and
ruining them as much as themselves.

And howsoever that they with us in England, by a great infelicity to our
languishing Monarchical Government, after an horrid Rebellion and murder of our
late King, Anno. 12. Car. 2. by an Act of Parliament made upon his now
Majesty's 12. Car. 2.
happy Restoration for the taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, Tenures
in Capite and by Knight service, and Pourveyance, and for settling a Revenue
upon His Majesty in lieu of a great part of the lands of England and Wales,
which the Rebels besides their great Estates had forfeited unto him, which they
were willing to retain to themselves, and thank him as fast as they could with
a more detestable Rebellion, the Praeamble mentioning most unfortunately, for
want of a right Information and understanding thereof, That the said Court of
Wards and Liveries, Tenures by Knight service in Capite, holden of the King or
others, and Socage in Capite, have been by consequence more praejudicial, then
beneficial to the Kingdom, (as if the Nerves and Ligaments of the Crown of
England, and the ancient Support and Defense of the Honor and glory thereof,
for more then one thousand years, could any way deserve to be so Charactered)
and that after the Intromission of the said Court, which has been since the
24th. day of February 1645. (when the Devil and his Reformation had made a
large progress in the chasing Religion out of the Kingdom, and washing over in
blood the Blessed Martyr King Charles the first, 3 Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland) many Persons could not by their Will or otherwise
dispose of their Lands by Knight Service; whereby many Questions might possibly
arise, unless some seasonable remedy be taken to prevent the same: Our
Sovereign Lord by the Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same did enact the taking away of the said Court of
Wards and Liveries with other the Premises, And all Tenures of any Lands,
holden of the King or any others, shall be turned into free and Common Socage,
and be discharged of all Homage, Escuage, Voiages, Royal Wardships and Aid,
Pour file marier and pour fair fitz Chivaler livery and ouster le maine, all
Statutes repealed concerning the same, all Tenures hereafter to be created by
the King his Heirs or Successors shall be in free and Common Socage, Provided
that that Act extend not to take away Rents certain, Herriots or Suits of Court
belong ing to any other Tenures taken away or altered by that Act, or other
Services incident to common Socage, or any Releifes due and payable in cases of
free and common Socage, or of any Fines for Alienations holden of the King, by
any particular Customs of Lands and Places, other then of Lands holden
immediately of the King in Capite. Nor extend unto any Tenures in Franck
Almoigne, or by Copy of Court Roll, honorary Services by grand Serjeanty, other
then what are before dissolved or taken away; Provided that this Act, nor any
thing therein contained, shall infringe or hurt any Title of Honor, feodal or
other, by which any person has or may have right to sit in the Lords House in
Parliament, as to his or their Title of Honor or Sitting in Parliament, and
the Privileges belonging to them as Peers.

And that that Act extend not to any the Rights and Privileges of His Majesty
in his Tynn Mines in Cornewal.

In recompense whereof the King shall have the Excise of Ale, Beer, Perry and
Syder, Strong and Distilled Waters settled by that or some other Act of
Parliament, touching the Excise, upon the King during his Life, and a Moiety
only after his death to His Heirs and Successors.

And are by Sir Henry Spelman said to be non solum jure positivo, Sed and
Gentium, and quodammodo Naturae, not only by positive, k Spelman's Glossar'.
but the Laws of Nations and Nature. Especially when it was not to arise from
any compulsory, Fabian Philips tenenda non tollenda.
uncertain way, or involuntary Contribution, or out of any personal or movable
Estate, (cases of Relief only excepted,) but to fix and go along with the
Lands, as an easy and beneficial Obligation and Perpetuity upon it; and was so
incorporate and inherent, as it was upon the matter a Co-existence or Being
with it; Glanvil, and Bracton being of Opinion with the Emperor Justiniam,
that Justinian's Institutes.
the King must have Arms as well as Laws to govern by, and not depend ex
aliorum Arbitrio; and therefore the Prelates, Earls, and Commonalty of the
Realm did in a Parliament in the 7th. Year of the Reign of King Edward the 1st.
declare 7. E. 1.
it to be necessarily belonging unto him, and to none other; Judge Hutton in
his Argument in the case of the Shipmony in the Reign of King Charles the
Martyr, and diverse other Learned Judges and Lawyers have declared Tenures in
Capite, and by Knight Service, to be so inseparable from the Crown, as not to
be aliened or dissolved by any Act or Authority of Parliament. Some of whom
could not forget, that a Design having been presented and offered unto King
James (when the Scots had by their importunityes much enfeebled the Royal
Revenue) by some, who neither understood our Fundamental Laws or the
Constitution of our Government, and having considerable Estates in the County
of York, and Bishopric of Durham, and being Members of the House of Commons in
Parliament, and mischievous enough in the long Rebellious Parliament, a Revenue
of Two hundred thousand pound per Annum to dissolve his Courts of Wards and
Liveries, and release his Tenures in Capite, and by Knights Service; and the
King liked so well of those Hopes of augmenting his overwasted Revenue, as he,
with Promises of great Rewards to the Designers, ordered a Table to be
purposely kept at White Hall for them, until they had brought their
undertakings to perfection; unto which the Reverend Judges being summoned by
the King to deliberate and give their Opinions, could find neither Law or right
Reason for the taking away of those Tenures with their incidents, even by an
Act of Parliament; Insomuch as the Design and Table were laid down, and no more
thought of, until the unhappy Fate and Misery of forsaking and destroying
Fundamentals, did so drive it on afterward as it has done, by our abandoning
the old ways and the Truths thereof into those very many Misfortunes, which it
has brought us into already, and will more and more into the Prophet
Jeremiah's Lamentations. And so greatly resembled that very ancient way of the
great Councels or Parliaments in France, drawn and derived from their Ancestors
the Francks, and other their Northern Progenitors in and of that Kingdom, long
before there inhabiting, until the miseries brought by the English Conquests,
and their own Divisions, upon that people by those Wars, and their seeking in
the interim to govern their Kings, and Domineer over them in the midst of their
Troubles, Necessities, and Disabilities to protect them, had constrained some
of their after Kings, as Lewis the 11th. one of their Kings to find the way to
govern so Arbitrarily, as they have since done with a continual so limited
Parliament, as it signifies little more than an extraordinary Court of
Justice, and verify the Edicts of his prerogative Power with a car tell est
nostre plaisir; Insomuch as those kind of Tenures and beneficial Mutualites,
might not improbably have been here introduced by the Saxons, from one and the
same or a like Radix, or Original, before the Normans Atcheivements and
Acquests, either here or in France, or by what they had learned or practiced of
the Feudal Laws in the Empire, or after the Normans had brought England (their
long before Compatriots) into subjection; and in the Reigns of some of their
after Kings continued Masters of Normandy, Aniou, Aquitaine, Main, and
Poicteau, and of so many other great parts and Provinces of the French
Dominions, as in process of time they gained a full Possession of the residue,
and in a short time after lost them all by our own Domestic Ambitions, and
Discords.

So as one Egg of the same kind, cannot commonly be more like in it is external
Form and Likeness, to an other, then the ancient and ever-to-be-approved Method
of our and their former great Councels or Parliaments were.

Wherein may warrantably, without any suspicion of an Arbitrary Government, be
vouched and called the learned Sieur du Fresne, a man of vast Reading and
Litterature, and not only Learned in all the Roman and Northern Antiquities,
but in our Old English Saxon Laws, and the allowed classical and veritable
Authors, and Writers of our Nation, and to whom the Learned Works of our
Glanvil, Bracton, Littleton, Fortescue, Coke, Stamford, Spelman, and Seldom
were no Strangers, when in his Glossary, or Comment upon the word Pares, he
represents unto us the Figure or lively Picture of our own ancient m Fresne in
verbo Pares. LL. Al^man. tit. 9^. capitl. car'. m. lib. 3. ca. 71. 72.
Customs and Usages in our great Councels or Parliaments, in these his Words
or Annotations. Pares dicuntur, qui ejusdem sunt Conditionis vel Dignitatis.

In charta Grodegangi Episcopi Metensis apud Meurisium. p. Apud Marenlsum lib.
1. formul 32.
167. It is said, Ego Grodigangus un^ cum voluntate illustrissimi Pipini
Inclyti Francorum Regis Avunculi mei, and cum Consensu omnium Parium nostrorum,
Episcoporum, Abbatum, Presbyterorum, Diaconorum, Subdiaconorum, vel omnis
Cleri, seu and hominibus Sancti Stephani Metensis Ecclesiae cogitavi casion
humanae Fragilitatis etc.

Apud Baldricum Noviocomensem Compares sunt Pares Feudales, and in legibus
Henrici primi Regis Angliae. ca. 34.

Et exinde appellati unius domini Convassalli quod ratione Hominij and Tenurae
sibi invicem Pares sunt, qui Domino subsunt, a quibus soli judicari poterant,
nam Convassalli diversarum Baroniarum seu Territoriorum eidem Domino subjecti,
non dicuntur proprie Pares, a Paritate igitur conditionis and dignitatis
appellatio illa profluxit.

Exploditur virorum doctissimorum Sententia, quod Pares deriva^tur a Patritijs
Francicijs tenebantur Pares judicijs dominicis interesse, Judicumque munere
fungebantur, and ad id astringebantur Feudorum suorum obligatione.

Quod si legittimam Excusationem haberent, quo minus possent Judicijs dominicis
interesse tenebantur eo casu, Paris sibi conditionis Vicarios submittere, qui
eorum locum tenerent in ijsdem Judicijs.

Dignitas autem Regia, Ducatus, Marchio, Comitatus, non dicitur proprie eo quod
Duces, Marchiones, and comites Regibus sint Pares, sed n Paur Meister de
jurisdict Imperij Romans 45. tit. de legibus Conrad. and Forcat in com. de seudis.
partim quod a Rege proxime descendit.

Parium autem Judicia in ipsos Pares and convassallos exercebantur, adeo ut si
aliquis oriretur sententia inter ipsos Pares dirimi non possit, nisi in
Conventu and judicio Parium suorum, Domino ipso Feudali praesidente. In Parium
consessu judicia ab ijs in dominum non exercebantur, quippe ils ne sont mis
appeller Pers pour ce qu'il soient Per a lui, mais Pers sont enter eux ensemble.

Parium Judicia inter Pares seu Convassallos tantum exercebantur.

Neque Pares duntaxat per Pares seu Convassallos ad judicium subeundum
summonebantur, sed and actiones caeterae omnes Judiciae per Pares peragebantur.
Cum igitur Pares sint Vassalli, qui a Domino Feudali nude pendent ratione
Tenurae, atque ita etiam vulgo appellati sunt Barons, ideo vox utraque eadem
notione passim usurpata legitur, pro majoris dignitatis Vassallo qui vel in
Consilium adhibentur a Domino aut Rege. That which was mentioned by Ingulfus,
to have been in use amongst the Monks, in the Abbey of Croyland, being in the
Reign of William Rufus.

And as to the Court Barons of the mesne Lords, derived from their Superior,
says du Fresne, Parium judicijs non modo intererat Dominus, vel ejus Ballivus,
sed etiam in rebus arduis concilium expetebat, ita ut Conciliariorum Domini
feudalis vicem fungerentur.

In quibusdam tamen locis, ut in Comitatu Bellovensi, le Seigneurs Du Fresne
Tom. 3. 13^.
ne jugent pas en les Cors, mes les Homes jugent, and in locis ubi cum Paribus
suis considet ejusmodi judiciis interesse non posse, si Litem vel Controversiam
habet cum Paribus.

Pariae ex Hispanico Parias feudales redditus honores homagia.

And we might as well borrow from them the word Parliament, which Du Fresne
has told us, was made use of by Lewis the 8th. King of France in the year
1224. which was in the 8th. year or 9th. of our King Henry the 3d., nineteen or
twenty years before it was found, that the word Parliament was used in any of
our Public Records, in the Ancient and former Ages, in all the latter in our
King's Writs of Summons to their Parliaments (except some few by Inadvertency)
giving it no other Title than Confilium or Colloquium.

And Du Fresne, after his learned Comments upon the word Baronia, and the
Ancient Usages thereof in England, says, That our Bishops had their Regalia,
seu majora dominia Episcoporum ac Praelatorum, quae a Regibus in feudum
tenentur; and the Laws of our King Henry the 1st. as our Gervasius
Dorobernensis reports, do allow that Archiepiscopi and Episcopi habeant
possessiones suas de Domino Rege, sicut Baroniam, and inde respondent Ministris
and justitiae Regis, and id etiam obtinuit (says du Fresne) in Francia, ut
Regalia Episcoporum and Ecclesiarum Baroniae dicerentur: And he cites very
ancient Authorities out of the French Authors, Records, and Registers of their
Parliaments, mentioning an Arrest or Judgment thereupon given in the year 1282.
which was in the 9th. Year of the Reign of our King Edward the First; and that
long before, viz. in the Year of Grace 1233. which was in the 17th. Year of the
Reign of our King Henry the Third, t(...) (...) Bar^^ia Ecclesiae Lugdinensis,
nam non modo proprie Regali^, (...)Barons Servitiis omnibus feudalibus obnoxii
erant, sed ^^iam in Comitiis publicis seu Parliamentis s^dere jus iis erat,
cujus Du Fresne Gloffar. tom. 1. 492. and 49^.
apud nostros usus infinita praestant exempla apud Tullium and Alios, in
Angliam vero Episcopos in Parliamentis publicis eo nomine locum and sedem
habere constat.

And that Barons Eleemosynarii apud Stanfordum, and in jure Anglicano dicuntur
Archi-episcopi, Episcopi, Abbates, and Priores, qui praedia sua Ecclesiae a
Rege tenent per Baroniam, Baronias en^m suas ex Eleemosynis Regum perhibentur
accepisse, licet ipsa praedia (...)rum saepe mun^ficentia consecuti fuerint,
quomodo etiam apud nos Regalia Ecclesiarum censentur esse ex sola Regia
liberalitate iis olim concessa.

And amongst our English Bishoprics, besides those of Oxford, Bristol, and
Gloucester, which our King Henry the Fighth erected and endowed, the Bishopric
of Lincoln had many Manors and Lands granted by or in the time of King Henry
the First not in Eleemosinam, and that of Durham by King Richard the First, and
great Possessions afterward gained and laid unto it by Anthony Beke a Bishop
of that See, in the Reign of our King Henry the Third, or King Edward the First.

And Quaestio agitata fuit (says that Learned Sieur du Fresne) an supremi
Palatii Francici Officiales possunt Du Fresne Idem. 138. in Tom. 3.
Parium Franciae judiciis interesse, and cum iis consedere in judiciis in lite
mota inter Joannam Comitissam Flandriae, and Johannem de Nigello, wherein by an
Arrest of the Parliament of Paris in the Year One Thousand Two Hundred and
Twenty Four, which was in the Eighth Year of the Reign of our King Henry the
Third, it was adjudged, That the Cancellarius, Buticularius, Camerarius,
Constabularius, Franciae, and Marescalli Hospitii Domini Regis debent ad usus
and consu^^^dines observatas interesse cum Paribus ad judicandum Pares, ut quod
ministeriales praedicti de hospitio Domini Regis debent interesse in Curia
Domini Regis cum Paribus Franciae ad judicandum Pares, and tunc praedicti
Ministeriales judicaverant praedictam Comitissam Flandriae cum Paribus Franciae.

Wherein our Ancestors, without any Arrest or Decree of Parliament, did rather
give than take the Pattern, when their Bishops, as Chancellors of our Kings,
very often and in a continued Series from the Reign of King Edward the
Confessor, who was not without his Charta Regis Edwardi Confestoris Ecclesiae
S. Petri Wellmon. 25 R^gni sui and Anno Domini 1066.
Reinbaldus Regiae dignitatis, Vice-C^ncellarius, when Maurice Bishop of London
was Chancellor to William the Conqueror in the first Year of his Reign, and
other Bishops have in that high and great Office severally from thence
succeeded unto the 29th. of Edward the First, and not a few of the other
Bishops have been Treasurers and Secretaries of State, and by that Right alone,
besides their Spiritual Rights, and Temporal Baronies, did sit as Peers in that
great Assembly, together with the Lord Privy Seal, Constable, Marshal, and
Great Chamberlain of England, Lord Steward, Chamberlain of the Household, with
the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of England, which do
Illustrate that greatest of our Kings Councels, attended with such of the
Judges, and other Assistants, as their Sovereigns shall be pleased to call or
permit to Sit therein.

Neither could those grand Officers claim a Right to be accounted by them or
any others Equal, or Coordinate with them or their Superiors, or to have any
Vote in the House of Peers in Parliament, by their sitting there, it being in
the Act of Parliament made in the 31st. Year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, Entitled, How. the Lords in Parliament shall be placed, wherein it
being expressed, That it appertained to his Prer^gative Royal, to give such
Honor, Reputation, and Place to his C^uncellors and other his Subjects, as
shall be seeming to his excellent Wisdom. It was specially mentioned, That the
Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the King's Council, Lord E.
1. H. 9. ca. 10.
Privy Seal, or Chief Secretary, that shall be under the degree of a Baron of
the Parliament, are to give no Assent or Dissent in the Parliament. And it is
likewise remarkable, That in the Title of that Act of Parliament, and all along
and thorough the Body thereof, the House of Peers is only styled the
Parliament, and no mention is therein at all made of the House of Commons in
Parliament, nor any Care or Order taken for their Degrees or sitting in
Parliament.

Neither do any of our Parliament Rolls, Records, or Authentic ancient
Historians mention, that our Kings were in those their great Councels limited,
or accustomed to call all their Barons thereunto. Nor until the latter end of
the Reign of King Richard the Second, had voluntarily obliged themselves to
Summon thither the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts, unto those their
great Councels.

And when it has been truly said, that Omne Majus continet in se Minus, it
will not be easy to believe, That the Minus does or should Continere in se
Majus.

For in Anno 23 Edward the First, there were but Sixty-three Earls and Barons
Summoned, and in the same Year upon another Summons, but 45. King Edward the
Second did not Summon all the Earls and Barons.

In the 6 E. 3. the To. Parl. 2^.
like. M. 22 E. 3. 6 R. 2. and 11 R. 2. the like.

King Edward the 3d. in the 9th. Year of his Reign, Summoned but five Earls,
and Eleven Barons.

In the 10th E. 3. the Elsiag's Ancient and Modern manner of holding
Parliaments ca. 1. p. 46. and 47.
Parliament Writs of Summons were directed but unto Fourteen of the Temporal
Barons, with a Memorandum entered, that Brevia istis Magnatibus immediate
praescriptis directa essendi ad Parliamentum praedictum remissa fuerint
concilio Regis pro eo quod quidam ex eis in partibus Scotiae and quidam ex eis
in partibus transmarinis existant adnullanda. 15 E. 3. there were Summoned but
26 of all sorts.

16 E. 3. But a very few.

21 E. 3. Elsing ca. 2. 51.
but 22.

45 E. 3. but thirteen Earls and Barons, and not many to diverse Parliaments
after, (the great Commune and Generale Concilium, rightly understood, being but
Synonyma's of the word Parliament) and of latter times they which were in the
King's Displeasure have had their Summons, but with a Letter from the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper commanded not to come, but to send a Proxy.

In Anno 46 E. 3. and diverse years in the Reign of King Henry the 5th. few
Earls and Barons were Summoned, for that many of them were then busied in the
Wars of France.

But in the Parliament in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, John Earl of
Bristol being denied his Writ, petitioned to the House of Peers for it;
whereupon he had it without any intercession of the House of Peers, but withal
a Letter from the Lord Keeper, signifying his Majesty's Pleasure, that he
should send his Proxy, and forbear to come; whereupon he petitioned the
Parliament again, showing, That that Letter could not discharge him from
coming, for that the Writ commanded him to come upon his Allegiance; but that
point was not then debated, for the said Earl was presently sent for as a
Delinquent, and charged with High Treason, the Majores Barons being men of the
best Estate, Extraction, and Abilities, and better sort of the Tenants in
Capite, by ancient Law and Custom of the Kingdom, being to be only Summoned
according to the very old custom of the Romans, probably learnt from thence,
Sigonius de antiquo j^re Civium. Romans lib. 2. ca. 2.
who, as Sigonius writes, did in legen^o Senatores make choice of them
according to their Birth, Age, Estate, and Magistracy well exercised and
performed.

And could be no less then well warranted by a constant, well experimented,
long approved and applauded Usage thereof for more than fourteen hundred Years,
attested by the industrious Labors of Mr. William Pryn and others; and for the
times before the Conquest, and the Learned Collections of Sir Robert Filmer,
and others since the Norman Invasion, fortified by such Records (which in
themselves are never found to lie) as the teeth of devouring Time has left us,
seconded by unquestionable, ancient, authentic, classical Authors, which might
silence those disputes Factious and Foolish opinions and cavils, which in the
latter part of this last unquiet Century or age have been stirred up against
that very Ancient and Honorable Assembly or House of Peers, which all the
former ages neither durst or did lift an hand or heel against, or so much as
malign or bark at: So greatly are our most degenerate, wickedly hypocritical,
worser Times altered from what they were or should be; and the only Recital of
whose long and Ancient Successions, through their so many several gradations,
may abundantly satisfy any that are not before so prepossessed, as to resolve
never to be satisfied with any thing that looks but like Truth or Reason, if
they shall but read as they ought to do the ensuing Series or Catalogue:
Wherein they may find, that in the Bud or Blossom of Christianity in this our
British Isle, whither with diverse good Authors we believe that King Lucius, who
is said to lie x Concilia Spelman 32. 34.
buried at Winchester, did in the year 156, after the Birth of our Redeemer, or
in the year 185, 186, or 187. write his Letter to Pope Eleutherius to transmit
unto him the Roman Laws, it is allowed by Sir Henry Spelman to have been
written Rege and Proceribus Regni Britanniae, and that Faganus and Dervianus
two Doctors being sent by Eleutherius to King Lucius Baptized him, and cum
regulis populum Baptizant, Clerum ordidinant, 3. Metropolitanos and 28.
Episcopos instituunt.

Rex Ambrosius Aurelius ut memoriale Procerum Britanniae, quos Hengistus
Saxonesque sui accomplices nefanda proditione in monte Ambrosij (qui nunc vulgo
Stohenge dicitur) trucidaverant 480. Consul' and Barons aeternum fieret
praegrandes Lapides, qui ibidem in borum memoriam usque in praesens positi sunt
ab Hybernia cum magna manu Germano Spelma^l concilia 60
suo Uther illuc transmisso deportari fecit, qui c^^n allati fuissent
congregati sunt in monte Ambrosij edicto Regis magnates eum Clero and cum magno
honor dictorum nobilium sepulturam prepararent.

In the Charter of King Aethelbert confirming his Grant of the Land given to
the Church of St. Pancrase in the Year 605. It is Spelmanni concilia 119.
mentioned to have been done, consensu venerabilis Augustini Archiepiscopi ac
Principum suorum.

Et Decreta judiciorum ordinavit juxta exempla Romanorum concilio sapientum;
and when Edwin King of Northumberland was persuaded Seldom tit. honor 632. and
Bid Hist Eccles. lib. 2. ca'. 5.
to be a Christian, it is said, that he consulted cum principibus and
conciliariis suis.

Anno Dominicae incarnationis Aethelbertus Rex in fide roboratus Catholica una
cum beata regina filioque ipsorumque Eadbaldo ac Reverendissimo praesule
Augustino caeterisque Optimatibus terrae solemnitatem natalis Domini celebravit
Cantuariae convocato igitur ibidem communi concilio tam Cleri quam populi.

In Anno Domini 673. a Parliamentary Council was holden a Pryns 1st part of an
historical collection of the ancient Parliaments of Eng land. 6. and Spelmanni
concilia. 441.
at Hertford presentibus Episcopis ac Regibus and Magnatibus universis, but not
any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons, as we read of, says Mr. Pryn.

A great Council or Parliament was held at Becanfeld, where Wythred King of
Kent was present.

Anno 694. In like manner, where none but the Peers were present.

The like Anno 710. at Worcester; but without any Commons.

The like in the Council at Cliff. Anno 747. holden by Ethelbaldus King of
Mercia, omnibus Regni sui principibus and ducibus being present, but not one
Knight or Burgess mentioned.

The like in Anno 787. at Colchuth coram Offa Rege and suis magnatibus, and
convenerunt omnes principes tam Ecclesiastici quam seculares.

Anno Domini 793. King Offa held a Council at Verulam, wherein the King suorum
Magnatum acquiescens concilio took a journey to Rome.

Anno 794. after his return Celebrated two Councels, the one at Colchyth, where
were present nine Kings, twenty-five Bishops, twenty Dukes, (but no House of
Commons) the other at Verolam, Congregato apud Verolamium Episcoporum and
Optimatum concilio.

About the year 796. Cynewolf King of West Sex held a Council where he wrote to
Lullus Bishop of Mentz touching matters of Religion una cum Episcopis suis nec
non cum caterva Satraparum.

Anno 800. Kenulf King of Mercia called to the Council at Clovesha, omnes Regni
sui Episcopos, Duces and Abbates, and cujuscunque dignitatis viros, where there
was no mention of any Commons.

Anno 816. at the Council of Colechyth Caenulf King of Mercia was present cum
suis principibus, ducibus and optimatibus; but not a Syllable of Knights or
Burgesses present.

About the year 822. in the Council of Clovesh^, where Beornulf King of Mercia,
Wilfred Archbishop, Omniumque dignltatum optimates Ecclesiasticarum and
Secularium were present, but no Knights of Counties or Burgesses.

Anno 824. another Council was held by the same King at the same place
assidentibus Episcopis, Abbatibus and Principibus b Spel^an Council.
Merciorum universis, but no Commons for ought appears; the King, Archbishops,
Bishops and Dukes Subscribing their Names to the decrees there made.

About the same time a Council called Pan-Anglicum, or for all England was
holden at London, Praesentibus Egberto Rege West Saxonum and Withlasio Rege
Merciorum, utroque Archiepiscopo, caeterisque Angliae Magnatibus, who
Subscribed it.

Anno Domini Pryns Part of historical collections of the ancient Parliaments of
England.
838. a Concilium Pan-Anglicum was holden at Kingston, where King Egbert and
his Son Ethelwolph were present cum Episcopis and Optimatibus, but not a word
mentioned of the Commons Assent or Dissent.

Anno 850. A Council was holden at Beningdon Praelatis and proceribus Regni
Merciae under King Bertulf, when Lands were Settled and Confirmed by them to the
Abbey of Crowland, without the Assent or Mention of any Commons.

Anno Domini 851. In a Council held at Kingsbury, under King Bertulf,
Praesentibus Ceolnotho Archiepiscopo Doroberniae caeterisque Regni Merciae
Episcopis and Magnatibus without Knights or Burgesses.

Anno 855. There was a Council or Parliament of all England held at Winchester,
where Ethelulf King of West-Sex, Beorred King of Mercia, and Edmond King of
East-Sex, were present, together with the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
Caeterisque Angliae Episcopis and Magnatibus, wherein King Ethelwolf Omnium
praelatorum and principum suorum gratuito concilio (without any Knights or
Burgesses) gave the Tithes of all the Lands and Goods within his Dominions (a
matter of no small Concernment to all his Subjects in their Estates and
Proprieties) to God and the Church, which has continued ever since in Force
through all England.

Betwixt the Year 871. which was the beginning of King Alureds Reign, and the
end of which was in Anno Christi Domini 900. that excellent and prudent Prince
Collected and Corrected diverse Laws made by the Saxon Kings, his Predecessors
omitting others consulto sapientum and Prudentissimorume suis consiliis usus
edicit LL Saxonis
eorum observationem, which was probably so done in a great Council or
Councels, which were afterward called Parliaments, which in that so generally
an unlearned age cannot be understood to be less than the Magnates of the
Kingdom, Bishops and Barons.

And the like is to be said of the Prudentum concilium given to Edoard who
began his Reign in Anno 900. and ended it in Anno 924, and as much is to be
believed of the Council or Parliament of King Aethelstan, who began his Reign
in Anno 924, and ended it in the year 940. who besides what is mentioned in the
making of his Laws, that he did it prudenti Ulfheline Archiepiscopi aliorumque
Episcoporum suorum concilio, did about the year of our Lord, 930. by his
Charter give diverse Lands to the Abbey of Malmesbury; in one of which Charters
or Grants there was a Postscript or Subscription in these words, Sciant
sapientes Regionis Nostrae non has prefatas terras me injuste rapuisse rapinas
Deo dedisse, sed sic eas accepi quemadmodum judicaverunt omnes Optimates Regni
Anglorum, to wit, in a full Parliament, which then consisted only of the King
and his Nobility.

Anno Domini 944. King Edmond granted many large liberties d Pryns historical
collections of the Ancient Parliaments of England.
and the Manor of Glastonbury to the Abbey thereof cum concilio and consensu
Optimatum suorum (made it seems says Mr. Pryns in Parliament, and a clear
evidence that the Nobles of that age were the Kings great Council and
Parliament) without any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses, of which he found no
mention in History or Charters.

Anno 948. there was a Parliament or Council holden at London, under King Edred
Cum universi Magnates Angliae per Regium edictum Summoniti tam Archiepiscopi
Episcopi and Abbates quam caeteri totius Angliae Proceres and Optimates Londini
convenissent ad tractandum de negotiis publicis totius Regni, in which
Parliament no Knights, Citizens or Burgesses are said to have been present.

Anno 965, or 970. King Edgar with his Mother Clito his Successor, the King of
Scots, both the Archbishops caeterisque Episcopis and omnibus Regni proceribus
Subscribed his Charter granted to the Abbey of Glastonbury communi Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Primorumque concilio generali assensu Pontificum Abbatum Optimatum
suorum and concilio omnium Primatum suorum, without any Commons present
(assistants and attendants only excepted.)

Anno 975. King Edgar and his Queen, Elferus Prince of Mercia, Ethelinus Duke
of the East Angles, Elfwold his Kinsman, Archbishop Dunstan cum caeteris
Episcopis and Abbatibus, Bricknotho Comite cum Nobilitate totius Regni held a
Council at Winchester without any Commons.

Anno 977. in the Council of Calne under King Edward omnes Anglorum Optimates
were present, together with the Bishops and Clergy, but no Knights or Burgesses
for ought is Recorded.

Anno Christi 1009. by King Ethelreds Edict, Universi Anglorum Optimates at
Eanham acciti sunt convenire, not the Commons.

A Parliament was Summoned by King Edward the Confessor, concerning Earl Godwyn
at Gloucester, where Totius Regni Proceres, etiam Northumbriae Comites tunc
famosissimi, Sywardus, Leofricus, omnisque Anglorum Nobilitas convenere. Et
Anno 1052. at London, Rex and omnes Regni Magnates ad Parliamentum apud London
tunc fuerunt, Mr. Pryn declaring his Opinion, That the former and ancient
Parliaments consisted of our Kings and their Spiritual and Temporal Lords,
without any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, Summoned to Assist or Advise with
them, or to Assent unto what they Enacted or Ordained. In the 25th. Year of his
Reign granted Lands and Liberties to Saint Peter's Church at Westminster, Cum
concilio and decreto Secunda Char^^ E. Confessor S. Petri Westmonaster in
Council collect per H. Spelman.
Archiepiscoporum Episcoporum Comitum aliorumque suorum Optimatum.

And from the Conquest until that forced something like but not to be accounted
a Parliament, in the 49th. Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, diverse
Learned good Authors, Summae and incorruptae fidei, no diminishing or
additional Record-makers, have assured and given Posterity and after Ages such
an exact Account of our Parliaments, as will leave no ground or foundation Sir
Robert Filmers Freeholders grand Enquest.
of Truth or Reason for any to believe, That an Elected part of the Commons
were before that Imprisonment of King Henry the Third, in the 49th. Year of his
Reign, made or Summoned to be a part of our English great Councels or
Parliaments.

The Charter of William the Conqueror to the Abbey of Battle was made Assensu
Lanfranci Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, Stigandi Seldeni ad Eadmerum notae and
spicilegium 167 LL Gulielmi Conquest in Hist. Ecclesiastgentis Anglorum ex Beda
and LL Saxonis per Abrahamum VVhelocum
Episcopi Cicestrensis, and Concilio etiam Episcoporum and Baronum suorum. And
that great Conqueror had in the 4th. Year of his Reign, Concilium Baronum
suorum and confirmavit Leges Edwardi Confessoris, posteaque Decreta sua cum
Principibus constituit.

In the 10th. or 11th. Year of his Reign Episcopi, Comites and Barons Regni
Regia potestate ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis and tractandis
convocati fuerunt.

Separated the Courts Temporal from the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, Communi
concilio and concilio Archiepiscoporum suorum and caeterorum Episcoporum
Abbatum and omnium Regni sui; and in the Register of Winchelsey Archbishop of
Canterbury, it is Recorded, That Rex Angliae (Gulielmus Conquestor) in concilio
Archiepiscoporum Abbatum and omnium Procerum Regni, did forbid the Leges
Episcopales to be used in any Hundred or other secular Courts.

And in the 21st. Year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, Mr. Seldom says,
There is mention made of a Great Council holden under the said King William,
wherein all the Bishops of the Land, Earls and Barons, made an Ordinance
touching the Exemption of the Abbey of Bury, from the Bishops of Norwich.

In that great and notable Pleading for three Days together at Pynnendon in
Kent, in the Reign of King William the Conqueror, who (as Mr. Seldom repeats it
out of the Leiger Book, or Register of the Church of Rochester) Anglorum regnum
armis conquisivit and suis ditionibus subiugavit, in the great Controversy
betwixt Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, and Odo Bishop of Baieux and Earl
of Kent, the Conquerors half Brother, for many f Seldeni ad Eadmerum notae and
spicilegium 198, and 199.
great Manors, Lands, and Liberties of a great yearly Value, which Lanfranc
claimed to appertain to his Archbishopric, of which that potent Norman Bishop
and Earl had injustly disseized him; the King commanded the whole County
without any delay to Assemble together, as well French as English, and more
especially such as were well Skilled and Learned in the ancient Laws and
Customs of England, as Gosfridus Episcopus Constantiensis, qui in loco Regis
fuit and justitiam illam tenuit, Elnothus Episcopus de Rovercestria, Aegelricus
Episcopus de Cicestria, Vir antiquissimus and legum terrae Sapientissimus (qui
ex praecepto Regis advectus suit ad ipsas antiquas legum Consuetudines
discutiendas and edocendas in una Quadriga) Ricardus de Tonebregge, Hugo de
Monte Forti, Gulielmus de Acres Haymo Vicecomes, and alij multi Barons Regis
and ipsius Archiepiscopi and aliorum Episcoporum homines multi, whose Decisions
made by many Witnesses, Evidences, and Reasons, being certified to the King
Laudavit laudans cum consensu omnium Principum suorum confirmavit, and ut
deinceps perseveraret firmiter praecepit. Upon a Rebellion of Rafe de Guader a
Norman, made Earl of Norfolk by the Conqueror, Confederating with some
discontented English, whilst he was absent in Normandy, upon Notice thereof
given, hasted into England, where omnes ad Curiam suam Regni Proceres
convocavit legitimos Heroes and in fide probatos.

Unto which may be added, That in the Agreement betwixt King William Mat.
Paris. 16.
Rufus, and Robert Duke of Normandy his elder Brother, touching his Claim to
the Kingdom of England (being of great Concern to the People) wherein the King
assured to the Duke All that he could Claim from his Father except England, it
is said, Pactum juramento confirmarunt duodecim Principes nomine Regis, and 12.
Barons nomine Ducis.

In the 2d. Year of King William the Second, there was a great Seldom tit.
honor.
Council De cunctis Regni principibus, and another which had all the Peers of
the Kingdom.

In the 7th. Year of his Reign was a great Council, or Parliament so called, at
Rockingham Castle in Northamptonshire, Episcopis Abbatibus cunctisque Regni
Principibus coeuntibus; and a Year or two after, the same King De statu Regni
acturus called thither by his Command his Bishops, Abbots, and Peers of the
Kingdom.

Anno 1106. Robert Duke of Normandy coming into England, Mat. Paris. 60. 64, 68.
and seeking to be reconciled to his Brother King Henry the First, which could
not at Northampton be effected Magnatibus regni ob hoc Londonium edicto Regis
convocatis, the King by fair Words and Promises so frustrated the Dukes
designs, as Omnium corda sibi inclinavit, ut pro ipso contra quemlibet usque ad
capitis expositionem dimicarent, Dux in Normanniam iratus perrexit, and Rex
ipsum secutus est usque in Herchebrai Castellum, trahens secum omnes fere
Proceres Normanniae and Andegaviae, robur Angliae and Britanniae, ut ipsum
debellaret.

The Emperor having sent Ambassadors unto him, to request his Daughter Maud in
Marriage, Tenuit itaque Rex apud Westmonasterium in Pentecosten Curiam suam,
qua nunquam tenuerat splendidiorem, wherein the Marriage was concluded.

Anno Domini 1114. Rex Anglorum Henricus fecit omnes suae potestatis Mat.
Paris. 51. and 5.
Magnates (as if there were no need of Commons, which were then believed to be
included in them) fidelitatem jurare Willielmo filio suo.

At the Coronation of which King, who had usurped his said elder Brothers
Kingdom, and stood in fear of his better Title, it was said, That all the
People of the Kingdom of England were present, but the Laws (and Charter) then
made were Per commune concilium Baronum suorum confirmed; and that Charter was
attested by Mauritio Londoniensi Episcopo, Willielmo Wintoniensi electo,
Odoardo Herefordiensi Episcopo, Henrico Comite, Simone Comite, Waltero Gifford
Comite, Robert de Monti forti, Rogero Bigod and aliis multis; Et factae sunt
tot Chartae quot sunt Comitatus in Anglia, and Rege jubente positae in Abbatiis
singulorum Comitatuum ad Monumentum.

In the 3d. Year of his Reign, the Peers of the Kingdom were called, without
any mention of the Commons; and Orders were at another great Council made
Consensu Comitum and Baronum. Florentius Wigorniensis says, that Lagam Edwardi
Regis LLH 1. ca. 2.
reddidit cum illis emendationibus quibus eam Pater suus emendavit concilio
Baronum suorum.

After whose Death King Stephen Ordericus vitalis lib. 13. 930.
having Usurped the Crown of England, which did not at all belong unto him, and
Fought stoutly to keep it, Concilium congregavit and de statu Reipublicae cum
Proceribus suis tractare studuit.

Anno Domini 1153 Justitia de Caelo prospiciente diligentia Theobaldi
Archiepiscopi Cantuar' and aliorum Episcoporum regni, King Stephen having no
Issue Facta est concordia betwixt him and Henry Duke of Normandy, after King
Henry the Second, who was by King Stephen acknowledged In conventu Episcoporum
and allorum Optimatum, wherein it was accorded, That Duke Henry, says Matthew
Paris, should Succeed him in the Kingdom, Stephen only enjoying it for his
Life, if he should have no Children, ex concessione Ducis Henrici, ita tamen
confirmata est pax, quod ipse Rex and Episcopi praesentes cum caeteris
Optimatibus regni (no Commons) jurarent, quod Dux post mortem Regis si ipsum
superviveret, Regnum fine contradictione aliqua obtineret.

King Mat. Paris. 100.
Henry the Second, in the 10th. year of his Reign, held a great Council or
Parliament at Clarendon (where some of the Customs and Constitutions of the
Kingdom were Recognized) which was an Assembly only of Prelates and Peers.

Anno 1118. in a Peace or League made betwixt him and Philip King of France, it
was agreed, That in any Matters of Difference Mat. Paris.
afterward ariseing betwixt them, they should abide by the Award of three
Bishops, and three Barons to be Elected on the King of France his part, and the
like on the King of Englands.

Anno Gratiae 1272. Venit Oxenford and in generali Concilio ibidem celebrato
constituit Johannem filium Hovedeni Anpales part posteriore. 566, and 567.
suum Regem in Hybernia concessione and confirmatione Alexandri summi
Pontificis, and in eodem concilio venerunt ad Regem Resus filius Gryphini
Regulus de South Wales, and David filius Owini Regulus de North Wales, qui
Sororem ejusdem Regis Angliae in uxorem duxerat, and Cadwallanus Regulus de
Delmain, and Owanus de Kavillian, and Griffinus de Bromfeld, and Madacus filius
Gerverog, and alii multi de Nobilioribus Gualliae, and omnes devenerunt homines
Regis Angliae patris, and fidelitatem ei contra omnes homines, and pacem sibi
and regno servandam juraverunt.

In eodem concilio dedit Dominus Rex Angliae praedicto Reso filio Griffini
terram de Merionith, and David filio Owani terram de Ellismore.

Deditque Hugoni de Lasci, ut supradictum est, in Hybernia totam Midam
cum-pertinentiis, pro servitio centum militum de ipso and Johanne filio suo,
and Chartam suam ei inde fecit.

And being to return an Answer to the Popes Letter, inviting him to take upon
him the Croysado, Prrte 1st part of a brief Register of Parliamentary writs.
and succor the Holy Land, assembled a Parliament at London, ubi dominus Rex
and Patriarcha (Jerusalem) Episcopi, Abbates, Comites and Barons Angliae (but
no Knights, Citizens or Burgesses thereof says Mr. Pryn) Willielmus Rex
Scotiae and David frater ejus cum Comitibus and Baronibus terrae suae
convenerunt.

Anno Domini 1162. Mat. Paris. 98. 154. 158. 166.
(without leave of Parliament or People) Fecit jurare fidelitatem Henrico filio
suo de haereditate sua, and inter omnes Magnates Regni Thomas Cancellarius
primus fidelitatem juravit, salva fide Regi patri, quamdiu viveret and regno
praeesse vellet.

In the 22d. Year of his Reign held a great Council at Nottingham by
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons.

At Windsor Communi concilio, with Bishops, Earls and Barons. And the like
afterward at Northampton.

King Richard the 1st. held shortly after his Coronation, upon the invitation
of the King of France and his undertaking to do the like, a great Council or
Parliament, cum Comitibus and Baronibus suis Hoveden. 376. 378. 413.
qui Crucem susceperant in generali Concilio constituti apud Londonias, taking
their Oaths for the recovery of the Holy Land, hasting thither and passing into
Normandy Elianor Regina matter Richardi Regis, with whom he had left the care of
the Kingdom, and Alays Soror Phillippi Regis Franciae, Baldwin Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of Norwich, Durham, Winchester, Ely, Salisbury,
Chester, Geffry the Kings Brother elected Archbishop of York, and John Earl of
Morton the Kings Brother, shortly after transfretarunt de Anglia in Normanniam
per mandatum Domini Regis, and habito cum illis concilio Dominus Rex statuit
Willielmum Episcopum Eliensem Cancellarium suum Justitiarium Angliae.

Granted to Hugh Bishop of Durham, Justitiam a fluvio Humbri usque ad terram
Regis Scotiae, made his Brothers John Earl of Morton and Geffry elect
Archbishop of York, to swear tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis, that they would
not come into England within three Years then ensuing, nisi per licentiam
illius, but suddenly after released his Brother John of his Oath, and gave him
leave to return into England, taking his Oath quod fideliter ei serviret.

In Crastino Exaltationis Sanct^ Crucis apud Mat. Paris. 154.
Pipewel Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, and aliorum Magnatum suorum fretus
concilio benign concessit Galfrido fratri suo Archiepiscopatum Eborum; and
circa dies istos iturus ad Terram sanctam per concilium Magnatum suorum
Gerardum Archiepiscopum Auxisnem, Richardum de Canvill etc. Justiciarios
constituit super totum navigium Angliae, Normanniae, Britanniae and Pictaviae.
Et tradidit illis Chartam suam in hac forma: Richardus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum
omnibus hominibus suis per mare ad Terram sanctam ituris salitem; Sciatis Nos
de proborum concilio virorum has Justitias statuisse, being certain severe Sea
Laws, and illas Consuetudines ab omnibus observandas, and quod singuli
Justitiariis obedirent, fecit Sacramento confirmari.

Eodem tempore in the Kings absence ad instanciam Comitis Johannis fratris
ipsius Regis convenerunt apud Pontem de Leodune inter Radingum and
Windeleshores ad colloquium Magnates Angliae de magnis and arduis Regis and
Regni negotiis tractatur', in crastino autem tam Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis
quam Eboracensis and Episcopi omnes apud Radingum convenerunt and colloquio
interessent. The Bishop of Roan being sent thither by the King to take and give
him an account thereof.

Anno Domini 1290. Rex Anglorum Richardus ad natale Domini fuit in Normanniam
apud Burum, and ibi tenuit solenne festum cum Primatibus terrae illius, and
post natale habitum est Colloquium betwixt the Kings of France and England,
where the Expedition was agreed upon, and a Peace made and sworn betwixt the
two Kingdoms, Mat. Paris. 156.
and the Comites and Barons utriusque Regni (none of the Commons) did swear,
That they would remain faithful to both the Kings, and make no War until
forty days after their return, and the Archbishops and Bishops utriusque
Regni juraverunt to denounce sentence of Excommunication against the
Transgressors.

In which Wars in the East for recovery of the Holy Land, after many glorious
Victories obtained against the Infidels, King Richard, (being shipwrackt Mat.
Paris. 158.
and with a small company escaping cast upon the Territories of the envious
Duke of Austria his incensed Aemulator, for that he had caused his Standard,
which he had set up before his at the taking of the Town of Joppa, to be taken
down, and thrown into a Jakes) was discovered, Idem 172, 173.
waylaid, taken, and delivered or sold to the Emperor of Germany for 60000l.
of Silver ad pondus Coloniensium.

And the Emperor (to whom his Brother John, who had in his Absence endeavored
to usurp his Kingdoms, and with the King of France his Confederate Hoveden.
417.
offered great sums of Money, whereof the latter would have paid 50000 Marks
of Silver and the former 30000, to have him detained Prisoner) detesting their
Practices, and showing to King Richard their Letters, after much Respects and
Kindness to such a magnanimous Prisoner, agreed to take for his Ransom 140
thousand Marks of the same kind of Money, which he paid to the Duke of Austria,
without any thing to be paid for the Expenses of himself or any other; but an
Oath was first taken by the Bishops, Dukes, and Barons, that as soon as the
Money should be paid, continuo liber proprium regrederetur ad regnum, which
being together with the Emperors Letter published in England by the Bishop of
Ely his Chancellor, suddenly after Exiit edictum a Justiciariis Regis, ut omnes
Episcopi, Clerici, Comites, Barons, Abbatiae and Prioratus quartam partem
Redituum suorum ad redemptionem Regis conferrent, and insuper ad illud Pietatis
opus Calices aureos and argenteos sustulerunt.

And upon his delivery by the Archbishops of Mentz and Cologne Hoveden 417.
into the hands of Queen Elianor his Mother, on the behalf of the Emperor gave
Sureties or pledges, until all the Money should be paid Walter Archbishop of
Roan, Savarick Bishop of Bath, Baldwin de Wac and alios multos filios Comitum
and Baronum suorum de pace servanda Imperatori and Imperio suo and omni terrae
suae dominationis.

The Bishop of Norwich Mat. Paris. 173.
dimidium pretij de Calicibus sumpsit, and de rebus habitis Regi donavit, and
the Cistertian Monks being always before by Privilege freed from any
Contributions, Bona sua universa ad Regis redemptionem dederunt.

Anno gratiae Mat. Paris. 199. 200, 204. 206.
1200. King Richard being dead Rex Francorum Philippus and Rex Anglorum
Johannes inter Wailan and Butavius castella ad colloquium convenerunt, ubi
convenit inter eosdem Reges cum concilio Principum utriusque Regni, quod
Ludovicus filius Regis Francorum and haeres duceret in uxorem filiam Aldefonsi
Regis Castellae and Neptem Regis Johannis, and Rex Anglorum pro hoc matrimonio
contrahendo daret Ludovico cum nepte sua nomine Blanca in maritagio Civitatem
Ebroicarum cum toto comitatu, and insuper 30000 marcarum Argenti.

Rex Johannes post completa negotia in partibus transmarinis transfretavit in
Angliam, veniens autem Londonias apud Westmonasterium, Huberto Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi and Magnatibus Regni praesentibus, Gaufridus Archiepiscopus
Eborqcensis cum Rege pacificatus est, quo tempore Rex Johannes significavit
Willielmo Regi Scotorum ut veniret ad eum ad Lincolniam, ut ibidem de jure suo
sibi satisfaceret in Crastino sancti Eadmundi.

Ubi convenerunt Rex Anglorum Johannes and Rex Scotorum Willielmus cum universa
Nobilitate tam Cleri quam populi utriusque Regni, whence he directed his Writ
to the Barons, and those which did hold of him in Capite, to come unto him with
Horse and Arms to Northampton, die Domini^a proxime ante Pentecosten, in forma
sequente.

Rex etc. Henrico To. claus. 6. Johanni* m. 2. (...).
etc. Mandamus tibi quod in fide quam Nobis debes, ficut Nos and corpus and
honorem Nostrum diligis, omni occasion and dilatione postpositis, sis ad Nos
apud Northampton die dominica proxime ante Pentecosten, paratus Equis and Armis
and aliis necessariis ad movendum cum corpore Nostro and standum Nobiscum ad
minus per duas quadragesimas, ita quod infra terminum illum a Nobis non recedas
ut tibi in perpetuum in grates seire debeamus T. etc.

And in the same year Summoned the Peers (but no Commons) to a great Council or
Parliament (not for Military Aid) in To. claus. 6 Johannis m. 3 in dors.
these words, Rex, etc. Episcopo Sarum Mandamus vobis rogantes, quatenus omni
occasion and dilatione postposit' sicut Nos and honorem Nostrum diligitis,
sitis ad Nos apud London die Dominica prox' ante Ascencionem Domini, Nobiscum
tractatur' de magnis and Arduis negotiis Nostris and Communi Regni utilitate,
quia super biis quae a Rege Franciae per Nuntios nostros and fuos mandata sunt,
unde per Dei Gratiam bonum speramus proveniri vestrum expedit habere Concilium
and aliorum Magnat' terrae nostrae, quos ad diem illum and locum fecimus
convocari, vos etiam ex part Nostra and vestra Abbates and Priores
conventuales totius Diocesis vestrae citari faciatis, ut concilio praedicto
Nobiscum interfitis, sicut diligant Nos and Communem Regni utilitatem. Test,
etc.

And shortly after Celebrating apud Portesmue solemnitatem festi Pentecostes,
Rex cum Regina in Normanniam Transfretarunt, exinde veniunt ad colloquium Reges
Anglorum and Francorum prope insulam Andelard and pacifice convenit inter eos,
and Barons de regno Francorum were fidejussores pro Rege suo, and undertook
the Guarranty to compel him, if he should violate that Peace, Et eodem modo
factum est in part Regis Anglorum.

Et Eodem Anno Rex fecit generaliter Acclamari, ut legalis Assisa panis
inviolabiliter sub poena Collistrigiali observaretur, quae probata fuit per
pistorem Gaufridi filii Petri Justitiarii Angliae, and pistorem R. de Thurnam,
ita quod pistores sic poterint vendere.

King John being Dead, Mat. Paris. 298, and 299.
and leaving his Son Henry very young, Willielmus Marescallus Comes
Pembrochiae, without the Consent of the Commons, or Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses Elected, was ordained Regis and regni Tutor.

Obiit Willielmus Mat. Paris. 304.
Mariscallus Regis and regni Rector, post cujus mortem Petrus Wintoniensis fuit
(without the Consent of the Commons) Custos Regis.

In Anno Domini 1221. Upon a Rebellion of Fulke de Brent and others,
Convenerunt Magnates Angliae ad Regem apud Westmonasterium ut de negotiis regni
tractarent, no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses mentioned.

4. or 5. Henry the Third, Convenerunt Magnates Regis (no Commons) apud
Westmonasterium ut de negotiis Regni tractarent. Idem ibidem 310. 316.


Anno Mat. Paris. 316.
Domini 1223. apud Londonias Rex venit (without the Commons) cum Baronibus ad
colloquium.

Anno Domini 1224. convenerunt ad colloquium apud Northampton Rex cum
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus and aliis de Regni negotiis
tractaturi (no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses Elected there present) voluit
item Rex uti concilio Magnatum suorum de terris transmarinis quas Rex Francorum
paulatim occupaverat, but was hindered by other Accidents.

Eodem Anno Rex Henricus ad Natale tenuit Curiam suam apud h Mat. Pari^. 316.
and 318.
Oxoniam, and postmodum in Octabis Epiphaniae apud Londonias veniens cum
Baronibus ad colloquium, requisitus est ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi and
Magnatibus aliis (no Commons, although greatly concerned in their Estates and
Liberties) ut libertates and liberas consuetudines pro quibus Guerra mota fuit
contra patrem suum confirmaret.

Which the King yielding unto, Habito concilio misit literas suas ad Singulos
Vicecomites Rogni ut per 12 Milites vel legales homines utriusque Comitatus per
Sacramentum facerent inquiri (no Writ to Elect Members of an House of Commons
in Parliament) quae fuerunt Libertates in Angliae tempore Regis Henrici Avi sui
and factam inquisitionem ad Londonias mitterent ad Regem in quindecim diebus
post Pascha (which, says Sir Henry Spelman, was never found or returned)

Eodem Anno Murmuratio non modica fuit a Magnatibus Angliae, contra Hubertum de
Burgo Justiciarium, and Rex Henricus curiam suam apud Northampton tenuit, when
the Archbishop of Canterbury, cum Suffraganeis suis and militia magna nimis
being present, and with great Solemnity pronouncing Excommunication against the
Disturbers of the King, the Church, and Kingdom, unde (Barons) Saluberrimo
concilio usi venerunt apud Northampton ad Regem universi, surrendered unto him
the Castles and Lands which they had obtained or gained from the Crown.

Anno Domini 1225. which was Anno 9 Henry the Third Rex Henricus ad Natale
Domini tenuit Curiam suam apud Westmonasterium praesentibus Clero and populo
cum Magnatibus Regionis Solemnitate completa, Hubert de Burgo, Domini Regis
Justitiarius, ex part Regis proposuit coram Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis Universis damna and injurias quae Regi illata
fuerant in partibus transmarinis, ex quibus non solum Rex, sed and Comites
multi and Barons sunt exhaeredati cum ipso, petiit ab omnibus concilium and
auxilium, and demanded a fifteenth of all the Movables in England, tam
Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum, unto which Archiespicopus and tota Concio
Episcoporum, Comitum, Abbatum, and Baronum, habita deliberatione Regi dedere
responsum, quod gratanter adquiescerent si illis diu petitas libertates,
without any Elected for the Commons, concedere voluisset, annuit itaque Rex
cupiditate ductus quod petebant Magnates.

Eodem Anno Mat. Paris. 324.
convenerunt apud Westmonasterium ad colloquium Rex Anglorum cum Magnatibus (no
Commons mentioned) where the King Jussit sententialiter diffinire quid de
Proditore suo Falcasio foret agendum; whereupon Proceres concenserunt cum Rege,
that he should abjure the Kingdom, Quo facto precepit Rex Will' Comiti Warrenno
to see it done.

Anno Domini 1226. venit interea terminus Concilii apud Westmonasterium Mat.
Paris. 328. 336.
praefixus, ubi Rex cum Clero and Magnatibus Regni (none Summoned or Elected
for the Commons) comparere debuerat ut Domini Papae Mandatum audiret.

Whereupon the Legate pressing the English Prelates and Clergy in Parliament
very hard for a Tenth upon their Spiritual Livings, they Answered, that Ista
quae Nobis proponitis Regnum sententialiter tangunt and generaliter omnes
Ecclesiarum Patronos (which might have required the Assent of an House of
Commons; yet were not then either Summoned or Elected) Tangunt Episcopos and
omnes Suffraganeos, nec non Innumeres Angliae Praelatos. Cumque ergo Rex
propter infirmitatem and Archiepiscopi nonnulli and Episcopi and alij
Ecclesiarum Praelati sunt absentes and in eorum absentiam (Papae) respondere
non possunt nec debeant; Quia si id facere presumerent in Prejudidicum omnium
absentium Praelatorum fieret.

Et hiis dictis venit Johannes Mariscallus and alij Nuntij Regis ad omnes
Praelatos qui de Rege Baronias tenent in Capite destinatis, districte mandantes
ne Laicum feudum sacrae Romanae Ecclesiae obligarent, unde a servitio sibi
debito personaliter, Haec omnia cum Magister Otto intellexisset statum hiis qui
alterum diem ibi in media Quadragesimae dum ipse procureret Regis adventum and
absentiam Praelatorum, ut tunc negotium sortiretur effectum, sed illud absque
Regis and aliorum qui absentes erant assensu praefixum diem admittere. Ita
singuli ad propria sunt reversi.

Rex Convocatis seorsim Praelatis and quibusdam Magnatibus (no Commons
mentioned) dedit responsum Nuntiis Imperatoris circa electionem (...) Mat.
Paris. 421.
Richardi Comitis Cornubiae Regis fratris in Regem Romanorum.

Rex Anglorum ardenti desiderio sitiens ad parts Transmarinas Hostiliter
transfretare convocavit Conciliariis suis fecit recitari literas a Domino Mat.
Paris. 336.
Papa transmissas quaerens, not to disturb the King of France whilst he was in
the Wars at Jerusalem, Ab eis Concilium placuit. Itaque Praelatis and
Magnatibus universis (no Commons at that Council) ut differetur negotium.

Anno Henry the Third, 11. apud Oxoniam Concilio Congregato denunciavit coram
omnibus se Legitimae esse aetatis and de caetero solutus a Custodia Regni
negotia and se principaliter ordinaret.

Anno Domini 1229. which was in 13. Henry the Third, Rex Anglorum Henricus ad
Natale Domini Curiam suam tenuit apud Oxoniam Mat. Paris. 333. 429. 435.
praesentibus Magnatibus Regni, no Commons thither sent or Elected.

Eodem Anno Rex Anglorum Henricus congregavit apud Portesmue Idem. 363.
totam Nobilitatem Regni Angliae Comites, viz. Barons and Milites cum tanta
equitum and peditum turba quantam nullus Antecessorum suorum aliquo creditur
tempore congregasse.

Anno Domini 1232 which was 16. Henry the Third, convenerunt nonas Martij ad
colloquium apud Westmonasterium ad vocationem Regis Magnates Angliae tam Laici
quam Praelati (no Commons sent or Elected) of whom the King requiring Aid for
his Wars and payment of his Debts, Comes Cestriae Ranulphus pro Idem. 372.
Magnatibus loquens respondit quod Comites, Barons, and Milites qui de eo
tenebant in Capite, having Personally attended him, were many of them gone
home, and could give him no Aid; and the Bishops pretending the Absence of
diverse of the Bishops and Abbots, petierunt inducias until they all might meet
together, Praefixus est itaque Dies a quindecim diebus post Pascha.

Anno 1236. which was 20. Henry the Third, congregati sunt n Mat. Paris. Idem.
421. 422
Magnates Angliae (no Commons) Londini ad colloquium negotiis Regni tractaturi.

Anno 21. Henry the Third, tenuit Curiam suam ad Natale apud Wintoniam and
Misit per omnes fines Angliae Scripta Regalia (his Writs of Summons)
praecipiens omnibus ad regnum Angliae spectantibus. viz. Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Abbatibus and Prioribus installatis, Comitibus and Baronibus, ut
omnes sine omissione in Octavis Epiphaniae Londoniis convenirent Regia negotia
tractaturi totum regnum contingentia, quod audientes Magnates (no Commons)
Regis praeceptis c^n^inuo paruerunt.

Anno 22. Henry the Third, Rex recedens a Londoniis venit Mat. Paris. 421. 422.
468.
Mortonam ut ibi revocati Magnates (only) audito recenti Imperatoris Mandato
una cum Rege de regni negotiis contractarent, Diebus etiam eisdem Rex Henricus
Tertius pro salute animarum and emendatione Regni sui Spiritu ductus Justitiae
and Praelatis quasdam Leges novas constituit and constitutas per regnum suum
inviolabiliter jussit observari.

Et eodem Anno convenerunt Magnates Londini die statuto multis equis and armis
communiti, ut si Rex circumventus per lenitatem recalatraret cogeretur.

Eodem Anno in colloquio (ad quod ex lo^ginquo Nobiles convocaverat) he prayed
an Aid.

Eodem Anno Scripsit omnibus Magnatibus suis, (no Commons) ut coram eo and
Domino Legato Papae in festo Exaltationis sanctae Crucis apud Eboracum
convenirent, de Arduis regnum contingentibus tractaturi.

Anno 24. Henry the Third, convenerunt apud Radingum omnes Archi^piscopi,
Episcopi and Majores, Abbates and quidam Magnates Regni Papale Mandatum a
Domino Legato explicandum audituri.

Anno 26. Henry the Third, Archiepiscopus Eboracensis Custos Regni Existens and
omnes Episcopi Angliae Abbates and Priores per se vel per Procuratores suos,
nec non and omnes Comites, and fere omnes Barons Angliae ad Mandatum Domini
Regis convenerunt apud Westmonasterium.

Eodem Anno Rex Mat. Paris. ^79.
Anglorum omnibus suis Angliae Magnatibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus and Baronibus, districte praecipiens ut omnes
generaliter Londinum convenirent die Martis prox ante festum Purificationis
beatae Mariae Virginis de negotiis Regni dilationem non Capientibus cum summa
deliberatione Tractaturi, imminente vero die totius Angliae Nobilitas tam
Praelatorum quam Comitum and Baronum secundum Regium praeceptum est Londini
congregata, atque Regi auxilium pecuniare petenti restiterent Magnates (no
Commons) etc. Archiepiscopus Eboracensis and omnes Episcopi Angliae Abbates and
Priores per se vel per Procuratores suos, nec non and omnes Comites and fere
omnes Barons Angliae (no Commons) in Scriptis dederunt responsionem.

28. Henry the Third, Convenerunt Regia submonitione Londinum Mat. Paris. 639.
Magnates totius Regni, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites and
Barons tunc (to answer to the Kings demands) and de communi Assensu electi
fuerunt ex part Cleri Cantuariensis, Wintoniensis, Lincolniensis, and
Wigorniensis, Episcopi ex part Laicorum (which were not to be believed to be
any more present, than the Universitas or whole Body of the Clergy) Richardus
Comes frater Domini Regis, Comes Bigot, Comes Legr' Simon de Monte Forti, and
Comes Mariscallus W'ex part vero Baronum Richardus de Muntfichet, Johannes de
Bailioil, and de Sancto Edmundo, and de Rameseia Abbates.

Convenerunt autem iterum (for it appears they had been prorogued) Magnates cum
Praelatis generaliter Londini (no Commons at all mentioned.)

* Upon the Emperor Fredericks being Excommunicated, and deprived by the Pope,
notified to the Kings of England Mat. Paris. 681.
and France, who fearing the example, had sent their Ambassadors to Rome, in
the 29th. Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third, Expectantibus
Universitatis Anglicanae Procuratoribus viz. Comes Richardus Bigod cum suis
Consortibus placabile domini Papae responsum.

Anno 30. Idem. 89^.
Henry the Third, Rex missis literis suis totius Regni Magnates convocavit
Londini de statu regni generaliter tractaturos. Where the Pope intercedes for
the Pardon of Fulke de Idem. 325.
Brent, and the King denied it, because the Judgment against him was given in
Parliament, ab enim omni Clero and populo regni, per judicium Curiae suae ab
Anglia fuerat in exilium pulsus, and licet regni cura specialiter ad ipsum
spectare videretur, debet legis quidem and bonas Regni consuetudines observare,
although Mat' Paris himself P. 324. 32^. 693.
had said, That Rex did sententialiter diffinire, and the Proceres and Magnates
consenserunt cum Rege, that he should abjure the Kingdom and be banished (the
King's Court being then the Parliament without Commons.)

Anno 31. Henry the Third, Rex cum Magnatibus tractatum habuit diligentem per
plures concilium urgens dies.

Medio Quadragesimae edicto Regio convocata convenit ad Parliamentum
generalissimum Anglicani totius nobilitatis Londini videlicet Prelatorum tam
Abbatum, Priorum, quam Episcoporum, Comitum quoque and Baronum, ut de Statu
Regni jam vacillantis efficaciter prout exegit urgens necessitas contrectarent.

Upon further troubles and concernments of the Kingdom Mat. Paris. 709. 720.
7^7. 730.
Convenerunt ad Parliamentum memoratum totius regni Magnates, (no Commons)
imprimis aggressus est Dominus Rex ore proprio Episcopos per se, postea vero
Comites and Barons, deinde Abbates and Priores.

Afterward in the same Year Habitum est magnum Concilium inter Regem and regni
Magnates apud Wintoniam super multiplici Regni totius and maxim totius
Ecclesiae desolatione, wherein, upon the hopeless Account given by William de
Powic, and Henry de la Mare, two of the Procurators sent to Rome, of the Popes
obstinacy to continue his Pilling and Polling of the Kingdom:

It is said, Haec autem cum audisset dominus Rex cum Magnatibus Mat Paris. 709.
suis (not the Commons) commotus est vehementer and merito, praecepitque voce
Praeconis in omnibus Comitatibus per omnes villas loca and congregationes, that
no Man should pay any of the Popes Exactions.

And in the 31. Henry the Third, Rex cum Magnatibus tractatum habuit diligentem
and per plures concilium urgens dies protelavit.

Per idem tempus Dominus Rex comperiens regnum suum enormiter periclitari
jussit omnem totius regni Nobilitatem convocari, ut de Statu ipsius manifest
periclitantis Oxoniis diligenter contrectarent, Praelatis autem maxim ad hoc
Parliamentum vocavit arctius.

32. Henry the Third, at the Quindena of St. John Baptist covenit Idem. 749.
Londinum tot^^s Angliae Nobilitas venientibus in unum omn^b^s regni Primatibus
in a great expectation of the King's redressing of Grievances.

Anno 33. Henry the Third, Rex congregavit omnes regni Nobiles, (...). (...).
ut ^^rum consensum flecteret ad auxilium dandum, sent his Letters by Simon
Pasleu to the Sheriffs of every County, to Collect what they could of them.

An^o 35. Henry the Third, 13 Calendarum Martij habitum est Parliamentum magnum
Londini, sicut fu rat praelocutum and praefixum, (...). (...) and (...).
where Henricus de Bathonia Justiciarius Regis being greatly accused by the
Commons (not any Commons Elected to come in Parliament) was afterward, for a
Fine or great Sum of Money, pardoned by the King, when he was hugely incensed
against him, yet there was enough to manifest that there were none of the
Commons.

Eodem Anno instante Paschali solennitate fecit dominus Rex convocari Londini
omnes Magnates Angliae cruce signatos, ut infra Quindenam (...).
Paschae ibidem convenerent, and super n^gotio Terrae sanctae eujus honor
enormiter vacillare videbatur diligenter contrectarent.

Adhuc autem non terminato Parliemento, where the King was said to be
inexorabilis factus omni petenti saltem breves inducias debitoribus suis non
concessit and graviter Comes (L^griae) in cu^ia Regis accusatus, and when the
King magna ira had commanded Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother, to deliver
up his Patent or Commission of the Covernment of Gasco^gne, which the Earl
refused, and charged the Citizens of Bourdeaux to apprehend him, which they
denied; it is said, that Noluit autem Rex hoc praecipere Magnatibus Angliae,
certus quod hoc nullatenus facerent sieve maxima consideratione. Rex igitur ne
viderentur quidam Magnates qui jam illuc advenerant inaniter suisse convocati
districte tractatum suscitavit.

Soli to igitur cum Regis, Cleri, and Magnatum indignatione, etc.

Convocatis denuo dommus Rex, Optimatibus suis, etc.

Anno 37. Henry the Third, in Quindena Paschae tota edicto Regio convocata
Angliae Nobilitas (no Commons) convenit Londini de arduis regni negotiis simul
cum Rege tractaturi, extiterunt igitur ibidem cum Comitibus and Baronibus
quamplurimis, Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Bonifacius Episcopi Angliae fere
omnes.

Where when the King pressing for Aid and Supplies, could not, upon the Bishops
unwillingness, forbear to remember Idem. ^^5. 326
them, how he had in particular advanced many of them beyond their deserts;
they had no better answer to return him, than Domine Rex, non facimus de
praeteritis mentionem, sed Sermonem extendimus ad sutura, after many long
Debates a Tenth was granted by the Clergy toward the Wars of the Holy Land,
per visum Magnatum (not of the Commons) cum iter ad Jerusalem arriperet, and a
militibus Scutigeris illo Anno ad scutum tres Marcae, was persuaded by Fear, or
the desire of the Money, by no Order or Ordinance of Parliament, (to which not
any of the Commons, though greatly concerned therein, were Parties) to give his
Consent, and walk with many of the Nobility and Bishops through
Westminster Hall in that direful Procession, with burning Torches, pronouncing
Curses, and wishing Damnation, and the fiery Torments of Hell upon the
Infringers of the Charters of their and the Peoples Liberties.

38. Henry the Third, Mat. Paris. 881.
Convenissent universi fere Angliae Magnates, viz. Comes Mareschallus, R.
Bigod, Gilbertusque de Segrave, speciales domini Regis Nuntij ad Parliamentum
venientes ex part ejus propositum suum praecordiale Universitati Angliae forte
seducti nuntiantes, aderant autem illuc Comes Richardus frater Domini Regis
Comes Cornubiae, Comes Wintoniensis cum domind Regina (no Commons) and omnes
Episcopi Angliae (exceptis duntaxat Cantuariensis and Eboracensis
Archiepiscopis and Dunelmensi and Bathoniensi Episcopis qui cum Rege in
Gasconia fuerunt) where after the necessities of the King showed, and the
danger of Hostilities from the King of Castile, respondit Universitas, they did
not believe there could be any such danger, and sic igitur solutum fuit
Concilium cassum and inane.

Eodem Anno Ibedem 887.
Congregati sunt iterum Angliae Magnates quibus significabat Rex, quod pecunia
indigebat and viribus amplioribus ad repellendum violentiam magni hostis
supervenientis, but they alleging former great Taxes denied it.

Anno 39. Henry the Third, Edicto Regio convocata convenit Magnatum Mat. Paris.
911. 913. 939. 946. 963. 964. 965. 968.
numerosa multitudo, anno vero sub eodem ad sestum sancti Edwardi fuerunt apud
Westmonasterium omnes fere Angliae Magnates, ubi Rex petebat auxilium pecuniare.

Anno 41. Henry the Third, veniunt Londini ad dominum Regem qui multos sibi cum
Comite Richardo ibi Magnates congregarat quidam de Primatibus Alemanniae,
concerning the Election of the said Earl Richard to be King of Almaine.

Eodem Anno in media Quadragesima factum est magnum Parliamentum, where the
Controversy betwixt the Bishop of Lincoln, and the University of Oxford was
debated, and extitit ibidem tota fere Angliae Nobilitas, but no Commons.)

42. Henry the Third, Rex militiam Anglorum edicto Regio convocavit venire cum
equis and armis contra Wallenses.

Et post diem Martis, quae vulgariter Hokeday appellatur, sactum est
Parliamemtum, Londini Rex namque multis and arduis negotiis sollicitabatur,
where diverse Altercations passing betwixt the King and the Parliament, it is
said, Doluit igitur Nobilitas Regni in Crastino and diebus sequentibus
habuerunt diligentem tractatum dominus Rex and Magnates, diebus quoque sub
eisdem constanter and praecise responderunt uno quasi ore Magnates Regni in
Parliamento Regi cum urgenter ab eis (the Commons or any of them certainly, not
personally being present) auxilium postulasset, quod nec voluerunt nec
potuerunt.

Duravit adhuc Parliamenti praelibati Altercatio inter Regem and regni Magnates
usque diem Dominicam proximam post Ascensionem, and dilatum est Parliamentum
usque in festum sancti Barnabae apud Oxoniam, interim Optimates Angliae utpote
Gloverniae Legrecestriae Herefordiae, Comes Marescallus and alii praeclari Viri
(no Commons) confoederati sunt.

Et prolabentibus diebus ante Parliamentum Oxoniale missi sunt solennes Nuntii,
videlicet de Electis Comitibus and Baronibus (none of the Prel(...)) in
Franciam ad Regem Franciae, desiring him to give them Aid, and not disturb them
in their designs for Peace.

Ad diem indictum Oxoniae Magnates and Nobiles terrae ad Parliamentum
properabant, preceperuntque omnibus qui eisdem Servitium debuerant, (which
could not be a small number) quatenus cum ipsis venirent parati veluti ad
Corpora sua contra hostiles insultus defensuri quod fecerunt, caused the
Seaports, and their Confederate the City of London's Gates to be Guarded by
their own Party, where the Magnates (not the Common People) demanded Justice,
and a Confirmation to be made by the King Mat. Paris. 971.
of King John's, and his own Charters, Jurantes fide mediante and mutuo Dextras
exhibentes, quod non omitterent propositum persequi pro pecuniae vel terrarum
amissione vel etiam pro vita and morte sua vel suorum.

Recalcitrantibus Edwardus Principe Johanne Comiti Warrennae Willielmo de
Valentia cum aliis, and when Henry the. Son of Richard King of Alemaine, began
to join with them in the refusal he was told, quod etiamsi pater fuus
adquiesceret Baronagio (no Yeomanry or any other under their degree of Barons)
Nollet nec unum sulcum terrae in Anglia obtineret.

The King and his Son Edward, after all the Barons had Sworn unto them, were at
length compelled to Swear to perform and observe all such Ordinances and
Provisions, as the rebellious Barons had there made, who did shortly after send
Messengers, ex part Universitatis Regni, to the City of London, whom they
understood to be in themselves comprehended, (for the Londoners were those that
were sent unto, not the Barons, who did send unto them) qui convocaverunt
totius Civitatis cives (then no inconsiderable part of the English Nation,
either as to Number, Riches, or Faction) quos Barons vocant (no Peers of
Parliament, for they were as was then believed another kind of Barons) and in
aula quae Gildehall appellatur, Mat Paris. 974.
demanded of them si Statutis Baronum vellent fideliter obtemperare, and join
in the resistance of those which should infringe them; to which they thankfully
gave their Consent, Et confecerunt super hoc eis Chartam suam de communi
sigillo Civitatis consignatam; veruntamen non adhuc quae Statuta fuerant
proposuerant publicare circa idem tempus convocati fuerunt Praelati
universaliter ut Oxonioe convenientes ne penitus cadat, Statum reformarent
convenerunt quatuor Episcopi ad hoc specialiter deputati, qui convocaverunt
exemptos omnes Abbates and alios alterius Ordinis vel eorum idoneos
Procuratores (no Laics or vulgus) scire volentes, si eorum Statutis vellent
acquiescere and eorum defensioni and sustentationi unanimiter adhaerere, sed
quia quidam excusatione absentes, quidam in assensu dubitantes, nullum tunc
potuerunt dare responsum recesserunt omnes imperfectum relinquentes Iudicium.

Which manifestly evidenceth, that at the Parliament at Oxford, the Citizens of
London had no Burgesses then and there representing in Parliament for them, and
there appears no Consent there given or demanded by or from any other County,
City, or Borough, in that Parliament, or given by them, or any of them, to the
said Provisions made at the aforesaid Parliament at Oxford.

And the Universitas Regni at Oxford there Assembled, can receive no other
proper or genuine Interpretation, that they were those that were Assembled at
Oxford, (no elected Men of or for an House of Commons in the Parliament at
Oxford, not at all there meant or intended by the Party or Provisions made at
Oxford for the aforesaid Conservatorships, of which the Commons of England were
never agreed to be any part or parcel) but only for such as were Assembled at
Oxford, which were none other than the Magnates and Optimates Regni, with their
Milites and numerous Attendants, some whereof were especially named, as the
Earls of Gloucester and Leicester, Lord High Steward of England, Earl of
Hereford, Constable of England, the Earl Marshal of England, and alii praeclari
viri, their Confederates, with Letters and Statutes sent as aforesaid, from the
Barons at Oxford, to the Citizens of London, brought an imperfect Return, for
that some of the Citizens of London were then absent, and the other were not
resolved what to answer or assent unto; so as the Messenger sent to London from
the Barons at Oxford, returned Imperfectum relinquentes Judicium.

Destinantur postea Nuntij solennes ad Dominum Papam Mat. Paris. 978. 981. (...)
ex part Regni and totius Universitatis, qui nuntia sua domino Papae plenarie
intimarent, and quam citius possent non expectantes aliquam disputationem vel
disceptationem remearent.

Anno vero sub eodem Philip' Lovel, Treasurer of the King, Capitales
Justitiarij and quam plures de scaccario were removed from their places, and
others put therein judicio Baronagij.

24. Henry the Third, Fuit Rex ad Natale domini Londini, ubi Magna solieitudine
tractatum est inter Nobiles Regni, quomodo conservato suo salubri proposito
satisfacerent desiderio Regis Richardi de Alemannia.

The King Journeying toward the Sea to meet his Brother the King of Almaine.

Who was reported to have raised Forces beyond the Seas to Succor him, and who
the Baronage feared would come and alter what they had done, Nuntii solenmes
(wherein certainly according to their usual Phrase they intended themselves,
not the Common People) a Communitate Regni Angliae destinati, brought an Answer
from him, si Nobiles Mat. Paris. 983. 984, 985, 986, 987.
Angliae (which he certainly understood not to be the common People, nor that
they that sent them were the common People, or that the Nobility were intended
to be a part of them, but rather that their Wills and Actions were wholly
submitted to the Peerage) reformare voluissent Regnum deformatum me deberent
primum accersire.

In Crastino post ejus adventum in Angliam intraverunt Magnates Capitulum
Cantuariense (so great a Power had they then over their Tenants and the Common
People) ducentesque reverenter Reges Angliae and Alemanniae, the Earl of
Gloucester stans in medio, called out the King of Almaine by the name of the
Earl of Cornwall, to take the Oath for a general Reformation of the Kingdom.

Eodem Anno being 43. Henry the Third, Congregati sunt Nobiles Angliae Londini
prout inter se prius condixerant, whither came quidam de secreto Regis
Francorum concilio Decanus Bituricensis, ubi non modice tractatum fuit de
negotio inter duos Reges Franciae and Angliae and quid in partibus transmarinis
actum fuerit and exinde probatum.

After which a Monk of St. Albans ex part Regis, Reginae, and Magnatibus
Angliae, finding the King, Queen and Magnatibus Scotiae in their Parliament,
and informing them of the cause of his coming ex part Regis, Reginae and
Baronum Angliae, requested that the King and Queen would not fail to come into
England, to treat of Matters of great Concernment and Secrecy, with much
difficulty obtained Letters Patents from the King, Queen, and Nobility of
Scotland, Communiter sigillatas tam sigillo Regis quam omnium Magnatum Scotiae
ad Regem Angliae and totam communitatem, wherein they granted their Request,
dummodo se facerent Rex Angliae and Magnates (which explains the extent and
true meaning of the preceding words, Tota Communitas Angliae) de scripto suo
sibi prius promisso securos, and returned by him Domino Regi Angliae and
Reginae and Magnatibus terrae Literas commendatorias, and did shortly after
send the Earl of Bochan, and other honorable Commissioners to Treat with the
King of England and ejus Concilio, who at their coming, speaking with the said
Monk, Nullam in publico super expeditione negotij erga Regem and Regni
communitatem (which may in this place well be understood to intend the
Baronage) reliquerunt redeuntes Certificationem.

Eodem Anno ex concilio domini Regis Franciae, Angliae and totius Baronagij,
the Earls of Clare and Leicester, John Mansell, Peter de Sabaudia, and Robert
Wallerand were sent ad Parliamentum Magnum Regis Francorum pro pluribus
negotiis regna Franciae and Angliae contingentibus, carrying with them a
Charter or Resignation from their King to the King of France, and Letters of
Credence, to compose with that King and his Council super negotiis (without
the Commons or their Consents) inter eosdem Reges and eorum regna diu agitatis;
but for that the Countess of Leicester refused to resign that part, which she
held or claimed Mat. Paris. in vita Henrici 3.
in Normandy, infecto negotio cachinnantibus Francis redierunt.

In the mean time the Almaines, perceiving how little their King elected was
respected in England, returned home, saying, Ex quo compatriotae sui ipsum non
venerantur, nos ipsum quomodo honoribus prosequemur? And in his Absence elected
another.

Eodem Anno King Henry the Third in Franciam transfretavit, and required
Restitution to be made of the Provinces in France, unjustly taken away from his
Father King John, and detained from him; unto which the French answered, That
the Donation of Normandy was not free, but by force extorted by Rollo, so as
the King, if he had a mind to regain it, having not Money to raise an Army, and
especially when he did see his own Subjects ready to make War against him, was
enforced to yield to a Peace, that pro 300000 Turonensibus parvis and
restitutione terrarum in France unto him ad valorem Continua(...) Mat. Paris.
980. 99^ 991, 992 (...).
20000 librarum in Gasconia, the King was to resign and release to the King of
France his Duchy of Normandy, and County of Anjou, and ex tunc literarum
suarum abbreviavit titulum, ut nec Ducem Normanniae nec Comitem Andegaviae se
vocaret.

And fearing that he had committed Perjury in taking the Oath, to observe the
Provisions enforced from him at Oxford, sent secretly to the Pope for an
Absolution.

Eo tempore Simon de Monte Forti Comes Legriae, Richardus de Clare Comes
Gloverniae, Nicholaus filius Johannis, Johannes filius Galfridi, multique
Nobiles ipsis adhaerentes convenerunt Oxoniae equis and armis sufficienter
instructi, finaliter Sta^uentes aut mori pro pace patriae aut pacis eliminare
Patriae turbatores; whither came also the Bishop Elect of Winchester William de
Valentia, and the rest of the Poictovins stipati Magna caterva satellitum and
fautorum; but when they understood, that the English Nobility intended eos
vocare standum judicio pro suis nequam factis, simul and communiter jurandum
cum eis ad observandum provisiones, they fled to the Castle of Whitesey,
whither the Barons pursued them, and fearing that the Bishop Elect of
Winchester would carry his Complaints to Rome against them, sent four Knights
as their Agents to Rome, with Letters under their Hands and Seals (not of the
Commons) to complain of the Injuries which the Bishop had done to the Kingdom;
and the Justices itinerant of the King, were at Hereford prohibited to proceed,
for that as was alleged, it was against the Provisions made at Oxford.

Anno 45. Henry the Third, the King retired to the Tower of London, and caused
all the Citizens of London above the Age of Twelve Years, to Swear unto him
Fealty, and made Proclamation that all that would come as Soldiers to serve
him should be paid; the Barons came with great Forces to the Walls of the
Tower; lodging in the City, the Absolution being come, and Prince Edward not
accepting it, which the Magnates (not the Multitude or Commons) taking notice
of missis Nuntiis humiliter rogabant, ut Mat. Paris.
communiter juramentum praestitum inviolabiliter observare vellet, and si quid
displiceret, eisdem ostenderet ad emendandum. Qui nequaquam acquiescens, dure
and minaciter respondens, dicens, quod eis a Conventione deficientibus non
amplius adquiesceret, sed unusquisque deinceps propriis defensionibus
provideret, tandem quibusdam mediantibus it was agreed, that Two should be
chosen on the King's part, and Two on the Barons, (no Commons mentioned) and
the Arbitrators were, if they could not agree, to choose a Third; but by reason
of Prince Edwards late return from beyond the Seas, and that being returned,
and informed what strange Councels had been given his Father, was so Angry as
he absented himself from him, and adhering to the Barons, says the Continuator
of Matthew Mat. Paris.
Paris, in hac part prout juraverat fitque conjuratio inter eos, quod malos
Conciliarios and eorum fautores adquirerent and a Rege pro viribus alongarent,
which the King understanding, betakes himself again to the Tower of London, Cum
suis Conciliariis, Edwardo filio suo cum Magnatibus foris remanente, sed tandem
interveniente Regina vix quibusdam concordati Magnatibus in pacis anplexibus
invicem sunt suscepti, and the King relying upon the Popes Absolution, and the
promise of the King of France una cum suis Magnatibus sibi se velle succurrere
manu forti, coming to Winchester displaced the Chancellor and Justice made by
the Baronage, and novos creavit pro suo beneplacito.

In the 47th. Year of his Reign, keeping his Christmas with the Queen in the
Tower of London, Elaboratum est tam a Regni Angliae Pontificibus quam a
Praelatis Mat. Paris.
Regni Franciae, that there might be a Peace betwixt the King of England, and
his Barons, Ventumque est ad illud ut Rex and Proceres (not the Commons) se
ordinationi Regis Franciae in praemissis provisionibus Oxoniae submitterent.

Whereupon in Crastino sancti Vincentij congregato Ambianis populo pene
innumerabili, Rex Franciae Lodovicus coram Episcopis, Comitibus, aliisque
Francorum proceribus, (the King of England, and his Queen, Boniface Archbishop
of Canterbury, Peter Bishop of Hereford, and all or most of the Magnates of
England, before named (no Commons) which submitted to the reference on both
sides) Solenniter dixit sententiam pro Rege Angliae contra Barons statutis
Oxoniae provisionibus, ordinatio^ibus, and obligationibus penitus annullatis,
hoc excepto, quod antiquae Chartae Regis Johannis Angliae universitati
concessae per illam sententiam in nullo intendebat penitus derogare; which
Award both Parties having solemnly bound themselves by Oath to abide by, Simon
Earl of Leicester, and his Accomplices refused to obey it; for that as they
pretended the Provisions made at Oxford were founded upon that Charter of King
John: So as the troubles and discontents continuing, and breaking out into open
Wars betwixt the King and his never to-be-contented Barons, the Battle of Jews
shortly after followed, wherein the King was taken, and for a long time
detained Prisoner, (the King of France, and his Barons after a great part of
his Design satisfied by getting a Release of the Duchy of Normandy, giving him
no manner of Aid at all) nor after the more successful Battle of Evesham, had
by the Escape and Valor of his Son the Prince reinvested him in his Kingly
Rights, that King of France, and his Father before him playing the Foxes
betwixt the King and his Father King John, in their Troubles with their unruly
and rebellious Barons for their French advantages.

Anno 50. of his Reign, kept his Christmas at Northampton, with his Queen, the
King of Almaine, and Ottobone the Popes Legate cum exercitu formidabili.

Anno 51. kept his Christmas at Oxford, with the Queen and the Popes Legate,
multisque Magnatibus, ubi, after the ancient course of our English Kings, at
that and the other Two great Festivals of the Year, to hold their great
Councels, diligenter tractatum est de pace reformanda inter Comitem Gloverniae
and Rogerum de Mortuo Mari: Circa tempus istud Rex citari fecit Comites and
Barons, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, and Abbates omnes, qui communiter militare
servitium sibi debentes, ut apud Sanctum Edmundum cum equis and armis Mat.
Paris. 1002.
sufficienter instructi convenirent ad impetendum eos qui contra pacem Regiam
occupaverunt insulam Elyensem; but the Earl of Gloucester refusing to come, the
Earl of Warren, and William de Valentia were sent unto him, qui illum ad
Parliamentum venire moverent ab adunatis qui ad Parliamentum citati fuerunt
praeter rebels, where primo and principaliter Rex and Legatus, required the
Bishops to consent to the Articles or Demands before recited.

Anno 54. of his Reign the King and Queen cum Regni principibus, kept their
Christmas at Eltham.

So as that honorable Title of Barons, and those that have a just Claim or
Right thereunto, is not to be trampled upon, and thrown amongst the Community,
but contra distinguished from them, when Baro says, The largely Learned Du
Fresne Glossat' Du Fresne in verbo seu tit. Baro 485. and 486. Isidor' de orig'
verborum.
a French Man, Sieur or Baron du Cange was in Persius time amongst the Romans,
of no greater esteem than Servus militum, and by Isidorus were termed, or no
better styled than Ministri mercenarii, qui serviunt accepta mercede, yet apud
Graecos nominantur Barons, quod sint fortes in laboribus; Barus enim dicitur
gravis, quod sit fortis, Glossae M. S. Baro Gr' Lat' vir fortis, unde Barons;
Barons igitur Ministri appellati non modo Persii and Isidori aevis, sed etiam
long postea, siquidem Barons regios Ministros vocatos qui ex Regis familia
erant, unde non mirum si traductam hanc vocem ad viros Magnates passim legamus,
qui principibus ipsis obsequia and ministeria sua praestabant, seu ex officii
ratione seu ex beneficio ac feudis quae ad ejusmodi obsequia impendenda iis
indidem conferri solebant; Quinetiam ab ipsa Augustini tempestate Barons dicti
videntur viri nobiles Principum obsequiis and servitio addicti, vel certe viri
Militares qui primos tenebant locos in aulis Regum, as those Words of his do
Evidence, where he says, Vbinam est Caesaris corpus praeclarum ubi caterva
Angustini Sermon. 48 ad fratres in eremo.
Baronum, ubi Principes aut Barons; Quibus in locis ij forte fuerunt qui in
obsequiis Principum versabantur, ita ut numerosum eorum ac Nobilem famulatum
indicare voluerit Augustinus; Quemadmodum autem famulos homines vulgo
appellabant. Ita Franci and omnes Boreales populi postquam Galliam invasere vel
Italiam Barons quosvis viros nominarunt, as their Salique, Ripuar, Aleman, and
Longobard Laws, Lindenbro^ius in legibus eorum. Hinckmarus in Epist.
Constitutiones Sicul. Capitulars of Charlemaine and Hinckmarus in his Epistles
have informed us: The Barons Regum Angliae were the Magnates, qui de domo and
familia Regis sunt vel certe majores Regis Vassalli qui de illo praedia sua
nude tenent; Adelwaldus was one of King Edward the Confessors, which Florentius
Wigornensis, and the Book of Ramdsey do style Minister Regis: The Barons of
Almaigne, from which Nation our Saxon Ancestors being descended, brought unto
us many of their Customs, made a twofold difference amongst their Barons, Alii
dicuntur Du Fresne 1 Tom. 487.
simplices Barons, alii semper Barons, and semper Baro is esse fertur qui a
nullo horum feudum habet, sed alii ab ipso, adeoque liber est ut nulli ad
fidelitatis astringitur juramentum; insomuch as it was a very ancient Custom
and Observance amongst the Germans, not to allow the Title or Dignity of Baron
unto any that were not Born of such a Frey Heeren Father and Mother, but those
who were on the Mothers part descended from an ordinary Tenant, holding by
Military Service of others, they would by no means call Barons, but Debaronized
them (which in time might have introduced amongst us, that Distinction long
after about the Reign of our King John of the Barons majores, those that were
Seldom tit. honor. 621. 622, 623, 624, 625. LL Canuti.
Ministri Regis, and held great Possessions only of the King, for long before
the Conquest they were called Thaines, Barons, or Lords, who were Honorary, and
the Minores middle Thaines or Valvasores, who were only feudal, and held all or
much of others or lesser parts of the King, and by Canutus's Laws there appears
to have been in those times Thani infimae conditionis: In Germany, says
Schwederus, there Schwederus Part 2. S. 2. p. 838.
are two sorts; The First that do hold of the Empire immediately; The Second
mediately of others, and that in the diversity of Opinions amongst the Learned,
whether the word Baron be derived from the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Spanish, or
French, the Germans have been content with theit own word, or original Baar,
which signifies Frey or liber homo and Barons are liberi Domini Frey Heeren:
Et Baro signifies virum dignitate praecellentem: So as that exquisitely
Learned Du Fresne in his Gloss upon the words Barons Parliamenti, says, In
Anglia and Scotia, qui vulgo Lords of Parliament vocantur, ij sunt ex Majoribus
Baronibus qui a Rege unde pendent and ad Parliamentum sive concilium publicum
diplomatibus Regiis evocantur, nam constat in Anglia ut in Francia non omnes
qui a Rege praedia sua immediate tenebant ad Parliamenta admissos, nam nimius
esset numerus eorum; sed illos tantum qui proximi essent a Rege and dignitate
and vassallorum numero caeteros anteirent, prout etiam in ipsis Baronum feudis
Du Fresne Glossar' 491.
factitatum: And defining a Barony, says it is Praedium a Rege nude pendens
vel maius praedium vel feudum; Cassanaeus takes it to Cassanaeus in catalog
glor' mundi 8 part S. 15.
be Quaedam dignitas habens quandam praeeminentiam inter solos simplices
Nobiles.

Tiraquel by good Authority of rectified experimented Reason, Tiraquel de
mobilitate and Virgilius Aened 5.
Laws, and ancient Customs, says, Leges sanciri debent a Principibus etiam
Nobilium concilio quod plane ostendit Virgilius de Aceste Rege loquens Gaudet
regno Treianus Acestes
Indicitque forum and Patribus dat Jura vocatis.
Id est, Leges sancit Jura distribuit vocatis ad id Patribus id est
Senatoribus. L'Oyseau defining Seigneuries says, they are Public ou L'Oyseau
traite des Seignenries. Ca. 66.
prives, and that les droits and praerogatives des grandes Seigneuries a
scavoir les Duchez, Marquisats, Comtez and Principautez, don't le premier est
qu'elles ne relevent que du Roy, encore que de leur nature else deuvoient
relever immediatement de la Couronne. C'est pourquoi les Feudistes les
appellent Feuda regalia ou Regales dignitates tit' de Feud encore non tant pour
ce qu'elles participent aux honeurs des souverainetez que de leur d'autant
qu'elles sont vrays Fieffs du Roiaume ne pouvant relever d' autre Seigneurie.

Et tout ainsi que ces Capitaines s' aydoient de leurs vassaux en la guerre
aussi faisoient ils en les Justices principalement aux causes d' importance
Idem ibidem. Ca. 1. and 6.
qu' ils Iugoient par leur advis and pour ceste raison ils les appelloient
Pairs Cour, C'est a dire Pairs au Compaignons de leur Cour de Justice.

Says, le Seigneurie privee n' induit point de puissance public, and
concludes and proves it to be un Erreur d' penser qu' aux livres de Fieffes
Valvasores Regni seu Majores valvasores fussent ceux qui tenoient leurs Fieffs
a Capitaneis Regni, nempe a ducibus and Marchionitibus.

And were had in such a Veneration and Respect, as when 1 Eliz. ca. 1.
in the first Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, an Act of Parliament was
made, that every Member of the House of Commons should before the Lord Steward
of the King Queen, or her Successors Household, or his Deputy, for the time
being before they sit, or be admitted by his Oath taken upon Oath of Supremacy.
the Holy Evangelists, testify and declare, That the Queens Majesty is the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other Her Highnesses Dominions, and
Countries as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things or causes as
Temporal, and renounce all Foreign Jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate, Prince,
or Potentate whatsoever.

And promise that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance Oath
of Alegiance.
to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and Lawful Successors, and to my Power
shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and
Authorities granted or belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and
Successors, or United and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

From the taking of which Oath, the Lords Temporal, and all of or above the
degree of a Baron, were by that Act of Parliament of 5. Eliz. exempted, for
that the Queens Majesty is otherwise sufficiently assured of the Faith and
Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of her High Court of Parliament.

Although of that High and Honorable Assembly of the House of Peers, all that
hold Offices under our Kings, as the Lords Chancellor, Treasurer, Steward,
great Chamberlain, and Chamberlain of the Household, Constable, Earl Marshal,
Lord Privy Seal, Secretaries of State, and all that receive Creation-Money of
him, as Earls, Viscounts, Marquesses and Dukes, and all the Assistants as
Judges, Masters of Chancery, and the Barons in that high Court of Judicature,
Subordinate to the King, may find themselves comprised and obliged in and by
that Act of Primo Eliz. ca. 1. as the Archbishops and Bishops are.

For it may everlastingly, with great assurance of Certainty and Truth, be
affirmed, That our Parliaments or great Counsels have in their Constitutions,
Forms, Customs, and Usages, altogether or for the most part followed, and
imitated those of the Almans, Saxons, and Ancient Francks, when Marculfus, who
lived in the Year after the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
Six Hundred and Sixty, now something Marculfi formulae in praefat.
more than One Thousand Years, when Clodouaeus the Son of Dagobert of the
Merovignian, and first Race of the Kings of France ruled, as it will be Evident
by the Writ of Summons thereunto, Entitled, Prologus de Regis Judicio cum de
Magna re duo causantur simul, in the form or words ensuing, (or the cause of
Summoning or Calling the Parliament as our Kings have many Times done in their
Writs of Summons to their Parliaments) Viz.

Cui Dominus regendi curam Committit cunctorum Jurgia diligenter examinatione
cum rimari oportet, ut juxta propositionum vel responsionum alloquia inter
alterutrum salubris donetur sententia, quo fiat ut and nodos causarum vivacis
mentis acumen coerceat, and ubi praelucet Justitia Marculfi Lib. 1. Ca. 25.
illuc gressum deliberationis imponat: Ergo nos in Dei nomine ibi in Palatio
nostro ad universorum Causas recto Judicio terminandas, una cum Dominis and
Patribus nostris Episcopis vel cum plurimis Optimatibus Nostris patribus illis
Referendariis illis Domesticis illis vell Senescallis illis Cubiculariis and
illo Comite Palatii vel reliquis quam pluribus Nostris fidelibus resideremus
ibique veniens ille illum interpellavit cum diceret, etc. Bugnonii notae in
Marculfum 510. 511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516.


Upon which words, viz. Una cum Dominis and Patribus Nostris Episcopis, the
Learned Bignonius Commenting says.

Hi enim in Iudiciis Regi assidebant, ut etiam notavit Tillius, qui recte
Curiae seu Parliamenti originem hinc deducit, illudque ita durasse usque ad
Philippi Vallesy tempora, qui amplissimum Parisiensem Senatum a Comitatu and
Consistorio Principis separatum edicto constituit. Hujus quoque Judicii
Episcopis and Proceribus adstantibus forma refertur Antiquitatum Fuldentium
Lib. 1. Anno Dominicae Incarnationis 838. Jnd. 1. 18. K L. Julii facta est
Contentio Gozboldi and Hrabani Abbatii coram Imperatore Ludovico and filiis
ejus Ludovico and Carolo, necnon and Principibus ejus in Palatio apud Niomagum
oppidum constituto de Captura, etc. Presentibus Trugone Archiepiscopo, Otgario
Archiepiscopo, Radolto Episcopo, etc. Adalberto Comite, Helphrico Comite,
Albrico Comite, Popone Comite, Gobavuino Comite Palatii, Ruadharto similiter
Comite Palatii, and Innumerabilibus Vassallis Dominicis.

So did the Referendarii, Masters of Requests or Chancery the Senescallus
Palatii, the Cubicularii. And Bignonius moreover declares:

Domestica dignitas fuit non Contemnenda sub prima and secunda Idem Ibidem 586.
587.
Regum nostrorum familia, nam inter praecipuos Regni Ministros Domesticisaepe
enumerantur; and in praefatione Leg' Burgundion' Sciant itaque Optimates
Comites Consiliarii domestici and Majores domus nostrae and cum munera in
Judicio accipere prohibeantur, eos quoque Judicasse dici potest, sic Leg'
Ribuar' tit. Go. Ut optimates Majores domus domestici Comites Grafiones
Cancellarii vel quibuslibet gradibus sublimati in provincia Ribuaria in Judicio
residentes munera ad Iudicium per vertendum non recipiant; Hos etiam Regi
Judicanti adsedisse probat Marculfus ipse lib. 4. dum inter Ministros and
officiales qui Regi adsiderent domesticos recenset.

Neither were the Writs of Summons to the Peers and Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, in that fatal 49th. Year of the Reign of that unfortunate Prince King
Henry the Third, though many Ages before Accustomed to be Summoned to their
Sovereign's great Counsels, framed upon any better Foundation than Force, and
Partiality, when a Rebellious part of the Baronage of England had, by the
Success of their Rebellion, made him, and the Prince his Son, his Brother
Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, and his Son, with many of the
Loyal Baronage, and other his faithful Subjects, Prisoners on purpose to create
an Oligarchy in Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, and some few others of their triumphant and seduced Party, and fix
in themselves a Conservatorship, and domineering Power over the rest of the
Peers, and Nobility, and their fellow Subjects, especially the Commons, left in
a full assurance of Slavery, and hopeless of any thing more than to be
Assistant to the everlasting Ambition and variable Designs of others.

SECT. XIV.
That those enforced Writs of Summons to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
accompanied with that then newly devised Engine or Writ to elect Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses to be present in Parliament, were not in the usual and
accustomed Form, for the Summoning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to the
Parliament.

FOR the eminently Learned Seldom has informed Us, That Seldom tit. honor 708.
and in dors claus. 6. Johannis m. 3.
the most ancient Writ of Summons that he has seen, was no Elder than the 6th.
Year of the Reign of King John, directed to the Bishop of Salisbury, Commanding
him to come, and Summon all the Abbots, and Convential Priors in his Diocese to
do the like, viz.

Mandamus vobis rogantes quatenus omni occasion and dilatione post posita
sicut Nos and honorem Nostrum diligitis sitis ad nos apud London die Dominica
proxime ante Ascensionem Domini Nobiscum tractaturi de magnis and arduis
negotiis nostris and communi Regni utilitate; Quin super his quae a Rege
Franciae per Nuntios Nostros and suos Nobis mandata sunt unde per Dei gratiam
bonum sperare vestrum expedit habere concilium and aliorum Magnatum terrae
nostrae quos ad diem illum and locum fecimus convocari, vos etiam ex part
Nostra and vestra Abbates and Priores conventuales totius Diocesis citari
faciatis, ut concilio praedicto interfint, sicut diligunt Nos and communem
Regni utilitatem. T. etc.

The Roll that has this Writ has no Note of Consimile to the rest of the
Barons, as is usual in other close Rolls of Summons to Parliament; but it
appears in the Body of it, that the rest were Summoned, and that there was a
Parliament in the same year.

And another close Roll in the Reign of the same King, To. claus. 6. Johannis
m. 2. in dorso.
and in the same year has a Writ in these words, viz.

Rex Henrico, Mandavimus tibi quod in fide quam Nobis debes, sicut Nos, and
Corpus, and honorem nostrum diligis, omni occasion and dilatione postpositis
sis ad Nos apud Northampton die dominica prox' ante Pentecosten parat' cum
equis, and armis, and aliis necessariis ad Movendum nobis cum Corpore nostro,
and standum nobiscum ad Minus per duos quadrag' ita quod infra terminum illum a
Nobis non recedas, ut te in perpetuum in grates Scire debeam. T. R. etc.

And out of a close Roll of the 26th. Year of King Henry Dors. claus. 28. H. 3.
m. 13.
the Third, cites a Writ of Summons in these words.

Henricus, etc. Reverendo in Christo Patri Waltero Eboracensi Archiepiscopo,
Mandamus vobis quatenus ficut Nos and honorem nostrum pariter and vestrum
diligitis, and in fide qua Nobis tenemini, omnibus aliis negotiis omissis sitis
ad Nos apud London a die sancti Hillarii in quindecim dies ad tractandum
Nobiscum una cum caeteris Magnatibus nostris quos similiter fecimus convocari
de arduis negotiis nostris statum nostrum and Totius Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus, and hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Meipso apud Windlesorum 14. die
Decembris.

Subscribed with Eodem modo Scribitur omnibus Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus,
and Baronibus.

And that the First that he found accompanied with the other circumstances of a
Summons to Parliament (as well for the Commons as the Lords) is in the 49 h.
Year of the Reign of King Henry the Third in the Form beforementioned (which
by the Dates of the Writs were by Sir William Dugdale first of all Discovered,
or taken notice of to be during the said King's Imprisonment) by which he calls
both the Earls and Barons to Westminster (no such words as the Commons Elsings
ancient and modern manner of holding Parliaments in England. 7. and 9. 'Et in
dors. ^0. claus. 49. H. 3. in sched.
being called appearing either in the Exemplar, or Transcription of the former
Writs, or in that which Mr. Elsing has left unto the World.

In forma praedicta subscribitur Abbatibus, Prioribus subscriptis, etc. without
any Christian Names, or Additions formerly used.

Sub data apud Woodstock 14. die Decembris.

In forma praedicta mandatum est Comitibus, and aliis Subscriptis dat' apud
Woodstock, viz. Comiti Leicester, Comiti Glou', Comiti Norff', and Marescal'
Angliae, Comiti Oxon', Comiti Derby, Rogero de sancto Johannis, Hugo de
Spencer, Justiciar' Angliae, Nich' de Segrave, Johanni de Vescy, Robert Basset,
G de Lucie, and Gilbert de Gaunt, of which the Earls of Leicester, Gloucester,
Norfolk, Oxford, and Derby, were notoriously known to be in open Arms, and
Hostility against the King, the whole number of the Temporal Lords therein
named, not amounting unto more than Twenty-Three, with a Blanck left for the
names of other Earls and Barons, which have not been yet inserted or filled up.

And all the other which were in that constrained Writ of Summons, particularly
and expressly named, were no other than H de le Spencer Justiciar' Angliae,
John Fitz John, Nicholaus de Segrave, John de Vescy, Rafe Basset de Drayton,
Henry de Hastings, Geffery de Lucy, Robert de Roos, Adam de novo Mercato,
Walter de C^lvill, and Robert Basset de Sapcott; those which together with the
then Bishops of London, and Worcester, Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, and
Steward of England, H. de Boun Juvenis, Peter de Monte forti, and S. de Monte
forti Juvenes, Baldwin Wake, William le Blond, William Marescallus, Rafe de
Gray, Will' Bardoff' Richard de Tany (or Tony) Robert de ^^teri Ponte, made up
the Number of the opposite Party to the King in the aforesaid Reference to the
King of France.

And Mr. Seldom has observed, That the Preambles sometimes so varied, that
some eminent Occasions of the calling of the Parliament were inserted in the
Writs to the Spiritual (...). Paris. 41. (...). P. 12^3. (...). (...). ^o^or.
716. and 719. dors (...). (...). 23. E. (...). dors. (...). 5^. (...). (...).
(...) 2. (...). 6. E(...). (...) and present manner of holding Parliament^. C^.
2. P. 22. 23, and 24.
Barons, that were not in those to the Temporal; and oftentimes no more than a
general and a short Narrative of the Resolution of having a Parliament, with
much variation in the Writs of that nature, with many Differences of slighter
Moment, sometimes against making of Proxies, and at other times a License to
make them, and sometimes in all a Clause against coming attended with Arms;
and says That until the middle of the Reign of King Richard the Second, when
Dukes, Earls, and Barons, were created by Letters Patents of our Kings, that
the names of the Barons to be Summoned to Parliament, were Written from the
King's Mouth at his Direction and Command; and in that agrees with Mr. E^sing,
who says it was ad libitum Regis, for surely none but the King can Summon a
Parliament, and that is the Reason that Henry the Fourth having taken King
Richard the Second his Liege Lord Prisoner, the Twentieth of August, in the
21st. Year of his Reign, did cause the Writ of Summons for the Parliament,
wherein he obtained the Crown, to bear Date the Nineteenth day of the same
Month, and the Warrant to be per ipsum Regem, and Concilium, and himself to be
Summoned by the name of Henry Duke of Lancaster.

And the Warrants have been diverse, sometimes per breve de privato sigillo, but
commonly per ipsum Regem, or per ipsum Regem and Concilium.

SECT. XV.
That the Majores Barons, or better sort of the Tenants in Capite, Justly and
Legally by some of our Ancient Kings and Princes, but not by any positive Law
(that of the enforced Charter from King John at Running Mede, being not
accounted to be such a Law) were distinguished and separated from the Minores,
or lesser sort of the Tenants in Capite.

FOR it could be no design in the Framers or Contrivers of his Charter, to make
any distinction betwixt the Majores, or Minores Barons, of the Kingdom; or to
leave to Posterity a definition of either of them; or a Rule for after Ages,
for that would have unpolitickly very much disturbed and distracted that
rebellious Assembly at Running Mede, or could be likely to obtain any more
thereby, as to their meeting in our Kings great Councels (the word Parliament
being not then in use amongst us) than to have a Common Council shortly called
to settle the manner of Assessment of Aides upon Knights Fees, and to that only
end to Summon the Tenants in Capite, which were not all of that sort, being not
the Majores or Magnates then, and yet understood by our Nation to be the Barons
long before, and ever since, at the good Will and Pleasure of our Kings,
usually Called and Summoned by them to their Great Councels upon urgent
Occasions; the Majores Barons being to be there present to advise thereupon:
Which, for after Assemblies of that nature, constantly to be holden, would have
been very Numerous, Troublesome, Ordericus Vitalis hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 4. p.
523. b. Seldom tit. honor 692. 693.
Chargeable, and Dangerous, if the Tenants in Capite had been Threescore
Thousand, as Ordericus Vitalis has Recorded them, or but Thirty Two Thousand,
as our great Seldom has more probably estimated them: And although the Learned
Sir Henry Spelman was inclined to believe, that the distinction betwixt
Spelmans Glossar' 452.
the greater and lesser Baronage, had its Foundation in that Charter; and the
Learned Cambden, from a very good Authority Cambden Brit. 122.
as he thought, asserted, That King Henry the Third, Post Magnas
perturbationes, and enormes vexationes inter ipsum and Symonem de Monte forti,
ex tanta multitudine quae seditiofa and turbulenta fuit Optimates quosque
rescripto ad Comitia evocaverit; yet Mr. Seldom says, That in all that he has
met with since the Seiden tit. honor 713.
making of that Charter, he found no mention of any Interest which those other
Tenants in Chief eo nomine had in our Kings Great Councels or Parliaments, who
doubtless were the Persons that were excluded from it, and was persuaded to
give little Credit unto the Author cited by Mr. Cambden, but rather to
conclude, That not long after that grand Charter of King John (like enough in
that time) some Law was made, that induced the utter Exclusion of all Tenants
in Chief from Parliaments; besides the Ancient and Great Barons, and Baronies
(which Matthew Paris says, King Henry the Third reckoned to be Two Hundred and
Fifty) and such other as the King should in like sort Summon; and that there
Seldom tit. honor 713.
were Barons by Writ, as well as Barons by Tenure, cites a Testimony out of
Matthew Paris, who speaking of King Henry Matthew Paris 81. edict. London.
the Third, says, That in the Twenty Nineth Year of his Reign, Rex edicto
public proposito de submonitione generaliter facta fecit certificari per totam
Angliam, ut quilibet Baro tenens ex Rege in Capite haberet prompta and parata
Regali praecepto omnia servitia Militaria quae ei debentur tam Episcopi and
Abbates quam Laici Barons, Barons holding in Capite, as if some held not so,
which must be such as were Barons by Writ only.

The Tenants in Chief being by those Differences distinguished in their Titles,
Possessions, and Reliefs, were so much less in Honor, than the greater Barons,
who had several Writs at every Summons, and all the ancient Circumstances of
the Title of Baron still remaining to them: It was the less difficult for those
greater Barons to Exclude the rest wholly at length from having any Interest in
the Parliaments of that Time, under the name of Tenants in Chief only.

And although in somewhat a different, and much inferior manner to the Majores
Barons, their Number, Greatness of Provinces and Estates, or near Alliance in
Blood unto the Crown, is not much unlike the distinction made in France of the
Douze Pairs, not exclusively to the other Baronage; which our Matthew Paris, and
their own Authors will Evidence, were not only before, but are there to this
day continued as a Degree of Honor, different from the Barons Minores, or the
Vulgus or Common People, much inferior to that lesser Baronage; yet the Annalls
and Records of France, are not yet accorded of the precise time of the first
Institution of their twelve Pairs, lately Augmented to a much greater number.

For Du Fresne is of Opinion, That in the Year 1179. Du Fresne in ^erbo Pares.
which was the 25th. Year of the Reign of our King Henry the Second, there was
no certain number of the Peers of France, Narrat quippe Rogerus Hovedenus
Willielmum Archiepiscopum Remensem eundem Regem unxisse Remis, ministrantibus
ei in illo officio Willielmo Turonensi and Biturocensi and Senonensi
Archiepiscopis, and fere omnibus Episcopis regni Henricum vero Regem Angliae de
jure ducatus Normanniae coronam auream qua coronandus erat Philippus and
Philippum Comitem Flandriae gladium regni praetulisse, alios vero Duces,
Comites and Barons praeivisse and Secutos diversos diversis deputatos officiis
(according to the long before used custom of the English at the Coronation of
their Kings) where diverse of the greatest Officiary and Nobility; as the
Constable, Marshall, Steward, and Great Chamberlain of England, cum multis
aliis, One Nation learning of Another their Customs and Usages, did conceive it
to be an Honor fixed in their Families by Grand Serjeanty: Et Rigordus eandem
Coronationem peractam ait, astante Henrico Rege Angliae and ex una part
coronam super caput Regis Franciae ex debita subjectione humiliter portante cum
omnibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, caeterisque regni principibus, ex quibus
patet, says Du Fresne, caeteros Episcopos qui pro Franciae Paribus habentur,
ea quae hodie non assecutos ministeria in ea Solemnitate.

Proinde hand improbanda forte sententia qui Parium Francicorum duodecim
virorum definitum fuisse tradunt a S. Ludovico Rege quos inter est Johannes a
Leidis lib. 22. ca. 7. itaque Sanctus Ludovicus Rex Franciae ordinavit in regno
Franciae constituens inde collegium seu capitulum qui haberent ardua regni
tractare, Scilicet 6 Duces and 6 Comites, and de Ducibus sunt tres Episcopi,
and de Comitibus sunt etiam tres Episcopi.

And L'Oiseau a Learned Frenchman gives us an account L'Oiseau tralte de^
Seigneuries cap. 5. p. 100.
of the Erection of the 12 Pairs of France in these Words, ils furent choisis
selon la plus vray semblable opinion par Loys le Ieune du tout a la maniere des
anciens Pairs de fief don't parlent les livres de fieffs et ont aussi toutes les
mesmes charges qu' eux a Scavoir d' assister leRoy en Son investiture qui est
son sacre and coronement et de juger avec luiles differens des vassaux du
Royame and ont les uns and les autres este ainsi appellez non pas pour estre
agaux a leur seigneur mais pour estre Pairs and compagnons entr' eux seulement
come l' explique un ancien Arrest done contre le Comte de Flandres au
Parliament de Toussaints 1295. rapp^rte par du Tillet. Ce fut pourtant un trait
non de ieune, mais de sage Roy lors que les Duc's and Com'tes de France avoient
usurp le souverainete presque entiere pour empescher qu' ils ne se separassent
tout a faict du Royaume d'en choisir douze des plus mauvais les fair Officiers
principaux, and commemembres inseperables de la couronne a fin de les ingager
par un interest particulier a la maintenir en son integri^e mesmea empescher la
des union des autres moindres qu' eux moyen que les Allemans ont aussi tenu
pour la conservation de l' Empire par la creation des 7 Electeurs. (Which in
process of Time being long afterward done by the Aurea Bulla, might not
improbably have been instituted in some imitation of the douze Pairs du France.

And in Anno 1226. being the 30th year of the Reign of our Henry the 3d, the
Earl of Flanders, and the Earl of Boloigne complaining that their Lands had
been Seized and taken away, without the judgment of the 12 Peers, as by the
Laws of France, they, as was alleged, ought; and when those their greivances
were redressed, they would attend at the Coronation; howsoever Blanch the Queen
Regent, although the Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Champaigne, St Paul Britain and
fere omnes nobiles ad Coronam (who may probably be understood such as more
particularly did hold by some grand Serjeanties to be performed at the
Inauguration of their Kings) did by the Counsel of the Popes Legate, cause her
Son Lewis to be Crowned without them.

And when St. Lewis. the French King so called, whose Mat. Paris and Favin in
his Theater of honor. 181.
Saintship in our Barons wars, had cost England very dear, could in a seeming
friendly Entertainment of our King Henry the 3d at Paris, wish with an Outinam
duodecim Pares Franciae had not done as they did in the forfeiture of Normandy,
and mihi consentirent certe amica essemus indissolubiles, but did at the same
time add, and Baronagium, and might have understood that that judgment against
King John denied by the English to have any justice in it, was not given by the
1^ Peers against him as Duke of Normandy, for he was one of the principal of
them himself, and was neither present or heard.

But whither that or their Offices to be performed at the Coronation of their
Kings, gave the rise or ground of that especial Peerage, the time when being
something uncertain, for Du Fresne doubting of it, declares, that quando the
Pairs Du Fresne in verbo Pares.
of France redacti fuerunt ad duodenarium numerum non omnino constaet inter
Scriptores sane in confesso esse debat ab ipso seudorum origino vassallorum
Coronae Franciae controversias a Paribus suis fuisse judicatas and Anno. 1216.
which was the 17th Idem Tom. 3. ^^3.
year of the Reign of our King John, numerus Parium Franciae non fuit definitus.

And that distinction of the Majores Barons and Minores Barons, mentioned in
King John's extorted Charter a^ Runingmede, whether then newly gained, as the
learned Sir Henry Spelman believed, or only put in practice by Edward the
first, a better defender of his Crown-Rights, then his Father or Grandfather,
as others have with good probability Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle.
conceived, may receive the better entertainment amongst all the friends and
well-willers of truth and reason, when it shall be considered how much it
corresponds with that more ancient custom amongst the Hebrews in a government,
ordained by God himself, where the Princes of the 12. Tribes of Israel,
Numbers 11. Joshua. 23. Jeremiah. 26.
Summo Magistratui assidebant, Nobilium ordo pro seminario munerum praecipuorum
quia, says Besoldus, liberaliter educati sapientiores esse censentur, and
therefore Comites or Earls, being anciently in the Reign of Charlemaine (which
was in Anno Christi 806. if not long before, Perfecti Provinciarum and qui
Provincias administrabant, were with Dukes also and Barons, not only in France,
about those times, but in Germany also (whereas Bodin says, they did so
spirare libertatem, as Bodin Besoldus de Comitibus imperii. 117. Arumaeus de
Comitiis 7 and 223.
they (...) it, on Earth to be the utmost of their wishes and d(...) to obtain
as much as they could of it) inserted, and put in(...) the Ma^ricula or Roll of
the States of the Empire, Et in Comi(...)us suffragii habuerunt, and Arumaeus
as well as many other (...)hentick Authors, are of opinion that it was pars
liberta^is, a great part of the peoples liberty, and for their good, that
deliberatio ordinum concilio et authoritate quorum periculores agitur
suscipitur; Et qui apud principem et jura Comitiorum u^a and perpetua privativa
est mediata subjectio qua qui infectus est, nec Comitiorum particeps esse
potest, it being a Rule or Law in such Assemblies, that they that sit there, or
are to have voice or suffrage therein, were to hold immediately of the Empire,
and the reason of the first institution of the Parliament of France, composed
of the ancient Nobility by the ancient Kings of France, and Pepyn, was, as
(Pasquier that learned King Pasquier dec Recherches, li. 2. 72. 74, and 76.
Advocate of France observes) inpartem solicitudinis, to assist their Kings in
the better management of their Government, who did thereby communicate les
affai^es publiques a leurs premier and grandes Seigneurs come si avec la
Monarchy ils eussent enter mesler l' order d' une Aristocratie and
gouvernement de plusieurs personages d' honneur and ne se mettre en haine des
grands seigneurs and Potentats, and not draw upon them the envy of their great
and mighty men. Et estans les grands Seigneurs ainsi lors uni se composa un
corpse general de toutes les princes and gouverneurs par l' adois desquels se
vinderoint non seslement les differeuts qui se presenteroient enter le Roy and
eux, mais enter le Roy and ses Subjects; And the great Lords being so united,
composed and made one general body of all the Princes and Governors of
Provinces, by whose advice and council, not only the differences which should
happen between the King and them, but betwixt his Subjects, and were to be in
extraordinary concernments of the Kingdom determined Et estoit l' usance; de
antiens Roys tell qu'es lieux ou la necessite les summomot se uvidoient
ordinairement les affairs par assemblees generals des Barons; and accordingly
by the direction of right reason, or of that or the more Ancient government of
the Greeks, in their great Council of Amphiction, or of the Romans in their
Empire; where in suis constitutionibus prohibitum fuit ne portae dignitatis
vilibus personis paterent quas ipsa remana respublica plebeis cum sui
destructione Livy. Fenestella and alii Romanae gentis Scriptores.
aperuit ut in ipsos Senatores imo tandem Consules insurgerent particularia
Jura (plebiscita) pro plebe formarent tandem sibi summam potestatem sub
tribintia authoritate arrogarent and factionibus in contrarium motis
rempublicam perderent; and our Saxon Kings could neither think they wronged
themselves or their subjects, to call to their Assemblies and great Counsels,
for the redressing of Grievances and Enacting of Laws, their regni
Scientissimos and Aldermannos, Governors of Provinces, so as they which have
had any Conversation with Tyraquel and Nolden de nobilitate, Cassanaei
catalogus gloriae mundi, L'Oyseau in his books de Seigneuries and de droit des
offices, Du Fresue's glossar, our Seldens titles of Honor, Sr John Ferues
glory of generosity, and Sr Henry Spelmans glossary, may find, as L'Oyseau
says, that there are simple Nobles, and hautes grauds and moindres seigueurs
publicquees et privees, And they may loose more credit then they are likely to
get in making such a stir to metamorphose Pigmies into Giants, and Giants into
Pigmies, and procure their Proselites or fellow-Undertakers, if they can, to
believe that all the world has been since the creation thereof, greatly
mistaken beside themselves. Howsoever if that will not accomodate their
levelling humors and designs, they will make an essay to entice others to
invade their Sovereigns Rights and Authority, although they themselves should
miss of their mark or aim, intended by putting the Majores Barons in mind,
that they have a coordinate or compulsive power in their Kings great
Counsels, more then deliberative or subordinately Judicial, when there will
be evidence enough against it, and the Parliament-Rolls and Records, will (if
well observed) afford ensuing plentiful proofs and instances thereof.

Principes Comites and Barons Imperii alique ordines non tantum minora cum
provinciis et territoriis sibi in feudum datis sed et ex majoribus illis quae
re haud Innania capiunt, as our William the Conqueror did in his Grant of the
Earldome of Chester teneud' Ita tibere per gladium ut Rex tenet Angliam per
gladium, and that Earl and his heirs had diverse Barrons under him of their own
Creation. And one of the said Earls granted the Earldom of Lincoln to his
Sister Hawisa and her heirs, the Bishopric of Durham as a County Palatine aver
Justice haute and Basse subordinate to the King; and in like manner was the
Duchy of Lancaster granted by our King Edward the 3.. 10.

Incorporales res apud omnes quoque gentes in feudum dari Sext. 6. p. 43.
receptum et Jura appellantur haec res Immobilium Jure censentur arg. l. 2. de
servis idque before and planuis Intelligi potest. sect. proced. n 4. and 5.
Similiter venatio quoque express in feudum dari potest (as our free warren)
and tunc licet fuudus in venatione non consistat id est propter eam non
habeatur venari potest vasallus and quod teperit ipsius erit, l. 9. sect. 5. l.
62. F. de usufr. Successio etiam alia ex testamento alia ab Intestato liberis
deficientibus e latere conjuncti veniunt, whence proceeded the power of the
Tenant in Capite granted King Henry the 8. 32. H. 81. Seldans M^.
by Act of Parliament, to dispose of 2 parts of his lands, reserving a 3 part
to the Heir and Administrations de bonis Intestati, were anciently (as Mr
Seldom says) granted by our Seldans M^.
Kings or Lords of Manors Derivatively from them, 13. E. 1. Quia Emptores terr.
the statute. 1. E. 1. compelling men of 20 l. per Annum, to take the honor of
the Knighthood, 17. E. 2. de homagio faciendo, cum multis aliis.

And those together with the beforementioned Feudall Laws have been so
fundamental to our Laws and Customs of England, and which has been called our
Common Law, as it has been rightly said to be velut ossa Carnibus, and so
Incorporate in the body thereof, as it runs like the lifeblood, through the
veins, arteries, and every part thereof, circulating to the heart the primo
vivens and ultimo moriens of our heretofore, for many ages past, in our very
ancient bodypolitick and Monarchick, attested and every where plainly and
visibly to be met with, seen, and understood, not only in and by our Glanvill,
Bracton, Britton, and Fleta, together with our Annalls, Historians, and
Records; the latter of which as unto matter of fact do never lie or speak
false; but is and has been written, said and practiced, by, in, and amongst
the most of Europaean Nations of Germany, France, and Spain, if we read and
consider well the books of their learned Lawyers, when too many of our now
effassinated nation, will not take the pains to look into former ages, or if at
all, beyond our Inexpiated and late Rebellious Age, beginning at the year 1641.
but scorn at Solomon's large, Just, and Well-deserved Commendations of Wisdom;
and esteem the Prophet Jeremy, inspired by God to be no other in his Council or
Advice, State Supervias antiquas and inquire veritatem, then a fopp or a grave
thinking Coxcomb, and to be told to his face, as the Prophet Jeremy was, say
what thou will, we will not hear thee. And it may be to our sorrow be made an
Addition to our heretofore seven wonders of England, that our Littleton, and
Sir Edward Coke his adoring Commentator, should draw the water, and have so
little or no acquaintance with the Fountain, from whence it Came; and all our
Year-books, and Law-Reports should allow of so many of our Feudall Laws, and
not cite, or quote, or tell us from whence their Original came in: Insomuch as
Littleton as Sir Edward Coke relates, speaks of the Kings Prerogative but in
2 places in all his book, viz.. 125. 128. and in both places says, it is by
the Law of England, And Sr Edward Coke that gave in some of his books, that
good and wholesome advice, petere fontes and non Sectari Rivules, should not
(as he fondly did) have built Altars, and Sacrificed his otherwise to be well
esteemed abilities, to the reasonless and notoriously false and vain figments
of his so much adored modus tenendi Parliamentum, and the mirror of Justice,
and it can be no less then a marvail, that so learned a Council at Law and
State, as that great and Excellent Queen Elizabeth was so blessed with, should
permit her to afflict and torment her mind, in the taking away the life of her
Cousin Mary Queen of Scotland for Treason, who had fled unto her for
protection, against the persecution of her Rebellious Subjects, who had driven
her out of her own Kingdom; and was by some Illaffected English made use of in
some of their plots and Conspiracies, which were then made or Contrived, by the
advantage of her being here, against their Sovereign and her Royal Government;
upon a designed Marriage betwixt her and the Duke of Norfolk, and to endure the
menaces and threatenings of some foreign Kings and Princes her Allies, to
avenge her death as a Common Concernment, (which his now Majesty, and his
blessed Father, the Royal Martyr for his people, could not in all their many
distresses find any amongst their great Allies and kindred, that would do any
thing more then to make their own unjust advantages by an Early Complying with
their Adversaries) when the Justice of that her unwilling action in the Silence
of our best and most learned Annalists and Historians, (who brobably might in
that and other matters of our Laws, think our Feudall Laws to be as unnecessary
to be proclaimed in England, as that there is a God, when every one should
believe it) might have easily proved and demonstrated, the sentence and
condemnation of that unfortunate Queen being a Feudatory of our Queen
Elizabeth, and holding her Kingdom of Scotland of her by ancient Tenure in
Capite, homage and fealty, of and under her Crown of England, to have been
agreeable unto those Laws, although very unhappy unto the necessity of the one
in the causing, and the other in her Suffering under it: and that so many of
the Kings Council in the Law, that should be more than the Carved Lions about
Solomon's Throne, if they would but read the learned B^oks that have been
written by some Learned Gentlemen and Divines in the defense of the Kings Just
Rights from the Bars of our Courts of Justice to the Bench, and from the Bench
to the Bar, should take so little notice of those our fundamental Laws, as
only to entitle the Kings ancient Monarchick Rights to no better a Foundation
and Original, then that which the miserable seduced and infatuated Common
people shall be pleased to call Prerogative, as if it were some new word or
term of Usurpation or Tyranny, to be maligned, bawled, and bayted at, by the
silly rabble; or as if the name of Prerogative made every thing unjust that the
King or his Ministers have either done, or shall do; and some of the Causes
(for reason amongst many of the effascinations which like the Egyptian darkness
has almost Covered all our Land of Egypt) is a word too good for it, may be
the mischeivous quarrel betwixt our Common Lawyers and Civil or Caesarean
Lawyers, not reading or understanding so much as they should do, the venerable
mother of that which they would call the Common Laws; when at the same time
they can be content to make use of their Excellent Rules and Maxims in many of
their Pleas, Arguments, Books, and Reports, as so many faithful Guides and
Directions.

And for further satisfaction unto, and as far as a demonstration from what
original the most of our fundamental and Principal Laws tanquam a font
purissimo, the purest fountain of Right Reason, have proceeded, been fixed and
continued amongst us, the particulars of the Feudal Laws following, not before
mentioned, will (if rightly considered) abundantly Illustrate and Declare, when
the Feudists or Fendal Lawyers may assure us, that the Feudal Laws being as a
Jus gentium of all the Northern Nation of Europe, from or out of which England,
Scotland and Ireland, with their adjacent Isles and Territories are not, or
ever yet were to be excluded.

In the company whereof, attended also as the Fidus Achates the Trinoda
necessitas or expedtitiones castrorum and pontium reparationes; From which the
Bishops and Clergy by themselves or others, were not to be excused, raising of
Forces at the Countries Charges (which the preservation of their Lands, that
were given them for that service, besides the obligations of their Oaths, and
gratitude strictly oblige them unto) making provisions for the War, for the
Victuals and the Wages of Military Men, as well at Home as in Foreign
Expeditions, for the defense of the Kingdom and State; together with the
Arrogationes Auctoritatem dare, l. 2. F. de adopt. Sect. c. 1. or give license
to adopt (as our King Stephen did King Henry the II.)

Which together with our Licenses and Pardon of Alienation, and Fines paid for
the neglect thereof, Courts-Leet and Baron, Ancient demesne, Free and
Copyholders, and Fines certain or uncertain, at the Will of the Lord,
Prescription of Ancient Custom and Usage not mala in se, villani Bordarii
manucaption Satis datio or Bail, Fribergh, Tithings, Sheriffs Turns or
County-Courts, Hundred-Courts, and our Communia Concilia or Parliaments, upon
Urgent and Special occasions, concerning the defense of the Kingdom, and Church
of England, and the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to be had
therein. Wardships, Marriage, Advowsons, Patronage of Churches, License of
Widows of Tenants in Capite, to Marry, Seizures Ouster les maines, Liveries or
Investitures, Primer seizen; forfeiture of portion upon marriage tendered and
refused, respite of homage, Priority in Suing for Debts, Ann. Diem and Vastum.
Power to amend, wave, or charge his Demurrer, to Employ Coroners, Escheators,
and Feodaries; Issues aut diem clausit extremum stay other Men's Actions with a
Rege Inconsulto; Kings Silver or Money to be paid pro Licentia Concordandi,
Writs of per que Servitia cessavit per Biennium de Coronatore eligendo de
advocatione, and the Assessments of Escuage quare impedit and de viridario
eligendo in Parliament. Writs of Couge de Eslire Evesque. Writs of Recordare or
Accedas ad Cariam, Writs of Prohibition distringas de Excommunicato Capiendo;
our Juries or Trials in matters of Controversies per pares, our Writs de Odio
and Atia ne injuste vexes, Writs of Novell Disseisiu, or of Entry and
Redisseisin or Trial by Battle, or Judicium Dei fire deal or Ordial, Writts
de Nativo habendo Certiorari de Proprietate probanda cum multis aliis,
mentioned in that authentic book of our Laws called the Register of Writs;
and even almost the whole frame and Context of our Laws do (besides the Laws
and Statutes made by our Kings and Princes, and the reasonable Customs and
Usages of the People, indulged or allowed by them) plainly bear and declare the
Idea, Effigies, and lively Portraict of the Feudall Laws Planted and
established as they ought to be in this our heretofore more happy Islands;
distinguishing Estates in Lands granted inter feudum nobile and plebeium: From
the former of which, our Nobility and Bishops have derived their Privileges of
Freedom from Common Process of Arrest, and even the widows of the Nobility,
together with the precedence of the Sons and Daughters of them; And our Kings
have enjoyed the privilege of protecting the persons of their servants from
personal arrests, which they may certainly as Justly and lawfully do, as the
members of the house of Commons, and their Servants; And that of the House of
Peers in Parliament do and have none in the Times of Parliament, and it should
not be unobserved or unknown by or unto our later Lawyers of England, that the
ancient and usual forms of our Declarations and Pleadings at Law, have been
and are, that the Plaintiffs or Defendents were or are Seized in dominico suo
ut de feodo Simplici aut Talliato, and that our Laws have or had ab
antiquissimis Seculis, or ages, a great mixture of the Feudal Laws, which the
people esteemed to be a part of their happiness, until this our last mad age
of Rebellion, Faction and Sedition, had taught our English Copyholders to
esteem their Tenures to be a Norman Slavery, wherein the Charity and good will
of their Landlords have continued to their generations, yet notwithstanding
have by length of time converted their kindnesses into a villainous Custom of
Ingratitude. And as the Civil Law had before done inter patrones et Clientes,
the patritii or Nobility esteemed it to be a Disparagement to intermarry with
the vulgar, who could not for a long time, and without much Struggling, be
admitted into the Magistracy; (as Livy and other good Roman Livy.
Historians have assured us) but were as a Separate part of the people, glad to
be content with their Tribuni plebis to Intercede with the Senate, to make good
and wholesome Laws, or abate the rigor or Severity of any of them; so far were
they from ambition or any designs of Intermedling above their Incapacitated
Spheres, or Incroaching upon the Kin^^y Government; as if Simon Montford, and
his Fellow-Rebells, had by force put upon King Henry the 3d. in the 49th, year
of his Reign, taught them the way unto it, not as he did, by force, but by
degrees and sly Insinnuations, working upon the Indulgence or necessities of
their princes, but might have tarryed long enough, and beyond the longest
period of time, before our Feudal Laws would have given them so much as a leave
or license to attempt it.

However if that will not do, those Novillists, or hatchers of new and
unwarrantable doctrines, will to work again, and limbeck their Fancies, to vent
the only Vapors of such imaginations, or what can be Extracted as some Elixir
Proprietatis, Elixir Vitae, or Salutis, to be purchased at their own and others
costly enough rates and prices, so as they may be isntrumental and subservient
to their Wicked, and Seditious Designs, of Subverting the Monarchy, and
Deluding the People. And their men of more Faction then Wifdom, Law, Right,
Reason, or Evidence.

SECT. XVI.
That the General Councels or Courts mentioned before the Rebellious meeting of
some of the English Baronage, and the constraint put upon King John at Running
Mede, or before the 49. of H. 3. were not the Magna Consilia, or Generale
consilium, Colloquium, or Communia Consilia now called Parliaments, (wherein
some of the Commons, as Tenants in capito, were admitted) but only truly and
properly Curiae Militum, a Court Summoning those that hold of the King in
Capite, to acknowledge, record and perform their services, do their homage, and
pay their reliefs, etc. and the writ of Summons, mentioned in the close Rolis
of the 15th, year of the Reign of K. John, was not then for the summoning of a
great Council, or Parliament, but for other purposes, viz. Military Aids and
Offices.

WHich withal their Strains, Conjectures, or Alchimy of abused Wit, will never
be able to make the Writ, which Mr Seldom found in the close Role of the 15th,
year of the Reign of King John, to be any Pattern, or to have any resemblance
with the Writs of Summons, framed by Simon Montfort, and his rebell-party, in
the time of the Imprisonment of King Henry the 3d, in the 49th, year of his
Reign, having no other then these words, viz. Rex vit. Oxon, precipimus tibi,
quod omnes milites ballivae tuae, qui Summoniti fuerunt, esse apud Oxon ad nos
a die omnium Sanctorum in quindecim dies, venire facias cum armis suis, corpora
vero Baronum sine armis similiter, Et quatuor discretos milites de Comitatu tuo
illuc venire facias ad nos, ad eundem Terminum, ad loquendum nobiscum de
negotiis regni nostri, and meipso Westmonaesterium, 7. die Novembris, and not
the 15th as Mr. Seldom has mis-recited the dates thereof.

Et eodem modo Scribitur omnibus vice Comitibus, Which writs, he says, seems
to be a Summons to Parliament at Oxford, To. Claus. 15. Jo. part 2 m. 7. in
dorso, not part. 1. as in Seldan or his Printer has misquoted it.
by the Strangest Writ of Summons, and without example, that he had been, and
was ever-willing to prove the distinction, betwixt the Barons Majores and
Minores, to have its original or foundation about that Time: Whereunto pace
tanti viri I may not subscribe, for that it is more likely to be but a military
Summons, much of that roll being busied in Writs of Summons of Array to the
Ports and others against a feared approaching invasion of the French, to whom
the Pope had given the Kingdom of England, and so many Tenants in Capite would
have made too great a number to appear in a Parliament or Great Council, and
have been much fitter for a Muster, and to come with Arms was not
Parliamentary, and there was nothing like a distinction in that Writ or Summons
betwixt the Majores and Minores Barons, for they held in Capite also as all
the other did, and the quatuor milites out of every County might all or some of
them hold in Capite, and if it had been to a Parliament, the Barons would have
had particular Writs of Summons directed unto them, and the Praelates also, who
were usually Summoned at the same time, and as other of the Baronage would have
taken it ill to be driven to their Duties by Sheriffs Authorized by Writs of
Venire facias, and Samuel Daniell much disagreeing with Matthew Paris therein,
gives the reason of those Writs, and that intended great assembly to have been
only the great care of King John, to gather all the Force and Strength he could
to march with him to Dover, to resist the French, and to that end having before
Summoned all Earls, Barons, Daniel in the Life of King Joh. 136 137. Matt.
Paris. ^34.
Knights, and who else could bear Arms, to be ready at Dover presently upon
Easter, furnished with Horse, Armor, and all Military Provision to defend him,
themselves, and the Kingdom, against the intended invasion under the penalty of
Culverage, Spelmans Glossar.
which was perpetual Shame and Servitude.

Whereupon so great numbers came, as for want of Sustenance, being returned
home, he retained only some of the more able sort, which amounted to the number
of 60000. and some of the writs or Commissions of Array sent to the Ports had a
clause therein, and unusquisque sequatur Dominum suum, Et qui terram non habent
and arma habere possint (as Matthew Paris has it) illuc veniant ad capiendum
solidatas Regis, and the words Corpora vero Baronum sine armis, in the writts
of resummons of the more special part of the men formerly summoned, having
nothing of the penalty of Culverage, might be well understood to be, that the
Barons, who were not to be arrayed by Sheriffs amongst Common Soldiers, were in
such a case of extremity to be desired to be there sine armis to encourage, and
lead on those that held of them.

And they with the quatuor milites discretos, were besides ad loquendum cum
Rege, which being to be without Burgesses, and not ad faciendum and
consentiendum to those things which the King and his Council of Praelates and
Barons should ordain, can arrive to no nearer a resemblance, of the forced
writts of the Elections of some of the Commons, to come to a Parliament in the
49th, year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d, then 4 Knights of every shire,
without Burgesses, do unto 2. with as many Burgesses out of every City and
Borough, some Citys having a County appertaining unto it (but are not many)
and sending four, whereof 2 were to be for the Connty and 2 for the City, and
as little resembling in the business or matters for which they were to come, as
ad loquendum de negotiis regni cum Rege, does with ad faciendum and
consentiendum to such things as the King and his Council of Barons, Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, should in Parliament advise, and ordain.

In the first year of the Reign of King Henry the 3. when no Acts of Parliament
are found to have been then made, To. Claus. 1. H. 3. m. 9. in dorso.
that King directed his writ to the Sheriffs of Devonshire, and unto all his
Sheriffs of the Counties and Shires of England, quod venire faciat usque Oxon,
A die Iovis prox. post nativitatem sancti Johannis in tres Septimanas,
Archiepiscopes, Episcopes, Abbates, Priores, Barons, Com: omnes, milites,
libere tenentes, and omnes alios qui servitium nobis debent, equis and Armis,
cum fideli nostro Will. Marist. and aliis Magnatibus de Consilio nostro, quae
eis praeteperimus, and hoc, sicut honorem suum and sui Indempnitatem diligunt,
nullatenus omittant, test Com. apud Glouc. And in a writ directed to the
Sheriff of Berks, Commanded him, quod venire fac. usque Oxon. die Dominica
prox. post festum sancti Petri, ad vincula totum servitium, quod Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Abbates, and viri religiosi, Com. and Baron. and Omnes alii de
Balliva tua quaecunque fuerint nobis debent; venire fac. illuc ad diem illum
similiter, omnes illos de Baliva tua, qui non sunt homines praeditorum, and per
Catalla eorum and alia Jurati sunt, promptos, and paratos ad eundum in
servitium nostrum, quae eis praecepimus, quae etc. T. apud Oxon. So as it may,
with some confidence be asserted, that the Commons of England, otherwise then
comprehended in the authority, Votes and Suffrages of the Nobility and Bishops,
had before the imprisonment of H. 3. as aforesaid, no Summons by election or
otherwise, to come unto the great Councels, or Parliaments of our Kings or
Princes: Wherefore they must be more then a little confident, of their art in
tentering other men's Judgments and Opinions, to affirm with any probability,
that the Commons, or any elected number of them, either in the now mode of
Election, or that which had its first creation in the imprisonment of King
Henry the 3. otherwise then as he, or the former Kings did sometimes use, as
they pleased, to call some of the more Wise and Able of them for Advice or
Information, as King John did ad loquendum, or as King Henry the 3d. in the
36th, Year of his Reign, did call the Londoners to Westminster, Sam. Daniel,
167.
about taking upon them the Cross, and attending him in those Wars,
representing in that particular only, their own Estates, or Qualities.

When in a Parliament holden by the Queen, and her Council, in his absence in
France, in the 38th, year of his Reign, though Matthew Paris, and Mr Daniel have
given us no intimation of a Parliament then holden, (wherein do not appear to
have been any Commons or House of Commons) the Lords gave an aid by themselves,
the Clergy doing the like, as is evidenced by the 2 following Records in these
words, viz.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo de Oddinggeseles salutem, Cum Venerabilis
pater B. Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Claus. 38. H. 3. m. 14. dors.
Episcopi provinc. Cant. R. Com. Cornub. frater noster, R. Com. Glouc. and alii
Com. and Barons in quindena sci. Hillarii jam praetoriti apud London, coram
dilecta Regina nostra and Consilio nostro Commorante in Anglia, constituti
nobis promiserunt liberaliter and benigni facere auxilium decens and perutile,
viz. quidam prelati in propriis personis, and quidam in pecunia; Comites vero
and Barons in propriis personis suis, potenter contra Regem Castelliae, qui
terram nostram Vasconiae in manu forti in quindena Pasche proxime futur,
hostiliter est ingressurus, vos ex toto cord requirimus, quod sicut supradicti
Commites and Barons nobis promiserunt quod erunt London A die Paschae prox:
futur in tres septimanas parati and been muniti, sine ulla dilatione versus
Vasconiam ad nos personaliter movere; vos ad dictas diem et locum modo
consimili veniatis omni occasion and dilatione postpositis, ad tendendum
versus portesmum cum praefatis Magnatibus, ad transfretandi cum eisdem ad nos
in Vasconiam, et hoc, in fide qua nobis tenemini, vobis firmiter injungimus,
and sicut honorem nostrum, and indempnitatem corporis nostri diligitis. T. per
Reginam 5. die Febr.

Et mand. est per Henr. 3 Regem in An. 38. regni sui Archiepiscopis Claus. 38.
H 3. m. 13. Shedula
et Episcopis totius Angliae, quatenus cum festinatione omni convocent omnes
Abbates et Priores suae Diocesis cujuscunque sint ordinis, inducentes modis
omnibus quod nobis in praesenti necessitate subveniant, manu lar(...)lua; ne
per defectum ipsorum vel aliorum corporis incurramus periculum, et terrae
nostrae jacturam, quod absit, quia id verteretur in vestrum ipsorum opprobium
sempiternum, sic igitur vestra vigilet discretio circa praedictum auxilium tam
a vobis deferendum quam a subditis vestris per quirendum, quod futuris
temporibus vobis and ipsis simus non immerito obligati. Proviso quod praefatum
auxilium habeamus apud Westmonasterium in quindenam Pasche proxime futuram sine
defectu, and hoc sicut nos and honorem nostrum, nec non and indempnitatem
corporis nostri diligitis, non omitatis. Dirigitur etiam litera ista
Archiepiscopo Cantuar, cum hac clausula, and quod ordinariam jurisdictionem
exercetis vacant sede in Episcopatu Linc. vos requirimus affectuose quatenus
officiariis vestris et Archiediacono ejusdem Episcopatus scribatis, attente
quod tempestive convocent omnes Abbates, and Priores ejusdem Episcopatus,
cujuscunque sine ordinis ad certos dies and locum abducentes eos nudis omnibus
quod in hoc necessitate vestrae concilium nobis faciant subventionem.

And the failing to perform Military services was afterward by the Statutes of
6. E. 1. ca. 4. and 13. E. 1. ca. 21. made so Penal and fixed upon them, as
after a Cessavit per Biennium in the performing of their service, the King or
Chief Lord might by writs ordained to be granted out of the Chancery, demand
and prosecute to recover the same, and such Tenants after Judgments had against
them were to be for ever barred to demand, or enjoy the same, and where either
the To. Marist. Coke. 1. institutes tit. Escuage. Sect. 102.
King demands Escuage of his Tenants, or the mean Lords demands Escuage of
their Tenants, it was to be assessed in Parliament, and Proved or disproved by
Certificate of the Marshall of the Kings Host, who is enabled thereunto by his
Roll kept for that purpose. When in Parliament, the members of the house of
Commons either holding Lands, in Capite, or of mesne Lords, by Knights Service,
were not upon denying to grant Subsidies, or Aids to the King, to forfeit or
lose their lands, according to the aforesaid Acts of Parliament or otherwise.

And such kind of Courts for lands holden in Capite or by Knights service,
should not by the most ordinary and mean Capacities, be understood to be one
and the same with the great Court or Council of Parliament, which many times
by the Power and Authority of the King in that his Highest Court, corrects, and
rectifies the defaults of the other.

Our high Courts of Parliament, having the Judges of the Land subordinate to
their Prince, whether they have lands holden in Capite or no land, summoned by
his writs to give their Council and advice as to matters of Law, and the
ancient customs of the Kingdom, wherein the King is attended with his great
Ministers or Officers of State, as the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal,
great Chamberlain of England, Lord Steward, and Chamberlain of his household,
and Lord Admiral, whether of the degree of Barronage, or holding of him in
Capite, or not, with other great and solemn formalities becoming the honor and
State thereof, with which that most honorable assembly is accompanied, greatly
different from those lesser Courts or Council of summoning and calling
together, those that were only proper or obliged to actions of war, or to know
how their services were performed, when our Parliaments being summoned to treat
and advise of matters, concerning peace and the defense of the Church, and de
quibusdam arduis only, and have sometimes no matters of war consulted thereon.
Those military Counsels, anciently summoned for service in war and defense,
being in a very different form from Parliamentary Counsels, as for further
satisfaction may be manifested by the writs aforesaid.

And was no more then what every Earl and Baron had in their Courts and
Jurisdidictions, when they summoned the Tenants, holding of them by Knights
service, to their Courts of honor, or their honorary Possessions which were in
our records frequently styled, as the honors of Eagle, Eye, Leicester,
Hedingham, Penerel, Arundel, etc. to which purpose they had their Escheators,
Feodares, and Stewards to preside, or officiate therein, subordinate unto them,
when they called their Tenants together either to aid, ride, or go along with
them in the wars and service of their Prince and Country, or to pay them their
reliefs or ayds, pairfile marier, which the Law Interprets to be only the
elder, or to make the eldest Son a Knight, or to do their homages, or pay for
the respite of them, and to give the Lord to understand what alienations had
been made of the lands holden of him, whereby to Entitle him, and those that
did hold of him, to the benefit of the Statute of Statute Quia Emptores
terr^rum. 18. E. 1. cap. 1.
Quia Emptores terrarum. And altogether dissimular to that of the Parliament
first begun, with those few of the Commons, which adventured to come unto it in
Anno. 49. H. 3. when he was a Prisoner in the custody of Montfert Earl of
Leicester a powerful rebel, discontinued and interrupted, as rebellious
designs ought to be, after his release, until King Edw. the 1. found it
convenient to make use of that kind of writ of Summons to balance the then
swelling power of some of his over-Unweildy Baronage.

For in the former or those great Counsels or Parliaments that were before the
49th Year of the Reign of King H. 3d. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal took
upon them the care and charge of the Commons, as included in themselves, as
their Subjects, they being by that then first kind of Writ only Elected to
consent and yield Obedience to such things, as the Lords, not themselves,
should ordain; for had it been (as it never was) otherwise, it would have been
altogether ungatory and ridicule, to allow a power to the Commons to ordain,
when they were empowered only to assent unto and obey, and cannot at all be
understood to obey, and be subservient to that which themselves had Decreed,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, until the King had given unto what was
advised by them, his Royal sanction and assent, being not at all obliged to
any Obedience thereunto.

And until the statute de Tallagio non concedendo, without the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament Assembled, was by
King E. 1. assented unto, had nothing to do in the granting of ayds and
subsidies in Parliament Concurrently with the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
in the aforesaid Writ of 18. H. 3. is said to be for to supply their own
necessities as well as the Kings.

But in the Military Courts, which were as aforesaid Summoned by King John or
any other of our Kings before 49. H. 3. the Knights or those that held in
Capite, or Knights-Service, that should fail to do their Services, was to
forfeit their Lands so holden, and be in the Kings Mercy, or pay Escuage, which
though it were to be assessed by Parliament, was not then Understood to be a
Parliament Composed of an House of Commons, but a Parliament after the Ancient
way, consisting only of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Kings Great
Officers of State, Judges and Council.

Which our Kings and their Council both general and special, were not
ignorant of, either as to its right use, or necessity, for public good or
preservation, When King John being rightly informed, and in fear enough of an
Invasion intended by the King of France, his professed and known enemy, Mat.
Paris. 233. and 234.
et de omnibus quae in transmarinis partibus agebatur edoctus, did not only
inbreviare omnes naves, universis portubus totius Angliae per brevia sua sed
alias literas universis Vicecomitibus regni sui misit et direxit sub hac forma,
Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Summone per bonos Summonitores, omnes
Barons, Milites, and omnes liberos homines, and servientes, vel quicunque
sint, vel de quocunque teneant, qui arma habere debent, vel arma habere
possint, and qui homagium nobis, vel ligeantiam fecerunt, quod sicut nos and
seipsos and omnia sua diligunt, sint apud Doveram ad Instans clausum Paschae,
been parati cum equis and armis, and cum toto posse suo, ad defendendum caput
nostrum, and capita sua, and terram Angliae, and quod nullus remaneat, qui arma
portare possit, sub nomine Culvertagii, and perpetuae servitatis, (when both in
England and France, nihil magis quam opprobrium significavit) Et unusquisque
sequatur dominum suum, and qui terram non habent and arma habere possint, illuc
veniant ad capiendum solidatas nostras, and tu omnem attractum victualium, and
omnia mercata ballivarum tuarum venire facias, ut sequantur Exercitum nostrum,
Ita quod nullum mercatum de ballivis tuis alibi teneatur, and tuipse tunc sis
ibi cum predictis Summonitoribus, and scias, quod scire volumus quomodo
venerint de ballivis tuis, and qui venerint, and qui non and videas quod tu Ita
efforciate venias, cu(...)equis and armis, and haec Ita exequatis, ut inde ad
corpus tuum nos capere debeamus, and tu inde habeas rotulum tuum, ad nos
certificandum qui remanserunt. Whereupon, says that Historian, his ergo
literis per Angliam divulgatis, convenerunt ad maritima in locis diversis,
homines diversae conditionis, et aetatis, sed cum per dies pauces tantae
multitudini victus defuisset, remiserunt ad propria, principes militiae, ex
inormi vulgo copiosam Multitudinem milites solummodo servientes, and liberos
homines cum Balistariis and sagittariis, juxta maritima retinentes omnibus,
igitur congregati ad pugnam aestimati sunt in exercitu apud Barham d^nam inter
milites electos and servientes strenuos, and been armatos sexaginta millium
virorum fortium, quibus si er ga Regem Angliae and defensionem patriae cor
fuisset and anima una non fuisset princeps sub coelo contra quem regnum Angliae
se non defenderet.

And it was no mervail to the people of England, who then had not learned to be
afraid or make Bug-bears of public Walsingham. Hist. Angli. E. 1. 69.
good, or kick and winch at every thing that tended that way, when King Edward
the first in the 24th, Year of his Reign, Citari fecit omnes qui sibi servitium
debebant, caeterosque omnes qui viginti libratas terrae and amplias tenebant,
ut parati essent Londoniis in festo sancti Petri ad vincula cum equis and armis
transfretaturi, cum eo and Regis stipendiis militaturi.

And do very much differ from a Writ to Summon the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal to Parliament, as ad colloquium or consulendum, does from coming
parati cum equis and armis which the Ancient cares and usage of Parliaments,
since that over-powerfull, and unhappy designs of some unruly Barons coming in
Arms to the Parliament at Oxford, in the 42. Year of the Reign of King Henry
the 3. and the sad consequences thereof taught our Kings to take heed of it
ever after, by prohibiting the coming to Parliaments with Arms, and differs no
less from the purpose, tenor or purport of the Writs, or Commissions to elect
Knights of the Shires, Citizens and Burgesses, which had their first Original
and Commencement to come to our Parliaments, in Anno. 49. of King Henry the 3.
when that King was a Prisoner to an Army of Rebels, and was not then until
after a long intervall of time in Anno. 22. E. 1. re-continued sub eadem
fo(...)a, which was in no other Tenor, or to any other purpose, then ad
faciendum and consentiendum iis to those matters or things, which the King by
the Council and advice of the Peers viz. the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
should ordain, and although there have been ab ultima antiquitate great
Counsels or Parliaments. Now, although not formerly, called Parliaments in
this Nation or Kingdom, yet they were not materially or formally the same, and
if it could be proved that the members thereof consisted of 3. Estates, besides
the King their Sovereign Lord, before the 49th, Year of the Reign of King Henry
the 3. which all our Parliament Records do deny, yet they that were admitted or
came under the Elections, illegally forced Writs and designs of Montfort, and
his rebellious partners, by their then only newly contrived House of Commons,
can never entitle themselves to the same Origene, Identity, purpose and usage
of our former Parliaments, before that House of Commons in Parliament were
admitted to consent unto and do what the King by the advice of his Lords
Spiritualand Temporal therein should Ordain.

And there might be allways reason enough found, that there should be a
distinction betwixt the great Counsels of Parliament, which were not only for
extraordinary emergencies touching the defense of the Kingdom, and Church, and
redress of grievances in Civil affairs and contingencies, and that which was
for Military aids and services, for says our old and learned Bracton, in Rege
qui recte regit necessaria Bracton Li. 1. de legibus and conscietudinibus
Anglica.
sunt duo haec, Arma videlicet and leges quibus utrumque tempus Bellorum and
pacis recte possit gubernare, utrumque enim illorum alterius indiget auxilio,
quo tam militaris res possit esse in tuto, quam ipsae leges usu Armorum, and
praesidio possint esse servatae, Si autem Arma defecerint contra hosts,
rebels, and indomitos sic erit regnum indefensum, sic autem leges sic
exterminabitur Justicia nec erit qui rectum faciet Judicium.

And our Kings, whose Royal Progenitors had heretofore all the Lands in England
holden of them in Capite, might, in their greater concernments, better deserve
to keep their separate and particular Military Courts for aids and services,
then those many of their Subjects do, that would be unwilling not to be allowed
to do it in their own Estates, which had no other fountain or original then
the bounty and indulgence of their Kings and Princes; and Bracton has informed
us, that quod ille homagium suum facere debet obtentu reverentia quam debet
domino suo, adire debet dominum suum ubicunque inventus fuerit, in regno vel
alibi, si possit commode adiri, Et non tenetur dominus quaerere suum tenentem.

And in the homage, Secundum quosdam, there is to be salva fide debita domino
Regi and haeredibus suis. Et quod faciet servitium debitum domino suo, and
haeredibus suis, and non debet homagium facere privatium, sed in loco publico
and communi, coram pluribus in Comitatu, Hundredo, vel Curia, ut si forte
tenens per malitiam homagium vellet dedicere, possit dominus facilius
probationem habere de homagio facto, and servitio recognito.

Which with the aid of tenures, and feudall Laws, and the homage and services
due from the Subjects to the Crown, their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and our many and excellent Laws for self-preservation, and public safety did
so firm, and fix the Militia, and Jus gladii in our Kings and Princes, ordained
and appointed by God, for the execution of Justice, Defense, and Protection of
the People, their Religion, Persons, Lives, Laws, Liberties, and Estates, as
they that would by perverted, wrested, and falsely concluded arguments overturn
our Government, and have Labored by all the Shifts and Falsities, which the
Devil and his Imps could contrive and furnish, to Propagate their Designs, and
Principles of Wickedness and Confusion, may find that all the Laws, Records,
Annalls, and Historians of the Kingdom do assert, and prove the Jus gladii to
appertain to none, but our Kings, and that the attempt to take it from them
has been ever accounted and punished as a Rebellion; And that they are not
Masters of their Wits, or are Lunatiques without intervalls, that can think
their Industry and Pains well bestowed, to go about to prove that there ought
to be, or ever was an Allegiance Oath, or Homage made or taken to the People
universally considered, or was unto them due or could be by any right rule of
Law, Custom, or Right Reason, claimed by them or any way appropriate unto them.

Unto which well known and allways due Rights of our Kings and Princes, were
very subservient those great aids and support of the Kingdom, the Knights fees
and lands, held of our King in Capite, the strength and honor whereof, could
neither well be preserved, called upon, or certified unto our Kings in their
Exchecquer, as the book called the Red-book, in that Court, kept only for that
purpose, will inform us, without an often Summoning those necessary and useful
Courts, or keeping them from a disuse, which heretofore were wont to serve as
Prognostiques or Indications, or a feeling of the strength and pulse of the
Kingdom, by our Kings and Princes, the careful Physicians thereof; the neglect
whereof by the dissolution of the Abbeys, Monasteries, and religious Houses,
and those large quantities of lands being no less then a fourth part of the
Kingdom, and the parcelling thereof into small quantities, afterward granted
with a tenure in Soccage, and our Kings granting of other great quantities of
the Monastic Manors and lands, to be holden in free and Common Soccage of the
King, as of his Manor of East Greenwitch, together with the carlesness of the
Court of Wards and Liveries, and the Eascheators and Feodaries of the after
ages, so little minding their Duties and Oaths, as if one parcel of lands were
by a Jury found to be holden in Capite, they were well content to suffer all
the rest to pass with a per quae servitia ignorant, and the carelessness in the
levying of Fines, and not suing out of Writs, in such cases accustomed called
per quae servicia, which, if the tenures in Capite and by Knight service had
not been so ever to be lamented unhappily exchanged, for a moiety, after the
Kings decease, of a corrupt and unwholesome Drunken Excise, those Terms in
Capite with their Military aids and services, the quondam strength and glory of
our Kings and Nobility, would have dwindled and shrunk into a consumption and
Tabes, of our heretofore Gigantine body politic, and have for a great part by
themselves, without the so often murmuring and unwilling taxes and assessments
been too weak or feeble to preserve their grandeur, and protect and defend them
and their peoples properties, trades and interests, from domestic disturbances
and foreign invasions or Injuries.

Howsoever rather then want a Shift, or that which they would have to be called
Truth and Reason, when it can be neither of them, they think something may for
their purpose be picked out of old Bracton, to help in a Case of necessity, and
and it were a pity, that the best Cause of God, as they called it, should be
lost, for want of a little help to Support it, and therefore rather then suffer
it to sink and perish, every one that was well affected and a well-willer
thereunto, should make use of all the Contrivances imaginable, and do all that
they can to persuade and believe, otherwise it will Conduce to little purpose.

SECT. XVII.
That the Comites or Earls have in Parliament or out of Parliament, Power to
Compel their Kings or Sovereign Princes to yield unto their Consults, Votes,
or Advices, will make them like the Spartan Ephori, and amount to no more then
a Conclusion without Premises or any thing of Truth, Law, or Right Reason to
Support it.

BUt the straw and stubble upon which the late long Parliament-Rebellion has
built a great part of their wicked and godless pretenses by misusing and ill
understanding of a piece of our learned Bracton, snatched and torn from the
true and genuine meaning and Intention of the Author, will deceive their
expectations and hopes in relying upon it, if where he says,

Item nec factum Regis nec Chartam potest quis Judicare Ita Bracton lib. 2 de
a^quirendo Domin^. ca. 16. sect. 3.
quod factum Domini Regis irritetur sed dicere potuit quis quod Rex Justitiam
and been et si hoc eadem ratione quod male and Ita imponere ei quod injuriam
emendet, ne incidat Rex and Justic. in Judicium viventis Dei propter Injuriam.

Rex autem habet Superiorem Deum scilicet, item legem, per quam factus est rex.

Item Curiam suam, viz. Comites, Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi socii
Regis.

Wherein if the word Superiorem should relate or be intended by Bracton to the
Law and the Kings Court of Parliament, It would be as a little Grammar as good
Latin Law, or Right Reason, and the Authors meaning who lived in the Time of
the Imprisonment of King Henry the 3d. by Simon de Montfort and other his
Rebellious Earls and Barons, and by some Citations in his book may be believed
to have then or after Written it, his aforesaid book cannot be rationally
thought by the Entire and whole Context thereof to have any design to encourage
so Wicked and long continued a Rebellion or intend to render the King Inferior
to the Law, in Contradiction unto his own assertions, that Rex parem non habet
and Rex facit Legem, and make his Curia Court or Coke 4th part institutes.
Parliament whom he can call, Continue, Prorogue, Dissolve, wherein he has a
negative voice, and as Sr Edward Coke says, is Principum, Caput and finis, and
as it were the Anima, or Soul thereof, And to suppose him to be Inferior to a
Court of his own Calling or disposing kept in his own house or Palace, and
composed of many of his especial domestiques, is and would be beyond the
fancies of little Children, or the reach of the silliest sort of Imagination.

And need not be afraid of their Earls and Barons supposed bridling of them in
Parliament, when the Barons may be Called or Summoned as our Kings pleased, and
the Earls and Greater Nobility also before the Reign of King Richard the 2. And
our Kings have both before, and since, always had Seldens tit. honr.
as much liberty to Summon the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, as they had
before that Time (...), not to Summon the Praelates, or as they had before or
since the Reign of King Richard the 2. to dispense both with the not Coming of
the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, by an allowance of their Proxies given to
Members of their own house.

Et qui habet socium, habet magistrum, and ideo si rex fuerit sine fraeno, id
est, fine lege debent ei fraenum ponere nisi ipsimet Bracton.
fuerint cum Rege sine fraeno.

Et tunc clamabant subditi, and dicent Domine Jesu Christi. etc.

It shall be rightly considered that however the word Magistrum and the word
Socii by some inadvertency of the Author may, unto those who would be willing
to have it to seem to give a power to the Comites and Barons, which the later
never either in their use or institution claimed or practiced; It may recieve a
more genuine or proper interpretation to be no more then an Advisor or
Instructor and more agreeable to the mind of the Author.

For the Comites were in the Roman Empire very anciently Spelmans glos. in
verbu Comes and Pancirodo de utrisque imperiis.
styled Consules and Comites, and after in that and the Eastern Empire, and all
its limbs and branches rent and divided from it, and in this Nation enjoyed the
name or title of Consul a O^dericus vitalis. Lib. 13.
Consulendo, and Comes only a Comitando or being in Comitatu Tacitus. Hist.
Lib. 2.
Principis, and Comitatum ipsam Aulam and familiam Principis, which in
Tacitus's time was called a Cohors Cortis, or Curtis, Ordericus vitalis.
Hoveden and alii histor. Angliae passim and frequenter.
or Court, and not Seldom by our old Historians, as Odericus Vitalis, Hoveden
etc. Ealdermen in the Saxon times and sometimes Comes, which says our Learned
Seldom were but at the first officiary dignities both here and in the Empire,
Seldom. tit. honor. cap. 1. 3. sect. 5.
and Governed as Praefecti Comitatus and Provinciarum, and the Counties were in
Edward the Confessors Laws called L. L. Edwardi Confessor. 12.
Consulatus, some Vestigia or intimations whereof may be perceived in the grant
or confirmation of the Earldom of Oxford to Alberick de Vere by the tertium
denarium Comitatus, Seldens. tit of honor.
the 3d penny of the fines and amerciaments of that County.

And were neither in England or the Western or Eastern Empire, or any of their
Historians, or by any of our or their Antiquaries or Enquirers into the Secrets
or Cabinets of time, and its forsaken memorialls ever accounted to be either as
Socii or Magistri, or so recorded in any of their or our Records, Annals, or
Histories.

And therefore we may without calling up the Ghost of our old Henry de Bracton
(who had in the Reign of King Bracton in proamio.
Henry the Third made his enquiries into all the ancient Laws, and Customs of
England, and searched the vetera judicia, (mentioned diverse cases and
precedents formerly adjudged,) in the perusal of his Learned Works, meet with
his own expositions of what he there Wrote or could be thought to have been any
of his Intentions.

For he in the words immediately proceeding not only says that de Chartis vero
Regis and factis Regum non debent nec Bracton. Lib. 2. de acquirendo Domino.
cap. 16. sect. 3.
possunt Justiciarii nec privata persona disputare, nec etiam si in illo
dubitatio oriatur possunt enim interpretari and in dubiis and obscuris vel si
aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus, Domini Regis erit expectanda voluntas
and interpretatio, cum ejus sit interpretari cujus est concedere, and etiam si
omnino sit falsa propter rasuram, vel quia forte signum appositum est
adulterinum, melius and tutius est quod coram ipso Rege procedatur ad judicium.

But in several other places of those his learned labors plainly declares
that leges Anglicanae and consuetudines were Lib. 1. Ca. 2. sect. 7.
made and confirmed Regum Authoritate, ipse autem Rex non debet esse sub
homine, sed sub Deo, and sub lege, quia lex facit Regem.

Attribuat igitur Rex legi quod lex attribuit ei, viz. dominationem and
potestatem, non est enim Rex ubi dominatur voluntas Lib. 1. ca. 2. dererum
divisione. sect. 8.
and non lex: Et quod sub lege esse debeat cum sit Dei Vicarius. Omnis quidem
sub eo, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, Parem autem non habet in regno
suo quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum Par in Parem non habet imperium.

Item nec multo fortius superiorem nec potentiorem habere debet, quia fic esset
inferior sibi Subjectis, and inferiores pares esse non possunt potentioribus.

Et Sciendum est quod ipse Dominus Rex qui ordinariam habet Jurisdictionem, and
dignitatem, and potestatem super omnes Lib. 2. de acquirendo Dominio. cap. 24.
sect. 1.
qui in regno suo sunt, habet omnia jura in manu sua quae ad Coronam and
Laicalem pertinent potestatem, and materialem gladium qui pertinet ad Regni
gubernaculum, habet etiam Justitiam and Judicium quae sunt Jurisdictiones ut ex
Jurisdictione sua sicut Dei Minister and Vicarius.

Habet etiam quae sunt pacis ut populus sibi traditus in pace sileat, and
quiescat, habet etiam coertionem ut delinquentes puniat and coerceat.

Si ab eo breve petatur, cum breve non Currat contra ipsum, locus erit
Supplicatione quod factum suum Corrigat and emendet Bracton. Lib. 5. cap. 8.
quod quidem si non fecerit satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod Dominum expectet
ultorem nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare multo fortius contra
factum suum venire.

And Stamford a Judge speaking of the opinion of Wilby delivered in Mich. 14.
E. 3. that in King Henry the 3ds Reign he had seen a Writ which was Precipe
Henrico Regi, and Stamford grants of the Kings 41.
it was said in Hilary Term 22. E. 3. that in the time of King H. 3. the King
might be impleaded as any other Common Person, but King E. 1. his Son ordained
such as were grieved, or to sue to the King by Petition, howbeit saving the
authority or reformation of those books, he thought that the Law was never that
a man should have any such Action against the King, and says that Bracton in
his 3d Book under the Title of contra quem competit Assisa concludes as to the
King in the negative; And so says Stamford, no Action lies against the King,
but the party damnified is to sue unto him by Petition. And in one place
Bracton discoursing where the King does a wrong, he says, nec poterit ei
aliquis necessitatem imponere quod illam corrigat vel amendet (speaking
doubtfully Bracton. Lib. 5. de defaltis cap. 3.
not positively with a nisi sit) qui dicat quod universitas Regni and
Baronagium suum hoc facere debeat and possit in Curia ipsius Regis.

But he does more clearly express himself afterward, when he says, Rex enim
decipi potest cum sit homo, Deus autem nunquam cum sit Deus, and where any
thing should be said to be injuria Domini Regis, says again, that Superiorem
non habeat nisi Deum, and satis erit illi pro paena quod Deum expectet ultorem,
and quicquid dicitur de facto Regis eo quod est Rex and proinde factum judicium
disputari non debet, nec factum a quoquam judicare nec revocari poterit, cum
sit justum, si autem factum injustum fuerit, perinde non est factum Regis, and
cum non sit factum Regis, quia injustum, inde disputari poterit and factum
Judicari, sed idem emendari non poterit nec revocari sine eo.

So as to rescue the words of that Learned Author from those wicked and absurd
interpretations, which the late Parliament-Rebells and Monarchy-Underminers
would have put upon them, It must either be thought that that worthy book of
his, has in that particular Place and words so caught at, fallen under the
fate of many Eminent Books or Manuscripts even amongst those of the venerable
Fathers of the Church, who have not in a long race or course of Time and
contingences been able to escape the hands of Corruptors, as the Books or works
of the Excellent Origin did by the overbusy designs and rashness of Russinus,
the many Spurious Manuscripts of the Vatican Library, and of other Popish
Authors Baronius Annalls ad An. 315. 12. 13. 14. 15.
so acknowledged to be by Baronius, and some other of their own Writers.

Or rather that the good man intended no more by the word Magister then an
instructor or an Assistant, as the Jews called their Doctors Rabbis; or as
Origin was called, by way of Eminency, the Master of the Eastern Churches, and
St. Cyprian called Tertullian so who was never his Master; and our Famons
Lawyer, Littleton, gave no less a name to Judge Newton his Predecessor.

And that he used the word Socii, but as Aeneas is said to Virgills Aeneids.
have done to his afflicted Trojans in their wanderings to seek new habitations,
when in his Oration to comfort them, he says, O Socii neque enim ignari, sumus
ante malorum; or as Julius Caesar did when he encouraged his Soldiers with the
acceptable title of Commilitones.

Or as our laws and reasonable Customs have done in the titles and use of the
Masters of Chancery, Subordinate to the Lord Chancellors or Keepers of the
great Seal of England, who sit and say nothing; or as in the acts of our Courts
of Justice are done, where they are recorded and said to have been done by the
Chief Justice and Socios Suos; or as in the case of an associate unto a Chief
Justice, or any of the Kings Justices Sitting by and under the Kings
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, where an equality, co-ordination, or
Superiority so contra-distinct and opposite each unto other can never be
Claimed or allowed. And the Framers and Fancyers of that kind of Argument will
gain little by it, when the word Magister properly and truly signifies no more
then a Doctor or Instructor (not a Superior) as Sr Henry Spellman has given us
the definition, received meaning, and acceptance of it, when he says, in Jure
Canonico vel Civili Magistri dicuntur in Theologia vel Artibus videtur tempore
Clementis. 5. and Concilii Spelman glos in Verbo Magister.
viennensi Magistri and Doctoris vocabula confundere aevo scilicet Edwardi 1.
Usitatiorem tunc fuisse apud nostrates Magistri titulum, reverendum and hoc
vocabulum semper de peritia venit and in nomine cognoscitur quod sit moribus
aestimandum.

And therefore those many Testimonies before-recited of Bractons contrary
meaning, if he may be, as certainly he ought to be, allowed to be his own
Expositor may free and vindicate him from being either a Presbyterian or a
Conventicler or Republican, and make him to be the better believed, for that he
wrote that book after the 20th, Year of King Henry the 3d. as will appear by
his citations therein flagranti Seditione, when the times were full of danger
and Suspicion, there were great thoughts of heart, and commotions of mind, and
the Regal Authority was endeavored to be depressed.

Lived after the 21st Year of the Reign of that King, when the jealousies of
that part of his Nobility which shortly after took Arms, and entered into an
open War and Rebellion, against him, had made him walk in that dreadful
Procession with burning Torches through Westminster Hall to the Abbey Church or
Cathedral, cursing the infringers of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forestis, and
being a Judge Itinerant in the Dugdales Origenes Juridiciales. Seldens notes
upon Hengham. 239.
51d, Year of that Kings Reign, was believed to have written that Book in the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward the First, could not be ignorant of what
had been done, and To. Pat. 51. H. 3. in dorso.
Transacted in the 42d Year of the Reign of King Henry the Seldens dissertatio
ad Fletam.
3. in the aforesaid Provisions at a Parliament (so called) holden at Oxford,
and in the 49th, Year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d, during his
Imprisonment by an unruly part of the Nobility.

But if the Earls could have been said to have been tanquam Socii and fraena in
Power and Authority with the King, which they never were, that could not
Entitle the Barons who in the language of our Laws, Records, and Histories,
foreign, or domestique, were never called Comites, or Socii of their
Sovereigns. But as Earls had surely something else to do, and were not (as
Fraenas use to be Superior to Horses whose much greater strength could not
otherwise be subdued by mankind) to govern and rule their Sovereign as the
greatly abused words of Bracton would have it, when their ordinaria Epilogo.
Li. 2. de vite Aelfredi Regis. Script per Johannem Spel-Kenrici Spelmani filium.
potestas in King Aelfreds and those elder times now very near 800. Years ago,
was in Comitiis Comitativis praesidere in bellis sui Comitatus militibus
imperandi, in Curiasine Comitar^ Regis conciliis publicis suorumque negotiis
attendendi, and mandata Regia subditis suis Communicandi Rex enim ipsi Comiti
in Curia sua plerunque residenti, mandata detulit ille Vicecomiti, his
Centurionibus, Centuriones decurionibus, maxima cum expeditione pertulerunt.

And neither the Earls or Barons were or claimed to be Consortes Imperii, or
like the Spartan Ephori.

Or if the Title of Comites did or could give such a Right or Privilege unto
them, which may with great Evidence be utterly denied, and the contrary as
easily Justified, the Commons or universality of the People, will, until they
can be so mad as to think themselves to be Earls, Socii or Comites of their
Kings and Princes or Barons, be little the better for that mischievously
overscrewed Text or words of Bracton.

Or The Earls or Barons being not likely in their honorable Assembly of Peers
to claim, or have more then a deliberative and consultive Power in matters only
concerning the King and his Monarchical Government, but where it was inter
Pares or amongst themselves, or by his special license, Hoveden part
posteriore. 375.
when at the first Coronation of King Richard the 1st, the Comites and Barons
serviebant in Domo Regis prout dignitates eorum exigebant, and Die Coronationis
suae Johannes Rex accinxit Willielmum Marescallum gladio Comitatus de Striguil
idem 451. part posteriore.
and Gaufridum filium Petri gladio Comitatus de Essex qui licet antea vocati
essent Comites and administrationem suorum Comitatuum habebant, tamen non
accincti erant gladio Comitatus and ipsi illo die servierunt ad mensum Regis
accincti gladiis.

And therein Mr Seldom that Monarch of learning and Dictator of Reason is to be
so interpreted as it may consist with Reason and Truth, when he declared that
the Lords in their deliberative or judicial Power in the Court or House of
Peers in Parliament, had a Power to give or pass judgment for or against their
Sovereign; for that in the precedent cited by him of King Edward thr Confessors
appeal or accusation of Earl Godwin in the great Council or Parliament of that
Seldens tit. honor. 632, 633. 634.
King for the death of his Brother Alfred, to whom he as well as the King had
appealed for Justice, as the words of the judgment thereupon given against Earl
Godwin and the opinion of the Lords not contradicted there mentioned as
Malmesbury, Hoveden, Huntington, Brompton and Florentius do testify was that
Comes nec Baro, nec aliquis Regi subditus bellum, battle, or single combat
(says the margin; a kind of trial then much in use amongst contending private
Persons, where other Evidence failed) contra Regem in appellatione sua de lege
potest vadiare sed in toto ponere in misericordia sua and emendas offerre
competentes; whereupon it was advised that ipsimet and filius suus and duodecim
Comites and amici and consanguinei sui essent coram Rege humiliter procederent
onerati cum tantum auri and argenti quantum inter brachia quilibet poterit
bajulare illud sibi pro suo transgresso offerendo deprecando ut ipse male
volentiam suam, rancorem and iram Comiti condonet and accepto homagio suo and
fidelitate terras suas sibi integre restituat and retradat illi autem omnes sub
ista forma thesauro se onerantes and ad Regem accedentes seriem and modum
considerantes locum eorum sibi demonstrabant Quorum considerationi Rex
contradicere nolens quicquam judicaverant ratificavit wherein the utmost use
that can be made of that Action and precedent to confine the Kings judicative
Power in Parliament to that of the Peers and Lords Spiritual and Temporal is
that the King upon Earl Godwins answer to the Kings accusing him for the Death
of Alfrred his Brother, and the Earls eaecusing himself with a Domine mi Rex
salva reverentia and gratia vestra pace and dominatione fratrem vestrum nunquam
prodidi nec occidi unde super hoc pono me in consideratione Curiae vestrae was
not willing to be a Judge or give Sentence in an appeal of his own and such a
Concernment as the Death of his Brother for which one of the Peers was to be
Arraigned and fitter to be tried as the L^w required by his Peers which by the
Ancient Custom like Trialls might be done without any derogation from the Kings
higher and supreme Authority, and therefore gave a leave or license to them in
that single particular or extraordidinary case to do it.

And our Kings and Princes to avoid the imputation of Tyranny Oppression or
Partiality, may be the more willing to indulge the like in all cases and
matters of Attainders and forfeitures of lands and Estates where our Laws do
give unto them the benefit accrewing.

And the honorable Peers and Judges in that Court subordinate unto the King
may as to matters therein determinable be the better content therewith for that
not being Sworn nor punishable, as Judges in other Courts are, and in what they
do advise therein, they neither are or can be punishable in a judicio
colloquiale, wherein as Paulus Screrbic has said in his Paulus Screrbic
promptuar. Statut Poloniae. 171.
Statua Poloniae, Judex in colloquiis aut Regis praesentia judicans argui de
male judicato non potest.

And the word KUPIA as Sir Henry Spelman says, with the Greeks and Romans
signifying potestas and dominium, and the Lord or owner of it, qui potestate
fretus est judiciumque exercet, Spelmanni glossar. in vocibus Curia and Curtis.
and the place habitaculum, domini, the residence or Court of the Lord or
Superior, ubi sana rei narratio placitum forenses vocant, dicebatur autem Curia
primo de Regia, palatio principis, inde de familia and judiciis in ea habitis
ritu veterrimo, or the place where Kings did administer Justice, surely Kings
were not therein to be coordinate, or any less then Superior.

And the very Learned Sir John Spelman the Son of that Excellent Learned Father
writing the Life of King Alured Aelfredi magni Anglorum Regis vita per Johannem
Spelman Equit (...)rat Henrici. f. Lib. 2. 121. sect. 10. 11. 12.
or Alfred, has together with the unquestionable historical part and truth of
the relation given us the observation that

Et Comitum potestatem ad huc minuebat nam neque iis integra restabat
negotiorum bellicorum tractatio. Horum enim magna pars Heretochiis, sive
Ducibus inferioribus a plebe in Comitiis suis Electis Committebatur. Hi enim
recensionibus, meditationibis, armorumque lustrationibus praefuerunt; milites
in Centuriis suis coeuntes, ad locum toti exercitui destinatum deducebant; in
bellis demum Ducum inferiorum officiis fungebantur* Prout e legibus boni
Edwardi aliisque locis facile colligitur. Haec institutio (cum a populo, non
Comitibus Ductores hi eligebantur) non parum e Comitum potentia abstulit.

Comitibus ergo, quorum potentia Regibus semper maxim formidabilis,
relinquebatur ordinaria potestas in Comitiis Comitativis praefidendi; in bellis
sui Comitatus militibus imperandi, in Curia sive Comitatu Regis conciliis
publicis, suo rumque negotiis attendendi; and mandata Regia subditis suis
communicandi quod mira celcritate post novam hanc imperii institutionem factum
est.

Et quidem si Aelfredi nostri vestigiis posteriores Regis institissent, neque
tot Seditiones ortae, neque tantum Sanguinis in bellis Civilibus exhaustum,
neque Regis ipsi toties temporibus subsequentibus periclitati fuissent. Sed tam
been constituta partim bella Civilia (quae statim post ejus obitum
recrudescentia pene omnibus legibus executionem impediebant, videantur Edvardi
senioris querelae, lege quarta) Danique post renovatas invasiones sub canuto
victores, maxim vero Normanni, labefactarunt. Gulielmus enim, sive ut
Magnates, in invasione regni hujus maxima momenta, pro meritis, and pactis
etiam, remuneraret; sive ut Anglos dominio suo efficacius subderet, nobilibus
suis Normannis maximam potentiam (que postea tot malorum origo) indulsit.
Henricus vero primus, quantum potuit, leges Aelfredi nostri and instituta
revocavit; sed tempora consuetudinesque perversae omnia, quae expedire
poterant, inferri non patiebantur.

And the authority of our Kings in Parliament were not only in the Ages before
but in King Alfreds or Alureds time, Superior and Super-eminent in his great
Counsels over his Subjects, as Asser Menevensis living in his Court Asser
Menevensis in Aelfredi Regis and Seldens tit. honor. 628.
and Writing his Life after his Death says, that Saepissimo in concionibus
Comitum and praepositorum ubi pertinacissime inter se dissentiebant (ita ut
pene nullus eorum quicquid a Comitibus and praepositis judicatum fuisset verum
esse concederet) qui pertinaci dissensione obstinatissimo compulsi Regis subire
judicium singuli subarrabant, and when Appeals and Writs of Error came before
him from his Earls or Ealdermen says Mr. Seldom out of Asser Menevensis, when
he found Error and Injustice committed by them would Sharply reprove them.

For in our Monarchical Government with the ancient long continued and
well-experimented existence and constitution of the House of Peers and Peerage
in the Kingdom of England, the Common People were so subordinate to the
Baronage and Peers as the Commons were allways understood by our Kings and our
Laws and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Common People
themselves, to be comprehended in and under the Baronage, who did for them and
as they were included in them very often in our great Counsels and
Parliaments, grant or deny aids or Subsidies, and in their behalf without the
Commons themselves speaking or advising, allege their poverty and disability,
and the Popes and Foreign Neighbor Princes in their letters and rescripts
understanding it no otherwise, of which Mat. Paris and Thomas Walsingham.
Matthew Paris, and Thomas of Walsingham authors of great credit living in the
Reign of King Henry the 3d. and King Edward the 1st. his Son, have afforded us
plentiful instances.

And all things rightly observed or Considered, could not give any one the
least of reason or color of it, for if our Comites and Burones (Bracton not
mentioning the Bishops,) who then had great power if not too much over our
Kings and Princes, there then being no Dukes, Marquisses, and Viscounts whom
our Kings then used not to create, though there were many Dukes, or said to be,
in the time of the Saxons before the Norman Conquest, who by our fundamental
Laws enjoyed all their authority Subordinate unto their Parliaments and Great
Counsels, might forfeit their Lives, Estates, and Lands, holden of them in
Capite, which was the only Measure of punishment in England before the Act of
Parliament in the 25th Year of the Reign of King 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2.
Edward the 3d. was made, which did at the request of the Lords and Commons
(the Bishops not mentioned) declare what should afterward be attempted and
punished as High Treason, against him and his Heirs, or for Counterfeiting his
Great Seal, which did or should bear record of the Laws and Actions and Kingly
Government of our Kings and Princes, there having not been in that Act of
Parliament or any Act of Parliament; or Laws of our British, Saxon, Danish, or
Norman, before or since, tacitly or expressly, for the abolishing or taking
away our Feudall Laws and Customs or that ever to be wailed unhappy Act of
Parliament made by his now Majesty, King Charles the 2. for the taking away of
the Court of Wards and Liveries by reason of his tenures in Capite and of all
homage and fealty, drawn and prepared by a Learned Lawyer, and a Member of that
House of Commons in Parliament, Dreaming of a Commonwealth, until their man
of Sin Oliver Cromwell was pleased to awake them, who was in his profession
well known to have been eminently skilled in the Common Laws of England, some
part of the Civil and Canon Laws, and a great part of the Records of the
Kingdom, and much honored for his love and care of Justice, But being a Judge
in those Times, and seduced by another of that Rank, to take such a place upon
him, upon the pretense of keeping up and supporting the Law, and was upon his
Majesty's Restoration advanced into an higher degree, seemed notwithstanding
not to have been so much or so well read as he might have been in the Feudall
Laws excellent constitution and frame of the Monarchick Government of this
Realm, when in that House of Commons either in a cool neutrality, or over
persuaded by by his fears of or desire of living in safety or to preserve the
Common Law, when against his will and well known Integrity, he was in that
house of Commons in Parliament heard by another Member, that Sat next unto him,
to say or declare his opinion that the King was trusted by the People, wherein
he might have better considered that two parts of our Laws, most precious and
necessary both to and for the King and his People, which were the Summoning and
calling of Parliaments or Great Counsels, and the Trials of his Subjects
Guilts or Innocencies, per Pares, with Reliefs and Herriots due to our Kings
and Princes, and unto Ten thousand Lords of Manors or thereabouts Subordinate
unto their Kings in England, and Wales, with Fines and Amercements, Felons and
Outlaws Goods, Annum diem and vastum cum multis aliis, etc. were solely and
principally derived from the Feudall Laws.

Which with some of the Usages and Customs of the Nation, and our Statutes and
Acts of Parliament, from Time to Time after made and added thereunto, were the
Laws which many of our Kings and Princes took an Oath at their Coronations to
Protect and Defend, as also the leges and Consuetudines quas vulgus elegerit,
who, if our Feudal Laws had not been so very ancient as they have been, would
not want such as would heartily desire and make choice of them to have Lands
given to hold of their King in Capite, and enjoy to them and their Heirs under
his more especial protection, and was in the Reign of our famous Arthur, King
of Britain, esteemed so great an happiness, as Consensu Historicorum
eruditorum of that Age and Time, Leland has informed us, Utherus Pendraco fuit
pater Arthuri cujus and Leland in assertione Arthuri.
Gorlas Corinnae regulus beneficiarius erat a Notion or Title anciently used of
such as held their lands in Capite or by Knight Service.

And therefore howsoever the learned Bracton's Pen might seem to have erred in
his expression or words of Fraenare Regis, it might as it ought consonantly to
the Proper and Genuine Sense, Intention and Meaning of all his Arguments,
through the Context and Tenor of his whole Books, being no little one, be
accepted and taken to be no otherwise then a restraining him, as Kings and
great and good men have usually been, by good advice and Council of friends or
Servants, as Naaman the Syrian's Servants did in their Lords returning back in
an anger from the Prophet Elisha, who came near unto him and persuaded him to
wash in Jordan 2 Reg. ca. 5.
in order to his recovery from his Leprosy, when otherwise that harsh word or
phrase of fraenare Reges could not without great danger, damage or forfeiture,
be used, or any forcible persuasion put upon a free Prince, by Authorities
coutrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Justly and Truly
descending from the Feudall Laws which commands all men holding of them in
Capite to do otherwise.

And although some of our Ancient Historians have informed us, that in a
Parliament holden at Merton in the 20th, Year of the Reign of King Henry the
(...). upon the Bishops endeavoring to have a Law made, that according to the
Canon Law the Children born before Marriage illicitis amplexibus, should by a
subsequent Marriage of the Parents be esteemed legitimate, the Temporal Lords
restiterunt, and laying their hands upon their Swords Jurarunt quod noluerunt
leges Angliae mitare, it was not any plain absolute denial of the Kings
Decisive and Legislative Power, but only an Altercation, Debate, or Dispute
betwixt the Spiritual and Temporal Lords in Parliament concerning that matter.

And neither the Bishops, or the house of Commons, or any of the Commons
represented, or not, could not so much as attempt to force or bridle their King
by Commotions or force of Arms, which by the Feudall Laws and the most of our
Laws and Customs derived from thence would have been legally adjudged a
Rebellion, and Fraenare Regis in that undecent expression, si quod rei fecerit
aut neglexerit, quod Dominum contempsisse dicitur, aut si Dominus per
consequentiam laedatur persona cujus existimationem sartam tectam Feltman de
Feudis, sect. 45. p. 146. 148.
manner Domini interest, for Concilio and auxilio Domino adesse debet, which
was the Cause and ground of right Reason, that in the Reign of our King Edward
the 2. the Lord Beaumont or de Bello monte was in Parliament Fined for refusing
to come to Parliament and give the King his advice or Council: And it is not
many Years since that the Emperor of Germany Seized and Imprisoned Prince
William of Furstenburgh, a feudatory for appearing in Person at a Treaty
betwixt the Emperor, and the King of France, against his Lord the Emperor; And
our Mesne Lords holding their Lands, Jurisdictions; Courts Baron and Courts
Leet, notwithstanding that Act of Parliament for dissolving the Court of Wards
and Liveries, and the tenures in Capite supporting it, did from the 24th, Day
of February in the Year of our Lord 1645, when in the height of their Wars
against their Sovereign they had but Voted the Dissolution of thrt Court and
the Tenures in Capite, for at that Time there appeared not to have been any Act
of Parliament, although an Act made in the Time of Oliver Cromwell might be an
usher, or used as a pattern in the drawing of that (by a learned Judge of those
Rebellions Times) wherein the Reliefs and Herriots were found necessary to be
reserved unto his now Majesty his Heirs and Sucessors.

Which may sadly be believed to have been a Decapitation or cutting off the
head of the Body-Politick or Government as a Prologue to the Tragical and
Direful Murder in the cutting off the Head of their most Pious better
Deserving King; No King or Prince in the World, Christian or Heathen, black or
white, that had all their Subjects except their Nobility and the Bishops, and
such as hold their Lands by the Honorary Services, of grand Serjeanty, or by
the tenures of Copyhold or by Copy of Court-Roll unto which our Littleton
gives no better a name or Title then tenure in Villainage, or any service
incident thereunto, which being Littletons tenures.
originally derived from the tenures in Capite, were, not many Years ago, very
nigh a fourth Part of the Kingdom, that had so small a real dependence upon
them, or so great a part of their Kingdoms of England, and Ireland converted
into free and Common Soccage, the tenures in Capite in Ireland being about that
Time with the like exceptions converted into free and common Soccage, as
England disastrously also was, the Isles of Man, Wight, Garnsey and Jarsey; the
two latter being parts of Normandy, together with the American Plantations, as
Virginia, Bermudas, Barbados, Jamaica and New England and many other our West
Indian Plantations escaping that part of the greatest wound that could be given
to our Ancient Monarchy.

And how dangerous and prejudicial a misconstruction of the Statutes de Usilus
in possessionem transferendis might be both unto the King and his Subjects, if
he should be accounted to have been a trustee for the his people, and it was a
wonder that the late Lord Chief Justice Hale should in that Act turning all
into Free and Common Soccage, not take a Care to abolish the Releifs, being a
Duty long before the Conquest payable to his Majesty's Royal Progenitors, but
leave them with an Exception of all Releifs and Herriots, Fees, Rents,
Escheats, Dower of the 3d part, Fines, Forfeitures, and such as are and have
been usually paid in free and Common Soccage.

Maimed and mangled the Monarchy and Government, as 1. cap. Iudic. 2. 6. and 7.
much, if not more, then Adonibezeg a King of Canaan did the Seventy Kings,
whom he had taken Prisoners, and cut off their great Toes and Thumbs, for no
other advantage then to undermine the beautiful and goodly Structure of our
Government, built and supported by and upon these great Pillars and excellent
fundamentalls, which, like an House built upon a Rock, was able to resist any
the winds and Storms, for many Ages past leave us as a house built upon the
Sands, ready to drop into it is own Infallible ruins, which could not be so
Rebuilt or Reduced to it is former Strong and Goodly Structure, by reserving to
the King and his Successors the Reliefs and Herriots, nor will arise to any
recompense, although it might be a great value, together with the Excise of
Ale, Beer and Sider, added thereunto, which has helped to bring in or increase,
as the opinion of the Doctors of Physic have informed us, that Epidemick now
more then ever Praedominant Scorbutique Disease, making rich the only
false-dealing Brewers and Alehouse-keepers, and Impoverishing the Common
People, and Consideratis Considerandis, in his Majesty's necessary and
inevitable Expenses more then ever was or can be easily or beforehand
calculated. And it may be hoped that it was neither intended by that no
Phanatique preparer or framer of that undermining Act of our Monarchick
Government, or any Assenters or Advisers of it, or his Majesty, that gave the
breath of life unto it, and was as the Anima, or Soul otherwise animating a
liveless body, did ever intend to abridge or deny himself the Sovereignty of
our British Seas, or their tenures in Capite holden of none but himself and
God, the Antemurale or Walls thereof, and with our Ships traveling in or out
upon them, as the Safety, Strength, Power, Riches, and Honor of the Nation, or
to be ranked or accounted as a tenure in Common Soccage, free ab omnibus
servitiis, when it was never accounted to be any part, or within the verge of
the Court of Wards and Liveries.

The Seas belonging to our King of England's Sovereignty having been never
under the Courts of Wards and Liveries, or any of its Incidents, or
appurtenances, or within its cognizance, and this newly found out device or
extraordinary way of Soccage or tenure by the Plow, free ab omnibus servitiis,
was never nor can be fit for the Seas, unless they, that cunningly have been so
fond of it, can make it to be fit or proper or to any purpose or profit to
adventure to Plow up the Seas, with Plows drawn by Horses or Oxen, and by that
means of Plowing up the Seas, make the Seas to yield and deliver up all their
Riches, Plate, Gold, Silver, and Jewels, which misfortunes of Shipwreck have
before 2000 Years if not more in the Epoche or age of our long continued
Monarchy far exceeding the Gold of Ophir, and the value of all the Lands of
England if they were now to be sold, the former admitting a greater Decay then
the Latter, Our British Seas having always been in subordination to our Kings
and Princes under the Separate Government of the Lord Admiralls, Court of
Admiralty, Vice and Rere Admiralls, Deptford-House, and the Cares of the
Cinque Ports, many other Seaports, Light-Houses and Maritime Laws, etc.

Whereby our Kingdom has been greatly enriched by its Trade and Merchandise
carried further then the Roman Eagles ever Flew, and as far as the four great
quarters or parts of the Habitable World do extend or stretch themselves unto,
and the Sun ever shined upon.

And if it had not been upon the Design of blowing up or Disarming our Monarchy
together with as much as they could of the Kings Regal Rights for the Defense
of Himself, they would not have attacqued the Militia, or labored to Destroy
it, when Glin Sergeant at Law, a busy Enemy of our Monarchy, and another
Sergeant at Law whose name for his great parts and abilities I silence,
heartily wishing that he would before he Dye add repentance to his treasury and
great stock of Learning in the employing of it Otherwise then it should have
been in that so called long and Hypocritical Wars, Rebellions, False
Doctrines, together with his Misdoings, in the drawing, and forming the Act of
Oblivion and General Pardon, the greatest and largest in extent and gift that
ever any of our Kings and Princes gave unto the greatest and most in number of
their Subjects, wherein he acquitted these numberless Offenders, that never
pardoned any of his or his Blessed Fathers Loyal Party any or but small things,
but retained every thing which they had taken from them by Plundering, Taxes,
Sequestrations, Decimations, and spoil of Woods and Timber, which should have
been an assistance to the building of their burnt Act of Oblivion and General
Pardon granted by his Majesty after his Happy Restoration.
or demolished Houses or Castles, and the building of Ships the wooden walls of
our Seas, and the Carriers out and the bringing home of our Merchandise.

In the Preamble whereof It was declared, that whereas several Treasons,
Murders, and Crimes had been committed and done by Color of Commissions, or
Power granted unto them by his Majesty or his two Houses of Parliament, as if
any Treason could in Law be committed by any Commission or Order of the King or
his Royal Father, the Blessed Martyr, and the Framers of that Act of general
Pardon, could not but remember, that many that Assisted his Late Majesty came
upon his Proclamation and setting up his Standard at Nottingham Castle under
the obligation of their Tenures in Capite, and the Duty of their Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and others for hire by great Sums of Money, lent him
by that Loyal and Prudent old Earl of Worcester, Grandfather unto the now Duke
of Beaufort, and by men leavyed and sent unto him from Wales in his Majesty's
March as far as Shrowsbury toward him, the better to enjoy, and be near the
great assistance which he promised and performed, without which, and the
Ancient and Legal aid and help of his tenures in Capite and by Knight Service,
he could not have made any defense for Himself or his Loyal Subjects, but might
have been taken and Imprisoned by the Sheriffs of every shire or County,
thorough which he was to pass in his Journey to York, with his eldest Son the
Prince, whom they would likewise have seized upon, when he was by the Faction
and their Hunters, driven and pursued as it were thither for Refuge, as a
Partridge hunted upon the Mountains, from his Parliament; when he had no
Provision of Arms, Men, or Money: And the Rebell-Party of that Parliament had
formed and beforehand made ready a great and powerful Army without any manner
of want of Money and a seduced party of his People to march against him.

And our Feudall Laws were so little despised, unknown or unusual in this
Kingdom, as our Magna-Charta and Charta de Foresta, more then 30 times
confirmed by Acts of Parliament, and the Petition so called, of Right, will
appear to have no other source or Fountain as to the most of the many parts
thereof then the Feudall Laws. And they must be little Conversant in the
reading, practice and usage thereof, demonstrable in and through our Records
and Authentic Annalls and Historians that will not confess and believe it,
when they shall so manifestly almost every where see the vestigia and tracks
thereof and our Saxon Laws faithfully translated and rendered unto us by the
labors and industry of our learned Lambard and Abraham Whelock Arabic
professor in the University of Cambridge and the glossary of our Learned Sr
Henry Spelman, may abundantly be found Lindenbrogius.
to declare that they had for the most part no other Progenitors.

And could not be understood to amount unto no less then the greatest and
strongest Fortifications that any Kingdom could have, though not so guarded by
the Sea, as our Islands of Great Britain are and have been, when Seventy
Thousand Horsemen gravi Armatura or not meanly Armed should (as the manner of
those Times were) without much disturbance to their other affairs be suddenly
ready upon any Emergencies of Wars, Intestine or Foreign, without Pay or
Wages, under the greatest obligations Divine and Humane, to defend their Kings
themselves and their Estates, which in more valiant and plain dealing Times did
in no longer part of time, commonly determine the fate or fortune of a Kingdom
as to a great part of the Event or success of a War.

And was so necessary to the Defense of the King and People, as our William the
Conqueror, that did not bring but found the Feudall Laws here in England, may
be thought to have been very willing to have strengthend his Conquests here,
when he distributed amongst his great Officers in the Army and his Soldiers as
much of his Conquered Lands, as Ordericus Vitalis has related it, Seventy
Thousand Knights Fees, who in regard of their service for the defense of the
King, had a C^kes 1 part. institutes and Comment snr. Littleton. ca: 4. sect.
101. and 102.
Privilege by the Kings Writ for them and their Tenants to be free ab omni
Talagio from all Taxes, which privilege or acquittal says Sr Edward Coke
discontinued. Of which our Feudall Laws the Britains the more ancient
Inhabitants of England as well as the Britains in America in France, now known
by the name of the Duchy of Britain, cannot be believed to have been Ignorant,
when the Father of our Victorious Arthur, King of Britain, was a
Beneficiarius, and held his Lands in Cornwall of the King in Capite, unto whose
Kingdom were appendant the large Dominions of Norway, and the Islands ultra
Scanriam, Islandiam, Ireland, Curland, Dacia, Semeland, Winland, Finland,
Wareland, Currelam, Flanders, and omnes alias terras and Insulas Orientalis
Oceani usque Russiam, Et iu Luppo etiam posuit orientalem metam Regni Brittania
and multas alias Insulas usque Scotiam and usque in Septentrione quae sunt de
appendicis Scaniae quae Noricena dicitur, and that Kingdom of Britain had so
large an Extent, and the King of Britain such a directum Dominium therein,
that upon an exact Search and inquiry into the Memorialls, Antiquities In fine
L L. Edwards Regis.
Annalls, and Historians thereof, it was evident that in the Times of Ely and
Samuel, after the Siege and Destruction of Troy, Brute came into this Island,
called it by his name, and divided his Kingdom to his 3 Sons, Loegria, now
called England, to his Eldest, Albania, since called Scotland came to the 2 and
Cambria or Wales unto his 3 Son Camber, after whom was Arthurus Rex Britonium
famosissimus.

Who subdued a great part of France, and those his Noble Acts were not unknown
unto some of the Roman Poets and Historians, and the Laws used here in his
Time, may with great reason be understood to have been the same which the
English or Saxons our later Ancestors, Fletibus and Precibus, with
supplications washed in Tears, obtained of the Norman Conqueror to be left unto
them, as King Edward the Confessors Laws for his Justice and Holiness reputed
to have been a Saint, and together with the Mercenlage or Laws made by Mercia a
Queen of Mercia, or the Borders or Confines of in Praefatione L. L. Edwardi
Confessioris.
Wales, ought to be esteemed the same aggregate Laws, which K. William the
Conqueror of the Britains, Saxons and Normans after they had began to
Intermarrie, and were become, as it were, Populus unus and Gens una, were
certified by the greatest, most universal and most Solemn Jury and verdict
that ever was Impannelled or made use of in England, and under the strictest
and severest Charge, not by Judges delegate but by the King himself, and a
Conquering King that had omnia Jura et terras in manu sua, which he did
Consilio Baronum suorum in Anno quarto Regni sui cause to be Summoned through
all the Shires and Counties of England of and out of the Nobiles sapientes et
in Lege cendites, ut eorum Leges, et Jura, et Consuetudines ab ipsis audiret,
Whereupon in singulis totius patriae Comitatibus, a Jury of 12 men, qualified
as aforesaid Jure Jurando, coram ipso Rege, before the King himself, no
ordinary Judge but the Highest under God, quo ad possent recto tramite
incidentes, neither turning on the Right hand nor the Left, legum suarum and
Consuetudinum suarum patefacerent, neither omitting or adding any thing by
fraud or praevarication, yet the King seeming better to approve of his Norway
and Danish Laws, which in many things, affinitate Saxonum, seemed to be the
same with the Norway Laws except in some small difference in the heightning of
the Fines and Forfeitures, which when the King had heard read unto him maxim
appreciutus est, and proecepit ut Obsequerentur per totum Regnum, for he said
that his Ancestors and omnium Baronum fere Normannorum Antecesseres Norwigenses
exticissent, Et quod de Norwicis olim venissent, Et hac Authoritate leges eorum
cum profundioses and honestiores omnibus aliis essent prae caeteris Regni sui
Legibus asserebat se debere sequi and observare (and the Saxon Laws being in
the Saxon language and he and his Normans for some Generations past altogether
speaking French written in another Idiome and manner could not be thought so
soon well to understand) Quippe cum aliaerum legibus Nationum Britonum,
scilicet, Anglorum, Pictorum and Scotorum praeponderassent, as if he or his
Normans having so lately Conquered the Kingdom of England, and he had after
some time returned into Normandy, whether he had Carried some of the most
Potent of the English Nobility as Pledges and Hostages.

And after some tarrying there, and time expended in the settling of his
Affairs, returned into England, where he found Ordericus Vitalis degestis
Gulielmi Conquestoris.
some Mutinies and Rebellions, might not, in a mind wholly employed in the
Study of War and Glory be allowed some parcel of Ignorance, or so much as to
make him and his Norman Adventurers mistake and not understand that the Feudall
Laws, and those of Norway were the same for the most part with the Laws of the
Saxons or their Praedecessors, or their often invading and contending neighbors
the Picts and Scots, or the Saxons so impoverished and affrighted, as not to be
able to declare unto him that the Laws of St Edward the Confessor were the same
which the Conquerers Compatriots the Norwigians were governed by, or might not,
so well as they should, have understood their own Laws or the Feudal Laws,
which their Northern or German Ancestors had so much affected to be ruled and
governed by, more especially when those Laws so Sacred of St Edward the
Confessor had by reason of some discords in England layne, as it were, hid and
asleep, about Sixty Eight years from the Reign of King Edgar until the Reign
of King Edward the Confessor. Which the Conqueror himself had then only as the
learned Sr Roger Twisden Sr Roger Twisdon in his Preface to William the
Conqueror's Laws.
says, ut melius unicuique administraret Anglicam locutiorem Sa^egit ediscere,
Et in perceptione hujus durior aetas illum compescebat endeavored to learn;
which Verdict or Careful Enquiry, in the poor Conquered Englishman's greatest
Concernments in this world, next unto their greatest in the next being
presented to him, he Concilio habito precatu Baronum granted their Petition,
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury and Maurice Bishop (of London) Scripserunt
propriis manibus omnia ista praedicta per praeceptum praedicti domini Regis
Gulielmi, Et ex illo igitur die multa Authoritate veneratae, et per universum
regnum Corroboratae, et Observatae sunt prae ceteris patriae legibus leges
Edwardi Regis Sancti.

Insomuch as King William the Conqueror, upon a better understanding that those
Laws of St Edward were one and L. L. Gulielmi Conquestoris.
the same or very near of kindred unto the Norway or Danish Laws, had not only
given and distributed amongst his great Officers and Soldiers Seventy Thousand
Knights Fees, in lands of a great value to be holden of him his Heirs and
Successors in Capite, but in his own Laws afterward made other Feudall Laws as
additions thereunto, as de Clientari seu Feudorum Jure and Ingenuorum
Immunitate Ca. 55. de Clientum seu vassallorum praestationibus Ca. 58. nequis
Dominio suo debitas suas praestationes substrahat Ca. 34. de foemina granida
quae capitali supplicio damnatur Ca. 35. (which was a Law either before or
since brought hither by the Phenitians or Roman Colonies, Boemus demosibus
Gentium.
de relevio eorum qui Clientes pendent, c. 40. And in the decretis made by him,
it is mentioned, that cum principibus suis constituit post Conquisitionem
Angliae (not Constituerunt) that next unto the Reverence of God and Faith in
Christ, he would have inviolably observed and kept pacem and securitatem,
Concordiam, Judicium and Justiciam inter Anglos and Normannos, similiter inter
Francigenes and Britones Walliae and Cornubiae, and Pithos and Scotos Albaniae,
Similiter Francas and Insulicolas omnium Insularum and provinciarum quae
pertinent ad Coronam and dignitatem, and ad defensionem and observationem, and
ad honorem Regis infra omnes sibi subjectos per universam Regni Britania
firmiter and inviolabiliter, Statuimus etiam ut omnes liberi homines fide and
Sacramento affirment quod intra and extra universum Regnum, quod olim vocabatur
Regnum Britanniae, Willielmo Regi, Domino suo, fideles esse volunt, Terras et
Honores suos omni sidelitate ubique servare cum eo and contra Inimicos and
Alienigenas defendere volumus. Et hoc firmiter precipimus Decreta and leges
Gulielmi Conquestoris and emendationes. Quas posuit in Anglia quae olim
vocabatur Britannia.
and Concedimus, ut omnes liberi homines totius Monarchiae Regni nostri
praedicti habeant and teneant terras suas, and possessiones been, and in pace,
ab omni exactione injusta, and ab omni tallagio, Ita quod nihil ab eis exigatur
vel capiatur, nisi servitium suum liberum, quod de Jure nobis facere debent and
facere teneantur, and prout Statutum est eis, and illas a nobis datum and
Concessum Jure Haereditario in perpetuum per Comune Concilium totius Regni
nostri, Statuimus and firmiter praecipimus ut omnes Comites, Barons, and
milites, and servientes, and universi liberi homines totius Regni nostri
praedicti habeant and teneant se semper been and in armis and equis, ut decet
and oportet, and quod sint semper prompti and parati ad servitium suum integrum
nobis explendum et peragendum cum semper opus abfuerit secundum quod nobis
debent in feodis and tementis suis sicut illis statuimus per Commune Concilium
Regni nostri praedicti, and illis dedimus and Concedimus in feudis Jure
haereditario hoc praeceptum non sit violatum ullo modo super forisfacturam
plenam, statuimus etiam and firmiter praecipimus ut omnes liberi homines totius
Regni praedicti (which could not be understood to have been any other then his
Norman Commanders and Nobility for the most part if any English) sint fratres
conjurati ad Monarchiam nostram, and ad Regnum nostrum pro viribus suis and
facult atibus contra omnes pro posse suo defendendum, and viribus servandum,
and pacem and dignitatem nostram and Coronae nostrae integrum observandum, and
ad Judicium rectum and Justitiam constanter modis omnibus pro posse suo sine
dolo and sine dilatione faciendum.

Which being made at London, was without any limitation or restraint as to the
number of Days, wherein the Service was to be performed, or how long to be at
their own Wages, or their Kings was not at all expressed in that Kings
original Grant, Law or Constitution, for although the Fortune or Fate of a War
in those bold magnanimous and hardy Times, wherein they disdained to tarry for
the effects of Stratagems, Bribery, and Treacheries then little or not at all,
but now altogether or too much practiced, but universally and absolutely it
being as unsafe for a King as his People and Kingdom to undertake to foretell
the period of an Intestine Rebellion, the power and malice of a Foreign Enemy
or the sad and often Changes and events of War, and to leave a King without the
Power of a King and aid of his Subjects, and be a King only for Forty Days, and
upon every Occasion or mischance of War arising from Foreign Princes or his
Subjects, either by Sea or Land, be no longer a King then for so short a Time
as if the Subjects Loyalty were to be put under such a limitation, and if in
that Time he cannot gain the Victory, must run into an hole and hide himself in
an hourly expectation of Death, and a worse Destiny then that of the once
mighty King Nebuchadonozers being changed into an Ox, and put to grass until
the King of Kings (not his Subjects or People) should be pleased to restore him
to his former shape and dignity, which could never be understood to be the
meaning of our William the Conqueror.

And if praxis be, as it should be, de Jure Gentium accounted to have been
optimus legum Interpres, our Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, however
our very learned Littleton a Sir Edward Coke in procmio of his Institutes or
Comment upon Littletons Tenures.
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, who is by Sr Edward Coke his Commentator
believed to have written his book of Tenures in or about the 14th Year of King
Edward the 4th. and Sr Edward Coke without giving us any Record, Authority or
positive Law to warrant or build up their opinion for any such limitation, yet
it does not appear, but needs some further Confirmation. For the learned Sr
Robert Cottons Collection Sr Robert Cottons Collections. M. S.
out of the book of Doomesday has taught us, that Oxoniae Civitas tempore
Regis Edwardi Confessoris geldebat, nisi quando Londonium and Eboracum and
Wintonia geldebant, and hoc erat dimidia marci argenti ad opus mil quando
expeditio ibat per terram aut per mare, serviebat haec Civitas quantum 5. hydae
terrae, Barnestaple vero and Lydeford and Totendis serviebant quantum ipsa
Civitas.

Quando Rex ibat in expiditione Burgenses 20. ibant pro omnibus aliis, vel 20.
libras dabant Regi ut omnes essent liberi.

Omnes mansiones, quae vocantur murales, tempore Regis E. libera erant ab omni
expeditione and muri reparatione, propterea vocantur murales and Mansiones quia
si quis fuerit, and Rex praeceperit murum reficerit.

Civitas Lodocestria tempore Regis Edwardi reddebat per Annum Regi 30. libras,
ad numerum de 20. merae and 15. Sextarios mellis, quando Rex ibat in Exercitu
per terram de ipso Burgo, 12. Burgenses ibant cum eo, Si vero per mare in
hostem eat mittebant ei 4. equos de eodem Burgo usque Londouium ad comportanda
Arma vel alia quae opus essent; for that great Conqueror, as Sr Roger Twisden
has rightly and Judiciously observed, had 3 things after that his Conquest in
his purpose, Cares and intention, 1. ut prospicetur Regno de necessariis ad
bellum, 2. ut Satisfaceret Gallis periculorum suorum and laborum Sociis, Ita
tamen ne Anglis ea occasion praeberetur Justa offensionis causa qua reddi
possent ad insurrectionem, seu rebellionem paratiores, 3. ne Coloni utpote sine
quibus Agricultura exerceri non poterit. William Rufus and King Henry the First
Sr Rog. Twisden in praefatione ad leges Gulielmi Conquestoris and Henrici. 1.
filii ejus and Gervasuis Tilburiensis.
his Sons kept and established the same without any lessening or alteration as
to the Time or ways, King Stephen Henry the 2. and Richard the First did the
like, and King Richard the 1. wanted not an aid and money for his redemption
out of his Captivity, so did King John in his general muster and array of all
the Forces of England, sub poena Culvertagii, of Shame and Reproach like
Deborahs Curse ye Meroz against the feared Invasion of the French King, neither
was it altered by King He. the 3. who mandavit vice Comitibus Wiggon. Staff.
Salox and War. quod venire fac. ad ipsum Regem in exercitu suo usque Bery in
Wallia desingulis duabus Hydis Terrae Com. To. claus. 12. H. 3. m. 2. in dorso.
suorum unum Hominem cum una bona securi etc. habentem secum victualia pro ^s.
Diebus, Edward the first did not understand himself to be manacled as unto Time
and Wages, when he told Roger Bigod, Earl of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England,
refusing to go with him to War into Flanders, he Sam. Daniel Hist of Edward the
1. and in to. clause and pate. E. 1.
should go or be hanged, and afterward seized the great Estates of Bohun Earl
of Hereford and Essex Constable of England, and Gilbert Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford and made them glad to accept his Pardon, and in the 7th, Year of his
Reign the Praelates, Earls, Barons and Commonalty of this Realm 7. E. 1.
did in Parliament Declare that they are bound to aid their King at all Seasons
(no Time or Manner at all limited) King Edward the 2. left it as he found it,
and in hte 3. Year of the Reign of King Edward 3. it was in Parliament
declared, that uone shall by any Writing bebe bound to come Armed 3. E. 3.
to the King, for that every Subject is to be at his Commandment, that in his
busy Reign of gathering Triumphant Lawrells, a Proclamation was made in
singulis Com. Angliae quod To. Clause. 8. E. 3. m. 17. in dorso.
omnes homines habentes literas Regis de pardon felon. etc. causa guerrae
Scotiae ad Regem veniant; and our Kings Richard the 2. Henry the 4th, 5th, and
6th, Edward the 4th, and Richard the 3. continued them nothing being ordered to
enervate that Constitution or Law of William the Conqueror, it was by an Act of
Parliament made in the 11th, Year of the Reign of King Henry the 7th, ordained
that none that shall attend 11. H. 7. ca. 1. and 19. H. 7.
upon the King and do him true Service shall be attainted, or forfeit any thing
by attending upon the King in his own Person, and to him true and faithful
Allegiance, or in any other place by his Commandment, within the Land or
without shall do and Perform, And in the 19th, Year of the said Kings Reign, by
an Act of Parliament it was ordained declared and enacted by the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, (no Commons therein
mentioned) by Authority of the Same who shall forfeit that does not attend the
King, being in his own Person, in his Wars either within the Kingdom or
without, or depa^t from his said Service without the Kings License in Writing,
under his sign Manual, or Signet or Great or Privy Seal or general
Proclamation, there having been no Repeal or limitation afterward of that
especial Service either in the Reign of that King or of King Henry the 8th,
Edward the 6th, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles the 1.
And our Annalls, Historians and Records can appa^ently evidence that Queen
Elizabeth, in the designed Invasion of England by the King of Spain with a
formidable Navy and Army in the Year 1588. did not by any of her Counsels,
Judges, Delegates or Lawyers, great or small limit in the raising of Forces,
either by Land or Sea, the Numbers, Time of Continuance or Wages, and it has
been a part of the Jus Gentium or Law of Nations not to contradict, but allow
the Seizing of Ships of Merchants and Strangers in the Potts or Havens of a
Prince, like to be Assailed and in Danger of War, when every man ought to fight
tanquam pro Aris and Focis And that magnanimous, great and wise Princess could
not without that Power inhaerent in her Monarchy have aided with Men and Arms,
the great Henry King of France, and the distressed Belgic Provinces; checked
the Papal Powers and Plots, and Planted and Supported the Protestant Religion
in most of the parts of Christendom, holding by a steady hand the Balance
thereof, and so well understood her own Rights and the true methods of
Government, as she blaming some of the House of Commons for flying from their
Houses near the Sea Coasts, Aurelius Townsend proceedings in Parliament: in
some of the last Years of R^ign of Qu. Elizabe^h.
in the affright of the Spanish Invasion, did Swear by the Almighty God, that
if she knew whom in particular, she would punish and make them Examples, of
being the Deserters of their Prince and Country. King James asked no leave of
his Subjects in Parliament to Raise and Send Men and Arms into the Palatinate,
being his Son in Law's Inheritance, for the Defense thereof under the Command
of Sr Horatio Vere, and an Army for the same purpose also under the Command of
Count Mansfelt a German Prince, King Charles that blessed Martyr by a Company
of accursed Rebels furnished to Sea 3. several Armies and Navies in aid of
the distressed Protestants at Rochell in France, in whose Reign all the Judges
of England subscribed to their Opinions, that the King was to prevent a danger
impending upon the Commonwealth, might impose a Case of Ship Money argued in
the Exohequer Chamber.
Tax for the furnishing out of Ships, and was to be the sole Judge thereof,
which had but a little before been enrolled in all the Courts of Justice in
Westminster and in the Chancery as the opinion of all the Judges of England,
under their hands, which in the leavying but of Ten Shillings being Cavilled at
by Mr Hamden a man of 3 or 4000 l. per Annum one of the grand Sedition-Mongers,
who as a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament had by an Execrable
Rebellion almost Ruined and destroyed England, Scotland and Ireland, to pacify
which that Pious Prince being willing to satisfy their scruples, as much as
the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom as he hoped might Allow, and being a
Principal part of the Monarchy, the Arcana's whereof Queen Elizabeth believed
not fit to be sacr^ficed unto Vulgar and Public disputes, and hammered upon
the Anvills of Lawyers arguments, tending unto more what could, then should be
said, and therefore did in some of her grants or rescripts insert the words as
King James afterward did, de quo disputari nolumus a maxima, which the great
Henry the Fourth of France in his Government strictly observed, and which every
Sea or Land Captain has through many Ages and traverses of the world ever
experimented to be necessary and useful; Insomuch as license was given to
frame a Case or question thereupon, that never was before done in England
through all its Changes of our Monarchs, under the British, Roman, Saxon,
Danish, and Norman Races, or in all the Empires and Kingdoms of the habitable
World, for amongst the Israelites there was an outward Court for the Common
People, there was a Sanctum Sanctorum, there was no dispute suffered, about
their Urim and Thummim, or the dreadfuly delivered Decalogue, and the Ancilia
and vestall fire at Rome were not to be pried into by the Common People,
neither would the vast Ottoman Empire suffer the secrets of Mahomets Pidgeon,
or the laying the Foundations of their Religion or Alcoran vast Empire to be
disputed, or exposed unto vulgar Capacities, that would sooner mistake or abuse
then assent unto truth or the most certified reason. In the way unto which our
fatality and ever to be lamented sad Consequences that followed the late long
Parliament Rebellion, Mr Oliver St John and Mr Rober Holborne, two young
Lawyers, affecting a Contrariety to the approved sense and Interpretation of
our most known and best old Laws, and to Criticize and put doubtful
Interpretations upon the ever to be reverenced and wholesome Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom, did to that end expend much Time in the search of
all the Records of the Kingdom: The first of which labored to propagate his
design of Ruining the Kings Power of taxing Ship Money, and leavying it in Case
of necessity for the defense of his Kingdom and Subjects, but Mr Holbornes
better opinion after all could not but leave him an earnest Assertor of the
Kings Rights and Power therein, So as of the 12 Judges upon the debates of the
Kings learned Council and the Peoples Lawyer Mr St John and others dispute
arguing Pro and Contra, One against the Other, Ten of the Judges giving their
Judgments therein against the said Mr Hamden, that that unhappy aforesaid Ten
Shillings ought to be leavyed upon him, Notwithstanding Justice Hattons and
Justice Crokes dissenting opinions, who did afterward forsake that begun and
after long continued paths of Rebellion.

And that good and great man, that prepared the Act of Parliament for the
Converting Tenures in Capite into free and Common Socage, that took away the
strength of our Israel, and worse then the folly or ill managed love of old
Pelias Daughters to make their aged Father young again, whether misled by his
friend Oliver St John or overmuch in love of the well poysed temper of his so
much admired the Roman Pomponius Atticus, needed not to have been so over
Severe in the astringent penalties nailed and fastened upon that Act of
Parliament and the breaking of that Socage Act, by adding to that much better
of the tenures in Capite no less then the affrightfull penalty of that of a
Praemunire, when it was not likely to be so great a Stranger to his memory,
that the Learned Judges of the Kingdom had at several times in the Reigns of
King James and King Charles the Martyr declared their well weighed opinions,
that the Tenures in Capite were so fundamental a part of our Laws, as no Act
of Parliament could be able or have force to repeal, change or take them away.
And that in all the Icarian attempts and high Flights of the long called
Parliament Rebellion, and even in their Hogen Mogen unparaleld Nineteen
Propositions made unto their King, which, if granted, had taken away from him
all the Power of a King and a Father, or to govern or defend his Subjects.
Until in that much mistaken Erroneous Act of Parliament said to have been made
in Feb. 1645. by some of the Lords and Commons of that which should not have
been called a Parliament when they made War and had like strange Subjects and
Advisors beaten away their King, neither had there been any design of
abrogating the Tenures in Capite or of that kind in all the British, Roman,
Saxon, Danish or Normam times, to annull or dissolve so strong and solid a
Foundation as our Feudall Laws, nothing in the Rebellion, Force, and strange
unkingly restrictions Articles and agreements put upon King John at Running
Mede, no grievance by the Tenures in Capite or by Knight Service certified upon
any the Writs sent by King Henry the 3. unto all the Sheriffs of the Counties
and Cities of England and Wales to Elect 4 Knights of every County To. Clause
H. 3.
and City to certify to the King and his Baronage their Grievances: nothing in
the forced Parliament and Oaths upon King Henry the 3. and his Son Prince
Edward, in the 42. Year of his Reign, nothing in his direful procession and
wa^king with his Parliament of Praelates and Nobility throu^h Westminster Hall
unto that Abbey Church, with burning Tapers, Curses and Anathema's against the
Infringers of Magna Charta and Charta de Forresta, then and yet holden in
Capite, with many of our Liberties Fundamental and Feudall Laws therein
contained, nothing desired or ordered to be taken away of them or any of them,
no mention of them in the arbitration or award made by the King of France
betwixt that King and his Rebel Barons, or when Simon Montfort and his
Partners kept him in their powerful Army a Prisoner about a Year or a Quarter,
no Complaints or grievances against those Tenures in Capite, in all those
multitudes of other supposed grievances, nothing in the Petition of Right, and
30 times confirmation of Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta, as if they could
never have enough of them, nor Reformation desired in and through all the
Clownish Rebellions and Insurrections in England, in the Times of Wat Tiler,
John Ball, Jack Cade, Ket and others.

And therefore whilst these Underminers of our long lived Monarchy, and in that
their own happiness, have gratified their fond feavourish fancies in procuring
a Dissolution of as many as they could of our Tenures in Capite, for all if any
they could not with the Costly expense of 48. Millions sterling in money,
besides an uncomptable and unvalued damage of four hundred thousand Men Women
and Children slain or Massacred whole families ruined or for ever Crpled,
Heaven angry and incensed, Hell gaping, Religion torn in more then one hundred
pieces, and all for want of the Care, Provision, and Protection, that the
despised Mother Church of England, like the Voice that was heard in Ramah,
Rachel mourning for her Children that they were not, our Shames Published in
the Streets, of Gath and Askalon, in the Time of its peace, and the Sins of
Rebellion and Witchcraft, have as the Egiptian Locusts covered and overspread
the face of our heretofore fruitful Island.

And the Protection and Provision, usually made by our Tenures in Capite for
Younger Children as well as the Eldest affords them no better a care then to
leave them when the Mother is after the Fathers Death by some Debaucht,
Rooking, or Gamiug Coxcomb, made a fool of and Married again, as very often
they will, are like Lambs left as a Prey unto the Wolves or Foxes; the Second
Husbands, who, if the Mother have Children by him, will be as too many are well
content to help to Fricasse the first husbands Children to make Portions or
Estates for the Second, so as if it be Enquired where is now the Court of Wards
and Liveries which has been so pretendedly without any Just Cause at all
complained of, they may find every where a Court of Wards and Liveries
lamentably governed by the Fathers in Law of England, Wales, and Ireland.

They might do well to make more have then they have done to repentance and
consider how much more then nothing at all the Nation was beholding to those
overtures, as much as they could, of the Monarchy and Tenures in Capite, have
been to those Commonwealth Erecters have deserved of the People and those whom
they pretended to represent in Parliament, when instead of bread they have
given them Stones, and of Fishes Scorpions, and to show the profoundness of
their wisdom did as wisely as those that attemp^ed to drown the Eel, when upon
a great and serious consult they may Easily discover no better effects or fruit
of their overchargeable expenses enforced upon the people to their own great
and Villainous gain, and the ruin spoil and inestimable damage of our 3, before
that, most happy flourishing redoubtable Kingdoms.

When that Act of Parliament, for taking away the Tenures in Capite, does but
as much as it could convert them into Free and Common Socage (without any
mention of pro omnibus servitiis) L. L. In. 15. and 16.
and the Law made by King Ina, who Reigned here from the year of our Savior
923. until after some part of the Year 940. which is not specially repealed,
by that Act of destroying as much as it was able the Tenures in Capite and by
Knight Service did ordain that Scutarorum nullus ex pelle ovina
Scutafabricatur, qui secus fecerit 30 solides, mulctator pro singulo quoque
aratrobinos alat quisque ornatos atque instructos Equites, and in a Tenure in
Free and Common Socage Fealty is a duty and service inseparable, as Littleton
says and Littleton tit. Fealty. sect. 92. 93.
signifies (although as he puts the Case, is in the Ceremony of the doing
thereof sometimes different from homage) for when the Tenant does fealty unto
his Lord he shall hold his hand upon a Book and shall Swear that he shall be
faithful and true to his Lord, and shall bear him faith for the Lands which he
holds of him, and fealty is derived a fidelitate, (Feltman bestowing upon an
original of the like nature a fide) and Escuage draws unto it homage, and
Homage Feltman ^rac de Feudis. sect. 2.
draws unto it fealty, for fealty is incident to every manner of Service,
unless it be in the Tenure of Franck-Almoigne, and the Tenures in Capite and by
Knights Service (some only excepted) being transferred into Free and Common
Socage without saying, per fidelitatem tantum pro omnibus servitiis, may,
notwithstanding the forebidding or rejection of of Homage and all other
Incidents of Tenures in Capite and by Knights Service, render the fealty
incident unto free and Common Socage, by our Laws to amount unto as much as
that which the framer of that Act of Parliament hoped to extinguish, by
Converting, those Tenures in Capite as much as he could into Tenures in pede,
which should have been believed to have been very fundamental and dangerous to
alter, when the wisdom of the English and Scottish Commissioners authorized by
an Act of Parliament in the Reign of King James who had a great desire to unite
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland in their Laws and Religion, as well as
they were in their neighborhood, and to have them to be in Subjection under
one and the same King and Sovereign, were after long and learned Conferences
and disputes constrained to forsake that impossible to be achieved Enterprise,
and our great Incendiary Mr John Pym could in the Year 1641. harangue in that
unfortunately seditious Parliament that our Laws, which he might or should have
known, as to a great Calvin's Case, Cokes 7 Relat. and Lord Chancellor
Ellesmeres argument upon the Postnati, Reports and Register of Writs and
Archives and Records.
part of them, to have been composed and derived unto us from our German and
Northern Progenitors, Feudall Laws intermingled with the Civil and Cannon Laws
with some municipall Laws and Consuetudines non Malos in se as Gavel kind and
the Rescripts, Edicta, and mandata principum, Responsa and adjudicata Judicum
and prudentum, not dissonant or contradicting each other the Laws of God an
rules of Right Reason were the Peoples Birthright, and our persecuted, until
he was Murdered, blessed Martyr King Charles the First did in the 3. 3 Car.
primi.
Year of his Reign, when he signed that which they styled the Peoples Petition
of Right, declare unto them that his maxim is that the Peoples Liberties
strengthen the Kings Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative is to defend
the Peoples Liherties, and may when all is done, if well and truly weighed in
the Balance of Right reason and understanding, and what has happened and may
come to pass hereafter, easily discern that in England there never was such a
Confusion and overturning of our Laws and Ancient Monarchick Government,
through all the Successions of our British, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings,
as has been in England since the beginning of that famously infamous
Rebellious Parliament and their Undermining of our Laws and Libeties and turn
all into an Anarchy that they might gain a power to enrich themselves by the
spoil of 3 Kingdoms, and ruining of as many as would not be as Wicked Rebels
as they had been.

And that when his Majesty had Released unto them the Fabian Philipps, the
mistaken recompense given to the King, for the release of his Tenures in Capite
and Knights-Service and Pourveyance. P. 49. and 50.
arrears of his profits by his Tenures and Court of Wards and Liveries, a
Million and a half Sterling, and in his pourveyances, Nine Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Pounds, It was hugely praejudiciall to the King and beneficial unto
his Subjects, too many of whom had Rebelled against his Royal Father,
persecuted and Murdered him, Hunted and would have extirped his Royal
Posterity, And that it can be no otherwise accounted to be then a most
Barbarously Ungrateful and unworthy Act of the Nation and People of England,
after many Knights fees and Lands freely given and granted by the Kings Royal.
Progenitors to their forefather and their Heirs, to be holden by Knight Service
and in Capite, of which if the Sixty Thousand Knights fees and more reckoned by
some Authors should be no greater a number then ten thousand, and valued but at
20l. per Ann. as they may be conjectured to have been accounted in Anno. 1
Edwardi. 2. they would amount unto 200000l. per Ann. and if each of them have
since increased but unto 300l. per Ann, which may be thought to be now the
least improvement, might amount in yearly value unto 3 Millions Sterling, (and
if that should be multiplied 60 times more as Ordericus Vitalis reckonet it,
the Yearly value thereof might swell unto one Hundred Eighty and 3 Millions
Sterling,) besides great quantities of other Lands freely granted in the
several Reigns of his Majesty's Royal progenitors, unto others of them and
their heirs to be holden of them in Socage, besides 200000l. per An. or a very
great Yearly sums of Money necessarily expended upon his Military Guards for the
defense of himself and his people against Sedition and Rebellion-mongers more
then his Royal Father and progenitors needed to have done if he had kept entire
his said eminent and Legal Rights of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service
to endeavor to extinguish the Right use of them, and forget their great and
very great obligations to their Prince and Common parent, and Royal
progenitors, and take away from our Kings the means whereby they should protect
and defend themselves and their Subjects from damage and Injuries foreign and
domestique.

And those Tax improvers and Advantage Catchers can (as if that were not
sufficient) make it as too many of their Actions and business to cozen and beg
all they can from him, and instead of never ceasing to give him thanks for
breaking the bars of an Hell of Arbitrary power and slavery, wherein their
Counterfeit Commonwealth's men by their perjuries and Hypocritical Rebellion
had brought them, And their Cheating Man of Sin Oliver Cromwell had by his
Instrument of his own making locked and bolted them fast enough, as he hoped,
with a Domine quid retribuam, what shall we render for all his benefits, make
it the greatest of their care and Employment not only to take and keep from him
all they can, even at the same time when they had obtained of him an
unparalleld Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, to pardon and forget all their
Treasons and offenses committed against him, and his blessed Father, which in a
small kind of Calculation may not unprobably be believed to amount unto Sixteen
Millions Sterling in arreres of his own Revenue, and 2 or 3 Hundred Millions
Sterling at the least for the forfeitures, which our Laws would have given him
with some Mercy and Moderation to boot for so small a Recompense as during his
life in the Moiety or one half of the Excise to his Heirs and Successors to be
drawn out of the Groans Tears Complaints and sorrows of which the main part of
the Common People who never did or are like to hold any Lands of our Kings in
Capite or by Knight Service, And should not have forgotten how they promised
him to be his Tenants in Cord, and with what a Princely and Fatherly affection
he told their Representatives that he was sorry to see so many of his Good
People come to see him at Whitehall, and had no Meat to feed or entertain them,
yet when he had bereaved himself of that grand and continual part of the
strength and support of his Crown, Power and Dignity, and those entire Rights
of his Monarchick Government; which our prudent second Fabius, ever to be
praised and remembered, from Generation to Generation, the late George Monk,
Duke of Albemarle, for his military wary Conduct thorough almost insuperable
Difficulties, without harkening to the Siren songs of those that pretended to
be for a Common wealth or being tempted or deluded to restore his Majesty to a
Cripled Monnarchy, as the men of the Rebellious Rump or no Parliament with
their Juggling Covenant, or as many Faces as they should have occasion to
impress or stamp upon it, would have persuaded him to have done, and that great
Hero denyd to do, And that ill advised framer of that Unhappy Act of Parliament
to cut or take away the Arteries, Nerves, Sinews and Ligaments of the Crown and
head of our body Politic, and in the doing thereof also might have bereaved
the Nation of the ancient and honorable assistance of the House of Peers in
Parliament, which of Ancient and long time Immemoriall have been, as they
should and ought to be, the firm and strong pillars and supports of our
Monarchick Government, had not the Earls of Oxford and Strafford Magnanimously
as a Prologue to its Restoration come to the House then called the House of
Commons in Parliament, wherein that great Monck, that Unus homo nobis qui
cunctando restituit rem, was then admitted a member guarded with his own so
warily conducted Army out of Scotland, before his Majesty's happy Restoration
and the way had been prepared for it, and calling him unto the Door of that
house, demanded as Peers their Rights and privileges, to have their house of
Peers doors opened, which upon his Majesty's Blessed Father's murder that so
misnamed house of Commons in Parliament had shut up, and Voted to be Useless
and Dangerous, which he instantly of himself Ordered to be opened, without any
Act, Order or Vote of Parliament, into which they went and sat until they
gained more of their Loyal Party to help to fill their House again, which by
Degrees was shortly after (especially after his Majesty's Landing and Coming to
London) Replenished and Restored, as their King and Sovereign was. And the
Nation had notwithstanding by that Framer of that aforesaid ever to be deplored
Act of Parliament, been deprived of that only part of our Parliament
Subordinate unto their King from the beginning of our very ancient Monarchy
(and as it ought ever to be) till the 49th, Year of K. Henry the 3. when he was
a Prisoner unto Simon Montfort and his Army of Rebels and not before: When
some Commons were in that Rebellion Elected to be as a part of Parliament and
to sit in a Separate Lower House, ad faciendum and consentiendum iis which the
King and Lords should think fit or necessary to Ordain, had it not been rescued
and prevented by the Care of the Lord Viscount Stafford and the Barons of
Abergavenny and Dudley, awakened by the Book a little before Printed and
Published, entitled Tenenda non Tollenda, who caused a Proviso to be inserted
in the said Fabian Philips Tenenda non Tollenda.
Act of Parliament, that nothing therein contained should be extended or
prejudicial to the Rights and Privileges and Honors of the Peers in
Parliament, or any that held by Grand Serjeanty, etc.

And having by their good will left as few Spears or Swords as they could in
our Israel, to help to protect or defend it, could notwithstanding readily find
the way to that Ungrateful River Lethe and Sin of unthankfullness, which God
and all good men do not only Abhor, but the most fierce and Savage Beasts of
the Field and Fowls of the Air do detest; and could not be fully satisfied
until they could add unto the Kings evil Bargain the taking away of the Royal
Pourveyance, which amounted unto no Smaller a damage unto him then Ninety or
One Hundred Thousand Pounds per Ann. it being in the 35th, Year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, Estimated in the Saving of the household expenses 25000 l. per
Ann. communibus Annis, in the 3. Year of the Reign of King James 40000 l. per
Ann. And in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr at the most not above 50000 l.
per Ann. Communibus Annis. But whether more or less is not to be found in the
receipt or Yearly Income of the Moiety of the daily ceasing pretended
Recompense by the Excise arising unto no more then one Hundred and Fifty
Thousand Pounds deducting the no little charges in the Collection thereof, and
in taking away of that 50 l. per Ann. for the Royal Pourveyance brought upon
the King no less a Damage then One Hundred Thousand Pounds per Ann.

And cannot by the most Foolish of the People (Lunaticks out of their
Intervalls, Idiots, very small Infants, and Children only excepted) be with any
manner of Color or Shadow of reason believed to be any thing near a
Compensation singly for the Pourveyance, and a great deal less for that
inestimable Jewel of the Crown the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service,
the later a principal part of the support of the Sovereignty and the former of
the Crown.

For that the Power, Might and Majesty that resideth therein is unvaluable, and
not to be Balanced by any thing that is not as much, the Pourveyance being in
the Fourth Year of the Reign of King James held to be such an Inseparable
adjunct of the Crown and Imperial Dignity, and some few Years after believed
by the Incomparable Sr Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor of England to be a
necessary support both in Sir Francis Bacon's Ire. to the Duke of Buckingham.
Law and Politiques in other Nations as well as our own, has told us is such a
Sacra Sacrorum as Baldus and Individua, as Cynus terms them, which
Jurisconsultorum Communi quodam decreto by an uncontroverted opinion of all
Lawyers nec cedi nec distrahi nec abalienari a Summo Principe, cannot as Bodin
Baldus in proem. feudorum and in consult. 274. lib 3. Cynus in l. si viva matre
de bonis matris.
says be granted or released, nor by any manner of way aliened or witholden
from the Sovereign Prince nec ulla quidem temporis dinternitate praescribi
posse, nor by any length of time prescribed against him, and therefore by
Besoldus called Imperii and Majestatis Jura and bona Regni conjuncta
incorporate Bodin de repub. lib. 1. Beseldus dissert politis. Juridic. de
Juribus Majestatis. ca. 9.
seu Coronae unita quae princeps alienare non potest, the Rights and Empire of
Majesty and the goods and part of the Crown so Incorporate and annexed unto it
as the Prince cannot alien, which, for the Subjects to attempt, would not be
much different from an endeavor to restrain a Prince by Law against the Law of
God and bonos mores, which by the opinion of the Learned Bacon the Lord Chief
Justice Hobart and Judge Hutton would be Void and of none Effect, for the
presents and good will of Inferiors to their Superiors is one of the most
ancient and Noble Customs which mankind has ever practiced, and began so with
the Beginning and Youth of the world, as we find the Patriarch Jacob sending
his Sons to his then unknown Son Joseph, besides the Money which he gave them to
buy Corn, a Present of the best Fruits of the Country, a little Balm, a little
Honey, Spices, Mirrh, Nutts, and Almonds.

The Persians in their Kings Progresses did munera offerre, Aelianus Hist.
varia^. lib. 1. Brissonius de Regno Persiae. lib. (...).
neque vilia neque exilia, neque nimis pretiosa nec magnifica, bring them
Presents neither Precious nor Contemptible, from which etiam Agricolae and
Opifices, Workmen and Plowmen were not freed in the bringing Wine, Oxen,
Fruits, and Cheeses and the first Fruits of what the Earth brought forth quae
non tributa sed doni loco consebantur, which were not accounted to be given as
tributes but oblations and free Gifts, which made the poor Persian Synetas,
when he met with Artaxerxes and his Train in the way of his Progress, rather
then fail to offer, hasten to the River and bring as much water as he could in
his hands, and with a Cheerful Countenance, Wishes and Prayers for his health,
present it unto him.

Nor was so altogether appropriate to those Eastern Countries where God speaks
first unto his people, and the Sun of his righteousness did arise, but was long
ago practiced in England where the custom was as Gervasius Tilburiensis, (who
wrote in the Reign of K. Henry the 2.) informs us that in the Reign of King
Henry the 1.) upon all addresses to the King quaedam in rem and quaedam in spem
offerre, to present the King with some or other presents, either upon the
granting. of any thing, or the hopes that he would do it afterward, and so
usually as there were Oblata, Rolls or Memorialls kept of it in the Reign of
King John and some other the succeeding Kings and Queens, who seldom escaped
the tender of those Gratitudes of Aurum Reginae, Money or Gold presented unto
them as well as unto their Kings, and was a Custom not infrequent in the Saxon
Times, as appears by our Doomesday Book the most exact and general survey of
all the Kingdom, and so little afterward neglected as it was paid upon every
pardon of life or member, and so carefully collected as it was long after in
the Reign of King Henry the 3d by an Inquisition taken after the Death of
Gilbert de Samford, who was by Inheritance Chamberlain to the Queens of
England, found that he had amongst many other Fees and Profits due unto him and
his Heirs by reason of his said office Six pence per Diem, allowed for a Clark
in the Court of Exchequer to Collect and gather that oblation or duty.

For if there were no Damage to a Prince in his Dignity and Sovereignty, as it
must needs be of no small concern, it can be of no small Importance in matters
of profit and other Necessaries appertaining to his Regality and the necessary
protection and defense of himself and his people, as has been truly calculated
and made demonstrable.

And when Homage has been defined by our Learned Lawyers Littleton and Sr
Edward Coke to signify no more then Ieo deveigne vostre home, Et mutua debet
esse, dominii and homagii and fidelitatis Connexio, Ita quod quantum homo
Domino ex Homagio tenentis, tantum illi debet Dominus ex Dominio praeter solam
reverentiam, and Sr Edward Coke citing a part out of the Red book of the
Exchequer says, omnis homo debet esse sub Domino de vita and memibris suis and
terrenio honor, and observatione consilii sui per honestum and utile,
comprehended in the words Foyall and Loyal, salva fide deo terrae Principi;
and servicium is by him defined in Liege Angliae regulariter quod pro tenemento
suo debetur ratione feodi sui, and the manner of doing homage and fealty
declared or appointed to be taken in 17 King Edward the 2, was, that he should
hold his hands together between the hands of his Lord; our 17. E. 2.
Littleton long after writing his book says, he shall be ungirt, his head
uncovered, his Lord shall sit and he shall kneel before him upon both his
knees, and hold his hands Jointly together betwixt the hands of his Lord, and
say, I become your man, from this day forward, of life and limbs and earthly
worship, Littleton tit. Homage.
and shall owe you my faith for the Lands which I hold of you, saving the faith
which I owe unto my Lord the King and to mine other Lords.

Et homo and Homagium says Sr Henry Spelman sunt verba feudaliam and in
fundamentis Juris illius, and after the Osculum Spelman glos. tit. homagium.
or kiss of the Lord received, arises and takes the Oath of Fidelity to be
faithful and true unto him, and says Bracton homage becomes to be ex part
Domini protectio, defensio, Bracton lib. 2. cap. 35. number. 8.
Warrantia, and ex part Tenentis reverentia and Subjectio.

And our Littleton defining fealty as it is amongst the Feudists a fidelitate,
says, that it is to be true and faithful to his Lord for the Lands which he
holds of him, and shall faithfully do unto him the service which he ought to
do.

And Gervasius Tilburiensis cited by Sr Edward Coke might have added to the
definition of homage on the King or Lords part something more from the Tenant
or Homager then reverence and subjection, and not have omitted the greatest Tie
and Obligation which was gratitude, for the Lands at the first given to his
Father and Ancestor for that only Service; The Tenant holding his lands and
services under a forfeiture but the King or Lord not simili modo but reteyning
and holding his propriety and directum dominium without any limitation the
utile dominium appertains unto the Tenant until he forfeits and then the
Lord may enter upon the utile, and annex it unto his directum and dispose of it
as he pleases.

And Sr Henry Spelman says licet non Juratum est in homagio sed in fidelitate,
Intelligendum est quod fidelitatis praestatio individue sequitur homagium, Et
in nostro Jure fidelitas est de Essentia Homagii, nam si quis fidelitatem
remiserit cassum facit Spelman gloss. tit. homagium.
ipsum Homagium, And in the language of our Old Records Writs and rescripts of
our Kings and Princes, Homage and fealty do so often go together, as they may
be seem to be adjuncts each unto the other and are in effect as to the
Subjection and service but Synonimous and Consignificant, differing only in the
Ceremonies, as our Littleton says, in doing the same which in the direction
and style of our Kings mandates unto one that has actually done his homage,
the Word Fidelis is many times used without any mention of Homage, dilecto and
fideli suo, as comprehending Homage, fidelitas autem particularis apud Anglos
individue comitatur omnes Tenuras, etiam dimissiones ad brevissimum tempus
Spelman gloss. tit. fidelitas.
nunc dierum, and quamvis nunc dierum parcius exigitur relaxari tamen nullo
modo potest sine tenurae interitu.

And Homage and Fealty being such inseparable Concomitants as not to be
separated, Homage in the Capite and Knight Service conjoyning unto it, Fealty
which is the reality effect and service thereof, and Homage in those Tenures
the only Ceremonial part thereof, which would be to little purpose without the
faith fidelity and service which can subsist and perform its services without
it, And was so understood by our Kings and Princes in their Writs of Summons to
their Baronage to their Parliaments when making no mention of Homage which is
often respited, commands them infide qua 1 Jac. ca. 26. and (...). Claus. H. 3.
nobis tenemini to appear and be present.

For howsoever amongst Kings and Princes, those great concerns of them and
their Subjects may be allowed to insist upon punctilio's of Honor and very
necessary Concernments, which might be consequentiall thereunto, which caused
our great and prudent King Edward the First when he did his Homage to the King
of France for the Duchy of Acquitaine carefully to except his ancient right to
the Duchy of Normandy, and the French Kings denying his brave and victorious
Grandchild Edward the 3. to do his Homage by proxy made him so Inquisitive into
his own better Title unto that Kingdom as the French King paid dear for it, and
the English King at Spelman's (...)(...)
length the owner of that great and flourishing Kingdom.

When Fealty is conjoined with the Oaths of Allgeance and Supremacy, the true
born only Legitimate Issue and Children of the Feudall Laws, they will be like
a 3 fold Cord not at all in Reason or Justice to be broken, And in matters
touching Inheritances, Nobility, Titles of Honor, women's Dower of the 3 part
of Lands, and Tenements, fees, tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, Rents,
Escheats, Fines, Felonies, Forfeitures, trial by battle, cum multis aliis,
etc. our Laws being not only founded upon them but supported and guided by
them, It may be wondered it should be so unknown to our Common Lawyers, whom a
careful reading of our Glanvil Bracton Britton and Fleta, and a better
acquaintance with their mother the Civil and Caesarean and Feudall Laws, with
a due inspection into the ever to be valued Records of the Kingdom might better
instruct then the malecontent and ill affected Sr Edward Coke and some other of
the later School or Edition of those which are called Common Saviors, as not to
believe with great assurance that that which they call so generally the Common
Law is for the most part, if not all, the Feudall Law which they are pleased to
call the Praerogativa Regis declared and acknowledged in Anno, 17. E. 2. and
likewise that of the view of Franck pledge the next Year ensuing, and that it
was therefore not unfitly wished by a Late Learned Author supposed to be a
post-hume of Sr Henry Spelman, that Some worthy Lawyer would diligently read
the Feudall Laws, and show the several heads from whence those of our Laws are
derived, wherein says he the Sr Henry Spelman of the Laws, Terms, etc.
Lawyers beyond the Seas are diligent but ours are all for profit, And An Act
of Parliament in Anno, 1662. made by King Charles the 2. for the Settlement of
the Kingdom of Ireland, wherein notwithstanding that it was in the ^3th, Year
of his Reign ordained that all lands and Tenements in England and Ireland
should be holden of him his Heirs and Successors in Free and Common Socage,
there is a Proviso and Exception that all lands tenements and Hereditaments (in
Ireland) settled or to be settled on the Soldiers who are out of said Act, and
not provided for shall be, held of the King his Heirs and Successors by Knight
Service in Capite; and it is well known that our unruly Neighbors in Scotland
that could never be satisfied with the Fat and plenty of our Land of Goshen
until the lean kine had eat up the fat, and they had set our before happy
Kingdom on fire with their Hypocritical, dissembling, Illegal, wicked
Covenant, did not in all the mischiefs and Miseries which they brought upon us
and themselves in those their Rebellious Designs, make it any part of their
desires to change their ancient tenures in Capite and by Knight Service into
free and Common Socage, which by unhinging the Government would have set all
the wild Beasts of the Forests loose and at Liberty, and made the otherwise
unruly and never to be governed numerous vassalls so masterless as to tear in
pieces their Lords Lairds or Superiors, and turn that Monarchy to do as well as
it can amongst a herd of rudeness and Incivilities in their Plads and Blew
Capps.

And the Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Frisiaeque principes terra marique potentes
heretofore nullo externo usi milite ex veteri Longobardorum Consuitudine sub
certa quadam feudalitiae necessitudinis lege hoc est mutuae inter dominicum
patrocinum ac Fiduciariam Cornelius Neostadius in tract. de Origin Feudi
Hollandici Frisici accordat. Origin.
Clientelam veluti pactionis nexu beneficiarii instituerentur qui Conceptis
verbis interposita Juratae fidei religione pro beneficio accepto patrono suo
militarem operam praeberent navarentque ut scilicet quoties usus posceret
parati in armis essent id quod Jure Feudalistico proprium Feudatariorium munus
atque officium est.

Et cum praediorum defectu in these Provinces which ingenio soli quod natura
depressum ac uliginosium were naturally situated cum incilibus passim fossis
lacubusque ac paludibus intercussum haud sane faciles aditus ostentat confisa
and turbas and Seditionum praemia converteret, and therefore to untie those
obligations betwixt the Lords and Tenants and enervate those strengths and
promptitude to a confidence in their own Power, Charles the 5th Emperor,
Edicto perpetuo Anno Domini 1518. officia haec militaria vulgo servitia dicta
in universum abragavit vassallisque omnibus remisit.

Ea tamen lege ut fundi Clientelares functionibus publicis (quibus hactenus
Imunes fuissent) in posterum non secus atque patrimoniales obnoxii existerent,
and having so far enticed them out of their old into a much worse
constitution, with Taxes and the Spanish Inquisition managed by the Duke D'Alva
in a most tyrannical arbitrary Government, so desperated them as after a long
time expended in Intercessions without any redress obtained, and those their
discontents heightened and made use of, by the Policies of their neighbors the
English and French, who had reason to fear the ambitious encrochments and evil
designs of the King of Spain to oppress them that were his neighbors; and by
the assistance of his late Conquest of the West Indies with their Gold and
Silver Mines endeavoring to make himself to be as it were the Atlas of the
World and extend his Dominions to a Fifth Monarchy and a Ne plus ultra; All
which concurring and put together with the Conduct and Adventurous successful
care of the then Prince of Orange assisted by the united Seven Provinces,
whereof Holland Zealand and West Freisland were the greatest Incouragers, of
the other, caused that faedus ultrajectinum, which in a long series and
continuance of Time of Years making those netherland Belgic Provinces to be a
Campus Martius and field of Blood, has with an intermission only of 12 Years
Truce after that Centnry ended, occasioned greater ruins and effusion of blood
then the Wars Joined all together between Rome and Carthage, and Caesar and
Pompey in the Pharsalian Fields.

So long and fatal from the beginning to the ending has been that unhappy
project of the dissolving the Hollandish Zealand and West Freizland ancient
Feud (...) Laws by the altering their Tenures in Capite and by military
service, which howsoever they had so continued depressed during the heat and
fury of that Spanish War been laid aside and intromitted says Neostadius, haec
olim celeberrima Feudalis Curiae quam Oraculum Bataviae was wont to be called,
the Lords the States of Neostadius in suo Epist. dedicat.
Holland and West-Freisland did by a Public Decree order that omnia
Instrumenta Feudalia publica and Feudalia Scrinia should be searched put and
kept in order; And in his Epistle Ded. unto the Estates aforesaid and Judges of
the said Feudal Court Dated no longer ago then in the Month of Sept. 1665. from
Alemar, says likewise, that de qua Intromissa saepissime quaerebatur denuo
instaurata fuisset adeo ut vos (the Estates) qui hoc tempore ejusdem
reminiscentis Feudalis Curiae Senatores sive pares estis negligereaut aliis
postponere non posse. And yet they do think Themselves at this day to be as
free a people as any in the World with an high and mighty Hoghen Moghen into
the bargain.

And the Framers and Voters of that overturning as much as it could of our
ancient Monarchy, (many of whom, as House of Commons, Members in that
Parliament, were Knights Baronetts, Knights of the Bath and Knights Batchelors)
might have been something more cautious then they were, and taken more care of
the fatal Consequences that might and would inevitably happen, yea more then
by Chance by an unavoidable necessity, or for the liberties of 10000 manors in
England and Wales and a great many of manors and liberties in Ireland which had
no other original or Foundation then Monarchy or the unrebellious Feudall Laws
and it and their continuance, for what could they imagine but Confusion and
Villainy would follow in the order of Baronetts Created by King James in the
9th, Year of his Reign limited at the Seldens tit. honor.
first unto the number of 200. now supernumerated unto almost 1500. to hold by
the tenure of maintayning 30. foot-Soldiers at 8d. per diem for 3 Years for the
regaining of the Province of Ulster in Ireland, what for any of the Honorable
Knights of the Garter that have no privilege of Peers in Parliament, what for
the Knights of the Bath that are to be made at the Creation of every Prince of
Wales being the King of Englands eldest Son, what for such as our Kings have
honored or shall be pleased to Dignify with the honor of Knighthood or the
Sword or to be an Eques Auratus; what care was taken in that levelling Act in
the effect of turning the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service into free and
Common Socage, for the honor and degree of Knighthood or of that more
meritorious extraordinary one of Knight Banneretts: Was it ever intended they
should go all to Plow with some ill brewed Ale to wet their Whistles, with
their sword and guilt spurrs promiscuously, some with blew or red Garters or
ribbons, and the rest without, and could there be no Exception or proviso's
inserted in that Act for those Honorable degrees, which appertained so only to
the Sovereign or a power derived from them, as our Queens Regent, in their
Incapacities of wearing or brandishing a sword or personal fighting, are by
themselves or others commissionated by them only to grant or give those
Privileges which are not a Few and can have no other derivation or reason for
their Commencement then a Militando, not as Common Soldiers but ex strenua and
continuata militia tantum adipiscatur honor, when by the Imperial Laws Knights
ex Jure concessione principis prescriptione and consue(...)dine, were anciently
at the receiving Sr John Fernes glory of Generosity sect. 110. 111. 117. 118.
119.
of that honorable o(...) to swear not to reveal any thing by solemn Oath or
Vow (...) concerns his Sovereign or his Country, never to put on Armor
against his Prince, never to forsake his General, never to fly the field of
his Enemy, etc. had Jus Annulorum as the Equestris Ordo were amongst the Roman
Knights used to be honored with, when at the Battle and overthrow of them at
Cannes there were gathered amongst Livy.
the slain 2 Bushel of Rings, in England and other Northern Kingdoms had jus
Imaginum Coat Armorius and besides what Sr Edward Coke cannot deny to be an
ancient privilege due unto Knighthood, as has been before said to be free ab
omni Tallagio, a Knight is not to have his Equitature or Horse distrained and
taken in Execution although it be for the Kings Debt, a Knight accused of any
Crime (Treason shall not be examined but before his Competent Judge,) against a
Knight in war no prescription runs, neither shall he be compelled to be
Guardian to Children, except they be the Children of Knights, shall not suffer
any Ignominious Corporal Punishment, as hanging upon a Gibbet unless first
Degraded, nor be set at any ransom but such as he shall be able after to
maintain his Degree.

And in time of peace has been so much valued and esteemed as 3 Knights
Associated in the Kings Commission of Oyer and Terminer might hear and
determine forcible Entries and outrages in the same Country or Province. A
Coroner, formerly an especial officer of the Crown, was to be a Knight, a
Sheriffs Certificate, and return of the Tallies of the Kings Creditors, and
Moneys paid as due unto them is to be accompanied with the hands of 2 Knights;
a Sheriff cannot remove a plaint out of an Inferior into a Superior Court
without the testimony of 4 Knights. Knights and no other are to be sent by the
Sheriffs to make the View de malo lecti; the Knights of Bracton de Ess^cits ca.
10. sect. 1.
the shires elected to be members of the House of Commons in Parliament ought
to be gladiis cincti, and the Commons have in Parliament Petitioned the King
and obtained a grant that it might not be otherwise, Ou autrement tiel notables
Seldens tit. Honor. ca. 5. sect. 831.
Esquiers Gentilhomes del nation des mesmes les Counties come soyent ables
d'estre Chivalier and noul home destre tiel Chivaler que estoite enles degrees
de vadlet (ou Varlet says Mr Seldom) and de south, an Infant holding his Lands
in Capite or by Knight Service shall not be in Ward after he is Knighted, a
Knight inhabiting in any City or town Corporate shall not be Impannelled in a
Jury for the Tayal of a Criminal, in a Civil Action for Debt or the like,
wherein any of the Nobility are plaintiffs or defendents. 2 Knights are to be
Impannelled on the Jury. A Knight shall not be distrained to serve in person
for Castle guard, although he do hold Lands by that Tenure. A certain number of
Knights are to elect a Jury in a Writ of grand Assize, and none but a Knight
should be permitted to wear a Collar of S. S. or Golden or Guilt Spurrs. And
the Dignity of Chivaler or Knight, has been in England so honorable, as Earls,
besides their Greater Titles, would many times use the Title of Chivaler only,
and at other times desire to receive the Honor of Knighthood from the King
after they were Earls, and our Kings have sometimes sent their Eldest Sons to
be Knighted by other Kings.

And a Villain which Sr Edward Coke styles a Sokeman or one that holds in
Socage is not by the Law of Nations and Sir John Fernes glory of Generosity.
107.
Arms to be made a Knight, unless he can manifest himself to be a Gentleman.

So great a disparagement, inconvenience, and disarming, and disabling the
Nation, both in the defense of their King and Themselves and their Posterity
and the Honor and Dignity of their Kings and Princes with as much Wisdom as if
they should make their most Earnest Supplications unto God Almighty the King of
Kings to lessen the Sun and make him to be no more then a small Farthing
Candle, have the Procurers and Contrivers of that most prejudicial Act of
Parliament, for Metamorphosing the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service into
Free and Common Socage, brought upon us that ever was contrived, against the
Imperial Crown and Dignity of our Kings and the safety of their People and
Subjects, wherein they have attempted, as much as they could, to Manacle our
Monarchy, and Invalidate and make ineffectuall at once that great and
unvaluable service, done by the gallant and Generous George Monk, in his
Majesty's most happy Restoration, with his entire and Just Regalities.

When they should rather admire, and give God thanks for that goodly Fabric
and Structure of our Laws and Liberties, under the best of Monarchies, then
seek to eradicate and pull them up Root and Branch, by hearkening to that
wicked advice, which Mr Bond, the Master of the Savoy, in the time of their
troubles, and some distresses happening to the hopes Bond's Sermon to the House
of Commons in Parliament.
of erecting their Project of a Commonwealth, Founded in the Murder of their
Religious King, and the Blood of multitudes of their Fellow Subjects, gave unto
his Fellow-Rebells, in a Consolation Sermon preached by him before the then
Usurped House of Commons in Parliament, that if they could not prevail, they
should imitate Sampsons Revenge upon the Philistians, by pulling down the House
upon their Heads, with an Encouragement and Assurance, that, if they should
fail or miscarry in that Cause of God, he would have it after his death to be
Written upon his Tomb, Here lies he that was deceived in his God and his
Gospel.

The Scutifer Armiger or Esquire. which in a right definction, and in its true
Etymon and radix is and should be less, and of a lower Degree then Gentleman,
as de gente Fabia Cornelia, (although of later Times it has been otherwise
believed and used) and is not Equivalent unto that of a gentleman, who has
many Privileges, As to bear Arms or Coat Armory, The Clown Varlet or Sokeman
shall arise and give him place. A gentleman ought to be preferred unto Offices
before any man Ignoble, and in matters of Testimony Magis Credendum Nobilibus
quam plurimis aliis, may wear better Apparel as to his body, and use more rich
utensils in his House or necessaries: his vote vow or opinion is in the
Election or Scrutiny of Voices next after the President or Magistrate and
primam vocem Sir John Fernes glory of Generosity.
Edit Nobilis, the ungentle shall not Challenge the Gentle to a Combat, Quia
Condition impares with 28 more Privileges, which the Civil Caesarean and
Feudall Laws have given them.

And those Confusion Mongers might once, if ever they Intend to repent, ought
not only to look back into the days of old, where in all Kingdoms and Nations
of Mankind, they may see it was found to be necessary to have several orders
degrees and Classes of people, according to each of their Capacities, had under
Kings appointed by God, those that were fit for Magistracy and Council,
Military men and such as were necessary for War by Land or Sea, Plowmen or such
as might Sigonius de antiquo Jure Provinciarum
manage or Till the Earth, Opifices or Tradesmen, with the plebs or imperita
Multitudo, and how much Sin and Villainy, great Damage, Ruin and Confusion they
have committed or done against their Kings Themselves and their own Posterities
in assaying to make an head out of the feet, or turn an head into a foot, or
what kind of Reformation could those Contrivers imagine could ever be made out
of such a Chaos of their own making, which will inevitably prove to be in the
sequel as Impossible as for Circes Enchanted Cup soundly or deeply drank off
ever to Unswine those that had been Enchanted or Transformed by it, or what
Form or Frame of Government we should have, when the Caesarean and Feudall
Laws, and the Ancient rectified and rational Customs of the Kingdom shall be
Massacred, when (the happily escaping) Baronage, Temporal and Spiritual, the
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Freeholders, the later of whom had no other
style or Title at the best then probos and legales Homines, must be put under
or into no better a respect or Condition then to be sent to Plow as Villain or
Varlets, and be no more then Socage or Sokeman, of which that of Villainage or
Husbandry, has Littletons tenures and Cokes Comments thereupon.
been both by our Littleton and Coke accounted to have been a part, for Lauds
apud Gallo^ liberi sunt aut serviles, vernacula Lauds Francks and Lauds
serfs, hi rei rusticae ascripti, tributa pendunt and opera servilia, illi ad
militiam designati nobiles Spelmans glos. tit. Lauds.
habentur and Immunes a tributis.

And all men but meanly acquainted with the beginning, rise, Duration and
Continuance of the vast Roman Empire, must Acknowledge that they were at the
first but Bubulci and Opiliones, such a Company of Shepherds and Heardsmen, as
their neighbors the Sabines scorning to intermarry with them, they were forced
to Ravish and steal their Daughters to make Wifes; and that after many Wars,
Troubles, seditions and Expulsion of their Kings, and abrogating of former Laws
and Customs, they rolled, tumbled over and over, and so disquieted each other,
as they were constrained to send to Sparta Livy.
and Athens, to enquire what Laws and Government they had, which for a while
Contenting and keeping them in some order, whilst they were busied in the
Building up their Empire robbing and Conquering a great part of the World,
Although with troubles enough the while, in the often change and turmoile of
their Magistrates as in their Decemviri, Consuls, Tribuni Plebis patricii and
Commons with the bloody interchange of the Marian and Syllan proscriptious
Triumvirate etc. until they arrived at the happiness of perpetual Dictator
and Monarchy, yet in all that time and after the Division of that overgrown
Empire mole ruentis sua, into that of the West and East, they never sought to
abrogate the Laws of the 12 Tables, the Fontes and Origines of the Civil Laws
and those voluminous Comments which have been made upon them by their
Jurisconsults and though long after hidden as for a great part disused and
driven almost into Oblivion by the Irruption of the Goths and Longobards into
the Western Empire, and the Establishment of their better-natured and approved
Feudall Laws, until about 500. Years after they had escaped the Edicts of
those Northern People to be Selden's notes upon Fortescu^.
burned and never more used, and being found safe and entire, were in the time
of Lotharius the Emperor brought in a grand Procession and Ceremony by
Torch-light into Pisa or Florence, and so ever after lived peaceably and
quietly in the neighborhood of the Feudall Laws; So as the One became
Assistant unto the Other, cohabited and would never after depart from each
other, and even the Late Commonwealth Rebels could not amongst all their
new-Fangles and Devices forbear their being much in love with the Trials by
Juries both in Civil and Criminal Actions, which had both their Use and
Foundation from the Civil and Feudall Laws; And Oliver Cromwell could after he
had over-reacht and Mastered them, find no better expedient to maintain the
Grandeur of his wickedly-gained Protectorship, but to borrow and make use of
that part of the Feudall Laws which allowed a subservient Peerage, and
therefore Created some of his Major-Generalls, (amongst whom were those grand
Statesmen Hewson the Cobbler, Pride the Drayman, and Kelsy the Bodiesmaker,
etc.) Members of an House of Peers, which he would by another name have called
the Other House, as Superior to his House of Commons, or Rebellion-Voters, who
having sat and executed as much Power as he could bestow upon them, did, after
death had cropped his Ambition, and carried him to his deserved severe account,
attend with their whole House in grevious melancholy and mourning, his
Funeral and Magnificent Charriott of State, to be buried in Westminster-Abby,
to lie there until the Hangman afterward by a better Authority fetched away
his Hipocriticall Carcass to a more proper Place, with their long-mourning
Train, Supported by 6 or 8 of his nicknamed Peers.

And after those pullers down, as much as they could, of our Excellent
Foundations to build up their Abominable Babell of murdering their King,
Destroying, Massacring, Plundering, Sequestring and decimating of his Loyal
Subjects and ruining his Royal Posterity, should after his Miraculous
Restoration think it to be a great piece of service to themselves and the
whole Nation, to put under the shame and Ignominy of a tenure unto which our
Laws never yet afforded any more then the lowest of Titles, as Rusticks, men
holding by the service of the Plough and Villainage, to teach the most Ignorant
and Incapacious part of the People how to Master, equal or abuse their
betters, or invite the Hogs and Swine into the Gardens and Beds of Spices, to
root up, foul, and trample upon the Lillyes of the Valleys and Roses of Sharon,
hoping thereby to frustrate the glorious actions of that great General Monk,
in the Restoring of the King unto his Just entire regal Rights, and to lay a
Foundation hereafter of binding him and our Kings in Chains and our Nobles in
Fetters of Iron, and to make an easy way for all the People of other Kingdoms
to order and Govern their Kings as they hoped, by transforming their Laws and
Regalities into such evil and Ignorant shapes, Interpretations and
Constructions as the People, (...) like the Dogs in the Fable of Acteon, might
(when they pleased) be the Murderers of their Kings and Princes and of their
own Laws and Liberties.

But that Great and Prudent Prince in the time of his travail and abode, after
his fathers death in the parts beyond the Seas, and other great Actions done by
him before he returned into England, as Fleta a Lawyer of good account and not
meanly instructed, as well in the Civil as Common Laws, or else Mr Seldom would
neither have Caused his Manuscript (so long concealed in Libraries and passing
from hand to hand, of such as could be made happy by the view thereof) to be
Printed and Published with his learned Dissertations or Comment thereupon,
says, that there having been a Congress or Meeting at Montpellier in France
upon the 16th, day of November 1275 or some short time after in the year Fleta
lib. 3. ca. 6. sect. 3.
1276, about the 4th, year of his Reign between him and many other Christian
Kings or their Ambassadors, Viz. Michael Paleologus Imperator Orientis,
Rodolphus Primus Occidentis, Galliae Philippus Audax, Castellae Leonis
Alphonsus, Decimus summus ille Astronomus and Partitarum Author, Scociae
Alexander tertius, Daniae Ericus octavus, Poloniae Bodislaus, Hungariae
Uladislaus quartus, Aragoniae Jacobus, Boemiae Ottocarus Carolus, Siciliae Hugo
Hierosolonicorum and alii Complures minoris nominis, qui Regum Christianorum
vocamme fruebantur, wherein certain agreements and provisions were severally
made touching the resumption, of the Lands and Manors appertaining to their
Crowns and Kingdoms, together with their Homage, Rights, and Jurisdictions,
wherein, although Mr Seldom that great Diver and Searcher into antiquities
seems to doubt of the truth thereof, for that Scriptores de hoc Anno non
Convenient, and at that time Rodolphus Caesar had granted unto Pope Gregory the
10th; Latifundia circumquaque amplissima quae antea Imperii pars insignis; And
says that Scldeni dissertatio ad Fletam ca. 10. p. 249.
assertion or place in Fleta is locus prodigiosus, the rather for that Azo Item
Jurisconsulti illius (aevi) summi vecusti, and our Bracton makes no mention of
it in his Chapter de donationibus, nor Britton in his Compendium Juris, neither
is it found in any other Jurisconsults, or in Fortescue who lived long after.

Howsoever, Notwithstanding the great reverence and respect which every man of
learning or well-wishers thereunto must or ought to bear unto our great Seldom,
that Dictator of learning so universally acknowledged not only in England but
in the parts beyond the Seas to be Decus gentis Anglorum, I shall be of
necessity constrained in this particular to V^ndicate Fleta from what he
charge upon him concerning the provisions and resolutions made and taken by
our King Edward the(...) and ^^e aforesaid Christian Kings and Princes, who,
especially Alexander King of Scotland and the Kings of France, Castill, and
Leon, near neighbors to England, or his French territories, together with the
Emperor of Germany, and the King of Sicily, by whom he had been Sumptuously
Feasted in his Return from Jerusalem, might probably not have been Ignorant of
his own and his Fathers and Grandfathers troubles and Ill usage, by some of his
Rebellious Baronage and a party of the Ecclesiastical and Common People
depending upon them, or allured unto their Ill usage of their Kings and
Princes. but to appeal to his own Vast reading and the Company of his large and
Eminently furnished Library, with his Collection and recherches of and into all
the Records and Choice Manuscripts in England all the Uuiversities thereof and
Foreign parts, the Roman Vatican not excepted, and what could be in that
famous Library of Sr Robert Cotton whilst he lived, truly believed to be the
Esculapius Librorum.

And it will be undoubtedly certain that there has never been, since the
Writings of the books of Sacred Scripture, any Infallibility or absolute
Certainty, that a Gospel of St Thomas has been assayed to be Imposed upon the
Christian World, that St Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, though by the Church
admitted to be canonical, have met with some Jealousies, who was the Author
thereof, the great Care of the Monks, mentioned in the preface of Dr Watts his
Edition of Matthew Paris, to have truths ^n^y registered to Posterity, have not
freed us from the Discrepancy amongst our Ancient Writers as unto matters of
Fact, as well as of opinion, and reasons given thereof, and even in that plain
dealing Monk of St Albans matters of Consequence have been omitted, though he
was King Henry the 3. his Historiographer, which others have recorded, and some
things recited that others have omitted, and it will ever be impossible to
reconcile the every where apparent differences amongst Ancient Authors as to
things done, when non omnia possumus omnes has been truly said, one man may
know all, and others but some part, one thinks it not necessary to record some
things, and others the Contrary, and quot Homines tot sententiae, our English
Chronicles written by Hollingshead, Grafton, Fabian, Stow and Sr Richard Baker,
have not been Written with one and the same Pen memory or Intelligence. And it
is likely that all, or most of them, have not given us the true relation of the
Cause or misfortune of the firing or burning of the Famous High Steeple of St
Paul's Cathedral in London, and a great part of an Hundred Years has passed,
whilst the People have entertained a belief, that the height of that Steeple
and Lightning had been the Cause of it, until a Plummers Boy, grown up to a
very old man, did upon his deathbed Confess that it was his own Carelessness
that did it by leaving of Fire amongst the Chipps that helped to melt the Lead,
whereby the Steeple and Church fell on Fire, and that until then he durst not
reveal it. And our great Seldom may suffer the World to believe, that in his
most excellent book of mare Clausum, to prove the Dominion of the British Seas
to appertain unto our Kings of England he has Discovered more then ever was
known or Written of before by any Author, and of many other his learned
Recherches in all the parts of the most Severe and hidden learning through the
Western and Eastern Languages, opening and Discovering of many of the Rich
mines of Knowledge and learning, which until his Industrious labors had
Blessed the World with the Knowledge thereof, had yet probably lain as it were
buried and Concealed. And certainly were that Summus ille vir great man of
Learning now Living, he would Ingeniously Confess that, that even in his own
times our great Physician the Learned Doctor Harvey has Discovered and made it
to be Confessed and Believed, without any Contradiction of the Learned in the
Medicinal Art, that the blood in the body of a man does Circulate unto the
Heart, which Gallen, Hypocrates, Avicen, Averroes, or any the Medici,
Physicians, and Anatomists Pancirello and his learned Commentator Salmuthius
that Travailed so much in the search of the Occultia and nova reperta of the
World from the Creation thereof, never met withal or were able to Demonstrate
as he has done, and Mr Seldom must of necessity permit it to be likewise
believed that our English Annalists, Historians and records will witness, that
before the Reign of King Edward the 1. and that grand Parliament, or congress
of him and the aforesaid Christian Kings mentioned by Fleta, our Henry the 2.
King of England, did not only resume and call back to the Revenues of his Crown
diverse Manors, Lands and Hereditaments, which his Royal Predecessors had
aliened, but King Edward the 1. Henry the 4th, 6th, and Edward the 4th, did the
like.

For Choppinus in his book de antiquo Dominio Regum Francia has given us the
Reason and necessity thereof, and our Choppinus de antiquo Dominio ^egum
Francia.
Parliament Rolls can evidence that the Commons of England have complained that
our Kings have granted away to their Subjects too many of the Liberties
belonging to the Crown of England, and it was one of the Articles, Exhibited
against the Rebelliously deposed King Richard the 2. that he had aliened
certain Manors and Lands of the Crown.

And the Actions and Proceedings of King Edward the 1. after his return into
England, and that aforesaid Congress and Meeting of so many Christian Kings and
Princes, must of necessity greatly Corroborate and Confirm Fleta's
beforementioned assertion, when the great Actions of that Prince after that he
came into England may evidence that he was Diligent and Careful in the
performance of what he undertook and understood rationally to be done in his
own Kingdoms and Provinces, and might well think that many of the aforesaid
other Kings and Princes would have done the like, if some other evenements or
disturbances, as the long continued Wars in France, and the Aurea Bulla in the
Empire of Germany, had not lessened or hindered their resolutions.

So as our excellently learned Mr Seldom may give me and others leave to say,
That when Fleta recited that Dreadful Procession, Imposed and put upon King
Henry Fleta lib. 1. ca. 42. P. 93.
the 3. to walk through Westminster Hall to the Abbey Church of Westminster,
Cursing and Condemning to Hell the Violaters of Magna Charta and Charta de
Forresta, and says it was done in praesentia and assensu Regis Henrici,
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Priotum, Comitum-Baronum, magnatum
Regni Angliae, he does not mention King John's Charter being read, as Matthew
Paris and Samuel Daniel have related, or of the Record before specified of the
Kings special saving of his Regalities, and it happened well that none of the
Predecessors or Progenitors of the House of Commons in the Parliament of 1641.
and their Continuators, through all that long and fatal Rebellion, the most
Ingrate and greatest Infringers of Magna Charta and Charta de Forresta, and as
great over-turners of Reason, Laws, Religion, and Truth, and the English
Nation, and the sense, Construction, and true meaning of the words heretofore
used, or misused therein as ever was or has been in any Nation, Country, or
Kingdom, or at the Confusion of Languages at the building of the Tower of
Babell, or amounting to all the Nonsense that has ever since been spoken by or
amongst mankind in an everlasting Spirit of Contradiction to Reason, Truth and
the Laws of the Land.

And Fleta, a Contemporary Lawyer, under that valiant and prudent Prince has
likewise recommended to After Ages that res sacras Coronae fuere liber Homo,
pa^, Jurisdictio muri and portae Civitatis quae nullo dari debeant. And that
res quidem Fle^a lib. 3. ca. 6. sect. 2. and 3.
Coronae sunt antiqua maneria Regis, Homagia, libertates and hujusmodi quae non
alienentur, tenentur Rex ea revocare, secundum provisionem omnium Regum
Christianorum apud montem pessulam mompellier in Languedock Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi, fill. Regis Henrici, quarto; Et si de Escaetis suis perinde debeant ad
valenciam, nec valebit deforciantibus longi temporis praescriptio, diuturnitas
enim temporis tantum in hoc Casu magis Injuriam auget quam minuit, cum constare
debeat singulis quod hujusmodi libertates de Jure naturali vel gentium ad
Coronam tantum pertineaut.

And that great King was so more then ordinarily careful of the rights and
Honor of his Crown and Regal authority, which had been too much depressed and
misused by the Rebellion of Simon Montfort, and some Rebellious Barons, and his
fathers Imprisonment, with the Wars and Hardships put Daniels Hist. 184. 191,
192.
upon them, and did so well provide against any the like troubles and
Convulsions of State, as in his return through France, and abode for some time
in Aquitain, where he was Sumptuously feasted by the King of France he took an
especial care when he did Homage to him for Aquitain and some other Dominions
he held of him in that Kingdom, to limit it only unto them and except Normandy,
where he expended much time in the Settling of his affairs.

But howsoever Summus ille viz our Mr Seldom was of opinion that so remarkable
a provision and Monarchical Resolution of our King Edward the first and so many
Emperors and Christian Kings and Princes to conserve the rights of their Crowns
reported by Fleta, was Prodigious, and taken too much upon trust and an over
facile credulity of our Carceratus Fleta as he termed him because resumptions
of the Sacred Patrimonies aliened had been used here in England long before and
not used at or about the same Time by Rodulphus primus the Emperor of Germany
when he granted to Pope Gregory the 10th, Bononia (in Italy) et latifunda
circum quaque amplissima quae ante Imperii Romani pars insignis and permitted
to be aliened to the Pope who was not then so easy to be resisted, and that
Choppinus and those many great and learned Doctors of the Law that had written
and argued so much concerning those kind of alienations and our own Historians
had been altogether silent therein yet that Decus Anglorum gentis might in his
great recherches of our English Records Laws and Annalls have found that our
King Edward might have been believed to have taken such Council either from his
former calamities, in his and his fathers Time, or by a general Consult with
some or all of those Christian Princes or their Legates for that he was no
sooner arrived in his own Kingdom and Dominions but he began to busy himself as
much as his other great Cares and Variety of troubles would Suffer him to do in
the allaying the Unquietness of the Disturbances which Humfrey do Bohun
Constable of England, Rigor Bigod, Earl Marshall of England, Gilbert de Clare
Earl of Gloucester and many other the remains of his fathers more then Cammon
Distresses, and in his Wars with Scotland and annexing the Rights and
Superiority of it to his Crown of England in the placing and displacing of the
Kings and Heirs thereof a Regality Superlative not to be neglected and an
effect pertinent enough to that Monarchick Universal consult; when in the
fourth year of his Reign an Enquiry was made of all the Manors and Lands,
Tenements, Parks, Buildings, Woods, Tenants, Commons, Pastures, Pawnage, Honey,
Herbage, and all other profits of Forests, Waters, Moors, Marshes, Heaths,
Turbury and Wastes, and how much it was worth by the year, Mills, Fishings
Common and several Freeholders and Copyholders, by what Service they did hold
their Land by Knight Service or in Socage, and what reliefs what Customary
Tenants and by what works or Service they did hold; what rents of Assise what
Cotages and Curtilages and what rents they do pay by the Year, what pleas and
exquisites of the Counties and of the Forests and what they were worth by the
Year, what Churches of what Yearly value and who was the Patron with the yearly
value of Herriotts Fairs Markets Escheats Customs Services fore Time Works and
Customs and w(...) the pleas and perquisites of Courts Fines and all other
Casualties were worth by the Year or may fall by any of those things; an
Inquisition much resembling that of the Norman villains enquest in the Book of
Domesday or that which long before preceded it called the Roll of Winchester
and in his elaborate recherches of all the Ancient Records Annalls Historians
Manuscripts and Memorialls of the British Saxon Scottish and English Nations
for the clear Evidence and manifestation of his Undoubted Right to Jus
Superioritatis oftke Kingdom of Scotland.

And in the same Year what things a Coroner should enquire of purprestures or
usurpation upon any of the Kings Lands and Statute Coronatoris Anno 4. E. (...).
that they should be reseised.

A Statute of the Exchecquer touching the recovery of the Statute de Bigamis
eodem Anno. Statute of the Exchequer or Ruthland. Westminster 2. 13. E. 1. ca.
16.
Kings Debts made in Anno 10. E. 1.

A Cessavit per Biennium to be brought by the Chief Lord with a forfeiture upon
him that neglects to do his service by the space of 2 Years.

In Anno 17. Fined 10 of 12 of his Judges accused and indicted of taking Bribes
and very great sums of Money Statute of quia Emptores terrarum that the Feoffs
shall hold his lands Quia Emptores terr. 18. E. ca. 1.
of the Chief Lord and not of the Feoffer.

And afterward caused the Judges at their return out of their Circuits to
rectify in rolls of Parchment all Fines and amercements due unto him and
ordered them to receive only Inter record apud recept Socii tempore E. 2.
their then small Wages thereout, curbed the Clergy that denied to give him
Aids, and forbad them to come to his Parliament which was holden, until their
Submission with a Clero Excluso and granted his Writs contra Impugnatores
Jurium Regis, made 2 Statutes of Quo Warranto in 18. E. 1. 18. E. 1.
that every man should show cause how he claimed or held his Liberties.

Ordinatio de libertatibus perquirendis 27. E. 1. 27. E. 1.


Statute of Wards and Reliefs Anno. 28. E. 1. 28. E. 1.


Another Statute of Quo Warranto. Anno. 30. E. 1. 30. E. 1.


Ordinatio Forrestae Anno. 33. E. 1. 33. E. 1.


So that pace tanti viri with all the honor and reverence that can or ought to
be given to Mr Seldom that Dictator of Universal and Solid Learning it may be
said that our Fleta which was by him so well esteemed as to have been published
and caused to be printed with his learned dissertations and Comment thereupon
might well have escaped his scruples and distrust, when in that great Kings
travail from Jerusalem or out of Daniel in the Life of King E. 1.
Aba homewards he was royally feasted by the King of Sicily one of the
aforesaid Confederate Christian Kings the Pope and diverse Princes of Italy.

And when the Pope had afterward demanded 8 Years arrears of him for an Yearly
tribute of 1000. Marks for the Kingdom of England and Ireland enforced from
King John did by his letter answer that the Parliament was dissolved before his
letter came unto his hands and that sine Praelatis and Proceribus (no Commons
therein mentioned) comunicato Concilio sanctitati suae super praemissis non
potuit respondere and Jurejurando 3. E. 1. To Claus (...) 9. and Seldens it is.
of honor.
in Coronatio sua prestita fuit astrictus quod Jurat regni sui servabit
illibata nec aliquid quod Diadema tangit regni ejusdem, (no such Oath or
Promise being in the Coronation Oath) ut nihil abusque illorum requisito
Concilio faceret; And that greatly learned man could not but acknowledge that
there were afterward resumptions of Crown Lands in the Reign of King Henry the
2. the alienation of some of the Crown Lands severely charged upon King Richard
the 2d. Anno. 33. H 6. by an Act of Parliament and in the reign of King Edward
the 4th, at the request and upon the Petition of the To part 1. mo. E. 4.
Commons, and were much more needful then those that had been before in the
Reign of King Henry the 2. made Leoline Prince of Wales to come and do him
Homage and Baliel King of Scotland attending in our P^rliament to arise from
his State placed by the Kings and Stand at the Bar of the House of Peers whilst
a cause was pleaded against him.

And it might not be improbable that that League betwixt that King and the
aforesaid Christian Princes might be entered not amongst the Common Rolls and
records of England but To. Vascon. 22. E. 1.
of Gascoigne where it was most proper and that some Vestigia of his great
Actions might be there found of it as well as that of the 22th Year of his
Reign of a Summons of diverse English Barons to come to his great Council or
Parliament, in England; and it could not be unknown to that great man of
learning, that as Authors and Writers have learned and Writ one out of another,
so have many Wrote that singly and alone which many of the Contemporaries have
either not been Informed of or did not think fit to Mention the dreadful
plagues of Egypt and the most remarkable that ever were in so short a Time
inflicted by God upon any Nation of the Earth, since the universal Deluge,
destroying all but the Righteous Noah and his Family and the several Kinds of
Creatures perserved with him, and the passage of Moses thorough the Red Sea in
his conduct of the People of Israel into the land of Canaan were not to be
thrown out of the belief of Christians and all others Venerating the Sacred
Scriptures, because Plato or Pythagoras travailing into Egypt in the inquest of
learning have given us no particular accounts thereof, and it will ever be as
truly said as it has been, that Bernardus non videt omnia and the ancient
institution rites and ceremonies of the most Honorable Garter is not to be
suspected because our Law and Statute books have not made such Discoveries,
Recherches, or a worthy and most elaborate Record thereof as the learned and
Judicious Mr Elias Ashmole has lately done, or our Glauviles Book de legibus
and Consuetudinibus Angliae is not to fall under the question whether he was
the Lord Chief Justice of England that Wrote it because there has not been so
much heed taken of him as ought to be by our Common Law Year-Books or
Memorialls of Cases adjudged in our Courts of Justice and later Law Books when
the learned Pancirollo in his Book de deperditis Ac etiam de novis repertis and
the exquisitely learned Salmuthius in his Comment or Annotations thereupon, or
the learned Pasquier in his Recherches and our ever to be honored Mr Seldom in
his rescuing from the Injuries of Time those many before hidden truths which he
in his history of Tithes Jauus Anglorum Analett Brittanniae Titles of honor de
Synedriis Judeorum u^or Jus naturae and Gentium Historia Ead mei cum multis
aliis, and those very many discoveries of learning and Truth which the world
must ever confess ought to be attributed to his walking in unknown paths
nullius ante trita pede have very Justly escaped any such suspicions and that
long and Eminent Treaty for Peace at Nimiguen for diverse Years last past
managed by most of the Monarchs of Europe and their concerns wherein the care
and mediation of our King in the charge of his Plenipotentiaries have not
wanted grateful Testimonialls of the many very much concerned Kings and
Princes in the putting a stop to the Wars effusion of Blood and devastation of
so great a part of Christendom Recneil de tons les traiter enter les potentats
de l'Europe a Nimegne.
is not or ought to be placed amongst the non liquets or Doubtings of after
Ages because (which by some Incuria or neglect of our Recording of it amongst
our Archives, which the more is to be pitied is not much unlikely to happen)
it is not to be met with amongst our Records or Historians.

When the so much Deservedly admired speculations and Experiments of the
excelently Learned Sr Francis Bacon Lord Verulam in his Philosophy more then
Aristotle and many others had made those Discoveries of des Carts, Depths and
Investigations of our Sr Kenelme Digby into the most abstruse parts of Learning
and that great addition now every where allowed to be true to that most
necessary and useful Art or Faculty of Physic of the circulation of the Blood
in the Bodies of men first Discovered and made apparent by our late Learned
Doctor Harvey, though the Egiptian Arabian and Grecian Doctors and the greatly
Famed Galen and Hypocrates had in all their labors knowledge and Practice not
so much as taken notice of it were never the worse but rather much the better
that former ages and men in the length of Art and the short Curriculum of their
lives often intermitted with Sickness and the Cares and Troubles of the World
had no sooner communicated it neither ought the Truth and value of our allways
highly to be esteemed Seldens Labors in the vindication of our Kings
Sovereignty in our British Seas suffer any abate because no Englishman before
had undertaken it, or of his learned Observations and Comments upon Sr John
Fortescues Book de laudibus Legum Angliae because he did not mention or had
Discovered that that over-tossed and turmoiled worthy and learned Chancellor
was after the Expulsion of the 3 Henrys 4. 5. 6th, of the House of Lancaster
under the later of whom he had Faithfully served from the Inheritance of the
Crown of England by King Edward the Fourth, with his better Title enforced
publicly to beg his Pardon and with much ado and by Writing and delivering
unto him a Book contradicting the Title of those former Kings and asserting
that of his own, which appears in that Act of Parliament in the 13th Year of
that King for the Reversall of his Attainder.

And those disturbers and misuses of our Fundamental Laws might do well to sit
down and consider that our uncontrolled every where in England venerable
Littleton can certify us, that if a man hold Land of his Lord by Fealty only
for all manner of service, it behooves that he ought to do some service to his
Lord, for if the Tenant ought to do no manner of service to his Lord or his
Heirs, then by long Continuance of time it would grow out of memory whether the
Land were holden Coke Comment ^up Littleton. 1 part Instit. ca 5. tit. Socage.
of the Lord or his Heirs, and thereupon the Lord may loose his Escheat of the
Land or some other Forfeiture, so it is reason that the Lord and his Heirs have
some service done unto them to prove and testify that the Land is holden of
them and that without taking away the Fealty and repealing the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy the Duty and Oaths of the Subjects remained as they
did whilst they held their Land in Capite and by Knight Service.

Which probably as may sadly be lamented could never have happened if the later
men of the Law in England had not by the space of something more then Forty
Years, last past, leaped over (as it may be feared they have overmuch done) the
successive learned labors and Books in a long process of Time in the Reign of
our Regnant Kings and Princes diverse Judges and Sages of our Laws Recording
from Time to Time Cases Judgments Decrees and Dicisions maturely and
Deliberately adjudged therein: But too much neglected those guidings better
guides and faithful Directors the Civil and Feudall Laws, and suffered their
Studies and practice to be employed and encouraged in the Factious Se^i^ious
and Rebellious principles of those Times, by following the gross Mistakes of Sr
Edward Coke in his Discontent malevolence and Ill will unto the necessary and
legal Regalities of the Crown and Idolizing, as he did, those grand parcells
of forgery and Imposture entitled the Mirror of Justice, and the Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, and their neglecting the readings of Glanvile, Bracton and
Britton, and other good Authors.

And the Civil Law was the Parent and Mother of many of the maxims and
principles of that which is now called our Common Law, And those men of the Law
who without Books subsistence or Estates, when they went beyond the Seas, with
their Sovereign, and had not there the opportunities of the Knowledge or help
of the Records of the Kingdom that might have been their best Instructers, were
for the most part but Young Gentlemen Born and Bred in the times of our
Distempered Parliaments, (as those were that Tarried here, who walked along
with the Rebellion, too much adhered unto them) and came Weather-beaten again
with his Majesty, had understood as they might have done, the Original
Foundation and Continuance of our Monarchick Government.

But King Edward the 1. who had passed over and overcome so many Hardships,
Difficulties, Misfortunes, and Storms of State, was so unwilling to be afraid
of a part of his Unquiet Baronage, or to Humor the popularity and ignorance of
any of the Common People, or to be in fear of them, or of any their Factious or
Seditious Machinations, making what have his affairs would permit to return
into England, where his father having by his Death escaped the restless
conflicts of a long and troublesome Reign, and his Exequies and Ceremonies of
burial performed, Robertus Kilwarby, Cantuariensis Walsingham Hist. E. and Sa.
Daniel Hist. E. 1.
Archiepiscopus, Gilbertus de Claro Comes Gloverinae, (a man that had been in
Arms and opposite enough against his father and himself in the former
convulsions of State) and John Warren Earl of Surrey (says Samuel Daniel went
up to the High Altar) cum aliis Praelatis ac Regni proceribus Londiniis apud
novnm Templum convenerunt Edwardum absentem Dominum suum Ligeam recognoverunt
paternique Successorem honoris ordinaverunt assensu Reginae (non Populi) and
before his return into England John Earl Warren and Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester in the Abbey Church of Westminster swear unto him Fealty (without
asking leave of the People) and proclaimed him King, although they knew not
whether he were Living or Dead, caused a new great Seal to be made, and
appointed six Commissioners for the Custody of his Treasure and Peace, whilst
he remained in Palastine, where by an Assassin feigning to Deliver Letters unto
him, he received 3 Dangerous Wounds with a poisoned knife (then said and
believed Daniel in the Life and Reign of King E. 1.
to have been cured by the Love of his Lady, that Paragon of Wives and Women,
who sucked the Poison out of the Wound, when others refused the adventure) and
after 3 Years Travail from the time of his setting forth, many conflicts and
Disappointments of his aids and Ends, left Acon well fortified and manned, and
returned homewards, in which as he travailed, he was Royally feasted by the
Pope, and princes of Italy, whence he came toward Burgundy, where he was at
the foot of the Alps met by Diverse of the English Nobility, and being
Challenged to a Tournament by the Earl of Chalboun, a man of extraordinary
Renown, Successfully hazarded his Person to manifest his valor. thence came
again into England, with the great advantages of his Wisdom, Courage, and
Reputation, assisted by the memory of the fortunate Battle at Evesham, and his
Actions in the East.

SECT. XVIII.
Of the Methods and Courses which King Edward the 1. held and took in the
Reformation and Cure of the Former State Diseases and Distempers.

KIng Edward the 1st, was together with his Queen Crowned at Westminster by
Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, (Alexander King of Scotland and John Duke of
Britanny attending that Solemnity) which being finished he shortly after forced
Leoline Prince of Wales (who had taken part with Montfort against his Father
King Henry the third) to do him Homage, and after a Revolt imprisoned and
beheaded him, did the like to his brother David, and United Wales as a Province
to England, made the Statute of Snowden, considered Plowdens Comment in le case
inter Bu^kley and Rico Thomas.
and perused their Laws, allowed some, repealed others collected some, and
added new, as he well might there do, (for the Prince or King which Governed
Wales had always used so to do) and appointed one to give his assent to the
Election of Bishops and Abbots.

And when The Pope demanded 8 years arreares for the rent or tribute of the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland enforced from King John, did by his letter
answer that his Parliament was dissolved before it came, and that sine
Praelatis et 3. E. 1. To Claus m 9. and vide Seldens tit. of honor.
Proceribus communicato concilio sanctitati suae super praemissa non potuit
respondere, et Jurejurando in coronatione suam praestito fuit obstrictus quod
jura Regni sui servabit illibata, nec aliquod quod diadema tangat Regni ejusdem
(no such clause or promise being in the Coronation Oath) ut nihil absque
illorum requisito concilio faceret.

Sent to Franciscus Accursius Docto: of laws resident at Bononia in Italy, the
son of the famous Accursius the Civil lawyer, to come with his wife and family
into England and by his writ to the Sheriff of Oxfordshire commanded him to
deliver unto the To. pa. 4. E. 1. m. 35. and Seldeni dissertatio ad Fletam 526.
said Doctor Accursius the King's manor house and castle of Oxford (then no
mean place) for him and his wife to Inhabit.

Did so imitate the wisdom and providence of the Roman and Caesarean laws, as
Augustus Caesar, and other of the Succeeding Emperors had done, as he gave
unto men learned in For sterus de juris prudentia Romans
the laws (which was more for the peoples good then in their suits and actions
at law to court and live under the protection and humors of their popular
Patroni's) libertatem respondendi 3. E. 1 ca 29.
to give council and advice to their clients in their concernments at law and
direct and plead their causes, and was with us in England the original of our
Sergeants at law, and pleaders mentioned in the Statute made in the 3d year of
his Reign with great penalties to be inflicted upon them for any falsehoods or
deceits which should be committed by them, which in the 3d year of the Reign of
King Edward the 2d came to be To. Claus. 3. E. 2.
so much in use and reputation (much more since augmented by the grace and
permission of our Kings and Princes into an eminent State and degree) as they
are only to be made and constituted by the King's writs, appointed for the
people to help them to Justice in their causes or actions either as to
Prosecute for their Rights, or defend them from wrongs, and oppressions, and
intimate, and show unto Judges what the laws do require to be done according to
Justice and equity, and must needs be grateful to the people who were so
thereby freed from maintenance, champerty, and quarrels too frequently haunting
the courts of Justice as it was enough for an advocate or Lawyer in discharging
himself from actions brought against him for Champerty or maintenance to plead
that he is Homo legis and was retained by his Client.

Although the word Narrator or Narratores pleaders have been found to have been
used in the later end of the Reign of King Henry the 3. which might either
proceed from the Civil or Caesarean Laws whereof the Lawyers of those Times
would have been ashamed to have been such professed Enemies as some of ours are
pleased to be, because they do not or cannot afford to understand their
excellencies or from the use or misapplication of some newly Devised Verba
Novata by some rash or inconsiderable Authors or Writers unto some long before
by gone and past ages such as Hint Sham, etc. not at all in those Times made
use of or understood which have produced great Digladiations and Disputes both
amongst Writers and Readers and made many that otherwise would not or should
not go to Cuffs in the Dark for little or nothing.

And to satisfy his Subjects in the grand concernments of their Laws, and
Liberties, Lives, and Estates, and to cause them to be fully kept, and
Executed, sent his Writs to his Justice of Chester, and the Sheriffs of all the
Counties of England in these Words, viz.

Cum propter communem utilitatem and totius Regni nostri meliorationem and
populi nostri relevationem de Communi concilio Praelatorum and Magnatum Regni
ejusdem (no Knights, or To. pat. de An. 3. E. 1. m. 10. de Statutis legend and
proclamand in Cum. Cest and alibi.
Citizens, and Burgesses for the Commonalty being then present or believed to
have been necessary) quasdam provisiones and quaedam Statuta cum magua
diligentia ordinari and postmodum sigillo nostro signari fecerimus tam a nobis
quam a ministris nostris quibuscunque quam ab ipsis Praelatis and Magnatibus
nostris ac tota communitate Regni praedicti (then understood to be included in
the advice of the Prelates and Nobility) ad perpetuam memoriam rei gestae
inviolabiliter observand vobis mandamus in fide and dilectione quibus nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes quod provisiones and Statuta illa in pleno Com.
Cestr. and in singulis Hundredis ejusdem comitatuus, Civitatibus, Burgis,
Villis, Mercatoriis, and locis aliis ubi expedire videritis legi and public
and solempnitor proclamari and ea in omnibus and singulis articulis suis and ab
omnibus de baelliva vestra futuris temporibus juxta tenorem corundem firmiter
and inviolabiliter observari and provisionibus and Statutis illis sic
proclamatis and ea in singmlis locis infra ballivam vestram ubi expediri
videritis distinct and aperte conscribi and ea fidelibus nostris locorum
illorum sic Scripta sine dilatione liberari vobis ac ballivis and fidebus
nostris habere cum eis indigueritis ostendenda and quatuor vel duobus militibus
de fidelioribus and discretioribus militibus Comitatus praedicti de assensu
totius communitatis trad^ faciatis (those Knights only and no Citizens or
Burgesses trusted therein) ad Securitatem dictae communitatis Cusiodiend. and
it a vos habeatis in hoc mandato nostro exequendo ne nobis seu aliis per vos
vel vestros seu vobis per defectum vestrum vel vestrorum imputari possit vel
debeat quod ea quae in dictis provisionibus and Statutis continentur vel little
aliquae in balliva vestra minus plene observentur, and hoc vobis and
universitati Comitatus praedictitenore presentium significamus, T. R. apud
Westminster. 28 die Mar. consimiles literae diriguntur singulisVice comitibus per
Angliam, which needed not to have been said there if there had then been an
House of Commons in Parliament or any such comprehension or representation of
Commons by Commons in Parliament as the Authors of their supposed Sovereignty
have fondly imagined.

And at the instance of John de Cobham altering the tenure of some of his Lands
in Gavel-kind, did it by his Charter in these Words, ad Regis celsitudinis
potestatem pertinet and officium ut partium suarum leges and consuetudines quas
justas 4. E 1. to cart. m 3. part 17. aut potius part 3. m. 37.
and utiles censuerit, ratas habeat and observari faciat inconcussas, illas
autem quae regni robur diminuer potius quam augere and conservare abolere
convenit aut saltem in melius commutare.

Directed his Writ to Roger de Seyton and other his Justices Itinerant at the
Tower of London in these Words, viz.

Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Magistro de Seyton and Sociis suis
Justiciariis Itinerantibus apud Turrim London, Sal^tem. Clause. Anno 4. (...).
1. m. 15. dorso.
Sciatis quod per dominum H. Regem patrem nostrum and nos, ac Consilium, nec
non and alios fideles suos qui cum eodem patre nostro convenerant apud
Marleberge provisum fuit, quod si coram quibuscumque Justiciariis Itinerantibus
appellum vel querimonia fieret de roberia and pace fructa vel homicidio aut
aliis commissis tempore guerrae nuper suborte versus eos qui fuerunt contra
eundem patrem nostrum vel alios, aut dc hujusmodi commissis presentationes
fierent sicut ad Capitula Coronae fieri solent, nullus ea occasion amitteret
vitam vel membra, aut penam perpetui Carceris incurreret, set alio modo de
dampius and amissis vel ablatis and transgressionibus fieret Judicia and
castigatio secundum discretionem Justiciariorum dicti patris nostri and insuper
diligenter attenderent and observarent ea que continentur in dicto de
Kenilleworth.

Et habeant Justiciarii in singulis Itineribus suis transcriptum dicti prefati,
Ita quod de his quae per alios Justiciarios ips^^s patris aostri ad hoc
assignatos termina fuissent seu terminari deberent, nichil facerent Justiciarii
dicti patris nostri Itinerantes sine speciali mandato suo, si forte sibi idem
pater noster aliquid injungeret and sciendum quod tempus guerrae incepit a
quarto die Aprilis Anno. Regni dicti patris nostri 48 quando vexillis
explicatis exivit cum exercitu suo ab Oxonia versus Northt. and duravit
continue usque Sextum decimum diem Septembris Anno Regni dicti patris nostri
xl. nono quando apud Wyntouiam pacem suam post bellum de Evesham in presentia
Baronum suorum qui ibidem convenerant firmari fecit and clamari; (no Commons or
Knights or Burgesses representing for them) Provisium fuit etiam ne aliquis
amittteret vitam vel membra pro Roberiis aut homicidiis aut aliis commissis sub
specie guerrae per illos qui contradictum patrem nostrum erant a quarto die
Junii Anno Regni ejusdem patris nostri xlvii. quando illi vexillis explicatis
primo per terram suam incedentes roberias homicidia and incarceraciones tam
personis Ecclesiasticis quam secularibus fecerunt usque ad predictum tempus quo
ab Oxonia versus Northt. cum exercitu suo recessit. De aliis autem quae tempore
illo sub specie guerrae non fiebant haberetur tempus illus velnd tempus pacis.
A tempore autem supradicto quo apud Winton pacem suam firmari fecit and
clamari, curreret Lex pro ut tempore pacis currere consuevit. Ita tamen quod
illi qui fuerint apud Axeholm. sive apud Kenill, vel Insula Elyens. vel apud
Cestrefeld vel postmodum apud Suwerk observaretur plene pax sua prout eam
habere deberent sive per dictum de Kenileworth sive per privilegia sua de pace
sua sibi concessa. De illis autem qui cum Com. Gloverniae in ultima turbatione
fuerunt, observaretur pax facta inter dictum patrem nostrum and ipsum Com. Ita
quod a tempore quo dicto Comes recessit a Wall. versus London. usque ad diem
quo recessit a Civitate praedict. non procederent Justic. contra ipsum vel eos
qui erant in part sua. Et hoc de illis tantummodo intelligeretur. De
depredationibus autem utrobique factis and tempore praedicto observaretur hoc
quod pace inter dictum patrem nostrum and ipsum Comitem facta continetur. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod hec omnia in prefato Itinere diligenter observari
faciatis. T. R. apud Kickleton. xix. die Marc.

6. E. 1. He commanded the Sheriffs to distrain every man that had 20 l. per
Annum, in Land, or a whole Knights Fee of the li^e value, and hold of him in
Capite and milites esse debent and ad arma militaria within such a Time a nobis
suscipiend. which was like a Nursery for military affairs for the continuance
of those gallant necessaries for public Defense in and by the obligations of
their Tenures, wherein a great part of our Fundamental Laws, Oaths of
Allegiance, Loyalty, and Duties of Subjects do subsist.

And by an Inquisition taken in the same Year at Launceston in Cornwall by a
Commission out of his Court of Exchecquer, it was found by a Jury that Dominus
ratione Regiae dignitatis and Coronae suae habet privilegium quod nullus in
Regno suo aliquo qui sit de Regno Angliae alieni homagium sine fidelitatem
facere debeat vel aliquis hujusmodi homagium vel fidelitatem ab aliquo recepire
debeat nisi facta mentione de fidelitate domino Regi debita eidem Dominus Regi
observanda Episcopus Exon adfuit contrarium etc. Et in contemptu, etc. Et le
Evesque mis a respond.

And like a second Justitian did cause John le Breton one of the Justices of
the King's Bench, Or, as others have written, Dugdales or. ju^idic 56. etc.
Seldeni noiae in Hengham and Breton.
Bishop of Hereford, to compile in his name a Book of the Laws and Customs of
England, wherein the King directring the Book to all the People, which were
under his protection par la Soufrance de Dieu, says, for that peace could not
be without Laws, he had caused those which had been heretofore used in his
Realm to be put in Writing, which he Willed and Commanded should be Observed in
all England 6. E. 1.
and Ireland, en toutz pointz Sauve a nous de repealer and de eunoiter, and d'
amander a toutz les faitz que nous verron que bon a nous serra par l'assent de
nos Countes and de nos Barons and autres de nostre Conceil Sauve les usages a
ceux que prescription de temps oul autrement use en taint que leur usages
soyent mys discordants a droiture; in which Book and the Droits de Roy there is
no mention made of the Britton 1 and ca. 15. and 19.
Election and Summoning of Knights of the Shires, Citizens and Burgesses, to
Parliament.

By his Edict or Proclamation prohibited the burning of Seacole in London and
the Suburbs thereof for avoiding its noysom Smoke; and without any Act of
Parliament divided Wales into Shires, and ordained Sheriffs there as was used
in England; caused some London Bakers not making their bread as they ought, to
be drawn upon Hurdles and 3 men for rescuing a prisoner arrested by an Officer
to have their right hands cut off by the Wrists.

Fined without advice or assent of Parliament (which might well be so
understood to have been so upon the Act Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle. Speeds
Hist. of Great Britain.
of Parliament in Anno 3 of his Reign, ordained that such offenders should be
ransomed and Punished at the Kings Will and Pleasure) Sr Ralph Hengham Chief
Justice of his Bench 7000 Marks, Sr John Lovetot Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas 3000 Marks, Sr William Brompton 6000 Marks, Sr Solomon Rochester (or
Roffey) 4000 Marks, Sr Richard Boyland as much, Sr Thomas Sodenton 2000 Marks,
Sr William Saham 3000 Marks, Roobert Littlebury Clark Speeds Hist. of England
in the Reign of King Edward the 1st. and Spelmans glos. in catalog. Justiciar.
Master of the Rolls 1000 Marks, Roger Leicester no less, Henry Bray Escheator
and Justice of the Jews 1000 Marks, Sr Adam Stratton Chief Baron of the
Exchequer 34000 Marks, and Thomas de Weyland being the greatest delinquent and
of the greatest substance, could not be so easily excused, but was Banished and
had all his Goods and Estate Confiscate to the King, only John de Metingham and
Elias de Beckingham (two of the itinerant Judges, to their eternal honor,
says Henry Spelman appearing Guiltless and Righteous in that severe and Kingly
examination and Justice) purged his Courts of Justice and the Officers and
clarks thereof from Bribery and extortion, banished the usury of the Jews,
hanged 297. of them for abusing the Coin and Money of the Kingdom, curbed the
pretended Independent power of the Clergy, Clipped their Jurisdictions, and
upon their refusal to pay Tallage toward his Wars, Seized many of their
Temporallities, put them out of the protection of his Laws and Justice and
caused them to be excluded out of one of his Parliaments until their
Submission, whom he had by woeful experience understood to have had too great
an Influence upon some of the unquiet Nobility.

Made himself the Arbitrator and Umpire betwixt the many great Pretenders to
the Crown of Scotland, amongst which was Erick King of Norway, and received the
homage of the King thereof, and in his Claim to the Superiority Walsingham
ypodigma Neustria 491 492. 493. and 494.
strongly Asserted it, when the Pope had by his Letter unto him mediated on the
behalf of the King of Scotland, and claimed that Kingdom.

And was so watchful over his own Rights and what belonged to his Crown and
Dignity, as upon an appeal from John Baliol King of Scotland and his Parliament
to the Parliament and Court of the K. of England, unto which when he was
Summoned personally to appear before him, and appearing, sat with him in
Parliament, was Suffered no longer to sit by him, but until the Cause came to
be heard, when he was cited by an Officer to leave his Seat, and Commanded to
stand at the Bar appointed for pleading, which he having no mind to do craved
leave to answer by his procurator, but was denied, and as a Feudatory made to
arise and descend to the Bar, and defend his own Cause before him as his
Superior.

Which by the Ancient feudall, Fundamental Laws of England without the
assistance of any other of our Laws concerning Treason, might have excused and
Justified our excellently virtuous Queen Elizabeth in her unwilling Trial,
Condemning Beheading and putting to Death Mary Queen of Scotland her Feudatory,
not only for Usurping the Arms and Title of the Crown of England, but plotting
after her flying for Refuge unto her, and her Kingdom of Scotlands Superior for
Resuge, to bereave her of her Kingdom of England and the Dominions thereof, by
her intended Marriage of the Duke of Norfolk, for which he was likewise
condemned and Executed for Treason.

In the same Year by his Writ commanded to be arrested Susurrones and publicos
predicatores contra personam Regis.

In the 7th year of his reign upon occasion of false rumors sent his
Commissioners into several Counties of the Kingdom, ad inquirendum qui
dicebant Regem inhibuisse ne 7. E. 1. to. pat. m. 13.
quis blada sua meteret, vel prata sua falcaret, and quod omnes tales sine
dilatione in prisona custodiantur douec authors suos invenerint and tunc
liberent and authors in prisona custodiant donec pro deliberatione little
mandatum habuerint Speciale.

In the 13th, Year of his Reign for a fine of 20 Marks paid by W. gave him a
respite de se militem faciendo. Et 1. E. to. claus. m. 1.
a pres il fut amerce per les Justices itinerant parceo q'il ne leur monstre
son Charter.

In the 10th Year of his Reign granted authority to Signify 10. E. 1. to. pat.
m. 2.
his assent to a future Abbot.

And in the same year empowered Edmond Earl of Cornwall 20. E. 2. to. pat. m. 4.
to admit in his name the Mayor of Oxon, when the commonalty of the town
should present him, and the like for the Mayor and Sheriffs of London.

In the 12th, Year of his Reign granted to the Citizens of 12. E. 1. to, Cart.
m. 3.
London power to make Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.

In the 13th, Year of his Reign directed his Writts to the Sheriffs in the
words ensuing, cum de consuetudine regni qui habent 20 libratas terrae vel
feodum militis valens 20 libratas 13. E. 1. to. Claus. m. 9.
terrae vel feodum militis valens 20 libratas per annum distringerentur ad arma
militaria suscipiendum nos ob servitium etc. in Wallia a communitate regni
nostri volumus quod non habentes tantas libratas terrae non distringantur.

Ordained that in Parliament certain Bishops, Lords and Other their Assistants
should be named of that Honorable Assembly of Parliament at the very beginning
thereof, which for many Ages after has been duly observed, to be receivers 13.
E. 1.
and tryers of the Petitions, Complaints, and Desires of his People to be
exhibited therein whether properly to be there determined or in the Courts of
Justice in Westminster Hall or other inferior Courts.

In the 14th and 16, Years of his Reign made his cousin Edmund Earl of Cornwall
custos regni.

Spared not in his Court of King's Bench Robert the Son of William de Glanvile
and Reginald the Clark of the said William for delivering at Norwich a Panell
of the Kings Writs, which Mich. 18. E. 1 Norf. to. 46.
the King's Coroner ought to have brought.

Banished his Son Prince Edward from his Court and Presence for 6 Months for
giving reproachful words to a great Officer of his Court or Household.

Caused the Prior of the Holy Trinity in London and Bogo de Clare a man of
great power and reputation to be arrested at his suit by Peter de Chanet
Steward of his household, and Walter de Fancourt Marshall of the King for citing
Edmond Earl of Cornwall to appear before the Archbishop of Canterbury as he
was passing thorough Westminster Hall to the Parliament whereupon the Prior and
Bogo after some pleadings in the said case submitting themselves uuto the
King's Grace, Will and Pleasure, were committed to the Tower of London, there
to remain during his Will and Pleasure, and being afterward placit. Parl. 18.
E. 1. n. 4. R^ley^ placit Parl. 6. 7. and Pryns aurum Regin.
Bailed the said Bogo paid to the King a Fine of 2000 Marks, and gave security
to the Earl for 1000. which by the interposition of the Bishop of Durham and
others of the King's Council was afterward remitted unto 100 l. and the Prior
was left to the Judgment and process of the Court of Exchecquer.

In the 20th Year of his Reign praecepit singulis vice Comitibus per Angliam
and Justic. Cestr. quod proclamari facerent quod to claus. 20. E. 1 to. fin. m.
25. and to. pat ejusdem annt^m. 5. and 17.
omnes qui habent 40. libratas terrae in feodo and haereditate sumerent
militaria arma.

In that and the Year following seized the Lands of those that would not take
that Degree, and made special respites to some during their lives.

Caused his Justices to certify into the Exchecquer at the return out of their
Circuits by particular Rolls under their own Names the Fines and amerciaments
set imposed and forfeited upon Actions of trespass, rescous, deceit, attaints
non est factum or salse Pleas, untrue avowries, appeals of Murder, felony,
manslaughter, meyheim, Contempts and attachments Cokes 8. report Beechers case
in Anno. 6. Jac. and rot. Just^itin. tempore E. 1.
upon process out of any of his Courts, of Justice, abuse of the Law,
Fictitious actions, and vexatious Suits, Non-suits in Actions real and
personal, or when but part was found for the Plaintiff or Defendant, which
were in those Days as much for the advance and well ordering of Justice as they
were for the Kings profit.

who took such a care not to have it neglected, as by his Writ (without an Act
of Parliament he prefixed his Justices certain times for the causing the said
Moneys to be levied, when their own then little Wages or Salaries were to be
paid out of inter record apud recept Scrii de tempore E. 1.
it which made them to be so exact therein as there was no fault deserving a
Just Punishment could escape the Eyes and Ears apprensions and Watch of his
regulated Justices, insomuch as Offenders were Fined or amerced pro falso
clamore or quia non invenerunt pleg. for Deceipts, Sheriffs for not returning
of Writs, Jurors for not appearing or pro falsa appretiatione, or giving
verdicts before they were sworn, Fined such as threatened or abused them, and
sometimes the Common People that had occasion to attend his Courts of Justice
pro garrulitate or irreverent Behavior, kept his Courts of Justice within
their Centers, and Limits of Jurisdiction, held them to their just and legal
forms of Pleadings in verbis Curia, and was severe against any of the Pleaders,
Counters or Officers pro Seductione Curiae as the Language of the Records of
those times did import for any Deceits or Collusion misleading or abusing the
eyes and ears of his Judges and the Clients, as well as the faithless Officers
and Ministers of his Courts of Justice, or in the Circuits of the Judges
itinerant, and therein was something less severe then the Law and Usages were
in the Reign of his Great Grandfathe Henry 2. when William Fillius Nigelli
prali^a in itinere apud Glou. temp^^^ H. 2. to. I. 242.
a judge itinerant being in misericordia of the King pro defalt qui postea
venit and cognovit quod emendavit rotulos Sine Sociis suis, and ideo in miser.

Did not leave the grand Jurors so much Arbitrary Power, as too many now please
themselves to mind more where to have good Meat and Wine until some seldom
Indictments more for Malice then Love of Justice or a care of their Oaths be
brought unto them, but ordained their Charges not to be given in fine orations
or speeches, as soon gone out of their Memory as come in, but to put in Writing
in distinct articles of enquiry, whereunto they were upon Oath to answer
negatively or affirmatively, whereby the offenses against the Laws
Conspiracies, Treasons, Dangers, and Disturbances, of the Nation were in the
Embrio's stisled, and as soon Discovered as hatched.

But the troubles and injuries forced upon the Crown, his Father, and Himself
by the wicked attempts of Simon Montfort, and his Rebellious partners putting
him in mind to make his business to give a stop to growing mischiefs and
prevent as much as was possible any thing of the like nature for the future,
did find it necessary for the good of himself and the Kingdom, as the judicious
Sr Henry Spelman has recorded it, Spelmans glos. in diatri^a de Justi. Anglia
334.
to lessen those high powers, authorities and privileges, which the Chief
Justices of England had before that time exercised and claimed as appurtenances
to that great Office, as it were to be Vicarias Regis, Pro Rex, and locum
tenens Regis, Custos regnii and regni Guardianus in absentiae Regis, tanto
etiam prae aliis omnibus emicuit Justiciariis ut eisdem suo brevi more regio,
imperaret, and restrain ejus phtestatem cancellis circumscriptis arctioribus
adeo ut se sejunctum a rerum fastigio and priscae amplitudinis forensi
solummodo negotio and judiciis exercendis eum abdicavit, did by his Writ
constitute the said Chief Justice, and all that were to succeed him in that
Office and place under the form and declaration only concerning the affairs and
business, wherein he was to Officiate and be employed in his Court of
King's Bench rs by his Writ appears in these Words;

Quia volumus quod sitis Capitalis Justiciarius noster ad placita coram nobis
tenenda, vobis mandamus quod Officio illo intendatis, Tmeipso apud Westminster, etc.

And in all probability praeteritorum memor, By sad misfortunes warned learnt
to beware
How dangerous innovations ever are.


Well considering that if that contrived Writ of Elections gained by a
rebellious force and imprisonment from his father almost 30 Years before, could
have created in or to the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses to be elected or
brought into our King's greatest councels of the highest and most important
concernments of the weal public of the Nation.

Any such Rights or Privilege, as some of their Successors or Factious
flatterers have since arrogated, yet so long a Discontinuance of a Privilege
not at all executed or vested in them after a forfeiture incurred by the Cities
of London, Bristoll, Gloucester, and the most of the Counties, Cities, or
Boroughs, which had taken Arms against their King instead of their aid and
assistance not very fully pardoned by any the Compositions or agreement made by
King Henry the 3d, his Father by the dictum de Kenilworth after his Victory
gained of them at the Battle of Evesham.

And that notwithstanding he might have taken in again his own just Rights and
debarred them from an after Invading or disturbing of him therein, and that
neither his Fathe^s Charters nor his own Confirmation of all the Peoples
Liberties and privileges either in Words expressed in his Father's Magna
Charta or Charta de Forestae, or any way to be employed within the verge or
meaning thereof, could bind him to Continue such a kind of Election of a
separate part, of the Vulgar or Common People, as Simon Montfort, and his
Rebellious Accomplices had Traitorously devised, and that such an attack of the
Regal Government by the hoped for advantages of some, or intermedling ambition
of others in matters wherein they had little or no understanding, or whereby
they sought only to accomplish their own evil Designs, making them ever
afterward more industrious then they should be to associate the creeping Ivy
with the Royal Oak, which by its clipping Kindness and drawing to it self its
Sap and nourishment, might at length Canker, enervate and destroy it.

Yet willing to show them that he would as little as he could, recede from what
had been granted as privileges and Liberties to his Subjects, and probably to
pacify their then too much accustomed fears and jealousies, and allure them
into a course of obedience to those Laws and provisions which should be made by
the Privity and approbation of a Select number of the more wise and discreet
part of his Common People, and give them experience of an Adage or worthy
saying of his own in many or some of his rescripts, quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus approbari debet in some special cases, but not either by the laws of
God, Nature, or Nations, or our laws always adjudged to be Requisite or
necessary.

And at the same time to lessen, as Mr Prynne, Sr William Dugdale, and other
weighty Authors have well observed, the Strength and power of a part of his
ungovernable Baronage by counter-ballancing in some sort their overgreat power
in his great counsels or Parliaments, by Requiring and making use therein of
the service of the Knight Citizens and Burgesses Pryn in his Preface to the
abridgement of the records in the Tower of London. Dugdales Baronage.
fairly to be elected according to the intention of his writs, and Royal
mandates, and acting according to the commissions or procurations which their
Counties, Cities, or Boroughs should lawfully give or trust them withal.

But so little approved of Popular elections and that which had been imposed
upon his Father, as he was unwilling to adventure upon any thing like it until
he had rectified many things, which he b^^ieved had been much of the causes of
the Distempers in the Body Politic, and was to be warily done by a care and
retrogradation, as much as might be, before he would condescend to please the
People; which Some of them, or those that would make use of them began to be
too fond of, and therefore could hardly bring himself to please them in that
kind especially when he could perceive the Nobility Disliking and averse unto
it.

Howsoever with some Confidence believing it to be beyond any fear or
Imagination that any Danger to the English Monarchy and Government so
Anciently, rationally and well founded according to the Laws of God, Nature and
Nations, Laws of the Land, and reasonable Customs thereof could happen
thereunto by the election of a part of the People Subordinate to the Nobility
and Baronage as well Spiritual as Temporal adstricti legibus, and obliged by
their Tenures in Capite Homage and Fealty in the strongest manner that the
Wisdom and Care of Mankind could devise, as bonds never to be shaken off and a
tie upon their Estates, Bodies and Souls by their Oaths of Allegiance, Tenures,
and Forfeiture of their Lands to be true and faithful to their King and those
which they held of, or that they or any of their Posterities could be so
ungrateful for benefits received from the Crown and his Progenitors from
Generation to Generation as to be so unmindfull of their often repeated Homages
and Oaths of Allegiance as when they were Summoned only to perform and obey
what the King and his Lords Spiritual and Temporal in his greatest Council
should adjudge meet to be done for the Public Good, and to stand as
Petitioners in the outward Courts, should by Insinuations from some privileges
and the Power granted unto them and others for that purpose and only end of
contributing necessary aids for their Kings for the defense of themselves and
their Defenders, by gradations and the over indulgence of their Kings and
Princes and the advantages of caught opportunities creep into the Arcana
Imperii and snatching the thunderbolts and authority of the Sovereign out of
his hands make themselves too busy with the supreme power themselves that
should be governed, to be the unruly and unreasonable Governors of their King
and Gods Vicegerent.

Who might have thought himself and his Successors to have been in some
condition of Safety when the Summons to Parliament were to be only by his Writs
and Authority and the Sheriffs who were not the Parliaments Officers but the
Kings, and by the Law Sworn unto him not unto both or either of the Houses in
Parliament and strictly bound to observe and Execute his Writs and Mandates,
made himself content to allow some things of that way or course which had been
before unduly and Illegally contrived, and therefore did as it appears alter
and change it into a more legal and just way with different methods enough as
he thought to make them and after Ages understand, that it was his only right
to do it; and that they were to be no more then consenters obedient, and ready
to do and perform what the Lords Spiritual and Temporal should in Parliament
advise, wherein he was to be the sole Director, Ratifier, and Ordainer, and to
be at his Disposing in the Summoning and Calling them together, as to Time,
Place, Continuance, Proroguing, Adjourning, or Dissolving any such or the like
Assemblies, and that he in all things to be done therein was as their Sovereign
to have his Granting, Directive, and Negative Voice, and in the sending out of
his Writs of Summons for any Great Counsels or Parliaments to vary in the
circumstances orders or limitations or additions, as his occasions for the Weal
public should require, with such other variations as might signify his care to
prevent future Evils or impending Dangers, and reserve to him and his
successors the long ago just rights of the best tempered Monarchy in the
Universe.

And for the better method and order to be used in his House of Lords and
Peers, whom he had Summoned and made use of in his great Councels and
Parliaments, until that time, without the Commons or any Procurators on their
behalf in the making of diverse Laws and Statutes of very great Concernment to
them and the Weal Public.

And to make the Counsels and Assistance of the Wiser and better part of his
People more Effectual, and in a better order then that which the rebellious
part of his and his Fathers ill-affected Baronage had neither well provided for
themselves or them, did whilst he was content to admit into the fitting and
necessary Secrets and intimacy of his great Counsels a select part of them to
be duly chosen by his Writts and commands as to Time, Occasion, and Place,
resolve to give after ages to understand that he did notwithstanding reserve to
himself as his Royal Progenitors had Anciently done, when they only Summoned
the Prelates and Peers to their Great Counsels his and their most undoubted
rights and power of Summoning, Proroguing, Adjourning, or Dissolving those
Assemblies, and the sole and only affirmative or negative voice in the making
of Laws, as being the only breath, Life, and being thereof.

Did at his being in Goscoigne in the Twenty Second year of his Reign send his
Writs of Summons to Summon diverse To. vascon. 22. E. 1.
great Lords as well French as English being in number Sixty one, amongst whom
were Roger de Moubray, William Trussel, Simon Basset, Theobald de Verdon, etc.
habere colloquium and tractatum with him (in England) ubicunque fuerit, in a
much Differing form then those of Henry the 3 his as aforesaid Imprisoned
Father.

And Directed his Writ to the Sheriff of Northumberland in these Words, viz.
Rex etc. Vice Comiti Northumbriae Salutem tibi praecipimus quod de Comitatu
praedicto duos milites and de qualibet Civitatem ejusdem Comitatus duos Cives
and de quolibet Burgo duo Burgenses de discretioribus and ad laborandum
potentioribus sine dilatione eligi and eos ad nos ubicunque in Regno nostro
fuerimus venire facias, it a quod dicti milites plenam and sufficientem
potestatem pro se and communitate Comitat praedicti and duos Cives and
Burgenses pro se and communitate civitatum and Burgorum praedict. divisum ab
ipsis tunc ibidem habeant ad consulendum and consentiendum pro se and
communitate illa his quae Comites, Barons, and proceres de Regno nostro
ordinabunt, etc. T. Rege octavo die Octobris, altogether Different from the
Writs made out and enforced from his Father King Henry the 3. During his
Imprisonment in Anno 49 of his Reign. Consimilia brevia diriguntur singulis
aliis Vicecomitibus Angliae, And in the same Year and the next Day after, sent
another To. Claus. 22. E. 1. (...). 6. in dorso.
Writ to the same Sheriff in these words.

Cum nuper tibi praeceperimus quod duos milites de discretioribus ad and
laborandum tunc potentioribus ejusdem Comitatus de consensu ejusdem eligi and
eos ad nos usque Westmonasterium in crastino Sancti Martini proximo futuro cum
plena potestate pro se and tota Communitate ejusdem Comitatus venire faicas ad
consulendum and consentiendum pro Communitate illa his quae Comites, Barons,
and Proceres de Regno Nostro in dicto crastino ordinabunt (the King being then
in Gascoigny and not intending to be there present) tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes quod praeter illos duos milites eligi facias alios duos milites
legales, and ad labor andum potentes, and eos una cum dictis duobus militibus
usque Westmonasterium venire facias it a quod dicto crastino sint ibidem ad
audiendum and faciendum quod eis tunc ibidem before injungemus and hoc nullo
modo omittatis, and haheas ibi hoc breve test meipso apud Westminster. nono die
Octobris, and caused more Knights of the Shires at that Time to be Elected,
then he had done before or after, Eodem modo mandatum est singulis
Vicecomitibus Angliae.

And to that end did afterward without any Deviation from what might justly
appertain unto himself in the well Claus. 23. E. 1. m. 9. in
ordering and government of his counsels and Subjects in the most legal
manner, send his writ of Summons to Gilbert de Thornton (chief Justice of his
Court of Kings bench) in these words. viz.

Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis nos et Regnum nostrum and vos caeterosque
de concilio nostro tangentibus quae sine vestra praesentia nolumus expedire
vobis mandamus in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini fir miter
injungentes quatenus sitis ad nos apud Westminster. primo die mensis Augusti proximo
futuro vel saltem infra tertium diem subsequentem ad ultimum tractatur; and
vestrum concilium impensur. and hoc nullo modo omittatis test meipso apud
Album Monasterium 23. die Junii Anno regni nostri 23.

Eodem modo mandatum est Justiciariis de utroque banco and de Itinere and
Justic. assignatis Decanis juratis de Concilio, Baronum de Scaccario and aliis
Clericis de concilio quorum nomina annotantur.

And the inferior Secular Clergy not being at all called with other of the
Commons by that unauthorized Writ of Simon de Montfort in the 49th Year of the
Reign of his then imprisoned Father King Henry the 3d, did hold it to be as
agreeable Claus. 23. E. 1. m. 2. in dorso.
to Reason and his good Intentions for the One as the Other, to make out his
Writ of Summons in These Words, Viz.

Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Cantuarensi Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati salutem, licet nuper mandaverimus quod die Dominico proxime
post festum St. Martini quod jam instat apud Westminster. personaliter interessetis
and quod praemoneretis Priorem and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Archidiaconum
and totum Clerum vestrae diocesis faceretisque quod iidem Prior and
Archidiaconus in propriis suis personis and dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque
Clerus per duos procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab
ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes una cum vobiscum interessent modis omnibus
tunc ibidem ad tractandum, ordinandum, and faciendum nobiscum and cum caeteris
praelatis and Proceribus and aliis incolis regni nostri qualiter periculis,
quae eidem regno nostro, hiis diebus imminere videntur, poterit obviari quia
tamen pro navigio nostro congregando and parando quod ad dicti regni
defensionem, and hostium nostrorum impugnationem, annuente Domino, speramus
maxim profecturum: quodque per omnibus utile, credimus festinari in partibus
de Wynchelse, moram tam diu facere nos oportebit, quod dictis die and loco
Commode non poterimus interesse; vohis mandamus in fide and dilectione, quibus
nobis tenemini, firmiter injungentes, quod die Dominica, proxima ante festum
beati Andreae Apostoli proxime futurum; ad quem diem dictum negotium ex causa
predicta duximus prorogandum, apund Westminster. personaliter intersitis,
praemunientes praedictos Priorem, and Capitulum, Archidiaconum, and Clerum
facientesque quod tunc ibidem intersint, ad tractandum, ordinandum, and
faciendum super praemissis, prout in priori mandato nostro, vobis inde directo,
before continetur. Prorogationem autem hujusmodi de dioces. Vestra, quorum
interest celeriter nuncietis. Test Rege apud Odymere 11 die Novembris.
Consimiles literae de verbo ad verbum diriguntur Episcopo Eli. Episcopo Norwic.
Episcopo Winton. etc.

But in that ballancing way of his great nobility by the vulgus or common
people fastened so ill an example in process of time upon his Crown and
successors as some of them have sadly since experimented it, as in the event it
has too much resemblance with what that excellent Queen Elizabeth did by
supporting that ungrateful Republic of the united provinces, when she was
forced to do it to preserve her self and the Protestant Religion as well at
home as abroad against the Spanish tyranny and encroachments.

When he was not able at that time to foresee that the number of freeholders
would be as they were afterward almost 300 in 5 increased, and that such great
quantities of Abbey, Priory, Nunnery, and Chantry lands and other profits and
possessions given and dedicated to Religious uses, which in the Reign of King
Henry the 8th may be justly estimated to be a 3d part of the lands and revenues
of the Kingdom should (much of it) fall to the share of the common people, and
make them more surly and haughty then they were, and ought to be, or that in
the granting of those lands from the Crown (from which much of it originally
came) a great part of the tenures in Capite, and by Knights service should in
those times be turned into free and Common Soccage; or by the manumising or
making free Multitudes of Copyholders) which in former ages may be accounted to
have been another third part (if not more) of the lands of the Kingdom.

Or that the Offices of Sheriffs, which in his and the former Reigns of our
Kings were commonly lodged and entrusted in the hands of the Nobility and great
men of the Kingdom, would so much be altered as to be most commonly placed in
the lower rancks of the People, whereby the ignorant vulgar, Seditious, or
Factious, and most numerous part of them should be suffered to take upon them
to make their own indiscreet or purchased Elections, when the Writs only
comm^nded and intended that the Sheriffs who were solely (...) thereunto,
should without any Bribery, Partiality, (...) Corruption, make and Govern the
Election, and to be the Judges of the Fitness or Unfitness of the persons to be
Elected to give their Assent in Parliament unto what should be there Ordained
by their King, by the Council and Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.
Or that any of his Successors would for an Excise upon Ale, Beer, Coffee, and
Syder for want of a regal revenue, which in many ages past had been by
Princely indulgencies and necessities of encouraging and rewarding merit and
Service for the good of the public greatly and too much wasted and exhausted,
ever have been persuaded to have released so much as was done of the Tenures in
Capite by a factious part of the people, (who designed to undermine the
Monarchical Estate of the Government.

Or by some of the more Loyal advisers who either by ignorance or otherwise
did not well understand Monarchy and the Government; Or the sad and ever to be
lamented Consequences and Effects that have already followed, and will
hereafter fatally ensue the change of the Tenure in Capite and by Knight
Service, to release and turn those Nerves and Sinews of the Government,
ligaments and ties of the Crown, the Chariots and Horsemen of our Isreal's Glory,
Strength, and support of it, and the Loadstone of the Subjects obedience, into
free and common Soccage.

Wherein much more heed was to have been taken then formerly, for that the
Militia and the Sovereignty and Power of our Kings, much whereof were lodged
and incorporated therein, were founded and built upon the Tenures in Capite,
and by Knights Service, the Basis, Foundation, Life, Blood, Animal Spirits,
Soul, Essence, and support thereof, and had not long before been by an Horrid
and Hypocritical Rebellion wrested out of the hands of the late blessed Martyr
King Charles the 1st. by abuse and misconstruction of the Laws, false
arguments, and the fear and flagging of some of his most Eminent Justices and
Lawyers who were too little acquainted with the Feudall Laws, and Laws of
Nations, the Records, Annalls, and Histories of the Kingdom and the
Monarchical Government thereof. Which too much encouraged and assisted the
Rebellion against him, together with the murder and destruction of him and many
Thousands of his Loyal and more Dutiful Subjects that fought for him.

Notwithstanding all which the aforesaid cares and condescensions of that
prudent Prince King Edward the 1. hoping for the best and not suspecting the
worst, In the 25th Year of his Reign requiring Bohun Earl of Hereford and
Constable of England and other the Barons to go with him to the Wars in
Gascoigny, and Bygod Earl Marshall of England, likewise refusing, unless the
King himself would go in Person, the King swears ye shall go or Hang, and the
Earl answered he would neither go nor Hang, and so without leave departed, the
King notwithstanding proceeded in his Voyage to Flanders, the two Earls of
Hereford and Norfolk, assemble many Noblemen and other their friends to the
number of 30 Bannerets, so as they were 1500 men at Arms and stood upon their
Guard, and the King being ready to take Ship, the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and Commons sent him a Roll of the Grievances of his Subjects, Sam.
Daniel in the Life of King E. 1.
in Taxes, Subsidies, and other imposicions, with his seeking to force their
services by unlawful courses; to which the King answered, that he could not
alter any thing without the advice of his Council, who were not now about him,
and therefore required them, that seeing they would not attend him in his
journey, (which they absolutely refused to do though he went in person, unless
it were into France and Scotland) that they would yet do nothing in his absence
prejudicial to the Crown, promising at his return to set all things in good
order; but being afterward enforced to send for more Supplies of Money,
ordained a Parliament to be held at York, and to the End he might not be
disappointed of aid, condesended to all such Articles, as were demanded
concerning the great Charter, promising from thenceforth never to charge his
Subjects otherwise then by their consent in Parliament.

Seized the moneys in the Popes Bankers hands to relieve his and the public
necessities, gave protections from arrest and troubles in their Estates to them
that should have paid it otherwise, and notwithstanding the Popes Anger and
Threats not in those days easily to be adventured upon, did not pay and refund
it within 2 or 3 Years after; Seized also and took at his own price the Wools
which the Merchants then had in the Ports ready to be transported, and all the
Lands and Great Estates of Bohun Earl of Hereford and Clare Earl of To Clause
tempore E 1. and Sam. Daniel in viea ejusdem Regis.
Gloucester, and upon the Marriage of his Daughter the Lady Elizabeth to the
first with a Gift in Tail to them. the reversion in the Crown, and the like to
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and Hertford by Marriage of his Daughter
the Lady Joan restored them in tail as aforesaid unto them, and made not only
the said Humfrey de Bohun, Roger Bygod Earl Marshall (whom upon second failings
he afterward confiscated) and all others who had joined with him in refusing to
serve him in his wars according to the tenure of their lands to be glad and
well content with his general pardon.

In the same year granted to Hugh Kent de Galvy in Ireland and the Heirs Males
of his body the liberty of enjoying the benefit of the English laws in terra
sua Hyberniae as the writ ensuing wlll evidence. viz.

Rex omnibus ballivis and fidelibus suis in Hybernia ad quos etc. Salutem
volentes Hugoni Kent de Galvy Hyberniae gratia To pat. 25 E. 1. part prima
(...). 9.
facere specialem concedimus ei pro nobis and haeredibus nostris quod ipse and
liberi sui de corpore ipsius Hugonis legitime procreati and procreandi hanc
habeant libertatem quod ipsi and posteri eorum de extero in terra nostra
Hyberniae tam in morte quam in vita legibus consuetudinibus utantur Auglicanis
firmiter inhibentes ne quis eos contra hanc concessionem nostram injuste vexet
in aliquo vel perturbet in cujus etc. Test Rege apud Gillingham 25 die Martii
per ipsum Regem.

And by his letters patents constituted Johannem de Breton Custos or Warden of
the City of London as follows, viz.

Rex omnibus ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quod etc. sciatis quod dilectum and
fidelem nostrum Johannem le Breton constituimus To pat. 25. E. 1. part 1. in 3.
custodem civitatis London ad amerciandos Aldermannos and alios quoscunque de
civitate praedicta qui ad rationabilem praemonitionem, Seu Summonitionem
custodis ejusdem pro negotiis nos and Civitatem illam tangentibus venire
contempserent, and etiam ad Vicecomites Civitatis praedict. and ipsorum
Clericos ac ministros mercedem sui Officii capientes cum super hoc modo debito
convicti fuerint juxta quantitatem delictorum suorum castigandos and puniendos
quantum necesse fuerit and quatenus sua discretio de jure viderit faciendum
specialem tenore praesentium 13. vel 14. E. 1. and to. 8. E. 2.
committimus potestatem quam diu nos placuerit durando in cujus, etc.

Having before in the 13 or 14th Year of his Reign fined Gregory de Rokesly
Mayor of London, for that he renounced the Mayoralty and delivered the Common
Seal of the Mayoralty (or City) to Stephen de Ashren and aliis de Communitate
London sine licencia ipsius Regis, for which he was glad to receive his Pardon.

In the 25th Year of his Reign directed his Writ Custodi To. Claus 25. E. 1.
Northwallia mentientes and falsos rumores contra Regem castigand.

The like to punish conventus and conventicula.

Another to respite the King's Debts and aliorum dum in obsequio Regis.

With a Proclamation for the confirmation of Magna Charta, and Charta de
Foresta, and to Command that two discreet Knights be chosen in every County to
Attend Prince Edward the King's Son his Lieutenant in England during the Kings
absence in partibus transmarinis to procure the King's Letters-Parents for
confirmation of the Peoples Liberties.

In the 27th Year of his Reign a Parliament being called at Westminster,
wherein the two Charters were confirmed, with the allowance of what
Deafforestation had been formerly made but with ommission of the clause Salvo
jure Coronae nostrae, which the King labored to have inserted, being a small
return and Civility to a Sovereign, whose Royal progenitors had freely granted
those Liberties and Privileges, and himself willing to confirm them, but by no
means it would be agreed unto.

Was so incensed at the revolt of the Scots, and so fixed in his resolution of
subduing them, as going to fight a battle with them, whose army much exceeded
his own, when he was with one foot in the Stirrup getting on horseback, the
horse upon some great noise or shout in the Scottish army, who were Speeds
History of England in the Life of King Edward the 1.
Marching on to engage him, Started and throwing him to the ground with his
hinder foot Struck him so on one side as he brake two of his Ribbs, which could
not so hinder either his Courage or Resolution but he again remounted the same
Horse, and charged with good Success as he wan the field, and slew as some of
their Historians mention about 60 thousand of them.

In the 30th, Year of his Reign the Constable of Dover having upon an Order or
Sentence of the Court of Sheppey, which was the Magna Curia of the
Cincque-Ports arrested the Abbot of Feversham, pro quibusdam transgressionibus
per To. Claus. 30. E. 1. m. 13.
ipsum perpetratis in laesionem Coronae and regiae dignitatis, was cited and
excommunicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the King thereupon (as the
record mentions) nolentes nobis super Statu regio nostro aliqualiter derogari
aut ministros nostros pro hiis quae judicialiter fuerint indebite fatigari
commanded the Archbishop in fide qua sibi tenetur firmiter injungentes quod
hujusmodi citationibus of the Constable or his Ministers ea de causa faciendis
supersedeat sententias praedictas in ipsos per ipsum ut praemittitur fulminatas
faciat sine dilatione aliqua revocari ita quod non operteat nos ad hoc aliter
apponere manum nostram.

In the claim which he made and deduced to the Pope of his right to the
Superiority of the Kingdom of Scotland attested by an hundred hands and seals
of the Earls and Baronage of England in a Parliament holden at Lincoln, when he
gave an answer to a letter of the Pope mediating in the behalf of the King of
Scotland, and claiming that Kingdom to belong to the Church of Rome, wherein he
had desired him to send his procurators and evidence to be heard and determined
at Rome, the historian and our records have informed us in these words that
quoniam vero ad hoc quod Papa petivit quod si Rex Angliae jus haberet in regno
Scotiae, vel aliqua ejus part procurators and instructos Walsingham Ipodigma
Neustria. 491. 492. 493 494. 495.
mitteret, and fieret eis justitiae complementum, Rex per se noluit respondere,
sed hoc commisit Comitibus aliisque terrae Baronibus, who gave him a choking
and flatly denying answer on the behalf of their King.

And pursuing his Victories against that Nation took out of Edinburgh the
Crown, Scepter, and Cloth of Estate, with Speeds Chronicle. 654.
the Marble Chair, wherein the King's of Scotland used to Sit, whilst they were
Crowned, wherein according to an old Scotch Prophecy the fate of that Kingdom
so resided, as wheresoever it should be, the Rule and Government of that Nation
should follow, and offered up the same at St Edwards Walsingham Ipodigma Neu.
and Hist. E. 1.
shrine at Westminster intending to unite the Kingdom of Scotland to England,
imprisoned the King of Scotland in the Tower of London, where he long detained
him, subdued Malcolmus King of Man and the Kings of the Other Isles, and was so
unalterable in those his purposes as he ordered that his bones should after his
death be carried along with such English Armies as should afterward be
employed against that Nation.

Did in the 31st year of his Reign treat with the foreign Merchants, and by his
Charta mercatoria without the trouble, advice, or assent of his great Council
or Parliament, relinquish unto them his former kind of customs called Prises
upon their granting unto him 3d of the pound now called the Petit Customs out
of all foreign Merchandises imported (except wines) for every sack of wool to
be exported 40d, for every 300 woolfells the like, and for every last of
leather a demi mark over and above the duties payable by Denizens for the same
commodities; which grant being by the Merchants of several nations not
incorporate into a body-politick of no force by the rules of the common Law,
the Kings Charter only made it good and maintained it until it was confirmed
by Act of Parliament in Anno. 17. E. 3. which was 50 Years after, which Charter
being made in England by that great and valiant Prince was afterward by him
exemplyfied and transmitted M. S. Sr John Divies argument upon the question of
Impositions.
into Ireland with a special Writ to the Officers of the Customs there to
leavy the 3d penny in the Pound and other duties mentioned in that Charter, as
appears in the Records of the Exchequer of Ireland, by virtue of which writ
without any Act of Parliament there the 3d penny in the pound with the other
duties were ever after leavied in that Kingdom, and paid to the Crown.

In the 32d year of his Reign he was so little afraid of his potent Nobility,
under whose greatness and power many of common people sheltered their
Oppressions of one another by wrongful disseisins, and making themselves
Tenants to their greater Landlords for those Lands, which they had no right
unto, as he made severe Laws for the regulation thereof.

And in Declaratione Juris Regis in regno Scotiae protestavit se jus Coronae
suae usque ad effusionem sanguinis defensarum ab quem Rex illo Anno omnia
Monasteria Angliae, Scotiae, and Walliae perscrutari faceret, ad dignoscendum
quale jus posset sibi Walsingham in vita E. 1. p. 50.
competere in hac part and repertum est in Chronias mariani, Scoti, Willielmi
de Malmesburia, Rogero Hoveden, Henrici de Huntingdon, Radulphi de Luzeto, (or
diceto) quod Anno Domini non gentesimo decimo Rex Edwardus subegit sibi Regis
Scotorum and Cambrorum, Item ibidem que Anno domini non gentesimo vicesimo
primo praedictae gantes Eligerunt sibi Edwardum praedictum in Domium and
patroum, Item ibidem Anno Domini nongentesimo vicisimo Sexto Rex Angliae
Adolstanus denirit Regem Scotiae, Cententium, and iterim sub se permisit Regno,
Item Edradus frater Adolstani Rex Angliae dericit Sates and norhambro, qui se
submiserunt, ei and fidelitatem Juraverunt, Item ibidem Edgarus Rex Angliae
superavit Renadum, filium Alpini, Regem Scotorum, Et ex tunc factus est Rex
quatuor regnium, scilicet Angliae, Scotiae, Daciae, and Norwegiae, Item sovetus
Edwardas regum Scotiae dedit Malcolmo filio Regis Cumbrorum de se tenendum,
Item Willielmus Bastard Anno regni sui Sexto vicit Malcolmum. Regem Scotiae,
and accepit ab eo Sacramentum fidelitatis.

Caused special Commissioners from Scotland to attend him, and the Lords of
England in Parliament about settling the peace and Military affairs in Scotland,
where it was assented to, by the King that a Parliament should be called in
Scotland by the Kings Writ out of his Chancery there, in which Parliament the
commonalty of that Kingdom should elect Ten Persons for themselves to come to
the King and his Parliament at London pro tota communitate terrae Scotiae, the
Pryn's 4. p^ of a Register of Parliament Writs 22. and 23. and Ryleys placit
Parl. 43. and 44.
Scots Commissioners Petitioning the King that those ten Persons might have
their Costs and expenses to be leavied by two or three lawful men specially to
be elected by the Commons, by the view and advice of the Guardian and
Chamberlain of Scotland which the King granted with an order that duo legales
homines citra mare Scotiae and duo legales homines ultra mare Scotiae eligentur
ad hujusmodi expensas assidendas and levandas To. Claus. 33. E. (...) m. 13.
and Cedul ordinat per Dominum regem de stabilitate terrae Scotiae.
per visum and concilium custodis regni Scotiae and Camerarii; wherein as Mr
Pryn well observes they were not to be as sitting Voting Members, but as
Proxies and Commissioners to Treat with the King and English Parliament
concerning Scottish affairs only.

And so great Regard was had to the words and Testimony of this great Prince,
as it was in his time not denied to be law, Mich. 33. and 34. E. 1. to. 103. in
banco Regis.
that Ordinatio (Meaning an award or something acknowledged in the King's
presence, and per ipsum Regem affirmat) Majorem vim hahere debet quam finis in
Curia sua coram Justiciariis suis levatus.

Agreeable to which was the Opinion of the Judges also in his time in these
words, videtur concilio Regis quod Dominus Rex a quo omnes ministri sibi
Subiecti habeant recordum est Superlativum In placitis and adjudicat tempore.
E. 1. in banco regis coram rege Wallia.
and Magis arduum recordum and super omnes ministros suos and processus and
recordum praecellens, and not at all disagreeing with the great reverence and
Regard which the good Subjects of this Kingdom have never failed to give unto
the hands and great Seals of their King's and Princes which by many
inspeximus's have made a record that was so Obliterate and Unintelligible as it
was no Record before, and given a New life and Resurrection to many a Custom,
Right, and Liberty, which otherwise would have been lost and buried in the
Rubbidge of time.

Commanded the Sheriffs of Lincoln to leavy the expenses of the Knights of that
Shire in eundo, morando, and redeundo de To. Claus. 34. E. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
mandato suo venientibus prout aliis in casu consimili consuevit.

Punished by his Justices of his Bench William de Brewse a great and powerful
Baron for giving Reproachful words to Roger de Hengham a Baron of the
Exchecquer, after he had Mich. 33. and 34. E. 1. coram regero. 71.
there given a judgment against him, and followed him as he was going from the
Court, and reviled him with gross and bitter words; who in those times were
frequently in their records said and understood to be de concilio Regis, and
ordered that the said William de Brewse should go without his sword (a very
great dishonor to a Baron) bareheaded a banco ipsius Domini Regis ubi placitr
tenentur in aula Westmonaster. per medium aulae praedictae cum curia plena
fuerit usque ad Scaccarium and ibidem veniam petat a praefato Rogero ut gratiam
sibi faciat de dedecore and transgressione sibi fact. and postea pro contemptu
facto Domino Regi and curiae suae Commirtatur turri (London) ibidem moraturus
ad voluntatem Domini Regis.

Was so careful of his Superiority and Jurisdictions as he would not suffer
either it or his Justice to be sullied in the administration or execution
thereof, as in the case betwixt the Pryor and Bishop of Durham in the 34th Year
of his Reign he caused an Information to be brought in his Court of King's
Mich. 34. E. 1. incipiend to. 113. Coram rege and concilio in banco regis.
Bench against the Bishop for that he had Imprisoned his Officers or Messengers
for bringing Writs into his Liberty and that the Bishop had said that nullam
deliberationem de eisdem faceret sed dixit quod caeteros per ipsos castigaret
ne de caetero litteras Domini Regis infra Episcopatum suum portarent in
laesionem Episcopatus ejusdem; in the entering up of which Information, Plea and
Judgment thereupon, the record says quia idem Episcopus cum libertatem
praedictam a Corona exeuntem and dependentem per factum Regis in hoc minister
Domini Regis est adea quae ad Regale pertinet infra eandem libertatem loco
ipsius Regis modo debito conservanda and exequenda ita quod omnibus and
singulis ibidem justitiam exhibere and ipsi Regi ut Domino suo and mandatis
parere debeat prout tenetur licet proficua and expletia inde provenientia ad
usum proprium per factum praedictum percipiatur.

Wherein the Judges and Sages of the Law (as in those ancient times they did
frequently in matters of great Concernments) have given us the reason of their
Judgment in these words, Cumpotestas Regia per totum regnum tam infra
libertates praedictas quam extra se extendant videtur Curiae and toti concilio
Domini Regis quod hujusmodi imprisonamenta facta de his qui capti fuerunt
occasion quod brevia Domini Regis infra libertatem praedictam tulerint simul
cum advocatione and acceptatione facti and etiam dictis quae idem Episcopus
dixit de castigatione illorum qui brevia Regis ex tunc infra libertatem suam
portarent manifest perpetrata fuerunt.

Et propterea ad inobedientiam and exhaereditationem Coronae, and ad
dimunitionem dominii and potestatis Regalis ideo consideratum est quod idem
Episcopus libertatem praedictam cujus occasion temerariam sibi assumpsit
audaciam praedictae gravamina, injurias, and excessus praedictos perpetrandi
and dicendi toto tempore suo amittat, cum in eo quo quis deliquit sit de jure
puniendus and eadem libertas capiatur in manus Domini Regis, and nihilominus
corpus praedicti Episcopi Capiatur.

And that often distressed prudent Prince was so Unwilling to forsake the old
Paths of Truth and the good ways and Rules of the English, in their great
Councels for Extraordinary affairs, wherein a long and very Ancient Gray headed
series of his Royal Ancestors had until the aforesaid Imprisonment of his
Father, constantly and successively walked, did Resolve as long as he could to
continue therein; Insomuch as

3. E. 1. Indictum est Parliamentum Londoniis ubi Leolinus princeps Walliae
being summoned to come to do his Homage, Ib. 46.
pretended that he durst not come without hostages, which the King taking ill,
refused to give, sed tamen dissimulato negotio inceptum Parliamentum
consummavit, post Parliamentum vero Rex raised an Army to subdue him, and hoc
Anno solvit populus Regi quinto decimam bonorum quae patri suo dicebatur
praeconcessa.

Anno. 5. E. 1. in subsidium guerrae Wallensis concessa est Regia populo
vicesima pars bonorum. Anno 6 tenuit Parliamentum Ib. 48. 56. and 57.
Gloverniae in quo edita sunt Statuta quae Gloverinae appellantur, and it
appears by the Act of 7. E. 1. that the Prelates, Earls, and Barons were
present at the making thereof.

2. E. 1. Habitum est Parliamentum Salopiae in quo per deputatos ad hoc
Justiciariis, David the Brother of the Prince of Wales, sine condemnatus
tractus and suspensus, Eodem Anno tenuit Rex Parliamentum apud Acton Burnell
ubi editum est statutum quod a loco cognominatum est.

18. E. 1. Upon the death of Margaret daughter of the Ib. 51.
King of Norway by the daughter of Alexander King of Scotland ad quam jure
haereditario defuncto avo patruo and matre regnum Scotiae devolvi debebat and
quis fuit justus haeres Scotiae apud omnes in dubium vertebatur, and there
being many competitors, amongst which there were of the English Baronage
Johannes de Hastings, Dominus Abergavenny, Johannes de Vescy, vice patris sui,
Nicholaus de Sules, and Willielmus de Ros, and the Pope claiming the
superiority and the determination of the Title.

Eodem Anno post Pascha Rex Angliae Scotiam apprcpinquans Parliamentum tenuit
apud Northumbr. ubi consultis Praelatis ac utriusque juris peritis (wiser and
fitter men then Common Walsingham Hist. Angliae sub E. 1. p. 55. 56. 57.
people use to be) revolutisque priorum temporum Annalibus and the memorialls
of the Abbeys and Monasteries vocari fecit Praelatos and Majores Regni Scotiae
and corameis in Ecclesia parochiali de Northumbr. jus suum in superius dominium
Regni Scotiae fideliter declaravit petivitque ut haec recognoscerent
protestando se jus Coronae suae usque ad effusionem sanguinis suae defensurum.

And the Kings Right and Superiority being fully evidenced, all the pretenders
to that Crown did under their Hands and Seals not only acknowledge his
Superiority, but that they would hold that firm and stable, which he should
declare therein, and yield the Kingdom to such as he should adjudge, which no
where appears to have been done by the consent of the Common people of England,
and Scotland, and was of the greatest concernment to those of Scotland.

And in another Charter of the same date declaring Cum autem non possit
praefatus Rex Angliae isto modo cognitionem facere, nec complere sine judicio
nec indicium debeat esse sine executione nec executionem possit debito modo
facere sine possessione and seisina ejusdem terrae and Castrorum, did deliver
seisin to the King, as the Supreme Lord, until the Right should be determined.

Ita tamen that before the seisin taken he should give good Security to deliver
it back to such as should be adjudged to have Right to the Kingdom of Scotland,
cum tota Regalitate, dignitate, dominio, libertatibus, consuetudinibus,
Justiciis, legibus, usibus quibuscunque cum pertinentiis in eodem Statu etc. So
as an account and Restitution be made within 2 Months after, to those that
should be adjudged to have Right unto that Kingdom, of the issues and profits
thereof salvo Regi Angliae homagio illius qui Rex erit.

Quo facto, although Ericus King of Norway did at the same time by his
Attorneys or Procurators appear coram concilio Regis Angliae with his
Commission omnibus inspecturis to claim 100000l, Sterling a penalty for not
admitting the said Margaret his daughter to be heir to the Kingdom of
Scotland, and 700 marks per Annum dowry which he gave with her etc. who being
heard and several days given, and refusing ulterius prosequi, post diligentem
hujus negotii disquisitionem inter caeteros (competitores) de assensu communi
Rex Angliae (without any license or confirmation of his Parliament) post varias
disceptationes vendicantium regnum illud adjudged it to John de Baylioll, as
descended from the Eldest Daughter of David King of Scotland, excluso Roberto
de Brus, who claimed from a younger, received his homage and fealty and caused
him to be Crowned, sitting super lapidem Regalem, said by these people to have
been the Stone, upon which Jacob Slept, when he journeyed from Barsheba to Aran.

About the same time 200 Ships or Barks of Normandy, sailing homewards with
Wines from Gascony, and Domineering as if sibi solis maris cessisset libertas,
they were by 60 English Ships taken, and 15000 of their men slain, and the King
of France by his Ambassadors demanding Satisfaction, or to have the matter
determined in his Court in Gascony, being of a very great concernment to the
English Nation; the King deliberato habito concilio sending the Bishop of
London, adjunctis sibi aliis viris prudentibus to the King of France, and suo
concilio, offered that if any found themselves aggrieved, Walsingham. ib. 60.
61.
they should upon a safe conduct come for Justice ad Curiam suam quae nulli
subjecta fuit; whereupon a great contention arising betwixt the two Kings, and
the King of France seizing diverse Castles of the King of England in Gascony,
and citing him personally to appear at his Court at Paris to answer for that
transgression, which being upon a safe conduct performed, and a peace thereupon
concluded, and that shortly after cavilled at by the King of France.

The King in the 22 year of his Reign convocato Londoniis Parliamento cui
Johannes Rex Scotorum interfuit being in the same year and Parliament to which
he had by his writs caused some of the Commons of England to come to assent
unto what should be there ordained de concilio Praelatorum and Procerum
consentium (without any mention of the Community) agree that terram sub-dole
ablatam recuperandam fore gladio.

And thereupon the King (not the Parliament) sent his Ambassadors again unto
the King of France, and declared that since he had Violated the Leagues and
Agreements made betwixt them and their Royal Progenitors, Non videbatur sibi
(his great Council and Parliament not being at all named) quod ipsum Regem
Angliae ducemque Aquitaniae hominem suum reputabat, n^c ipse homagio suo
astringi ulterius intendebat.

And mandavit Justic. suis hic breve suum patens in haec verba, Edwardus Dei
Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Midd. (...).
Hiberniae, and Dux Aquit: Dilect. and fidelibus suis, Rogero de Hengham, Petro
Malorre, and Roberto de Recford salutem, sciatis quod assignavimus vos vel duos
vestrum quos presents esse contigerit Justic. nostros ad inquirend. per
Sacramentum tam militum quam aliorum proborum and legal. hominum Anno. 35. E. 1.
de Civit, nostra London and Comitatibus Kanc. Surr. Sussex and Midd. per quos
rei veritas melius sciri poterit de Malefactoribus and pacis nostrae
perturbatoribus, homicidia, depredationes, incendia and alia dampna quam
plurima nocte dieque perpetrantibus and eorum scienter Receptatoribus and eis
Consentientibus vim and auxiliam praebentibus seu dictas transgressiones fieri
procurantibus and praecipientibus and etiam ad inquirendum de illis qui pro
muneribus suis pactum fecerunt and faciunt cum malefactoribus and pacis nostrae
perturbatoribus and eos conduxerunt and conducunt ad verberand. vulnerand.
maletractand. and Interfi^iend. plures de Regno nostro in feriis mercatis and
aliis locis in dict. Civitate and Comitaribus pro Immicitia, invidia, malitia,
ac etiam pro eo quod in Assisis Juratis recogn; and Inquisitionibus factis de
feloniis positi fuerunt and veritatem dixerunt unde per Conductionem hujusmodi
malefactorum Juratores Assisar. Jurator. recogn. and Inquis; illarum prae
timore dictorum malefactor. and eorum minarum sepius veritatem dicere seu
dictos malefactores indictare minime ausi fuerunt and sunt, and etiam ad.
Inquirend. de illis qui hujusn odi munera dederunt dant and quantum and quibus
and qui hujusmodi m^nera receperunt and recipient, and a quibus, and qualiter,
and quo modo, and qui hujusmodi malefactores in malicia sua fovent, mitriunt,
and manutenent, in Civitate and Comitatibus praedict. and etiam de illis qui
ratione potestate and Dominii sui aliquos in eorum protectionem and
advocationem pro suo dando susceperunt and adhuc suscipiunt, and de illis qui
pecuniam vel aliud quodeunque ab aliquo per graves minas ei factas maliciose
extorserunt and de Conspiratoribus and hiis qui malas confederationem faciunt
seu fecerunt and de malefactoribus in parcis and vivariis and ad felonias and
transgressiones praedictas audiendas and terminandas secundum legem and
Consuetudinem Regni nostri and Juxta ordinationem per nos and Consilium nostrum
in Parliamento nostro factam and etiam ad omnes Assisas Juratas and
certificationes coram quibuscunque Justic. nostris in praedict. Com. Kan^.
Surr. Sussex and Midd. arrainiatis and arrainiandas quamdiu vos vel duo vestrum
in Comitatibus illis pro negotiis praedictis morari contigerit capiendas and
etiam ad gaol^^ nostras in Civitate and Com. praedict. tam de prisonib^^ Captis
pro suspicione feloniae vel mali, licet prius inde non fuerint indictati, quam
de aliis prisonibus quotiens vos ad patres illas adesse contigerit deliberandas
secundum legem and Cons. Regni nostri, Et ad inquirend. si Statutum nostrum
edictum de aquis in quibus Salmones capiuntur positis indefenso, and Statutum
nostrum Winton. and etiam mandatum nostrum de suspectis arestand. and Capiend.
in singulis suis Articulis teneantur, nec ne and si non teneantur, ^unc
qualiter infringuntur and per quos, Et si Ballivos alliquos infra libertatem
vel extra, seu ministros nostros inde Culpabiles inveneritis, eos postquam inde
convicti fuerint dimittatis per bonam and sufficientem manucaptionem essendi
coram nobis ad certum diem eis per vos praefigendum, and Recordum and premissum
inde coram vobis habita tunc nobis sub Sigillo unius vestrum m(...)atis and
omnes alios de quibus vobis constare poterit quod contra Statuta nostra
venerint, taliter per paenas in Statutis illis ordinatas vel alio modo in Casu
quo penae in eisdem Statutis non est ordinat, castigetis; quod paena unius sit
Castigatio aliorum, Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ad certos dies and loca quos
vos vel duo vestrum ad hoc provideritis omnia praemissa expleatis in forma
predicta, facturi inde quod ad Justic. pertinet secundumlegem and Coas. Regni,
salvis nobis amerciamentis and aliis ad nos inde spectantibus, mandamus enim
Vicecomitibus nostris London and vic. nostris Com. predictorum quod ad vos dies
and loca quos vos vel duo vestrum ei scire facietis, predicti vic. nostri
Civitatis predictae omnes prisonae gaolarum ejusdem Civitatis, and eorum
attach. et tot et tales tam milites quam alios probos and legales Homines de
ipsa Civit. Et predicti vic. predictorum Com. Assisas, Jurates, Certificationes
illas cum brevibus originalibus, and omnes prisones gaolarum dictorum Com. and
eorum attach. and tot and tales tam milites quam alios probos and legales
Homines de Com. predictis, per quos rei veritas in premissis melius sciri
poterit and inquiri, coram vobis ven. fac. In Cujus rei testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus pat. T. mei ipso apud Laureto xxi die Februarii Anno
Regni nostri xxxv. which Walsingham an Authentic writer of those Times
calls a Walsingham. Hist. E. 1. F. 89.
Troil Baston or the modern French Ottroy le Baston or a Commission to enquire
of notorious Offenses and Offenders and punish them.

And in the making of his Laws and Act of Parliament 3. E. 1. ca. 1.
did not omit the right use of his Power and Authority when in the 3 Year of
his Reign in an Act of Parliament that the Peace of the Church and the State
should be maintained, he did Will and Command that Religious Houses be not
overcharged.

In an Act of Parliament made in the same Year that a Clerk Ca. 2.
convict of Felony delivered to the Ordinary should not depart without
Purgation, it is said to be provided, and in the perclose, so that the King
shall not need to provide any other Remedy.

And in some other Acts made in the year it is agreed; and Ca. 5.
In another Act of Parliament that elections ought to be free, the King
commands upon great forfeitures, that no man, nor other by force of Arms, by
Malice, or Menacing, do disturb any to make free elections.

That amerciaments shall be Reasonable, and according to the offense (wherein
Cities, Boroughs, and Mesne Lords were Ca. 6.
concerned as well as himself.)

Concerning the Punishment of Ravishers of Women, the King Prohibiteth. Ca. 13.


Concerning Appeals to be against the principal and accessory, it is provided
and commanded by the King. Ca. 14.


The like in Ca. 15. What persons be mainprisable and who not, and the penalty
for unlawful Bailment (those that were taken by the Commandment of the King,
or of his Justices, or of the Forest being not Bayleable.)

Concerning the penalties of a Sergeant or Pleader committing Deceit, the King
commands that such things be no Ca. 29.
more done from henceforth.

And if any Officer of Fee does it, his Office shall be taken into the Kings
hands.

It is provided and agreed that the King of his Office shall from henceforth
grant attaints upon Enquest in Plea of Land Ca. 37.
or Freehold.

In the several limitations of prescription in several Writs which might be to
many very prejudicial, it was in like manner Ca. 38.
provided that in a Writ of right none should presume to declare of the seisin
of his Ancestor further or beyond the time of King Richard the 1st, Writs of
Partition and Novell Desseisin of the first voyage of King Henry Father of the
King into Gascoigne, Writs of Mort d' Auncestor, of Cosinage, Ayel, et Nuper
obiit of the Coronation of the s^id King Henry, and not before.

That one plea shall be decided by the Justices of the King's Bench, before
another be commenced, it is provided also and Ca. 45.
commanded by the King.

In an Act touching the Tenants plea in a Writ of Dower, and at what time
Assizes shall be taken, it was declared, that Ca. 48.
forasmuch as the King has ordained those things unto the honor of God and
Holy Church, and for the Commonwealth and remedy of such as be grieved, he
would not that at any other time it should turn into prejudice of himself or of
his Crown, but that such right as appertains unto him should be saved in all
points, and forasmuch as it is great Charity to do right unto all men at all
times when need should be, it was provided by the assent of the Praelates that
Assizes of Novell Disseisin, Mortd auncestor, and Darrein presentment should be
taken in Advent Septuagesima and Lent, even as well as Enquests may be taken,
and that at the Special request of the King made unto the Bishops.

In the 4th Year of his Reign caused an Eatenta Maneriorum or Survey (as to his
particular Royal Revenue much like unto that of William the Conquerors) of his
Castles, Houses, Buildings, Demesne-Lands, Copyhold, Commons, Parks, Forests,
Woods, Asserts, Tenants, Cottages, Pleas, and Perquisites of the Counties,
Churches, and the values thereof, and of Heriots, Fairs, Markets, Escheats,
Customs, Rents, Services, Fishings, Freeholders, Woods, Rents of Assize,
Tenures in Soccage, or by Knights-Service, Foreign Works, and Customs,
Perquisites of Courts, Fines, and all other Casualties.

Declared by a Statute de Officio Coronatoris, the Duties of a Coroner, and
enquiries to be made by them.

In the matter of Bigamy published and declared certain constitutions before
him and his Council, and commanded them to be steadfastly Observed in the
presence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and others of the
Kings Council, to which the Justices as all the Kings Council did agree.

Cap. 1. In what Cases aid shall be granted of the King, in what not, it is
said, that it is agreed by the Justices and other Learned men of the Kings
Council of the Realm, which heretofore have had the rule and practice of
Judgments, that where a Feoffment was made by the King with a Deed thereupon,
if another person by a like Feoffment and Deed be bound to Warranty, the
Justices could not heretofore have proceeded any further, neither yet do
proceed without the Kings Command.

And it seems also they could not proceed in other cases, wherefore they
shall not surcease by occasion of any Grant, Confirmation, or Surrender, but
after advertisement made thereof to the King, they shall proceed without delay.
Ca. 4. Concerning purprestures upon the Kings Lands to be reseised.

If any do complain of such Reseisins, he shall be heard as right requires.

6. E. 1. In an Act concerning a man killing another in his own defense, or by
misfortune, it is said, the King commanded.

In Ca. 10. that the husband and wife being impleaded shall not fourch by
Essoin, that act of Parliament is said to be the Statute of the King.

In the same year an Exposition and alteration of the Statute of Gloucester in
diverse articles and points was made by the King and his Justices, by the Kings
Letters Patent dated at Gloucester.

In the foregoing statutes or Articles whereof videlicet ca. 1. it is said to
have been provided in ca. 3. Established the like in Ca. 4. in 5. and 6.
provided, and the like in the 8. and the offenders shall be greivously amerced
to the King.

In the Statute of Gloucester, ca. 14. where it is ordained, that a Citizen of
London shall recover in an Assize damages with the land, it is said the King of
his special grace grants, and the Barons of the Exchequer and Treasu^er
shall be commanded. And in several statutes and Articles there made, did
afterward by the advice of his Justices make in some of them diverse Exposition
of the Statute of Gloucester.
expositions, alterations and additions in several material parts or Points.

7. E. 1. by his Writ directed to the Justices of his Bench, Signified that it
was accorded, that at the next Parliament by the council and assent of the
Prelates, Earls, and Barons, provision should be made that none should come to
Parliaments, Treaties or Assemblies with force and arms, and in the next
Parliament after the said Treaty, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the
Commonalty of the Realm (Comprised in the Votes and suffrages of the Prelates
Earls and Barons) there assembled to take order of that business, have said,
that to the King it belongs, and on his part it is through his Royal
Seigneury Strictly to defend by force of armor and all other force, against
his peace, at all times, when it shall please him, and to punish those which
shall do contrary according to the Laws and Usages of the Realm, and hereunto
they are bound to aid him, as their Sovcreign Lord, at all seasons, as need
should be, and commanded the same to be read before him in his Bench, and there
enrolled.

In the Statute of Mortmaine made in the same Year, that no Lands should be
aliened in Mortmaine upon pain of the forfeiture thereof, it is mentioned, that
the King for the profit of his Realm, minding to provide a convenient remedy by
the advice of his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of his Subjects being of
his Council, has provided and ordained, etc.

10. E. 1. in the Statute of the Exchecquer, touching the recovery of the Kings
Debts, the King by his Writ directed to the Treasurer, Barons, and Chamberlains
of the Exchecquer for the Indemnity of him and his People, Willed and Provided.

Anno. 1^. E. 1. in the Statute of Acton Burnell made for recovery of Debts,
the King for himself and by his Council has Ordained and Established.

In the Statute of Entails that the Will of the Donor should in all things be
performed, Ca. 1. (which was of a grand Concern to all the Nobility, Gentry,
and Freeholders of England in their Dignities, Families, Lands and Estates, and
the transmitting them to Posterity) it is said, wherefore our Lord the King
perceiving how necessary and expedient it should be to provide remedy, has
ordained.

In Ca. 3. where a cui in vita shall be granted, and a Wife, or he in reversion
received, the King has ordained.

Ca. 6. Where a Tenant Voucheth, and the Vouchee denies the Warranty, the King
has ordained.

Ca. 9. Entitled in what case the Writ of Mesne is to be pursued, it is said
in the perclose, that for certain causes, Remedies are not in certain things
provided, God willing, there shall be at another time.

Ca. 10. Providing at what time Writs shall be delivered for suits depending
before Justices in Air, the parties may make General Attorneys, it is said,
the King has ordained.

Ca. 14. Concerning Process to be made in wast, our Lord the King from
henceforth to remove this error has ordained.

Ca. 24. For the granting of Writs of Nuysance quod permittatis in consimili
casu, where the King ordains (for which by no ground or color of reason it
is otherwise to be understood) that whenever from thenceforth it should
fortune that in Chancery (which is no body's Court but the Kings) a like Writ
is found, and in another case falling under the like Law a like remedy is not
found, the Clerks of the Chancery shall agree in making the Writ, or the
Plaintiffs may adjourn it until the next Parliament, and let the cases be
written in which they cannot agree, and let them referr themselves until the
next Parliament by consent of men learned in the Law (which could not in those
times be understood as of the Members of the House of Commons, none of them
being then chosen or Summoned to give their consent in Parliament.

Ca. 25. In the Act of Parliament entitled of what things an Assize shall be
certified.

It is said, that forasmuch as there is no Writ in the Chancery whereby
Plaintiffs can have so speedy remedy by a Writ of Novell Disseisin, our Lord
the King willing that Justice may be speedily, ministered and that delays in
Pleas may be taken away or abridged, grants, etc.

And our Lord the King to whom false exceptions be odious has ordained, etc.

The like words of the King's granting and ordaining are to be understood in
the Chapters immediately following, viz, Ca. 26. 27. 28. 29. and 30.

In that of 13. E. 1. ca. 30. The two Knights of the Shire are changed by
length of time or some other causes, into those which are now called
Associates, and are indeed but the enrolling Clarks, which by that Statute are
allowed the Justices in their Circuits, as they have used to have in times past.

Were not Knights of the Shire Elected for an House of Commons in 29. E. 1. ca.
5. the King wills that the Chancellor and Justices of his Bench shall follow
his Court, so that he may at all Times have some near unto him which be learned
in the Laws, and be able to order all such matters as shall come unto the Court
at all Times when need shall require.

And the like that the King ordained and willed is to be understood in the
chapters or articles 31. 32 33.

In that of 32. where it is mentioned, and so the Statute is defrauded, it is
said our Lord the King has ordained and granted.

Ca. 39. Concerning the manner of Writs to be delivered to the Sheriffs to be
executed it is said, that our Lord the King has provided and ordained, etc.
And the King has commanded that Sheriffs shall be punished by the Justices for
false Retornes once or twice if need be.

Ca. 41. entitled contra formam collationis, which was of great concernment in
their lands and estates, and also as they then thought in matters of provision
for the souls of their parents, Ancestors, and near relations it is said our
Lord the King has Ordained.

In ca. 42. appointing the several fees of Marshall, Chamberlains in fee,
Porters of Justices in Air, etc. which was of great Importance to many, it is
mentioned that our Lord the King has caused to be enquired by an enquest what
the said Officers of fee used to have in times past, and has ordained and
commanded that a Marshall in fee, etc. which was then Roger Bigod Earl of
Norfolk, a man of great power and authority; it is in like manner Ordained.

Ca. 43. That Hospitalers and Templers (which were a part of the People then of
great Estates, Power, and Authority in the Kingdom) shall draw no man in suite,
etc. it is said to have been prohibited, and the King also prohibiteth.

Ca. 44. Settling the Fees of Porters bearing Virges before the Justices, etc.
it is said, be it provided and ordained, and the King charge his Justices.

In the Statute of Winchester made in Anno. 13. E. 1. that fresh suit shall be
made after Felons from Town to Town, our Lord the King to abate the Power of
Felons, has established a pain in that case.

Ca. 2. Where the County shall answer for the Robbery where the Felon shall not
be taken, which though it was an excellent Law and ever since put in execution,
might upon the first impression seem to bear hard upon the People, that they
not committing the Crimes should be responsable in their Purses and Estates for
it, the preamble says likewise, our Lord the King has Established.

Ca. 3. Respiting that Act until Easter then next nsuing, it is mentioned that
forasmuch as the King will not that his People should be suddenly impoverished
by reason of the penalty, which seems very hard to many, the King grants
that they shall not incurr immediately, but it should be respited until Easter
next following, within which time he may see how the Country will order
themselves and whether such felonys do cease.

After which time let them all be assured, that the aforesaid Penalties shall
run generally, that is to say, the People in the Country shall be answerable
for Felonies and Robberies done amongst them.

In an Act of Parliament at what time the gates of great Towns shall be shut,
and Night-Watches begin and end, it is Ca. 4.
said the King commanded.

For the breadth of Highways leading from one Market Town to another, it is
said, and further it is Commanded. Ca. 5.


In the Act of Parliament that every man should have Armor in his house
according to his ability, it is said, and further it is commanded, and the
Justices assigned shall present Ca. 6.
in every Parliament unto the King, such defaults as they shall find, and the
King shall provide remedy therein.

In the Statutes of Merchants made in the same year wherein the form of a
Statute Merchant is appointed, it is recited that the King and his Council at
his Parliament holden at Acton Burnell in the 11th year of his Reign has
ordained.

In the Statute of Circumspecte Agatis, the King only says, Use your self
circumspectly, concerning the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy.

In the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum made in the 18th of his Reign it is
said our Lord the King in his Parliament at the instance of the great men of
the Realm has granted, provided and ordained that the Feoffees or Alienees
shall hold of the chief Lord of whom the Lords were holden.

Ca. 2. If part of the lands be sold it is to be apportioned, and it is, to
wit, that this Statute extends, but only to lands holden in fee simple, and
for the time coming, and is to take effect at the Feast of St. Andrew next.

In the Statute of Quo Warranto liberties are holden, our Lord the King of his
especial grace, and for the affection which he bears unto his Prelates,
Earls, and Barons, and other of his Realm has granted.

In a 2d Statute of Quo Warranto to the same Effect has Established.

In the Statute de modo levandi fines it is to be noted, that the order of the
Laws will not suffer a final accord to be leavyed in the Kings Court without a
Writ Original.

In the Statute of Vouchers made in the 20th Year of his Reign, Our Lord the
King by his Common Council has ordained.

In another of the same year concerning wast committed by Tenant for life, Our
Lord the King has ordained.

In the Statute de defensione juris, Has ordained, and from henceforth
commanded.

In a Statute de non ponendis in Assisis made in the 21st year of his Reign,
Our Lord the King has ordained.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year de malefactoribus in parcis, Our
Lord the King has granted and commanded.

In the Statute or Act of Parliament de Consultatione, made in the 24th Year of
his Reign Wills and commands.

In the Confirmation of the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest in the
25th Year of his Reign Grants and Wills.

In Ca. 2. That Judgments given against them should be void it is said We will.

The like in Ca. 3 and 4.

In Ca. 5. We have granted.

In Ca. 6. That the King or his Heirs will for no business whatsoever take aids
or prizes, but by consent of the Realm, and for the Common profit thereof,
saving the Ancient aids and prizes due and accustomed, it is said, Moreover we
have granted.

In Ca. 7. for a release of Toll taken by the King for Wool, without consent as
aforesaid, saving the custom of Wools, Hides and Leather granted by the
Commonalty, it is said, that the King at their request has clearly released
and granted.

The King hasting into Flanders to aid his Confederate the Earl thereof,
against the Continued envy, malice, and designs of the King of France his
malignant Neighbor, constituted Walsingham, Hist. E. 1. 75. and 76.
(without License of Parliament) his Son Edward then being under age the Custos
or Guardian of the Kingdom, and appointed Richard Bishop of London, William
Earl of Warwick, nec non and milites Reginaldum de Gray, Johannem Gifford and
Alanum Plukenet viros emeritae militae, providos and discretos to be his
Assistants and Counselors, who in the Kings absence with much ado, and with
nullam aliam sentire vellent, obtained a Peace to be made with the Earl of
Hereford and Earl Marshal, that the King should confirm the great Charters with
the aforesaid Articles added in the 2. 3. 4. and 5. of that Parliament, and to
the 6. of Nullum Tallagium, but by the consent of the Realm, and for the Common
profit thereof, saving ut supra, releasing the Tolls of Wool.

Which being sent unto the King were returned sub sigillo suo tanquam, says
the Historian, ab eo qui in Arcto positus erat cedendum malitiae temporis
censuit, upon the confirmation whereof the populus Anglicanus concessit
denarium nonum bonorum suorum.

But the King being returned in the 26th Year of his Reign was pressed in
Parliament by the aforesaid Earls, the Constable and Marshal, because the
Charters were confirmed in a Foreign Country, to do it again, for that the
Bishop of Durham and the Earls of Surrey, Warwick and Gloucester, had promised,
that obtenta victoria against the Scots, he should post ejus reditum do it, and
in the 27th Year of his Reign, being again in a Parliament holden in London,
urged by the said Earls to do it, post aliquas dilationes, was willing to do it
with an addition of Salvo jure Coronae, with which the Earls being displeased
and leaving the Parliament, revocatis ipsis ad quindenam Paschae ad votum eorum
absolute omnia sunt concessa.

Which begot the Statute said in the printed book of Statutes published by Mr
Poulton to be incerti temporis. E. 1. but it is to be believed for the Reasons
aforesaid to have been made in the 27th year of his Reign in those only words,
that no Tallage or Aid shall be taken or leavied by us or our heirs in our
Realm, without the good will and assent of Archbishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.

In the Statute of Wards and Reliefs 28. E. 1. Who shall be in ward, and pay
relief, which seems to be a declaration of the King alone, being for the most
part of matters concerning himself, and his undoubted casual revenue, it is to
Wit when in the Statute immediately following touching persons appealed, it is
said, the King has granted, ordained, and provided.

In the Statute called Articuli super Chartas, ca. 1. in the confirmation of
the great Charter and the Charter of the Forest, in the later end and close
thereof are these words, viz. And besides these things granted upon the
Articles of the Charters aforesaid, the King of his especial grace for redress
of the grievances which his people has sustained, by reason of his Wars, and
for the amendment of their Estate, and to the intent that they may be the more
ready to do him service, and the more willing to assist him in the time of
need, has granted certain Articles, the which he supposes shall not only be
observed of his Liege People, but also shall be as much profitable, or more
then the Articles heretofore granted.

That none shall take prices, but the Kings Purveiors or their Deputies, it is
said to be Ordained with a Nevertheless Ca. 2.
the King and his Council do not intend by reason of this Estatute to diminish
the Kings right, for the ancient prizes due and accustomed, as of Wines, and
other goods, but that his rights shall be saved unto him whole, and in all
points. Declaring of of what things only the Marshall of the King's House shall
Ca. 3.
hold plea, etc. It is Ordained. And in Another Act Entitled, Common Pleas
shall not be holden in the Exchequer, it is said, moreover no Common Pleas
shall from henceforth Ca. 4.
be holden in the Exchequer contrary to the form of the Great Charter.

That no Writ concerning the Common Law shall be award under any Petit Seal.
Ca. 6.


The authority of the Constable of the Castle of Dover touching hold pleas and
distresses. Ca. 7.


That the Inhabitants of every County shall make choice of their Sheriff being
not of Fee, it is said, that the King has granted to his people that they
shall have Election of their Ca. 8.
Sheriff in every Shire where the Shrievalty is not of Fee, if they list, which
would have been very prejudicial both to the King and his people, as to the
collecting of his revenue, and Executing his Justice by his Mandates, Writs,
and Process, if the confirmation, allowance, or disallowance thereof had not
been by Law lodged in the King and his Supreme authority.

What persons shall be returned in every Jury, the King Wills and Commands.
Ca. 9.


For a remedy against Conspirators, False Enformers, and Embracers of Juries,
the King has provided a remedy. Ca. 10.


Against Mainteynors of Suits, it is said, the King wills, but it may not be
understood hereby that any person shall be prohibited to have Council of
Pleaders, or of Learned Ca. 11.
Men in the Law for his Fee, or of his Parents or next Friends.

What distress shall be taken for the Kings debts, and how it shall be used,
the King wills. Ca. 12.


What sort of Persons the Commons of shires shall choose for their Sheriffs,
forasmuch as the King has granted, it is said, Ca. 13.
the King wills.

That Baylewicks and Hundreds shall not be let too dear to charge the people
with contribution. Ca. 14.


In summons and attachments in plea of land, the writ shall contain 15 days,
it is in like manner to be understood. Ca. 15.


In like manner against false retornes of writs.

The King wills that the Statute of Winchester shall be read Ca. 16.
4 times in the year, and put in execution. Ca. 17.


The King wills that Escheators shall commit no wast in Wards lands. Ca. 18.


In an act of Parliament declaring in what cases the owner shall have his lands
delivered out of the King's hands with Ca. 19.
the issues, it is said the King wills.

In an Act of Parliament that vessels of gold shall be assayed, it is said to
have been ordained, and that notwithstanding Ca. 20.
all those things beforementioned, or any point of them, both the King and his
Council, and all that were present at the making of that Ordinance (meaning
the Judges and Assistants of that Honorable Court) will and intend that the
right and prerogative of his Crown shall be saved to him in all things.

In the Statute de Escatoribus 29. E. 1. at the Parliament of our Lord the King
at Lincoln in his Council, it was agreed and also commanded by the King
Himself, and this order shall be held from henceforth in the Chancery
notwithstanding a certain ordinance lately made by our Lord the King concerning
lands, and tenements taken into his hands by his officers, and not to be
delivered but by the King himself, and as it is contained in a Certain
dividenda or indenture made betwixt the King himself and his Chancellor, whereof
one part remains in the Custody of the Chancellor.

In the new Statute of Quo Warranto made Anno 30. E. 1. it is recited that the
King himself in the 6 year of his Reign, providing for the wealth of his Realm,
and the more full administration of Justice as to the Office of a King
belongs the more discreet men of the Realm, as well high as of low degree
being called thither, it is provided and ordained; but in the writs framed to
enquire by what warrant the Liberties were granted to the people, they are said
to be in Parliamento nostro per nos and concilium nostrum.

31. E. 1. In an ordinance for Measures, it is said, that by the consent of the
whole Realm of England the King's measure was made.

In the Statute of 33. E. 1. Touching protections, granted by the King, it is
said to have been provided. In the ordinance or definition of Conspirators made
in the aforesaid Year it is declared that this ordinance and final definition
of Conspirators was made and aworded by the King and his Council in Parliament.

In the Statute of Champerty made in the 33d year of the Reign of the aforesaid
King it is recited, that whereas in our Statute it was contained, and provided
by a common accord, the writ framed thereupon mentions that law to be the
Kings Ordinance.

In the Ordinance for enquests made in Parliament the same year, it is said to
have been agreed and ordained by the King and all his Council.

In the ordinatio Forestae made in the year aforesaid whereas certain people
have by great men made request to our Lord the King that they may be acquitted
of their charge, and the demand of the Foresters, our Lord the King answered
that when he had granted Pour lieu, he was pleased it should stand as it was
granted, albeit the thing was sued and demanded in an evil point.

Nevertheless he wills and intends that all his demeasne lands, which have
been of the Crown or returned unto it by 33. F. 1.
Escheat or otherwise shall have free chase and free warren and in right of
them that have lands and tenements disafforested for the said Pourlieus, and
such as demand to have Common within the bounds of forests the intent and will
of our Sovereign Lord the King is etc.

And if any that were disafforested would rather be in the Forest, it pleases
the King very well and our Lord the King wills and commands the Justices of
the Forest, etc.

In Anno 34. of his Reign there being an Ordinance for measuring of Land.

In the same Year the King by his Letters Patent with the Test meipso
certifying the Statute de Conjunctim Feoffatis declared that it was no new
thing that among diverse establishments of Laws which he had ordained in his
time upon the great and heinous mischiefs that happen in Writs of Novel
disseisin chiefly above others he (as if he neither did know or believe any
co-ordination, or that he was to be tutored by a Conservatorship) had devised a
more speedy remedy then was before, and wills and grants that that Statute
shall take his effect the morrow after the feast of St Peter ad Vincula next
coming.

In the Statute for Amortising of Lands tempore E. 1. the King commands, etc.

In Ca. 4. Which seems to be about the 27th Year of that Kings Reign in the
confirmation of all our Laws, Liberties, and Customs it is said that the King
wills and grants, if any Statutes have been made or any customs brought in
contrary thereunto, that such Statutes, and Customs shall be void for evermore.

And for the more assurance of this thing we will and grant that all
Archbishops and Bishops for ever shall twice in the (...). (...).
year cause to be openly read in their Cathedralls the said Charters and
denounce curses against the willing infringers thereof, and the Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. have voluntarily Sworn to observe the tenor thereof.

In the ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae made by him at Nottingham by the assent
of his Council there being in Ca. 6. in what cases the Justices of Ireland may
grant pardon of Felony etc. and where not, there is an exception so always that
there be no pardon or protection granted of those Felonies which shall be
hereafter committed without the Special Commandment of us our selves.

In the Ordinatio Forestae made in the 34th Year of his Reign the King ordained.

The like in Ca. 2. That an Officer dying or being absent another shall be put
in his place.

That no Forester should be put in any Assize or Jury the King wills. Ca. 3.


The like touching the punishment of Officers surcharging the Forest. Ca. 4.


The like for Grounds disafforested. Ca 5.


Touching Commons in Forests and that the Justices of the Forest in the
presence of the King's Treasurer, and by his Ca. 6.
assent may take fines, and amerciaments, it is said, the King wills.

In the Statute de Asportatis Religiosorum it being recited, that it came to
the knowledge of our Lord the King by the grievous Complaints of the honorable
persons Lords and other Noblemen, of this Realm that Monasteries and other
Religious Houses founded by the King and his Royal Progenitors, and by the said
Noblemen, and their Ancestors, and endowed with great portions of Lands, that
the Abbots and Priors especially certain aliens Priors etc. have letten the
said lands and laid great impositions and tallages thereupon, our Lord the King
by the Council of his Earls, Barons, great men, and other Nobles of his
Kingdom (no Commons) in his Parliament has ordained and enacted.

That Religious persons shall send nothing to their Superiors Ca. 2.
beyond the Seas.

That no Impositions shall be Taxed by Priors, Aliens, it is said, moreover our
aforesaid Lord the King does inhibit Ca. 3.
it.

By whom the Common Seal of the Abbys shall be kept and how used, it is said,
and further our Lord the King has Ca. 4.
ordained and established.

And though the publication and open notice of the ordinances and Statutes
aforesaid were in suspense for certain causes since the last Parliament until
this present Parliament holden at Caerlisle the Octaves of St Hilary in the 35
Year of the Reign of the said King, to the intent they might proceed with
greater deliberation and advice, our Lord the King after full conference and
debate had with the Earls, Barons, Noblemen, and other great men of his Kingdom
(no Commons) touching the premises by their whole consent and agreement, has
ordained and enacted, that the ordinances and Statutes aforesaid, under the
manner, form and conditions aforesaid from the 1st day of May next ensuing
shall be inviolably observed for ever, and the offenders of them shall be
punished as is aforesaid.

And so well did he and the Lawyers of that age understand the Original,
Benefit, and use of the Feudall Laws, the Ancient Honor, Glory, and Safety, of
the English Nation, their Kings Princes and People, as he did, (as the Learned
Dr. Brady in his Answer to Mr. Petit^ Essential and Constituent Rights of the
House of Commons in Parliament. fo. 117. Et to. 10. E. 1. To. Scotiae and
abinde ad 19. E. 1.
and Judicious Dr. Brady has asserted) in and by the right of the Feudal Laws,
and their original grant of the Fees (without assent or advice of Parliament)
give license to their Tenants to Talliate, Tax, and take Scutage for aid of
performing the Knight or Military Service, incident or chargeable upon their
Lands; and likewise to Tenants (otherwise employed by the King) in Capite,
though not in the Army to charge their Tenants with Scutage, warranted by the
Writ following, in the 10th Year of his Reign directed to the Sheriff of
Worcester in these words.

Rex Vicecomiti Wigorn. salutem, Quia dilectus, and fidelis noster, Hugo le
dispencer per praeceptum nostrum fuit cum dilecto consanguineo and fideli
nostro, Edmundo Com. Cornub. qui moam traxit in Anglia pro conservatione pacis
nostrae, Anno regni nostri decimo, nobis tunc existentibus in Guerra nostra
Walliae, Tibi praecipimus quod eidem Hugoni facias habere scutagium suum in
feodis militum quae de eo tenentur in balliva tua, videlicet quadraginta
solidos de Scuto pro exercitu nostro praedicto, and hoc nu^latenus omittas T.
Edmundo Comite Cornubiae Consanguine Regis apud Westminster. 13 die Aprilis.

Et Consimiles literae diriguntur vicecomitibus Leicest. Eborum, Lincoln. Suff.
Wilts. South. Surr. Buck. Essex. North. Oxon, Berk. Norff. Staff. Rotel. and
Justic. Cestr.

And a Writ on the behalf of Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, directed the
Sheriff of York in the Words, Quia delectus and fidelis noster, Henry de Lacy,
Comes Lincoln, non To. Scutag. 31. E. 1. m. 2.
sine magnis sumptibus and expensis, ad Communem utilitatem regni nostri in
obsequium nostrum per praeceptum nostrum, in partibus Franciae, pro
reformatione patis inter nos and Regem Franciae, tempore quo Eramus in Guerra
nostra Scociae Anno videlicet Segni nostri 31. Quod quidem obsequium loco
servitii sui quod tunc nobis fecisse debuerat Acceptamus, tibi praecipimus quod
eidem Comiti haberi facias scutagium suum de feodis militum quae de eo
teneantur in balliva cua videlicet Quadraginta solidos de scuto pro Exercitu
nostro praedicto, Et hoc nullatenus omittas Test Rege apud Westminster. 6. die
Aprilis.

Consimiles literas habet idem Comes direct. Vicecomitibus War. Bedford. Buck.
Somerset. Dorset. Glouc. Norff. Suff. Hereford. Leic. Lenc. Notting. Derby.
Northampton. Midd. Cantabr. Oxon. Berk.

Another on the behalf of Henry de Percy in the form ensuing, videlicet,
Rexvicecomiti Eborum salutem, Quia dilectus and fidelis noster Henricus de
Percy fuit nobiscum per praeceptum nostrum in exercitu nostro Scotiae Anno
Regni nostri 31. Tibi praecipimus quod eidem Henrico haberi facias Scutagium
suum, de feodis militum que de eo tenentur in balliva tua, videlicet
quadraginta solides de Scuto pro, Exercitu nostro praedicto, and hoc nullatenus
omitas test Rege, etc.

Consimiles literas habet idem Henricus Vicecomitibus Lincoln. Derb. Notting.
Cant. Hunt. Norff. Suff. Salop. Stafford. Consimiles literas habent Executores
testamenti Johannis de Watrenna quondam Comitis Surr. defuncti, probably the
same man that being called to an account, Quo Warranto he held many of his
Liberties, is said over Sturdily to have drawn out or unsheathed an old broad
Rusty Sword, and showing unto the Justices Itinerants, instead of his Plea
answered, by this which helped William the Conqueror to Subdue England, which
so much incensed the King as he afterward, as some of our English Annalists
have reported at his return home caused him to be Besieged in his Castle at
Rigate, until in a better obedience to his Laws he had put in a more Loyal
and Legal Plea.

Had the like letters de Habend. Scutag. de feod. militum, quae de ipso Comite
tenebantur die quo obiit in guerra Regis speciale direct Vicecomitibus Surr.
Sussex, Essex, Hereff. Buck. Lincoln. Northampton. Ebor. by writ of privy seal.

Consimiles literas habuit prior de Coventry qui finem fecit etc. direct.
Vicecomitibus War. Liec. Northt. Glouc. Wigorn. Abissa Shafton qui fecit
finem, etc. Habet Scutagium suum.

But if aids and Scutage were assessed by Parliament the military Tenants were
to be the only Collectors thereof.

35. E. 1. In the Statute Ne rector prosternat arbores in Caemiterio, it is
said, that because we do understand that Controversies do oftentimes grow
between Parsons of Churches and their Parishioners concerning Trees growing in
the Churchyards, both of them pretending that they do belong unto themselves,
we have thought it good rather to decide the controversy by writing then by
Statute, and declaring them to be parts of the goods of the Church, the King
did Prohibit the Parsons of the Church that they do not presume unadvisedly to
fell them, but when the Chancel or the body of the Church wanted necessary
reparations in which cases the Parsons of their Charity shall do well to
relieve the Parishioners with bestowing upon them the same Trees, which he will
not command to be done, but will commend it when it is done.

So happy and ready was the obedience and better Wisdom of the Subjects of this
Kingdom in the ancient and former Ages, when an agreement made before the King
or his word was adjudged to have the power and force of a Fine, and any one of
his Writs or Edicts wanted not the operation and efficacy in many things of an
Act of Parliament or Statute, and so degenerate and unhappy are our present
times as to suffer our interest and wrangling peevish disputes, to disobey or
lay aside not only the King's mandates and edicts in the ordinary and necessary
course of his Government, but in extraordinary and his Supreme power in
Parliament.

Who was as well furnished with Common as he was with Civil Lawyers, which as a
militia togata were as strong and impregnable forts and bulwarks to help to
guard his Crown and Dignity, namely, Henry de Bracton, John de Breton, the
sincere and upright John de Metingham, and Elias de Beckingham, together with
Accursius Doctor utriusque Juris Civil and Canon Gilbert de Thorneton first his
Attorney general, afterward Dugdales Origines Juridic. and Catalog. Justic.
Chief Justice ad placita cor am Rege, Gilbert de Rowbery, Roger Brabazon and
William Howard a Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, cum multis in legibus
eruditis and side dignis as to this day it appears in the steady and
unarbitrary pleadings and Records of his glorious Reign.

In whose Time it was not denied to be Law and Right Reason that that
verificatio patriae Contra Chartam Regis non est admittenda.

And did in the making of his Laws but imitate his great Ancestors.

For King Ina who Reigned in Anno Domini 712. Conredi Leges Anglo-Saxoniae
translatae per Abrah^^ (...) Whilocu^.
patris sui Heddae and Ercenwaldi Episcoporum suorum omnium senatorum suorum
and natu majorum sapientum populi sui in magna servorum Dei frequentia who in
his making of his Laws did believe it necessary in his Imprimis to use the word
precipimus.

King Alured who began his Reign in Anno Domini 871. made his Laws with a
Proposuimus and esto and in those which were published by Johannes Bromp^on
with a Praecipimus.

King Aethelstan who Reigned in the Year 930. made his Laws prudenti Ulfhelmi
Archiepiscopi aliorumque Episcoporum suorum concilio with a Signif(...),
Decrevimus, Statuimus and omnibus clare significat, and says Brompton Mandat
praepositis Brompton legibus S ^icis.
suis, and declared many of his Laws with a Volo and diximus and Ediximus and
Placuit nobis.

King Edmund that began his Reign in Anno 940. made his Laws solemni Paschatis
Festo frequentem Londini tam Ecclesiasticorum quam Laicorum coetum celebravit
cui inter fuerunt Odo and Wolstanus Archipraesul. plurimique alii Episcopi with
an Ego Edmundus Rex omnibus qui in ditione ac potestate mea sunt clare
significo Decrevimus.

Edwardus Rex says, Brompton made his Laws with a mandit and Praecipit omnibus
praefectis and amicis ut justa judicia judicent and injudiciali libro stant and
quod unum quodque placitum terminum habeat.

King Edgar who began his Reign in Anno 959. made his Laws frequenti senatu
with a Sancivit Porro autem has populo (who were not then understood to be
Lawmakers) quas servet proponimus leges and publici juris beneficio quisque
fruitor, and like his Predecessors made them short and imperative and his
Canons in Ecclesiastical Affairs with a Docemus.

King Ethelredus who began his Reign in Anno Domini 979, made his Laws
sapientum concilio habito Woodstoci Merciae quae legibus Anglorum gubernatur
solely and imperatively with an Esto.

Canutus Anglorum Dacorum and Norweglorum beginning his Reign here in England
in Anno Domini 1016, made his Ecclesiastical Laws solely and imperatively with
an Imperimus sapientum concilio ad natale Domini. And his humanae and politica
sapientum concilio with an Omnibus observari praecipio, Edocemus and Esto, and
touching his Dominions of Mercia with an Haec eadem in Mercia pro suis vendicat
praeterea praecipimus, and an Esto, Satisfacto and poenas dependito,
Compensato, Castigetur, Exterminetur, in potestatem detur, Plectitor,
Mulctator, mando Invitus cogatur, Habetor, and omnibus and singulis in Dei
nomine obtestor and praecipio.

Gulielmus Rex Anglorum cum Principibus suis constituit post conquisitionem
Angliae qu^dam decreta with a Volumus and firmiter praecipimus, Statuimus,
Decretum est, Interdicimus, Prohibimus, Ch(...) Li^hfielden.
and when the English had in the 4th Year of his Reign fletibus and precibus by
the assistance of his Norman Subjects also obtained of him a confirmation of
King Edward the LL. Gulielmi Conquest.
Confessors Laws, and to be governed by them, it is said to have been concilio
Baronum after an enquiry throughout all England, and Certificate returned per
universae Angliae consulatus Anglos nobiles sapientes and su^ lege eruditos
what those Laws and Customs were, Et cum Rex quae audisset cum aliis sui regni
legibus maxim appretiatus est and praecepit ut observaretur per totum regnum.

And they that will peruse the laborious Collections of my ever honored friend
Mr Edward Falconbergh, one of the Deputy Chamberlains of the Exchecquer, the
truest lover and carefullest preserver (of the Records, entrusted to his
Charge) that ever come into that place, the very ancient Gervasius
Tilburiensis, Mr Agard Scipio le Squier, and many other learned men, in the
revolution of more then in that Office 600 Years last past (not excepted) of
the proceedings upon the very many Quo Warranto's, brought before the Justices
Itinerant in their several Circuits, throughout all the parts of the Kingdom,
in the Reign of King Edward the first as well High as Low, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, Abbots and Priors, Great or Small, therein sparing not his own
Brother, Edmond Earl of Kent, may have premises enough to conclude, that that
Stout and Magnanimous Prince did (as our Common English saying is) lay about
him, and had a mind to let his friends, the Kings and Princes, at the before
mentioned Congress, at Montpelier in France understand that he knew how to
perform what he had promised and undertaken.

And it was high time to do it and look about him, when the Benificiarii, his
Tenants in Capite, would not be content to be grateful, and allways keep in
remembrance the Obligations incumbent upon their Lands, Estates, Ancestors, and
Posterities past or to come, and their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
grounded thereupon, unless they might so work upon the favors, Indulgence,
(and many times) necessities of their Kings and Princes, as to procure as much
as they could of their Regal power and Authority into their hands, as an
addition to the many Manors and Lands formerly bestowed upon their forefathers,
several Precious Flowers of the Crown, as Fines and Amerciaments, Assize of
Bread and Beer, Felons, and Outlaws Goods, Year, Day, and Wast, Deodands,
Waifs, Estreats and Herriot, fossa and furtas, Pillory and Tumbrell, etc. And
the then over-powering Clergy, with their Multitudes of Abbotts, Priors, and
several orders of Monks, Friars and Nuns, working upon our former Kings and
Princes Devotions and Liberalities; heightened and procured by their too many
tales and fictions of Miracles and Relicques, attracted unto themselves and
their several Houses and Societies as much of their Kings Regalities, as could,
with any Justice to themselves or the rest of their Subjects and people, or any
reason, be required, or asked of them: And were Anciently so fearful to loose
what they should not in that manner have gained, as the Charter and
Patent-Rolls of many of our ancient Kings never wanted the company of the many
Confirmations of such kind of unbecoming grants; and it may moreover justly be
attributed unto the overmuch Clemency and Indulgence of our Common Parents,
Kings and Princes, that in their many Acts of Resumptions of no small
quantities of Manors and Lands aliened from the Crown of England, which as to
its real Estate in Lands, is almost reduced to an Exinanition or much too
little for a Royal Revenue, they have notwithstanding, without any diminution
permitted their Feudatories to enjoy those very many Regalities, which made
them live like so many Subreguli or Petty Kings or Princes under them, and
leave them so far exceeding the Old Saxon Heptarchy, as Ten thousand Manors in
England and Wales unto their great Regalities and Liberties can amount unto no
less then a strange kind of Poliarchy in a Monarchy, which like Esau and Jacob
Struggling in the Womb never after agreed together, which that great Prince King
Edward the 1. suis and aliorum miseriis edoctus did endeavor to prevent, and
leave it to his Heirs and Successors as it ought to be a most Ancient great and
entire Monarchy.

Was so exact and careful in the Causing of Justice to be done, unto his
people and Subjects, as by himself or his Justices Itinerant and Juries
Impannelled to enquire according to certain Articles given unto them in
writing, unto which they were to answer negatively or affirmatively, (not as is
now used by the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench, twice every Year upon the
Impannelling of the grand Juries of the County of Middlesex, or by the Judges
in their several Circuits to the Grand Juries of the several Counties or
places, by their Learned speeches, and recommending unto them what they should
enquire, and present what they know, and not tarry until by chance or malice
it be brought unto them) which for the most part proves to be as little
effectual, as if they should be required to have a care of their Bill of Fare,
or what good provision of Meat and Wine was to be had at Dinner, from whence
well Luxuriated and Tobaccoed (as unto not a few of them) if they get home at
any reasonable time of the night they have done their Country service, that
they have, and all is well, and for the little that they know is like to
continue. But it was not thought to have been enough in that our great
Justiciar, King Edward the first his Reign, when he Commissionated some of his
Justices to Impannell Juries in every Ward of London, where it was found and
returned upon their Oaths in Anno 3. of his Reign, Quod Civitas In Bag^ de Quo
Warranto and in R(...)l. extract de vereditis Civit. London pro Rege tempore E.
1.
London cum suis pertin. and cum Com. Middlesex tenetur in Capite de Domino
Rege, pro certa Annua pentione, soluta ad Scaccarium Dominum Regis per Vicecom.
London.

Quod Dominus Radolphus de Berners Mil. ten. unum messuagium, duo molend.
aquatic. cum pertin. in paroch. Sancti Botolphi extra Algate, quae vocantur the
Knights fee, quod quidem Tenementum debet invenire Domino Regi unum servientem
Armatum in uno Turretto Turris London, per xl dies tempore guerra, ad proprios
sumptus and in ultima guerrae fecit defalc. etc.

Dicunt etiam quod in Com. Midd. sunt 7 Hundred. Wapp. and Tithing. and pertin.
ad Civit. London, Palate. Westminster, Keneton, Judaismum, and Turrim, and
Civit. London in manu sua.

Inquisitio facta per 12 Jur. de Warda Anketili de Alneranzo Civis and
Aldermanni London super certis Articulis ex part Domini Regis E. Anno
ejusdemtertio apud Sanctum Martinum magnum London eisdem Jur. tradit.

In which dicunt quod Civit. London and Turr. ejusdem, Westminster. Com. Midd. sunt
de Dominico Domini Regis, and quod reddant Domino Regi per Annum 400l, Item
dicunt quod Wynton, Northampton, Southampton, Oxon, Bristoll, Ebor. and al.
Civitat. and Burg. quorum nomina ignorant, sunt de Dominico Domini Regis and
reddunt certam pecuniae Summam annuatim, sed quantum ignorant.

Et quod Dominus Johannes quondam Rex Angliae, pater Domini H. Regis, dedit
Elianorae tunc temporis Reginae Angliae Ripam Regiam in Civitate London, quae
fuit de Jure, and est de Dominico Domini Regis.

In which that great princes inquisitions, and desire of administering Justice
to his people, It is not to pass unobserved, that amongst all his Quo
Warranto's what Liberties were Claimed in every part of the Nation, and every
man that would enjoy them, driven not to conceal but Claim them, there was
until the 22 year of his Reign, when the disused house of Commons, first
erected in and by Simon Montfort's aforesaid Rebellion, was again ordained to
be elected with some modification, there was not any claim of Parliament
Liberty, nor in any of our after Kings Reigns, nor is it at any time to be
called a Liberty to be Crowded under that Denomination, for that it was but
Transitory, not fixed to any person or Land, and was but vaga and incerta, that
opinion of a would be Learned Lawyer and Recorder in the County of Surry
reprehended openly by a Judge, that it was a privilege or liberty of
Parliament, to use some Art by a Counterfeit Deed, or otherwise to make himself
to be a Freeholder, with an Intent to be a Parliament Man.

Which Jury presented Pourprestures in stopping up the way betwixt Ludgate and
Newgate, and from Newgate to St Nicolas Shambles, and to and from several other
places within the City, that John de London and Gregory Rokesly received money
of the King to pay his Debts, and retained a 3d part to their own use, and paid
that which they did in bad money, that the Mayor, Shrieves and Aldermen of
London, without the Consent of the Community, did Tax the men of small Estate
and suffered the greater to escape, that after the Battle of Evesham the City
was fined 20000 Marks, which was leavyed of the Commonalty, 5 of the Citizens
being excepted from pardon.

Et quod Dominus Rex habet in Dominico suo, quae pertinet ad dignitatem Coronae
suae de antiquo Dominico aquam Thamess, quae incipit apud Youland ad introitum
maris, versus Orientem, ex utraque part usque ad pentem de Stains.

Caused Juries to be Impannelled and Presentiments made, quae and quot maneria,
quae esse solent in manibus Domini Regis, and de feod. Domini Regis, aut de
antiquo Dominico, de firmis, Hundredi, Wapentach, etc. quot Hund. in Com.
Middl. and de firmis antiquis, etc. of Malefactors, Assaults and Batteries
felonies, Escheates, Lands aliened in mortmain, encroachments super solum
Regis, pourpraestures and Stopping of streets or Passages, for building upon
the Kings ground, one whereof being presented by the Jury not to be ad
nocumentum was arrented at 4d per Annum.

Who presented quod Edmundus de Cheyne tenuit prisonam de Fleta Serjeantiam de
haereditate Johannae valet per Annum 10l. and per Serjeantiam Custodiend.
prisones Domini Regis, and Palatium Domini Regis apud Westminster. whereupon a Sine
die was granted, but with a Salvo Iure Regis, etc.

Buildings super solum Regis ordered, to be beaten down, when they were ad
nocumentum, and inquiries made de vinis vendit contra Assisam, purprestures in
the passages of streets ordered to be altered and laid open, and the
transgressors in misericordia and punished, a Toll taken unjustly by the Warden
of the Fleet upon Fleet-bridge, and between that and Holborn-bridge prohibited,
and the Warden fined, Stalls, Shops and Galleries built, or Posts and Walls
erected super solum Regis in Civitate praedicta commanded to be taken down, the
Overseer or Supervisor of Cloth in the City, presented for taking too much
Custom of the Merchants, and other Money to conceal the Defects of Cloth, for
which his Deputy being accused, petit quod possit admitti ad finem in hac part
priusquam Inquisitio fiat, and admittitur per finem 13 s. 4 d. per pleg.

It being presented that the Customers or Collectors of the Customs for the
Wool (then a very great transportable Commodity into Foreign parts) had taken
a greater Custom then the usual Cockett, and as well of the English as
Foreigners, ad dampm. Domini Regis, and oppressionem and depauperationem
totius populi; they prayed to be admittted ad finem cum Domino Rege, and were
accordingly; another was presented for setting up 4 Posts with Iron-Chains,
ante Ostium Cellarii sui, and 2 of them cross the Street, Postea the Defendent
came and Pleaded quod delevit predictos posts infra sum. Itiner. Et Jur. hoc
testantur, and quia prius non delevit in misericordia; Peter Cosyn presented
for building a Porch of 16 foot long in solo Regis, by which the Street was
straightened, Et (quod) nullo modo possunt stare, Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod
prosternere fac. quicquid sit ad nocumentum, Et def. in misericordia quia de
facto suo; William Cosyn being presented for raising an Imposition or Toll in a
street called Cosyn-street, through which the People fetched water from the
River of Thames, Et predictus Williel, non venit, Et fuit attach. per etc. Ideo
in misericordia, Et Jur. testantur quod predict. Will. levavit de novo 40d. per
Anuum, Ideo Consid. est quod Dominus Rex Recuperet 13 s. 4d. pro predict. 4.
Annis versus predict. Will. Et Idem Will. in misericordia; Et predict. venella
reman. Communis ficut prius esse solebat, William de Dalby in misericordia, for
that he having a freehold Tenement in Civitate ista did not appear before the
Justices Itinerant; A mudd-wall built upon a piece of ground before the Church
of St. Michael Bassieshaw in Civitate London being presented to be ad
nocumentum, was ordered to be thrown down.

Walter de Herbeston presented in Cripplegate Ward London for erecting certain
bars super solum Regis, who confessing it, was ordered to pull them down at
his own Charge, and in misericordia quia prius non delevit.

Richard de Bakere presented for making a Well, the one half in his own ground,
and the other super solum Regis. Roger de Bellinger built 4 Stalls super solum
Regis, which he said he was willing to pull down if they should appear to be ad
nocumentum, and praec. est vic. quod deleantur si sint ad nocumentum, and
nichil de misericordia quia non de facto praedicti Rogeri. Another was
presented for setting up pales of Boards before his house in Aldermanbury in
London, which not being denied the Sheriff was ordered to pull them down, at
the Charge of the Transgressor. Another for building a Chimney super solum
Regis, which was ordered to be pulled down at the charge of him that did it.

William de Pontefrayt for suffering his Tenant Hugh Malyn since deceased, to
build quendam gradum de Petra extra ostium de Ten. 3 foot long super Regiam
viam, and the Landlord himself about a Year before fecit quandam fenestram in
eodem ten. 2 foot and an half broad and 3 foot long, appropriando sibi de solo
Regis ad nocumentum, and non potest arrentari, Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod deleri
fac.

Robert de Rofham 10 years before fec. unum ostium 4 foot long, ad ingressum
cujusdam Cellarii in Chepe, extending it self into the Kings Highway,
appropriendo sibi de solo Domini Regis ad dampnum Domini Regis, and non potest
arrentari Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod deleri fac.

The Dean and Chapter of St Paul's London, being presented for taking 12 s. per
Annum rent for an house in Woodstreet, and Incroaching upon 20 s. rent out of
another Tenement in London, with another rent of 70 s. per Annum out of another
house, pro sustentatione Cantariae in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli London in
perpetuum, who pleading that the King had Granted and confirmed unto them omnia
Legatu, Donationes eis prius facta de quibuscunque terris, ten. seu redditibus
in Civitate is it a seu suburb. ejusdem per literas suas paten. prout before
apparet inter placita in Warda de Farindon Irrotulat, Ideo idem Decanus and
Capitl. inde sine die, etc.

Hugo de Waltham being presented for building an house in the parish of St.
Peter's in Cornhill super solum Regis, for which an Anachoret paid 12 d. per
Annum, and enclosed another part thereof with Pales 48 foot in length and 10
foot in breadth super solum Regis, and John de Oxon was the now Tenant thereof,
who came and prayed that he might rent it at 12 d. per Annum, which was granted
paying the King as much, the Jury finding it not to be ad nocumentum, etc.

Ric. le Tailor and others, presented for selling in the Night, veteres Pannos,
Caligas and alia mercimonia in Deceptionem ementium, cum per antiquam
Consuetudinem usitatum in Civitate, nullum mercatum ibi teneri debint, nisi
post ortum solis usque ad horam nonam vesperarum die, Ideo prec. est vic. quod
venire facias. And thereupon the Offenders were prohibited to do so no more,
and the Mayor and Sheriffs enjoined, quod mercata de caetero non teneantur in
London, post horam vesperarum pulsatam in Ecclesia Sancti Thomae de Aconia in
Civitate London, Et postea Proclamatum fuit, (the Modern and too frequent
impudent cheating Custom of falselights purposely built in or near Shops in the
street side not then held to be Godly, or to fignify any more then to show
where a Knave dwells.)

Presented some that had Money to pay the Kings Debts and paid but part of it
retaining the residue to their own use.

And some of the Company of the Weavers in London for making an Order for
exacting a greater rate then was due for their Works.

That Richard de Rofham and al. fecerunt quandam Congregationem ad aulam
plumbatam super Cornhil.

That Johanues de Wengrave dum fuit Major Civitatis London, took of the
Vintners of London 50 l. ut permitteret eos vendere Lagonem Vini ad 5 d. and 6
d. ubi vendidisse debuissent ad 4 d. tantum ad dampnum totius populi Civitatis,
Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod venire fac. And that the said John de Wengrave in the
taxing of the Subsidy in the City of London, ad opus Domini Regis, by employing
2 Men in every Ward, ad opus voluntatem suam, did cause to be Leavyed de
mediocri populo Civitatis, and when they were to leavy 200 l. ad opus Domini
Regis, did leavy de mediocri populo Civitatis 300 l. retinendo inde ad opus
suum proprium 100 l.

And that the said John Wengrave and his Confederates being to collect in the
City of London 1650 Marks, for a sine, imposed for a trespass done to the King,
for breaking down a Wall juxta Turrim London per quosdam de Civitate praedicta,
retained to their own use 650 Marks, in praejudicium Domini Regis and dampnum
ejusdem mediocris populi, Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod venire fac. eum, etc.

Likewise that the said John Wingrave whilst he was Mayor of London did sell 15
dolia Vini in Grosso, and ad Retalliam pretii cujuslibet dolii 3 l. post
Statutum, Ideo prec. fuit vic quod venire fac. eum, and postea testatum est
quod praedictus Johannes de Wingrave non est invent, etc. sed quod
distrinxerunt eum per Exit. quorundam ten. and ipse non ven. Whereupon the King
by his Writ directed unto Hervey de Stanton one of the Justices Itinerant,
Reciting the whole matter, commanded him to certify the said presentment to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchecquer, that they might according to Law take
order therein.

Presented that the Dean and Chapter of St Paul's in London, had incroached upon
a large piece of ground near that Church, where the Mayor and City of London
were accustomed to keep their Folkmote, and also Muster and show their Arms,
being solum Regis, and other large pieces of ground toward St.
Augustines-Gate, unto which they pleading diverse Grants and Charters of some of
the Kings Royal Progenitors, the King by his Writ adjorned the process and
pleading therein to be heard and determined before himself, ubicunque fuit in
Anglia in Quindena St. Michaelis prox. commanded the Dean and Chapter there
also to attend at the same time.

Johannes de Cumbuelle Constable of the Tower of London, was presented for
taking Toll, Custom, and Victuals of such as fish upon the River of Thames
near unto the Tower, who pleaded that he took it for the Kings use, and had
accounted for it in the Exchecquer.

Postea predictus Johannes recessit in Contemptum Curiae, Ideo praec. fuit vic.
quod distring. eum, and quod habeat corpus ejus coram Thesaur. and Baron de
Scaccario in Quindena Sancti Michaelis ad audiendum Judicium.

Presented William de Broy Archdeacon of London and others, for Extortions as
Officers and Clerks in the City, who made falsas and fictas Actiones and per
minas, extorserunt diverse great sums of Money, and prec. fuit vic. quod venire
fac. who came and denied the Extortion but would not put themselves upon the
Jury, but the Justices declaring unto them that when they are charged in the
Court for Trespass against the King, Et non vellent se ponere in Jur. Patriae
ad ipsos inde acquietand. per quod Jur. secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Regni
Capiend. finalis Exitus debet fieri, they were otherwise to proceed.

Whereupon the Defendants not denying their offenses, but refusing to put
themselves upon the Jury, submiserunt se gratiae Domini Regis in ea part, and
ideo ad Judicium, and postea petunt dimitti per plevinam, and eis conceditur.

And it was moreover presented ex part Comunitat. London, quod omnes
Tabernarii, vina vendentes ad retalliam in Civitate ista, had by Confederacy
amongst themselves, ordained that they would not suffer any, that buy Wine of
them, to see it drawn out of the Vessel, and sic predicti Tabernarii Vina sua
vendunt in locis absconditis and obscuris, per quod plures Homines bibentes de
Vinis illis aliquando gravitur infirmantur, and quidem ea occasion moriuntur,
Ideo prec. fuit vic. quod venire fac. omnes hujusmodi Tabernarios, etc.

Whereupon some of the Taverners their Drawers or Vadlets, as they were then
called, came and not denying the fact, were fined 20 Marks to the King, unde
quilibet eorum pleg. alterius etc. Et injunctum est iis quod de caetero
permittant vina Emere volentibus videre vinum and dolium de quo bibere debet,
and quod Emptor videat ubi and quando vinum extrabatur de Dolio, and similiter
Proclamatum est quod Emptores Vinorum de caetero non impediantur ad videndum
vina sicut Injunctum fuit Tabernariis, etc.

And Juries were also Impannelled to certify who were amerced sine rationabili
causa and ultra quantitatem delicti, and non per pares, etc.

And was so allways ready and willing in the Administration of his Justice, for
the good of his Subjects, as in the 3 year of his Reign, he did cause an Act of
Parliament to be made to punish frauds and deceits, in Sergeants or Pleaders,
in his Courts of Justice, under no less a Penalty and Punishment then a Year
and a Days Imprisonment, with a Fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure, and be
never more after suffered to practice in 3. E. 1. ca. 39
any of the Kings Courts of Justice. And if it be an Officer of Fee his Office
shall be taken into the Kings hands, and whether they be of the one kind of the
Offenders or orher, shall pay unto the Complainant the treble value of what
they have received in like manner.

And thus that great King by the Testimony and Applause of the Age wherein he
lived justly merited the Honor to be Enrolled in the Records of Time History
and Fame, for a most Prudent and valiant Prince, and in his personal valor
much exceeding that of the exttaordinarily Wise Solomon, Alexander the great,
Julius Caesar, the politic Hannibal, the wary Fabius, or his valorous and
daring great Uncle Richard the first of that name King of England, rendered
himself equal to all the great Kings and Captains that lived before or after
him.

And might have thought himself and his Successors to have been in some
condition of safety when the Writ or Election of Members in the House of
Commons in Parliament were to be only by his own Writs and Authority, and the
Sheriffs who were not the Parliament Officers but the Kings, and by the Law to
be sworn unto him not unto both or either of the Houses of Parliament, and were
strictly to observe and execute his Writs and Mandates.

SECT. XIX.
That the Sheriffs are by the Tenor and Command of the Writs for the Elections
of the Knights of the Shires and Burgesses of the Parliament Cities and
Burrough-Towns, the only Judges under the King, Who are fit and unfit to be
Members in the House of Commons in Parliament, and that the Freeholders and
Burgesses more then by a Just and Impartial Assent, and Information who were
the Fittest were not to be the Electors.

FOr the Commissions or Mandates of Inferior Judges, Magistrates or Courts, or
their power and authorities over executed, and further then the true Intentions
and proper Significations of the words therein not overstrained or racked, or
not as they ought to be duly executed, are in our and the Laws of most of the
Nations of the World, accounted to be void and liable to punishment.

And it ought not to Escape our or any other men's observations that the County
Court of a Sheriff is as Sr Edward Coke Cokes 4th Institutes ca. 55. and tit.
Parliament. fo. 6.
says no Court of Record, and is in it self of so Petit a Consideration as it
holds no Plea of any Debt or Damage to the value of Forty Shilings, or above,
or of any trespass vi and armis, because a fine is thereby due to the King, is
Called the Sheriffs County Court, and the Style of it is Curia Vicecomitibus,
the Writs for the Summoning of the Commons or Barons of the Cinque Ports, who
have been (since 49. H. 3.) and the allowance thereof in 22. E. 1. after a long
discontinuance accounted as Burgesses are directed to the Warden or Guardian of
the Cinque Ports, as they are to the Sheriffs of every County for the Choice
and Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses.

And the Sheriffs authority, as to that particular affair, is so Comprised in
the Writs, as they are not to swerve or depart Elsiugs ancient and present
manner of h^lding Parliaments. ca. 1. 57.
from the tenor or purport thereof, which are made by the Chancellor of the
King, or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and sometimes by a Warrant under
the King's own hand, as in the fifth year of the Reign of King Eward the 3d in
the words following, viz.

Rex Vicecomiti Eborum Salutem Quia propter quaedam magna and ardua negotia nos
and ducatum nostrum Aquitaniae, ac alias terras nostras in partibus
trausmarinis, pro quibus ad easdem parts nuper Solemnes nuntios nostros
destinaverimus Contingentique in ultimo Parliamento nostro a quibus certis
Causis terminari non potuerint, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westmonasterium die
Lunae in Crastino quindeux Paschae, proxime futurae teneri, and cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus and proceribus dicti Regni ordinavimus habere Colloquium and
tractatum tibi praecipimus firmiter Injungentes quod de dicto Comitatu duos
milites, and de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius duos Cives, and de qualibet
Burgo duos Burgenses, de discretioribus, and ad Laborandum potentioribus eligi,
and eos ad dictum diem and Locum venire faciatis, ita quod milites plenam and
sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Comitatus praedicti, and dicti
Cives and Burgenses pro se and Communitate Civitatum and Burgorum divisim, ab
ipsis habeant, ad faciendum and Consentiendum iis quae tunc de Communi Concilio
(favente Deo) ordinari Contigerint super negotiis antedictis, ita quod pro
defectu hujusmodi potestatis dicta negotia ineffecta non remaneant quovis modo,
and habeas ibi nominia praedictorum militum, Civium and Burgensium, and hoc
bre, and hoc sicut nos and honorem nostrum, and tranquilitatem and quietem
dicti Regni diligitis, nullatenus omittatis etc. T. Anno 5. E. 3. 17. Febr. per
ipsum Regem.

Wherein none of the Spiritual and Temporal Barons or their Tenants for the
Land anciently belonging unto their Baronies, or the Clergy, having no Lay Fee
Tenants of the King, and Ancient demesne, though many of those kind of Tenants
do take upon them to do it, Abbots and Priors, Monks or Friars, which latter
are to be accounted as dead Persons in Law, Copyholders and Widows are
neither to be Electors or Elected, nor Persons attainted of Felony or Treason
Outlawed, or Prisoners in execution for Debt, and the Sheriffs in their returns
or Indentures are not to return, as they Cromptous Jurisdictien of Courts. 11.
did sometimes, or do now, that the Freeholders elegerunt, but that the Sheriff
elegi fecit, as was done in 8. E. 2. by a Sheriff of Roteland quod Elegifeci in
pleno Comitatu per Communitatem totius Communitatis illius duos milites de
discretioribus.

In a return of a Writ of Summons in 18. E. 3. Drogo de Barentine the Sheriff
of Oxford and Berkshire returned, that Richardum Pryns brevia Parliamentaria
redi viva. 145. and 148.
de Vere militem, and Johannen de Croxford de Com. Oxon, Richardum de Walden
and Johannem de Vachell de Com, Berk de assensu and arbitrio hominumeorundum
Com. nominatos premuniri feci and firmiter injunxi quod sint ad diem Locum etc.
And a Sheriff of Leicester and Warwickshire mentioning the day when the Writ of
Summons was delivered unto him, says it was per manus cujusdam exteanei de
Garderoba Domini Regis q(...) nomen suum sibi nonnominavit nec billam
expectavit, and that he had thereupon chosen Robert de Wileby Miles de Com.
Leic. and qui manucapt. fuit per Johannem Clerk and Johannem Russell Johannem
Peche mil. de Com. War. per manucapt. Johannem Walkere, Willielmo peniter.

For although it has been said, and sometime taken for a Rule in our Laws, as
well as in others in some cases, that qui facit peo alium facit per se, yet
such trusts as those are as little transferrable as that of a MemberShip of the
house of Commons in Parliament to one that was never elected, and the Sheriffs
are not to trust either Ignorant or Factious men, by packing and juggling one
with another to choose Boys or Youths under the age of 21. of which sort as Mr
Pryn has publicly declared there have been above Twenty at a time in the
House of Commons in some of our late unhappy Parliaments; or Debauches,
Heretics, or Anti-Trinitarians as one was in one of Oliver Cromwells
mock-Parliaments and ejected for it, or an Atheist; in regard that besides some
particular clauses of their Writs mentioned, it is allways expressed that the
business for which the Parliament was likewise to be Assembled was pro
defensione Regni and Ecclesiae Anglicanae which do manifestly declare the
Intention of the King and his Writs to be, that the Madheaded people led by
Drink, Ignorance, Interest, Bribes, Fear, or Flattery are not to be suffered by
Sheriffs to choose Papists Fanatiques or Rigid Presbyterians, the greatest or
most Inveterate Enemies to the Church and Kingdom, or the Sons of such as Sat
in the Horrid Convention that murdered their King, and when they should make
their Election de prudentioribus and Discretioribus, let Fools Knaves and
Drunkards choose one another; for howsoever the House of Commons have been
heretofore filled with some, or molded otherwise then they should be, yet the
Intention of the Writs was never to Introduce such Fiery Tempers or Granadiers
as should do what they Could to Fire all within and without, and Elect all the
newfangled untryed Innovations they Can, and encourage others thereunto,
before they know how to Understand them; make Remonstrances and Harangues, and
print and publish them to the people against the Government, Fundamental Laws,
and the just rights of their Sovereign, and their Succession the former and
later, of which the Politiques of former Ages and Queen Elizabeth's blessed
Reign, would never think sit to be there disputed, and the perclose or later
part of those Writs, that one part of the Indentures should be returned to the
King in his Chancery may evidence that the Intention of those Writs and of him
that gave them their breath, and authority, was, that the approbation and
allowance of the Elections should ultimately reside in the Sovereign, which
gave occasion to Oliver Cromwell in his Usurped Kingship, under the Counterfeit
title of Protector of his Fellow-Rebells in an Instrument of his own making, to
reserve to himself and his Privy Council the power of allowing and disallowing
such as should be Chosen to be Members of the House of Commons in Parliament.

For by Law it is intended that the King should have the approbation of the men
elected, and therefore to that end one pair of the Indentures are to be
returned to the Clark of the Crown in Chancery and our Kings in their
Parliaments that Succeeded the 21th Year of the Reign of King Edward the first,
as well as the tenor and purport of the Writs, did provide that the Sheriffs
who are the Kings, Officers and not the Peoples, should according to the Kings
Writs be Judges of the fitness, or unfitness of the persons Elected or to be
Elected, and did therefore to prevent the defaults of due Elections, ordain
Penalties to be laid upon them for making false retorns or doing wrong therein
and give directions unto them how in many things to manage the affairs in such
Elections, as in 7. H. 4. 15. where it was Complained that the Sheriffs made
the Elections according to affections or otherwise, 11. H. 4. that undue
Elections should be enquired of by Justices of Assize, who should have power to
enquire of false retornes made, and to examine and Fine the Sheriffs making
default at 100 l. and the Knights unduly returned were to lose their Wages of
old time accustomed; and by an Act of Parliament made in the 6th year of the
Reign of King Henry the 6th, the said Sheriffs and Knights were to be admitted
to their answers, and traverse to such enquests taken (which must be understood
to be either in the Kings Court of Chancery or King's Bench, where the King
himself is supposed by Law to be present) and the Knights Daltou^ officium
Vicecomitum. 417. (...)
should not be endamaged to the King, his Heirs and Successors by any such
enquest until they should thereof be Convict according to the form of the
Statute of the 1. of H. 5. 1. Knights and Burgesses should be Chosen of such as
be resiant 8. H. 6. ca. 7. The People that were to Chose (or rather to assent)
were to have 40 s. per Annum Freehold, and none to be Chosen Knights of the
Shires that have not above, and the Sheriffs were Empowered to examine upon
Oath how much every one in giving his Vote or Consent to the^ Election might
expend by the Year.

And by the Statute of 23. H. 6. 15. the Sheriffs is to make his Precepts to
the Mayor or Bailiff of Cities and Parliament Burgess Towns, who were to take
Care of due Elections and Cokes 4 pars Instituts (...). parliament.
return the Indentures to the Sheriffs and the Penalties given to the King,
and they that should be mischosen and Sit in Parliament are to forfeit 100 l.
to the King, and as much to the Party duly Elected, or to them that will Sue
for the same, wherein no wager of Law or Essoyne is to be allowed, but such
process as are to be awarded, as in trespass at the Common Law: and Brooker a
Sheriff of Wiltshire was in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, prosecuted in the
Court of Starr-Chamber upon Dier fo. 6^.
an Information for perjury at the Queens Suit for a false Return made of Sr
John Thyn to be Knight of the Shire for the said County in Parliament, whereas
in truth Penruddock was Chosen by the greater number of the Freeholders in the
said County in deceit of the County and of the whole Realm.

And the Sheriffs and the Chief Magistrates of every City and Burgess town,
every Knight of the Shire and Burgess of Parliament ought by the mandate and
tenor of the Writs, and as the Indentures which are not made betwixt the
Electors and the Elected, but betwixt the Electors and the Sheriff do ordain to
take Care that the Knights should have plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro
se and Comunitate Comitatus, and the Burgesses Chosen for every City and
Burgess town: ad faciend. and Consentiend, etc. which in a Just formality of
Law ought to be signified to the King in his Chancery by their Indentures as an
Instrument or Deed of procuration or letter of Attorney which the after Clause
Ira pro defiatu potestatis does Intimate to be a thing so necessary as without
it they might be rejected, if it should be Insisted upon, for surely the King
that by his Writ for the Election gives the power and license to his Sheriffs
to Elect Knights and Burgesses to come unto the Parliament, is to have so much
Control and Power over it, as to examine whether they were duly Elected, and
upon occasions of death, undue Elections, or other Incapacities to Cause new
Elections to be made, wherein although the House of Commons have in this our
Century, or an hundred years last past, been willing to save the King and his
Ministers of State a labor, and upon the death or removal of a Member have
usually sent their Warrant or Certificate to the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of
the Great Seal of England, or the Clark of the Crown for the Election of
others; the learned Lord Chancellor or Keeper Egerton, scrupling such a kind of
proceeding, wished it might be otherwise, and the President of Simon de
Monforts Rebellious first institution of an House of Commons, in his new
unexampled kind of Parliament in the 49th year of the Reign of King Henry the
3, cannot be so racked or strained, as to Warrant any such proceeding, for even
then, when he was those Rebels prisoner for an Year and a Quarter, they could
not tell how to adventure upon such a kind of new and self authority; yet it
has been by the permission and Indulgence of our Princes, who have thereby too
much given them the opportunity and advantage of making one evil action to be a
Custom, for all that have been but a little acquainted with our Laws and
Records may without derogation to that part of the honorable Court of
Parliament, of which it has been well observed and said in the Earl of
Leicesters Case, No man ought to Speak or think dishonourably Plowdens Com meant
in the Case of the Earl of Leicester.
of them, believe that it is a matter particularly and especially only
appropriate and belonging to the King and his Supreme authority and dignity,
and the Elections are so entrusted by the King to the care of the Sheriffs and
his Officers, as in the Choice or election of Coroners or Verduters de assensu
Comitatus by the assent or good likeing of the Common People Register of Writs.
177.
of the County, there is in the Conclusion of the Writ a Special Clause to
Certify the name of whom they had Chosen, which if the King were not therein
to give his allowance or refusal, would be altogether Insignificant and to no
Purpose.

And by his Sovereign power notwithstanding his approbation Register of Writs.
in such an Election it was never denied to be lawful and for the weal
Public, that the King upon Information that the Coroner so Chosen was aliis
detentus negotiis, and could not attend the duty and employment of that office,
or was Surprised with a dead palsy, or had not Laws Sufficient in the County,
or lived in the further part thereof so that he could not conveniently execute
the said office, or was elected Sheriff or a Verdurer in a forest, or that
Quidam R. who was elected by the Sheriff de assensu ejusdem Comitatus, was not
a Knight, as the statutes concerning the making or electing of Coroners
directed, and had not 5l. per Annum Land of Freehold, yet the Sheriff had
elected him into that office, to Command the Sheriff to choose another in his
Place de assensu Comitatus qui melius Scire and possit ad illus intendere, and
quod nomen ejus Scire faceret etc. or when a Verdurer was adeo languidus and
semo confectus as he could not attend the execution of the office, another
should be elected in his place de assensu Comitatus, and nomen ejus scire
faceret.

And it is not like to be any disparagement to the Judgment or knowledge of
any man of the Law to acknowledge that the Writ of Conge de Eslire granted by
the King to a Pryor Fitz-Herberts not. bre. 170. E. 1. 3. Articuli Cle. 2. and
25. Register of Writs in the Case of an Abbot. 294.
and Covent to elect an Abbot, or Dean and Chapter of a Diocese to elect a
Bishop, when the King has before hand nominated the man by an especial Clause
takes care that he be regno and Regi utilis and fidelis, and that after his
election and the formality of the election by the Dean and Chapter dispatched,
there is a Writ de Regio assensu to Confirm that election, followed by another
to the Escheator to restore unto him the temporalities in the form following.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo J. Justiciario suo Hiberniae salutem, Cum dilecti
nobis in Christo Decanas and Capitulum Ecclesiae de B. vacant nuper Ecclesia
sua praedicta per mortem bonae memoriae Lucae nuper Episcopi loci illius
dilectum nobis in Christo M. J. Decanum Ecclesiae predictae in suum Episcopum
elegerunt and pastorem, and nobis per suas patentes literas: Supplicaverunt, ut
Electioni Regium assensum adhibere dignaremur: Nos licet idem Decanus and
Capitulum prius a nobis eligendi licentiam non postuleverint, ut est moris,
volentes tamen eis hac vice gratiam facere specialem, eidem Electioni Regium
assensum Duxerimus adhibendum, nolentes quod, quamvis ipsi hujusmodi licentiam
mini ne (...)runt, molestentur in aliquo seu graventer, volentes insuper eidem
Electo, ut ipsius parentur laboribus and expensis, gratiam facere uberiorem
vobis dedimus potestatem, quod si Contingat Electionem hujusmodi per loci
Metropolitanum Canonicum Confirmari, and vobis inde per literas patentes loci
ipsius Metropolitam, nobis inde directas constiterit, tunc fidelitatem ipsius
Electi nobis debitam in hoc part nostro nomine recipiatis, and ei temporalia
Episcopatus illius, prout moris est, restitui faciatis vice nostra receptis
prius ab Episcopo Electo literis suis factis Sigillo suo, and sigillo Capituli
sui Signatis, quod gratia nostra, quam eidem Electo ad praesens ex mera
liberalitate nostra fecimus nobis vel haeredibus nostris non Cedat in
praejudicium, etc. T. etc.

And may remember that when the Papal Clergy were Culminated in their highest
Zenith under the domineering power and Insolency of the Popes their Incouragers
and Protectors, and so high as upon the vacancy of Bishoprics or other
dignified Ecclesiastic preferments they that sought for those places would
hasten to Rome, nd get Bulls of investiture from the Pope upon the Kings
unwilling recommendation, which though a politic fear had made King Henry the
8. for a Time to Condescend unto, yet he was Careful to make the party so
preferred to appear at his return before him, either in person, or by proxy,
and renounce every Clause in Burnetts hist. of the reformation of the Church of
England. 1. part. 11.
the Popes Letters or Bulls that might prove derogatory to his Crown and
Prerogative or the Law of the Land, and Swear Fealty, and Allegiance unto him,
and thereupon Writs were ordered to be made out of the Chancery for a new
Election, if none had been before made by the Dean and Chapter of the Diocese,
or afterward for the Kings allowance of an Election To. Claus. 4. E. 3.
to be made by the Dean and Chapter and a restitution thereupon of the
Temporalities.

And Fitz-Herbert a learned Judge has informed us that if a Dean and Chapter
should elect a Bishop without the Fitz-Herberts natura brevium. 170.
Kings assent, and after make a Certificate thereof to the King, he may assent
thereunto or refuse to do it, if he please, and if he do assent thereunto a
special writ is to be made to some Person to take his Fealty and to restore
unto him his Temporalities in the form aforesaid.

And our Kings have not only done it in the Election of Coroners and Verdurers,
but in matters of an higher nature viz. the Election of Members of the Commons
in Parliament in Elsings ancient and present manner of holding Parliaments in
England. Ca. 1. 65. 66.
the Case of Sr Thomas Camois Banneret (which says Mr Elsing) did not, as a
Baron, anciently use to serve as a Member in the house of Commons in
Parliament, as appears by the Kings writ directed to the Sheriff of Surrey
for a new Election in the Stead of the said Sr Thomas Camois, wherein the
reason To. Claus. 7. R. 2. in dorso. m. 32.
is expressed in these words: Nos animadvertentes quod hujusmodi Banneretti
ante haec tempora in milites Comitatus ratione alicujus Parliamenti minime
consueverunt eligi.

And was afterward as a Baron summoned into the House of Peers in Parliament,
and the Kings servants have likewise had exemtions, as when James Barners was
discharged quia de retinentia Regis, familiaris and unus militum Camerae Regis.
To. Claus. 7. R. 2. 28.


The servants of the Queen and Prince enjoying also the like Privileges.

For the same year there appears to have been an exemtion and discharge of
Thomas Morvill, Quia est de retinentia Charissimae Dominae and matris nostrae
Johannae Principissae Walliae.

A Verdurer being Chosen in a forest beyond Trent, and the King upon a
Suggestion made in Chancery, that he had Register of Writs 177. and 178.
not Lands and Tenements Sufficient within the Limits of the Forest, nor was
resident therein, having Caused another de assensu Comitatus to be elected, did
upon better Information by the Justice of that Forest, that he had Lands and
Tenements sufficient, and was fit for the place, supersede the later Writ, and
Commanded that he that was formerly elected should be permitted to execute the
said Office.

In the first year of the Reign of King Edward the 1st the King being Informed
that one Matteville having been elected 1. (...). 1. To. Claus. 1. part.
Coroner of Essex, de assensu Comitatus officium praedictum explere non potuit,
sent his Writ to the Sheriff of Essex to elect per assensum Comitatus, one that
should be able to execute that office, with a Command to Certify the name of
the party to be so elected, which a King that is sui Juris and not governed by
those he should govern, might surely better do, then a private man who is never
denied the refusal of one elected, that is not fit for the ends and purposes
for which he was Chosen; as if a Carpenter should by a mistake of a friend or
servant, be hired or employed to do the work or business of a Farrier; or a
Farrier of an Apothecary.

And it should be no otherwise, when all the Laws of the World where right
reason and morality have any Influence, or any thing to do, have ordained and
allowed a retorn or attempt to be given of Writs, Process, Mandates, or
Precepts, well or evil executed, unto those that had authority to grant them,
and how they had been observed and obeyed; which was the only reason, end and
design, of such retornes and attempts to be given thereof.

In the yearly nomination and appointment of Sheriffs of the Counties of
England and Wales, the Judges of the several Circuits do elect six whom they
think fit to be Sheriffs for every County, which upon Consideration had by the
Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the great seal of England, Lord Treasurer,
diverse of the Lords of the Kings Privy-Counsell, some Officers of his
Household, and the aforesaid Justices, being reduced to three for every County,
their names are to be presented to the King, who Chooses One for every County,
who is afterward Sworn and made Sheriffs by his Letters Patent (the former
being discharged) and not seldom upon better Information given to the King,
altered, and another named by him, the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and the
Mayor of Oxford being elected, according to their Charters, are to be Yearly
presented and Sworn before his Barons of the Exchecquer, before they can
Execute or Intermeddle in their Offices, and a Sheriff has some hundred years
ago been amerced and in misericordia quia retornavit and elegit alios quam
milites in brevi de Assiza.

And with the same reason, and rule of Justice, it has been done in the undue
and Illegal Elections of some Members of the House of Commons in Parliament,
upon Complaint made, by remedies provided in the 36th year of Claus 36. E. 3.
m. 2. and 3. in dorso.
the Reign of King Edward the third, as may be evidenced by the view and
consideration of the Records ensuing in these words, viz: Rex Vicecomiti Lanc.
salutem, quia super Electione facta de militibus pro Communitate Com. praedict.
pro ultimo Parliamento nostro in Com. praedict. venientibus maxima alteratio
facta existit, nos ea de Causa volentes super electione praedicta plemius
certiorari tibi praecipimus quod habita in pleno Com. tuo super electione
praedict. Cum militibus and allis probis hominibus de Communitate dict. Com. de
Liberatione and Informatione diligentibus utrum viz. Edwardus Laurence and
Mathaeus de Risheton qui in brevi nostro de Parliamento praedicto tibi directo
retornati fuerunt pro militibus dicti Com. electi fuerint an alii, and si per
deliberationem and Informationem hujusmodi inveneris ipsos de Communi assensu
totius Com. pro militibus dicti Com. electos fuisse tunc habere facias eisdem
Edwardo and Matheo december and octo libras and duodecem Solid. pro expensis suis
veniendi ad Parliamentum praedict. ibidem morando, and ex inde ad propria
redeundo, viz. pro quadraginta and septem diebus utroque praedictorum Edwardi
and Laurentii Capiente per diem quatuor solidos, and si alii pro militibus
ejusdem Com. electi fuerint tunc nos de nominibus eorum sub sigillo tuo in
Cancellaria nostra reddas certiores hoc breve nobis remittens Test Rege Decimo
Septimo die Novembris.

per ipsum Regem.

But it seems that took no effect, for Mr Pryn in his Marginall note says,
that they made no retorn as they ought to have done (so early did the design of
a factious popularity to provide for themselves, begin to take root, by the
calling of an intended Elected part of the Common People of England into the
great Council thereof) as the Tenor of the Subjoyned Writ will manifest in the
form ensuing, viz. Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis Godfr. Foliambe and sociis
suis Custodibus pacis nostrae in Com. Lancastr. Salutem cum nuper pro eo quod
super Electionem (recitando usque redder et nobis Certiores) ac jam
intellexerimus quod praedicti Edwardus and Laurentius qui locum tenentes dict.
vic. existunt and retornum brevium nostrorum Com. praedict. faciunt breve
nostrum praedictum penes se retinent and executionem aliquam inde hactenus
facere non Curarunt, and nihilominus vadia illa indies levari faciant in nostri
deceptionem manifestam nos volentes hujusmodi deceptioni obviare vobis mandamus
quod prox. Sessione vestra vocatis Coram vobis militibus and allis probis
hominibus ejusdem Com. and aliis quos noveritis evocando diligentem
Informationem, and inquisitionem super praemissis capiatis and de eo quod in
hac part inveneritis nos in Cancellaria nostra sub Sigillis vestris aut
alicujus vestrum distinct and aperte sine dilatione reddatis Certiores hoc
breve nobis remittentes T. R. apud Westminster.

per ipsum Regem.

Et mandatum est vic. Lanc. quod levationi dictorum vadiorum Supersedeat
quousque aliud inde de Rege habuerit in mandatis T. ut supra.

per ipsum Regem.

Upon which Mr Pryn observes, that the King in that age, not the House of
Commons, examined and determined all Pryns 4 part Regist. of Parliamentary
Writs 259. 260. and 261.
disputable and undue Elections Complained of, and ordered that the Knights
whose elections were unduly made, should not receive their wages or expenses,
until the Legality of their elections were examined; and that the King may
cause the Elections to be examined, by special Writts to the Sheriffs or
Justices of the Peace, in his default, to Enquire and Certify the legality of
their elections by the Testimony of their Electors or Assenters, out of the
whole County, and until full Examination Supersede the Levying of their Wages;
and in his Plea for the House of Lords and Peers, says, Idem in his Plea for
the House of Lords 394. and 395.
that the Statute made in the 8th year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th, and
the 11th of King Henry the 6th upon the Petitions and Complaint of the Commons
in Parliament to the King and Lords, which Inflicted Penalties upon the
Sheriffs, for making undue Elections and retorns, which formerly were
Arbitrary, at the discretion of the King, and to be Tried (not by the Commons
alone without Oath upon Information as now) but by the Justices Assigned to
take Assizes, and that by enquest and due examination therein, if the Sheriff
be found Guilty, he shall forfeit one hundred pounds to the King; and the
Knights unduly returned, shall lose their Wages (not to be turned out, says Mr
Pryn, by a Committee for Privileges of the House of Commons) and that the
Statutes of 1. H. 5. ca. 1. 6. H. ca. 4. 8. H. 6. ca. 7. 22. H. 6. ca. 15.
touching the Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament, do not
alter the Law, or Empower the House of Commons to determine the Legality of any
Elections, but leave them as before to the King, by the advice of the Lords, to
redress, as these Law Books, viz. Dier 113. 168. Plowden 118. to 131. Old Book
of Entries 446. 447. have resolved, and are not to follow any late Arbitrary
Precedents, but the ancient usage and Law of our Parliaments, and solid reason,
which will not Justify those late Innovations or extravagancies; for when men
are, (says the Learned Sr Robort Filmer) Assembled by an humane Sir Robert
Filmers Patriarcha or the natural power of Kings. p. 60.
power, the authority that does assemble them, Can also limit and direct the
execution of that Power.

SECT. XX.
Of the small Numbers of Knights of the Shires and Burgesses, which were
Elected, and came in the Reign of King Edward the first, upon his aforesaid
Writs of Election; and how their Numbers now amounting unto very many more,
were after increased by the corruption of Sheriffs, and the ambition of such as
desired to be Elected.

FOr Mr. Pryn in his indefatigable and most exact searches of the Summons and
Elections of Members of the House of Commons in Parliament and the return of
the Sheriff thereupon (which he himself as well as others might have then
thought unnecessary and superfluous yet are now of great use for the discovery
of long hidden truths) has in all the Reigns of King Edward 1. Edward the 2.
Edward the 3. Richard 2. Henry 4. King H. 5. and 6. and Edward the 4th found no
Pryn's brevia Parliamentaria rediviva. 223. 224. 225. 2^6. (...). 8.
more then 170. Boroughs, Cities, and Ports either Summoned by Sheriffs or
their precepts or Writs to elect or return or actually electing, returning
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque ports to attend in
Parliament, that of those 170. Glastonbury in Somersetshire, Overton in
Hantshire, St Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Hoden and Richmond in Yorkshire had only
one precept issued unto them; Odiham 2 precepts, Alton and Basingstake in
Hantshire 4 precepts to elect and send Burgesses to Parliament, upon neither of
which they returned any Burgesses, as the Sheriffs returns of ballivi
libertatis nullum dederunt responsum, or nihil inde fecerunt will attest,
whereupon they never had any more precepts of that nature sent unto them before
the end of King Edward 4's Reign, Christchurch only excepted, which of late
Years has elected and returned Burgesses. So that in truth 20 of those 170.
Namely Newbury in Barkshire, Freminton, Modbury, South Molton in Devonshire,
Bromyard, Ledbury, Ros in Herefordshire, Dunster, Langeport, Monteacute, Stoke,
Cursey, Matchet, Ware in Somersetshire, Alesford in the County of Southamton,
Oreford in Suffolk, Gatton in Surrey, Alverton, Malton, and Pontefract in
Yorkshire, elected and returned Burgesses but once, for one single Parliament
and no more; Mere in Wiltshire, and Rippon in Yorkshire, upon two several
precepts made only one election.

Five more of those ancient Boroughs, as Lidford in Cornwall, Bradnesham,
Okehamtam in Devonshire, Andover in Hampshire, Woodstoke in Oxfordshire, and
that 3 of 5 Several Precepts the Sheriffs returned quod ballivi nullum
dederunt responsum; Farneham in Surrey, Grantham in Lincolnshire, and Beverley
in Yorkshire, upon five precepts did but twice elect during the Reigns of the
aforesaid Kings; and 4 more, to wit, Cheping-Norton, and Dodington in
Oxfordshire, Mulliborne port in Somersetshiee, and Coventry in Warwickshire,
made in all the times aforesaid but 3 elections.

Poole in Dorsetshire, Webley in Herefordshire, Witney in Oxfordshire, and
Aixbrugh in Somersetshire, upon 5 precepts had but 4 elections, and returns in
all those Reigns.

St Albans in Hartfordshire, Kingston upon Thames in Surrey, Which in the County
of Wigorn, and Heytesbury in Wiltshire, made in all that time but 5 returns and
elections of Burgesses.

Five others, viz. Honyton and Plymouth in Devonshire, Chard in Somersetshlre,
Seaford in Sussex, and Wotton Basset in Wiltshire, but 7. Preston in
Lancashire, Stamford in Lincolnshire, Hyndon and Westbury in Wiltshire, but 6.
Stortford in Hartfordshire, only 8. and Lancaster 13. during the Reigns of the
aforesaid Kings.

Some of them having long intervals and discontinuances, for Ashperton in
Devonshire had it is first election in 26. E. 1. and it is 2d not until 8. H. 5.
which made above 120. Years, though by the Knavery, Corruption, and arbitrary
power of Sheriffs, and the ambitious designs of some that desired to be elected
members of the House of Commons, and the long after Pryn's brevia Parliamentar.
rediviva. 226. 227. Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts tit. Parliament.
introducing of those of Wales, Cheshire, Durham and Newwark, the number of all
the Members of that honorable Assembly were in Mr Cromptons Time who lived and
wrote in the later end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but 441. since
increased to 500. or thereabouts.

During the Reign of King Edward the 1st there were but 70 Cities and Boroughs,
besides the Cinque Ports which elected and sent Citizens and Burgesses to
Parliament of which number 7 made only one election and return of Burgesses.

In the Reign of King E. 2. there were precepts issued by Sheriffs for 19
Boroughs, viz. Great Marlow in the County of Buck. Lescard and Lestithiel in
Cornwall, Bradneston in Devonshire, Melcombe and Weymouth in Dorsetshire,
Ravensey and Rippon in Com. Eborum, Stortford in Hartfordshire, Witney in Com.
Oxon, Axbrigge Chard in Somersetshire, Lichfield in Staffordshire, Kingston in
Surrey, Greenested, Midhurst in Sussex, Cricklade, Mere, and Old Sarum in
Wiltshire, which never elected or returned Burgesses before, and two precepts
issued out to other new boroughs, viz. Dunstable, Glastonbury, Aulton, and
Christchurch, which made no elections or returns thereon.

Under the long Reign of King Edward the 3d there were Writs or Sheriffs
precepts directed to 19 new boroughs, and elections made to serve in his
Parliaments or great Councels viz. Ely in Cambridgeshire for one great Council
only, Barnstable, Dartmouth with Hardennesse thereunto annexed, Fremington,
Modbury, Tavestock in Devonshire, Poole in Dorsetshire, Malden in Essex,
Bromyard, Ledbury, Ros in Herefordshire, Barkhamsted in Hertfordshire (Botolph
in Lincolnshire for two great Councels only) Dunster, Langport, Monteacute,
Stoke, Curcy, Were, in Somersetshire, and New Castle under line in
Staffordshire, besides precepts issued to Hodon and Richmond two new boroughs
in Yorkshire, who made no election or return thereupon; and says Mr Pryn,
neither of those ever sent Citizens or Burgesses to Parliaments or great
Councels before that King's Reign for ought he could find by Records or History.

And as for the Ports of Dover, Ro^ney, Sandwich, and Winchelsey in Kent,
Hastings, Hythe, and Rye in Sussex, there are no original Writs of Summons
found for the election of any of their Members during the Reigns of King E. 1.
or 2.

In the Reigns of King Richard the 2d, Henry the 4th and 5th, there were no
Writs or precepts to any new boroughs to send Burgesses to Parliament.

About the middle of the Reign of King Henry the 6th, there were only Writs and
precepts issued out for 5 new boroughs in 2 Counties to attend the King in
Parliament as Members in the House of Commons, namely, Gatton in Surrey,
Heytesbury, Hindon, Westbury, and Wooton Basset in Com. Wilts.

During the Reign of King Edward the 4th, there was only one new borough,
Grantham in Lincolnshire, who never sent any in the former Kings Reigns.

Since which, 14 new boroughs in Cornwall namely, Camilford, Castlelowe, Foway,
Graundpond, St Germans, St Ives, Kelington, St Marie's, Newport, St Michael,
Portlow, Prury, Saltash, Bosseney, and Tregonney with the boroughs of Aylesbury
and Buckingham, in the County of Bucks, Cockermouth in Cumberland, University
of Cambridge, Bearealston, in Devonshire, Corfe Castle in Dorsetshire, Harwich
in Essex, Alderburgh, Boroughbrigge, Knaresbrough, Thrusko, in Com. Eborum,
Cirencester, and Tewkesbury in com. Gloucester, Maidstone, and Quinborough in
Kent, Botolph in Lincolnshire, (as to sending Burgesses to Parliament)
Clitheroe, Liverpool, Wigan in Lancashire, Westminster in Middlesex (which
never sent one Burgess to Parliament, though many have been holden in it until
long after the Reign of King Edward the 4th.) Brackley, Higham-Ferrers,
Peterborough in Northamptonshire, East-Recford in Nottinghamshire, Chester,
Thetford in Norfolk, Barwick, Morpeth in Northumberland, Banbury, and the
Univesity of Oxford, in Oxfordshire, Haslemore in Surry, Tamworth in
Staffordshire, Bishops-castle, Ludlow, Wenlock in Shropshire, Minched in
Somersetshire, Christ-church, Lymington, Newport, Newtown, Peterfield,
Stockbride, Whitchurch, Yarmouth, St Edmondsbury, Eye, Sudbury in Suffolk,
Beaudly, Evesham in the County of Worcester, in all 64. Committing the Knights,
Cities, and Boroughs of Chester, and Wales, erected by Act of Parliament Annis
27. 36. and 38. H. 8.) are all new and for the most part (the Universities
excepted) very Mean, Poor, inconfiderable Boroughs set up by the returns and
corrupt practices of Sheriffs, and ambitious Gentleman, which will be
sufficiently evidenced by the Sheriffs frequent returns of nullum dederunt
responsum, Pryn's brevia Parliamentar. rediviva. 64. and 229. 265.
and non sunt aliae Civitates neque Burgi in balliva mea or in com. praedict
aut non curant mittere, says a Sheriff of Northumb. in 6. E. 2. or nulli
electi ratione belli in 8. E. 2. or as in Northumb. in the 10th Year of the
Reign of E. 3. or as in the 8th Year of the Reign of E. 2. when the Sheriff of
Northumb. returned quod omnes milites de balliva sua non sufficient ad
defensionem Marchiae; and to the town of Newcastle upon Tyne quod omnes
Burgenses villae praedicta non sufficient, ad defensionem villae; in the 1. E.
3. the Communitatas Com. Northumb. respondet quod ipsi per inimicos Scottae
adeo sunt distracti quod non habent unde Solvere expedsas duobus militibus
proficissuris ad tractatum and concilium apud Lincoln tenendum; and the
Bailiffs of Newcastle upon Tyne returned, quod ipsi tam enervantur circa salvam
custodiam villae praedictae quod neminem possunt de dicta villa carere. So
little were the former ambitions or designs of the Gentry or Common people of
the Counties or Shires to be Members of the House of Commons in Parliament as
Knights of the Shires or as Burgesses of Cities or Towns Corporate, from the
49th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d, unto the later end of the Reign of
King Henry the 5th, in the course or circle of time of about 280. Years.

But all those the Royal cares and condescensions of King Edward the 1st to
pacify a discontented part of his people and eradicate a deeply rooted
Commotion and Rebellion did too soon or quickly after the expiration of the
aforesaid 280. Years deviate and degenerate from the former intentions and
design of those his Writs of Summons.

SECT. XXI.
Who made themselves Electors for the choosing of Knights of the Shires to be
Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, after the 21st Year of the Reign
of King Edward the 1st, contrary to the Tenor of his aforesaid Writs of Summons
made in the 22d Year of his Reign for the Election of Knights of the Shire and
Burgesses, to come to the Parliaments and great Councels of several of our
Kings and Princes afterward.

FOr so very great was the power, command, and influence of the Nobility and
dignified Clergy, as they could from time to time, as the Winds and Tides do
usually agitate and blow upon the unruly waves of the Ocean, make them lacquey
after their good will and pleasure, and attend their ambitions and advantages,
which began but to peep out and c^awl in the later end of the Reign of King E.
the 2d, when Roger de Mortimer Earl of March was in a Parliament holden in the
Reign of King Edward 3. Accused of Treason, and accroaching to himself Royal
power by procuring certain Knights of the Shires attending in the House of
Commons in Parliament to give their consent to an aid to the King for To. Parl.
4. 5. 36. E. 3.
his Wars in Gascoigny, and the humors and interests of the Common people were
so governed and influenced by the grandeur of the English Nobility and
principal Clergy enticing them thereunto, more by their own respects and
desires to please and humor, then by any particular motive or impulse of their
own; as in an Election of Members for the House of Commons in Parliament in the
13th year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th the Archbishop of York, and Sundry
Earls, Barons, and Ladies being said to be Suitors in the County Court of York,
were by their Attorneys the sole Electors of the Knights of the Shire of that
County; namely by William Pryn's bre(...) Parliament^ria rediviva. 152. 153.
154.
Holgate Attorney for Ralph Earl of Westmorland; William de Killington for Lucy
Countess of Kent; William Hesham for the Lord Peter de Malo lacu, William de
Barton for William Lord Roos, Robert de Evedale for the Baron of Graistock;
William de Feston for Alexander de Metham; Chivaler, and Henry de Preston, for
Henry de Percy Chivaler (who was then a Baron) Earls and Barons in those times
being well contented to make use of that then no disparaging Title) Sectatorum
communium com. no other electors being then named in the Indentures betwixt the
Sheriff and the County of York upon that Election; and in the 2d Year of King
Henry the 5th with little variation, except for the persons for whom the
Electors were Attorneys; as namely in Yorkshire, William Mauleverer Attorney
for Henry Archbishop of York, William Feutores for Ralph Earl of Westmorland,
William Archer for John Earl- Marshal, William Rillington for Henry le Scrop
Chivaler, Domino de Masham, William Heshum for Peter de Malo lacu, William
Postham for Alexander de Metham Chivaler, William Housam for Robert Roos,
Robert Barry for Margaret the Wife of Henry Vavasour Chivaler, and Robert
Davinson Attorney for Henry Percy sectatorum communium pro com. Eborum. (No
other suitors or electors being in that Election and Sheriffs Indenture then
mentioned) the like upon Writs for Election of Knights issued to the Sheriffs
of Yorkshire, were found by Indentures hereupon.

And in Annis 8. and 9. H. 5. And in 1. 2. 3. 5. and 7. Henry 6. the Attorneys
only of Nobles, Barons, Lords, Ladies, and Knights were made the suitors who
made the election of the Knights of Yorkshire, and sealed the Indentures until
25. of King Henry 6. when that undue course and way ceased, and the Election
and Indentures were made by the Freeholders; and being Elected were not at that
instant enabled by them, or at any time after, to act or do any thing otherwise
then according to the Intent, Tenor and Purport of their said Writs of
Elections, until some farther Requisites were to be by them performed and
done, in order to the Trusts reposed in them by their King and Fellow Subjects.

SECT. XXII.
Of the Actions and other Requisites by the Law to be done by those that are or
shall be Elected Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, to attend our King in their
great Counsels or Parliaments, precedent and preparatory to their admission
therein.

FOr the Sheriffs and people of the Counties were at the first so punctual in
the due performance of their Kings aforesaid Writs and Mandates, in all and
every the clauses and particnlars thereof, and so careful in their Elections
of such as were to be trusted by and for them, in affairs of so high and more
then ordinary concernment, as the States wellbeing, and defense of the King,
the Church, the Kingdom, Themselves and their Posterities, not only for their
personal appearance, but performance of the trust reposed in them, and not to
do less or more, too short or beyond the bounds of their Commissions or
Authority granted by the King, as they that were elected were constrained at
the same time to give pledges and main-pernors, and sometimes four securities,
but never under two, that they should not omit what was commanded by the Tenor
of those Writs; insomuch as in the 30th Year of the Reign of King Edward the
first, John de Chetwood and William de Samtresden being elected Knights Pryn's
brevia Parliamentarrediviva. 28. and 143.
of the Shire for the County of Buckingham, gave four manucaptors, and the like
did Robert de Hoo, and Roger de Brien elected Knights of the Shire in the same
Year for the County of Bedford, and in that Year Andrew Trolesks and Hugh de
Ferrers Elected Knights of the Shire for the County of Devon, were districti
per terras and catalla quia Pleg. invenire noluerunt.

And in Anno 8. E. 2. a Sheriff of Gloucester (Bristow at that time being
neither City or County) made his return on the dorse of the Writ of Summons,
that the Custos libertatis Pryn's brevia Parliamentar. 315.
villae Bristol respond. quod elegi fec. Robertum Wildemersh and Thomam
L'Espicer ad essend. ad Parliamentum apud Westminster, in Octavis Sancti
Hillarii qui manucaptores ad essendi ad diem and locum praedictos invenire
recusarunt per quod propter eorum vim, malitiam, and resistentiam and
executione istius mandati ulterius facienda intromittere non potuit.

And a Writ appears in that Year to have been returned for the County of
Midd. that William de Brooks and Richard le Rous milites electi fuerunt per
communitatem Comitatus praedict. essendi coram concilio Domini Regis ad diem
and locum in brevi content. qui potestatem habent ad faciend. quod de eodem
concilio Secundum brevis tenorem ordinabitur, after which followed the names of
their Manucaptors or sureties, and was a caution in those times believed to be
so necessary as in the 15th Year of the Reign of King Edward 2d, when Thomas
Gamel one of the Citizens of Lincoln being returned with 2 manucaptors, a
burgess for the Parliament, and not vouchsafing to attend the Mayor and
Commonalty of Lincoln, they elected Alain de Hodolston in his place, and
desired Sr William Ermyn then Keeper of the Great Seal, that he being so
elected by them, might be received with the other Citizen first elected with
Gamel as their Busgess for that Parliament; and Pryn's brevia Parliament^^.
rediviva. 227. 305.
sent that their Certificate and return under their City-Seal affixed to the
Writ of Election, that very ancient and necessary usage of giving Manucaptors
upon Parliamentary Elections being used in all the returns of the Writs of
Election, for the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses from the 21st
Year of the Reign of King E. 1. during the residue of his Reign (for before no
Manucaptors or pledges for Knights or Burgesses elected to come to Parliament
were given in for those Knights that were elected in Anno 49. H 3. for the
County of York) and from thence during the Reign of King E. 2. E. 3. R. 2. H.
4. and 5. and thence until after the 33. of King Henry 6. and had after their
Elections actual and formal Indentures, or instruments of procuration
mutually Signed and Sealed by the Sheriff and the Electors or Assentors and
Elected, which were with the Writs of Election returned and filed amongst the
records of the King in his Chancery, having their procurations or powers
inserted in the perclose of the indenture made betwixt the Sheriff and the
Electors (some being named instead of many) Dantes and Concedentes eisdem (the
parties Elected) plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate
praedict. ad faciend. Pryn's brevia parl. rediviva.
and consentiend. iis quae tunc and ibidem de communi concilio regni Domini
Regis, favente Domino, ordinari contigerint super negotiis in dicto brevi
specificat, and notwithstanding their election and one part of the Indenture
with the procuration therein returned with the Writ to the King in his Chancery
were not accounted members of the House of Commons in Parliament until their
admittance by the Kings Allowance and Authority as it was upon a great debate
adjudged in the 35 Elizabeth in the House of Commons in Parliament in the Case
of Fits-Herbert, in which the two eminent Lawyers Anderson and Coke afterward
successively Lord Chief Justices of the Court of Common Pleas were as Members
personally present, and in a Parliament holden in the 18 Year of the Reign of
King Edward 3. the King was angry that the Convocation of the Clergy appeared
not, and charged the To. parl. 18. E. 3.
Archbishop of Canterbury to punish them for their defaults, and said he would
do the like to the Parliament; In the 5 year of the Reign of King Richard 2.
Members Elected were by an Act of Parliament to appear upon Summons or be 5. R.
2. ca. 4.
amerced or otherwise punished according as of old times has been used to be
done in the said case, unless they may reasonably and honestly excuse them to
the King, and in 1st and 2d Philip and Mary 39 of the Members of the House of
Commons says Sr Edward Coke, (whereof Mr Edmond Plowdon Cokes 4th institutes.
the famous Lawyer was one, who pleaded that he was continually present at that
Parliament, and traversed that he did not from thence depart in contempt of the
King and Queen, and of the said Court) had an Information exhibited against
them by the aforesaid King and Queen for not appearing in Parliament according
as they were Summoned, cannot be admitted in the House of Commons in Parliament
before they shall have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before the
Lord Steward of the King's Household, or his Deputy under a forfeiture or
penalty, nor depart from the Parliament without License, and when admitted are
Petitioners 6. H. 8. ca. 16.
for License to choose and present their Speaker to the King who in their
behalf prays to be allowed access to his Majesty, 1. El. 1. ca. 5. El. 1. 3.
Jac.
freedom of speech and from Arrest of themselves and their menial servants
during the time of their attendance, have Wages allowed them by the King to be
paid by their Commonalties in eundo, morando, and redeundo according to longer
or shorter distances or abode, their Speaker being by the King also allowed
Five Pounds per diem besides other perquisites appertaining to his place, are
but Petitioners, have To. parl. 4. E. 3. and passim in regnis subsequentium
regum 40. E. 3. and Essings manner of holding Parliaments. 213.
receivers and tryers of their petitions assigned by the King, or by the Lord
Chancelour de per liu; and days were seldom prefixed and limited for exhibiting
of them which were many times rejected with a non est petitio Parliamenti
endorsed, for that it was more proper for inferior Courts and sometimes for
their have or Importance of the King's Affairs were ordered to be answered in
Chancery, are no Court of Judicature or Record, Pryns animadversions upou
Cokes. 4 institutes tst. Parliament.
were not accustomed to draw or frame Acts of Parliament which they assent
unto, but leave them to be formed by the Judges and the King's learned Council
at Law and not seldom after Parliaments ended, most of the former Acts of
Parliament being drawn and framed upon petitions or specifying to be at the
request of the Lords and Commons, or of the Commons only, or that the King
Willed, Commanded, Prohibited, Provided or Ordained; can make no proxies, and
Ms. of Mr. Noy.
are but a grand enquest of the Kingdom; are not Authorized to give or
administer any Oath, never did or are to do it, but Cokes 4(...) institutes.
are to send such Witnesses as are to be sworn to take their Oaths in the House
of Peers, and the Members of the House of Commons or their Speaker Jointly or
severally cannot administer an Oath unto any of their fellow Members or any of
the Commons whom they would represent, for that would be to administer it unto
themselves which Juries and men Impanelled in Enquests are never permitted to
do but are to receive their Oaths from a Superior Authority, and none but the
King or such as have been Commissionated by him are empowered to give Oaths,
which has allways put a necessity upon the House of Commons when any Witnesses
are to be examined before them to produce and send them first to be sworn and
take their Oaths in the House of Lords; and they cannot adjourn or prorogue
without the King's special order and command, nor were ever Summoned by
themselves legally to come to Parliament without the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, but as to their Meeting and Continuance were to follow their King in
his House of Lords, as the Moon and the Stars (those Common people of the Sky)
do the Sun; could not punish heretofore an offense or delinquency against
themselves or any of their Members without an Order first obtained from the
King or his Lord Chancellor; have sometimes Petitioned the Lords in Parliament
to intercede with the King to remit his displeasure conceived against them; in
the times of Henry the 4 few Petitions were directed to the King and his
Council, some were to the King alone, and some to the Lords alone, and some to
the Commons only, says Mr. Elsing; and if they were Petitions of Grace, the
Commons only wrote thereupon soit bail as Seigneurs Elsings ancient and modern
way of holding Parliaments in England. 22. 227. 233.
and per les a Roy, or soit per le a Roy, per les Seimurs and the other were
sent up to the Lords without any directions, and the Judges and the Kings
Learned Council in the Law prepared all answers to the Petitions of the
Commons; all Petitions directed to the King were to be considered by the Judges
and his Council at Law, and by them prepared for the Lords, if need were by the
Commons, who sometimes Petitioned the King that some of the Lords might be sent
to confert with them; at all their conferences with them do stand uncovered,
whilst the Lords dosit covered, and when any of their Members are by the King's
grace and favor created Barons or Earls and called into the House of Peers,
are to receive others to be Elected in their places, cannot of or by themselves
Pryn's brevia parl. rediviva. 240.
redress undue Elections, could not go home without license of the King, nor
have their Wages levied and paid by their countries without his Order and Writs.

And being with those requisites and precautions come unto the Parliament to do
and consent unto such things as by the King and the Lords Spiritual and
temporal should be in Parliament ordained, did not Certainly sit in one Room,
Chamber, or Place together.

But whither they did sit in one and the same house or Place, or not, will but
little contribute to the extravagant fancies of our now State-Moulders.

SECT. XXIII.
That the Members of the House of Commons being Elected and come to the
Parliament as aforesaid did not by Virtue of those Writs of Election sit
together with the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in one and the
same room or place; and that if any such thing were as it never was or is
likely to be proved, it cannot conclude or infer that they were or are
cor-ordinate or had or have an equal power in their Suffrages and decisions.

WHich they may dream of from the beginning of the World unto the End thereof
and never be able to Evidence, and if it had been so, will be such an ill
Shaped argument that the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament are
thereby to be believed to be coordinate with the King and House of Peers, or
superior unto either of them as any one that was but within a little of a
madman would be ashamed to propound or put it to the decision of the
over-circumspect inhabitants of Gotham.

For who but such disciples or proselites can find the way to imagine or
believe that when King William Rufus dined at his Marble table where the Court
of King's-hencb now sits in his large Westminster Hall, and his Nobility and
many of his Court attendants sat at their meat at their many lower table in the
same hall, could persuade themselves or others to suppose an equality in
degrees and Power, or that the King because they did all sit but in one room or
House was no more then coordinate with them.

For in the grand feasts of the Inns of Courts, Houses, Colleges, or Societies,
for the study of our Law, the Judges, Benchers, Barristers, and utter
Barristers are not so ill used as to be in danger of any the like argument,
because one Common hall or room contained them all; and the honor of the King
or his Privy Council are not diminished because there are greater or lesser
degrees amongst them sitting in one and the same Council Chamber. Howsoever if
they will keep their words and promise to acquiesce in proofs that are negative
to what they are so willing to affirm, and should be sufficient to convince
their insane conclusions, they need not want them when Mr Pryn and many good
Anthors will give us large and abundant evidences to manifest the errors of
such their fond and reasonless assertions.

For in the very many Councels or Parliaments of our Kings reckoned by Mr Pryn
from Anno Domini 673. unto the 1st Year of King John there were no Knights,
Citizens, or Burgesses Pryn's 1 part of Historical Collections of the ancient
Parliament of England. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.
21. 22. 23. 24.
for the Commons, as he positively and confidently affirmed either Summoned
Elected to those many Counsels or Parliaments, or present at any of them, and
being not there at all there needs not to have been any question or controversy
whether they Sat in one House or Room together.

And when King John in the 17th Year of his Reign at the Meeting and Rebellious
Convention at Running-Mede of some of his unruly Baronage (which some of the
Liberty Coyners would imagine to be a Parliament) where those Barons were in
the head of a mighty Army of their own Party, and the King had but a very few
unarmed attendants with him; Matthew Paris says, they did in that conference or
Mat. Paris.
treaty for a Peace seorsim considere, and notwithstanding that Sr Edward Coke
has without any good Warrant averred that the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Sat together, and that the surest mark of the division of both Houses, was
when the House of Commons had at the first a continual Speaker which he
mistakenly refers to To. Parl. 50. E. 3. m. 8. wherein a Loyal Learned
Gentleman hath^ against his will by misinformation Mr Dryden in the Vindication
of his Parallel betwixt the French Holy League and the Eng^. League and
Covenant. F. 13.
been led into an Error that our three Estates the King excepted (as they have
been sometimes and but sometimes called in our Records) State together, and
that our Records bear Witness that they according to the French custom have
sat in one (House or Room) that is to say the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
within the Barrand the Commons without, for Mr Pryn in his Animadversions upon
that and other of his Errors, says, that the King's Writs to Summon Pryns
animadversions upon the 4th instit. tit. Parliament. 9. and 10.
the Prelates and Peers interesse nobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus, and Proceribus Regni sui (did not intend the Commons, Knights, or
Burgesses,) tractaturi vestrumque concilium impensuri neither did in all
probability direct or intend that the Commons should join or sit with them as
both the Writs and practice have ever since evidenced, and that all that that
Roll of 50. E. 3. does import, is but that the Commons came to the Lords House
and had sometimes conference with them, but that they sat or debated together
is no way proved, but contsadicted by many Parliament Rolls as Parl. 5. E. 3.
Nu. 5. compared with Nu. 6. E. 3. Si aleront mesme les Praelats and Procurators
de Clergy par eux mesmes and les ditz Counties, Barons, and Grauntz par eux
mesmes whose report being drawn up and then read before the King and les
Prelatz Chivalers de Counties and les gentz des Commun furent pleysantz a eux
touz and par nostre Seigneur le Roy, Prelatz, Countes, Barons, and autres
Grauntz and auxuit par les Chivalers des Countes and Gentz des Commun furent
pleinement assentuz and accordez at a Parliament in the 6th Year of the said
King he requiring the advice of his Parliament touching the French affairs and
his voyage thither, they treated and deliberated C'est assavoir les Prelatz par
eux mesmes and les ditz Countes, Barons, and autres grauntz par eux mesmes and
auxuit les Chivalers des Countes par eux mesmes, and then gave their advice so
in the Parliament reassembled at York in the Utas of St Hillary, in the same
Year the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and great men by themselves et les Chevalers
des Countes and Gentz des communs par eux mesmes treated of the business
propounded unto them; and in the Parliament holden at York the Friday before St
Michael in the same Year, as q'eux Prelatz ove le Clergy par eux mesmes and
les Counties and Barons par eux mesmes Chivalers and Gentz des Countes and
Gentz de la commun par eux mesmes, en treteront and imparterent temps 4.
Vendredi prochein suont, and mesmes le Vendredi en plein Parliament les Prelatz
par eux mesmes les Countes, and Barons par eux mesmes, and les Chivalers des
Countes par eux mesmes, and puis toutz en commun responderont; and the like we
read of the Prelates, Earls, Barons and great men eux mesmes Chivalers and Gentz
des Countes of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses and Commons separate
consultations by themselves, and their several answers to the Articles and
businesses propounded to them in the Parliaments of 13. E. 3. N. 6. 10. 11.
part 2. N. 5. to 9. 14. E. 3. N. 6. 11. 17. E. 3. N. 9. 10. 11. 55. 58. To.
Parl. 20. E. 3. N. 10. 11. To. Parl. 25. E. 3. N. 6. 7. To. Parl. 28. E. 3. N.
55. 56. To. Parl. 36. E. 3. N. 6. 7. To. Parl. 40. E. 3. N. 8. To. Parl. 42. E.
3. N. 7. To. Parl. 47. E. 3. N. 6. and To. Parl. 50. and 51. when the Commons
had a Speaker and departed to their accustomed place in the Chapter House of
the Abbey of Westminster.

And ^aith Sr William Dugdale at the Parliament holden at Gloucester in Anno
Domini 1378. in the Reign of King Richard the 2d, in refectorio de armorum
legibus tractabatur aulae autem hospitium communi Parliamento erat deputata.

Porro in camera hospitii, quae camera Regis propter ejus pulchritudinem Chron.
Abb. Sci. Petri. Glouc. 115. in bib. Cotton. 148.
antiquitus vocata est concilium secretum inter Magnates versabatur ac in domo
capitulari concilium commune.

In the said Kings Reign the Knights and Burgesses were called by name in
presence of the King.

In the great alterations betwixt the Lords and Commons and King Henry the 4th
in the 9th Year of his Reign, and a pacification and endeavor to reconcile the
Lords and Commons, To. parl. 9. H. 4. m. 8. n 21.
the King sent unto the Commons to come before him and the Lords.

In a Parliament holden the 13th year of his Reign the Commons of Parliament
were called at the door of the painted To. parl. 13. H. 4. m. 1. and Pryn in
his 4 part of the abridgment of Parl. Waits. 574.
Chamber in the Kings Palace of Westminster, and came, which shows that they
did not usually sit there.

In the 33. of King Henry the 8. The Duke of Suffolk then Lord Steward
commanded the Clerk of the Parliament to Elsings ancient and modern way of
holding Parliaments in England. 74.
call the Names of the House of Commons, unto which every one answered, being
all in the upper house, below the Bar, and then the King came.

Nor was or is it likely to be within the verge or neighborhood of any truth
or reason, that such an inferior sort of men as some citizens and Burgesses to
be elected out of so many Citys and Boroughs, as those enforced writs of
Elections in Anno 49. H. 3. Designed, when the Nobility, and Gentry, and the
Laws of those times, not only held but believed it to be a disparagement to a
whole Kindred to Marry with the Daughters of Burgesses, who might be understood
to be either Littletons Tenures.
their Tenants, or Dependents, should presume or be allowed to Sit in one and
the same Chamber, room, or place with their King, sitting in his throne or
chair of estate, encompassed with his more noble and greatest council, the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, the Peers in Parliament, where none but the
Peers themselves and their Assistants, are permitted to sit, and do then also
sit uncovered, when the civil and Caesarian Laws, and the Laws, and reasonable
Customs of Sir John Fernes glory of generosity. 77. 78. 79.
nations, do so distinguish betwixt the noble and ignoble, as if a Gentleman be
present, the ignoble or common persons shall arise from their seats, and give
diligent heed when he speaks; and it is a peculiar honor due unto gentry to sit
upon benches or seats, and those who are otherwise, are not to take the right
hand of them, or the chiefest seats in the company, or to sit next the Judge
before them, are not to be so much valued in their testimonies; and more credit
ought to be given to the Oaths of two Gentlemen produced as witnesses, then to
a multitude of the vulgar or ignoble persons, and though many and great
privileges are and have been in the civil Laws given and allowed to the
Honorable Order of Knighthood, and that our Kings and common laws have given
unto Idem ib. 216. 217.
them great respects and privileges, which are and have been Claudius Ctareus
de militibus.
to these our dreggy and worst of times enjoyed, yet it can be no disparagement
to that ever to be esteemed Order and Degree, to have it affirmed and believed,
that it has been from the 21th year of the Reign of King Edward the 1st. to
this our present century, and scarcely slipped out of the memories of aged men,
no unusual thing that many of the Knights of the shires and Burgesses, elected
to be members of the house of Commons, have been the Secretaries, Stewards,
Feodaries, or domestic Servants, Reteyners, Tenants by Knights-service or
Petit Serjeanty, Castle-guard, or managers of some part of the Lands and
Estates of the Nobility and great men of the Kingdom.

And as to that which some that are unwilling to Submit to the powers of truth
and right reason, will be ready to object, Elsing's ancient and modern way of
holding Parliaments in England. 84. and 85.
that in the 3. year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, a Committee of the
Lords have come into the House of Commons to confer with them, and probably,
says Mr Elsing, might during the time of that Conference sit with them, yet it
was but pro hac vice and not constantly or at any other time.

And when King James in the 7th year of his Reign was pleased to order the
Lords and Commons to sit in the Court of Requests, the Lords on the right hand
by themselves, and the Commons on the left, they did then sit distinctly as out
of their separate houses to be Spectators of the creation of Prince Henry to be
Prince of Wales, and could be no more an argument for those contrivers who are
enforced to pick up any thing that they can imagine may be for their purpose,
then that of the fatal over-eager prosecution of the late Earl of Strafford at
the suit and instance of the house of commons upon their unlucky bill of
Attainder in Westminster Hall, whether his late Majesty (afterward murdered
and martyred) had from their separate and distinct houses for that only
business, dislocated and transferred them.

SECT. XXIV.
What the clause in the Writs for the Election of Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses to come unto the Parliament, ad faciendum and consentiendum, do
properly signify, and were intended by the said Writs. Of Election to be
Members of the House of Commons in Parliament.

FOr Assensum dare est probari l. 2. c. de relation. Consensus denotat
aequalitates sententiarum, cogitationis and voluntatis.

And facere duplici modo accipitur, aut pro nudo facto, aut eo quod effectum
juris post se relinquit, si nudum est factum, nihil aliud significat quam
corporalem effectionem, veluti fossam fodere, Romam ire etc. Quando autem
effectum juris post se relinquit, omnemomnino faciendi causam complectitur,
dandi, solvendi, numerandi, judicandi, l. verbum 218, F. de verb. sign. item
reddendi l. 175. eodem tit. and restituendi quo intellectu pro gerere and
reddere accipitur and pro eo quod est tradere l. verbum 54. F. de verb. elig.
l. extat F. quod me Cod. ad l. faciend. de verb. sig. Hinc facere posse vel non
posse in jure Civili pro Solvendo esse vel non esse sect. pend. de act. 3. de
constit. per l. 14. sect. 1. and posse F. de re.

Consentire est in unam Sententiam concurrere l. 1. F. conventionis. F. de
pactis sic accipitur in l. consensu F. de action. and oblig. consentire videtur
qui praesens non contradicit l. 7. in fine Gothofred ad l. 2. in prin. F.
consentit item qui non repugnat l. 12. de spons. consentire dicitur cum duorum
voluntates in unam concurrunt utroque approbante and sciente, and consensus
proprie non dicitur nisi qui verbis expressus est l. 1. sect. voluntatem. Non
qui cogitat aut loquitur proprie dicitur facere, sed agere, Cumtamen quicquid
fiat etiam agi dicitur.

And it neither is or ever was intended that the Commons Assembled in
Parliament were to ordain, but to consent unto and obey such things, as their
King and Sovereign by the Council and Advice of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal should ordain.

And therefore they will be foully mistaken, and run over head and ears into
the grossest of errors, if they shall suffer themselves to be Seduced into a
groundless opinion that they can, and are to advise the King in the making or
repealing of Laws, as the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are, or that they are
to consider or advise with their Sovereigns, or have as great an interest or
charge incumbent upon them in the weal public, and that the giving their
assent is to be as a causa efficiens sine qua non.

For if they will take the pains to consult our Old Historians and the Grants
and Charters of our former Kings and Princes or great men, and the
subscriptions thereunto, they will find the assent of all the subscribers, but
the Donors, to signify no more then approbations, or testimonies of witnesses,
of which Ingulphus, Eadmerus, with Mr. Seldens annotations thereupon, and his
tittles of honors, Matthew Paris, and Sr William Dugdales Monasticons will
afford us plentiful proofs and examples, and it will be beyond the reach of
credulity it self that all or any of such subscribers, except the Donors, had
any proper or just interest of their own thereunto either to promote or hinder
it. As in that Charter made by Witlafius King of the Mercians in Praesentia
Dominorum Ingulphi historia 486. 487. 488.
suorum Egberti Regis West-Saxoniae and Athel(...)ulphi filii ejus coram
Pontificibus, and proceribus majoribus totius Angliae in Civitate Londonia, ubi
omnes congregati sumus pro concilio capiendo contra Danicos piratas littora
Angliae assidue infestantes signo sanctae crucis confirmavit; or in that in
Anno Domini 833, the grant of great quantities of Lands to the Abbey of Croyland
attested by Celnothus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis consului. Ego Euboldus
Archiepiscopus Eboracensis consignavi. Ego Osmundus Episcopus Londinensis
collaudavi. Ego Helmstanus Episcopus Wintoniensis assensum praebui. Ego
Herewicus Episcopus Lichfieldensis consensi. Ego Cedda Episcopus Herefordensis
aspiravi. Ego Adelstanus Shireburnensis Episcopus procuravi. Ego Humbrithus
Helmari Episcopus probavi. Ego Wilredus Dommocensis Episcopus annui. Ego
Herferdus Wigornensis Episcopus gratum habui. Ego Godwinus Roffen Episcopus
favi. Ego Hebba Abbas de Medel Hamsted ratificavi. Ego Ambertus Abbas Ripadii
interfui. Kincuinus Abbas de Bardeine astiti. Ego Egbertus Rex West-Saxoniae
concessi. Ego Adelwulphus filius Regis West-Saxoniae consensum dedi. Ego
Wulhardus dux affui. Ego Athelstanus dux audivi. Ego Herenbrithus dux
acceptavi. Ego Swithinus Presbiter Regis Egberti praesens fui. Ego Rosa scriba
Regis Withlas^i manu mea Chirographum istud scripsi.

And King Edgar in his Charter and confirmation to the Church of Glastenbury,
using the Title of Ego Edgar divina Dugdales Monasticon, Tom. 1. 16.
dispositione Rex Anglorum caeterarumque gentium in circuitu persistentium
Gubernator, and Rector, viz. Dunstano Dorobernensi and Oswaldo Archiepiscopis
adhortantibus, consentiente etiam and annuente Brithelmo Episcopo Fontanensi,
caeterisque Episcopis, Abbatibus and Prioribus cum sigillo sanctae Crucis
confirmavit, Ealfgina ejusdem Regis matter consensit; Ego Kennadius Rex Albaniae
adquievi; followed by the consent of diverse Abbots, Dukes, and Servants of King
Edgar, communi concilio Optimatum suorum in the 12th year of his Reign.

And the same King founding a College or Abbey near unto Winchester Church had
the consent or approbation of Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury with a
corroboravi of Edmond and Edward Clitones or sons of that King then under age,
of Alfthryth the Queen with a Crucem impressi, of Eadgifu the Kings grandmother
with a Consolidavi, of Oscytil Archbishop of York with a confirmavi, of the
Bishop of Winchester with a Benedixi, the Bishop of London with a Consolidavi,
Osulf Bishop Confirmavi, Oswold Bishop Consignavi, Alfwold Bishop Consolidavi,
Byzethtlen Bishop confirmavi, Alfetan Bishop consolidavi, Eadelm Bishop
Confirmavi, Athulf Bishop consignavi, Wensige Bishop confirmavi, Aescwig Abbot
consolidavi, Osgar Abbot consignavi, the confirmation of two other Abbots and
the newly instituted Abbot of the foundation of Alfhere Duke followed by 5
Dukes more and 8 ministri or Thanes of the King, who as Mr Seldom in his
comment Seldeni notae and Spicilegium ad E(...) 155. and 160. Mat. Paris
addocta^ent. 241. Seldens tit. Honor. 689. and 690.
thereupon notes, nempe plerumque ut Regius Cliens aut minister Aulicus fundum
eo nomini possidebat, those ages believing that consentientes et facientes pari
constringuntur poena, in the hindering or not performance thereof, as in that
grant of Aethelred Anglorum Bas^leus of land to the Abbey of St Albans in the
year of our Lord 996. said to be assented unto and confirmed by the Queen, 10
Bishops, 8 Abbots, 4 Dukes, 8 Thanes, or servants of the Kings who had no right
or intelest in those lands; and in an Original Charter of King Stephens, by
which he gave Sutton to the Church of Winchester in exchange for Morden, after
the subsigning of diverse Bishops and Earls and some others that were great
Officers, there were 17 that subscribed with the Title of Barons.

And when Aethelbald in the Year of the Incarnation of our Savior Christ, 730.
as his Charter mentions Domino donante Seldens title of Honor. 607.
Rex non solum Mercor sum, sed and omnium provinciarum quae generali nomine
Angli dicuntur, did grant Cumberhto 10. Cassatas terrae, cui ab antiquis nomen
est indicum Husmerat, juxta fluvium ^tur, subscribed with Ego Aethelbald Rex
Britaniae propriam donationem confirmavi, subscripsi, Ego Unor Episcopus
consensi, and subscripsi; Ego Unilfridus Episcopus (jubente Aethelbaldo Rege)
subscripsi; Ego Aethelric subre gulus, atque Comes Gloriosissimi principis
Aethelbald, huic donationi consensi and subscripsi; Ego Ibrorsi magnus Abbatis
consensi and subscripsi; Ego Heardberht frater (atque dux) praefati Regis
consensi and subscripsi; Ego Ebbella consensum accommodans subscripsi; Ego
Onec. Comes subscripsi; Ego Oba consensi and subscripsi; Ego Sigibrid consensi
and subscripsi; Ego Bercot consensi and subscripsi; Ego Ealdoult consensi and
subscripsi; Ego Caila consensi and subscripsi; Ego Pedo consensi and subscripsi.

And the mere consent of a Tenant to his Landlords or Cokes 1. part instit ca.
10. tit. Attornment.
Lords grant by Attornment does not increase or enlarge his former estate, but
is only a consent and agreement unto that grant or as an obliging taking notice
thereof: And where an Archdeacon, Dean and Chapter are Summoned to Parliament
act tractandum, they neither did, do, or can claim any other power beyond their
obedience to what should be ordained by their Superiors.

The choice or Election of a Verdurer in a Forest by the Kings Writ, does not
make those that did it, the owners thereof; and the Election of a Coroner by
the like Authority to collect and take care of the Kings rights and profits,
did never yet truly and rationally signify, that the Electors were the Masters
of them; neither does the assent of the Freeholders in a Court Baron or Leet,
divest the Lord of the Manor or Court Leet of any part of his Right, Propriety,
or Jurisdiction therein.

For to assent in the aforesaid enforced Statute de Tallagio non concedendo,
without the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commons of England, viz.
That Tallage or Aid To. and 27. E. 1. Walsingham Hist. Angl. E. (...).
shall be taken, or leavied by the King or his Heirs in his Realm without the
assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and
other Freemen of the Land; which Tallages were the prises (as Walsingham
mentions) taken de bobus vaccis, frumentis, bladis and coriis, (purveyance
taken against his preparation for Wars in Flanders) de quibus tota Communitas
Angliae gravabatur, but was never granted and intended, either in words express
or tacit, to give either unto the House of Peers or Commons Jointly, or
severally, a Negative Vote, or denial, or a Legislative power, but only to
free themselves from those Tallages and Prises complained of, which had such a
force and obligation upon them, and placed in them such a reverence and awful
respect to their King and head, as they did subordinately, not seldom, obtain
their Kings Leters-Patents Dugdales Baronage.
to license, or empower them, Talliare Tenentes suos de dominico suo.

And although the Commons in Parliament in the 2 year of the Reign of King
Henry the 5th had in the Advantage, To. Parl. 2. H. 5. m. 10. and Dr. Bradys
answer to Mr. Pettits Book that the House of Commons is an Essential part of
the Parliament.
which they suppose they might sasely adventure upon in a Time of Usurpation,
assumed and arrogated to themselves a Legislative coordinate power in the
making of Laws which other then Petitionary as Subjects to their King, none of
their predecessors before or since the 48th year of the Reign of King Henry the
3. ever had or obtained, until the last Horrid Rebellion in 1642. when they
would make heedless and headless ordinances instead of Statutes or Acts of
Parliament without their King, and would not forsake their madness until they
had Murdered that Blessed Martyr King Charles the I. yet the answer of King
Henry the 5th to that Petition and claim did so manifestly deny to give any
allowance thereunto as one of their greatest Champions and Underminers of our
Fundamental manarchick Laws could afford, without prejudice to his the grounded
cause to give posterity, that Kings answer thereunto but concealed it as a
conviction not to be devulged to their seduced Proselites.

For in the making of a Bishop, wherein the King is acknowledged by the laws of
England, truth and Right reason, to be the only true and proper cause of making
him a Bishop, and the impositions of hands by some of the Presbyters
Subservient unto him in his Diocese which was but Ceremonial and much less
then the ornaments of Aarons garments in his multifarious priestly Attire, and
could never make or ordain him a Bishop without the King, or give him Livery of
the Lands appertaining to the Bishopric; neither does any Law or right reason
of any Nation or the dictates of holy Writ enable any to believe that the
assent of the Woman or Wife in the holy Rites of Matrimony, could or should
ever entitle her unto a command and superiority over her Husband, or Annihilate
the Decree of Almighty God in the framing and forming of Man and Woman kind and
order of the subservient government of the World.

And it would be an Engine mathematical, or contrivance Worth the Enquiry or
finding out, if it could be possible, how to settle or make our most
excellently composed Monarchick Government useful in its Legislative power, if
the Houses of Peers and Commons in Parliament should disagree who but their
King and Superior can or could be able to reconcile their discording Votes,
Opinions or Resolves.

For our Records Histories Annals and National Memorialls have never yet found
or so much as mentioned any Laws Statutes or ordinances made in Parliament or
out, without le Roy le voult or his fiat or grant, or the grant and assent of
the Custos Regni or his Lieutenant Commissionated by him made by an House of
Peers or Commons or party of them as it were in Parliament, until the Devil in
a Religious habit taught it unto the last most horrid of incomparable
Rebellions, or that any House or number of Peers ever did or attempted to do
any such thing or matter without the Kings le Roy le veult fiat assent or
ratification, or that of his Castos Regni or Lieutenant Commissionated by him,
Except that which was done by Simon Montfort and his Rebel partners in Annis
48. 49. Henry the 3 against that distressed over powered Prince; when they had
taken and kept him a prisoner for more then a Year, and by fear and by force
issued out Writs in his name for an Original of an House of Commons in
Parliament, and owned and acted what they would have him, or constrained him to
do in his name, and as by his sole authority neither as Ego and Rex meus or
Senatus populus quo^ Anglicanus; neither can the Eyes of any far-seeing Linx or
Lynceus, or any Perspicuity, clearness or strength of sight, or the greatest of
industry search or scrutiny whatsoever of our records or Historians, or even of
our Neighbor nations, find or make any but Fools or Knaves or Criminals of the
highest nature believe, that any Law was ever made in England or concerning any
part of its dominions or teritories without their Kings regal Assent, Will or
Dictate, until that House of Commons made that most damnable ever to be
abhorred wicked Vote or Order, which they would have called a Law, for the
Murder of K. Charles the First, Two of the principal Contrivers whereof
Cromwell and Bradshaw have since had their Carcasses by a just Judgment of God
thrown and buried under Tyburn a Common place of Execution for Thieves and
Traitors, the worst of Criminals and Malefactors in mankind; but lest the over
have of the designs of those that would make a gain thereby should Gallop them
into Errors of no small dangers or mischiess to the public, they may be
pleased to take a little breath, pause and consider the true meaning
acceptance and extent of the words Constitute Convince and Colloquium, so
often and necessarily used in the Writs and Mandates of our Kings and Princes,
in summoning or calling a part of their subjects unto their great Councels or
Parliaments.

For Constituere convenire Significat and conveniendo obligat se ad id quod jam
debitum est, sic constituere pecuniam est jam ante debitam absque stipulatione
promittere Theophil. in Sect de constable. non solum pro alio sed pro seipso quis
recte constituat. Sect. de constitut. inst. de act. debitum autem oportet esse
quod instituitur, constituere possunt qui bona vel peculia habent cum libera
administratione Gad. l. 182. and de verb. and res Signif. constituimus nudo
consensu eoque sufficient ad actionem producendam Sect. 9. de just act;
constituere in dignitate, munere Briss. ex F. andC. constituere quaestionem est
decernere ut judicetur Constitutio in generali nomine dicitur jus quod a
principe conditur Theophil. Sect. F. de jur. nature.

Constitutum i. e. decretum, Constitutus dies, dies praefinitus Lex Lengobard
si talis causa fuerit quam deliberare minime possit paenas constituat and
distringat hominem illum de judiciaria sua i. e. diem constituit lib. 1. 2.
tit. 21.

And it was the duty and interest of the Commons Elected Du Fresne glossar.
Tom. 1.
to come unto Parliament to consent unto such things as the Lords of whom they
held their Lands, and stood in great awe of to gain their loves or avoid their
ill-wills should advise, which with their Oath of Allegiance to the King their
Superior Lord, and their Homage and Fealty done to the Mesne Lord, might
persuade them to be as unwilling to forfeit their Lands as they would be to
injure their Judgments and Consciences.

And though in some of the Writs for the wages of the Commons in Parliament
assembled, it has by the mistaking or inadvertency of Clerks been sometimes
said, that they came and tarried ad consulend. and tractand. yet the Tenor and
intention of the most part of the Writs of Election for the Commons have been
since the 21st Year of the Reign of King Edward the 1. as many as almost 20 for
every one in the purpose, Tenor and commanding part of it, no more then ad
faciend. and consentiend, and sometimes ad loquendum, and at another time ad
audiendum and faciendum, upon which and no other account they came thither, and
were returned as Subjects, not King-makers, Lawmakers, Governors, Disposers
or Deposers, and whilst they remained there, or in veniendo and redeundo, and
tarried at home, were nor could be no otherwise then Subjects.

And in that and no other manner certainly did King Edward the 3d understand
it, when in a Parliament holden by him at Westminster in the 45th Year of his
Reign there had been a great mistaking in the designed manner of levying an aid
granted to the King of 22 s. and 3 d. out of every parish To. Claus. 45. L. 3.
m. 22. Dorso 2. parts of Mr Pryns register of Parliament Writs and 4th part of
a brief Register of Parliament Writs 288. 289.
of England as has been before mentioned: Upon the examination whereof after
the Parliament was dismissed, the King and his Privy-Councel finding that that
rate upon every Parish would fall much short of the sum intended, and not
supply the public occasions, did by an extraordinary special Writ directed to
the Sheriff of every County, command them to Summon only one Knight, Citizen
and Burgess of each County, City and Borough serving in that Parliament,
especially named by the King in those Writs, to avoid trouble and expenses, to
appear at a Council to be holden at Winchester, to advise how to raise the
intended sum of Money, and directed the Sheriffs to enquire and return the
number and names of all the Parishes, Churches, Chappells, and Prebendaries
within their respective Counties, in the hands as well of Laymen as of Clerks
and Religious persons, who accordingly meeting in the said Council of Winton.
which continued sitting but 9 days, as the Writ for the Knight of Southamton
expresses, and for Sussex, Berks, Oxon, Wilts, only for 11 days, and to others
in like proportions, each of those Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, though
they received their expenses for going to, tarrying at and returning from the
Parliament at Westminster, which granted that aid to the King, and were
specially again Summoned to that Council to rectify their great
mis-calculation in the aid intended and number of Parishes, had their expenses
by the Kings Writs allowed unto them for that purpose for repairing to,
continuing at, and going home from that Council, and in that and no other
sense or manner did the Commons in that Parliament understand it.

Neither did the Commons in Parliament, (when upon the grant of the Lords in
Parliament in the 13th year of the Reign To. Parl. 13. E. 3.
of that King of the 10th Sheaf of all the corn in their demesnes, except that
of their bound Tenants, the 1^th fleece of wool, and the ^0th lamb of their own
Store to be paid in 2 years. They made answer that they knew and tendered the
Kings estate, and were ready to aid the same, only in this new device they
durst not agree without further conference with their Countries, and so praying
respite until another time they promised to travel their Countries) think
themselves to be Kings or Sovereigns over their Fellow Subjects, or that they
themselves were any other then Subjects.

And Sr Edward Coke having affirmed it to have been as it were a Law or Custom
of Parliament, has likewise informed us that in the 42 year of the Reign of
that King, it being declared to the Parliament by the Archbishop of Cokes 4.
part institutes 14. To. Parl. 43. E. 3. (...). 7.
Canterbury, that in a Treaty between the Kings Council and David le Bruce of
Scotland, the last offer of the said David was, that he was willing to have (so
as he might freely enjoy to him in fee) the whole Realm of Scotland without any
subjection, or any other thing which might be accounted a perpetual charge,
concerning which the Lords and Commons being willed to give their advice made
several answers, that they could not assent to any such peace or any thing in
Parliament that tends to the Disherison of the King and his Crown whereunto
they were Sworn.

For that which in all governments begot the frequency of the use of the word,
assent, more especially with many of our Kings and Princes in their Laws,
rescripts, Charters and Edicts, proceeding from a design and desire only of
complacency to win, engage and continue the love and affections of their
Subjects, and persuade them to a more willing obedience and better liking of
what they had before given their assent unto, in the framing or contrivance of
any Laws, orders, or reglements, which might produce a custom not easily to be
abandoned or forsaken.

There being no greater ties or obligations imaginable upon mankind next to the
fear and obedience to the divine Laws, then Interest, Self-preservation, and
public good, and the dangers and mischiefs, which might and too often do ensue
by the neglect of any or all of them.

Or if the Commons Writs to attend in Parliament or their Sovereigns great
Counsels ad faciendum and consentiendum, had been, as they neither were or
ought to be, ad consulend. and tract. super arduis, it was not super omnibus
sed de quibusdam, that could not ex vi termini or the intent of their
Sovereign, or by any common or rational intendment of any other, be understood
to give them an authority over their King that desired their advice, nor
operate any thing to furnish them with a power which they could not claim, or
to release or discharge their duty and allegiance; nor should transport their
actions beyond the energy in either the mandate or procurations, for if it
should, the multitude of Counselors which Solomon accounted to be a safety,
would be as so many Masters o^ dangers, and there can be nothing in the words
ad faciendum and consentiendum, or the sometimes misclerkled or misapplyed
words consulendum, tractandum, ordinandum, or in those at other times used
words or expressions ad audiendum vel loquendum in the use, right, or genuine
acceptance, intendment, signification, true Etymology or common construction
of either, or any of these words, jointly or severally to make them aequalls;
Comptrollers, or masters of Varsev^^us de Concili^.
their Sovereigns, for though good Council be as the eyes, ears and common
senses to a Prince or Magistrate, yet it could never claim to be the soul or
reason of them.

For Concilium by Festus is derived a consulendo vel quod in Martinius.
unam sententiam plurium mentes conciliant, and Consiliarius is no more then
suasor, Consultor, consulere veneranda antiquitate fuit judicare, de utili and
honesto decernere: concilium and mandatum in hoc differunt quod mandatum
species quaedam est imperii quod pro societate generis humani receptum est ut
quod cuique negotium datum est id mandatoris periculo conficiatur. Concilium
autem ab imperio alienum est, nec ullam voluntatis ejus qui consultum dat
significationem habet, itaque ejus consultoris arbitrio permittit, nec utrum
fiet nec ne laborat itaque ex concilio nulla nascitur obligatio, ex mandato
nascitur. l. 1. in fin. and l. 2. F. and l. consil. de regul. juris.

Tractare est discutere, agere vel deliberare seu disserere; sic tractare in
jus l. 1. F. 44. l. Jul. de Adult. ad tractandum id est agendum seu
colloquendum l. 9. F. ad l. Jul. de Adult.

Tractatus pro questione and articul. in l. 5. in pr. and F. pro F. de prescr.
verb. l. ult. F. Ordo est dispositio recta antecedentium and consequentium
scilicet quodque ordine suo loco collocantus.

Loqui hi dicuntur qui cum quodam judicio vocem proferunt atque singula ordine
collocant vel sensus aliquos verborum de reg. juris l. 2. and 6. F. rem puplic.

Mando says Martinius signifies gerendum procurandumve, aliquid committo ut
Imperiionus impono, jubeo, volo, necessario fieri est autem mandare alicui
personae gerendum, aliquid exequendumque committere, mandatum est conventio qua
is qui rogatur procuratoris animo id se recepit gratuito daturum facturumve,
mandamus libero homini, villico, aut servo imperamus mandata appellantur
praecepta principum quae praesidibus provinciae profiscientibus dabantur quibus
omnis eorum potestas continebatur, l. 1. and leg. 19. F. de Offic. l. 27. in
fine and l. 33. F. de Jnre proconsul.

And Colloquium is no more then (...), to talk or confer together. Bracton
calls the Martinius and Calvin in (...) Leuis Philologi^
Parliament Magna Curia, and Communis reipublicae sponsio, and in the beginning
of his Book writes in this manner, Lex vigorem babet, quicquid de Concilio and
consensi Magnatum Bracton.
and reipublicae communi sponsione, Authoritate Regis sive principis
praecedente Just fuerit definitum and approbatum; the Register of Writs in the
Writs of Wast and Cessavit styles it Commune Concilium regni, Henry of
Huntington terms it Magnum placitum, when speaking of a Parliament he does it
in these words, fuit in nativitate sanctae Mariae magnum placitum apud
Northampton, in quo congregatis omnibus principibus Angliae deliberatum est
quod filia sua rediretur viro suo Comiti Andegaviae.

Ordinare i. e. judicium, causa, res, l. 24. l. 25. and ordinare postrema vel
suprema judicia l. 15. C. de testam, which the Commons cannot claim, when by
their Writs they are Elected, only ad faciendum and consentiendum iis, which
the King by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Martinius.
should ordain, and facere absolute est facere judicium and suffragium dicitur
vox illa qua unusquisque declarat suam voluntatem, Et pro auxilio accipitur, Et
suffragium dicitur proprie acclino deinde per Metaph. assentio, foveo,
auxilior, Et significat succurrere, auxilium dare, Et voces quae dicebantur in
Comitiis cannot be understood to make every Vote or opinion, which is but
recens and imbecilla assensio, to have the force of a Law: Et opinio quod
incerta est is not to be esteemed either as a Law, or any thing more then an
Embrio, or something more then a wish or desire; and if it grow not up into a
Law, is to return into a Vote, only with Quid enim nisi vota supersunt, and
must not claim to be a Law, when it has got but a third part, or the smaller
of the way unto it, and should not adventure to enforce as many as they can to
believe a Vote of the House of Commons in Parliament to be a Law like that
which has been said of the Laws of the Medes and Persians (who are now and
long have been under an Arbitrary Government) irrevocable, when as the Commons
in Parliament have been from the first original or beginning of it in the 49th
Year of the Reign of King Henry the 3. and for many ages past, and are and
should be no more then (as Sr Edward Coke says) a Grand Enquest, as Cokes lib
4. institutes.
men that were most Cognisant, that best knew the grievances of their Countries
with what might be their proper remedies, and their abilities or disabilities
to aid their Sovereign, and assist the public good, being the truest, most
intelligent and most considerate Judges of their own Interest, and the right
and only use of their being Elected appears by the use and reason thereof to
be no other in Parliaments then Informers of grievances, and are to be
Petitioners for Laws or Remedies.

When it is Judicis Officium, that is to say, the Suprema potestas, which in
England was never yet proved or rightly understood to reside in the People or
any other then the King; and in valde dubiis opinionibus in quibus non appareat
quae sit magis communis rations quae ex utraque part efficaces adducuntur
Trutinare and non est dubitare de iis quae lege vel apertaratione monstrantur
Qua propter opinio quaelibet contralegem and veram Salamonius de not. gent.
rationem and vana est.

And if any should be so wild or gone out of their reason as to endeavor to
make an Assent to be aequivalent, or as much as an innate Authority, or any
Effect of a Superiority, or so much as a resemblance thereof, they may as well
undertake to assert that the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of Engl.
had power to create Edward the black-Prince, Son and heir apparent of King
Edward the 3d Prince of Wales, and to give him the Principality thereof,
because that great and victorious King in the 11th year of his Reign, did grant
it unto him, concilio et concensu Praelatorum Comitum and Baronum and
Communitatum Regni sui (non suorum) Angliae in generali Parliamento; when in
the preamble thereof, he declared, that he did it de serenitate Regalis
praeeminencia, and the Commons in Parliament in the 50th year of the Reign of
that King, after that the Archbishop of Canterbury had spoken much in the
commendation of Richard de Bordeaux, Son and heir of Edward late Prince of
Wales, Son and heir apparent of the Realm, did with one voice pray the Lords
(so ignorant were they then of their own supposed coordination and so
over-valuing the power of the Lords) that they would make him Prince of Wales
as his father was.

Who answered, that it lay not in them but in the King so to do, but promised
to be Mediators for him. So as they who would pretend to such a large
representation of the people, are to remember, that they can give no power but
such as they are themselves justly and by law entitled unto as Subjects,
obeying in their Elections the words, intention, and true meaning of their
Sovereign, who did cause them to be Elected to come unto his Parliament, with a
consenting, performing and obeying power only, but not an equal, coordinate or
Superior; and that it has been a ruled and allowed case thorough all the
Nations of the World, and the Ages thereof, that nemo plus juris dare potest
quam in se ipso habet.

And however that prudent Prince King Edward the 1st. did (for the avoiding of
some troubles which a remnant of his and his fathers unquiet Barons would have
put upon him and his people, whom he was bound to protect,) condescend to that
Act of Parliament, that no Tallage or aid should be granted, without the
consent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons, Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Freeholders of the land, put himself and them under the frailty
of the good and kind will and intentions of a part of his subjects, yet he
could not find either any cause or reason to doubt or suspect, that they or any
of their posterity should so little follow the conduct or manage of their
understanding, the care of their self-preservation, and the prevention of the
ruin of their private in the public, as not to submit to that known, and
almost every where approved rule or Aphorism of wisdom, that Publica privatis
anteponenda sunt, and that of the Poet, Tunc tuares agitur paries cum proximus
ardet.


Or that any, if not an enemy to himself, his posterity and his Country, as
much as a Traitor to his King, would in a case of public necessity, when every
man was as greatly concerned to defend themselves, their King, Country and
posterities, by a giving giving a timely aid and assistance, ai if it had been
pro Aris and focis, and Hannibal had been at Porta's, have been either forward
or backward to guard and relieve themselves, their King and Country and not make
have to imitate the Romans, (who at other times Factious and Seditions enough)
would not suffer the more prudent Fabious the preserver of his and their
Country, even in the mioest of their discontents and murmurings that he made no
more have to fight and beat the enemy, to want their help, either with men or
money.

When as Bornitius says, Quicquid boni homo Civisque habet and possidet quod
vivit, and libere vivit, quod been, quod Beat, Bornitius lib. 5. ca. 1. Novel.
8. ca. 10.. 2.
omniumque rerum and bonorum usu and interdum etiam copia ad voluptatem utitur.
fruitur, totum hoc beneficium Reipublicae civilique ordini acceptum est
reserendum

And that omnis homo and res singularum in Republica conservari nequeant nifi
conservetur Respub. sive communis adeoque In epist. ad Roman. ^omil. 23.
singuli sui causa impendere videntur qnicquid conferunt in publicum usum.

And St Chrysostom was of the same opinion when he said, that ab antiquis
temporibus communi omnium sententia principes a nobis sustinere, debere visum
est ob id quod sua ipsorum negligentes communes res curare universumque suum
otium adeo impendunt quibus non solum ipsi, sed quae nostra sunt, salvantur.

And Zechius says, Regi competunt ratione excellentiae ejus Zechius de
principat ad ministriont.
dignitatis quae Regalia dicuntur, and that multa adjumenta sunt ei necessaria
ut dominium totum and externa tueri valeat.

With whom accords Bodin, informing us, that Sine majestatis contemptu fieri
non potest, ea res enim peregrinos ad Bodin de Rep. 16.
principem aspernandum and subditos ad deficiendum excitare consuevit.

For surely it was never rightly understood that their Membership of the House
of Commons in Parliaments did abridge or lessen the Superiority of their
Sovereign, as may be evidenced by the procedures and affairs of all the
Parliaments of England, from the beginning of their admission thereunto until
the late unhappy distempers thereof.

It having been by long experience Tried and found to be in Government a Policy
as successful as prudentiall, to gain in the making of Laws the approbation
and good-liking as much as may be of those that are to obey and be guided by
them, to the end that they may the more easily take effect and be put in
execution, and that all occasions of Envy, Dislike, Hatred and Calumny, might
be taken from the Prince and his Ministers of State, which advised or promoted
them; Zanzini de Recanati de Monarchi de France.
which (as Zanzini di Recanati has reported) was a custom and usage of our
Neighbors the French, in and since the Reign of their Charlemayn, and the
succeeding Kings until the Reigns of some of their later Kings and Princes.

Which could not be without some variations in the Writs of our Kings and
Princes Summoning or calling some of their Subjects their great Councels or
Parliaments, which may be fully evidenced.

SECT. XXV.
Of the many Variations and Alterations of our Kings Writs of Summons to their
great Councels or Parliaments, Excluding some and taking in others to be
assistant in that high and honorable Court, with its Resummons, Revisions,
drawing of Acts of Parliament or Statutes by the Judges or the Kings Learned
Council in the Laws and other requisites therein, necessarily used by the Sole
and Individual Authority of our Kings and Princes.

FOr in the 22. or 23. E. 1. the Sheriffs were authorized to Elect Citizens and
Burgesses, which they have since used to do by their precepts to the Mayors,
Bailiffs etc.

The Writ for the City of London, Anno 26. E. 1. was to Elect two Citizens;
another in 29, for 4; 1. E. 2. for 2; 32. E. 3. no more; Anno 34. E. 3 to Elect
4; and had usually Elected, and returned 3 or 4 Citizens to serve in Parliament
upon sundry Writs requiring them only to Elect two, as in Annis 6. 7. 8. and
15. E. 2. Annis 1. 6. 9. 11. 12. 14. 20. Pryns brevia Parliamentar. rediviva.
377. and 378.
21. 22, E. 3. and Mr Pryn's opinion was that such kind of Elections were made
good and effectual only by the subsequent allowances of our Kings unto whom all
those returns were made, and who in those times determined all the rights of
Elections and numbers of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to be elected.

And heretofore Burgesses only of every Borough in Dorsetshire by assent of the
rest elected and returned their Burgesses in the County Courts on the day of
the Knights election Pryns brevia Parliamentar. rediviva. 256.
all by one joint Indenture, and so continued to do not only in 3. 5. 8. 9. H.
5. 7. and 20. H. 6. but after the Statute of 23. Henry 6. as the Indenture of
33. of Henry 6. does attest.

In 27. E. 1. no Judges appear to have been Summoned to that Parliament. 27. E.
1. m. 3. to. claus.


Nor to another in the same Year. To. claus. 27. E. 1. m. 16. in dorso.


Diverse of the Writs of Summons in the Reigns of Edward 1. E. 2. E. 3. did
specify the causes of Summoning the Parliament, but for the most part they were
general, as at Elsing's ancient and present manner of holding Parliaments in
England. 9.
this day, and none special after the 7th Year of the Reign of Richard 2. The
Parliament being prorogued, for that the King could not be present the same
day, new Writs of Summons have been anciently sent forth, and another day
appointed as in 6. E. 1. 23. E. 1. 11. E. 2.

Edward the First in the Thirty Third Year of his Reign having Summoned a
Parliament to meet at Westminster die Martis in quindena Purificationis beatae
Mariae Virginis proximo 33. E. 1. m. 12. and 21. to. claus. in dorso.
pro quibusdam negotiis regnum suum Angliae nec non and stabilimentum terrae
suae Scotiae directing his Writ to Edward Prince of Wales his Son, and aliis
Magnatibus and proceribus Regni sui to be there tractatur, and concilium suum
impensur. did the 22d day of that January direct other Writs unto them,
declaring that at that day propter aliqua impedimenta legittima postmodum a
latere emergentia ibidem commode interesse non possumus quod nos taedet vobis
mandamus quod die dominica proxima post festum sancti Mathei Apostoli proximo
futuri ibidem personaliter intersitis nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi
and hoc nullate(...)s omittatis.

And in the same Year added a clause in the later end of his Writ of Summons,
et habeas ibi nomina praedictorum militum Civium et Burgensium et hoc breve and
scire facias eisdem quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum and
celeriorem expeditionem eorundem volumus primo die Parliamenti personaliter
interesse per quod nolumus nec intendimus aliquem ad dictum Parliamentum
Summonitum quod eodem primo die personaliter non inter sit habere ullo modo
excusatum, etc.

In the 34th Year of his Reign Summoned the Earls and Barons to come to a
Parliament ad tractandum de and super 34. E. 1. to. claus. in dorso.
auxilio ad Edwardum primogenitum filium Regis militem faciendum.

In the 35 Year of his Reign having Summoned a Parliament to be holden at
Caerlisle in Octabis Sancti Hillarii in 35. E. 1. to. claus. m. 13. in dorso.
expectation that Petrus Sabinensis Episcopus a Cardinal of the Church of Rome
and a Legate of the Popes, whose Predecessor or himself had been a great Agent
against him and his father for the Pope, the Kings of France and the unquiet
part of the Baronage (in the sad Afflictions of the Crown) would be there
against that time.

Et idem Cardinalis came not to him to Carlisle until the Sunday after
Mid-Lent called Passion Sunday, quae nunc instat did afterward,

The 22d of February then next following, Send his Writ to Thomas Earl of
Lancaster his Nephew a man of great power and Estate, and a darling of the
People, Commanding him in fide and dilectione quibus tenetur firmiter
injungentes quod dictis die and loco modis omnibus personaliter intersitis
nobiscum super praemissis habituri colloquium and tractaturi vestrumque
Concilium impensuri and hoc sub foriffactura omni quae nobis foriffacere
poteritis nullatenus omittatis.

Et eodem modo scribitur Episcopis and aliis Baronibus.

King Edward the 2d his Son in the first Year of his Reign Summoned a
Parliament to consult about his Coronation, burying To. claus. 1. E. 2. m. 19.
in dorso.
of his Father, and the Solemnities thereof, and his nuptials, and commanded
the Archbishop of Canterbury to Summon the Chapter of his Church, Archdeacon
and Clergy of his Diocese, the Dean and Archdeacon in their proper persons and
the Chapter by one, and the Clergy by two procuratores idoneos ad faciendum and
consentiendum his quae tunc de communi concilio favente Domino ordinari
contigerit super negotiis antedictis and hoc nullo modo omittatis.

Eodem modo scribitur Episcopis Lincoln, London, Cicestren, Oxon.

In the 2d Year of his Reign the Sheriff of Yorkshire returned a Writ of
Summons to the Parliament that he had according to the Tenor of the Writ made
Proclamation that none should come armed to the Parliament.

Some of our Kings after Writs of Summons to some Temporal Lords and Bishops
have countermanded them and commanded others to continue at their Charges.

In the 7th Year of his Reign a Parliament being called to be holden at
Westminster, the King understanding that Johannes 7. E. 2. claus. in dorso. m.
25.
de Insula and some others had appointed the Assizes to be held in the
Bishopric of Durham and the Northern parts, did within a few days after the
appointing of the sitting of the Parliament send his Writ to command him, that
omitting his holding of the Assizes he should in person be at Westminster at
the day appointed, and hoc sicut indignationem nostram and grave dampnum
vestrum vitare volueritis nullo modo omittatis T. R. apud Windsore 17 die
Septembris.

per breve de privato sigillo.

In the 8th Year of his Reign sent his Writ to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, that
omnibus aliis praetermissis he should be present (...). E. 2. ^^. 35. claus.
dorso.
at the Parliament, wherein amongst the Barons the Judges and others were
Summoned.

per ipsum Regem.

In the 18th Year of his Reign having Summoned the Earl Marshal to be at a
Parliament to be holden at Winchester, Secunda Dominica Quadragesima proxime
futura, and being 18. E. 2. (...). in dors. (...). 15.
informed by some of the Nobility that by reason of the shortness of time, they
could not sufficiently provide themselves, did prorogue the Parliament to
Octabis Paschae prox. futur. there to consult about the Defense of Aquitaine
and his passage.

In the 20th Year of his Reign he Summoned a Parliament to be at Westminster to
treat with the King, if he should be 20. E. 2. m. 4. to. claus. in dors.
there, or in his absence with the Queen and the Prince his Son.

In the 2d Year of King Edward the 3d the Sheriff of Yorkshire sending his
precepts to Richmond and Rippon to Elect Pryns 4 part of the Register for
Parliament Writs. 309. 318.
Burgesses, they answered they were not bound to Elect any, and would avoid the
charge of their expenses.

In the 3d Year of his Reign Termino Paschae the Bishop of Winchester was
Indicted in the Kings bench for departing from the Parliament at Salisbury.

Anno 4. Edwardi 3. the King Summoned Thomas Earl of Norfolk Earl Marshal of
England his Uncle to the Parliament 4. E. 3. m. 22. claus. in dors.
with these words in the end thereof, viz. quod si quid absit propter absentiam
vestram dicta negotia contigerit retardari ad vos prout convenit graviter
capiemus.

Having called a Parliament to consult about the affairs of 5. E. 3. claus. m.
21. in dorso.
Acquitain, and Summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. to the aforesaid
Parliament, and a peace by the French Ambassadors being made in the mean time
de assensu Praelatorum Comitum, and Baronum, did by his Letters (or Writs)
signify to them his pleasure that they should not come.

Commanded the same Knights and Burgesses that had been at the Parliament at
London, and quibusdam certis de causis To. claus. (...). E. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
recesserunt to appear at a Parliament at Westminster, seu alios ad hoc idoneos.

In the 6th Year of his Reign by reason of some stirrs in the North-parts of
England Summoned a Parliament at York, 6. E. 3. m. 9. in dors. to. claus.
commanding them to be personally there, giving them notice quod propter
arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum cessante impedimento legitimo praesentia
vestra carere non possumus ista vice.

And Summoned the Prelates, and Nobles to a Parliament at the same place, and
signified that he would not admit of any Proxies, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury with some Bishops not appearing, to the King's great disappointment,
he did by a Writ of resummons directed to the said Archbishop, 17 other
Bishops, 13 Abbots, 40 Magnatibus and aliis To. Claus. 6. E. 3. m. 2. in dorso.
therein-named, reciting that he had demanded an aid and advice of the
Prelates, Peers, and Knights of the shires then present, who deliberato
concilio responsum dederunt quod in tam arduis negotiis sine Archiepiscopi, and
aliorum Praelatorum, Magnatum, and Procerum praesentia concilium and assensum
praebere non possent nec debent, did earnestly supplicate him to continue and
prorogue that Parliament ad diem Mercurii in Octabis Sancti Hillarii tunc prox.
Sequen. and interim ceteros Praelatos, and Proceres tunc absentes convocari
faceremus ac nos quanquam hujusmodi dilatio nobis damnosa and periculosa
plurimum videatur eorum petitione in hac part annuentes Parliamentum
praedictum usque ad Octavas praedict. duximus continuandum seu prorogandum ac
Praelatis, Magnatibus, Militibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus injunximus quod tunc
ibidem interfuerint quacunque excusatione cessante ac omnibus aliis
praetermissis ne igitur contingat (quod absit) dicta negotia ad nostri and
Regni nostri dampnum and dedecus per vestri seu aliorum absentiam ulterius
prorogari vobis in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini and sub periculo
quod incumbit districte injungendo mandamus quod omni excusatione cessant sitis
personaliter apud Eborum in dictis Octabis nobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis,
and Magnatibus dicti Regni nostri super dictis negotiis tractatur. and vestrum
concilium impensur. sciatis quod si per vestram contigerit dicta negotia (quod
absit) ulterius retardari dissimulare non poterimus quin ad vos exinde sicut
convenit graviter capiemus. Test Rege apud Eborum. 11. die Decembris.

In the same Year on a Saturday, the House of Commons had leave to depart, and
were commanded to attend until 6. E. 3. N. 7.
the next day on which the Parliament was Dissolved.

In the several Parliaments of 6. Edwardi 3. and 2^. E. 3. the cause of Summons
was declared by those that were appointed to do it by the King's verbal
Command only and not by any Commission.

In the Year next following Receivers and Tryers of petitions Elsing's ancient
and present manner of holding Parliaments in England.
were appointed par nostre Seigneur le Roy, and son Concill, which Mr Elsing
understood to be the Kings Privy-Councell.

11. E. 3. an extraordinary Writ of Summons was sent to the Sheriff of the
County of Stafford concerning an aid granted by the Clergy of the Diocese of
Coventry and Lichfield of 20 d. upon every Mark given to the King to free them
Pryns brevia Parliamentar. rediviva. 382.
from the oppression of the laity in violently seizing upon their Wools.

14. E. 3. The Commons prayed that the Writs to the Sheriffs for the Election
of Knights for the shires might have the clause que deux miltz valuez Chivalers
de Countez soient esleuz and envoyez ad prochein Parliament pour la Commune si
que null d'eux ne soit Viscount ou autre Minister.

Which was agreed unto, and in the Summons of Parliament, and Writs for the
Electing of Knights of the shires was inserted, that they should Elect deux
Chivalers ceynct des Espees de chescun County pour estre en mesme le
Parliament, and thereupon the next Writ was quod de dicto Comitatu duos Milites
gladiis cinctos elegi facias, which continues to this day, although many times
Esquiresand no Knights are chosen, and by the indulgence of our Kings admitted,
when in a Dedimus potestatem to take a fine it will not be allowed.

Eodem Anno the Sheriff of Northampton was commanded quod venire fac. to the
Parliament de villa Northampton quatuor de corpore Comitatus sui, sex
Mercatores de discretioribus Pryns brevia Parl. 388.
and ditioribus Mercatoribus villae and Com. praedictorum cum quibusdam
Magnatibus and aliis de Concilio suo super dictis negotiis in brevi specificat
eis ibidem before exponend. tractaturi, suumque concilium impensuri,
ulteriusque facturi quod ibidem de communi concilio and assensu contigerit
ordinari, and that the Sheriff, as likewise the Sheriffs of all the other
Counties of England, were commanded to certify the names of the Merchants sic
eligendorum with a severe admonition in the latter end of the said Writ of
Summons, viz. sciens procerto quod fi dicti Mercatores de discretioribus and
ditioribus ut praedicitur eligendi ad dictos diem and locum non habueris te ab
ofsicio tuo amovere teque tanquam expeditionem negotionum nostrorum
praedictorum impedieras and de impeditione hujusmodi culpabilem invenire absque
difficultate aliqua faciemus, Test Edwardo Duce Cornubiae, and Domino de
Cestria filio nostro charissimo Custode Angliae apud Kennington.

Et Eodem Anno, Strangers have been sometimes admitted Elsings ancicient and
modern manner of holding Parliaments in England.
into the House of Peers after a Summons, to be Receivers, and Tryers of
Petitions, but did not sit.

The Commons at the beginning of every Parliament are sent for out of the House
of Commons to come to the Bar of the House of Lords, where the Lord Chancellor,
if he be present, or in his absence one of the Lord Chief Justices, or an
Archbishop of Canterbury, and sometimes the Lord Treasurer, and in 9. H. 6.
Linwood a Doctor of Law in the sickness of a Lord Chancellor, declared in the
behalf of the King or his Lieutenant the cause at large of the Summons of
Parliament, commanded them to elect and present their speaker, the Writs of
Summons making sometimes a short mention thereof, and many times none at all:
In 17th, E. 3. the cause of Summons was begun to be declared by the Chancellor,
but pursued by Sr Bartholomew Burghurst (concerning the Kings Actions in
France.)

15. E. 3. The King denied the Archbishop of Canterbury to come into the
Parliament House until he had answered Elsing 174. and Mat. Parker
antiquitates Ecclesia Britanniae.
certain Articles objected against him in the Exchequer, and then also refused
him entrance, until at the last at the intercession of the Lords, he was
admitted.

In Anno 16 of his Reign Prince Edward his son Duke of Cornwall and Custos
regni, with others of the Council To. claus. 16. E. 3. m. 13, part 2,
summoned a Parliament in his fathers name, to grant him an aid, being then in
his Wars beyond the Seas.

The King in the 18th year of his Reign sent his Writs of Summons to a
Parliament to treat of the affairs of the Kingdom, To. claus. 18. E. 3. part
prima. m. 14. in dorso.
with these words, nobiscum si praesentes fuerimus ibidem, seu cum deputandis a
nobis si abesse nos contigerit.

Eodem Anno, Writs were issued for the Electing of two Knights for every County
without mention of any Citizens Burgesses, and in some no manucaptors for the
Elected returned, Pryns brevia Parliamentar. rediviva. 143. 144. 146. 148. 150.
166. 231. 360.
and were to appear at London, but before the day appointed come, another Writ
came to appear at Sarum.

Eodem Anno, The King being offended at the small appearance of the parliament,
on Monday commanded it to be adjourned until the next day.

The Receivers and Tryers being named, because the prelates and other grandees
were not come, on Tuesday the parliament was adjourned until the Thursday, on
which day the cause of Summons was declared.

20. E. 3. On Friday the Commons delivered in their petitions, which were
considered by the Lords upon Saturday, 20. E. 3. n. 1^
Sunday and Monday, next following, and on that Monday they were Dissolved.

In the 21st Year of his Reign he declared in his Writs to Summon that
parliament, that he did call them not to give To. claus. 21. E. 3. part 2. m.
9. in dorso.
him Money, or Supplies, but only to enquire after wrongs done to the people.

Eodem Anno, the Commons having long continued together, desire an answer to
their Bill, and leur deliverance. To. parl. 21. E. 3.


Anno 24. E. 3. The King sending his Writs to Elect 2 Knights of every County
and 2 Burgesses of every City and To. claus. 24. E. 3. m. 3.
Borough caused a Clause to be inserted that none should be placitatores
querolarum manutentores aut ex hujusmodi quaestu vincentes.

In 26. E. 3. the King issued out Writs to the Sheriffs of every County in
England to elect one Knight for every County to come to the parliament, and
sent his Writs to the Mayors, and Bailiffs of Burgess Towns (not to the
Sheriffs as at other time) to retorn 1 Citizen for every City, and 1 Burgess
for every Borough, except London, whose Sheriffs were commanded In Bundell
brium. 26 E. 3.
to Elect 2 Citizens, giving the reason why no more then 1 for other places, ut
Homines ab ista occupatione Audumpnalo quo nirus possimus retrahomus.

Anno 27. E. 3. Sent hrs Writs to the Sheriff to Elect de assensu Com. only 1
Knight and to the Sheriffs of London, the Mayor and Bailiffs of all other
Boroughs that used to send Burgesses to Parliament to Elect and retorn 2
Citizens and Burgesses apiece for the Statute of the Staple made in the same
year ca. 3. has these words, viz. Whereas good deliberation had with the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and great men of the Country, that is to say,
of every County one for all the Countys and of the Commons of Cities and
Boroughs.

Anno 28. E. 3. the cause of Summons was first declared before the names of the
Receivers and Tryers were published.

Eodem Anno, the King issued his Writs to all the Sheriffs of England to cause
2 Knights of every Shire to come to the Parliament at Lincoln to confirm the
perambulation of the Forests, and particularly enjoined to Summon the Pryns
brevia Parliamentar.
Knights Elected the last Parliament, but if dead or unable to come to Elect
others in their places, and the Sheriff for Oxford and Barkshire receiving only
a mandate to elect Knights for Oxfordshire, did notwithstanding retorn two for
Berkshire in this manner, Et quia Com. Berks. est in ballia mea licet
perambulatio in eodem facta fuit and observata pro eo quod in isto brevi
continetur quod colloquium in Parliamento tractandum erit Super aliis negotiis
praefatum Regem tangentibus, Ideo gratis elegerunt duos milites quorum nomina,
etc.

Anno 29. E. 3. the Chief Justice declared that the Kings pleasure was that the
Cause of Summons should be declared by Mounsieur Walter de Manny, and so it
was, yet the Chief Justice managed the Parliament business in the House of
Peers as Speaker, for presently after Mounsieur de Manny's discourse, he called
the Commons to advise thereof and make ready their Petitions.

In the 34 year of his Reign sent his Writs to all the Sheriffs to cause to
appear in Parliament all Collectors of the Pryns brevia Parliamentar. rediviva.
369.
Tenths and Fifteenths granted to him in Parliament for paying his Forces by
Land and Sea for the Kingdoms defense, to be restored again to the payers, in
case no such expenses should be made, and all Arrayers of Soldiers to give an
account of all Moneys received and disbursed by them, for that the Soldiers and
Mariners were not paid.

And to appoint one honest man out of every County to come along with them to
see and examine their accounts.

37. E. 3. The cause of the Summons was first declared before the names of the
Receivers and Tryers were published, according to the use at this day and of
all Parliaments, since 29. E. 3. And it is said in the end of the showing the
cause of the Summons, Et outre le dit Roy volt que si null se sent greever met
avent son petition en ce Parliament and ci ne avoir convenable report and sur ce
ad assignee ascuns de ses Clercks en le Chancellarie Recevoirs des
ditzpetitions.

In eodem Anno Proclamation was made in Westminster Hall by the Kings command,
that all the Prelates, Lords, and Commons who were come to the Parliament,
should withdraw themselves to the painted Chamber, and afterward on the s^m^
(...) there being in the same chamber the Chancellor, Treasurer (...) some of
the Prelates, Lords and Commons, Sr Henry Gree^ the Kings Chief Justice told
them in English (much of the French Language being then made use of in the
Parliament-Rolls and Petitions) that the King was ready to begin the
Parliament, but that many of the Prelates, Lords and Commons, who were
Summoned, were not yet come, wherefore he wills that they should depart and
take their ease until Monday.

Anno 40. E. 3. The Lord Chancellor concluded his speech touching the Summons,
The Kings will is, que chescun que ce sont grievez met devant sa petition a
ces sont assignez per lui de ces recevoir and aussi de les triers.

Six days were not seldom allowed for receiving and trying petitions which were
sometimes prolonged two or three days, ex gratia Regis, and the reason supposed
for such short prefixions, was because the sitting of Parliaments in former
times continued not many days.

Toriton a Town in Devonshire was exempted from sending of Burgesses to
Parliament, and so was Colchester in 6. R. 2. To pat. 42. E. 3. part 1. m. 8.
E. (...). 2
in respect of new making the walls and fortifying that Town for Five Years.

In diverse Writs of Summons of King Edward 3. He denied to accept of proxies ea
vice 6. 27. And 39. E. 3. Proxies were absolutely denied ista vice 6. R. 2. And
11. R. 2. The like with a clause in every of those Writs of Summons legitimo
cessante impedimento.

Anno 45. E. 3. Ista vice being omitted a clause was added Scientes quod
propter arduitatem (negotiorum) Procuratores seu excusationem aliquam legittimo
cessante impedimento pro vobis admittere nolumus, and thereupon the Lords that
could not come, obtained the Kings License and made their proxies, and although
at other times they did make Proxies without the Kings License, yet in such
cases an Affidavit was made of their sickness (or some other Lawful
impediment) as in 3. 6. 26. And 28. H. 8.

The ancient form and way of such Licenses in 22d E. 3. being in French and
under the Kings Privy Seal, as Mr Elsing Elsings ancient and modern manner of
holding Parliaments in England. 100. 101. 102. 107.
has declared; and therein the Abbot of Selby's Servant was so careful as he
procured a Constat or Testimonial under the Kings Privy Seal of his allowance
of the said procuration, and another was granted to the said Abbot in 2. H. 4.
under the signet only.

Eodem Anno The Parliament having granted the King an aid of 22 s. and 3 d. out
of every parish in England supposing it would fully amount to Fifty Thousand
Pounds, Pryns 4 part of the Register for Parliament Writs. 28^.
but the King and his Council, after the Parliament, dismissed, finding upon
an examination that the rate upon every parish would fall short of the sum of
money proposed for that supply, did by his Writs command the Sheriffs of every
County to Summon only one Knight for every County and one Citizen and Burgess
for every City and Borough that had served in the said Parliament for the
avoiding of troubles and expenses to appear at a Council to be holden at
Winchester to advise how to raise the intended sum of money.

Anno 46. E. 3. An ordinance being made that neither Lawyer or Sheriff should
be returned Knights of the shire, the Writs received an addition touching the
Sheriff only which continues to this day, viz. Nolumus autem quod tu vel
aliquis alius Vicecomes shall be Elected, but the King wills that Knights and
Sergeants of the best esteem of the County be hereafter returned Knights in the
Parliament.

Eodem Anno There was no Judges Summoned to the To claus. 46 E. 3. m. 10. in
dorso Pryns 4 part of a Register of Parliament Writs.
Parliament.

In Anno 50. Some particular Knights were specially commanded by the King to
continue in London 7 days longer then others after the Parliament ended, to
dispatch some public affairs ordained by Parliament, and had wages allowed
for Claus 50. E 3. m. 3. in dors. part. 2.
those 7 days to be paid by their Countries.

Some being sent from Ireland to attend the Parliament, a Writ was sent by the
King to James Boteler Justice of Ireland to leavy their expenses upon the
Commonalty of that Kingdom which varied from those for England.

After the bill (which in the usual language and meaning of those times,
signified no more then a petition) delivered To parl. 50 E. 3.
the Chancellor, willed the Commons to sue out their Writs for their fees
according to the custom, after which the Bishops did arise and take their
leaves of the King, and so the Parliament ended.

Anno 51. E. 3. the Prince of Wales representing the King in Parliament Sat in
the Chair of State in Parliaments after Elsing's ancient and present manner of
holding Parliaments in England. 128.
the cause of Summons declared by the Lord Chancellor, or by any others whom
the King appoints, he concludes his speech with the Kings Commandment to the
House of Commons to choose their Speaker, who being attended by all the House
of Commons, and presented by them unto sitting in his Chair of Estate environed
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, has after his allowance and at his
retorn, and not before one of the Kings maces with the Royal arms thereupon
allowed to be carried before him at all time dureing the Parliament with one of
the Kings Sergeants at arms to bear it before him, and to attend him during
the time of his Speakership.

Anno 1. Richardi 2. The Parliament beginning the 13th of October was from time
to time continued until the 28th of To. parl. 1. R. 2. N. 137.
November then next ensuing, and the petitions read before the King, who after
answers given, fist bonement remercier les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Countes de
leur bones and graundez diligences faitz entouz l'Esploit de dites besognes and
requests y faitzpur commun profit and de leur bien and liberal done au liu
grantez en defens. De tout le Roialme commandant as Chivaliers To. parl. 2. R.
2.
de Contes, Citizens, des Citeos and Burgeys des Burghs quils facent leur
suites pour briefs avoir pour leurs gages de Parliament en manner accustumes Et
leur donast congie de departir.

In a Parliament of 5. R. (...). there were several adjournments, and the
Knights and Burgesses resorting to, continuing at, and returning, diversis
vicibus the Parliament was To. parl. 5. R. (...). N. 1. 37. 64. 65.
thrice adjourned from one day to another before it sat, by reason that sundry
Sheriffs had not returned their Writs, diverse of the Lords and Commons were not
come, and there arose a great quarrel betwixt the Duke of Lancaster and the
Earl of Northumberland, who came attended with many Thousand Pryns 4 part of
the Register of Parliament Writs 354.
armed men of his Tenants and followers to the Parliament, which caused the
King to adjourn it from Monday to Tuesday, thence to Wednesday, and from thence
to Saturday, until all were come, and the quarrel being pacified betwixt
those great Lords from the 8th Nov. to 15 December. by reason of the approach of
the feast of Christmas and the Queens arrival from beyond the Seas for her
intended marriage from thence to the 24th of January many of them in the mean
time returning home thence until Monday following, and from that time until
the 23d of February.

Before the 1st Writ of Summons could be executed a 2d came to prorogue that
Parliament. 30 E. 1. and 5. R. 2.


In 7. R. 2. a Parliament being Summoned to meet at new Sarum on the 20th day
of April being Friday it was twice adjourned, until the Wednesday and
Thursday following, because diverse of the Lords were not come, and many of the
Sheriffs had not returned their Writs.

21. R. 2. The Parliament was adjourned from Westminster to Shrewsbury, began
the Monday next after the Exaltation of the Holy Cross at Westminster, and at
Shrewsbury the 15th of St Hillary.

In 1st H. 4. The Writ for the Election of Commons had this clause, Nolumus
autem quod tu seu aliquis alius Vicecomes Elsings ancient and modern manner of
holding Parliaments on England. (...). 60. 61.
Regni nostri seu aliquis alius homo ad legem aliqualiter sit electus whence it
was called the Lay-mans Parliament or indoctum Parliamentum.

By the Statute of 7 and 8. H. 4. a clause was added in the Writ, Et electionem
tuam in pleno Comitatu tuo factam distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and
sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerunt nobis in Cancellaria nostra (not
into the House of Commons or House of Peers) ad diem and locum in brevi
contentum certisices indilate.

The Receivers and Tryers of petitions in Parliament which were nominated in
the beginning of every Parliament, were Prelates, Nobles, and Judges, and
sometimes the Lord Chancellor and Treasurer; and if need required anciently
the Clerks of the Chancery.

In two Parliaments of King Henry the 6th the Chancellours place was supplied
by the Kings verbal Authority.

In 9. H. 6. The Chancellor to whom it appertained, ratione officii sui to
declare the cause of the Summons of Parliament, being sick, the Duke of
Gloucester the Kings protector appointed Dr Linwood (a Doctor of Civil and
Canon Law) to declare the cause of the Summons of that Parliament.

In the Title of the Act of Parliament 18. 23. 27. 31. 33. H. 6. and E. 4. And
14. E. 4. It is mentioned to be by the advice and assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, and in 20. H. 6. By the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the request of the Commons as it had
been in the 25 of H. 6. where Bristoll was exempted 25. H. 6.
by a Charter of King Henry the 6th from sending any more then 2 Homines or
Burgesses to Parliaments.

7 or 8 Ports Summoned and in like manner admitted by the only Writ to Summon
the Cinque Ports.

1. H. 7. Acts of Parliament were mentioned to have been made by the assent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons. 2. H. 7. By the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, In 3 and 4. H. 7. the like. 11. H.
7. By the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons. Anno 12 the
like. 19 the like.

In the r. 3. and 4. H. 8. Acts of Parliament were said to have been made by
the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, and in 5. 6. 7.
14. 15. and 23. H. 8.

1. H. 8. The Abbot of Crowland was licensed to be absent by the Lord
Chancellor and Lord Treasurer signifying the Kings pleasure.

And howsoever that the Kings verbal license was sufficient, yet they that had
obtained that favor had for the most part a formal license under his hand, and
if not ready to be produced testimonialls thereof by some Lord or others that
could witness it.

And so continued until 28 or 31. H. 8. But afterward neither licenses or
testimonialls were required, only it satisfied that the proxies or procurations
mentioned the Kings license, which no man could be presumed to do unless he had
had it.

Anno 1. Henrici 8. Ex mandato Domini Regis Quia Domini Spirituales absentes
and in convocatione occupati sunt continuavit Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinum (the Lord Chancellor Elsing's ancient and present manner of holding
Parliaments.
being then a Bishop and absent also) and although some one or two of the
Temporal Lords then sat in the House of Peers it was but to receive Bills.

Which continued until 7. H. 8. In which Year the Lord Chancellor did the day
before continue the Parliament unto the day after.

In the same Year 30 November Dominus Cancellarius propterea quod Domini
Spirituales in convocatione in crastino die occupandi 7. H. 8.
continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem lunae, and many of the
Parliament Rolls and Journalls of King Henry the 8th being not to be found.

And from the 17th H. 8. until the 25th there does not appear to have been any
Journalls, although several Parliaments sat in the 21. 22. 23. and 24 Years
of his Reign.

20. H. 8. No mention was made of the advice or consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, or Commons.

The like in 25 and 26. 27. 28. and 31. H. 8.

25. H. 8. There is a memorandum in the Journalls of the House of Peers
Decretum est quod Domini Spirituales in convocatione diebus Martis and Veneris
prox. sequen. and ex tunc die Veneris (donec secus melius videtur) versari
possent, and proceres sequentibus diebus sine impedimento quotidie circa
dimi^ietat horae octavae ante meridiem in locis consuetis simul convenirent ad
tractandum and consulendum circa Republicae negotia.

And after in the same Parliament the Friday was changed into the Wednesday in
every week.

Eodem Anno In the Reign of H. 8. Wednesday being a Starr-Chamber day, and
Friday a convocation of the Bishops of the house of Peers was by the Chancellor
adjourned to the Saturday following, and in Queen Elizabeth's days when the
Starr-Chamber days were settled to be upon Wednesdays, the Parliament did not
sit upon those days in the Term time, which was constantly observed says Mr
Elsing all the time of King James until the 18th Year of his Reign, when upon
Tuesday Elsings manner of ancient and present Parliaments in England 94. and 95.
the 24th day of April upon a motion made in the House of Peers that there was
a great cause in the middle of hearing to be heard in the Starr-Chamber the
morrow after, the Lords were content not to sit that Morning, provided that it
be not drawn into a precedent, but that the House being the Supreme Court may
sit upon a Starr Chamber day notwithstanding the absence of the Lord
Chancellor, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Treasurer, the Lords of the
Privy-Councell, great Officers of State, the two Lord Chief Justices and Idem
ibidem. 96. 97. 98.
Lord Chief Baron, who do use to attend that Court, and the next Starr-Chamber
day the other part of the Lords House did sit in the forenoon.

The Lords that were absent and could not appear upon Summons of Parliament
were excused if they could obtain a license of the King, otherwise they were
amerced, as in 31. H. 6. a Duke was to be amerced 100 l. an Earl 100 Marks, and
a Baron 40 l. If they came not upon Summons to Parliament.

If the King be present in person, when the cause of Summons is declared, the
Lord Chancellor does first remove from his place, which is on the Kings Right
hand behind the Chair of Estate, and conferreth privately with his Majesty.

And that ceremony is ever to be observed by the Lord Chancellor, or those
that are appointed by the King to officiate in that particular for him before
he speak any thing in Parliament when the King is present.

The cause of which ceremony says Mr Elsing seeming to be, that as none but
the King can call a Parliament, so none but the King can propound or declare
wherefore it was called.

If the King be represented in Parliament by Commission the Lord Chancellor
sits on the Wool-sack after the Commission read, the Commissioners go to the
seat prepared for them on the Right side of the Chair of Estate, then the Lord
Chancellor arises, conferreth with the Commissioners, returns to his place on
the Wool-sack, and there declares the cause of the Summons (or Commission) as
was done in 28 Elizabeth.

The Warrants of the King for the making of the Writs of Summons to Parliaments
have been diverse some times, per breve de privato sigillo, but commonly per
ipsum Regem and concilium.

Anno 32. H. 8. Acts of Parliament were said to have been enacted with the
assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Parliament was continued
by diverse short prorogations, and was by his Graces Authority dissolved.

33. H. 8. In the Acts of Parliament no mention was made of advice or assent.

34. and 35. H. 8. The like.

Proxies were in the 20th Year of the Reign of King James under the hand and
seal of an absent Lord upon a lawful impediment signifying the Kings license,
in the form ensuing, Elsings ancient and present manner of bolding Parliaments
in England. 104. 105. 106. 107. 111. 112. and 113.
pro se and nomine suo de and super quibuscunque causis exponend. seu
declarand. tractand. tractatibus quae hujusmodi mihi factis seu faciendis
concilium nomine suo impendend. statutisque etiam and ordinationibus quae ex
maturo and deliberati judicio dominorum tam spiritualium quam temporalium in
eodem Parliamento congregat. inactitari seu ordinari contigerint nomine suo
cousentiendum eisdemque si opus fuerit subscribend. caeteraque omnia and
singula quae in praemissis necessaria fuerint seu quo modo libet requisita
faciend. and exercend. in tam amplis modo and forma prout ego ipse facere
possem aut deberem si praesens personaliter interessem ratum and gratum habens
and habiturus quicquid dictus procurator statuerit aut fecerit in praemissis.

A proxy cannot be made to a Lord that is absent himself.

The Lord Latimer made his proxy, which although the Clerk of the House of
Peers received, it was repealed by the Lord Chancellor, for that the Lord
Latimers deputy or procurator was absent; for if he to whom the proxy is made
be absent, the proxy is void, neither can it be transferred by the proxy to
another, as was adjudged in the case of the Lord Vaux, 18 Jacobi.

Our Kings (since the force put upon King Henry the 3d by some Rebellious
Barons at a Parliament at Oxford in Anno 42 of his Reign) at the beginning of
every Parliament by public proclamation did use to prohibit the coming with
Arms.

Not any of the Kings Sergeants at Law were Summoned to Parliament until the
Tenth of Edward the Third, when Robert Parning, William Scot, and Simon Trevise
Servientes To. claus. 10. E. 3. M. 1. and 5. in dorso.
Regis were Summoned by special Writs unto 2 Parliaments, after which none were
Summoned until the 20th of E. 3.

Robert de Sodington Capitalis Baro Scaccarii was the First and only Baron of
the Exchequer who was Summoned to Parliament as one of the Kings Council in
12. E. 3.

The Kings Attorney Generals (whose Office and impolyment was as ancient as 7.
E. 1. when William de Gisilham Dugdales Origines Juridiciales.
enjoyed it, and Gilbert de Thorneton was in 8. E. 1. his Attorney General)
had their First Writ of Summons in the 21. 30. and 36. Henrici 8. Those that
succeeded them never wanting the like privileges.

And the Kings Sollicitors generals have been in like manner Summoned. Sr John
Pettus Collections.


The Writs of Summons to the Lords are returned and delivered to the Clark of
their House, those with their Indentures for the Election of members for the
House of Commons to the Clark of the Crown in Chancery.

The Clergy of the convocation in Parliament are Elected by virtue of the Kings
Writs of Summons to the Bishops and their precepts but not by any from the
Sheriffs.

The Master of the Rolls if not Elected a Member of the House of Commons in
Parliament has a Writ of Summons to attend in the House of Lords.

The Masters of Chancery as necessarily appertaining to the Lord Chancellor,
or Keeper of the Great Seal of England have neither Writ nor patent, yet do
there attend.

The Bill or Act of Parliament signed for the Beheading the Earl of Strafford
much against the will of King Charles the Martyr was by Commission.

And diverse adjournments, and prorogations in the Reign of King Charles 2d have
been sometimes by Commission and at other times by proclamations.

The Commons were never Elected to come to Parliament before the 49th Year of
King H. 3. and his imprisonment, and then and from the 21st Year of the Reign
of King E. 1. did but as the Lesser lights follow that greater of the Sun, and
could not possibly be sent for, or caused to be Elected without the Peers then
Summoned and convened, for that they were only to consent unto, and do such
things as the King by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal should
there ordain, if the Lords were not Summoned to be there at the same time or
sitting.

The Chamberlain of the Kings Household was Summoned to sit in the House of
Peers in 25. 27. and 28. E. 3.

Masters of Ships, and some Scots have for advice been Summoned to attend the
House of Lords.

Ever since the making of the Statute of 5. Eliz. every Knight, Citizen,
Burgess, and Port Baron Elected, or to be Elected to be a Member of the House
of Commons in Parliament is to take before he be admitted to sit therein, or
have any voice as a Knight, Citizen, or Burgess of or in the House of Commons
an Oath upon the Evangelists before the Lord 5. Eliz. ca. 1. and 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
Steward or his deputy, that he does testify and declare, That the Queens
Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors, is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other her Oath of Supremacy.
Highness's Dominions, and Countries as well in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal, and renounce all Foreign
Jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate, Prince, or Potentate whatsoever.

And promise that from henceforth he shall bear Faith, and true Allegiance to
the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, and to his power shall assist
and defend all Jurisdictions, Oath of Allegiance.
Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities, granted, or belonging to the
Queens Highness, her Heirs, and Successors, or united, and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Queen Elizabeth in the 31st Year of her Reign did by the advice of her
Privy-Councell and of the Justices of both her Benches and other of her learned
Council, prorogue and adjourn the Parliament from the 12th of November 1588.
to Journalls of the 4 last parliaments of Q. Elizabeth Collected by Heywood
Townshend a Mem(...) thereof.
the fourth of February then next following, from which day it was continued
till the Thursday following post meridiem.

Wherein diverse of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, Justices and masters of Chancery
were Receivers and Tryers of petitions.

The Bishops, all but 7, named each of them 2 Proctors, 7 Temporal Lords sent
their proxies.

Such as were mere attendants in the House of Peers were sometimes made joint
Committees with the Lords in several matters

The Commons presenting their Speaker to the Queen, he was admitted with a
caution not to use in that House irreverent Speeches, or to make unnecessary
addresses to her Majesty, and the Chancellor by Command of the Queen
continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque diem Sabbati prox. hora nona.

When the Lords sent to pray a conference with the Commons and it is assented
unto, one of the Judges were allways named to attend the Lords Committees.

In a bill for settling a jointure for the Wife of Henry Nevill Esquire. Wherein all
former conveyances were to be cancelled, the Lords ordered that the deeds
should be sealed up, and brought into their house, to the end that they might
be redelivered again uncancelled, in case the Queen should resuse to sign the
Act of Parliament; the House of Commons by their Speaker desired her Majesty's
assent to such Statutes as had been provided by both Houses.

Upon her gracious general Act of Pardon les Prelates, Seigneurs and Commons en
Parliament en nom de toutes voz autres Subjects remercient tres humblement
vostre Majeste.

The Queens Solicitor general being Elected a Member of the House of Commons
in Parliament, they desired the Lords that he might come into the House of
Commons and sit with them, which was assented unto and performed.

In the Year 1588. and 31st of her Reign, when she had most need of her
Subjects aid and good will, upon the Petition of the Commons against some
grievances of the Purveyors and her Court of Exchecquer, she answered by their
Speaker, that she had given orders to her Lord Steward to redress any
Complaints of her purveyance, and that she had as much skill and power to rule
and govern her own House as any of her Subjects whatsoever to rule and govern
theirs without the help of their Neighbors, and would very shortly cause a
collection to be made of all the Laws already made touching Pourveyance and of
all the constitutions of her Household in that case, and would thereupon by the
advice of her Judges and learned Council set down such a formal plot (or
method) Idem ibidem. 24. and 25.
before the end of that present session of Parliament, as should be as good and
better for the ease of her subjects, then what the house had attempted without
her privity, and in which they would have bereaved her Majesty of the honor,
glory and commendation thereof, and that she had in the 10th year of her Reign
caused certain orders and constitutions to be drawn for the due course of such
things in her Court of Exchequer as her Subjects seem to be grieved at; And so
after a General Pardon and some bills passed, the Lord Chancellor by her
Majesty's command dissolved the Parliament.

Anno 35th. the Lord Keeper by her Majesty's command declared the necessity of
public aides, how little the Late Subsides amounted unto by Reason of the ill
gathering; desired the time might not be Misspent in long orations, Speeches and
verbosities which some men took delight in, Receivers and Tryers of Petitions
were named and some Proxies delivered.

Their Speaker Sr Edward Coke in his Speech remembered the Queen of her speech
to the last Parliament, that many Fo. 35. 37. and 38.
came thither ad consulendum qui nesciunt quid Sit consulendum and prayed that
she would give her assent to such Bills as should be agreed upon;

The Lord Keeper in his reply alleged that to make more laws might seem
Superfluous, and to him that might ask Quae causa ut crescunt tot magna
volumnia legum? It may be answered in promptu causa est crescit in orb malum.

And after upon further instructions received from her Majesty declared that
Liberty of Speech was granted, but how far was to be thought on; there be two
things of most necessity wit and speech, the one exercised in invention, the
other in speaking, privilege of speech is granted but you must know what
privilege you have, not to speak every one what he lists, or what comes in
his heart to utter, but your privilege is to say yea or no; wherefore Mr
Speaker her Majesty's pleasure is that if you perceive any idle heads, which
will not Stick to hazard their own estates, which will meddle with reforming
of the Church and transforming of the Commonwealth, and do exhibit any bills
to such purpose, that you receive them not until they be viewed and considered
of, by those who it is fitter should consider of such things, and can better
judge of them.

The daily continuing or adjorning of the Parliament was Dominus Custos magni
Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum.

After a bill for settling the lands and Estate of Sr Francis Englefeild
attainted of high Treason in Parliament had been Idem ibidem. 40. 4^.
ordered by the House of Commons to be engrossed, the Lords did hear Council
on the part of Englefeilds heirs, and afterward passed it.

In the case of repealing of certain uses in a deed concerning the Estate of Sr
Anthony Cook of Rumford in the County of Essex after the bill had been 3 times
read in the House of Lords and assented unto, a Proviso was added of Saving the
Queens right with a note entered that it should not hereafter be used as a
praecedent.

Acts or bills of General pardon do pass both Houses with once reading.

The Lord Keeper by her directions signified to the Speaker of the House of
Commons, that in some things they had spent more time then needed, but she
perceived some men did it more for their satisfaction, then the necessity of
the thing deserved. Misliked that such irreverence was showed toward her Privy
Counselors (who were not to be accounted as Common Knights and Burgesses of
the House, that are Counselors, but during the Parliament) whereas the others
are standing Counselors, and for their Wisdom and great service are called to
the Council of State.

Had heard that some men in the case of great necessity and aid, had seemed to
regard their Country and made their necessities more then they were, forgetting
the urgent necessity of the time, and dangers that were now eminent, she would
not have the people feared with reports, charged them that the Trained Bands
should be ready and well supplied, thanked them for their subsidies, and
assured them that if the Coffers of her Treasure were not empty, and the
revenues of the Crown and other Princely ornaments could supply her wants and
the charge of the Realm, she would not in the words of a Prince have now
charged them, or accepted what they gave.

After which the Queen sitting in her Chair of State, amongst other things
speaking of the injustice of the King of Spains Wars and the Justice of her own
said, I heard say that when he attempted his last Invasion, some upon the Sea
coast forsook their Towns, flew up higher into the Country, and left all naked
and exposed to his entrance, but I swear unto you by God, if I knew those
persons, or any that shall do so hereafter, I will make them know and feel what
it is to be so fearful in so urgent a cause.

Declared unto them that the subsidy which they gave her was not so much but
that it is needful for a Prince to have so Idem ibidem. 49. 54. 62. 63.
much allways lying in her Coffers for your defense in time of need, and not to
be driven to get it, when we should use it.

Upon which the Clerk of the Parliament having read the Queens acceptance and
thanks for the subsidies given, did upon the reading of the pardon pronounce
the thanks of the House in these words, les Prelates Seigneurs and Communes en
ce Parliament assembles au nom de toutz vous autres Subjects remerc erent tres
humblement vostre Majesty and prient a Dieu que il vous done en sante bonne
vie and longue.

The assent of the Sovereign is never given to a bill of subsidy because it is
the gift of the Subject, nor to an Act of general pardon, for that is the
Kings free gift, after which ended, followed the dissolution of the Parliament
in these words, Dominus Custos magni sigilli ex mandato dominae Reginae tunc
praesentis dissolvit praesens Parliamentum.

The names of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are at the beginning of the
Parliament delivered to the Clerk of the Crown (who always attends in the House
of Lords) and entered into his book.

After the Lord Keepers speech ended her Majesty calling him unto her commanded
him to give the Lower House Authority to choose their Speaker and present him
the Thursday following, unto which day he adjourned the Parliament.

At which day Sr Edward Coke Knight being chosen and admitted Speaker, the
Queen allowed his petitions for access unto her Majesty, privileges and liberty
of speech, with a caution that they should not speak irreverently either of the
Church or State, and then the Lord Keeper by the Queens command adjourned the
Parliament until the Saturday following.

When the House of Commons being again assembled Mr Peter Wentworth and Sir
Henry Bromley delivered a petition to the Lord Keeper, therein desiring the
Lords of the Upper House to be supplicants with them of the Lower unto her
Majesty for the entailing of the Succession to the Crown, whereof a bill was
ready prepared.

With which her Majesty being highly displeased charged the Council to call
the parties before them, whereupon Sr Thomas Heneage sent presently for them,
commanded them to forbear going to the Parliament and not to go out of their
several lodgings, and the day after they were called before the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh, the Lord Buckhurst and Sr Thomas Heneage, who informing them how
highly her Majesty was offended, told them they must needs commit them, Mr
Wentworth was sent prisoner to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromley and one Mr Stevens
(to whom he had imparted it) and Mr Welsh the other Knight of the shire for
Worcestershire to the Fleet.

A bill being offered by Mr Morris Attorney of the Court of Wards against the
usage of Ecclesiastical discipline by the Prelates, with an intent that the
House might be suitors to her Majesty to allow it, he was sent for to the Court
and committed to the keeping of Sir John Fortescue a Parliament man; And she
sent for the Speaker and by him sent a message to the House of Commons, which
he did not omit to deliver in her very words, that it was in her and her power
to call Parliaments, it was in her power to end and determine the same, and it
was in her power to assent or dissent to any thing done in Parliament.

And her Majesty's pleasure being by the Lord Keeper delivered unto them, that
it was not meant that they should meddle with matters of State, or causes
Ecclesiastical, she wondered that any should be of so high a Commandment to
attempt a thing contrary to that which she had so expressly forbidden, and
therefore with this she was highly displeased, and charged the Speaker upon his
Allegiance that if any such bill be exhibited not to receive it,

An Act was sent up by the Commons to the Lords who amended somewhat therein
but what they amend cannot be altered by the Commons, but the Lords will give
their reasons for such their amendment.

The Commons complaining of a Breach of Privilege that the Lord Keeper did in
the behalf of the Lords give answers unto their messages, and did not come down
unto hose that P. 91. 93. 94. 95. 101.
were sent to the Bar, after a great debate and much advice and consultation,
it was resolved that the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor ought to sit in his
place covered, when he gave them answers, and that if it had been lately
otherwise done, it was by error and mistake, but ought not; which then
Lordships by Mr Attorney General and Sergeant Harris signifying to the Lower
House, desired them to send some of their House to receive their Lordships
answer, whereunto they seemed to assent and returned some of their Knights and
Burgesses with those that before demanded satisfaction to receive their answer,
which being declared unto them, they by the mouth of Sr William Knolles (one o^
(...) House of Commons) protested that they had no Commission to receive an
answer in that form, after which upon a conference betwixt both Houses upon
great debate and arguments, it was resolved, that the order and custom of the
House of Lords was, that when any Bills or messages were sent to them, the Lord
Keeper and some of the Lords were to ^rise from their places and from thence to
go unto the Bar and receive the said Bills or messages; but contrariwise when
any answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper in the name and behalf of the
Lords, the Commons sent were to stand at the Bar and the Lord Keeper is to
receive the Bills or answer the messages with his head covered, and all the
Lords were to Keep their places with which the Lower House was satisfied, and
the same order has been ever since observed accordingly.

Anno 39. Eliz. There being in former times a custom in the house of Commons,
to have a bill read before the house did arise, the same could not now be done
at that time because her Majesty and the upper House had adjourned the
Parliament until Saturday Sennight at Eight of the Clock in the Morning, which
being signified by their Speaker he said all the Members of the House might
depart, and so they did.

Eodem Anno. At the ending of the Parliament after they had given the Queen
subsidies and prayed her assent to such Ibidem. 127.
laws as had passed both Houses, she gave the Royal assent to 24 public Acts,
and 19 private, but refused 48 Bills, which had passed both the Houses.

Anno 43. Eliz. John Crook Esquire. Recorder of London being chosen Speaker of the
House of Commons in Parliament disabling himself desired the Queen to command
the House of Commons to choose another, but his excuse received no allowance.

The Lord Chief Justice of the Queens bench and Common pleas together with the
Lord Chief Baron and Attorney General were ordered to attend a Committee of
Lords and Bishops.

Sr John Popham Lord Chief Justice, Francis Gaudy one of the Justices of the
Kings bench, George Kingsmill one of the Common pleas, Dr Carew and Dr Stanhop
were constituted Receivers of petitions for Gascoigne and other lands beyond
the Seas. Sr Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common pleas,
Sr William Peryam Lord Chief Baron, Thomas Walmisley one of the Justices of the
Common pleas, Dr Swale and Dr Hone.

Tryers of petitions of England, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Marquis of
Winchester, Earls of Sussex, Lord Marshall, Lord Admiral, and Steward of the
Queens Household, Earls of Nottingham, and Hertford, Bishops of London, Durham,
and Winchester, Lords Zouch and Cobham calling unto them the Lord Keeper, Lord
Treasurer, and the Queens Sergeants at Law.

Great fault was found by many of the House of the factouring and bribing of
too many of the Justices of the Peace, and it was by one of the members
alleged, that the five bills ^arely passed against Swearing, Drunkenness, and
for the making of good Ale, would be as much worth to those kind of Justices of
the Peace as a Subsidy and two Fifteens.

Mr Conisby Gentleman Usher of the House of Peers complained that forasmuch
upon the breach of any Privilege of that House he only was to be employed, and
not the Sergeant at Arms, the House ordered a Committee to consider of
Presidents and settle it, a motion was made by the Lord Keeper and approved of
by the Lords, that the Ancient course of the House might be kept by certifying
the Excuses for the absence of any of the Peers by the Peers and not by others.

The House being offended with Sr Walter Rawleigh for some words, and crying to
the Bar, Mr Brown a Lawyer stood up and said, Mr Speaker par in parem non
habet Imperium we are as members of one body and we cannot Judge one another,
whereupon it being put to the question, it was resolved in the negative that he
should not stand at the Bar.

The Speaker of the House of Commons at the ending of the Parliament of 44.
Eliz. humbly desired of the Queen, that certain Acts may be made Laws by her
Royal assent, which gives life unto them.

Unto which the Lord Keeper answered, that as touching her Majesty's pioceeding
in the making of Laws and giving her Royal assent, that should be as God
directed her Sacred Spirit, and delivered her Majesty's commandment, that as
to the Commons proceedings in the matter of her Prerogative she is persuaded
that Subjects did never more dutifully observe, and that she understood they
did but obiter touch her Prerogative, and no otherwise but by humble petition,
but she well perceived that private respects are privately masked under
public pretenses.

Admonished the Justices of the Peace (some whereof might probably be of the
House of Commons) that they should not deserve the Epithetes of prowling
Justices, Justices of Quarrels, who counted Champerty good Conscience, Sinning
Justices who did suck and consume the good of this Commonwealth, and likewise
all those who did lie, if not all the Year, yet at the least Three Quarters of
the Year in the City of London.

Anno 43. Eliz. One Mr Leigh of the House of Commons complained, that whilst
the Speaker of the House of Commons was presented to the Queen, he was denied
entrance into the House of Peers, which the Lords excused by saying it was the
ignorance of some of the Grooms or attendance, in the choosing of a Speaker, Mr
Knolls the Comptroller alleged that it was not for the State of the Queen to
permit a confused multitude to speak unto her, when it might often happen that
one or some might move, or speak that which another, or some or many would
contradict or not allow.

The Queen being sat in her State in the House of Lords, the House of Commons
were sent for to present their Speaker, who in a modest pretense of disability
prayed her Majesty to command the House of Commons to choose one more able but
had it not allowed.

And she in her grant of freedom of speech gave a caution not to do it in vain
matters, verbosities, contentions or contradictions, nor to make addresses unto
her; but only in matters of consequence, and prohibited their retaining or
priviledging desperate debtors upon pain of her displeasure, and desired a Law
might be made to that purpose.

Which done the Lord Keeper said, for great and weighty causes her Highness's
pleasure was that the Parliament should be adjourned until the Friday
following.

At which time the House of Commons did appoint a Minister every morning before
the House sat to officiate and use a set form of prayer specially ordained, to
desire Gods blessing upon their Counsels and preserve the Queen their
Sovereign.

The Ancient usage of not coming into the House of Commons with spurs, was
moved by the Speaker to be observed, others moved that they might not come with
Boots and Rapiers. but nothing was done therein.

Sr Robert Wroth a Member of the House of Commons did in his own particular
offer 100 l. per Annum to the Wars.

Sr Andrew Noel Sheriff of Rutlandshire having returned himself to be a Knight
of the shire for that County, it was adjudged by the House of Commons to be
void, because it was against the Tenor and exception of the Writ, and that he
ought to be Fined.

In the debate whither the Speaker should send his Warrant to the Clerk of the
Crown for the Election of a Burgess, it was answered by one of that House and
not contradicted, that (since 26. Eliz.) he did ex officio send his Warrant to
the Clerk of the Crown, who is to certify the Lord Keeper and so make the
Warrant.

Sr Francis Hastings a member going down the Stairs, a Page offering to thrust
him was brought to the Bar and committed, but was the next day upon the motion
of Sr Francis, and his submission upon his knees released, some of the House
moved to send him to a Barbers to have his hair cut, because it was too long,
but others dissuaded it, as a matter not becoming the gravity of the House.

Sr Walter Rawleigh declared that the Queen had sold her jewels, the money lent
her by her Subjects was yet unpaid, Idem ibidem fol. 19^.
she had sold much of her Lands, spared money out of her own purse and apparel
for her peoples sakes, and for his own part wished, that they would
bountifully, according to their Estates, contribute to her Majesty's
necessities, as they now stand.

Mr Townsend one of the Members declared in the House of Commons, that they
were Summoned and called as a grand Jury of the Land, though not upon their
Oaths, yet upon their conscience, and was not contradicted.

Sr Edward Hobby said it was always the custom of the House of Commons to have
their Warrant for the Election of a new Member directed by their Speaker to the
Clark of the Crown.

But Sr Francis Hastings said that the Lord Keeper had in private informed him,
that he had rather have it made to himself, then to any inferior Minister.

Sr Edward Hobby said that the Parliament being the highest Court was to
Command all other Courts

A bill being brought in for explanation of the Common Law concerning the
Queens Letters Patent, and certain Monopolies, Mr Spicer a Burgess of Warwick
said, that bill might touch the prerogative Royal, which was, as he had
learned, so transcendant, as the eye of the Subject may not aspire thereunto,
and therefore be it far from him that the State and prerogative Royal of the
Prince should be tied by him or Idem (...) (...).
the Act of any other Subject.

Mr Francis Bacon said for the prerogative royal of the Prince, for his part
he ever allowed it, and is such as he hoped should never be discussed, the
Queen is our Sovereign, has both a restraning and enlarging liberty of her
Prerogative, that is, has power by her patents to set at liberty things
restrained by Statute Law, by Non obstante's of Penal Laws or otherwise, and
by her Prerogative to restrain things that are at liberty as by her
Letters Patent for new inventions, license for transportation, etc. But Mr
Speaker pointing to the bill said, this is no stranger in this place, but a
stranger in this vestment, the use has been ever by petition to humble our
selves to her Majesty, and by petition to desire to have the grievances
redressed, especially when the remedy touches her in Right or Prerogative; If
her Majesty make a patent or a Monopoly to any of her servants, that we must
cry out against, but if she grants it to a namber of Burgesses or a
Corporation, that must stand, and that forsooth is no Monopoly, I say and I say
again that we ought not to deal or meddle with or judge of her Majesty's
Prerogative I wish every man therefore to be careful of this point.

Mr Lawrence Hyde said, I do owe a duty to God and Loyalty to my Prince, I made
it (the Bill) and I think I understand it, far be it from this heart of mine to
write anything in prejudice or derogation of her Majesty's Prerogative Royal
and the State.

Mr Sergeant Harris moved that the Queen might be petitioned by the House in
all Humility.

Mr Francis Moor, afterwatds Sergeant Moor said he did know the Queens
Prerogative was a thing curious to be dealt with.

Sr George Moor said, We know the power of her Majesty cannot be restrained by
any Act, why therefore should we thus talk? Admit we should make the Statute
with a non obstante, yet the Queen may grant a Patent with a non obstante to
cross it.

Mr Spicer said, He was no Apostate, but should stick to his former faith,
which was, that it should be by way of Petition, and that a course by Bill
would neither be gratum nor tutum.

Mr Davies said, God had given power to absolute Princes, which he attributes
to himself Dixi quod Dii estis, and as he attributes unto them, he has given
unto them Majesty, Justice, and Mercy; Majesty in respect of the Honor that a
Subject owes unto his Prince, Justice in respect he can do no Wrong, and
therefore the Law is in First H. 7. the King cannot commit a disseisin: Mercy,
in respect he gives leave to his Subjects to right themselves by Law.

Mr Secretary Cecill said, I am a Servant to the Queen, and before I would
speak or give any consent to a case that should debase her Sovereignty or
abridge it, I would wish my tongue cut out of my Head, I am sure there were
Lawmakers before there were Laws, if you stand upon Law and dispute her
Majesty's Prerogative hear what Bracton says, Praerogatium nemo audeat
disputare; for my own part I like not such courses should be taken, and you Mr
Speaker should perform the charge which her Majesty gave unto you at the
beginning of this Parliament not to receive Bills of this nature, for her
Majesty's ears be open to all our grievances, and her hands stretched out to
every man's petition.

All which worthy and dutyfull expressions of duty and Loyalty to their
Sovereign were made by Mr Spicer, Mr Francis Bacon, Sr Robert Cecill, Sr George
Moor, Sergeant Francis Moore, Sr Walter Rawleigh and others, without any
neglect of the good of the public, or the Office of Members of the House of
Commons Elected only upon their Princes Writs and Warrants ad faciendum and
consentiendum to those things, which should be by their Soveregn ordained by
the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
without any question or contradiction made thereupon, or calling them to the
Bar, Imprisoning them in the Tower of London, excluding them the House, or
making them ask pardon upon their knees, with other exorbitances which some of
their Successors have too often usurped to ask pardon of their fellow Members
who did not at all represent those that Elected them who were not wont to call
everything that suited not with their fancies to be an Error against the sense
or Tide of the House, or to be sent to the prison of the Tower of London, none
of their prison, or under their command or Authority, without their Sovereigns
privity or order, being far without the Bounds or reach of their Commission or
purpose of it, and an incroachment upon the regal power, was in the House of
Commons in Parliament used until the Late distemper thereof, or for their late
Speaker Mr Williams when Sr Robert Peyton one of their Members was for some
matter which they would create to be criminal, brought upon his knees, and
adjudged to be expelled the House and to receive his sentence from their
Speaker, in no smoother an expression or language then, Go thou cursed thou
worst of men, the House of Commons has spewed thee out, when they and others
may know that the House of Peers do never use by themselves to exclude any of
their members without the order and concurrence of their Sovereign, and in case
of Treason.

Upon the great debate of Monopolies, as they called them, granted by the
Queen, a list being brought into the House, she having notice thereof sent for
the Speaker and declared unto him, that for any patents granted by her, whereby
any of her Subjects might be grieved or oppressed, she would take present order
for reformation thereof, her Kingly Prerogative was tender, and therefore
desired them not to speak or doubt of her careful reformation, but that some
should presently be repealed, others suspended, and none put in execution, but
such as by a Trial at Law should appear to be for the good of the people,
which he reporting to the House to his unspeakable joy (as he said,) and
comfort, but thereupon Secretary Cecill said that there was no reason all
should be revoked, for the Queen meant not to be swept out of her Prerogative.

And therefore gave them a caution for the future, to believe that what soever
is subject to a public exposition cannot be good, and said that Parliamentary
matters were ordinarily talked of in the streets, that the time was never more
apt to disorder, or make ill interpretations of good meanings, and thought
those persons would be glad that all Sovereignty were turned into Popularity,
we being here but the popular bouch, and our liberty, but the liberty of the
Subject; if any man in the House speak wisely we do him great wrong to
interrupt him, if foolishly, let us hear him out; we shall have the more cause
to tax him, and I do heartily pray that no member of this House may plus verbis
offendere quam concilio inuare.

Mr Francis Moore moved that the Speaker in the name of the House might give
thanks to her Majesty for setting at liberty her Subjects from the thraldom of
those monopolies, and crave pardon for any extravagancy of words in that House.

Mr Wingfield wept and said his heart was not able to conceive, or his tongue
express the joy that he had in that message, but his opinion and Mr Francis
Moore and Mr Francis Bacon's were against the making of the Apology, for that
would be to accuse themselves of a fault, when they had committed none, and
being put to the vote, it was by the whole House agreed, that the Speaker
should return the Queen their humble thanks.

Mr Donald wished that her gracious message might be recorded in their books;
others that it might be in Letters of Gold, others in their Hearts. Idem ibidem
fall. 258. and 29^.


Mr Secretary Cecill said, there is not any soul living deserves thanks in this
cause, but our Sovereign.

Mr Francis Bacon said, he had served as a member in 7 Parliaments and never
knew but two committed to the Tower, the one was Mr Arthur Hall for saying,
that the Lower House was a new Person in the Trinity, and the other was Parry
for making a seditious speech in the House.

When the thanks were given by the Speaker, she said She was the person that
still (yet under God) had delivered them, and trusted that by his Almighty
power she should be the Instrument to protect them.

Declared to the Speaker of the House of Commons that she rejoiced not so much
to be a Queen as a Queen over so thankful a people.

Sir George Belgrave was complained (...) for procuring himself to be elected
Burgess of Leicester by appearing in a blew coat with the Earl of Huntingtons
cognizance, for which the Queens Attorney Sr Edward Coke exhibited in the Earl
of Huntingtons name an Information at the Queens suite in the Star Chamber.

Mr Bacon said there never were but 2 articuli super chartas, the one when the
Sword was in the Commons hands, the other Articuli Cleri, when the Clergy of
the land bore sway.

Some bill being brought in concerning monopolies which had been formerly by
the Queen redressed, Sr Edward Hobby said, If we will be dealing herein, by
petition will be our only course, this is a matter of Prerogative, and this no
place to dispute it.

Upon the bill concerning the transport of Iron ordnance, Mr Carry said we take
it for an use in the House, that when any great and weighty matter or bill is
here handled, we straightway say, it touches the Prerogative, and that must
not be meddled withal, and by that we come here to do our Country good, bereave
them of that good help we might administer unto them.

To which Mr Speaker replied qui vadit plane vadit^sane, let us lay down our
griefs in the preamble of the bill, and make it by way of petition.

Mr Francis Hastings said, How swiftly and sweetly her Majesty apprehended our
griefs I think there is no Subject but knows; for us then to deal in a matter
so highly touching her Prerogative, we shall not only give her Majesty just
cause of offense, but to deny our Proceeding by bill.

Sr George Moor disliked the proceeding by bill.

Mr Laurence Hyde said that he saw no reason, but we may proceed by bill, and
not touch her Prerogative, her Majesty is not more careful and watchful of
her Prerogative then H. 8. and E. 6. were, and then there was no doubt or
mention made of Prerogative.

Mr Comptroller said, in duty we should proceed to speak unto the Queen by wny
of petition, and not by way of bill or contestation, we must note that her self
and her Prerogative will not be forced, and I do not hold this course by bill
to fiand either with respect or duty.

In the debate concerning the Earl of Huntingtons bill in the Star Chamber
(sitting the Parliament) against Sr George Belgrave for indirectly making
himself a Burgess in Parliament, some of the House moving for a conference with
the Lords about it, Mr Dale said, id possumus quod dejure possumus, and that
the safest way would be a conference.

Mr Tate said, it will not be good to pry too near into her Majesty's
Prerogative by examining Informations exhibited in the Star Chamber.

Mr Carry said, that the custom of the House of Commons was, when they wanted
any Record, to send their Warrant to the Lord Keeper to grant a Certiorari to
have the Record brought into the House in Ferrers case in the Reign of King
Compton's Jurisdiction of C^^rts tit. Parliament.
Henry the 8th, who being a Member of the House of Commons and Imprisoned, the
House of Commons made an address to the King for his release, when they could
not do it by their own power.

Mr Speaker said, I am to deliver unto you her Majesty's commandment that for
the better and more speedy dispatch of causes we should sit in the afternoon,
and that about this day sennight her Majesty's pleasure is this Parliament
shall be ended.

At a conference with the Lords their Lordships told the Commons they would not
have their Judgment prejudicated, and in that conference of the House of
Commons styled themselves the Lower House.

There was says Justice Hussy a whole Alphabet of paenall Laws in the time of
King Henry the 7th.

Mr Mountague said, The praerogative Royal is now in Question, which the law
has over allowed and Maintained.

Sergeant Heal speaking somewhat that displeased the Generality of the House,
they all made an humming, and when he began to speak again, they did the like;
whereupon the Speaker stood up and said, It is a great disorder that this
should be used, for it is the ancient use of this House for every man to be
Silent when any one Speaks, and he that is Speaking should be Suffered to
deliver his mind without interruption.

Sr Edward Hobby upon the debate of a bill brought in for the peoples more
diligent repair to Church whether the Churchwardens were the more proper to
certify the defalters, said that when her Majesty did give us leave to choose
our Speaker, She gave us leave to choose one out of our own number.

Mr Onslow the Clark of the House of Commons in Parliament being Sick, the
House gave his man leave to officiate for him, every Members contributing 12d.
apeice for his support.

In the case of Belgrave depending in the Court of Star Chamber, upon an
Information brought by Sir Edward Coke her Majesty's then Artorney General,
prosecuted by the Earl of Huntington for wearing his Livery to make himself a
Member of the House of Commons in Parliament, after several Motions, Debates,
and Disputes in the House of Commons, a Conference was concluded to be had with
the Lords thereupon, the rather for that it had been said that the Lords in
Parliament were reported to have directed the said Bill to be exhibited in the
Star Chamber, one of their House being concerned therein, and a day appointed
by the Lords accordingly, which failing and revived again by a motion of one of
the Members of the house of Commons in their own House, and the matters
limited, whereupon it should consist, first touching the offense committed by
Mr. Belgrave, whether it was an Infringement of the Liberty of the House of
Commons, and for the first, that the Commons would do nothing therein until a
Conference with them, for the P. 298, 299.
2d. to know the reasons of their Lordships appointment of the Information, and
to bring it to some end. Mr. Speaker at another day certifying a message from
the Lords concerning some other matters, Sir Edward Hobby said, We attended the
Lords that morning which was appointed touching the Information against Mr.
Belgrave, who in the end concluded that forasmuch as it concerns them as the
House of Commons Privileges, they desired some time to consult, and they would
send us word of their Resolutions, and some days after a Copy of the
Information against Belgrave was sent to the House of Peers unto them under the
hand of the Clerk of the Star Chamber by them, and Sir Edward Hobby with some
Bills, but nothing appears to have been done touching the said Information
against Belgrave.

In the mean time a servant of Mr. Huddleston a Knight P. 324, 326.
of the Shire for Cumberland being arrested in London upon a Writ of Execution,
the Plaintiff and Sergeants denying to release him, because it was after
Judgment, they were upon complaint to the House committed to Prison, the
Sergeant released, paying the Sergeant at Arms Fees, and the Plaintiff paying
them as well as his own, was ordered to remain three days in the Sergeants
Custody.

For a like Judgment was cited to have been given by the House of Commons in
the case of the Baron of Wilton in that Parliament. Upon Thursday December the
7th Sir Edward Hobby showed that the Parliament was now in the wain and near
ending, and an order was taken touching the Information delivered to this house
(viz. P. 329.
the House of Commons) in Mr. Belgraves case but nothing done therein, and as
it seems by not taking out the Process no Prosecution of the Cause is
intended against the said Mr. Belgrave, he thought it fit, because the chief
Scope of the said Information seems to be touching a dishonor offered to
this House, that it would please the House that it might be put to the
question, (being the original and first horrid fashion of their afterward
altogether course or manner of voting, and making their own pretended
Liberties) whether he has offended this House yea or no? If he has, he
desires to be censured by you, and if he has not, it will be a good motive to
this Honorable House here present, who are Judges in this Court; (and yet he
might have remembered what long and learned debates and disputes there had
lately been amongst themselves, whether the Custom of that House was or had
been in cases of grievance to proceed by Bill, or Petition to the Queen, and it
was resolved that it was the most proper and dutiful way to proceed by
Petition, which was done accordingly) in clearing the Gentleman of that offense
when it came before them, which had then no higher esteem in Sir Edward Hobbyes
opinion, than to be previous to an after disquisition which that Law and the
Queens Writ, and the Election of that part of the people that brought them
thither, neither did or could give them any greater authority than ad faciendum
and consentiendum to do and perform that which the King and Lords in Parliament
should ordain to be done and performed, and when all should be rightly
considered was an offense) too often by more than one or once since practiced,
to procure a Membership indirectly in an House of Commons in Parliament
(committed by Mr. Belgrave that should as little have been countenanced as
there was any just or legal Warrant for it, wherein Mr. Comptroller said, I
know the Gentleman to be an honest Gentleman, and a great Servant to his Prince
and Country, I think it very fit to clear him, I wish it may be put to the
Question, I will be ready to vouch your sentence for his offense when it P.
330. 321. and 322.
comes there, but if any other matter appears upon opening the Cause, with that
we have nothing to do. Mr. Secretary Cecil who had not long before said in the
same House, he was sorry to see such disorder, and little do you know how for
disorder this Parliament is taxed, I am sorry I said not slandered, I hoped
that as this Parliament began gravely and with Judgment, we should have ended
modestly, and at least with discretion, I protest I have a Libel in my pocket
against the proceedings of this Parliament, could when he came to speak of Mr.
Belgraves aforesaid offense say, he had heard it spoken of diversely, but for
his own part he was more apt to move against Mr. Diet a Member of that House
that drew the Information in the Court of Star Chamber against Mr. Belgrave,
that he should be well punished for seeking to diminish the Praerogative of the
Court (a power or word never before believed to be proper or applicable to the
House of Commons in Parliament) by praying Aid of the Court of Star Chamber for
an offense done to us this Court sitting, (which complexedly with the House of
Peers in Parliament has been, and ought to be styled a Court, but not
separately as to its own constitution or practice;) And desired that Mr.
Belgrave may be cleared here, which will be a good Inducement not to censure
him heavily there, Mr. Ravenscroft said, we ought not proceed against a Fellow
member until he be called; It is not apparent to us that he made the
Information, it is under Mr. Attorneys hand, and therefore ought to be intended
his, for now it is upon Record under his hand, against which we can receive no
Averment, by speech of others, but by the Gentleman's own words, viva voce. And
so there was no more said of that matter.

But it was put to the question whether he should be cleared of the offense to
the House yea or no, and all cried I, I, I, only young Mr. Francis Grantham,
who gave a great No, at which the House laughed, and he blushed.

Some of the Members of the House of Commons observed and found fault, that
when the Members were Voting, the contradicting party went out of the House
leaving the affirming party in the House, they that remained did it more to
continue and abide in their places, than for any affection they had to the Vote
of the other, and there might be also a great mistake in the temputation of the
whole number of the Members, when some never came at all, or tarried but a
little, while many others were struggling in or out about their own Domestic or
particular Affairs. Upon Friday December the 18th. Anno. Dom. 1601. as the
Speaker was going to the House in the morning, the Queens General Pardon was
delivered unto him, which he took and delivered into the House, which they sent
back again, because it was not brought according to course (an haughtiness not
usual or comely for those that were to receive such vast benefits by it.) The
Collection for the Clerk of the Houses Servant supplying his Masters place at
12 d. each Member, amounted unto 25 l. which was after the number of 500
Members.

Afterward Mr. Attorney General assisted by Dr. Carry on the right hand, and
Dr. Stanhop on the left, brought to the House her Majesty's free and general
Pardon, and delivered also to the House their Subsidy-Bill, for the grant of
four entire Subsidies, Eight Fifteenths and Tenths, the Subsidy of the Clergy,
was sent in a Roll according to the usual Acts, whereunto Sir Edward Hobby took
exceptions because it was not sent in a long Skin of Parchment under the Queens
Hand and Seal, so it was sent back again, and then the other was sent.

The Lord Keeper upon the Speakers Speech at the ending of the Parliament said,
That Laws were to have the Queens Royal Assent, as God should direct her Sacred
Spirit, that she says touching their proceeding in the matter of her
Praerogative, that she is persuaded that Subjects did never more dutifully, and
that she understood they did obiter touch her Praerogative, and not otherwise,
but by humble Petitions, and therefore that thanks that a Princess may give to
her Subjects she willingly yields; but now she well perceives that private
respects are privately masked under public pretenses; as for the grant of the
Subsidies, and the manner of giving the Subsidies, it was not persuasive or by
persuasive Inducements, it was speedy, freely, and of Duty, with great
Contentment, that no Prince was ever more unwilling to exact or receive any
thing from the Subject, then she our most Gracious Sovereign, for we all know
she never was a greedy Grasper, nor strait-handed keeper, and therefore she
commanded him to say, that you had done plentifully, dutifully and thankfully;
And added also an admonition to the Justices of Peace (many of which probably
were Members there present) that they would not deserve the Epethites of
prowling Justices, Justices of quarrels, who counted Champerty good Conscience,
Justices who did suck and consume the Wealth and good of the Commonwealth, and
also to those who do lie if not all the year, yet at least three quarters of
the year at London, and after some Bills or Acts of Parliament signed with la
Royne se voult, or come il est desire, and some others with la Royne savisera
dissolved that Parliament in Anno 1601.

Which may be justly accompanied with the Observations and Annotations of that
eminent and learned Lawyer Mr. William Noy Attorney General of that pious
Prince and Martyr King Charles the first, who was by death M. S. of Mr. William
Noy, the learned Attorney General of King Charles the first.
arrested and called out of this World before his Royal Masters Persecution,
and ever to be detested Murder, and in all probability if he had then been
living, would have done more toward the rescue of his Royal Person and
Government, than all these silent Lawyers that crouched under the burdens of
the Rebellious miscalled Commonwealth, and their Man of sin Oliver Cromwell,
that afterward cheated them of their Prey.

In former times, especially since the admittance of Commons elected to Sit in
our great Councils in Parliament, all the Acts of Parliament were framed and
drawn up upon the Petitions of the Parliament, and the Kings Answers thereunto
by the Judges, and the Kings learned Council at Law compendiously, and very
often after the ending of the Parliament, or some good part of time afterward,
and if any thing were oversliped by the Commons, a clause was added to help the
same.

But on the other side, after the Petitions and Answers were read, and the
Royal Assent given, Additions contrary to the meaning of the Commons have been
added, and sometimes somewhat omitted.

All Bills commonly called Petitions, were most usually exhibited by the
Commons, it being their part petere leges, as best knowing what was amiss.

At the making of the Statute of Merton in Anno 20. H. 3. concerning Trespasses
in Parks and Ponds, the answer To. Parl. 20 H. 3. n. 11.
was, it is not yet discussed, for the Lords demanded the imprisonment of the
offenders therein, and the King denied it, wherefore it was deferred.

Some Petitions were formerly indorsed coram Rege, against which the Commons
petitioned in 6 E. 3. n. 31. for that nothing was done upon their Petitions,
and therefore prayed that theirs might be answered before the Parliament ended.
Some Bills have been exhibited in their names, which they agreed not unto, as
in Anno 21. E. 4. 3. concerning exceptions of Villenage, where the Commons in
their Petition afterward alleged it to be expressly against the Laws and
Customs of the Land, and therefore prayed the King and his good Council, to
prevent the mischiefs, which might happen by that Petition, and maintain the
good Laws and Customs of the Land in his time, and the times of his Ancestors,
by the sages of the Law used, and without having regard to the Petitions of any
singular Persons to the overthrow and open undoing of the Law of the Land.

The Commons prayed that the Petitions, which were delivered by them in the
last Parliament, and by our To. Parl. 22 E. 3. n. 30.
Lord the King, Prelates and Grandees of the Land answered and granted, be
held, and the answers before granted, not changed by any Bill delivered in this
Parliament, in the name of the Commons, or of any other, for the Commons do not
avow any such Bill.

Unto which was answered another time, the King by the advice of the Prelates
and Grandees caused to be answered the Petitions of the Commons touching the
To. Parl. 25. E. 3. n. 39.
Laws of the Land, that the Laws had and used in times past, nor the process
used hereafter, cannot be changed without making thereon a new Statute, the
which thing to do the King would not then, nor yet can intend for diverse
reasons, but as soon as he can intend it, he will take the Grandees and Sages
of his Council about him, and Ordain upon such Articles and others touching the
amendment of the Law by their Advice and Council, so as reason and equity shall
be done to all his Leiges and Subjects.

Anno 25. E. 3. Item priontles Commons, that for no Bill, especially of
singular Persons, no Statute heretofore ordained be changed, nor other process
made upon the Execution of the Statutes, which has not been used in times past.

About which time, or not long before, the Commons did use to present their
Bills (or Petitions) to the Re ceivers of Petitions appointed by the King by
one select Messenger (no constant Speaker it seems being then made use of, or
Mace or Ensigns of Honor carried before him, by one of the Kings Sergeants at
Arms, granted or allowed by the King, of which honorable circumstances Mr.
Pryn acknowledges he could find no original) accompanied with diverse other of
the House, which probably, says Mr. Noy, might produce such or the like
inconveniences.

A Subsidy was granted upon condition that their Petitions To. Parl 20 E. 3. n.
11.
and grievances might be received the next day in Parliament, and hasty
remedies ordained, which being promised, the Commons were ordered to deliver
their Petitions to the Clerk of the Parliament (then intended and understood to
be of the House of Peers) which was done accordingly.

Anno 21. E. 3. The Commons advised four days on To. Parl. 21 E. 3. n. 4. and 5.
the Kings charge for their advice to be given touching the French War, wherein
at last they desired to be excused.

Anno 22. E. 3. Granted an Aid upon condition that To. 22 E. 3. n. 4. and 15.
their Petitions of the last Parliament, and of this, might be dispatched in
the presence of four or six of the Commons, and afterward delivered their
Petitions to the Clerk of the Parliament.

Anno 29. E. 3. The cause of Summons being declared To. Parl. 29 E. 3. n. 10.
and 11.
on the Wednesday for a speedy Aid, the Commons were commanded to give their
answer upon the Friday following, and in the mean time to make ready their
Bills and Petitions, on which day after a short parlance with the Lords, they
granted the Subsidy, and exhibited their Petitions before the King.

Anno 42. E. 3. Were charged to make ready their To. Parl. 42 E. 3. n. 8. and 9.
Petitions, and to deliver them upon the Wednesday following.

Anno 43. E. 3. Being commanded to deliver their To. Parl. 43 E. 3. n. 10.
Petitions prayed day until the Saturday following, and then presented the same.

Anno 47. E. 3. The King requiring a speedy Aid, To. Parl. 47 E. 3. n. 4.
commanded, until it should be agreed, that all business in the Parliament
should in the mean time be suspended.

Petitions of the Commons were not always delivered in Parliament to the
Receivers of Petitions, but sometimes delivered publicly to the Lords
themselves, sitting in their upper House, unless sometimes when the Lords had
finished the charge given them by the King, and had no occasion to sit dailiy
in their House, then they were delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament.

Petitions also were sometimes in Parliament directed to be delivered to the
Lord Chancellor, who might of himself give them such Remedies, as the ordinary
course of the Chancery would.

The King usually gave the Answers unto Bills exhibited by the Commons with le
Royle veult, or le Roy's advisera, to ordinary Petitions in the granting or
denying.

The petition of the Commons in 22 E. 3. was answered by our Lord the King, the
Prelates and the Grandees To. Parl. 22 E. 3. n. 30.
of the Land,

In 28 E. 3. Some by the Lords alone. To. Parl. 28 E. 3. n. 27. To. Par. 2 R.
(...). n. 58.


And in the 2d R. 2. n. 47. some answered by the assent of the Commons, as 18.
E. 3. to the 18 Article Anno 29. E. 3. n. 22.

Some refered to the Kings great Council, as 22 E. 3. n. 18. 28 E. 3. n. 43.

Others answered by the Kings Council alone, as Anno 17 E. 3. n. 52. 10 E. 3.
n. 28. and 25 E. 3. n. 27.

Some referred to the King himself, as 22 E. 3. n. 9. 29. E. 3. n. 18. 20 E. 3.
n. 17. 16 R. 2. n. 32. 1 H. 4. n. 118.

The Judges and the Kings learned Council in the Law, and the Lords of the
Kings privy Council were anciently the standing Committees for to consider and
examine Bills or Petitions, but the Judges and the Kings learned Council at Law
do now only attend the Lords in their Committees.

All Bills and petitions in Parliament were formerly directed to the King and
his Council.

Anno 20. E. 3. the Petitions of the Commons were brought before the Grandees
of the Council. To. Parl. 20 E. 3. n. 11.


Anno. 27. E. 3. the Commons pray that their Petitions may be answered, the
which our Lord the King made to To. Parl. 27 E. 3. n. 9.
be read and answered by the Prelates, Grandees, and others of his Council.

The Chancellor tells the Commons that the King To. Parl. (...) E. (...).
(...). (...).
would ordain certain Lords and others after Easter, who should Sit upon the
points of their Petitions not answered at that time.

The Judges are summoned to Parliament ad tractandum cum concilio, for so it
was explained Anno 4. E. 3. the praeamble of the Statute de Bigamies mentions
the presence of certain reverend Fathers Bishops of England and others of the
Kings Council.

Anno 17. E. 3. the Parliament was adjourned before Receivers and Triers of
Petitions were appointed.

Although a time was before limited for the delivery of Petitions, and the
Commons were charged touching the maintenance of Peace, etc.

Petitions were sometimes answered by a Select number of the Kings Council, and
at other times all as the King pleased.

Some Petitions were formerly indorsed coram Rege, against which the Commons
petitioned in 6 E. 3. n. 31. For that nothing was done upon their Petitions,
and therefore prayed that they might be answered before the Parliament ended.

It appears by diverse Answers to Petitions in Parliament, that the Kings
Council unto whom they were committed did but report, what they thought fit to
be done for Answer, prout Anno 15. E. 3. n. 17. where it is To. Parl. 15 E. 3.
n. 17. 26.
said, our Lord the King caused the same Answers to be given to the said
Petitions, the which together with the Petitions were reported in full
Parliament.

Eodem Anno it was answered, Our Lord the King commanded Answers to be made,
the which put into writing were reported before our Lord the King, and the
Prelates, and other Grandees.

Anno 17. E. 3. It seems to the Council that it be To. Parl. 17 E. 3. n. 52.
done.

Anno 18. E. 3. Diverse Petitions of the Commons being exhibited, a Memorandum
was entered, viz. Unto which Petitions it was answered by the King and the
Grandees, as to the second Article, Soit cestipetition granted.

To the third Article il plaist au Roy, etc.

To the eight Article il plaist au Roy and au Son conseil quae se soit.

To the eleventh il plaist au Roy, etc.

To the 12th Article Soient les Statutes sur ceo faites tenus, etc.

Anno eodem the Answer was, It is assented by our Lord To. Parl. 1^. E. 3. n.
32.
the King, the Earls, Barons, Justices, and other Sages of the Law, that the
things above written be done in convenable manner according to the prayer of
the Commons in a long Petition of theirs against provisions from Rome,
whereunto the Bishops durst not assent.

Eodem Anno the Commons exhibited their Petitions, which were answered drawn
into a Statute sealed and delivered unto them Sedentibus before the Parliament
ended, in the same Parliament also the Parliament exhibited their Petitions,
which were answered, sealed and delivered unto them sitting the Parliament,
which was To. Parl. 18. E. 3. n. 11.
not usual, for the Statutes were most commonly made after the end of the
Parliament.

The Answer to one of the Clergies Petitions in this Parliament was accord est
pur assent du conceil.

Unto which may be added those of the 20th year of the Reign of King Edward the
third, which concerned To. Parl. 20. E. 3. n. 33. 35. and 38.
the Pope, to which Answers the Praelates (who were of that Committee) not
daring to agree, the opinion of the temporal Lords and the Judges were only
reported, viz. It seems to the Earls, Barons and other Sages, Laymen of the
Kings Council, etc.

Anno 21. E. 3. il Semble a conseil qu'il faut fair pour To. Parl. 21. E. 3.
n. 63.
grand bien si plaist au Roy and as grandes du terre.

Eodem Anno, It seems unto the King, the Praelates and the Grandees, that the
Custom stand in force, the Commons To. Parl. 21. n. 3.
having petitioned that the Custom of the Cloth made in England might be taken
away.

Anno 25. E. 3. It seems to the Council that such enquires cease, if it
please the King. To. Parl. 25. E. 3. n. 27. 28. 30.


Eodem Anno, It seems to the Council that the Laws heretofore ordained ought
to suffice, for that this Petition is against the Law of the Land, as well as
against the holy Church. It seems to the Council that it ought not to be
granted (the Petition being that no Capias Excommunicat. should issue before a
Scire facias to the party Et al. hujusmodi, etc.

Eodem Anno, It was answered, It is not the interest of To. Parl. 25. E. 3. n.
27.
our Lord the King, nor of the Grantz.

Anno 28. E. 3. n. 33. It seems to the Lords and to the To. Parl. (...). E.
3. n. (...).
Grands that the Petition is reasonable,

Eodem Anno, It is answered, Let the Common Law used To. Parl. (...). E. 3. n.
(...).
stand, for the Lords will not change it.

Anno 30. E. 3. The Petition of the Commons touching To. Parl. (...). E. 3. n.
(...).
Chaplains Wages had two answers, The Archbishops and Bishops at the motion of
the King and Grandees have ordained, etc. And therefore the King and the
Grandees have ordained, etc. Those two Answers are recited almost ad verbum,
the Prelates first, and then the Temporal Lords considered of the Answer.

Anno 47 E. 3. It was answered, The King and the Lords To. Parl. 4^. E. 3. n.
27.
have yet no will to change the Common Law.

Eodem Anno, The Commons do require that every To. Parl. 4^. E. 3.
man's Petition be answered.

Anno 2. R. 2. apud Gloucester le Roy del assent des Praelats, To. Parl. 2. R.
2. n. 74.
Dukes, Countz, Barons, and de les Commons de son Royalme ad ordeigne, etc. The
Commons having petitioned that all manner of Merchants might have free Traffic
here.

And the like Answer was made to their Petition in Anno 3 R. 2 n. 37. and 38.

In 16. R. 2. Upon a Petition of Robert de Mull and his Wife touching the
discharge of a Fine, the King answered, Soyent au Roy car ceo nest petition du
Parliament.

In Anno 20. R. 2. Robert Mull petitioned the Commons stiling them by the title
of honorable and Sage Commons in Parliament, praying them to be discharged of
a Fine to the King imposed upon him, and supplicating them to make Relation
thereof to the Parliament, and alleging that his Bill or Petition had been put
upon the file the last Parliament, which does prove that there was no standing
Committees then appointed by the Commons in Parliament.

2 H. 4. The King by Advice of the Lords in Parliament 2. H. 4. n. 55. 47. 37.
has committed this Petition to his Council.

Eodem Anno upon a Petition of the Commons for removing of Stanks and Milks,
generally, it was answered, It seems to the King and to the Lords, that this
Petition sounds in disherison of the King and of the Lords and others,
wherefore let the Statutes before made be held and kept.

Eodem Anno, It is assented and accorded by the King and Lords, etc.

Anno 2. H. 5. The King by the assent of all the Lords grants, To. Parl. 2.
H. 5. (...). 38 and 37.
etc.

Touching the Petition for taking of Tithe of great Wood contrary to the
Statute of 4 E. 3. whereupon the Judges were of sundry opinions; It was
answered, because the matter of the Petitioners demands required great and
mature deliberation, the King therefore would that it be adjourned and remitted
to the next Parliament, and that the Clerk of the Parliament cause this Article
to be brought before the King, and the Lords at the beginning of the next
Parliament for declaration thereof to be made.

In the 2d year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth the To. Parl. 2. H. 6. n.
12.
King by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons,
granted the contents of their Petition in all points.

Diverse other Answers given do prove Debates to have been in Parliament upon
Petitions betwixt the Lords and the Kings Council.

And says Mr. Noy, that grand and very Attorney General to King Charle(...)
the Martyr, who unhappily died before his Royal (...) had so much need as he
had afterward of his great abilities, or who ever was the careful Examiner of
many of the Parliament Rolls and Compiler of that Manuscript which is honored
with his name, there can be no question made of those or the like Answers that
they were conclusive, but only reported unto them to have their opinion first,
and then their assent by vote after deliberation, which should necessarily
precede their assent, and the Answerers were properly the Lords in the Kings
name.

And the Debate was in the Kings presence, for, says he, I have seen the
fragments of the journal tempore H. 7. which directly shows that the King
himself was present at the Debate of diverse Bills (or Petitions) that were
exhibited to the Commons and the Parliament, being kept in the Kings house, and
near his own lodgings.

The Commons Petition that the Sheriffs be allowed in their accounts for
Liberties, etc. Unto which was answered, The Lords were not advised to assent
unto that which may turn to the decrease of the ancient Farms of the Realm, or
damage of the Crown, for ever, seeing the King is within his tender Age.

The Commons exhibited two Bills against the Ryots of Cheshire and Wales, etc.
To which was answered by To. Parl. 12 R. 2. n. 44.
the assent of all the Lords and Peers, when all the Lords and Peers in
Parliament were charged in the Kings behalf, whereupon they have of their own
good grace and free will promised to aid according to their power.

In the 18th year of the Reign of King Edward third, diverse Answers were made
accord, etc. not naming by whom, and some were general, with only, let this
Petition be granted, yet the Statute touching Pleas to be held before the
Marshal does expound the practice of that age, when it says, that the King by
the assent of the Praelates, great men and the Commons granted the same.

In the Act for moderation of the Statute concerning Provisors, the Commons are
named, and the Lords wholly ^ 4. (...). 11. (...) 45.
omitted, and yet in the next Parliament, Anno 2. H. 4. upon a complaint of the
Commons that the said Act was not truly entered, the Lords (upon examination
granted by the King upon protestation that it should not be drawn into example,
and the King remembering that it was well and truly done as it was agreed upon
in Parliament,) did affirm, that it was truly entered, taking no exceptions at
the said omission, but said, it was entered au maniere come il fuest parlz and
accords par le Roy es Commons.

Anno 17 E. 3. The Commons petitioning that Children born beyond the Seas might
be inheritable of Lands in England, that Statute was not enrolled in the same
year; the Archbishop of Canterbury demanded of all the Praelates and Grandees
then present, whether the Infants of our Lord the King, being born beyond the
Seas, should be inheritable in England, the which Praelates and Grandees being
every one examined by himself, gave their Answers, that the Kings Children are
inheritable wheresoever they be born, but as touching the Subjects Children
born out of the Kings Service they doubted, and charged the Judges to consider
thereof against the next Parliament, the Petition was entered in the Parliament
Roll.

The Commons do pray, that where many Parceners To. 17. E. 3. n. 52.
use an Action Auncestrel, and some are summoned, and have served their Writs
alone without naming the others who have recovered, and in the same manner that
it may be done of Jointenants.

To which the King answered, il sue al conseil qu'il foit fair par le mischief
qu' ad esteentiels cas lieur heirs.

And therefore says Mr. Noy, Let the Lawyers puruse those Parliament Rolls,
viz. 17, 20, 21, 22, 29, 40, 46. 51 E. 3. wherein no Statutes at all were made.

Annis 47 and 50 E. 3. Statutes were made, yet very many of the Petitions were
not granted, but omitted, and doubts not but they will find diverse granted,
which demanded Novelley, and yet not observed for Law, because they were
omitted in the Statute, and that therefore the Commons have petitioned for some
of the same things again in subsequent Parliaments, which they would not have
done (except touching Magna Charta) if they had, had the grant of their former
Petitions been in force.

In the 11th year of the Reign of King H. fourth, To. Parl. 11. H. 4. n. 28. 63.
The Commons do pray that no Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. nor no other Officer,
Judge, or Minister of the Kings taking fees or wages of him, do take any manner
of gift or brocage of any man upon a grievous pain. To which was answered le
Royle voet, which being entered in the Parliament Roll, in the margent was
written, Respectuatur per dominum principem and concilium, whereby it was not
made into a Statute, nor ever observed for a Law.

In the same year they Petition against Attorneys Prothonataries and Filacers,
which being likewise granted and entered in the Parliament Roll, has in the
margent also written the like Respectuatur, and so no Statute made thereon at
any time.

But in the next Parliament 13 H. 4. The Clerks and To. Parl. 13. H. 4. n. 49.
Attorneys exhibiting their Petition to repeal that of 11 H. 4. did allege
that the Petition and Answer, if they be enacted in manner aforesaid into a
Statute, and put in execution, would be grievous, insupportable, and
impossible, and therefore prayed a modification.

To which was answered, Let the Petition touching the Prothonataries and
Filacers be put in suspense until the next Parliament, and in the mean time let
the Justices be charged to inter-commnne of this matter, and report their
advice therein.

And the reason is, because an Ordinance is of a lower nature than a Statute,
and cannot repeal a Statute, which is of an higher, and that Ordinances of
Parliament are seldom published by Proclamation, as the Statutes were, whereby
the Subjects might know how to direct their actions.

The Statute of 15 E. 3. being never used or put in practice, was repealed by a
bare Ordinance in the next Parliament.

In the Statutes or Acts of Parliament concerning London, Anno 28. E. 3. and
Anno 38. E. 3. and Cap. 6. concerning Coroners and Takers of Wood, Cap. 7.
concerning Sheriffs, Anno. 25. E. 3. Cap. 1. concerning Pourveyors, and Cap. 4.
concerning Attachments, and Cap. 2. concerning Treasons, the assent of the
Lords in the Parliament Rolls is wholly omitted, and yet the Statutes the best
Interpreters do mention their Assent.

In the 21 E. 3. the Commons pray that the Petitions To. Parl. 21. E. 3. n. 7.
delivered in the last Parliament be dispatched and answered this Parliament
without any delay, etc.

To which the King answered, The shortness of the time will nor suffer that
those things be dispatched before Easter, and therefore it pleased the King
that those other things be dispatched.

The King in Anno 22. of his Reign greatly prospering in his Wars in France,
and besieging Calice, sent unto his Parliament in England to demand a Subsidy,
putting them in mind of their promise to aid him in those Wars with their
bodies and their purses, whereupon they granted him two fifteens, the King
shortly after informing them of more successes, and that he had granted to the
King of France a Truce, and demanding another Subsidy, and to make them the
more willing thereunto, required their advice, whereupon after four days
deliberation with the Lords, fearing the lengthning of the Wars by Truces,
refused to advise touching the same.

The King on the other side received their Petitions, but answered them not,
and therefore the next Parliament the Commons petitioning for Answers,
conditioned with the King in their grants of the Subsidy to have Answers to
their former Petitions, and those also which were delivered in the present
Parliament; and although they were entered in several Rolls, as if they had been
answered in each Parliament, they were all answered in the latter.

And the use and practice was to enter none but such as had been read.

In the 6th year of the Reign of King E. 3. it being demanded of the Lords and
Commons on the behalf of the King, whether he should stay until the business of
Parliament were finished, or take his Journey in have into the North, they
advised him to go hastily into the North, and to appoint another time for the
dispatch of the business of the people upon their Petitions.

The Parliament giving a very great Subsidy to the King, a condition was
assented unto, that the Petitions of To. Parl. 14. E. 3. n 6. 23.
the Commons should be granted, upon which requests and conditions by
Commandment of our Lord the King by the assent of the Praelates, Earls, Barons
and Commons, a Committee of Praelates, Earls, Barons, the Treasurer, some of
the Judges, and ten Knights of the Shires, six Citizens and Burgesses, whom the
Commons should choose to sit from day to day, as also concerning the Petitions
of the Clergy, and put the same into a Statute.

The which Archbishops, Bishops and others, having heard and tried the said
requests by Common assent and accord, caused the Points and Articles to be put
into a Statute, the which our Lord the King by the assent of all in the said
Parliament commanded to be engrossed, sealed, and firmly to be kept throughout
the whole Realm.

Diverse things are entered in the Parliament Rolls which had not the consent of
the Commons, for that they might have been concluded by the King and the Lords
without them, yet none such could have been entered, but those which were
determined in the open house, and not privately at a Committee.

The Answers to the Commons were appointed to be read Sedente Curia, and a
Committee appointed to prepare To. Parl. 45. E. 3. n. 8. 13. 42.
the Answers to the rest after Easter, and so the Clerk having only read those
that were answered, the Parliament ended, says the Record, in Lent.

Shortly after upon the examination of the Subsidy, that it would not answer
the expectation, he hastily summoned a Magnum concilium in Octabis Trin.
following.

Where after a further grant of a Subsidy, the Petitions which were not
answered the last Parliament being read before the King, Grands and Commons,
the King gave them leave to depart, and so ended the Council. One of the last
Parliament against Impositions upon Woolls without assent of Parliament is made
into a Statute.

And happily it was answered at the Council and not at the Parliament.

And if that very age interpreted it to be legally done, we must do so also
says, that learned Commentator.

Anno 47 E. 3. where the Commons having delivered To. Parl. 47. E. 3. n. 1.
their Petitions, and desired Answers, it was told them that it pleased the
King, if any of them would stay to attend and have Answers of their Petitions,
that the rest might depart, and it was not unusual in those times for the
Commons to have leave to depart, and yet the Lords to stay and dispatch
business afterward, and the same reputed to be done in Parliament prout Anno
6. E. 3. Gregory n. 16. and 6 E. 3. Hill. n 7. in fine 1 R. 2. n 41. and 137.

The Commons did pray the King that he would advise to do that ease unto his
people which he may well do.

And Anno 18. E. 3. do pray that the Statute of Westminster the 2d may be
declared, to which the King answered, Let the Justices and other Sages be
charged to advise of this point until the next Parliament.

They pray that the Statute for the Kings presentment To. Parl. 20. E. 3. n.
43. and 22.
within three years, etc may stand.

Whereunto it was answered (probably by the Lords) let the King be advised and
do further by advice of his Council that which he shall will to be done.

Eodem Anno they do pray that sufficient men be made Sheriffs and abide but one
year, as has been ordained, and that the said Office be not granted for life
or in fee.

Whereunto the King answered, as touching the first point, let the Statute be
kept, as touching the 2d the Council will advise the King that it be not done,
for they be advised that it is against the Statute.

And note, says that learned Observator, that the King was then beyond the
Seas, and the Lords would not give a direct answer in his absence to what
concerned his power to grant an Office in fee.

The Commons show that the Scots entered England in the Kings absence, and pray
that the Prisoners taken in To. Parl. 21. E. 3. n. 9.
the Battle at Durham may be so ordered, as the damage and danger happen not
again.

To which was answered, the King will advise therein with his Grands, and by
their advice ordain that which shall be for the best, and so do, as the Commons
shall be out of doubt of that which they suppose by the help of God.

Which being a matter of State, the Lords would not conclude without the King,
but leave it to himself and his Privy Council.

They pray that no Royal Franchises, Lands, Fees, Advowsons, To. Parl. 21. E.
3. n. 36. 50. and 59.
which belong to the Crown, or are annexed to it be given away or severed.

Unto which was answered, The King will advise with his good Council, that
nothing shall be done in this case unless it be for the honor of himself and
the Realm.

Eodem Anno they do pray, whereas holy Church ought to have free Elections, the
Pope does now begin to give Abbeys and Pryories by Resignations, etc.

That the King would ordain Remedy therein by advice of his Council.

Whereunto was answered, the King will advise with his good Council.

The Commons do show, that whereas the men of the Navy have assented to all
Taxes current in the Land, yet their Ships are taken, and many lost in the
Kings Service without any recompense given unto them.

Wherefore they pray, that the King would be pleased to ordain thereof Remedy.

To which was answered Le Roys' avisera.

Which being a Petition coram Rege concerning him and their Wages and
Recompense, the Lords referred it wholly unto his Majesty.

Anno 22. E. 3. they do pray that no Appeals be received To. Parl. 22. E. 3. n.
13.
of any Apellors of Felony done out of the County where he is imprisoned.

To which the King answered, that will be to make a new Law whereof the King is
not advised as yet.

Anno 25. E. 3. they Petition against the payment of To. Parl. 25. E. 3. n. 37.
Tithe-Wood.

Unto which was answered, the King and his Council will advise of this Petition.

They pray, that the Customs of the Merchants cease, To. Parl. 21. E. 3. n. 21.
and they make their own conduct.

To which was answered, le Roys' avisera, and thereupon will answer in
convenable manner.

Anno 13. E. 3. they pray that a Justice of the one Bench or the other may come
twice a year into the To. Parl. 13. E. 3. n. (...).
Counties beyond Trent.

To which the King answered as touching this point, l' Roys' avisera.

Which amounted not to a denial, for the Judges went Circuit thither afterward.

Anno 37. E. 3. They pray that none be impeached for making Leases for Life in
time of Pestilence, nor hereafter for Lands holden in Capite without License of
Alienation.

To which the King answered, This requires a great To. Parl. 37. E. 3. n. 33.
deliberation and therefore the King will advise therein with his good Council
how this right may be saved, and the Grands and Commons of this Land eased.

Anno 45. E. 3. they Petition for the free passage of Woolls.

To which was answered, Estoit sur avisement.

Anno 50. E. 3. They pray that a Fine levied by Infants To. Parl. 45. E. 3. n.
29.
and Feme Coverts may be reversed within three years after they come to years,
or their Husbands Death.

To which the King answered, le Roys' avisera tanque To. Parl. 50. E. 3. n. 123.
al procheine Parliament de changer le loy devant used.

And it was the observation of Mr. Noy that faithful and learned Attorney of
his late Majesty, that in the Reign of King E. 3. in whose time the Answers of
le Roys' avisera first began by reason of his being continually in War beyond
the Seas, the King or his Council had no leisure, or at least no will to
answer, and so in time s' avisera became as bad as a denial, and no other
Answers given to such Petitions showed, that the King was not pleased to grant
them.

The Commons alleging, that notwithstanding the Statute made concerning Lands
seized into the Kings hands by his Escheators, the Lands after Enquest taken,
and before it can be returned into Chancery are granted to Patentees, and
before the Tenant can be admitted to traverse, the Lands are many times wasted,
do pray, that none be outed by reason of such Enquests until they be returned
into the Chancery, and the Occupiers warned by Scire facias to answer at a day
to come, when if they do not appear and traverse, and find Sureties to answer
the profits, and commit no wast, if it be found for the King, and that if any
Patent be granted, or any thing done to the contrary, the Chancellor do
presently repeal the same, and restore the Complaint to his possession without
warning the Patentee or other occupier as well for the time past as the time to
come.

The Answer unto which was, The King wills and Commands upon great pain that
the Escheators hereafter do duly return all their Enquests in the Term and upon
the pain heretofore ordained by the Statutes.

And further it is accorded by the Lords of the Realm if it please the King,
that before such Enquests be returned into the Chancery, the King shall not
hereafter make any Patent of such Lands in debate unto any, etc. And that the
King of his abundant grace will abstain one month after such return, within
which time the party may traverse the Office, and that the King will not make
any Patent of such Lands unto any Stranger, and if after any be made, it shall
be void.

But touching that which is demanded of Patentees made hereafter le Roys'
avisera.

It being observed by that worthy Observator, that as he conceived the first
part was answered by the Kings Council, and by them reported to the Lords, who
added the rest of the Answer, if it please the King.

And yet the said Answer is vacated upon the Roll, being Crossed all over with
a Pen, and the reason thereof given in the margent with a contrary hand to that
of the Roll, which shows that it was done after the Parliament was ended, and
after the said Roll was engrossed, viz.

Quia dominus noster Rex noluit istam responsionem affirmare, sed verius illam
negavit pro magna part dicens, soit usez come devant en temps de ses nobles
progenitors Roys d Angle terre out ad estre use, Et ideo cancellatur and
damnatur.

And there can be no question but this answer (in the affirmative) was allowed
(at the least not denied) at the time of the Royal assent, and that afterward
when the Statute was to be drawn up, the King taking advantage of the words (si
plest au Roy) did deny it, and so the Roll was vacated.

And the Council (which ought to be intended the Kings Privy Council, for the
Lords were the Kings great Council, and they or any Committee of them assisted
by the Judges whilst the Parliament was in being were at the dissolution or
proroguing thereof all gone out of their former power or employ, and nothing
ought to debar a King from advising with his Privy Council by whose Advice, as
the Writs of Summons do import his greater Council was called to assist them as
well as himself in the time of Parliament, or after it was ended, and whether
the one or the other had just cause to advise the King not to grant that
Petition for it, omitted the finding of Sureties to commit no Wast, and to
answer the Issues to the King, which the Commons offered in their Petition, and
the Lords, if the King so pleased, that no Patent be made to any stranger of
the Lands in debate, which the Commons never desired.

But the Council were the willinger to let it pass, because it was in the Kings
Power to deny it afterward, as he did, whereas, had it been the practice of
those times, the Council would rather have kept back the Answer, and not
suffered it to have been read at the time of giving the Royal Assent,

In the fame Parliament (after the said Petition was granted, and the Assent
cancelled as aforesaid) the Commons delivered openly in Parliament a great Roll
or Schedule, and another Bill annexed to the said Roll containing about 41
Articles, one of which remains Cancelled and Blotted out.

And in a Petition do pray the King their Liege Lord and the continual
Counselors about him (which can be no otherwise understood than of his
constant privy Council) that of all the said Articles comprised in the said
Roll and Schedule or Bill, which are in the file of other Bills in this
Parliament, good Execution and true Justice be done for the profit of the King
our Lord and his whole Realm of England.

Whereupon after it was said by the Chancellor of England on the Kings behalf
to the Knights of the Shires, Citizens and Burgesses there present, that they
sue forth their Writs (for their Wages) the Praelates and Lords arose and took
their leaves of the King their Lord, and so departed that present Parliament.

And after the Parliament ended, the Commons delivered unto the Lords two great
Bills, for the Commonalty of great Yarmouth, the which Bills with the
Indorsements thereupon made by the Lords, were also on the Filace.

Diverse Bills are there mentioned to be delivered, and some mentioned to have
been answered (as happily all were) (says that diligent Observator) by the
Lords of his Majesty's Council after the Parliament ended.

And therefore no marvel if all the Answers were not read on the last day of
the Parliament, when some of them were not made until after the Parliament
ended; and there is a Petition directed to the thrice redoubted To. Parl. 51.
E. 3. n 22, 23.
Lord the King in these words following, viz. Supply vos Leiges, the
Praelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Commons, Citizens, Burgesses, and Merchants,
of the Realm of England.

For Magna Charta to be confirmed unto them, and for a general pardon setting
down the Articles thereof, whereof many were granted and many qualified as the
King and his Council pleased to answer the same.

And it was not the use and practice of those times to keep back any Answer
that was justly displeasing to the King and his Council, much less any other.

For in Anno 11. H. 4. The Commons petition, that To. Parl. 11. H. 4. n. 28.
none of the Kings Officers may receive any gift, etc.

To which the King answered, le Roy le veult.

In the same year a Petition of the Commons concerning Attorneys was granted by
the King, and both the To. Parl. 11. H. 4. n. 63.
Petitions and Answers were engrossed in the Parliament Roll together with the
rest, which shows plainly, that they were Read on the last day of the
Parliament for the Royal Assent.

Yet notwithstanding the Kings Council so misliked them, that when the Clerk
attended with the Roll of that Parliament, for the drawing up of that Statute
(as the manner was) those two Petitions and Answers were not thought good to be
inserted in the Statute, and therefore they did write in the Margent of the
said Roll against the same, these words, Respectuatur per Dominum Principem and
Concilium, which is written with another hand, [and si non antea] le Roy le
veult, answered to a Petition of the Commons without a Statute made there, is
only an Ordinance.

The Commons complain of Commissions granted to To. Parl. 15. E. 3. n. 114. and
40.
enquire of diverse Articles in Air (generally) which have not been heretofore
granted without Assent of Parliament, and of the proceedings of the Justices
therein contrary to the Law in assessing Fines without regard to the Quality of
the Trespass.

To which was answered, The King is pleased that the Commissions be examined in
his presence.

In the 21th year of the Reign of King E. 3. the Commons To. Parl. 21. E. 3 n.
8. (...)
pray that their Petitions for the Common profit, and for amendment to have of
mischiefs, may be answered and indorsed in Parliament before the Commons, so as
they may know the Indorsement, and thereby have Remedy according to the
Ordinance of Parliament.

In the 37th year of the Reign of King E. 3. the Chancellor demanded of the
Commons the last day of the Parliament, after the Answers given to the
Petitioners were Read, if they would have the things so accorded, mys par void'
Ordinance ou de Statute qui disoient qui bone est le matere les chooses par
voydes Ordinances and nemy per Statut and issint est fait.

And yet those were no otherwise drawn up into an Ordinance, than only by
entering the Petitions and Answers in a Parliement Roll.

In the 9th year of his Reign, the Articles of the Clergy 9 E. 3.
being answered, they procured the same Articles and Answers to be exemplified
in such sort as they were entered in the Roll of Parliament (which is lost)
without penning the same in any other form, and were afterward published under
the great Seal of England, with an Observari volumus.

In the Reign of the same King it was accorded, that To. Parl. E. 3.
no Grand of the Land or other of what Estate or degree soever do make prizes
or carriages for the houses of the King, Queen, or their Children, and that by
Warrant shall make payment thereof; and it was ordained by Statute, that that
Accord be cried and published in Westminster Hall; And our Lord the King and
his Council wills the same accord be cried where it behooves.

So as where they prayed the publishing thereof at Westminster Hall, only the
King and his Council added the publishing thereof in London and elsewhere.

And the close Rolls of that year do declare that it was To. Claus. 5 E. 3. m.
2. indors.
published in all the shires of England.

When an Ordinance had its first motion and being in the House of Lords in
Parliament, and agreed on, and was drawn in the form of an Act of Parliament,
it was afterward to receive the Assent of the Commons in Parliament.

In diverse Parliaments when the Commons Petitioned for a Novel Ley, which the
Lords were willing enough to yield unto, and the King to grant, yet for that
the King intended not to make any Statute that Parliament, those Petitions have
been deferred to another time, and diverse others which did not demand a new
Law, were granted and reputed for good Ordinances or Acts of Parliament.

As when in 21 E. 3. The Commons prayed that in To. Parl. 21. E. 3. n. 13.
Writs of Debt or Trespass, if the Plaintiff recover damages against the
Defendant, that he have Execution of the Lands which the Defendant had the day
in which the Writ was purchased.

Unto which the King answered, This cannot be done without a Statute, whereupon
the King will advise with his good Council, and further do that which shall
seem best for his people.

In the same year the Commons do show, that whereas before these times it has
been used, that if Lands To. Parl. 21. E. 3. n. 47.
had been given to a man and his Wife, and the Heirs of their Bodies issuing,
and the one dies, no Issue having been had betwixt them, the other may commit
Wast without being impeached thereof, that it may please our Lord the King to
ordain thereof Remedy, and that in such case a Writ of Wast be ordained.

To which the King answered, Demurge enter les autres Articles don't novel ley
est demandez.

Eodem Anno, Show the Commons, that whereas a Writ of Possession does not lie
of Tenements deviseable, though they be not devised to the great damage of all
the Commons, that it would please our Lord the King and his good Council, to
ordain by Statute that Writs of Possession my lie and hold place as well of
Tenements deviseable in case where they are not devised, as of others, and that
there be saved to the Tenants their Answers in case that they be devised.

Whereunto the King answered, Let it remain amongst the other Articles, whereof
a New Law is demanded.

In the 22d year of the Reign of the same King they To. Parl. 22. E. 3. n. 20.
and 21.
do pray, that for that many are disinherited by non Claim, although they have
good Right, and namely, those who are not learned in the Law, that non Claim be
gone and utterly taken away.

To which the King answered, This would be to make a New Law, which thing
cannot be done for the shortness of time.

Eodem Anno, Pray the Commons, that where a man is attainted at the Suit of the
Party for Trespass done against the Peer, and the Trespasser taken and let by
the Marshal and his Marshals to Mainprise, or at large they be charged with the
Damages.

To which the King answered, To put an Issue to this Article in manner as they
pray, it would be to make a new Law, the which the King is not advised yet to
do.

The Commons do pray, That the Issues and Amerciaments of the Green Wax, be
certainly expressed in the To Parl. 4^ E 3. n 24, 25.
Estreats, and that the Sheriffs be allowed in their Accounts for the Hundreds
granted from the Crown, which Petitions were referred to the next Parliament,
for that the King had no leisure, or no intent to make Statutes thereof at any
time.

The Roll of the Parliament of 34 E. 3. is lost.

In the 17th year of the said Kings Reign, the Commons do pray, the King to
desire the Parliament to consider how he might gain the Arrears of the first
year, and be put in a way for to gain the second year of the said Aid with less
grievance to the People.

But the Lords and Commons were so exasperated by the Excommunication
threatened by the Archbishop of Canterbury against them all, because the King
would not admit him into the Parliament, and that they required a Declaration
to be first made and agreed upon, that the Peers of the Land, whether Officers
or not, be not bound to answer the Kings Suit but in Parliament, and it was a
whole week before the King would agree unto it.

All which time the Archbishop demanded entrance, standing upon his right as
primus Par Angliae, and required to be admitted upon pain of Excommunication.
At the last the said Declaration being first agreed upon by a special Committee
of the Lords, the King granted it, and presently upon the same day the
Archbishop was admitted, who demanded Trial by his Peers.

But as touching the Aid for the King, the Lords and Commons incensed by the
Clergy, flatly answered, that if the conditions of the grant in Anno 14. were
not performed, they would pay none.

After which the Laity and the Clergy exhibited their Petitions (as the manner
then was) severally but petitioning the one for the other, as they never did
since or before, except in Anno 25. E. 1. when the Popish Clergy had put that
great and Victorious King also to the like plunge, and their Petitions being
answered by the Kings Council (who were the standing Committee for that
purpose) but the Lords and Commons disliked thereof, and obtained a Special
Committee of themselves to consider of the same, which being reported and well
liked, a Statute was made thereupon by a Committee of the Grands and Commons,
which being read before the King, and Sealed with his great Seal, and delivered
to the Grands and Commons, diverse of the Kings Council, as the Treasurer, some
of the Justices of both Benches, the Steward of his House and the Chamberlain
were sworn upon the Cross of Canterbury to observe the same as much as to them
belonged, but yet the said Counselors, Treasurer, and Justices made their
Protestation, that they assented not to the making of the said Statute, nor to
the form thereof, neither could they keep the same if they were contrary to the
Laws and Usages of the Realm, which they were sworn to observe, which
disorderly Parliament ending in May, and the King intending not to suffer the
said Statute to be put in Execution, summoned his great Council to meet at
London in July following, to Repeal the same, but there were so many of the
Praelates called thereunto, although the Archbishop was omitted, that he could
not effect his desire therein, wherefore he summoned another great Council to
meet at Westminster about Michaelmas following, whereby the Assent of the
Earls, Barons, and other wise men, (not warning any Praelates) the said Statute
was repealed.

In which Statute so Repealed, there will appear to have been many
inconveniences both to the King and his People, if it had continued in force.

The 2d Chapter whereof touching Trial by Peers swerved very much from the true
meaning of Magna Charta, cap. 26. Nullus liber homo, etc. For that appoints
his Trial to be by his Peers, but restrains it not unto any place, whereas this
limits the Trials of the Peers of the Land to be in Parliament only, which
would be very inconvenient to the King to wait for a Parliament for every
Offense, and very troublesome to the Commons to be so often troubled thither,
and no way beneficial for the Temporal Lords, for they, whether in Parliament,
or out of Parliament, were ever to be tried per Nobiles Pares.

The 4th Chapter had Clauses, that the King should place New Officers when they
fall but by accord of the Grands, which shall be nearest in the Country, which
is directly against the dignity of the King, to be thus limited in the choice
of his Officers, and prove as inconvenient to the Subject, if those Grands
should not be men of Merit.

That the King shall take all Offices except the Judges, etc. into his hands
the 3d day of every Parliament, and the Officers be put to answer every
complaint, and if they be attainted, shall be judged by the Peers in
Parliament, and the King shall cause Execution to be pronounced and be done
accordingly without dclay, which is altogether unjust and against all Right and
Reason and against the Law, to put any man out of his place before Judgment and
Conviction, and against the Right and Dignity of the Crown to bind the King to
Execute the judgment of the Peers; And it is observable, that it was not in the
Petition, but was added afterward by the Committee, who drew up the Answer to
the same, and so was the 4th Clause penned by the said Committee much more
beneficial for the Subjects than was in the Petitions or Answers.

Which particulars well considered, no man can blame the King for his
dissimulation at that time, and his Repeal of that Statute.

In the Parliament of 18 E. 3. where the King having summoned a former
Parliament in the year before, and therein pacified the Lords and Commons so
well as they all agreed, that the said Statute made in the 15th year of his
Reign, should be Repealed and taken away, and loose the name of a Statute, for
as much as it is prejudicial and contrary to the Laws and Usages of the Realm,
and to the Rights and Praerogatives of the King.

But for that some Articles were comprised in the said Statute which were
reasonable, and according to the Law and Reason; It was accorded by our Lord
the King and his Commons, that of such Articles and others accorded in this
present Parliament, a new Statute be made by the advice of the Justices and
other Sages, and held for ever.

And no Statute being made, the Commons prayed the King to have the Answers to
their Petitions in writing in manner of a Patent under the great Seal of
England for every County, City and good Town, one Patent for the comfort of the
People, which the King granted by the advice of the Praelates and Grands, most
of which were the Judges, Officers of State, and Privy Counselors of the King,
which Patent was sealed and entered in the Patent Roll, under which was written,
la Charter ensealer pour les Communs.

After which the King summoned three Parliaments in 20, 21, and 22. But no
Statute was made in either of them. The next Statute was made in Anno 25 E. 3.
in which year the King had two Parliaments and Statutes made, but mention
nothing by whom they were made, only the Commons do pray, that the Petitions
reasonably prayed by the Commons be granted, confirmed and sealed before the
departure of the Parliament.

And in the same Parliament n. 43. The Commons praying, that the Statute made
the last Parliament touching Reservations, be published and put in Execution.

Unto which the King answered, Let the Statute be viewed and recited before the
Council, and if need be in any point, let it be better declared and amended, as
the Statute of the King and the Realm be kept.

By which it appears, that the Council penned the Statutes.

Anno 27. E. 3. The King summoned a great Council, whither many Commons were
sent, and it was agreed, that the Ordinances of the said Council should be
recited in the next Parliament.

Anno 28. E. 3. n. 16. The Commons prayed, that the Ordinances of the Staple,
and all the other Ordinances made at the last great Council, which they have
seen with great deliberation, be affirmed in this Parliament, and held for a
Statute to endure for ever.

Unto which the King and Lords agreed with one mind, so always, that if any
thing be to be put out, let it be done in Parliament when need shall be, and
not in any other manner.

And accordingly there is an Addition at the end of the first Chapter against
Provisors, as in the Statute Roll and Print, but not in rot. Concilii Anno 27.
nor yet in the Parliament Roll de Anno 28. E. 3. That whole Addition seeming to
be added by the Council alone, and yet showed to the Parliament for their
consent before the said Statute was published.

And it is observable by that of 27 E. 3. n. 43. and this of 28 E. 3. n. 16.
That the Statutes were most usually made long after the Parliament ended,
although in the Parliaments of 14, 15. and 18 E. 3. they were engrossed and
sealed in the time of Parliament sedente curia.

Statutes were made when some of our Kings were beyond Sea, which happened
often in the Raigns of. E. 3. and H. 5.

Anno 25. E. 1. a Parliament was held at London when the King was in Flanders
by his Son Edward, and the Statute made therein was put into the form of a
Charter or Patent.

Anno 13. E. 3. were two Parliaments whilst the King was beyond the Seas, but
no Petitions or Statutes in either.

Anno 14. E. 3. a Parliament was holden in the Kings absence beyond the Seas by
his Son Edward Duke of Cornwall Guardian of England, but no Petition of the
Commons nor Statute.

Anno 23. E. 3. a Parliament was held in the Kings absence by Lyonell the Kings
Son, Guardian of England, and diverse Petitions of the Commons were then
answered, but no Statute made thereof.

Anno 51. E. 3. the King could not be present at the beginning of the
Parliament, but granted a Commission to Richard Prince of Wales to begin the
same, Et ad faciendum ea quae pro nobis et per nos facienda fuerint.

And yet the Lords went to the King (lying sick at Sheene) the day before the
Parliament ended, where he gave his Royal Assent unto the Answers made unto the
Petitions, and commanded them to be read the next day in full Parliament, but
yet no Statute was made thereon, notwithstanding the Commission, for the
Commission was but for matters to be done in Parliament as the words Ibidem
facienda fuerint do import.

Anno 8. H 5. a Parliament was held in England by Humfrey Duke of Gloucester,
the King being then beyond the Seas, wherein the Commons petitioned n. 16. That
whereas it had been told them by diverse Lords in this Parliament that the
Petitions to be delivered to the Duke of Gloucester Guardian of England, shall
not be engrossed before they be first sent beyond the Seas to our Sovereign
Lord the King to have therein his Royal Assent and Advice, wherefore may it
please the said Lord Duke to ordain by authority of this present arliament,
That all the Petitions delivered by the Commons to the said Duke in the
Parliament be answered and determined within this Realm of England during the
said Parliament, and if any Petition remain not answered and determined during
the said Parliament, that they be held for void and of none effect, and that
this Ordinance be of force and hold place in every Parliament to be held in the
Realm in time to come.

To which was answered, Soit avise per le Roy.

Howsoever it may be conceived, that all the Petitions with the Answers were
sent to the King for his Advice and Assent which of them should be in the
Statute, and which not, for in that Statute consisting of three Chapters which
was made that year, there are only two of the answers to their Petitions
determined that is made into the said Statute, viz. pet. n. 4. in the 2d cap.
and pet. n. 7. in the 3 cap. The Commons did not Petition for any thing
contained in the 5th cap. neither is there any thing recorded thereof in that
Parliament Roll; and although one other of the Commons Petitions n. 15. for
Women Aliens the Widows of Englishmen to have Dower was granted absolutely, and
the Petition n. 8. against Retail of sweet Wines altogether, and the Petition
n. 9. That Gascoign Wine should not be sold for above 6 d. the Gallon were
granted with be it as is desired if it please the King.

Yet neitheir of these Petitions are in the Statute.

The usual time for making the Statutes, was after the the end of every
Parliament, yea after the Parliament Roll was engrossed,

Anno 3. R. 2. The Temporal Lords met in the great Council after the Parliament
was ended, where the Clerk read unto them the Enrolment of the Ordinance in
that Parliament touching the power of the Justices of the Peace.

At which time it is probable the Statute was made, and that Ordinance quite
altered.

Anno 11 H. 4. n. 28. and 63. The Petitions and their Answers agreed on in
Parliament, are entered in the Roll with the rest, which past into the Statute
of that year, and in the margent was written with another hand, Respectuatur
per dominum Principem and concilium, and neither of those are in the Statute,
by which it is very plain, that the Kings Council met after the Parliament was
ended to consider of the Petitions which were answered, and which of them were
fit to be put into the Statute, and which not, and when the Clerk attended with
the Parliament Roll, the Council thought fit to respite those, and to deny them
they could not.

And it is evident by the many additions in the Statutes and alterations
thereof, from the Answers agreed on in Parliament, that the Statutes were made
afterward.

And many Chapters in several Statutes are not at all entered in the Parliament
Rolls, as 27. E. 3. cap. 5, 6, 7, 8. Eodem Anno cap. 7. and 19. 2. R. 2. apud
Westminster. cap. 3. Eodem Anno cap. 15 9. R. 2. cap. 3, 4. and 5. 11. R. 2. cap. 4.
5. and 6. 14. R. 2. cap. 7. 15. R. 2. cap. 4. and 12. 16. R. 2. cap. 1. and 6.
18. R. 2. cap. 8. and 9. Anno 8. H. 5. cap. 1. 8. H. 6. cap. 28. and 29. 18. H.
6. cap. 3. 27. H. 6. cap. 3. The use being for the Clerk to bring the Bills
themselves as well as the Roll before the Kings Council, who penned the Statute
out of the original.

The Statutes were anciently drawn into a form of Law, and certain Articles out
of the Petitions and Answers.

Anno 25. E. 3. n. 23. The Petition was, quae null homine soit arcle de trover
gents d' Arms Hoblers ne Archers autres quae ceux quite ignont per tiel
service sil ne soit* par common Assent and grant en Parliament par ceo est
contre la droit du Royalme.

Unto which was answered, le Roy ottroie a cest Petition.

Yet the Statute hereupon made omitteth the words, viz. For it is against the
right of the Realm.

The 11th Chapter omitteth the clause in the Petition, viz. And not of other
fees as have been levied of late.

In the same year Petition n. 18. It is prayed, that null Enditour soit mis en
Enquest sur la deliverance de la Enditee nient plus en trespass qu' en felonys
'il soit challenge pour celle cause per celui qu' est enditee.

The Statute thereupon cap. 3. Is in rot. statut. Auxint accord est que null
Enditour Soit misen Enquest sur la deliverance del Enditee de trespass ou de
felonys'il soit challenge pour tiel cause per l' enditee.

Which is more favorably penned for the Subject, taking away all dispute,
whether the Enditor might have been of the Jury or not, in case of Felony,
before the making of this Statute.

And such kind of alterations happen often.

The 4th Chapter of this Statute agrees with the Petition, n. 19. Save that
after the words presentment, de bons and loy al and du visne, there is added in
the Statute, ou tiel face se farce, where such act is done which explains out
of which visne the presentment is to be.

But the Print is very false, for there it is said, that it shall be lawful for
every man to Exchange Gold for Silver, so as no man can hold the same as
exchanged, nor take the profit, etc. Whereas in the Answer to the Petition and
Statute Roll it is, that it shall be well lawful to any man to exchange Gold
for Silver, or for Gold or Silver, so as no man can hold a common exchange, nor
nothing take of the people for the same exchange.

The 13th Chapter of that Statute Anno 15. is taken out of the Answer to the
Petition n. 22. and somewhat out of the Petition also.

The 15 cap. out of the Petition n. 41. and the Answer also.

The 13th cap. of the Statute of 28 E. 3. was made part out of the Petition and
Answer n. 47. and part out of the Petition alone n. 55. and the last part
thereof out of the Petition and Answer n. 50. but the Statute has more
concerning Trials of Merchants n. 55. and for Mariners n. 50. than is in the
said two Petitions and Answers.

Of the 16th Article of the Statute of Westminster two touching conditional grants,
the answer is referred to the Judges to advise thereof till the next Parliament.

The Statutes thus drawn into diverse heads or Articles were shown to the King,
and upon his approbatio engrossed sometimes with a Praeamble, and an Observari
volumus in the conclusion, and at other times without any praeamble at all, and
by Writs sent into every County to be proclaimed.

Anno 14. E. 3. n. 7. the King commanded the Statute to be engrossed, sealed,
and firmly kept.

15 E. 3. n. 42. The Statutes were read before the King, sealed with the Kings
great Seal, and delivered to the Grands and Knights of the Shire, etc.

The Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, etc. made in 25 E. 1. is no where
enrolled, but is mentioned in the ancient Collection of Statutes, it was sealed
and sworn unto by the Bishops and great Lords.

The second Chap. That Judgments contrary to the said Charters, shall be void,
is out of the latter part of the fourth Article.

The Third Chap. That the said Charter shall be read twice in every year, is
out of part of the sixth Article.

The Fourth Chap. That Excommunication shall be pronounced against the
Infringers of the said Charters, is out of the rest of the said six Articles.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh, Chap. against Taxes, Aids, etc. out of the
first, second, and third Article, with two savings which are not in the said
Articles.

The confirmation of Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta were confirmed under
that Kings great Seal by Letters Patents.

And the great Charter of Henry the third by Inspeximus Test Edwardo filio suo.

The like confirmation also in 28 of his Reign being not enrolled in the
Statute Roll.

The praeamble of the Articuli Super Chartas, is false Printed, for in the
Record it is, our Sovereign Lord the King has again granted, renewed and
confirmed the said Charters at the request of his Praelates, Earls and Barons,
assembled in Parliament.

And has ordained, enacted, and established, certain Articles against all them
that offend contrary to the points of the said Charters.

Wherein he was enforced by the great Lords and the Peoples murmuring to omit
the Salvo jure, which he would have inserted.

But at his return from the Scottish Wars in Anno 33. of his Reign, repented
him thereof, and procured the Pope to absolve him of his Oath, for that he was
enforced thereunto.

The Statutes for Ireland were directed to the chief Justice of Ireland to be
there proclaimed.

Anno 21. E. 3. The Statute of the Leap-year, or rather as it is in the Record,
de modo surgendi de malo lecti, is enrolled in dorso rotuli Parliamenti, where
Proclamations were then usually entered, and directed to the Chief Justice of
the Bench.

The Sentence of Curse in Anno 37. H. 3. was no Statute, though proclaimed in
the presence of the King and his Nobles, sealed by the Archbishop and Bishops,
but not by the King.

All other Statutes of H. 3. were proclaimed.

In Anno 4. E. 3. The extent of Manors, and the Statute de officio Coronator,
etc. are not enrolled, nor the Statute of Bigamy made in the same year, though
it was published, and has the praeamble of a Statute.

Anno 7. E. 1. The Statute de defensione portandi arma, was sent by Writ Patent
to the Justices, and by another Writ Patent to the Treasurer, and Barons, of
the Exchequer to be there enrolled.

And Eodem Anno the Statute of Mortmain is directed to the Justices in Banco,
to be there enrolled in Rot. Statute.

9 E. 1. In the Print, the correction of the Statute of Glouc. is directed in
the form of Letters Patents to the Justices, but recorded to be done Anno 9. E.
2. To. Glouc. Anno Eodem m 10.

Anno 12. E. 1. The Statute of the Exchequer is directed to the Treasurer and
Barons of the Exchequer, To. Claus.

13. E 1. The Statute of Acton Burnel has no Praeamble, or any form of a
Proclamation, and yet it is enrolled in To. Stat. m. 46 Where there is one
clause, that the King shall have one penny out of every pound, to maintain the
Clerk, and another that that Ordinance shall not extend unto Jews, both which
are omitted.

This Statute is also enrolled To. Claus. Anno 11. E. 1. In dorso, which shows
the true year when it was made.

The Statute de circumspecte agatis was but an Ordinance upon the complaint of
the Bishop of Norwich.

Anno 18. E. 1. The Statute Quia emptores terrarum has a Praeamble and
conclusion in form of a Statute, and yet is not enrolled in the Statute Roll,
the first in the Statute Roll being that of 6. E. 1.

The Statute of Wast is but an Ordinance upon a debate in Parliament, and the
Justices commanded to proceed accordingly.

Anno 9. E. 2. The Articles for the Clergy are the Petitions of the Clergy, and
the Answers thereunto are ad verbum Exemplified under the great Seal, with an
Observari volumus, and not drawn up into the form of a Statute.

Anno 15. E. 2. The Statute of Carlisle, is by Writ sent to the Justices of the
Bench, and sealed in the time of Parliament, as may appear by the date thereof
at our Palace of Carlisle.

Articles concerning the Kings Praerogative, and the Answers thereunto, are
only recited, and not drawn up in the form of a Statute, and seems to be but an
Ordinance made in Parliament, and the Justices of the Bench, directed to
observe the same, else it had not been registered, says that very able
Commentator Mr. Noy, in our ancient Manuscripts, the venerable Conservators of
our Statute Laws, and otherwise had long ago perished with our Parliament
Rolls, whereof diverse are missing of the Subsequent times, all of the former to
4 E. 3. Yet the Statute Roll, from 6. E. 1. are extant, but diverse Statutes
omitted therein, even from the said time.

9. E. 3. The Statute of Money made at York, was directed to the Sheriff to be
proclaimed, it may be for have upon the approaching Fairs.

Of 18. E 3. Upon the Petition of the Commons To. Parl. 18. E. 3. in dors. n.
49.
that Merchant strangers might buy Woolls freely, Proclamation was immediately
sent to the Sheriffs for that purpose.

The revocation of the Statute of Anno 15. E. 3. and the Statute against
Maintenance Anno 20. E. 3. being Acts made in the Kings great Council and not
of the Parliament, were directed to the Sheriff to be published, and so was the
Statute of Laborers in the 23 year of that Kings Reign, and also to the
Bishops.

And all other the Statutes of E. 3. to the Reign of Henry 6. were drawn up in
the form of Letters Patents, or with a short Praeamble, that the things
following were ordained in Parliament, and sent with a Writ to every Sheriff to
be published, whereof some remain yet in the Tower of London unsent in the time
of Henry 6. Probably because that about that time the invention of Printing was
brought into England.

Insomuch as in those times,

1. No Statute has been made (in some Parliaments) although sometimes agreed
upon. 2. Many things have been omitted. 3. Many things added. 4. A Statute has
been made wherein the Commons gave not their Assent. 5. Wherein neither Lords
or Commons assented.
Anno 18. E. 3. The Commons exhibited a Petition containing 12 Articles, which
were presently answered, and together with the Subsidy grant was made into a
Statute, sealed, delivered and published, Sedente Curia.

And afterward in the same Parliament they exhibited another Petition against
Provisions from Rome, which was agreed and assented unto by the King, Earls,
Barons, Justices, and other Sages of the Law, that the matters contained in the
said Petition, should be put into a covenable form according to the prayer of
the Commons n. 32. and 39. and yet no Statute at all made thereupon.

Anno 25. F. 3. n. 13. The Commons Petition against Provisions from Rome, which
was underwritten for an Answer to the same, viz. It is agreed that the Answer
to this Petition shall be put into the Statute, and so the Statute was entered
by the Clerk amongst the rest in the Parliament Roll (a thing then usual) and
yet that was not published with the other Statutes.

For in the next Parliament in the same year n. 43. The Commons prayed it might
be published and put in Execution.

Anno 3. R 2. n. 38. The Commons Petition against Extortions, was absolutely
granted.

And notwithstanding the protestation of the Praelates to the contrary, it was
enrolled, and yet afterward at a great Council the Lords then assembled said,
it was not their intent it should be enrolled, and no Statute was made thereon.

Anno 11. H. 4. n. 28. and 63. Two several Petitions of the Commons were
absolutely granted and entered in the Parliament Roll, and afterward when the
Council met to draw up the Statute they were respited.

Anno 25. E. 3. n. 59. and cap. 3. Tit. Collations all this Clause was omitted
out of an answer to a Petition of the Clergy, viz. It is accorded by the King,
the Grands, and Commons, that after Judgment rendered for the King and the Clerk
in Possession, the Presentment cannot be repealed.

And there are added in that Statute two special Clauses for the Clergy which
were not in the Answer.

And afterward Anno 13. R. 2. n. 59. cap. 1. Collations, the like Clause for
the King is wholly omitted, viz. And further, the King wills, that
Ratification granted for the incumbent after that the King presented and
commenced his Suit, shall be allowed hanging the Plea, nor after Judgment given
for the King, but that such Judgment shall be fully executed as reason
demands.

Anno 37. E. 3. n. 10. The Commons petitioned, that the grand Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest, and the Statute made Anno 36. of our Lord the King that
now is, touching Pourveyors, and the other Statute made in his time, and the
time of his Progenitors, be firmly kept and maintained in all points, and be
duly Executed according to the Law, and that Writs be granted to every one who
will sue upon every point; contained in what Statute soever.

And if any Justice or Minister be dilatory to any Statute thereof made, that
so much as he has done to the contrary be held for nothing, and erroneous.

To which was answered, Il plest au Roy.

And yet notwithstanding that Petition was thus absolutely granted and agreed
upon, the Statute made thereof cap. 1. is only, that Magna Charta, and all
other Statutes, shall be kept and duly Executed, omitting all the test.

Anno 45. E. 3. n. 14. They Petition that King, that it please him of his Grace
and Majesty, to command, charge and ordain, that the great Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest be kept and held in all points, and that the Franchises,
Customs, and Liberties heretofore used be held and kept in form as they were
granted or used.

To which was anwsered, Re Roy le voet.

And yet in the Statute thereon, cap 1. is no more than thus; It is ordained
that the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest be held and kept in all
points, and omitteth all the rest.

Anno 2. R. 2. n. 27. cap. 1. The Statute is penned much larger for the
Liberties of the Church, than is in the Petition or Answer, and the salvo for
the Kings Regality, is wholly omitted.

Anno 3. R. 2. n. 26. cap. 1. They agree for the Liberties of the Church, but
Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta are wholly omitted in the Statute.

Anno 3. R. 2. n. 37. cap. 3. Touching Provisions, the special abuses of the
Pope are omitted.

Anno 13. R. 2. n. 40. cap. 3. In the Oath which the Justices are to take, the
words duly, and without favor are omitted.

Anno 25. E. 1. cap. 5. and 7. (Touching Aids, Taxes and Prises granted to the
King, but not to be taken for a Custom; And a release for Tole taken by the
King, for Wool, and a grant that he will not take the like without common
consent, and good will) were agreed by the Lords and Commons in that
Parliament, sealed with the Kings Seal, and the Seals of the Archbishop, and
Bishops, who with the Kings Council were voluntarily sworn to the performance
thereof.

Anno 28. E. 1. cap. 2. The saving was added by the King and his Council, at
the drawing up of the Statute, as appears by the words therein, viz. The King
and his Council, do not intend by reason of the Statute.

Item cap. 20. At the conclusion was added a saving for the King.

5. R. 2. cap. 5. For Preachers without the Commons Assent repealed, 1 E. 6.
12. and 1 Eliz. 1.

The Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, one or both expressed,
included, or implied in that of King E. 3. or H. 4's grant of the Duchy of
Cornwall and annexing Lands thereunto, do as in the many ancient grants of the
Saxon Kings, signify no more than an approbation, and confers neither jus in
re, or potestatem dandi vel concedendi; And so in the case of the entailed, and
restored Lands, and the Honor and Earldom of Oxford granted by King R. 2. to
Awbrey de Vere in the 16th year of his Reign n. 151.

And the like may be believed where some things have been done, or Grants or
Charters said and entered in the Parliament Rolls, to be Authoritate
Parliamenti, which as the Judicious Mr. Noy has observed, do not without other
circumstances prove a common Assent of Parliament, for that some of the Answers
to diverse Petitions of the Commons in Parliament temporibus R. 2. and H. 4.
were put upon the Files only, and not entered in the Parliament Rolls.

And the same words are in diverse Acts of Parliament, mentioned to be enrolled
in the Parliament Rolls of 4 and 7 of H. 4.

Anno 4. H. 4. The Commons pray, that the most sufficient To. Parl. 4. H. 4. n.
95.
Welshmen of every Lordship be chosen to keep the Peace, and to answer for all
Felonies, etc. as they were wont to do unto the Conqueror of Wales in the time
of King Edward.

To which the King answered, let this Petition be committed to the Council to
be thereof advised, and the same Council have power to provide Remedy therein,
according to their discretion by Authority of Parliament.

In the 7th year of the Reign of the said King, the Commons prayed the King,
that certain Petitions exhited by Bartholomew Verdon, and his companions, might
graciously be exploited, per authoritatem Parliamenti, whereupon the King by
the Advice and Assent of the Lords in Parliamenr, and at the request of the
Commons granted the said Petition, as by the Endorsement thereof filed amongst
the special Petitions may appear.

But afterward Anno 8. H. 5. n. 12. The Commons perceiving those words,
(Authoritate Parliamenti) often used by the Lords alone in their Answers to
Petitions exhibited to the Receivers, appointed by the King, whereby the
parties complained of, were oftentimes constrained to answer Causes,
determinable at the Common Law, before the Kings Council, or in the Chancery,
exhibited the Petition ensuing, viz.

Praying the Commons in this present Parliament, that if any man sue a Bill or
Petition, with these words, (authoritate Parliamenti) and the Answer be made,
let this Bill or Petition be committed to the Council of the King, or to the
Counselors of the King to execute and determine the contents thereof (whereas
the said Bill or Petition is not by the Commons of the Land, required to be
affirmed or assented unto) that no man to such a Bill or Petition, unless the
Assent or Request of the Commons be endorsed, be bound to answer contrary to
the Laws of the Realm.

Unto which was answered, soit aviser per le Roy.

At the foot of many Charters and Writs, have been indorsed, per ipsum Regem
and totum concilium in Parliamento, and sometimes, per ipsum and concilium suum
in Parliamento, and at other times, per petitionem in Parliamento.

Anno 6. H. 6. 1. Part pat. n. 1. Pro Abbate and conventu de Welhow de
avisamento Dominorum ad supplicationem Communitatis.

Et Test Rege apud Westmonasterium per petitionem in Parliamento and pro 10 l.
solut. in Hanaperio.

Anno 4. H. 4. n. 116. The Commons pray, that whereas one Thomas Taynleur
Approver, had appealed diverse honest men very falsely, for which he was drawn
and hanged; it would please the King to grant out Writs of the Chancery, unto
the Justices, to cease all process against the party so falsely appealed, which
was granted assensu Praelatorum Procerumque, etc. And the form of the Writ
there set down and underneath was written per petitionem in Parliamento.

In public Ordinances the words of ceremony are seldom expressed, only the
matter agreed upon is recorded, but the manner and form of the agreement, and
by whom in particular, is most usually omitted, yet necessary to be understood,
for such was the practice and usage of that age.

In cases which require no new Law, those Acts were seldom entered; it was
thought sufficient if they were on the file prout Fitz Herberts Abridg. tit.
Parliament Anno 33. H. 6. n. 17.

Neither did those necessarily require the Common Assent of Parliament, for the
Petitions granted Authoritate Parliamenti do not prove the Common Assent,
unless they were exhibited by the Commons, otherwise they were such only as
were delivered to the Receivers of Petitions appointed by the King at the
beginning of every Parliament, and they were answered by the Tryers then also
appointed for the same, amongst whom none of the House of Commons, were ever
appointed, and those answers, or the matters themselves being heard before the
Lords in Parliament as Petitions of great weight and difficulty always were,
for such always had the additions of Authoritate Parliamenti, the first of
them beginning tempore Richardi 2.

And whether those words be added or omitted, yet such Answers ever did and
will bind, so as they be not contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land.

There needed no publication of Ordinances, touching the Chancery, when the
Chancellor was present, nor concerning the Courts of Justice, when the Judges
were present in Parliament, neither touching the grievances of the Kings
Ministers and other Officers, for some of them were ever present in Parliament.

And the Commons were so careful to have their Parliament Rolls engrossed as in
2d Henry 4. n. 26. diverse days before the end of the Parliament they did by
their Speaker beseech the King that the business done, and to be done in this
Parliament, be enacted and engrossed before the departure of the Justices,
whilst they have them in their memory.

Unto which it was answered, that the Clerk of the Parliament should do his
endeavor to enact, and engross the Substance of the Parliament, by advice of
the Justices, and after show it to the King and Lords in Parliament to have
their advice.

By which it appears, that the Parliament Roll was not drawn up by the Clerk
alone ex officio, but with the advice of the Justices; and although it was here
said, that it should be afterward showed unto the King, and Lords to be
approved of by them, yet it is not to be thought that the King and Lords did
usually examine the same, but the Judges advice was usually had therein, how
else could the Commons require the same to be engrossed whilst it remained in
the Judges memory?

The Parliament Roll of 11. E. 3. For the creation of To. Parl. 5. H. 4. n. 22.
his Son Prince Edward Duke of Cornwall, and annexing Lands thereunto is lost.

But in Anno 5. H. 4. The Commons exhibiting their Bill in Parliament in the
behalf of the Prince to be made Duke of Cornwall, did recite that grant of King
E. 3. to have been made by the Kings Letters Patents, and pray that the Lands
which were annexed might not be aliened, and that which had been aliened,
reseised.

Annis 7. and 8. H. 4. n. 65. The Speaker in the name of the Commons prayed the
King and the Lords in Parliament, that certain of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal whom it pleased them to appoint, and a certain number of the Commons
whose names he had written in a Schedule or any 11. 10. 9. 8. 7. or 6. of them
might be at the Enacting and Engrossing of the Rolls of Parliament, and that
his Prayer and Petition might be enacted of Record in the Roll of Parliament,
which request the King graciously assented unto.

Anno 1. H. 4. n. 45. The Commons agreed, that the King might moderate the
Statute against Provisors.

Anno 2. H. 4. n. 45. They complain to the King, that the same was otherwise
entered in the Parliament Roll, than was agreed on by them, and that it might be
examined, which the King granted, but upon Protestation that it should not be
drawn into Example. Whereupon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Justices, and Counselors of the King, being severally examined in full
Parliament, in the presence of the King, and all the Commons, testified that
the said moderation was duly and justly entered and Enacted in the Parliament
Roll, in manner as it was spoken and agreed on, by the said Lords and Commons,
the which entering and enacting so made the King remembered to be well and truly
done as it was agreed on in the last Parliament.

So careful were the Commons of the Parliament Rolls, the only Treasury of
those public Ordinances, and yet never petitioned touching the Roll of
Statutes, nor to be present when they were made, for they knew full well that
that did belong merely to the King and his Council.

But only did put his Majesty in mind in Anno 2. H. 5. n. 10. That the Statute
ought not to be drawn up contrary to the meaning of the Petitions which were
then granted, and afterward to prevent that inconvenience, they themselves
framed their Bills in form of a Statute, which order continues to this day.

Anno 12. E. 2. The Petition of Hugh Audly and Margery his Wife concerning the
Lands of the Earl of Cornwall To. Claus. 12. E. 2. m. 5.
exemplified, was exhibited in the Parliament at York at Michaelmas, and
answered in the next Parliament at Easter following.

Some had Writs out of the Chancery for the settling and confirming of what was
granted to them by Parliament prout Anno 16. R. 2. For livery to be made to
Awbrey de Vere of the Lands entailed unto him.

The Act of Parliament of 28 E. 1. being granted and published with a saving to
the Right and Praerogative of the Crown, was afterward upon the murmuring of
some of the Lords and Commons against that Proviso, republished without it.

Statutes were not Enrolled, until the King had allowed thereof, and commanded
it to be engrossed, sealed and kept.

Things perpetual were made into a Statute and temporary into an Ordinance, or
signified by Letters Patents.

In the Parliament of 15 E. 3. A Statute was in a manner extorted from that
glorious King, and a special Committee appointed to pen it, against which the
Kings Council protested, and the King by his Proclamation or Declaration
revoked the same for that he assented not, but dissimuled, which remains upon
record to this day to that Kings great dishonor, if not rightly understood.

Which that great Attorney General Mr. Noy undertook to clear in this manner.

The Commons having granted the year before a very large Subsidy to the King
toward the French Wars to be paid in two years under diverse conditions, and the
Statute drawn up by a special Committee of Lords and Commons, who took great
care that the King should be duly answered the said grant, and the Subjects
enjoy his Majesty's graces in those conditions expressed, and the King going
into France with full confidence to receive the said money accordingly, but
being abused by his Officers that which was paid so spent as little came to his
hands, so as for want of money he was enforced to accept of a Truce when he was
in probability of a great Victory if not of the Conquest of all France,
whereupon returning suddenly, he fell first upon the Officers, who excusing
themselves, laid the blame upon the Collectors, which caused the King to send
out strickt Commissions to enquire thereof. But he was most incensed against
the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had encouraged him to those Wars, willing him
to take no care for treasure, because he would himself see him abundantly
furnished by the said Subsidy, which failing, and the King understanding that
the Pope sided with the French, mistrusted the Praelates in general, but
especially the Archbishop, and reprehended him sharply for it, who presently
complained of manifold violences against the Liberties of the Church and
English Nation comprehended in Magna Charta; and thus the Clergy incensed the
Commons against the King and the Commissioners, which he had appointed to
enquire of the abuses of the Collectors, who had enquired of diverse matters in
Air beyond the limits of their Commissions, which bred such ill humors in the
Lords and Commons, as when in the 15th year of his Majesty's Reign, when he had
in Parliament showed the necessity of the French Wars, and that the Aid granted
him the year before was withheld and ill spent by his Officers, and therefore
desired the Parliament to consider how Malefactors might be punished, and the
Law kept in equal force both to Poor and Rich, the Commons delivered up their
advice in writing for a Commission, to be directed to the Justices in each
Shire, d' Oyer and Terminer these matters in general.

But the King, the Praelates and Grandees thought fit to add Articles of the
said enquiry, and therefore they delivered unto the Commons certain Articles
which were ordained by the said Praelates and Grandees, for them to advise, and
give their Assent.

The which being viewed and examined by them, they assented that good Justices,
and Loyal, be assigned to hear and determine all the things contained in the
said Articles, for the profit of our Lord the King.

The Assent of the Lords is many times omitted to be entered, and so likewise
has many times been that of the Commons.

In the same year the Commons exhibited their Petitions for the confirming of a
Statute made in the 15th year of the said Kings Reign, which was general n. 26.
And in general for all Statutes, and the other special n. 27. for that in
particular.

And yet in the same 17th year an Ordinance was entered n. 23. viz. Item
accordez est and assentuz, that the Statute made at Westminster in the Quindena
of Easter in the year of the Reign of our Lord the King the 15th, be wholly
repealed and gone, and loose the name of a Statute, which was without any
mention either of Lords or Commons.

In the 30th year of the Reign of the said King, the To. Parl. 18. E. 3.
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, conferring together by the Kings order
touching the Exactions of the Pope in the White-Chamber (now called the Court
of Requests) assented, if it please the King.

Anno Eodem in the 9, 10, 11, and 12. Chapters of Statutes made in that year
upon several Ordinances entered in the Rolls of that year n. 27, 28, and 29. no
mention is made therein either of the Lords Assent, or the Commons, though both
are mentioned in the Praeamble of the Statutes.

Anno 2. H. 4. The cruel Bill for the burning of To. Parl. 2. H. 4. n. 48.
Heretics, beginning in the Lords House, and exhibited by the Clergy, was
written in Latin, and so was the long Answer to the same, and all and one in
the same phrase, and no mention made of the Commons Assent.

Anno Eodem a Bill was exhibited by the Clergy into the Lords House against a
Bull from the Pope to discharge the Possessions of the Cistertian Monks from
the payment of Tithes, which being there answered, was carried to the Commons
by the Archbishop of Canterbury himself, to have their Assent, and told them,
that the King and the Lords were attended upon with the Answer to the same, and
afterward the Commons came before the King and the Lords in Parliament, and
made diverse requests, and amongst others showed that the Archbishop of
Canterbury delivered them the Petition touching the order of Cistertians, to
which Answer the said Commons agreed.

Eodem Anno the Commons did show, that whereas the King had ordained a Staple
at Bruges in Flanders Merchant strangers did by Land or Sea bring their Wool
thither to the great profit and increase of the price of Wool coming thither;
the Town of Bruges has for their own profit forbidden the bringing of Wool
thither as they were wont to do to the great damage of the Merchants of
England, and of all the Commons, whereof they do pray Remedy.

Unto which was answered, It is advised by the Praelates, Grandees and Commons
of this Realm, that the Pention is reasonable.

The Commons Petition against the Subsidy of 40 s. To. Parl. 25. E. 3. m.
for every sack of Wool granted by the Merchants.

Unto which was answered, for that our Lord the King for great necessity which
yet endures and appears greater from day to day did do it, which being showed
to the Grandees, and Commons in this Parliament assembled on the Kings behalf,
the said Lords and Commons by Common Assent, have granted the said Subsidy.

The Parliaments or great Councels were heretofore very short, and dispatched
in a few days, having the matters (which were always extraordinary) appointed
or declared by the King to be treated of.

And there are diverse Answers to Petitions which cross or add to the prayers of
the Commons, whereunto their Assent is not specified, and yet the Statutes
thereupon made do mention it.

For the price of Wines, a report of a former Statute is not in the Petition,
but in the Answer only. To. Parl. 37. E. 3. m. 34. and cap. 16.


And it should be remembered that although the House of Commons in Parliament,
have been often of late times only said to have been the representing of some
part of the Commons of England, and those that were as aforesaid Elected and
admitted into the Parliament, have in their Petitions to their Kings for
Redress of Grievances, styled themselves no otherwise then your Pravrez
Communs, and Leiges, yet it was never intended, or could be of all the
Freeholders or people of England, or in the Latitude of the word represented,
which is over extended.

26.
What is meant by the word Representing, or if all, or how many of the People
of England and Wales, are, or have been in the Elections of a part of the
Commons to come to Parliament represented.

FOR the Nobility, the Proceres and Magnates, and the Bishops, and many Abbots
and Pryors were always Summoned apart to our Parliaments, and never represented
by the Commons, the consent of the Universality of the People being in and
before the 49th year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d included in the King,
and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Tenants and Knights Fees of the Lords
Temporal and Spiritual, not a few were not represented, when with those and
their dependancies they so overpowered King H. 3. in a Parliament at Oxford,
as to enforce him to yield unto those Provisions, which afterward proved to be
the fatal Incentives of an ensuing bloody War, and the Seminary of many
Commotions and Contests betwixt some of our Succeeding Kings and their Subjects
in their after Generations, those only excepted being Tenants Paravail, who
held their Lands subordinately of the Tenants that were mean, to those that
held their Lands of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Majores Barons,
holding of the King in Capite, with multitudes almost innumerable of
Copyholders, Lease-holders, Tenants at Will, or Sufferance, Villani or
Bordarii, le menu peuple et de busse condition, were exempted by Order of
Parliament, as represented by them and no other, and always used to be so, the
almost numberless Herd of Monks, Friars To. Parl. 41. E. 3. and 51. E. 3. m. 5.
and 1. R. 2.
and Religious Persons, and their Revenues, Servants, Tenants and Dependants,
were not, nor could be represented, but freed by the Kings Orders in
Parliament, from payment of the Commoners Wages that came to Parliament by two
several necessary sorts of Privileges and Immunities, instead of many more
which they claimed, the Religious and Monastic People of the Nation, with
their very large Possessions and Revenues, before the dissolution of them in
the Reign of King Henry the 8th. and King Edward the 6th. being rationally to
be accounted little less than a full 4th. part of the Lands of the Kingdom, the
Secular Clergy (always Pryns fourth part of Parliament Writs, 508. 510. 512.
513. ibid. 329, 330, 490, 491 To. Parl. 1 R. 2.
giving Subsidies apart by themselves) being almost 10000, were represented by
the Bishops or Convocation of the Clergy, the Tenants in Ancient demesne, or of
the great number of the Tenants of the Kings Annaent demesne proper and largely
extended Royal Revenue that should be, which before they were Granted or
Aliened away by our Kings, like Indulgent Common Parents to their almost every
days craving Subjects and People, or in Rewarding, and Encouraging public and
great Services, done or to be done for the Commonwealth or Public good, which
were very large and diffusive through all the parts of the Nation, and the
Clerks of the Chancery Beneficiate, as most of them Anciently were, and the
Judges, Kings Council and Officers attending the Honorable Re(...) of Writs,
and Pryns fourth part of Parliament Writs, 431, 432.
House of Peers in the like condition, and should be exempted, although by
length of Time, Custom, Indulgence or Permission, they have been since the
Original of the House of Commons, in the 49th. year of the Reign of King Henry
the 3d. (which was then no more than our Embrio, and from thence discontinued
until the 22d. year of the Reign of King Edward the first) charged and made
contributary to public Aids and Necessities, and the largely Privileged
County Palatine of Lancaster, having heretofore comprehended in it the three
great Earldoms of Leicester, Derby and Lincoln, with their largely extended
Revenues, was not at the first represented, but did forbear the sending of
Members, the remainder whereof is now a great part of the Kings Revenue, the
whole County Palatine of Chester with Wales and its Provinces, had none until
the Reign of King Henry the 8th, nor the County Palatine of Durham, and the
Borough of Newark upon Trent, until some few years ago: Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, 52 H. 3. c. 10.
Pryors, Religious Men and Women, and all that have hundreds of their own (as
very many have by Grant from the Crown) are by the Statute of 42 H. 3. exempted
from coming to the Sheriffs Torn or County Court, and so not intended to be
Electors or Elected.

The Kings very large should be Demesne Lands and Crown Revenue, and that of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the many other before mentioned exempted.

And the Records of the House of Peers in Parliament, have often told us, that
many times when the Commons gave Subsidies, they did it by the Assent of the
Lords Spitual and Temporal.

And as a very Learned Divine of the Church of England, (there being many
Pseudo-Protestant Divines that Considerations touching Laws positive and of
necessity.
are not of it) has well remarked there is no Subject of the Kingdom of
England, represented in Parliament by the Commons thereof, but as subordinate
to the King, and to join with him, and the Lords in their As-Assent and
Approbation (not against him or either of them) in our Kings and Sovereign
Princes making of Laws for the good of the Kingdom.

For Repraesentare, is no more than locum implore autoritate vel vicaria
potestate (...) ita iotis, est exhibere vi quadam juris praesentiam ejus qui
revera non est; Budaeus definit esse repraesentationem per figuram facere, and
imaginario visu rem ipsam repraesentare; locum implere, loco Martinius.
sistere, loco praesentis sistere, and repraesentatio quaedam imaginaria.
Budaeus.
And being but Commissioners, special Attorneys, or Procurators of some part of
the Lay-Commonalty, and Freeholders; not of the Copyholders, Lease-holders,
Villains or Bondmen, Servants or Apprentices, could not by their Indentures,
Letters of Attorney, or Procurations with any reason, truth, understanding, or
propriety of speech, be believed to represent for them, that never delegated or
authorized them, or to Act beyond the purpose or design of those that Elected,
sent or employed them, nor can make it to be any thing more than an aenigma, or
Riddle with some hidden and inveloped sense or meaning, not to be comprehended
in the genuine, obvious or proper meaning, sense or construction of the word
Repraesent, for who can without a great weakness, failing or Error in his
Judgment, think that they could by any tentering or straining of the word, make
all the several kinds of people, that sent them in obedience to the direction
of their Kings Writs or Orders, to empower them whilst they sat in the House
of Commons in Parliament, to Sentence, Condemn, Fine, Arrest, Imprison, Banish,
or Sequester any of those that they pretended to represent, when the
Praedecessors of those that would be Masters of such a Latitude, did in
Parliament, in the 42d year of the Reign of King Edward the third, when a Tax
or Aid was proposed for the King, (being the first, and only end, for which
they were elected and sent,) make it their request to the King, to give them
leave to go home to their several Countries and places, to advise before hand
with those that sent them; Otherwise the Pledges, or Sureties which every
Member of the House of Commons being to give their County and place whom they
would represent as their Procurators or Attorneys, are to be well heeded, and
cautiously taken for pledges or security, well watched in their doings, and not
left to trick and purchase to themselves, by unlawful Encroachments, an
Arbitrary and Illegal Sovereignty, which the Laws of the Land never allowed
them, and their Masters the Counties and places that sent them could neither
give or intend, for nil dat qui non habet, as being never able to give them
complextly or singly their diversities of Powers or Interests present or to
come, other than such as the intent and purport of their Writs of Election and
Commissions allowed, when the Devil with a pair of Spectacles, cannot find in
their Indentures or Procurations, any Commission either by the King, or those
that Elected them, other than to do and perform such things as the King, by the
advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, should ordain, but
not to make War against their King, and Murder him, Plunder, and destroy their
fellow Subjects and Masters, that elected, and sent them for better purposes,
neither can they, or any of their Record-massacring Champions, ever be able to
prove that the Lords Spiritual or Temporal, did, or could transfer unto them
their power representative in Parliament, which without the Authority of the
King that gave it, is not transferrable.

And when there were but 170 Counties, Cities, and Towns, that sent Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, to Parliament, in the latter end of the Reign of King
Edward the First, were but almost one Part of three that could be truly
esteemed Representers of many of the Commons (too many having been since only
added by corruption of Sheriffs and otherwise) it could never be intended, or
at all possible, or so much as probable, as all could be Freeholders or
otherwise, within the true meaning and intention of the word Representation, or
represent applied to the House of Commons, or any particular member thereof,
was until our late Factious, and Seditious Times, never found in any of our
Parliament Rolls, Records or Memorials, which has lately been made to be very
large, and drawn into a factious and seditious extent and interpretation.

For the Parliament being only the Kings great Council (not of the people his
Subjects) upon special emergent occasions concerning the weal public in the
defense of the Kingdom and Church, all offenses committed against the Members
of either of the Houses siting the Parliament, or in their coming or returning,
are by Law to be prosecuted, and punished in the behalf of the King, and in his
name, and by his only Regal Authority, (and the Prison of the Tower of London,
is the Kings by a long possession, but none of the peoples) as it was adjudged
in the Reign of Edward the 1st in the case of the privilege of the Earl of
Cornwall, and long after that, viz. In the latter end of the Reign of King Henry
the 8th, in the case of the Lord Cromwell and Tailbois, and in the extraordinary
forcible Riot and Trespass committed in the 12th year of the Reign of K.
Richard 2. upon the Goods, Lands and Servants of one of the Knights of the
Shire of Cumberland sitting the Parliament, whereupon that King upon his
complaint directed a Writ or Commission to enquire, and certify the Fact,
directing the Sheriff of Westmorland, by a Jury of his County, to attend them
To. Pat. 12. R. 2. part 2. in dorso. Pryns Animadversions upon Cokes 4
Institutes, 332, 333, 643, 647, 1199, 1200.
therein, and those that were found offenders, to arrest and bring coram nobis
and concilio nostro (not the House of Commons in Parliament) in Quindena sancti
Michaelis, with a nos talia si fuerint relinquere nolentes impunita, upon which
Mr. Pryn observes, that the King upon that complaint did not presently send
for the Offenders in Custody by a Sergeant at Arms (as the Commons of late
times have done;) And did the more, as he says, urge that Record and Precedent
to rectify the late irregularities, of sending for persons in Custody upon
every motion and suggestion of a pretended breach of privilege, to their
extraordinary vexations and expense, before any legal proof or conviction of
their guilt against the great Charter, and all ancient precedents and
proceedings in Parliament, further evidenced by him, to appertain only to the
King, by the Commons own Petitions from time to time in several Parliaments, in
the Raigns of Henry the 4th, Henry the 6th, and Edward the 4th, in the cases of
Chodder, Atwil, Dome, Colyn, etc. And that it was expressly resolved and
declared to belong only to the King, by his Writs of Privilege, supersedeas
and habeas corpora issued out of the Court of Chancery, to deliver members of
Parliament, or their Servants imprisoned, or taken in execution against the
Privilege of Parliament, for in the great Debates and Arguments in the House
of Commons in the case of Fitz-Herbert in the 35th year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, when Sir Edward Coke was Speaker, it was at the last concluded that
it was meet that the whole matter should be brought before them by an Habeas
corpus cum causa issued out of the Chancery, and there to be returned, since no
Writ of Habeas Corpus, nor yet of privilege could be returned into the House
of Commons, but only into the Chancery or Lords House, as Writs of Error were,
whereupon the Speaker attending the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
pressed for a special Habeas Corpus, with a clause to be inserted therein, that
Fitz-Herbert existens de Parliamento captus suit, etc. with a recital of the
cause of privilege, who upon conference with the Judges, would not Assent
thereunto, and resolving not to depart from the usual form, issued out the Writ
to the Sheriff returnable in Chancery, who bringing the Body of the Prisoner,
and certifying the cause of his imprisonment, the Lord Keeper sent the Sheriffs
return of the Habeas corpus to the Commons House, the Chancery men who brought
it, being ordered to read it, which they did, with the Writ thereunto annexed,
whereupon Mr. Dalton argued, that the House had no power to deliver him, he
being not arrested sedente Parliamento, but before it sat, and that in a point
of Law whether in this case he ought to be privileged, the Commons House ought
not to pass any Vote therein, but ought to advise with, and receive
instructions from the Judges of the Realm, whether in this case by the Law they
could grant Privilege, which being seconded by Sir Francis Bacon, and thirded
by Sir Edward Coke, it was ordered that Fitz-Herbert should appear and be heard
by his Council the next morning, and that the advice of the Judges should be
had therein, which being bad, the Judgment of the House was, that he was not to
have Privilege, for three causes, First, because he was in Execution taken the
same day of his Election; Secondly because it was at the Queens suit, which was
the grand Reason; Thirdly because he was taken neither sedente Parliamento, nec
eundo, nec redeundo, and Mr. Pryn likewise humbly conceived, that in case of
any Member of Parliament Arrested, their only legal Means and Remedy was, and
is by a Writ of privilege out of the Chancery.

In the Journal of the House of Commons in Parliament, Anno 6. E. 6. There is
an Order entered that if any Member require privilege for him or his Servant,
he shall upon declaration have a Warrant, signed by the Speaker to obtain a
Writ of Privilege, after which as on the same day follows a special Entry of a
Vote of the House of Commons in these words, For that William Ward Burgess of
Lancaster had obtained a Writ of Privilege out of the Chancery, without a
Warrant from the House, it is committed to Mr. Mason, Mr. Hare, and Sergeant
Morgan, to examine, and certify, whence it is apparent, says Mr. Pryn, (their
old friend) that the House of Commons in that age did not use to enlarge their
Arrested and Imprisoned Members, by their Sergeant at Mace, and own Orders, but
only by special Writs of Privilege issued out of the Chancery under the great
Seal of England, according to the practice and usage of former ages, that the
House was first to be informed of the Arrests, and thereupon to order their
Speaker not to grant a Warrant directed to the Lord Chancellor, (not as their
Subordinate or Coordinate Sovereigns) to Issue a Writ of Privilege Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Parliament.
to them, if he saw cause, and in case of Servants of a Member of an House of
Commons in Parliament Arrested or Imprisoned, the Master was upon his corporal
Oath, to prove that he was his real moenial Servant, who came along with, and
attended on him before he could be released by a Supersedeas, and Writ of
Privilege out of the Chancery (being the Court of the King, not of the House
of Commons in Parliament,) one Member of the House of Commons in Parliament
assaulting another, is a breach of Privilege, and of the Peace, for which he
may be imprisoned until he find Sureties of the Peace; and in the case of
George Ferrers, a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament, reported by Mr.
Crompton, the House it self appealed to King Henry the 8th for his deliverance:
And although they do represent some part of the Commonalty, yet it is within
limits and boundaries so little to be transgressed as our Laws, constant
Customs and Usage of Parliament have una voce constantly affirmed, that there
can be no allowance of Privilege of Parliament in cases of Treason, Felony, or
Trespass.

And being so subordinate, and tied up as to themselves by our Laws, ancient
Customs and Usages, and their own Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, ought not
surely to think that the power of representing for some, can be by a limited
Commission or Procuratorship enlarged to all that an Authority to represent in
the doing of one single Act, or consenting thereunto can give them a liberty to
do what they please in every other matter, and even in contraries against
duties enjoined by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and that when
anciently, and of long continuance, (now altogether disused) they were to give
Sureties or Pledges to their Counties or places to perform their trusts, it was
not to imprison, sequester, starve or ruin, or make Rebels and Traitors those
that gave them their Letters of Attorney, Substitutions, or Procurations, and
cannot but understand that an Attorney or Transgressor wilfully damnifying
those that commissionated them, are by common Law, Reason, and Equity damna
resarciri, and make amends, that jure gentium Leagues even made by Ambassadors
in the behalf of their Princes that sent them, contrary to their Mandates
Marsellaer de Legatis.
or Instructions have not seldom been avoided or altered, and that it was
adjudged in the case of Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador plotting Treason here
against Queen Elizabeth, that he was not to be allowed Camdens Annals of Queen
Elizabeth.
the privilege of an Ambassador, for that Illiciti non est mandatum. For did
they represent those that within their bounds they did truly and properly
represent, they could not Arrogate a power without the King, to unelect or
remove those that came thither elected by their own Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs, not by any power or Authority of their own, but by virtue of their
Kings Writs, nor order the Clerk of the Crown (the Kings Officer, and none of
theirs) to raze their names out of the Record, a matter which our Laws and
Parliaments themselves have ordained, to be without exception highly Criminal,
and it may be an everlasting problem how the Members chosen by one County or
City should be put out by another, that were strangers or Foreign unto their
Election, and were not commissionated to expel or justle out one another, (for
so might Cornwall, Wiltshire, and the County of Sussex, who do claim a
multiplicity of Members in the House of Commons in Parliament be praedominant,
and outdo all the rest in benefiting themselves, or hindering whom they list)
or by what Authority they do now of late (for before, or in the Raigns of King
Henry the 8th Edward 6. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles
the Martyr, and all their Royal Progenitors and Predecessors ever since this
Kingdom was and has been, and should be a Monarchy of above One Thousand
years, it has been never heard of, that strangers whom they would be thought
to represent, and sometimes their own Members, or those they do not represent,
must, when they receive their sentence or censure, as it is styled, from them,
who have no judicative power, but were only Elected ad faciendum and
consentiendum unto those things which should be ordained by the King, by or
upon the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, constrain to
receive their sentence of expulsion, if they be Members, or punishment, if
otherwise, upon their knees, unless they will claim to be a Sovereignty, which
their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, all our Laws, Records and Journals of
Parliament, and our Annals and Histories, and the Usage and Customs of
Neighbor Nations, Kingdoms and Republiques, have hitherto contradicted; or if
it shall be said, that it is in regard that the King is supposed to be
virtually there, and always believed to be present, our Laws, Records, Annals,
and Reason and Truth, will make have to confute them, that it would be
absurdissimum ab omni ratione remotum, and nullo Exemplo in Anglia usitatum,
for that the King is, we hope, no Commoner, or Member of the House of Commons
in Parliament who come thither as his Subjects, and sworn to obey him and his
Successors, under their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, was not Elected at
all, or to be there for his Place, and his Throne and Chair of State is in his
House of Peers in Parliament, to whom he sends, which he usually does in the
time of Parliament, to come to receive his Commands and Directions, and cannot
surely at one and the same time be supposed to be in two places, or to send for
himself to come out of the House of Commons to himself into the House of Peers
to hear what himself would say unto himself, for when in other cases it has
been said that the King is by our Laws intended to be vertually or personally
present in his Courts of Justice, it it is not personaliter, but authoritative,
where Sentences or Judgments are not received upon the knees, neither in the
Ecclesiastical Courts where the Bishops in the name of God and as the Church do
only give their sentences, and make their decrees without the Majesty or
Ceremony of kneeling unto them to be performed by those that are concerned to
obey the Condemnation, and it may be a Quaere harder to unriddle than many of
those of Sphinx, how it can consist with the reason of such a repraesentation,
that they whom they would seem to represent, should be Petitioners unto
themselves, and that if any of the County or place represented shall commit any
offense against any single Member of the House of Commons representing for
another County or place, as for breach of privilege, or for words, etc. The
persons of the other Province or place must be punished, and come upon their
knees, and not they that represented them and a Warrant sent by their Speaker,
for the Kings Writ to the County, City or place, to Elect another in that
House, and might have done much better to have hindered it.

Or if any Freeholder, Gentleman or Clown that Elected them were not before
accustomed to be kneeled unto as by an adoration, how these enlightened
overlofty Members can compel men to adore and kneel unto them under a color of
Representation, when those that they would have believe that their newfound
Representation, with an adoration designed to be entailed upon them, would have
been ashamed to have it to be done unto them, and durst never claim or own it
in their own Counties or places that Elected them, and might be abundantly
satisfied, that neither the Kings Writs, or their Election, Indentures, Letters
of Attorney, Procurations, or any Praescription, or supposed Privilege of
Parliament, could entitle them unto such a kind of Majesty, or how they that
are no Judicature or Court of Record, and have no power to give, or administer
an Oath to Witnesses, can escape the blame or censure of Magna Charta, and all
the Laws, Right, Reason, and Rules of Justice and Equity to be Parties and
Judges in their own Cases, or enforce their fellow Subjects, and not seldom of
better Births and Extractions to receive upon their knees with adorations their
unjust dooms and sentences, when better tried Criminals in the Court of Kings
Bench, where the King as a Judge is supposed to sit himself, do not likewise in
his other Courts receive their Judgments upon their knees, but only when they
receive the Kings pardon in rendering their thanks unto him.

But should rather remember, that the Angel in the Apocalipse would not suffer
St. John to kneel unto him, and that the often saucy Plebs or Vulgus of Rome
could be content with the Exorbitant power of their Tribuni Plebes in their
Intercessions for Laws, without any the adoration of kneeling, nor are there to
be found any Records or Presidents in England, or any scrap of Law or Reason
that any of our Kings in their licensing any of the Speakers of the House of
Commons, should give them any Power or Privilege to Eject any of their fellow
Members, and make them on their knees receive uncivil and ungentleman-like
words, such as Mr. Williams a late Speaker of the House of Commons in
Parliament was pleased to say unto Sir Robert Peyton Knight, being commanded
and enforced to receive his Lawless Ejectment upon his knees in these words, Go
thou worst of men, the House has spewed the out, or after such an Insolence to
require the Kings Clerk of the Crown to make out a Warrant in the Kings name to
Elect another Member in his place.

And our England, nor any other civilized part of the World, have yet found
such a Parcel of Representatives or Deputies that can think themselves so to be
entitled (as the Author of the Character of a Popish Successor in this Kingdom
of England has been pleased to grant unto them) to that which they would
willingly style their own Royal Inheritance and Sacred Succession of Power,
when they are not as Ambassadors, Repraesenting Princes, sent unto, or Treating
with Princes, but as Procurators or Attorneys employed by those that are, nor
ever were more than Subjects their ne plus ultra.

Or by what Art or refined Chemistry was such a Majesty entailed or infused
into them when Kelsy a Body or Bodice-maker and Barebone a Fanatic
Letherseller were Members, or what or whose Charters or Letters Patents, have
they to entitle them thereunto, when Sir Edward Coke a learned Lawyer, gives
them no greater Title than that of a grand Enquest, and Mr. William Pryn, that
adventured Body and Soul for them, and with great mistakings joining them in a
Supremacy conjoynt with the House of Peers in Parliament, abundantly found
fault with them in taking too much upon them in other matters, when those
designs of Majesty were not arrived or let down from Heaven, as the figment of
the Anciliae at Rome was believed to be, or how could the Commons in Parliament
charge (as they did so unjustly and wickedly) King Charles the first for coming
unarmed without any Guard to seize Pym, Hambden, Haselrig, and the rest of the
five Members, and Kimbolton, then, and long after, guilty of High Treason, if
he were then in the House of Commons in his Politic or personal Capacity, a
distinction which the Master of Hypocrisy and Lies had taught them when in
several of his Battles in the defense of himself and his Loyal Subjects, Weemes
a prefidious Scot and others Levelled their Cannons at him with Perspective
Glasses to be sure to hit him, a Method which David had not learned when he
found Saul sleeping, and was afraid to touch or kill the Lords Anointed, and
never left persecuting him until they had cut off his Head, and murdered him in
both his Capacities, which did not serve for a Plea in the case of Cook, Hugh
Peter's, and other his justly condemned Murderers, who had not then the
Impudence to plead or rely upon such a parcel of devilism, when they might know
that the Politic and personal capacity of a King, or any subordinate
Magistrate were so conjoint and inseparable, as in articulo mortis, that part
of Kingship or Magistracy could not be severed from the natural, unless it were
in such an apparent and public manner as in the self-deposing and Renunciation
of our King Richard the 2d of Charles the 5th Emperor of Germany, retiring into
a Monastery, or as some of the ancient Kings and Princes of France were when
they were cheated of their Kingly Power, and forced to be shaven as Monks, and
put into a Monastery.

And that notwithstanding the House of Commons new-fashioned way of their own
framing, since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of making their own Committee to
find out and determine such Privileges as they would claim, and have, they
might have discovered that in the Court of Kings Bench in the case of Richard
Chedder a Tempore H. 4.
Servant to a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament being in his coming
to Parliament beaten and wounded by one John Savage, the Record declares,
that, videtur cur quod non est necesse quod Inquiratur per patriam quae dampna
praedictus Richardus Chedder qui venit ad Parliamentum in Comitiva, etc. Et
verberatus and vulneratus fuit per Johannem Savage sustinuit occasion
verberationis, set magis cadit in discretionem Justic Ideo per discretionem cur
consideratum est quod dictus Richardus recuperet. dampna sua ad centum marc.
and similiter centum marc. And though he was a Servant to a Member of the House
of Commons in Parliament, was committed to the Marshal, quousque sinem faciat
cum Domino Rege per minatoriis datis Juratoribus appunctuat. ad inquirend.

And if there had been any Privilege due to the Members of the House of
Commons in Parliament besides, and other than that which their Speakers do at
their admittance by our Kings and Princes claim in their behalf being no more
than freedom of Access to their Persons, and from arrest of their Persons and
moenial Servants ever since, or in the 22 year of the Reign of King Edward the
first; for in the 49th year of the Reign of King Henry the third, when that
King was a Prisoner to Simon Montfort, and his Partner Rebels, those few that
were sent as Members of that, not to be called a Parliament, claimed not any
Privileges from the beginning of our verily long lasting Monarchy, until that
their distempered and unhappy framed Writ for the Election of Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses to come to Parliament in 49 H. 3. nor can it be made appear that
any of the Commons were before ever Elected to come as Members of Parliament
(the Writs ex gratia Regis allowed for the Levying of their Wages, being no
Privilege given by the King, but rather the Gift and Wages of the Counties and
Places that Elected them.)

And the Privileges of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, besides those of the
Earls, and higher Degrees of the Nobility, whose Patents and Charters about the
Reign of King Richard the 2d gave them their Privileges of having vocem locum,
and sedem in Parliamento, and concilio Seldom tit. honor.
generali Regis, and before had their Titles of Earls by a Charter of the third
penny or part of the Fines and Amerciaments of the County of Oxford, as the
Creation of Alberick de vere Earl of Oxford by King Henry the 2d has
demonstrated, and some Authentic Historians have told us, that King John made
two Earls, per Investituram cincturae gladii, who waited upon him immediately
after as he sat at dinner gladiis cincti, and by reason of the Grandeur and
Honor of their Estates and Privilege to advise their King, needed no
protection from Arrests, and their Ladies and Dowagers do enjoy the like
Priviedges, and when they should in extraordinary affairs be summoned to
Parliament to be advised withal by our Kings, whereunto when they were
traveling through any of his Forests, they might kill a Deer, so as they, or
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, tit. Parliament.
any of them gave some of the Keepers notice thereof by blowing of an Horn and
leaving a piece thereof hanging upon a Tree. A Baron may speak twice to a Bill
in Parliament in one day when a Member of the House of Commons can but once,
they neither need or choose any Speaker, for the Chancellor or the Keeper of
the Kings great Seal of England is the only Speaker of that House where the
King does not do it himself, or commissionates some other to officiate in the
Lord Cokes twelve Reports in the Countess of Shrewsbury's Case. Ob Countess of
Ri in his 6th Report.
Chancellor or Lord Keepers place, or time of sickness.

Every Baron or other Lord of Parliament in any Action where the Defendant
pleads he is no Baron, it shall not be tried at the Common Law, or by Jury,
nor by Witnesses, but by Record, their Bodies shall not be arrested, and
neither Capias or Exigent shall be awarded against them, and their bodies are
not subject to torture in causa laesae Majestatis.

Are not to be sworn in Assizes, Juries or Inquests, if any Servant of the King
in Checque Roll compass the Death of a Baron, or any of the Kings Privy
Council, it is Felony; in any Action against a Baron in the Court of Common
Pleas, or any of the Courts of Justice, two Knights are to be impannelled of
the Jury, he shall have a day of grace, shall not be tried in cases of Treason
or Felony, or misprision of Treason, but by their Peers, and such as are of the
Nobility who are not sworn, but give their verdict only upon their honor, and
super fidem and ligeantiam domino Regi debitam, and by an Act of Parliament
made by Queen Elizabeth are exempt from the taking of the Oath of Supremacy,
which the Members of the House of Commons are ordained to take before their
admittance, the Writs of Summons to a Parliament are directed only to
themselves who are not Elected as the Members of the House of Commons who are
but as the Attorneys and Procurators for those that sent them ad faciendum and
consentiendum, to do and obey what the Lords shall ordain, who sub fide and
ligeancia Domino Regi debita, do represent only for themselves, and the cause
says Sir Edward Coke of the Kings giving the Nobility so many great
Privileges, is because all Honor and Nobility, is derived from the King who
is the true fountain of Honor, and Honors the Nobility also two was, as, 1.
Ad consulendum, and (anciently) gives them Robes. 2dly. A Sword Ad defendendum
Regem and Regnum, and the Oath of Allegiance is, and ought to be imprinted in
the heart of every Subject, scil. Ego verus and fidelis ero, and veritatem
praestabo Domino Regi de vita and membro and de terreno honor, and vivendum
and moriendum contra omnes gentes, etc. Et si cognoscam aut audiam de aliquo
damno aut malo quod domino Regi evenire poterit revelabo, etc. And their Wives
and Dowagers enjoy the same Privileges in the time of Parliament, and without,
and their Sons and Daughters a praecedency, which those of the House of Commons
have not, the Lords can in case of Absence by the Kings License make their
proxy, but the Members of the House of Commons cannot; the Lords at any
conference with the Members of the House of Commons do sit covered, but the
Commons do all the while stand uncovered; the Lords have a certain number of
Chaplains in time of Parliament, and with a Privilege of enjoying more than
one Benefice, but the Members of the House of Commons none; the Lords in the
case of breach of Privilege (by arresting any of their Moenial Servants in the
time of Parliament, do by their own order punish the offenders, which the House
of Commons should not without the assistance of the King by his Writ out of his
Court of Chancery; the Lords and some others appointed by the King are in every
Parliament Tryers of the Petitions of the Commons, but they are not of any
Petitions to the King and House of Lords, the Commons not being to be allowed,
petitioning to themselves, and our Kings often refusing to grant what was
required, where any had offended and broken the Privilege of the House of
Lords, or committed any Treason or misdemeanor against the King and many times
upon a charge of the House of Commons they were to receive their sentence at
the Bar of the House of Lords kneeling, but never in the House of Commons until
the late new-fashion'd Rebellion, and fancied Sovereignty of the people, which
God never gave them, and the Devil cannot allow them after a Parliament ended,
and leave given by the King to depart, the Commons do Petition the King for his
Writs to the Counties and places that sent them to pay them their wages, which
the House of Peers never did.

And a strange representation, partial, much disordered and disjointed it was
when 45 Members in the time of a Rebellious and Parliamentary confusion,
ejected 400 of their better conditioned fellow Members, and have since taken
upon them, when their Sovereign has with some restrictions given them proper
and necessary liberty of Speech in the discussing of matters pertinent and
becoming the reason and business, for which they were called to deny innocent
liberty to their Partners chosen and entrusted by other parts of the Nation,
not at all depending upon them, but Elected, sent and entrusted by their fellow
Subjects, Arraign and Murder their Pious King at the Suit of the People when
they neither could, or did give them any Order or Authority to do, vote, and
make a War against him, his Loyal, and their fellow Subjects, to the Ruin and
Destruction of above two hundred thousand, and punish others as their Votes
shall carry it, receive upon their knees their Sentence sometimes to be
imprisoned in the Tower of London, sent thither only by their Speakers Warrant,
or expelled the House, with a Warrant for the Kings Writ, to Elect another, and
no man can tell whence that power was, is, or could be derived unto them either
by Warrant of the Laws of God, Nature, or Nations, or the Laws, and reasonable
Customs of England, or of any Foreign Senates or Councels, to disprove,
approve, or remove or punish one another, or how they can underprop that their
beloved Authority, when many times the Major part of the Members were absent in
person, and many of those that are present, and have no mind to concur, were
either wanting in their courage, or that for which they were Elected, and what
with those that were absent and tarryed in their Countries, or were in London
and come late to the House, or stayed there but a very short time, there is
seldom the one half, or so many of them as could make a Major part of them
understand to give an energy or certain establishment to what within the limits
and bounds of their constitution should be agreed unto, or by what Rule of Law
or rectified reason any that are represented should be condemned by those that
represent them not for that, but for better other purposes.

Or how they can be said to represent the People that sent them in the matter
of Parliament Privileges, when they that they represent are not to partake of
their Freedom from Arrests, Troubles of Suits, etc. for themselves and Moenial
Servants, or how do they represent in their properties, when there is no such
thing in their Writs, Commissions or Procurations, and they did in the 13th
year of the Reign of King Edward the 3d, ask To. Parl. 13. E. 3.
leave of the King to go home to their several Countries and Places, to confer
with those that sent them, concerning a Tax or Subsidy required, or how they
can be said to represent for all that sent them, and call themselves one of the
three Estates of the Kingdom, if any can tell how to believe them, when they
whom they would represent are not, nor ever were Estates, etc. If the People
had a Sovereignty Vested and Inhaerent in them, should be no more when they are
in Parliament but as a Grand Enquest, as Sir Edward Coke says, (to some only
Cooks fourth part of Institutes, tit. Parl.
purposes) but to many, and the most of their business, but as Petitioners for
Redress of Grievances, or if they could by any right or construction be
understood to be Sovereigns, when they can do nothing there, or have admittance
until they shall have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to their King
and Sovereign, or can demonstrate how many kinds of Sovereigns there be, and
which is on Earth the Single and Sole Sovereign under God, or when or how came
all the People they would represent to be Sovereigns, or how can they be
Sovereigns after they have taken their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy unto
their King and Prince, and his Heirs and Successors, their only very not
Fictitious Sovereign, and how it happens that they have in many of their
Petitions in Parliament, styled themselves your Pourez Leiges the Commons of
England, if they at that time had any part of Sovereignty in them, and were not
all Poor neither, or when sometimes in the Reign of King H. 6. or in his
Absence or Infancy their Petitions were directed unto them by the Title of
Sages, Senators, and tres Honorable Seignieurs, or how they could as
representatives of the Commons be Petitioned unto, by any of the Commons; For
that would have been as absurd to have been Petitioners to themselves, or to
have been believed to be all Wise or Honorable, or that all they represented
could by any kind of Grammar, Reason or Sense be understood to have been sent
as Sovereigns, or were ever so understood to be by those that Elected or sent
them, they should, when they were to go home to those that delegated them, were
not to depart without the Kings License, and then did not neglect to Petition
the King for Writs, to be paid their Wages by the Countries or Places that
employed them, and if any Sheriff had levied their Wages with an overplus for
himself, they that were so wronged have complained to the Kings Justices in
Air, and have been remedied; But were never found to complain to their
unintelligible Sovereigns, or to have any process from them to levy their
Expenses, or to Petition to have them paid out of the Lands and Estates of
those that sent them, or was granted by any Order or Procurations of those that
sent them. Or if all the people of England, who are and should be certainly to
be known and Ranked according to their several degrees and qualities, unless
all should be levelled into a Lump informity or menstrosity Higeldy Pigheldy,
all Fellows at Football, it might put Heraldry it self at a stand, or out of
its wits to distinguish how much of a Knight of a Shire is a Duke, Marquess,
Earl, Viscount, Baron, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, Yeoman, or Common
Freeholder, or the Widows or Feme Soles of any of them resides, or is
incorporate in that one Knight of a Shire, or how much in the other Knight of
the Shire, when by the Kings Writs there were to be no more than two, and by
Oliver Cromwels the Usurpers Writs, there was as many as six, and when in his
Time of Villainy two English Earls, Knights of the Kings Honorable Order of the
Garter, sat as Members of that which was miscalled the House of Commons in
Parliament, although it might well deserve the Question of what Nation they
were or Riddle, my Riddle what is this, how much of them were Earls or Commons,
or what Epiccen or Hermophrodite kind of men they were, or whom (if not very
Rebels, they did then and there represent?

Or whether the Knights and Burgesses of England and Wales, as they were
admitted into the House of Commons from the 48th and 49th year of the Reign of
King Henry 3. until the Reign of King Henry the 7th did or could represent, for
Ireland Gastoign, the Isles, and other Dominions of our Kings, and sometime
Scotland, for which until then there were Receivers and Triers of Petitions
particularly appointed for those other Dominions and places, or who did
represent for Wales the Bishopric of Durham before there were Knights of the
Shires and Burgesses allowed by our Kings, or for the Town of Newark upon Trent
so lately privileged by his now Majesty, or whether they do in one entire and
complexed Body represent for all the Commons of England, when as the Journals,
Parliament Rolls and Memoriols can inform us that sometimes the City of London,
as also other particular places have separately petitioned the King, and not at
all Times in a generality name and behalf of all the Commons of England,
Servants, Mechanics and Laborers, etc. which being no Freeholders or
Electors, can never be understood to have given any of the Members of the House
of Commons any procurations jointly or separately to give any consent or
represent for them in Parliament.

So that whatsoever has or shall be done or acted in Parliament either for
Lease or Copyholders villani Bordarii, Mechanics, Laborers, Servants, etc.
Neither is or can be obliging to those multitudes otherwise than by the
Sovereign power of the King, when by the Energy, and Virtue of his Royal Assent
that which was before but an Embrio comes to be aminated, and have as it were a
Life and a Soul breathed or put into it by his sanction, or giving it the force
of a Law by his, and no others Act of Parliament further than the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Assent or Approbation of the Commons in
Parliament assembled.

Or how they can by or with any Law, Right, Reason, Construction, propriety of
Speech or Grammar be said or believed to represent those of the Commons of
England whom they have many times accused and take upon them to imprison or
punish.

When our Parliaments have been, or should be founded upon the Feudal Laws, our
Monarchick best of Governments, and there could be no Election of Members of
the House of Commons to come to Parliament ad faciendum and consentiendum iis,
which the King by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal should there
ordain, not in omnibus, in all matters, for that was the proper care and
business of our Kings and Princes, and their private Council, by whose advice
the Writs of Summons issued out under the Kings great Seal of England, to
Summon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to a Parliament to consult not de
omnibus, or de omnibus arduis, but de quibusdam arduis, and until the 49th of
King Henry 3. when Simon Montforts Rebellious Parliament and his Counterfeit
Writs of Election of Members to be a then endeavored to be constituted House
of Commons in Parliament, received its first foundation, and gave the occasion
and encouragement to many Rebellions and Mischiefs afterward, and from the 21,
and 22 E. 1. until that gave it some rectifyed allowance unto such a kind of
Election and Convention of Members in an House of Commons in Parliament to be
assembled; the so Elected Members of Commons of Parliament could neither meet
or assemble, until there were Writs of Summons issued out to assemble the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal as Peers not unto the King, but one unto the other in
Parliament, for when the Lords Spiritual and Temporal are not to be assembled
by the Kings Writs of Summons, the Commons cannot be Elected to attend the King
and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, for to meet without so much as unto
Markets or Fairs, or Indulgent allowance of our Kings would be a breach of the
Kings Peace, which should be so sacred and ever was accounted to be of so great
a concernment unto him and his people, as when he pardoned any of his offending
Subjects against his Laws, the ancient forms of our Kings pardons were only
without enumerating, or particular specification of the Crimes damus and
concedimus pacem nostram, and gives us the reason that all our Parliaments as
well relating either to the upper or lower House, do specially except Treason,
Felony, or breach of Peace, which seems certainly to be no other than a
necessary Clause, added by our Kings in their privileges of Parliament. And
otherwise it would be an unread, unheard, and unintelligible mixture of a
Supremacy or Sovereignty, that a King deriving his Sovereignty only from God,
and his People and Subjects sworn unto him by their Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and obliged unto him for their Estates and Self-preservation, at the
same time be invested with a Sovereignty, which is to be certainly placed
amongst the most puzling Riddles of Madam Sphinx, and none of the over-turning
Republicans, can give us no manner of solution until all the Vulgus or Rabble
multitude of the World can be persuaded to be of one mind, and for many years
continue therein, and all impossibles come to be possible.

And there cannot be a greater absurdity offered to the Common Intellect or
understanding of mankind, than to endeavor to persuade them that there is a
plurality of Sovereigns, and that all the Subjects of England do or can
represent the King, and are his Sovereigns, or that he is the Subject or
general Servant of so many Millions of people, as he is rightfully King of, and
are sworn unto him by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, but are
conditionally only his Subjects until some fair opportunity to Arraign him at
the suit of his own Subjects, cut off his head, and extirpe him and his
Illustrious Family, by no other Warrant than to set up the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, who never yet gave them any Order or Authority to attempt any such
egregious Villainy.

And should not have been so locked up in their Morphaeus commonly erring,
wandering dreams or imaginations, as to think that two or three necessary
privileges only proper for Members of the House of Commons in Parliament may
be extended to all that they shall fancy or think to be necessary or suitable
to their incroaching humors or designs, and may be very great loosers by the
bargain, if by such a Gross mistake they make all that is or shall be their own
proper Estates allowed, or given unto them by the bounty and munificence of our
Kings and Princes, and their Feudal Laws to be Privileges of Parliament, when
their Properties and Liberties are not Privileges of Parliament; and all kind
of Privileges are and ought to be subject unto these two grand Rules of Law,
and may and ought to be forfeitable by a non user, or misuer, no Praescripton
or length of time in such cases being to be made use of, against the King, and
some Corporations, as the Borough of Colchester procured an Exemption from
sending Members to the House of Commons in Parliament* in regard of their
charge of Building or Repairing their Town-walls, and New Castle upon Tyne, did
the like propter inopiam, and charge and trouble to defend themselves against
the Scots; and Privileges of Parliament are not, nor can with any propriety of
Speech, Truth, Reason or Understanding, be called Liberties Properties or
Franchises, which they that make such a noise with them, would be sorry to have
so brittle, short or uncertain Title in, or unto their own Rights in their own
Estates, Lands or Livelihoods, and had better be at the charge to go to School
again, or fee a Lawyer, to instruct or make them understand the difference
betwixt Privileges of Parliament, and Privileges that do no way appertain
unto the aforesaid Parliament Privileges, and betwixt Privilegium and
Proprium, and cannot sure be so vain or foolish, as to think that they were
Elected by the Peoples Authority, and their own, and not by the Kings, or that
after the King has allowed them a Speaker, for otherwise he must be at the
trouble to forsake his own proper place, Chair of Estate or Throne in the House
of Peers, and sit in the House of Commons with them, and hear their Debates,
Discourses and Speeches, pro aut contra, which might have abridged them of
their Privilege of Freedom of Speech granted at his allowance of their
Speaker, or that by the immediate causing to be carried before that their
allowed Speaker in the presence of these many Members of the House of Commons,
that came to attend him to the King, one of his Royal Masses or Maces Crowned,
usually born before our King, as Ensigns of Majesty to attend him during the
time of his Speakership at home or abroad in the House of Commons in
Parliament, or without, whether it continue for a short or long time, as many
of our Parliaments have done, with an allowance of five pounds per diem for his
Housekeeping and Table-provision, whereof many of their Members do not seldom
partake (the Lord Steward of the Kings Household having likewise a large
Allowance of Expenses by the King for his Table, to entertain such of the
Nobility and others, as during the time of Parliament will come to eat with
him) besides many large Fees in the making of Orders, and passing of Bills or
Acts of Parliament for Laws, Naturalizations, etc. which could not be legally
taken without the Kings Tacit permission (the late illegal and unparliamentary
way never used in any Kingdom, Senate or Republic, or in this Kingdom, to
suffer their Speaker or his Clerks, to make a great weekly gain by the Printing
and Publishing, to be sold at every Sationers or Booksellers Shops, and cried
up and down the Streets in London and Westminster, by Men, Women, Girls and
Boys, all that is, or has been done in the Commons House of Parliament to the
no small profit of their Speaker excepted) or that when any person not of that
House, who have not by any supposed Privilege, any Sergeant, Lictor, Catchpole
or Messenger fastes or secures to attend them, or any particular Prison
allotted unto them who by their Commissions, Elections or Trusts reposed in
them by their King and Countries, may search, and never find any power or
Authority lodged in them, who never were or are any Court of Judicature, to
Seize, Arrest, or Imprison any of their Fellow Subjects, but since that late
Incroachment which has no older a Date, than about the latter end of the Reign
of our King James the First, who upon his observation of some of their
Irregularities, jestingly said that the House of Commons in Parliament were an
House of Kings, it never being intended by those that Elected them, or our
Kings and Princes that admitted them, that they should have or exercise any
power to Seize or Imprison, or any place or Prison allowed by our Kings as
their particular Prison, and though it appears that they had in the latter end
of the Reign of King Henry 6. a Clerk, yet it was by the grants of our Kings,
and by themselves have by the Kings permission appointed Door-keepers, but upon
any occasion or cause of Imprisonment, or punishing any offenders, could find
no other means, Praesident or way unto it, than to make use of the Kings
Sergeant at Arms attending their Speaker, who arresteth, and either carries
them to Prison to the Tower of London, which is no Prison appropriate to
matters of Parliament, either to the House of Peers, who are to consult and
advise their Sovereign, or the House of Commons to Assent and obey, (the Tower
of London being only the Kings Prison for special offenders) and more than
ordinary safe Custody the Marshallsea for the Courts of King's Bench, and
Marshallsea, the Fleet for the most of the Courts in Westminster Hall, that was
anciently the Kings House or Palace, every County or City in England and Wales,
and the Court of Admiralty having their particular Prisons appertaining to
their Coercive Power subordinate to their King, every Prison being always
styled and said to be prisona nostra, or prisona domini Regis, the Prison for
or of the King, whereby to restrain offenders of their Liberties, and keep them
in the Custody of the Law until they can be tried, and give Satisfaction to the
Law so as if there were no other cogent arguments or evidences amongst
multitudes of those that in our Annals and Records, and the whole frame and
constitution of our Kingly government, to support and justify the Sovereignty
thereof, that only one of our Kings allowing their Speaker the attendance of
one of their Sergeant at Arms, with his Mass, or Mace, as an Ensign of Royal
Majesty with a pension for his support and House keeping, and an allowance of
large. Fees as aforesaid, might be sufficient to proclaim a most certain
Sovereignty and Supremacy in our Kings and Princes, and none at all in the
House of Commons, who may do well to take more heed in their ways and
incroaching upon Regal Authority, which in the Raigns of King Edward the third
and King Richard the 2d upon less overt-acts and Praesumptions have been
accounted and punished as High Treason.

27.
That no Impeachment by all or any of the Members of the House of Commons in
Parliament, or of the House of Peers in Parliament, has, or ever had any
Authority to invalidate, hinder or take away the power, force or effect of any
the pardons of our Kings or Princes, by their Letters Patents or otherwise, for
High Treason or Felony, Breach of the Peace, or any other crime or supposed
delinquency whatsoever.

FOR if Monarchy has been by God himself, and the Experience of above 5000
years and the longest Ages of the World approved (as it has) to have been the
best and most desirable form of Government.

And the Kingdom of England, as it has been, for more than 1000 years, a well
tempered Monarchy, and the Sword and Power thereof was given to our Kings only
by God that rules the Hearts of them.

The means thereunto which should be the Power of Punishment and Reward, can no
way permit, that they should be without the Liberty and Prerogative of
Pardoning, which was no Stranger in England long before the Conquest, in the
Reign of King Athelstane, who did thereby free the Nation from four-footed
Wolves by ordaining Pardons to such Outlaws as would help to free themselves
and others from such villainous Neighbors, the Laws, of Canutus also making it
a great part of their business to enjoin a moderation in punishments ad divinam
clementiam temperata to be observed in Magistracy, Ll. Canuti.
and never to be wanting in the most Superior, none being so proper to acquit
the offense as they that by our Laws are to take benefit by the Fines and
Forfeitures arising thereby, and Edward the Confessors Laws would not have Rex
Regni sub cujus protectione and pace degunt universi, to be without it; when
amongst his Laws, which the People of England held so sacred, as they did hide
them under his Shrine, and afterward precibus and fletibus obtained of the
Conqueror, that they should be observed, and procured the observation of them
especially to be inserted in the Coronation-Oaths of our succeeding Kings,
inviolably to be kept.

And it is under the Title of misericordia Regis and Pardonatio, declared, That
Si quispiam forisfactus (which Ll. Edwardi Co(...)or, p. 19.
the Margin interprets rei Capitalis reus) poposcerit Regiam misericordiam
pro forisfacto suo, timidus mortis vel membrorum per dendorum, potest Rex ei
lege suae dignitatis condonare si velit etiam mortem promeritam; ipse tamen
malafactor rectum faciat in quantumcunque poterit quibus forisfecit, and tradat
fidejussores de pace and legalitate tenenda si vero fidejussores defecerint
exulabitur a Patria.

For the pardoning of Treason, Murder, breach of the Ll. H. 1.
Peace, etc. says King Henry the First, in his Laws, so much esteemed by the
Barons and Contenders for our Magna Charta, as they solemnly swore they would
live and die in the defense thereof, do solely belong unto him, and super omnes
homines in terra sua

In the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Second, Rot. Claus. 5. E. 2.
in dorso, (...). 15*
Pierce Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, being banished by the King in Parliament, and
all his Lands and Estate seized into the Kings hands, the King granted his
Pardons, remitted the Seizures, and caused the Pardon and Discharges to be
written and Sealed in his Presence.

And howsoever he was shortly after upon his return into England, taken by the
Earl of Warwick and beheaded without Process or Judgment at Law, yet he and his
Accomplices thought themselves not to be in any safety, until they had by two
Acts of Parliament in the seventh year of that Kings Reign obtained a Pardon,
Ne quis occasionetur pro reditu and morte Petri de Gaveston, the power of
pardoning, being always so annexed to the King and his Crown and Dignity.

And the Acts of Parliament of 2 E. 3. ca. 2. 10 E. 3. ca. 15. 13 R. 2. ca. 1.
and 16 R. 2. ca. 6. seeking by the Kings Leave and License in some things to
qualify it, are in that of 13 R. 2. ca 1. content to allow the Power of
Pardoning to belong to the Liberty of the King, and a Regality used heretofore
by his Progenitors.

Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, Chief Justiciar of England, in the Reign of King
Henry the third, laden with Envy, and as many deep Accusations as any Minister
of State could lie under, in two several Charges in several Parliaments, then
without an House of Commons, had the happiness, notwithstanding all the hate
and extremities Mat. Paris.
Put upon him by an incensed Party, to receive two several To. Claus. 16. H 3 m
4. and 3. To Patent 17 H* (...). m* 11. (...). To. Claus. 35 H 3 n. 6. ^at.
Paris.
Pardons of his and their King, and dye acquitted in the Estate which he had
gained.

Henry de Bathoina a Chief Justice of England being in that Kings Reign accused
in Parliament of Extortion and taking of Bribes, was by the King pardoned

In the fifieth year of the Reign of King Henry the Rot. pat. 50. E. 3.
third, the Commons in Parliament petitioning the King, that no Officer of the
Kings, or any man, high or low, that was impeached by them, should enjoy his
Place or be of the Kings Council.

The King only answered, he would do as he pleased.

With which they were so well satisfied, as the next Rot. pat. 51. E. 3.
year after, in Parliament, upon better consideration, they petitioned him,
that Richard Lions, John Pechie, and lice Pierce, whom they had largely accused
and believed guilty, might be pardoned.

And that King was so unwilling to bereave himself of that one especial Flower
in his Crown, as in a Grant or Commission made in the same year to James
Botiller Rot. Claus. 51. E. 3.
Earl of Ormond of the Office of Chief Justiciar of Ireland, giving him power
under the Seal of that Kingdom to pardon all Trespasses, Felonies, Murders,
Treasons, etc he did especially except and reserve to himself the power of
pardoning Prelates, ^arls and Barons

In the first year of the Reign of King Henry the fourth Rot. pat. 1 H. 4.
the King in the Case of the Duke of Albemarle and others, declared in
Parliament, that Mercy and Grace belongs to Him and his Royal Estate, and
therefore reserved it to himself, and would that no man entitle himself
thereunto.

And many have been since granted by our succeeding Kings in Parliament at the
request of the Commons (the People of England in Worldly and Civil Affairs as
well ever since, as before, not knowing unto whom else to apply themselves for
it.

So as no fraud or indirect dealings being made use of in the obtaining of a
Pardon, it ought not to be shaken or invalidated, whether it were before a
Charge or Accusation in Parliament or after, or where there is no Charge or
Indictment ant cedent.

The Pardon of the King to Richard Lions at the request of the Commons in
Parliament, as the Parliament Rolls do mention, although it was not inserted in
the Pardon, was declared to be after a charge against him by the Commons in
Parliament, and in the perclose said to be per Dominum Regem.

And a second of the same date and tenor, with a perclose said to have been per
Dominum Regem and magnum Concilium.

John Pechies pardon for whom that House of Commons in Parliament was said to
intercede, only mentions that it was precibus aliquorum Magnatum.

15 E. 3. The Archbishop of Canterbury before the King Rot. pat. 15. E. 3.
and Lords, humbling himself before the King, desired that where he was defamed
through the Realm, he might be arraigned before his Peers in open Parliament:
Unto which the King answered, that he would attend the Common Affairs, and
afterward hear others.

5 H. 4. The King at the request of the Commons, Rot. pat. 5. H. 4.
affirms the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of York, the Earl of
Northumberland, and other Lords, which were suspected to be of the confederacy
of Henry Percy, to be his true Leige-men, and that they nor any of them should
be impeached therefore, by the King or his Heirs in any time ensuing.

9 H. 4. The Speaker of the House of Commons presented Rot. pat. 9. H. 4.
a Bill on the behalf of Thomas Brook against William Widecombe, and required
Judgment against him; which Bill was received, and the said William Widecombe
was notwithstanding bound in a 1000 pound to hear his Judgment in Chancery.

And the many restorations in blood and estate in Rot. pat. 38. H. 6.
13 H. 4. and by King E. 4. and of many of our Kings may inform us how
necessary and beneficial the pardons, and mercy of our Kings and Princes have
been to their People and Posterities.

The Commons accuse the Lord Stanley in sundry particulars, for being
confederate with the Duke of York, and pray that he may be committed to prison:
To which the King answered, he will be advised.

And Pardons before Indictments or prosecution have not been rejected for that
they did anticipate any troubles which might afterward happen.

For so was the Earl of Shrewsburys in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth for fear of
being troubled by his ill-willers for a sudden raising of men without a warrant
to suppress an insurrection of Rebels.

Lionell Cranfeild Earl of Middlesex Lord Treasurer of England, being about the
18th year of King James, accused by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for
great offenses and misdemeanors fined by the King in Parliament to be
displaced, pay 50000 l. and never more to sit in Parliament, was in the 2d year
of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, upon his Submission to the King, and
payment of 20000 l. only, pardoned of all Crimes, Offenses and Misdemeanors
whatsoever any Sentence, Act, or Order of Parliament, or the said Sentence to
the contrary notwithstanding.

For whether the accusation be for Treason wherein the King is immediately and
most especially concerned, or for lesser Offenses, where the people may have
some concernment, but nothing near so much or equivalent to that of the Kings
being the supreme Magistrate, the King may certainly pardon, and in many
pardons as of Outlaries, Felonies, etc. there have been conditions annexed. Ita
quod stent recto si quis versos eos loqui voluerit.

So the Lord Keeper Coventry in the Reign of King Charles the Martyr to prevent
any dangerous questions, touching the receiving of Fines and other Proceedings
in Chancery, sued out his Pardon.

The many Acts of Oblivion, or general Pardon, granted by many of our Kings and
Princes, to the great comfort and quiet of their Subjects, but great diminution
of the Crown Revenue did not make them guilty, that afterward protected
themselves thereby from unjust and malicious Adversaries.

And where there is not such a clause it is always employed by Law in particular
men's cases, and until the Sovereignty can be found by Law to be in the People,
neither the King or his people (who by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
are to be subordinate unto him) are to be deprived of his haute ex basse
Justice, and are not to be locked up or restrained by any Petition, Charge or
Surmise which is not to be accounted infallible, or a truth, before it be
proved to the King and his Council of Peers in Parliament, and our Kings that
gave the Lords of Manors, Powers of Soke and Sake, Infangtheif, and
Outfangtheif in their Court Barons, and sometimes as large as Fossarum and
Furcarum, and the incident Power of Pardons and Remissions of Fine and
Forfeitures which many do at this day without contradiction of their other
Tenants enjoy, should not be bereaved of as much liberty in their primitive and
supreme Estates as they gave them in their derivatives.

And though there have been Revocations of Patents during pleasure, of
Protections and Presentations, and Revocations of Revocations quibusdam certis
de causis, yet never was there any Revocation of any Pardons granted where the
King was not abused or deceived in the granting thereof.

For in Letters Patents for other matters, Reversals were not to be accounted
legal, where they were not upon just causes proved upon Writs of Scire facias
issuing out of the Chancery, and one of the Articles for the deposing of King
Richard 2d. being that he revoked some of his Pardons.

The recepi's of Patents of Pardon, or other things were ordained so to
signify the time when they were first brought to the Chancellor, as to
prevent controversies concerning priority or delays, made use of in the Sealing
of them to the detriment of those that first obtained them.

And the various forms in the drawing or passing of Pardons as long ago His
testibus, afterward per manum of the Chancellor, or per Regem alone, per
nostre Main, vel per manum Regis, or per Regem and Concilium, or authoritate
Parliamenti, per Regem and Principem, per Breve de private sigillo, or per
immediate Warrant being never able to hinder the energy and true meaning
thereof.

And need not certainly be pleaded in any subordinate Court of Justice without
an occasion, or to purchase their allowance who are not to control such an Act
of their Sovereign.

Doctor Manwaring in the fourth of sixth Year of the Reign of King Charles the
Martyr being grievously fined by both Houses of Parliament, and made incapable
of any place or Employment, was afterward pardoned and made Bishop of St.
Asaph with a non obstante of any Order or Act of Parliament.

So they that would have Attainders pass by Bill or Act of Parliament to make
that to be Treason which by the Law and ancient and reasonable Customs of
England, was never so before to be believed or adjudged, or to Accumulate
Trespasses and Misdemeanors to make that a Treason which singly could never be
so, either in truth, Law, right, reason or Justice.

May be pleased to admit and take into their serious consideration, that
Arguments a posse ad esse, or ab uno ad plures, are neither usual or allowable,
and that such a way of proceeding will be as much against the Rules of Law,
Honor and Justice, as of Equity and good Conscience.

And may be likewise very prejudicial to the very ancient and honorable House
of Peers in Parliament, for these and many more to be added Reasons, viz.

Former Ages knew no Bills of Attainder, by Act of Parliament after an
Acquittal or Judgment in the House of Peers, until that unhappy one in the
Reign of King Charles the Martyr, which for the unusualness thereof had
aspecial Proviso inserted, That it should not hereafter be drawn unto Examples
or made use of as a Presid^^t.

And proved to be so fatally mischievous to that blessed King himself* and His
three Kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland, as he bewailed in his excellent
Soliloq^^es, and at his Death, his consenting to such an Act, and charged His
late Majesty never to make Himself or ^is People, to be partakers of any more
such Mischief procuring State Errors

The House of Commons if they will be Accusers, wherein they may be often
mistaken, when they take it from others, and have no power to examine upon
Oath, wild and envions Informations, and at the same time a part of the
Parliament, subordinate to the King, will in such an Act of Attainder be both
Judge and Party, which all the Laws in the World could never allow to be just.

And such a course, if suffered, must needs be derogatory and prejudicial to
the Rights and Privileges, and Judicative Power of the Peers in Parliament,
unparallelled, and unpresidented, when any Judgments given by them, shall by
such a Bill of Attainder, like a Writ of Error, or as an Appeal from them to
the House of Commons, be enervated or quite altered by an Act of Attainder
framed by the House of Commons, whereby they which shall be freed or absolved
by their Peers, or by that Honorable and more wise Assembly, shall by such a
back or by-blow be condemned, or if only Fined by the House of Peers, may be
made to forfeit their Estates and Posterities by the House of Commons; or if
condemned in the Upper House, be absolved in the Lower, who shall thereby grow
to be so formidable as none of the Peerage, or Kings Privy-Councel shall dare
to displease them, and where the dernier Ressort, or Appeal, was before and
ought ever to be to the King in his House of Peers, or without, will thus be
lodged in the House of Commons, and of little avail will the Liberty of our
Nobility be to be tried by their own Peers, when it shall be contre caeur, and
under the Control of the House of Commons.

Or that the Commons disclaiming, as they ought, any power or Cognizance in the
matters of War and Peace, should by a Bill of Attainder make themselves to be
Judges and Parties against a Peer, both of the Kings Privy Council and Great
Council in Parliament, touching Matters of that Nature.

For if the Commons in Parliament had never after their own Impeachments of a
Peer or Commoner, Petitioned the King to pardon the very Persons which they had
Accused, as they did in the Cases of Lions and John Pechie, in the 51 year of
the Reign of King Edward the Third whom they had fiercely accused in Parliament
but the year before the Objection that a Pardon ought not to be a Bar against
an Impeachment, might have had more force than it is like to have.

Neither would it, or did it discourage the exhibiting any for the future, no
more than it did the many after Impeachments, which were made by the Commons in
several Parliaments, and Kings Raigns, whereupon punishments severe enough
ensued; For if the very many Indictments and Informations at every Assizes and
Quarter Sessions in the Counties, and in the Court of King's Bench at
Westminster, in the Term time, ever since the Usurpation and Reign of King
Stephen and the Pardons granted shall be exactly searched and numbered, the foot
of the Account will plainly demonstrate, that the Pardons for Criminal Offenses
have not been above, or so many as one in every hundred, or a much smaller and
inconsiderable number, either in or before the first or latter instance, before
Trial or after, and the Pardons granted by our Kings, so few and seldom, as it
ought to be confessed, that that Regal Power only proper for Kings, the
Vicegerents of God Almighty, not of the People, has been modestly and
moderately used, and that the multitude of Indictments and Informations, and
few Pardons now extant in every year, will be no good Witnesses of such a
causelessly feared discouragement.

And it will not be so easily proved, as it is fancied, that there ever was by
our Laws or reasonable Customs an^ Institution to preserve the Government by
restraining the Prince, against whom and no other, the Contempt and Injury is
immediately committed from pardoning offenses against Him, and in Him against
the People to whose charge they are by God entrusted.

Or that there was any such Institution (which would be worth the seeing if it
could be found or heard of) that it was the Chief to be taken care of, or that
without it consequently the Government it self would be destroyed.

To prove which groundless Institution the Author of those Reasons is
necessitated (without resorting, as he supposes, to greater Antiquities) to
vouch to Warranty the Declaration of that excellent Prince, King Charles the
First of Blessed Memory, made in that behalf (when there was no Controversy or
Question in agitation or debate touching the power of pardoning) in his Answer
to the nineteen Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, wherein stating the
several parts of this well regulated Monarchy, he says, the King, the House of
Lords, and the House of Commons, have each particular Privileges.

Wherein amongst those which belong to the King, he reckons the power of
pardoning, if the Framer of those Reasons had dealt fairly and heartily, and
added the Words immediately following, viz. And some more of the like kind are
placed in the King.

And this kind of excellently tempered Monarchy, having the power to preserve
that Authority, without which it would be disabled to protect the Laws in their
Force, and the Subjects in their Peace, Liberties and Properties, ought to have
drawn unto him such a respect and reverence from the Nobility and Great Ones,
as might hinder the Ills of Division and Faction; and cause such a Fear and
Respect from the People as might impede Tumults and Violence.

But the design being laid and devised to tack and piece together such parcels
of his said late Majesty's Answer, as might make most for the advantage of the
Undertaker, to take the Power of Pardoning from the Prince, and lodge it in the
People, and do what they can to create a Sovereignty or Superiority in them,
which cannot consist with his Ancient Monarchy, and the Laws and reasonable
Customs of the Kingdom, the Records, Annals and Histories, Reason, Common Sense
and understanding thereof, the long and very long approved usages of the
Nation, and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy of those that would now not only
deny but be above it.

And would make the King, by some scattered or distorted parts of that Answer,
mangled and torn from the whole context and purpose of it, to give away those
undoubted Rights of his Crown, for which, and the preservation of the Liberties
of his People, he died a Martyr; the Author and his Party endeavoring all they
can to translate the Assent of the Commons required in the Levying of Money
into that of the power of pardoning, and jumbling the Words and Sense of that
Royal Answer, cements and puts together others of their own to fortify and
make out their unjust purposes, omitting every thing that might be understood
against them, or give any disturbance thereunto.

And with this resolution the Author proceeds to do as well as he can, and
says, that

After the enumeration of which, and other his Prerogatives, his said Majesty
adds thus; Again (as if it related to the matter of pardoning, which it does
not at all, but only and properly to the Levying of Money wherein that
Misinterpreter can afford to leave out his said Majesty's Parenthesis (which is
the Sinews as well of Peace as War) that the Prince may not make use of this
high Exect Collection of Remonstrances, Declarations and Messages betwixt his
late Majesty and the Parliament, Printed by Order of the Commons in Parliament,
24. March, 1642.
and perpetual Power to the hurt of those for whose good he has it, and of
Public Necessity (which clearly evidenceth that his late Majesty thereby only
intended that part of his Answer to relate to the levying of Money) for the
gain of his private Favorites and Followers to the detriment of his People.

Whither being come, our Man of Art or putter of his Matters together, finds
some words which will not at all serve is turn, enclosed in a Royal Parenthesis
of his late Majest^, viz. (An excellent Conserver of Liberty, but never
intended for any share in Government, or the choosing of them that should
govern) but looked like a deep and dangerous Ditch which might Sowse him over
head and ears, if not drown him and spoil all his inventions, and therefore
well bethinks himself, retires a little, begins at An excellent Conserver of
Liberty, makes that plural, adds, etc. which is not in the Original, fetches
his feeze and leaps quite over all the rest of the Parenthesis, as being a Noli
me tangere, dangerous words, and of evil consequence, and having got over goes
on until he came to some just and considerable expostulations of his late
Majesty, and then as if he had been in some Lincolnshire Fens and Marshes, is
again enforced to leap until he come to, Therefore the Power legally placed in
both Houses, is more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the Power of
Tyranny.

But not liking the subsequent words of his late Majesty, viz. And without the
Power which is now asked from Us, we shall not be able to discharge that Trust
which is the end of Monarchy, since that would be a total subversion of the
Fundamental Laws, and that excellent Constitution of this Kingdom, which has
made this Nation for many years both famous and happy to a great degree of
envy, is glad to take his leave with an, etc. and meddle no more with such
Edge-Tools, wherewith that Royal Answer was abundantly furnished.

But looks back and betakes himself to an Argument framed out of some
Melancholic or Feverish Fears and Jealousies, that until the Commons of
England have right done unto them against that Plea of Pardon, they may justly
apprehend that the whole Justice of the Kingdom in the Case of the five Lords,
may be obstructed and deseated by Pardons of a like nature.

As if the pardoning of one must of Necessity amount to many, or all, in
offenses of a different nature committed at several times by several persons
(which is yet to be learned) and the Justice of the Nation which has been safe
and flourished for many Ages, notwithstanding some necessary Pardons granted by
our Princes, can be obstructed or defeated in a well constituted Government
under our Kings and Laws; so it may everlastingly be wondered upon what such
jealousies should now be founded, or by what Law or Reason to be satisfied, if
it shall thus be suffered to run wild or mad.

For Canutus in his Laws ordained that there should be in all Punishments a
moderata misericordia, and that Ll. Caruti.
there should be a misericordia in judicio exhibenda, which all our Laws, as
well those in the Saxon and Danish times as since, have ever intended, and it
was wont to be a parcel of good Divinity, that Gods Mercy is over all his
Works, who not seldom qualifies and abates the Rigor of his Justice.

When Trissilian Chief Justice, and Brambre Major of London, were by Judgment
of the Parliament of the Eleventh of King Richard the second, Hanged and
Executed, the Duke of Ireland banished, some others not so much punished, and
many of their Accomplices pardoned, the People that did not know how soon they
might want Pardons for themselves, did not afflict themselves or their
Sovereign with Complaints and Murmurings, that all were not Hanged and put to
the extremities of Punishment; nor was Richard Earl of Arundel, one of the
fierce Appellants in that Matter, vexed at the pardoning of others, when he in
a Revolution and Storm of State was within ten years after, glad to make use of
Rot. Parl. 21 R. 2.
a Pardon for himself.

King James was assured by his Council that he might pardon Sir Walter
Rawleigh, the Lord Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham with many others then guilty of
Treason, and the Earl of Somerset and his Lady, for the Murder of Sir Thomas
Overbury, without any commotion in the Brains of the rest of his Subjects, some
of whom were much disturbed that he after caused Sir Walter Rawleigh to be
executed for a second Offense upon the Score of the former, not at all
pardoned, but reprieved or only respited.

And therefore whilst we cry out and wonder quantum mutantur tempora, may seek
and never find what ever was or can be any necessary cause or consequence, that
the five Lords accused of High Treason, and a design of killing the King, will
be sure to have a Pardon, if that the Pardon of the Earl of Danby, whose design
must be understood by all men rather to preserve him, shall be allowed.

Nor does an Impeachment of the House of Commons virtually, or ever can from
the first Constitution of it be proved or appear to be the voice of every
particular Subject of the Kingdom; for if we may believe Mr. William Pryn, one
of their greatest Champions, and the Records of the Nation and Parliaments, the
Commons in Parliament do not, or ever did Represent, or are Procurators for the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and their numerous Tenants and ancient Baronies,
that hold in Capite, nor for the many Tenants that should be of the Kings
ancient Demesne and Revenues, nor for the Clergy, the multitude of Copyholders
heretofore, as much as the fourth part of the Kingdom, neither the great number
of Lease-holders, Cottagers, etc. that are not Freeholders, Citizens or
Tradesmen, Pryns 4 part of his Register of Parliament Writs.
nor can all the Members of the Body Politic be equally wounded in their
Estates or concernments by the vain imaginations, causless fears, and
jealousies and bugbears of other seditious or fanciful Men's own making.

And to men that have not yet proceeded so far in the School of Revelation as
to be sure of the Spirit of Prophecy, it may prove a matter of ill consequence
that the universality of the People should have occasion ministered and
continued to them to be apprehensive of utmost dangers from the Crown, from
whence they of right expect Protection.

And a Wonder next a Miracle, from whence the Premises to such a trembling and
timorous conclusion can be fetched, or how a People, whose valiant and wiser
Forefathers were never heretofore scared with such panick fears, nor wont to
be affrighted with such Phantasmes, should now suspect they can have no
Protection from the Crown, when some of them do at the same time labor all
they can to hinder it.

Or how it should happen in the long Rebellious Parliament that after Mr.
Chaloner a Linen Draper of London, was hanged for Plotting a Surprise of the
City of London, and reducing it to the Kings obedience, honest Mr. Abbot the
Scrivener should be pardoned without any such discontent and murmuring of the
People, or that Oliver Cromwell should not be debarred of his Power, of
Pardoning in his Instrument of Government, and be allowed to Pardon the Lord
Mordant, for a supposed Treason against his usurped Authority; and our King
deriving his Authority, legally vested in Him and His Royal Ancestors, for more
than one thousand years before, may not adventure to do it without the utter
undoing and ruin of his Subjects in their Properties, Lives and Estates, by
His pardoning of some Capital Offenders: Or why it should not be as lawful and
conveninent for the King to grant Pardons to some other Men, as to Doctor Oats
or Mr. Bedlow.

When no Histories Jewish, Pagan or Christian, can show us a People, unless in
Cases of intolerable Villainies, Petitioning their Kings, that they would not
Pardon, when all are not like to be Saints or Faultless, and it will ever be
better to leave it to the Hearts of Kings, and God that directs them, than to
believe Tyranny to be a Blessing, and Petition for it.

And the most exact search that can be made, when it finds the Commons
petitioning in Parliament to the King or House of Peers, that they may be
present at some Trials there, upon their Impeachments, cannot meet with any one
President where they ever desired, or were granted such a reasonless Request,
pursued and set on by other Men's Designs to have one Man's Trial had before
another, and by struggling and wrestling for it, expose the King and Kingdom to
an utter destruction.

And therefore in those their fond importunities might do well to tarry until
they they can find some Reason why the Lords Spiritual may not Vote or Sit as
Judges or Peers in Parliament, in the Case of the five Lords, as well as of the
Earl of Danby.

Or any President that it is or has been according to Parliamentary
proceedings to have any such Vote or Request made by the Commons in Parliament.

Who neither were or should be so omnipotent in the opinion of Hobart and
Hutton and other the learned Judges of England, as to make a Punishment before
a Law, or Laws with a Retrospect, which God himself did never allow, but should
rather believe that Laws enacted contrary to the Laws of God and Morality, or
that no Aids or Help are to be given to the King pro bono Publico, or that
there should be no Customs or Prescription, or that the King should be governed
by His People, would be so far from gaining an Obedience to such Laws or Acts
of Parliament as to render them, to be ipso facto null and of none effect.

When the King has been as careful to distribute Justice as his Mercy, without
violence to his Laws and well informed Conscience has sometimes persuaded him
to Pardon, to do Justice, or to cause it to be done in a legal and due manner,
and is so appropriate to the Office and Power of a King, so annexed, appendant
and a part of it, as none but His Delegates are to intermeddle or put any
limits thereunto, and if it should not be so solely inherent in Him would be
either in abeyance or no where.

For the House of Commons are not sworn to do Justice, Pryns Animad. upon Cokes
4 Instit.
and if they were, would in such a case be both Judges and Parties, and the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal are not as to particular proceedings sworn but
merely consultive; So as Justice can vest in none but the King, who is by his
Coronation Oath only sworn to do it, if His Right of Inheritance and greater
Concernments than any of his Subjects, did not abundantly engage and prompt Him
thereunto; and is therefore so every way, and at all times obliged to do
Justice and Protect the Lives, Estates, Peace and Liberty of His Subjects, as
he is with all convenient speed and have to Try or bring to Judgment, a Subject
accused of Treason by the Houses of Lords and Commons, both or either of them
in His Court of King's Bench before the Justices thereof, or by special
Commission by a Lord High Steward in or without the time of Parliament.

And the King may acquit (which amounts to a Remission or Pardon) by a more
Supreme Authority than any of His Judges (some particular Cases wherein Appeals
are, or may be brought, only excepted) do ordinarily by an authority derived
from no other, not to be debarred by probabilities, or possibilities, or by
consequences, not always to be foreseen or avoided.

For a Man pardoned for Manslaughter, may be so unhappy as in the like manner
afterward to be the death of five or ten more; 20000 Rebels pardoned at a
time as in the Insurrections of Wat Tyler, Jack Cade, etc. may be guilty of the
like Offense, twenty or forty years after: The Lord Mayor of London that has
an allowance of Tolls and Profits to take a care of the City and wholsomness of
Food, might be, as they are, too much careless, and undo them in their Health
and well being.

The Judges may as those in the Reign of King Edward the First, and Thorp in
the Reign of King Edward the Third, be guilty of Mildemeanours, yet that is not
to bereave us of that good which better Men may do us in their administration
of Justice, our Kings have granted Privileges to certain Cities and Towns not
to pay Subsidies, and granted Pardons as their Mercies and right reason
inclined them, in the course of their several Raigns for many Ages last past,
yet have not acquitted or left unpunished all the Offenders ever since, there
being a greater likelihood that they would not be so easy in pardoning, where
they were to gain so much by Attainders, Fines and Forfeitures

And therefore panick and vain Fears, such as in constantem virum cadere non
possunt, should not be permitted to affright our better to be employed
Imaginations, unless we had a mind to be as wise as a small and pleasant
Courtier of King Henry the Eighths, who would never endure to pass in a Boat
under London Bridge lest it should fall upon his Head, because it might once
happen to do so.

Our Magna Charta's and all our Laws which ordain no man to be condemned or
punished without Trial by his Peers, do allow it where it is by Confession,
Outlawry, etc and no Verdict.

Did never think it fit that Public Dangers, such as Treason should tarry,
where Justice may as well be done otherwise without any precise Formalities to
be used therein.

For although it may be best done by the advice of the Kings greatest Council
the Parliament, there is no Law or reasonable Custom of England either by Act
of Parliament, or without, that restrains the King to do it only in the time of
Parliament.

When the Returns, Law-Days and Terms appointed and fixed, have ever given place
to our Kings Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Inquiries, etc. upon special and
emergent occasions.

And notwithstanding it will be always advisable that Kings should be assisted
by their greatest Council, when it may be had, yet there is no Law or Act of
Parliament extant, or any right reason or consideration to bind Him from making
use of His ordinary Council in a Case of great and importunate necessity.

For Cases of Treason, Felony and Trespass, being excepted out of Parliament,
first and last granted and indulged Privileges by our and their Kings and
Princes, there can be no solid Reason or cogent Argument to persuade any man
that the King cannot for the preservation of Himself and His People, in the
absence or interval of Parliaments, punish and try Offenders in Cases of
Treason, without which there can be no Justice, Protection or Government, if
the Power of the King and Supreme Magistrate shall be tied up by such, or the
like as may happen, Obstructions.

So that until the Honorable House of Commons can produce some or any Law,
Agreement, Pact, Concession, Liberty or Privilege to Sit and Counsel the King,
whether he will or no, as long as any of their Petitions remain unanswered
(which they never yet could or can) (those grand Impostors and Figments of the
Modus tenendi Parliamenta, and the supposed Mirror of Justice, being as they
ought to be rejected) when the Parliament Records will witness that many
Petitions have, for want of time (most of the ancient Parliaments not expending
much of it) been adjourned to be determined in other Courts, as in the Case of
Staunton in 14 E. 3. and days have been limited to the Commons for the
exhibiting of their Petitions; the Petitions of the Corbets depended all the
Raigns of King Edward the First and Second, until the eleventh year of Edward
the Third, which was about sixty six years, and diverse Petitions not
dispatched, have in the Reign of King Richard the Second, been by the King
referred to the Chancellor and sometimes with a direction to call to his
assistance the Justices and the Kings Sergeants at Law, and the Commons
themselves have at other times prayed to have their Petitions determined by the
Council of the King, or by the Lord Chancellor. And there will be reason to
believe that in Cases of urgent necessity for public safety, the King is and
ought to be at liberty to try and punish great and dangerous Offenders without
His Great Council of Parliament.

The Petitions in Parliament touching the pardoning of Richard Lions, John
Peachie, Alice Pierce, etc and a long process of William Montacute Earl of
Salisbury were renewed and repeated again in the Parliament of the first of
Richard the Second, because the Parliament was ended before they could be
answered

Anno 1. of King Richard the Second, John Lord of Gomenez formerly committed to
the Tower for delivering up of the Town of Ardes in that Kings time, of which
he took upon him the safe keeping in the time of King Edward the Third, and his
excuse being disproved, the Lords gave Judgment that he should dye, but in
regard he was a Gentleman and a Baronet, and had otherwise well served, should
be beheaded, but Judgment was howsoever respited until the King should be
thereof Rot. Parl.
fully informed, and was thereupon returned again to the Tower.

King Henry the Second, did not tarry for the assembling a Parliament to try
Henry de Essex, his Standard Bearer, whom he disherited for throwing it down
and aftrighting his Host or disheartning it.

16 E. 2 Henry de bello monte a Baron refusing to come to Parliament upon
Summons, was by the King, Lords and Council, and the Judges, and Barons of the
Exchequer then assisting committed for his contempt to Prison.

Anno 3 E. 3. the Bishop of Winchester was indicted in the King's Bench for
departing from the Parliament at Salisbury.

Neither did Henry the Eight forbear the beheading of His great Vicar General
Cromwell, upon none or a very small evidenced Treason, until a Parliament
should be Assembled.

The Duke of Somerset was Indicted of Treason and Felony, the scond of
December, Anno 3. and 4. Edwardi 6. sitting the Parliament, which began the
fourth day of November, in the third year of His Reign, and ended the first day
of February in the fourth, was acquitted by his Peers for Treason, but found
guilty of Felony, for which neglecting to demand his Clergy he was put to Death.

In the Reign of King Philip and Queen Mary, thirty Cokes Institutes.
nine of the House of Commons in Parliament (whereof the famous Lawyer Edmond
Plowden was one^) were Indicted in the Court of King's Bench, for being absent
without License from the Parliament.

Queen Elizabeth Charged and Tried for Treason, and Executed Mary Queen of
Scots her Feudatory, without the Advice of Parliament, and did the like with
Robert Earl of Essex her special Favorite, for in such Cases of public and
general Dangers, the shortest delays have not seldom proved to be fatally
mischievous.

And howsoever it was in the Case of Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury in the
fifteenth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, declared that the Peers
de la terre ne doivent estre arestez ne mesnez en Jugement, Si non en Parliament
and par leur Pairres, yet when there is no Parliament, though by the Law their
Persons may not then also be Arrested at a common persons Suit, they may by
other ways be brought to Judgment in any other Court.

And Charges put in by the Commons in the House of Peers, against any of the
Peers have been dissolved with it.

For Sir Edward Coke has declared it to be according Cokes 4 part of the
Institutes. Tit. Parliament.
to the Law and reasonable Customs of England, followed by the modern practice,
that the giving any Judgment in Parliament does not make it a Session, and that
such Bills as passed in either or both Houses, and had no Royal Assent unto
them, must at the next Assembly begin again; for every Session of Parliament is
in Law (where any Bill has gained the Royal Assent, or any Record upon a Writ
of Error brought in the House of Peers has been certified) is and has been
accounted to have been a Session.

And although some of this latter quarrelling Age have Espoused an Opinion, too
much insisted upon, that an Impeachment brought by the House of Commons against
any one makes the supposed Offense, until it be Tried, unpardonable.

A Reason whereof is undertaken to be given, because that in all Ages it has
been an undoubted Right of the Commons to Impeach before the Lords any Subject
for Treason or any Crime whatsoever.

And the Reason of that Reason is (supposed to be) because great Offenses
complained of in Parliament, are most effectually determined in Parliament.

Wherein they that are of that Opinion may be entreated to take into their more
serious Consideration,

That there neither is, nor ever was, any House or Members of Commons in
Parliament, before the Imprisonment of King H. 3. by a Rebellous part of his
Subjects, in the Forty ninth year of his Reign, or any kind of fair or just
evidence for it.

Factious designing and fond conjectures being not amongst good Pa(...)ots or
the Sons of Wisdom ever accounted to be a sufficient, or any evidence.

Nor was the House of Lords from its first and more ancient original, entitled
under their King to a Judicative Power to their Kings, in common or ordinary
Affairs, but in arduis, and not in all things of that nature, but in quibusdam,
as the King should propose and desire their advice, concerning the Kingdom and
Church in matters of Treason or public concernments, and did understand
themselves, and that high and honorable Court, to be so much forbid by Law,
ancient usage and custom to intermeddle with petty or small Crimes or Matters,
as our Kings have ever since the sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the
first, ordained some Rot. parl. 7 E. 1.
part of the Honorable House of Peers, to be Receivers and Tryers of Petitions
of the Members of the House of Commons themselves and others, directed to the
King to admit what they found could have no Remedy in the ordinary Courts of
Justice, and reject such as were, properly elsewhere to be determined, with an
Indorsement of non est Petitio Parliamenti.

Which may well be believed to have taken much of its reason and ground from a
Law made by King Canutus who began his Reign about the year of our Lord, 1016.
Nemo de injuriis alterius Regi queratur Ll. Canuti, 16
nisi quidem in Centuria Justitiam consequi and impetrare non poterit.

For certainly, if it should be otherwise, the reason and foundation of that
highest Court would not be as it has been hitherto, always understood to be
with a Cognizance only de quibusdam arduis, matters of a very high nature
concerning the King and the Church.

But it must have silenced all other Courts and Jurisdictions, and have been a
continual Parliament, a Jail-delivery or an intermedler in matters as low as
Court Leets, or Baron and County Courts, and a Pye-Powder Court.

And the words of any Crime whatsoever do not properly signify great Offenses,
and that all great Offenses do concern the Parliament, is without a Key to
unlock the Secret not at all intelligible, when it was never instituted or made
to be a Court for common or ordinary Criminals.

For the House of Commons were never wont to take more upon them than to be
Petitioners and Assenters unto such things as the King by the advice of His
Lords Spiritual and Temporal should ordain, and obey, and endeavor to perform
them.

And an Impeachment of the House of Commons cannot be said to be in the Name or
on the behalf of all the People of England, for that they never did or can
represent the one half of them, and if they will be pleased to exaimine the
Writs and Commissions granted by our Kings for their Election, and the purpose
of the Peoples Election, of them to be their Representatives, Substitutes or
Procurators, it will not extend to accuse Criminals, for that appertained to
the King himself and His Laws, care of Justice and the Public; for the Common
People had their Inferior Courts and Grand Juries, Assizes and Goal-Deliveries
to dispatch such Affairs without immediately troubling Him or His Parliament,
and the tenor and purpose of their Commissions and Elections to Parliament, is
no more than ad faciendum and consentiendum iis, to obey and perform such
things as the King, by the advice of His Lords Spiritual and Temporal, should
in Parliament ordain.

For although where the Wife or Children of a Man murdered shall bring an
Appeal, the King is debarred from giving a Pardon, because by our Saxon Laws
derived from the Laws of God, they are not to be disturbed Ll. Inae, 6.
in that satisfaction which they ought to have by the loss or death of the Man
murdered.

Yet the public Justice will not be satisfied without the party offending be
Arraigned and brought to Judgment for it, if the party that has right to
Appeal should surcease or be bought off, so as an Appeal may be brought after
or before the King has Indicted, and an auter foitz acquit in the one case
will not prejudice in the other, and where the Matter of Fact comes to be
afterward fully proved, and the Appeal of a Wife or Child of a Bastard called
filius populi, quia nullius filius, where only the King is Heir, cannot vacate
or supersede an Indictment of the Kings.

Neither is an Appeal upon a Crime or in criminal Matters in the first instance
to be at all pursued in Parliament, by the Statute made in the First year of
the Reign of King H. 4. the words whereof are, Item for 1 H. 4. cap. 14.
many great inconveniences and mischiefs that often have happened by many
Appeals made within the Realm of England (to the great afflictions and
calamites of the Nation, as it afterward happened by the Lancastrian Plots and
Desings in that mischievous Appeal in Anno 11. of King Richard the Second)
before this time; It is ordained and stablished from henceforth, That all the
Appeals to be made of things done out of the Realm, shall be tried and
determined before the Constable and Marshal of England for the time being; And
moreover it is accorded and assented, That no Appeals be from henceforth made,
or in any wise pursued in Parliament in any time to come.

And therefore that allegation that the House of Peers cannot reject the
Impeachment of the Commons, because that Suit or Complaint of the Commons can
be determined no where else, will want a better foundation (an Impeachment of
the House of Commons, in the Name of all the People being no other than an
Appeal to the King in Parliament.)

And the Suit of such as might be Appellants in another place (being there
expressly prohibited) cannot be supposed to be the concern or interest of all
the People deserving or requiring satisfaction, or especially provided for by
Law to have satisfaction, unless it could by any probability or soundness of
Judgment be concluded that all the People of England besides Wives, Children or
near Kindred and Relations (the necessity of public Justice and deterring
Examples) are or should be concerned in such a never to be fancied Appeal of
the People. And it will be very hard to prove that one or a few are all the
People of England, or if they could be so imagined, are to be more concerned
than the King, who is sworn to do Justice, unless they would claim and prove a
Sovereignty, and to be sworn to do Justice, which though they had once by a
villainous Rebellion attacked, until Oliver Cromwell their Man of Sin, cheated
them of it; for God would never allow them any such power or privilege, or any
Title to the Jesuits Doctrine which some of our Protestant Dissenters, their
modern Proselites, have learned of them, that the King, although he be singulis
major, is minor universis.

And it is no denial of Justice in the House of Peers to deny the receiving of
an Impeachment from the House of Commons, when they cannot understand any just
cause or reason to receive it, and the Records, Rolls, Petitions and Orders of
Parliament will inform those that will be at the pains to be rightly and truly
directed by them, that Petitions in Parliament have been adjourned modified or
denied; and that in the Common or Inferior Courts of Justice, Writs and Process
may sometimes be denied, superseded or altered according to the Rules of
Justice, or the circumstances thereof. And our Records can witness, that
Plaintiffs have petitioned Courts of Justice recedere a brevi and impetrare
aliud.

And it cannot be said that the King does denegare Justitiam, when he would
bind them unto their ancient legal, well experimented forms of seeking it in
the pursuing their Rights and Remedies, and hinders them in nothing but seeking
to hurt others and destroy themselves.

For Justice no otherwise denied should not be termed Arbitrary, until there
can be some solid reason, proof or evidence for it,

When it is rather to be believed, that if the Factious Vulgar Rabble might
have their Wills, they would never be content or leave their fooling until they
may obtain an unbounded liberty of tumbling and tossing the Government into as
many several Forms and Methods, as there be days in the year, and no smaller
variety of Religions.

And by the Feudal Laws, which are the only Fundamental Laws of our Government
and English Monarchy, those many parts of the Tenants that held of their Mesne
Lords in Capite, could not with any safety to their Oaths and Estates Authorize
any of their Elected Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, to accuse
or charge any of the Baronage of England, in the House of Peers in Parliament,
although every Tenant in his Oath of Vassalage to his Mesne Lord, does except
his Allegiance to the King, and would be guilty of Misprision of Treason, if he
should conceal it by the space of twenty and four hours, and if any of the
Elected would or should avoid such Misprision of Treason in the not performance
of his Duty and Oath of Allegiance, it would require a particular Commission to
his own Elected Members, and is not to have it done by way of a general
Representation when there is not to be discerned in the Kings Writ, or in the
Sureties, or Manucaptors matters, or things to be performed, or in the
Indentures betwixt the Sheriff and the Electors, and Elected any word of
Representation, or any thing more than ad faciendum and consentiendum iis, to
assent and obey, do and perform such things as the King by the Advice of the
Lords in Parliament shall ordain, and if they would make themselves to be such
Representers, were to have a particular and express Commission, to charge or
impeach any one of themselves or of the House of Peers with Treason, or any
other high Misdemeanors.

And they must be little conversant with our Records, that have not understood
that the Commons have many times received just denials to their Petitions, and
that some have not seldom wanted the foundations of Reason or Justice.

That many of their Petitions have adopted the Concerns and Interests of
others, that were either Strangers unto them, or were the Designs of some of
the grand Nobility who thought them as necessary to their purposes as Wind,
Tide, and Sails are to the speeding of a Ship into the Port or Landing-places
of their Designs.

For upon their exhibiting in a Parliament in the 28 Rot. Parl. 28. H. 6. n.
16, 17.
year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, abundance of Articles of High
Treason, and Misdemeanors, against William de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk one
whereof was that he had sold the Realm of England to the French King, who was
preparing to invade it.

When they did require the King and House of Lords that the Duke (whom not long
before they had recommended to the King to be rewarded for special services)
might be committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, the Lords and Justices upon
consultation, thought it not reasonable unless some special Matter was objected
against him.

Whereupon the said Duke not putting himself upon his Peerage, but with
protestation of his innocence, only submitting himself to the Kings mercy, who
acquitting him from the Treason and many of the Misdemeanors, and for some of
them by the advice of the Lords, only banished him for five years. And that
thereupon when the Viscount Beaumont in the behalf of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal required that it might be Enrolled that the Judgment was by the Kings
own Rule, and not by their Assent, and that neither they nor their Heirs should
by this Example be barred of their Peerage.

No Protestation appears to have been made by any of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal for or on the behalf of the Commons.

Or by the Commons for themselves.

So as a different manner of doing Justice can neither truly or rationally be
said to be an absolute denial of Justice, and was never believed to be so by
the Predecessors of the House of Commons in Parliament in our former Kings
Raigns, when some hundreds of their Petitions in Parliament have been answered.
There is a Law already provided, or let the old Law stand, or the King will
provide a covenable or fitting remedy.

And is not likely if it were, as it is not to be, any Arbitrary Power, or any
temptation or inducement thereunto, to produce any Rule or encouragement to the
exercise of an Arbitrary Power in the Inferior Courts, when there is none so
weak in his Intellect, but may understand that different Courts have several
Boundaries, Methods and Forms of Proceedings, and that the Kings extraordinary
great Court and Council in His House of Peers, although very just and
unarbitrary in their procedures, is so always ready to succor the Complaints
of People, as it never willingly makes it self to be the cause of it.

And cannot misrepresent the House of Peers to the King and his People, in the
Case of Mr. Fitz Harris, or any others, when that honorable Assembly takes so
much care as it does to repress Arbitrary Power, and does all it can to protect
the whole Nation from it, and many of the House of Commons Impeachments have
been disallowed by the King and his House of Peers in Parliament without any
ground or cause of fear of Arbitrary Power, which can no where be so
mischievously placed, as in the giddy multitude whose Impeachments would be
worse than the Ostracisme at Athens, and so often overturn and tire all the
wise men and good men in the Nation, as there would be none but such as deserve
not to be so styled, to manage the Affairs of the Government, subordinate to
their King and Sovereign.

To all which may be added, if the former Presidents cited to assert the Kings
Power of Pardoning as well after an Impeachment made by the Commons in
Parliament, as before, and after an Impeachment made by the Commons, and
received by the Lords in Parliament, or made both by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, be not not sufficient that of Hugh le Despenser, Son of Hugh le
Despenser, the younger, a Lord of a great Estate, which is thus entered in the
Parliament Roll of the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, ought
surely to satisfy, that the Laws and reasonable Customs of England will
warrant it.

Anno 5 E. 3. Sir Eubule le Strange and eleven other Rot Parl. 5. E. 3. n. 8.
Mainprisers, being to bring forth the Body of Hugh the Son of Hugh le
Despenser the younger, says the Record, A respondre au prochein Parliament and
de ester au droit and affair ce and de liu en conseil soit ordine and
mesuerent le Corpse le dit Hugh devant nostre Seigneur le Roi Countes Barons and
autres Grantz en mesme le Parliament and monstrent les L'res Patents du Roi de
Pardon al dit Hugh forisfacturam vite and membrorum sectam pacis homicidia
roborias Felonias and omnes transgressiones, etc. Dated 20 Martii anno primo
Regni sui Et priant a n're Seigneur le Roi quil le vousist delivrer de las
Mainprise and fair audit Hugh sa grace and n're Seigneur le Roi eiant regard a
ses dites L'res and voilant uttroier a la Priere le dit Mons'r Eble and autres
Main pernors avaunt dit and auxint de les Prelatz qui prierent molt especialment
pur lui si ad comande de sa grace sa delivrance. Et voet que ses Menpernors
avaunt ditz and chescun d'eux soient dischargez de leur Mainprise and auxint and
le dit Hugh soit quit and delivrers de Prisone and de guard yssint and si ho'me
trove cause devors lui autre and nest uncore trove quil estoise au droit.

And the English Translator, or Abridger of the Parliament Records, has
observed that the old usage was, that when any Person being in the Kings
displeasure, was thereof acquitted by Trial or Pardon, yet notwithstanding he
was to put in twelve of his Peers to be his Sureties for his good Behavior at
the Kings pleasure.

And may be accompanied by the Case of Richard Earl of Arundel in the 22 year
of the Reign of King Richard 22 R. 2. In the Abridgment of the Parliament
Records in English said to be done by Sir Robert Cotton.
the Second, being Appealed by the Lords Appellant, and they requiring the
King, that such Persons Appealed, that were under Arrest, might come to their
Trial, it was commanded to Ralph, Lord Nevil, Constable of the Tower of London
to bring forth the said Richard Earl of Arundel, then in his custody, whom the
said Constable brought into the Parliament, at which time the Lords Appellants
came also in their proper Persons. To the which Earl the Duke of Lancaster (who
was then hatching the Treason which afterward in Storms of State and Blood
came to effect against the King) by the Kings Coommandment and Assent of the
Lords declared the whole circumstances; after the reading and declaring whereof
the Earl of Arundel, who in Anno 11 of that Kings Reign had been one of the
Appellants, together with Henry Earl of Derby Son of the said Duke of
Lancaster, and afterward the usurping King Henry the Fourth against Robert de
Vere, Duke of Ireland and Earl of Oxford, and some other Ministers of State,
under King Richard the Second, alleged that he had one Pardon granted in the
Eleventh year of the Reign of King Richard the Second, and another Pardon
granted but six years before that present time. And prays that they might be
allowed.

To which the Duke answered, that for as much as they were unlawfully made, the
present Parliament had revoked them.

And the said Earl therefore was willed to say further for himself at his
peril; whereupon Sir Walter Clopton, Chief Justice, by the Kings Commandment
declared to the said Earl, that if he said no other thing, the Law would
adjudge him guilty of all the Actions against him.

The which Earl notwithstanding would say no other thing, but required
allowance of his Pardons.

And thereupon the Lords Appellant in their proper Persons, desired that
Judgment might be given against the said Earl as Convict of the Treason
aforesaid.

Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, by the Assent of the King, Bishops and Lords,
adjudged the said Earl to be Convict of all the Articles aforesaid, and thereby
a Traitor to the King and Realm, and that he should be hanged, drawn and
quartered, and forfeit all his Lands in Fee or Fee-tail, as he had the
nineteenth day of September, in the tenth year of the Kings Reign, together
with all his Goods and Chattels. But for that the said Earl was come of noble
Blood and House, the King pardoned the hanging, drawing and quartering, and
granted that he should be beheaded; which was done accordingly.

But Anno 1 Hen. 4. the Commons do pray the reversal Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 109.
111.
of that Judgment given against him, and restoration of Thomas the Son and Heir
of the said Richard Earl of Arundel.

Unto which the King answered, he has showed favor to Thomas now Earl, and to
others, as does appear.

The Commons do notwithstanding pray, that the Records touching the Inheritance
of the said Richard Earl of Arundel, late imbezelled, may be searched for and
restored.

Unto which was answered, the King wills.

And their noble Predecessors in that Honorable House of Peers, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament long before that, videlicet, in the fifth
year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, made no scruple or moat point or
question in Law, whether the power of pardoning was valid and solely in the
King after an Impeachment of the Lords in Parliament, when in the Case of
Edmond Mortimer, the Son of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, a Peer of great
Nobility and Estate, the Prelates, Counts, Barons, and autres gentz du
Parliament, did in full Parliament, as the Record it self will evidence,
Petition the King to restore the said Edmond Mortimer to his Blood and Estate,
which were to remain unto him after the death of his said Father, to whom it
was answered Rot. Parl. 5 E. 3. n. 17.
by the King in these words; Et sur ce nostre Seigneur le Roi charge a les ditz
Prelates, Countes and Barons en leur foies and ligeance queux ils lui devoient
and de puis ce que le Piere nostre Seigneur le Roi que ore est estoit murdre
per le dit Count de la March and person procurement a ce quil avoit mesmes
comdevant sa mort que eux eant regarda le Roi en tiel cas lui consilassent ce
quil devoit fair de reason audit Esmon filz le dit Count les queux Prelates,
Countes, Barons and autres avys and trete enter eux respondirent a nostre
Seigneur le Roi de Common assent que en regard a fi horrible fait comme de
murdre de terre and leur Seigneur lige quen faist unques ne avoient devant en
leur temps ne nes devant venir en le eyde de dieu quils ne scavoient uncore
Juger ne conseiller ceque seroit affair en tiel cas. Et sur ce prierent a
nostre Seigneur le Roi quils poierent ent aver avisement tanque au proche in
Parliament la quelle priere le Roi ottroia and sur ce prierent outre que nostre
Siegneur le Roi feist au dit Esmon sa bone grace a quoi il respond quil lui
voloit fair mes cella grace vendroit de lui mesmes.

Sir Thomas de Berkeley (who Sir William Dugdale in Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3. n. 16.
his Book of the Baronage of England, found and believes to have been a Baron)
being called to account by the King, for the murder of his Father King Edward
the Second, to whose custody at his Castle of Barkeley, he was committed, not
claiming his Peerage, but pleading that he was at the same time sick almost to
death at Bradely, some miles distant, and had committed the custody and care of
the King unto Thomas de Gourney and William de Ocle ad eum salvo custodiendi,
and was not guilty of the murder of the King or any ways assenting thereunto Et
de illo posuit se super Patriam, had a Jury of twelve Knights sworn and
impannelled in Parliament who acquitted him thereof, but finding that he had
committed the custody of the King to the aforesaid Thomas de Gournay and
William de Ocle, and that the King extitit murderatus, a further day was given
to the said Sir Thomas de Berkeley de audiendo Judicio suo in prox.
Parliamento, and he was in the interim committed to the custody of Ralph de
Nevil Steward of the Kings Household.

At which next Parliament Prierent les Prelatz, Countes Rot Parl. 5. E. 3.
and Barons a nostre Seigneur le Roi on the behalf of the said Sir Thomas de
Berkeley, that he would free him of his Baylor Mainprize, whereupon the King
charging the said Prelates, Counts and Barons to give him their advice therein:
Le quel priere fust ottroia and puis granta nostre Seigneur le Roi de rechef a
leur request que le dit Mons'r Thomas and ses Mainpernors fusseient delivres
and discharges de lure mainprise and si estoit Jour done a dit Thomas de estre
en prochein Parliament, which proved to be a clear Dismission, for no more
afterward appears of that matter.

Neither after a fierce Impeachment in the said Parliament of 21 R. 2. against
Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, of High
Treason, upon which he was by that injured Prince condemned and banished, when
as the Record says, Les dits Countz prierent au Roi ordenir tiel Jugement verse
le dit Ercevesque come le cas demand and le Roi sur ceo Recorda en le dit
Parliament que le dit Ercevesque avoit este devant lui en presence de certeines
Seigneurs and confessor que en la use de la dite Commission il sey mesprise and
lui mist en la grace du Roi surquoi, the Judgment was given against the said
Archbishop, that he should be banished and forfeit all his Lands, Goods and
Estate, when in the first year of the Reign of the usurping King H. 4. that
Archbishop not tarrying long in Exile, the minds of the Commons became so
settled on the prevailing side, that there was so small or no opposition made by
them against him, as the Duke of York and Earl of Northumberland, and others of
the Blood of the said Archbishop of Canterbury did in Parliament pray the King
that the said Archbishop might have his recovery against Roger Walden, for
sundry Wastes and Spoils done by him in the Lands of the said Archbishopric,
which the King granted, and thanked them for their motion.

The Bishop of Exeter Chancellor of England at the Rot. parl. at. R. 2.
assembling of the Parliament, taking his Text out of the Prophecy of Ezekiel,
Rexerit unus omnibus, alleging the power that ought to be in Sovereign Kings
and Princes whereby to govern, and the Obedience in Subjects to obey, and that
all alienations of his Kingly Privileges and Prerogatives were reassumable and
to be Repealed by his Coronation Oath, Pour quoi le Roi ad fut assembler le
Estatz de Parliament a cest fair pour estre enformer si ascun droitz de sa
Corone soient sustretz ou amemuser a sin que par leur bon advis and discretion
tiel remedy puisse estre mis que le Roi puisse esteer en sa liberty ou poir
Comme ses Progenitors ont este devant lui and duissent de droit non obstante
ascun ordinance au contraire and ainsi le Roi as Tener, Et les governera,
whereupon the Commons made their Protestation, and prayed the King that it
might be Enrolled, that it was not their intent ou volunte to Impeach or
Accuse any Person in that Parliament sans congie du Roi, And thereupon the
Chancellor, by the Kings command, likewise declared, That Nostre Seigneur le
Roi considerant coment plusieurs hautes offenses and mesfaits ont estre faitz
par le People de son Roialme en contre leur ligeance and l' Estat nostre
Seigneur le Roi and la loie de la terre devant ces heures don't son People
estiet en grant peril and danger de leie and leur corpse and biens and voullant
sur ce de sa royalle benignite monstre and fair grace a son dit People a fyn
quilz ayent le greindre courage and volonte de bien fair and de leure mieux
porter devors le Roi entemps avenir si voet and grante de fair and ease and
quiet and salvation de son dit People une generalle Pardon a ces liges
forspries certaines pointz limitez par le samant la suite al party forspris
cyn quont persons queux plaira au Roi nomer and tour ceux qui serront
Empeacher en ce present Parliament and dit austre que le dit Roi voet que plein
droit and Justice soyent faitz a Chascun de ses liges qui en voilent complandre
en cest Parliament and ad ordiner and assigner Receivers and Triers des
Petitions en cest Parliament.

And did in pusuance thereof in full Parliament excuse, the Duke of York the
Bishop of Worchester, Sir Richard le Scroop then living, William late
Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander late Archbishop of York, Thomas late Bishop
of Exeter, and Michael late Abbot of Walton then being dead, of the Execution
and intent of the Commission made in the Tenth year of his Reign, as being
assured of their Loyalty, and therefore by Parliament restored them to their
good Name.

And it is more than a little probable that the Prelates, Counts and Barons in
that Honorable House of Peers in Parliament, did well understand that the King
was a fit, and the only person to Petition unto for that Pardon, Discharge or
Dismission amounting to a Pardon, and did not think it to be either legal or
rational to Petition the People and their fellow Subjects, upon a supposed
incredible and invisible Sovereignty, no man knows when or how radicated and
inherent in them.

The Decree of the great Ahashuerus that Reigned Esther, ca. 1, 3, 5, 8.
from India to Ethiopia over one hundred twenty seven Provinces, whose Laws
were holden to be irrevocable, was reversed for the preservation of the Jewish
Nation upon the Petition of Queen Esther, and his holding out his Golden
Scepter unto her.

The Inquiet People of Athens now come enough under a Mohammedan Slavery, would
not again wish for Draco's bloody repealed Laws, without the mercy of a Prince
to moderate them according to the Rules of a prudent and discerning mercy.

Which made the Goodness and Wisdom of Solomon, so extraordinarily eminent in
his determination in 1 Reg. 3.
the Case betwixt the two Mothers claiming one Child.

Neither can a People ever be, or so much as think themselves to be in any
condition of happiness when their Laws shall be inflexible and hard hearted,
and there shall be no Superior Power to allay the rigidness or severity of them.

No Cities of Refuge or Asylums to fly unto, upon occasion of Misfortunes,
which God himself ordained for his Chosen People of Israel.

And therefore when Juries may err or play the Knaves, be Corrupt, Malicious
or Perjured, and Judges mistaken, our Judges have in their doubtings stayed the
Execution until they could attend the King for his determination.

Whereupon his Pardons did not seldom ensue, or a long Lease for Life was
granted to the penitent Offender, it being not amiss said by our old Bracton,
That Tutius Bracton.
est reddere rationem misericordiae quam Judicii, the Saxons in doubtful Cases
appealed to God for discovery, by Kemp or Camp, Fight, Fire or Water Ordeal,
which being now abolished and out of use, requires a greater necessity of the
right use of pardoning; for Sir Edward Coke says, Lex Angliae est Lex
misericordiae, like the Laws of Scripture Cokes Instit. 2. 315.
wherein Mercy is not, opposite unto Justice but a part of it, as 1 John 19.
Psalm 71. 2. Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 33. 13, 14. and it has not been ill
said that Justitia semper mitiorem sequitur partem, for it is known that a
Judge since his Majesty's happy Restoration, who, were he now living, would
wish he had made a greater pause than he did in a Case near Brodway-Hills, in
the County of Worcester or Gloucester, where a Mother and a Son were, upon a
seeming full evidence, Hanged for the Murder of a Father, who afterward when
it was too late, appeared to be living.

And Posterity by the remembrance of Matters and Transactions in Times past,
may bewail the Fate of some Ministers of State, who have been ruined by being
exposed to the Fury of the People, (who did not know how or for what they did
accuse them) and left to the never to be found Piety or Wisdom of a Giddy,
Incensed and Inconsiderate accusing Multitude, and Hurrying on the reasonless
or little Wit of one another.

And consider how necessary it had been for the pious good Duke of Somerset, in
the Reign of King Edward the Sixth to have had his Pardon, when at his Trial
neither his Judges, nor the prevalency of the faction that would have rather
his Room than his Company, nor himself could remember to put him in mind to
demand the benefit of his Clergy.

Or how far it would have gone toward the prevention of that ever to be wailed
National Bloodshedding miseries and devastations, which followed the Murders
of the Earl of Strafford, and Archbishop Land, if their Inno cencies had but
demanded and made use of his late Majesty's Pardon.

Or what reason can be found why a Pardon after an Impeachment of a particular
Person by an House of Commons in Parliament, or an House of Peers joining or
consenting therewith, should not be as valid and effectual in Law, Reason and
good Conscience.

As the very many General Pardons and Acts of Oblivion, which have been granted
by our Kings and Princes to their People for Extortions of Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
etc. together with many other Misdemeanors, Grievances and Offenses, often
complained of in many of our Parliaments, as the Records thereof will witness,
whereby they have acquitted and given away as much of their own just Rights and
Regal Revenues to their Subjects, then the Aids and Subsidies, which they have
Contributed toward their Preservation, and in theirs their own, and have been
more especially by our late Sovereign, who may be truly styled le deboniere and
to have been Piger ad paenas ad praemia velox.


And whilst we sit by the Waters of Babylon, and sadly bewail the loss and
casting away of our Tenures in Capite the Chariots and Horsemen, and the glory
and strength of our Israel, for a miscalled Recompense by an Excise before our
Presbyterian, and Common Ill rather than Commonwealth Rebels had to maintain
their wicked designs, introduced that Dutch Devil called the Excise upon our
half boiled, and half malted Ale and Beer, making our drink to be as the Waters
of Marah, and in the opinion of our Doctors of Physic, an Especial Friend to
our now much complained of seldom heard of before that Tenenda non Tollenda per
Fabian Philipps.
wicked Rebellion, the Scurvy and one of the most grievous and general Burdens,
that could be laid upon the Common sort of laboring poor people, and those
Tenures in Capite were so Essential and high a part of our Monarchick Miscalled
Recompense per eundem.
Government, as all the Judges of England did in the Reign of King James the
First agree and certify that they were so inseparable from the Crown of
England, as they could not be altered or taken from it by an Act of Ligeancia
Lugens pereundem.
Parliament, and that learned and pacifique Prince having been much tempted
thereunto in his great want of Money, by an offer of 200000 l. per annum, which
was more than the whole profits of the Excise upon Ale, Beer, Cider, Coffee,
etc. All the Salaries, Cheats, Charges and Allowances, Filchings, Lurches and
False Accompis deducted, could or did amount unto, that kind of Revenue being
since his late Majesty's death to be no more than a moiety thereof; And these
Tenures in Capite were so inherent in the Crown of England, as diverse of the
learned Judges of England in their Arguments in the Exchequer-Chamber in the
Reign of King Charles the Martyr made no Scruple to assert that the Tenures in
Capite were of so high a nature, that they could not be taken away by any Act
of Parliament.

And to take away from our Kings and Princes, the love and honor of the
people, as well as they had done the Tenures in Capite, the Nerves and Sinews
of our Monarchick Government, it was the especial work and design of those
Enemies of our former happiness to take away also the Honor of his Crown and
Hospitality, and could not think they had done all their work until they had
thrown the Pourveyance into the bargain of the Tenures in Capite, which nothing
but the value of the Kingdom it self could make an Equivalent recompense or
purchase, and the unhappy contrivers thereof might have put a better value upon
it, when in Michaelmas Term in the third year of the Reign of King James the
first, all the Judges of England did certify that it was a Mr. Francis Moors
Reports, Richards Case. 764.
Praerogative of the King at the Common Law, and that all the Statutes which
have been made to correct abuses in the Purveyances took not away the
Purveyances, but confirmed them. Et qui tollit Iniquitatem firmat proprietatem
and confirmat usum.

And all those mischiefs done by one that unhappily might have taken more heed
of an Assembly, which some flatteringly called the Collected Wisdom of the
Nation, when he could not well esteem them so to be, when by Fudling, Drinking,
Bribing, and all the base Cheats imaginable they had procured themselves to be
made Members of that much miscalled Parliament. And yet after his late
Majesty's miraculous restoration being advanced unto great preferments, and at
the last a Grand Minister of State, did so think well of his own doings, as he
publicly at the Table of Sir Harbottle Grimston Master of the Rolls in
Chancery Lane in the hearing of many worthy persons, Sir Nicholas Strode, John
Hern Esquire, and others, one of them yet living ready to testify it, what a
most especial Service he had done for the King and Kingdom when he was a Member
in Parliament, and known to be the Kings Solicitor General by a motion without
any the Kings privity or direction to dissolve and destroy the Tenures in
Capite, and accept a Recompense for them, which Sergeant Glyn a former Grand
Rebel to his Majesty, and after his Restoration crept in as the most of them
did, and got to be Members of Parliament, was ready to assist by the offer of a
Recompense by an Excise upon Ale, Beer, Sider, and Coffee, a Limb of that Dutch
Devil which they had made use of in their Rebellion and time of his late
Majesty's, and now Majesty's persecution. At which the Company standing amazed,
and Sir Nicholas Strode said, that he should never have fought for the late
blessed Martyr, or come to his setting up his Standard at Nottingham if he
could have foreseen it, the most of the Nation at that time, and almost ever
since, verily believing that it had been the folly and evil doing of Sir Edward
Hyde the late Lord Chancellor, afterward Earl of Clarendon, and therefore was
sufficiently railed upon, Cursed and Banned for it, and yet he was so Faultless
and Innocent therein, as it can be witnessed by the now Earl of Clarendon his
Son Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and Lord privy Seal in the Kingdom of England,
that this overbold and presumptuous motion of a Servant and Council at Law of
that unfortunate weather-beaten Prince, not being at all informed how or by
whom the project came to be first hatched or moved, his late Majesty calling
together his privy Council, and advising upon that most unhappy proposition,
wherein the Rebel Parliament in February 1647. had made some Vote, Act or
Ordinance against the aforesaid Tenures under the notion of the Court of Wards,
being but two years before his Royal Fathers Murder, and Oliver Cromwell had
made some Act of his Worships miscalled Parliament some few years after, as it
behoved for the destruction of those Tenures in Capite, when he intended as
much as he could to take away the Kingship and Monarchy, until he could make
himself fit to govern a foolish, besotted, rebellious people, they having
before not at all made any mention or request to have the said Court of Wards
put down, or the Tenures in Capite by their High and mighty 19 Propositions,
nor were any complaints of grievances made thereby, nor in all our Parliament
Records or Journals or Historians since or before the Raigns of King Edward the
Confessor, and William the Conqueror, does there appear to have been any
Petitions in Parliament against them, neither in that as it were intended
deposing Remonstrance of the 15th of December 1641. wherein nothing was omitted
that might injure or calumniate per fas aut nefas the Kings Authority or
Government, there appears to have been nothing against either the Tenures in
Capite or Court of Wards. And it can be proved that the Royal Martyr during his
imprisonment in the Isle of Wight, had designed that if ever he came again to
his Rights, he would upon all his Crown or Chequer Leases reserve some military
Services, notwithstanding all which his late Majesty's great want of present
Money, and some settled Revenue, persuaded him to hearken more than otherwise
his own great Judgment would have done. The Earl of Radnor was much against
their dissolution, alleging that the constitution it self was good, and was
not in it self to be cast away by any Maleadministration: Sir Geffery Palmer
was very much for the preservation of the Tenures, and so were many other, and
the Lord Chancellor Clarendon very much, and so greatly, as he called to the
said Solicitor General, and said, will you also put down the Pourveyances?
saying with some passion, by God we seem to be against the late Commonwealth,
and yet are acting for it.

And his late Majesty was so unwillingly drawn to be in Love with that ever to
be deplored Parliament contrivance to decapitate the Monarchy, and not only
that, but Ireland, and render all the Inferior part thereof, to be in a
paralitique or dead palsical over-benummed in its Members, as before that Act
passed, he sent for one Mr. Darnel, an ancient and experienced Clerk and
Attorney in the Court of Wards and Liveries, to propose some expedient for the
Regulation of any thing that had been Acted amiss in that Court, who bringing
it unto him in writing, he so much approved thereof, as he took him by the
hand, and gave him great thanks, but the fatality of that lamentable attempted
alteration of our ancient Monarchy, into an Anarchy or Poliarchy, with, by
their good will, a nudum nomen of a metamorphosed Monarchy, and that unhappy as
aforesaid proposer of it, cannot if he were now amongst the living but remember
that after I had Written a Book to Justify the Tenures in Capite entitled
Tenenda non Tollenda, dedicated to the Lord Chancellor, but delivered it unto
him before the Act had passed against them, and not at all imagining that Mr.
Solicitor* General had been so over-active in destroying them, desired him that
he would be a means to procure the military Services to be reserved, was
answered, it could not be done, and yet notwithstanding about a year or two
after attending him about some other affairs, he was pleased to say unto me,
Mr. Philipps, do you ever think to write in the Tenures in Capite again? unto
which I answering, no Sir, but I think the Child that is yet unborn may rue it,
unto which he replied, so do I also think, or I am of that opinion, which
shows, that though he did it without the Kings knowledge, and as a special
Service to be done unto him, did him that great mischief he never intended, and
was sorry for it afterward.

But when it was the wisdom of former ages to know what to contend for before
they quarrelled, therefore it may be necessary to let the Cavalling party
understand that there are multitudes of Privileges which are not Privileges
of Parliament, but truly and properly are the Privileges and Properties in
their own Estates, and they may be kinder to themselves if they will but take a
view of such Privileges and Properties, as they can call their own.

28.
Of the Protection and Privilege granted unto the Members of the House of
Commons in Parliament by our Sovereign Kings and Princes, during their
Attendance and Employments in their great Councels of Parliament according to
the Tenor and Purport of their Commissions.

COuld be granted by none but by our Kings the Original either by grant or
permission of all Privileges and Liberties enjoyed by their Subjects under or
in order to their Monarchick Regal Government, a view or Prospect whereof well
warranted by our Laws Records, and Annals, and from time to time contemporary
Historians, and experimented rules of right reason may serve to settle and
rectify the ill founded and superstructed fancies and opinions rather than
Judgments, built thereupon, which like some ignis fatuus, have led many
otherwise well meaning people, that heartily hated Rebellion, and Perjuries,
into the Bogs, and Snares of those very great and pernicious sins against God,
and his Vicegerents their Neighbors and fellow Subjects when their so ever
much mistaken privileges of Parliament will appear to be no more but
temporary, and of no long duration but from one usually short Parliament to
another when they were petitioned for before they were granted.

The Finis, end or motives whereof was primarily and principally the Kings
important occasions of summoning a Parliament, and causing them to come
thither, and he only was the Efficient cause, or causa sine qua non, thereof to
protect and keep them from disturbances, whilst they were busy and employed in
his service, either in their coming, tarrying or returning.

And therefore the Members of the House of Commons, were so sensible and
willing to have those privileges to be granted unto them, as might be
necessary for the affairs wherewith he had entrusted them, as they not dceming
any other to be requisite or belonging unto them.

And not thinking any more or other Privileges to be requisite for the public
good, were by the Kings License for better Orderand methods sake, to Elect one
of their Members to be their Speaker, and present him unto the King, who very
seldom refused him, notwithstanding his usual disabling himself by modest
excuses after whose allowance he did in the presence of many of his fellow
Members make it his and the House of Commons special request at that time
before, and ever since believed to be pertinent and necessary the privilege of
freedom of Access to his Majestys person, and freedom from Arrest and
Imprisonment for themselves; and their moenial Servants whilst they according
to their duties attended his commands in veniendo, morando, and redeundo, and a
third for himself since the miscarriage of an over-busy Speaker in the Reign of
King Henry the fourth to be pardoned for his ignorance in case he should speak
any thing ignorantly to the displeasure of his Majesty, which ought to be kept
within their proper limits and bounds, and not let loose to all or any the
Extravagant interpretations of the Roving fancies, either of the Vulgar or
Factious, neither making additions thereunto, or Supernumeraries, or as many as
they please, by a new Art of mutiplication, Alchymy, or Transmutation, or as if
they had purchased the often beggaring and deluding so called Philosophers
Stone properly enough so styled from making their Sectaries to be as poor as
Philosophers use to be) by transmating all that it touches into it self, or
something like it, and rendering the aforesaid two or three privileges to be
100, or 1000, 10000, or 20000: cum multis aliis, there having been an abundance
of various sort of privileges (not Privileges of Parliament) as well Civil as
Ecclesiastic even to an Excess granted by the Indulgence of our Kings and
Princes in the great and various concerns of their particular Affairs and
Estates as far as the extent of their fancies could carry them, and therein
grew to be something confident, if they could procure some success to Warrant
it, they might in good time by the help of their nevertyring Cavilling Tricks
and Endeavors, accomplish as much as ever the College de beaux Esprits at
Paris, or the Experiment-mongers of our Gresham College did hope to do by the
transmutation of young Blood into Old Bloodless Carcasses which might have done
no small mischief to our circulating Doctors of Physic.

And therefore certainly it would be more available, before we hunt our selves
out of our Loyalty, Christianity, Religion, Wits and Estates, to enquire into
the natural and true meaning of the word Privilege of Parliament, and
Proprieties, and how far it can carry us into those very different Proprieties,
and that which we may truly and not fictitiously call our own.

Wherein the Civil Law that universal Method of the reason of the World in the
diffinition and true meaning and intent of privileges concludes, that
privilegium neque F. de Admin. Cod. de pre. imposs.
stricte neque nimis large interpretari debet ne gravem aliis Jacturam adfert,
Quando igitur sine quavis gravamine alterius non possunt concedi Privilegia
proximum est ut cessant cum nimium laedant.

Et Privilegium est quod contra Communem Civilium ordinatio tenorem propter
aliquam naturalis aequitatis rationem certa constituentium authoritate
introductum est unde apparet, says Cicero, quod Privilegium contra Jus naturae
vel utilitatem Cit. de Legibus different.
publicam non magis sunt Privilegia quam Tirannis.

Privilegia ultra suam propriam naturam non extendi debet, nec ad ea quae
neutiquam prima sua origin sunt directa Reinoldus Curicke de privilegiis, ca.
3, 45. and 46. ca. 4, 52. and 53.
aliquin etiam ad incognita contra intentionem dantis extendi possent quod in
Jure absurdum est.

Expressa Privilegia a re ex Jure proprio Majestatis and superioritatis proprie
privilegiorum concessio non tantum arguit superioritatem dantis, and inducit
subjectionis speciem in persona impetrantis and quidem.

Ita ut privilegium non subdito concessum Regulariter in contractum transeat,
sed and soli Principi summo and qui regalem dignitatem and potestatem exercendi
Jura principis quoad Subditos suos in suo territorio concessit, competit per L.
Vinc. (de his qui a Princip. Vac. accep. lib. 10.)

Privilegia Jus superioritatis stricte and quidem Ita interpretari convenit ut
semper intelligantur salvo Jure superioritatis concessa Privilegii, enim
Interpretatio non debet verti contra Autorem; Ita quod per privilegia subditi
desinant esse subditi, sed quod tanto magis esse debent subditi cum Privilegia
proprie non nisi subditis dantur, and quis dubitat eum qui Privilegium
libertatis accipit leges alterius agnoscere cum privilegium non sit nisi
exemptis a Jure Communi L qui singular F. de L.

And very often confirmed Privileges that have been incroached or usurped may
justly come within the compass of that Rule also of the Civil Law much allowed
and made use of in our Common Law. Quod ab initio non valet tractu temporis non
convalescit. Confirmatio ex certa Scientia quamvis det robur, non tamen
extenditur ad id quod in eo non includebatur secundum Bald. sing. in l. 3. in
fin C.

Interpretatio privilegiorum, ita siat necesse est nec torqueatur, R. de
Caricke ca privilegiis.
sed facto deserviat neque factum variare oportet ut Privilegio respondeat.

Privilegium debet esse observatum et clarum, Michael Ant. Frances, de
veritigati aequivocum nihil operatur p. 564. in privilegiis men's concedentis
attenditur cap. 51. n. 223. privilegium transit in contractum ex causa onerosa,
fieri dicitur nec revocatur cap. 30. et 294 et 304. p. 570. ex privilegiatis
duobus quis sit praeferendis cap 10. p. 193. magis privilegiatus praecellere
debet ratione dignitatis, privilegium non extendit se ad ea quae de facili
concedi non solent; qualis est derogatio concilii, cap. 28. n. 327. non datur
res quae not sit cap. 28. and 414. and 415. p. 514. concessum ex causa ea
cessante revocatur etiam si concedens ex alia causa ea concessisset, cap. 28.
n. 497. p. 510. Revocatur nova causa superveniente, cap. 28. n. 428. p. 522.
Non datur nisi aliquid particular. concedat, cap. 13. n. 26. p. 556.
Privilegium and Exemptio laedunt Jus Commune cap. 30. n. 17, p. 554.
Privilegium ratione scandali revocatur, cap. 30. n. 299. p. 570.

And there were Privileges that were more stable, yet no Parliament
Privileges, such as St Paul's Dr. Brady in his History of England, from the
first Entry of the Romans until the Reign of King Henry the third, and Lambart
L L. Edwardi Confessor. 12.
was of being a Freeman and Citizen of Rome, bought, as he said, with a great
price, and some Coloniae and Mancipiae had the same Laws and Privileges, which
Rome had, the four great High Ways made by the Romans in Britain, to keep
their Soldiers from Idleness, as Watlinstreet, etc. had great Immunities and
Privileges, as to have the persons and goods of such as travailed or dwelt
therein freed from Arrest or Distress.

Et privilegia quae utilitati publicae sunt dannosa strictam interpretationem
requirunt quia generaliter quicquid contra jus vel utilitatem publicam in
quolibet negotio prefertur non valet l Jubeamus 10. C. des s. Ecclesiae 4.

The Decree of the great King Ahashuerus that reigned Esiber cap. 1. 3. 5. 8.
from India to Ethiopia over 127 Provinces, his Laws being holden to be
irrevocable, were as unto some part of them reversed for the preservation of
the Jewish Nation upon the petition of Queen Esther, and his holding out his
golden Scepter to her.

And the House of Commons themselves did in a Parliament in the 21 year of the
reign of King Richard the Second certainly so understand and believe it, when
they recommended to posterity their dutiful protestation to their King and
Sovereign, and request to have it specially Enrolled in these words, Item les
ditz Comes fierent protestation devant le Roi en plein Parliament and ils
vurroient monstrer and declarer mesme le Jour en plein Parliament certain
matieres and Articles deus queux ils fierent alors aviser and enter eux
accorder nient majus il fust and est leur intent and volunte percongie de
nostre Seigneur le Roy de accuser and empesther person ou persons a tantes de
foiz come leur sembleroit affair durant le temps de cest present Parliament and
prierent au Roy and lui pleiroit accepter leur dite protestation and quil soit
entrer en roll de Parliament de record la quele chose nostre Seigneur le Roi
leur ad ottroie and commanda a destre fait, and did think it not to be
unbecoming their duty to require license of the King to charge or accuse any
person or persons in that tempestuous Parliament nor did believe that their
accusations or impeachments should or ought to be so fatally mortal when in the
first year of the Reign of King Henry the 4th, by a patched contrivance of the
Parliament in the Reign of King H. 4. the same Commons in Parliament desired
that the Judgment given against the said Earl of Arundel, whose Pardon but a
little before had been rejected, might be reversed, and a restoration made of
all his Lands, Estate and Evidences.

And those their Privileges being but personal and temporary, and after they
were allowed by our Kings a Speaker, which was about the Reign of King R. 2.
the House of Commons well knowing who was the only donor of them, never failed,
at the Change and Allowance of every of their Speakers to give him in charge to
Petition in their behalf unto the King for the same, no other Privileges,
being necessary for the aforesaid Employment. Upon the violation of any whereof
by any of their fellow Subjects they did so well understand the extent of those
their Temporary Peculiar and Limited Privileges with the obligations of their
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and that it neither appertained unto them,
nor was or could be in their power to cause or enforce a better observation
thereof, but it was only in the King that granted them, and was to be vouched
to warranty, which was in common and ordinary matters very usual in our Laws
and reasonable Customs, and therefore to him only as the Grantor and Protector
of their Parliament Privileges and not to themselves the gratitude and
acknowledment was only due.

And the House of Commons until this our present unruly Age or Century did not
adventure to take upon themselves, or endeavor by any pretended Authority of
their own to punish any the violators of their aforesaid Privileges, but
supplicated Aid of their Kings and Princes that were the donors and granters of
them.

And therefore in the Reign of King Henry the fourth, it was adjudged, that as
the Record witnesses, Videtur Cur. quod non.

For in Anno 8 H. 6. William Lark a Servant of William 8. H. 6.
Wild, Burgess of Parliament being arrested upon an Execution during the
Parliament, the Commons petitioned the King to give order for his discharge,
and that no Lords, Knights, Citizens or Burgesses, nor their Servants coming to
the Parliament, may be Arrested during the Parliament, unless it be for
Treason, Felony or Breach of Elsings anuncient and modern manner of holding
Parliaments in Ergland. 172.
the Peace.

The King granted the first part of the Petition, Et quant al residue le Rei sa
avisera.

The Commons prayed, that Edmond Duke of Somerset, 39 H. 6.
Alice Poole, the late Wife of William Poole, Duke of Suffolk, William Bishop
of Chester, Sir John Sutton, Lord Dudley, the Lord Hastings, James de la Bar,
one of the Kings Secretaries, and 20, or 22 Knights and Esquires, particularly
named, amongst which was Thomas Kemp Clerk of the House of Commons (which the
Commons themselves and their own Clerk had not them found to be either a
Liberty or Privilege of their own to punish) might be banished from the King
during their Lives, and not to come within twelve Miles of the Court, for that
the People do speak evil of them.

To which the King answered, He is of his own mere motion contented that all
shall depart, unless only the Lords, and a few of them whom he may not spare
from his presence, and they shall continue for one year to see if any can duly
impeach them.

In Anno 31 H. 6. The Commons made a Request to 31 H. 6. To. Parl.
the King and Lords, that Thomas Thorp their Speaker and Walter Roil a member
of their house who were in Prison, might be set at liberty according to their
Privileges.

The next day after the Duke of York (who was then a Rival for a long time, but
after a public Competitor for the Crown and President of the Parliament) came
before the Lords (not the Commons) and showed that in the vacation (of the
Parliament) he had recovered damage against the said Thomas Thorp in an action
of trespass by Verdict in the Exchequer for carrying away the goods of the said
Duke out of Durham House, for the which he remained in Execution, and prayed
that he might continue therein.

Wherein the Council of the Judges being demanded, Cokes 4th. part Institutes
tit. Parliament.
they made Answer, it was not their part to Judge of the Parliament which was
Judge of the Law (wherein surely they might rather have said what they should
have most certainly have believed then as Sir Edward Coke did long after that
the King was principium, caput and finis Parliamenti) and only said that a
general Supersedeas of Parliament there was but a special supersedeas in which
case of special supersedeas every Member of the Commons House ought to enjoy
the same unless in cases of Treason, Felony, Surety, of the Peace, or for a
condemnation before the Parliament.

After which the Lords determined that the said Thomas Thorp should remain in
execution, and sent certain of themselves to the Commons (who then had so
little power to free themselves from Arrests and imprisonment, as they could
not deliver their own Speaker out of Prison, but were glad to follow the
direction of the King and Lords to choose and present unto the King another
Speaker) the which they did, and shortly after certain of the Commons were sent
to the Lords to declare that they had in the place of the said Thomas Thorp
chosen for their Speaker Thomas Charleton Esquire.

Walter Clark a Burgess of Chippenham in the County 39 H. 6. n. 9.
of Wilts being committed to the Prison of the Fleet for diverse condemnations
as well to the King as to others, was discharged and set at Liberty at the
Petition of the Commons to the King and Lords without Bail or Mainprise.

At the Petition of the Commons William Hill, a Burgess 12 E. 4. n. 55.
of Chippenham aforesaid being in Execution in the King's Bench was delivered by
a Writ of the Chancery saving the Plaintiffs right to have Execution after the
Parliament ended.

It was enacted by the universal Vote and Judgment 17 E. 4.
as well of the Commons as the Lords, that John Atwil a Burgess for Exeter
being condemned during the Parliament in the Exchequer upon 8 several
informations at the suit of John Tailor of the same City, shall have as many
Supersedeas as he will until his returning home.

King Henry 8. in the case of Trewyniard a Burgess Anno 28. and 29. H. 8.. 18.
of Parliament imprisoned upon an Outlawry after Judgment caused him to be
delivered by a Writ of Privilege upon an Action brought against the Executors
and a demurrer it was resolved by the Judges to be Legal.

George Ferrers Gent. servant of the King, and a Burgess 34 H. 8.
of Parliament, being arrested in London, as he was going to the
Parliament House by a Writ out of the Court of Kings Bench in execution at the
Suit of one White for the sum of 200 marks, being the debt of one Walden,
which arrest being signified to Sir Tho. Moyle Knight, Speaker of the House of
Commons, and to the Knight and Burgesses there, an order was made that the
Sergeant of the Mace attending the Parliament should go to the Compter and
Demand the Prisoner, which the Clerks and Officers refusing, from stout words
they fell to blows, whereof ensued a fray not without hurt, so as the said
Sergeant was forced to defend himself with his Mace, and had the Crown thereof
broken off by bearing off a stroke, and his Servant struck down, which broil
drawing thither, the 2 Sheriffs of London who did not heed or value the
Sergeants complaint and misusage so much as they ought, but took their Officers
parts so as the Sergeant returning without the Prisoner, informed the Speaker
of the House of Commons how rudely they had entertained him who took the same
in so ill part, that they all together, some of whom were the Kings privy
Council, as also of the Kings privy Chamber resolved to sit no longer without
their Burgess, but left their own house and went to the House of Peers, and
declared by the mouth of their Speaker before Sir Thomas Audley Knight then
Lord Chancellor and all the Lords and Judges there assembled, the whole matter
(such no Estates they believed themselves to be) who Judging the contempt to be
very great, referred the punishment thereof to the order of the House of
Commons, who returning to their places again, ordered that their Sergeant
should go to the Sheriffs of London to demand the delivery of their Burgess
without any Writ or Warrant, albeit the Lord Chancellor offered to grant them a
Writ, which they refused, as being of opinion that all commandments and orders
of their House by their Sergeants only showing of his Mace (the Ensign of their
Sovereigns authority) without a Writ, would be authority sufficient, but before
the Sergeant came into London the Sheriffs having intelligence how heinously
the matter was taken, better bethought themselves, and delivered the Prisoner,
but the Sergeant, according to his command charged the Sheriffs to appear the
next morrow in the House of Commons, bringing with them the Clerks of the
Compter, and the said White was likewise taken into Custody, whereupon the next
morning the said Sheriffs and Clerks, together with the said White, appearing,
were compelled to make Answer without Council, and with the Sheriffs, and the
said White were committed to the Tower of London, and the Officers and Clerks
to Newgate, where they remained for some days, and were after delivered, not
without the humble suit of the Lord Mayor of London, and diverse of their
friends; But a debate and questions arising in the House of Commons, which
lasted 9 or 10 days together, how to preserve the debt of the Creditor whilst
they enjoyed the privilege of Parliament by delivering Mr. Ferrers out of
prison upon an execution, and some being of opinion that it was to be salved
only by an Act of Parliament, and not well agreeing also thereupon the King
being advertised thereof, summoned to appear before him the Lord Chancellor,
and the Judges and the Speaker of the House of Commons, and other the gravest
persons of that House who after his Judicious arguments concerning the extent
and warrantableness of the privilege of Parliament, and his own more
especially in the granting thereof touching the freedom from Arrests (which all
the Judges assented unto, none speaking against it) commended notwithstanding
the intention of his Houses of Parliament to have an Act to preserve the
Creditors Comptons Jurisdiction of Courts Tit. Parliament.
debt, who he said deserved to have lost it, the Act of Parliament was
consented unto by the Commons, but passed not the House of Lords by reason of
the sudden dissolution of the Parliament.

Upon the report made by Mr. Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster Chairman or
principal of the Committee of 8 Eliz. in the Journal of the House of Commons.
Et Elsings Annaent, and modern manner of holding Parliaments in England 199,
200, 201. and Pryns Animadversions upon Sir Edward Cokes 4th part of the
Institutes.
the House of Commons for the delivery of Edward Smally a Servant of Mr. Hales
a Member of Parliament arrested in Execution, that the said Committees found no
President for the setting at large by the Mace (and if they had, it had but
denoted the Kings sole Authority for that it was his Mace and his Sergeant at
Arms that carried it, and none of their Mace or Sergeant) any person in Arrest
but only by Writ, and that by diverse precedents of Record perused by the said
Committee, it appears that ever Knight, Citizen and Burgess of the House of
Commons in Parliament which does require Privilege, has used in that case to
take a corporal Oath before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England for the time being, that the party for whom such Writ was
prayed was his Servant at the time of the Arrest made.

And thereupon Mr. Hall was ordered by the House, that he should repair to the
Lord Keeper, and make Oath in form aforesaid, and then to proceed to the taking
of a Warrant for a Writ of Privilege for his said Servant according to the
said report, and it so appears by the Journal of the House of Commons, and
says Mr. Elsing, the Writ of Privilege being so easy to be had, what needed
any Petitions to be made by the Commons to the King and the Lords for the same,
and as there is no precedent for this in the times of Edward the third, Richard
2d H. 4. nor H. 5. so there are none to the contrary.

There being then no such opinions as have been since indulged and seditiously
enough espoused by some that would go so far beyond Truth and Reason as to
believe that the Members of the House of Commons that are or shall be, have a
Charter of Ordination, or which is more, of a never to be proved Commission
from an unintelligible power of Sovereignty of the People.

And a man might wonder himself almost into an Ecstasy or Inanition how or by
what magical or strange artifice Sir Edward Coke in the latter end of his Age
and Treasury of Law and good Learning, if he had ever Studied and read as he
ought to have done the Feudal Laws, which were our Fundamental Laws, and the
Original of our once (and I hope may be again) happy government, and might
before he came to be overcredulously infected with the Impostures of the modus
tenendi Parliamenta, and mirror of Justice, have well understood that they
were no other than those which are and long have been the Laws of the Britains,
Saxons, Germany, France, and Spain, the Goths, Vandals, and Longobards,
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Hungary, Bohemia, Holland, and West Freizland,
Gelderland, Savoy, Transylvania, Silesia, Moldavia, Walachia, Navarre,
Catalonia, and the Republics of Geneva and Genoa, Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily, Dutchies of Lorrain, Millian, and Florence, with some little small
diversities, and that all our multitudes of allowed Customs, Usages and
Privileges by the Indulgence of our Kings and Princes, and their Laws, have
had no other Fountain or Original, and should confess that our Magna Charta,
and Carta de Foresta which were not only some Relaxations, Liberties and
Privileges granted and allowed by our King Henry the third, but were expressly
granted to be holden of that King his Heirs and Successors in Capite, and that
both they and all our Acts and Ordinances made them to be no other than as
their Patroni or foundation; and that our Colloquia generalia or Magna
Concilia, or Curia, as Brodon Brodon de Legibus and Consuetudinibus Angliae.
styles them now, or for many Ages past called Parliaments, and even those
beneficia and Laws were not unknown to the Britains in the time of their
valarous and great King Arthur, and could tell how when he was a Member of
Parliament in the third year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, and one
of the most eminent and busy, to Name and Style the Petition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, their Petition of
Right, when that which they would there claim to be their Rights and Liberties,
had no Right, Reason, Law, President, true History or Record to back or assert
what they desired the King to give his Royal assent or Fiat unto, and was no
more the Rights of the People truly understood than to desire a Liberty to pull
down the House or Government upon their own heads, carve out their own
destruction, and entail it, or as little Children left alone in an House with a
great fire without any wiser Body to regulate or take care of their Actions,
would deem it to be a brave Sport and Liberty to play with the Fire, until they
had set the whole House on fire, and burnt themselves into the bargain; and if
after he had by his practice and study of the Common Law, which was nothing but
our Feudal Laws, too much forgotten or unknown unto those that would be called
our Common Lawyers, and gaining 10000 l. per Annum, Lands of Inheritance, made
his boast that he had destroyed the so fixed and established Deeds of Entail,
and the Wills and Intent of the Donors, as nothing of Collusion, Figments, or
other Devices, should prejudice, and no Gentleman or Lover of Honor, Gentry or
Families, would ever have had an hand in such a destruction, Levelling,
Clowning, Citizening, and Ungentlemanning all, or too many of the Ancient
Families of England; 34 E. 1. cap. 1.
And if he could have lived to have seen or felt the tossing, plundering, and
washing in Blood three great and flourishing Kingdoms, would have wept bitterly
and lamented, or with Job, have cursed the hour or time of his birth, that he
should ever have given the occasion or been Instrumental in the promoting or
being a Contributor unto those very many dire Confusions and Disasters that
after happened; for if he had well read and weighed the History and Records
both before, and shortly after the gaining of that Act of Parliament de
Tallagio non concedendo, without the consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and how much that great and
prudent Prince King Edward the first, was pressed and pinched, when his
important affairs caused his sudden transfrecation by the overpowering party of
three of his greatest Nobility, viz. Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex Constable
of England, Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, and Bigod Earl of Norfolk
Earl Marshal of England, all whom and their Ancestors had been advanced to
those their Grandeurs by him, and his Royal Progenitors had so catched an
advantage upon him, and were so merciless in their demands, as they not only
would not allow him a saving of his Jure Regis, very usual and necessary, in
many of our Kings and Princes grants as well in the time of Parliaments as
without, but enforced an Oath upon him, which he took so unkindly, as he was
constrained shortly after to procure the Pope to absolve him of, for that it
had been by a force put upon him, (which a Protestant Pope might have had a
Warrant from God Almighty so to have done, but did after his return into
England so remember their ill usage of him, as he seized their three grand
Estates, and made the two former so well to be contented with the regaining of
his favor, as Bohun married the one of his Daughters, and Clare the other
without any portions with an Entail of their Lands upon the Heirs of the Bodies
of their Wives the Remainder to the Crown, laid so great(...) Fine and Ransom
upon Bigod, the Earl Marshal, as he being never able to pay it, afterward
forfeited and lost all his great Estate, and be all of them so well satisfied
with his doings therein, as they were in the 34th year of his Reign glad to
obtain his Pardon, with a Remissimus omnem Rancorem; Cap. 5.
And they and Sir Edward Coke might have believed that that very prudent Prince
might with great reason and truth have believed his Regality safe enough
without a Salvo Jure Regis, when the Law and Government it self, and the Good
and Interest of every Man, his Estate and Posterity was, and would be always
especially concerned in the necessity, aid and preservation of the King their
common Parent, appointed by God to be the Protector of them.

And our singularly learned Bracton has not informed us amiss, when he
concluded, that Rex facit Legem in the first place, and Lex facit Regem in the
second, gives him Authority and Power to guard that Regality which God has
given him for the protection of the People committed to his charge, who are not
to govern their King, but to be governed by him, and should certainly have the
means to effect it, for how should he have power to do it, or procure his
People to have a Commerce or Trade with their Neighbor People or Princes, if
he as their King had not any, or a just Superiority over them, etc. and must
not for all that have and enjoy those Duties, Rights and Customs, which not
only all our Kings Royal Progenitors, but their Neighbor Princes, and even
Bastard and self-making Republiques have quietly and peaceably enjoyed, without
the Aid and Assistance of any the Suffrage of the giddy Rabble, and vulgar sort
of the People controuling in their unfixt and instable Opinions, those of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the wiser and more concerned part of the
People, of which, and the Rights and Customs due and payable to our Kings and
Princes. Sir John Davies a learned Lawyer in the Reign of our King James the
first has given us a learned, full and judicious Account which well
understood, might adjudge that Petition of Right to deserve no better an
entertainment than the Statute of Gloucester made in 15 E. 3. which by Sir John
Davies concerning the Kings Customs, and the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo.
the Opinion of the Judges and Lords Spiritual and Temporal was against the
Kings Praerogative, and contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Realm of
England, and ought not to have the force and strength of a Statute; and Sir
Edward Coke might have remembered that in the Reign of King Edward the Third,
the Commons of England did in Parliament complain that Franchises had for time
past been so largely granted by the King, that almost all the Land was
enfranchised to the great arreirisment Rot. Parl. 21 E. 3.
and estenisement of the Common Law (which they might have called the Feudal
Law) and to the great oppression of the People, and prayed the King to restrain
such Grants hereafter, unto which was answered, The Lords will take order that
such Franchises as shall be granted shall be by good Advice.

And that if by any Statute made in the 25th year of the Reign of King Edward
3. it was ordained that no man should be compelled to make any Loan to the King
against his will, because such Laws were against Reason, Eginard en la vie de
Charlemaigne.
and the Franchise of the Land, that Statute when it shall be found, will
clearly also appear to be against our Ancient Monarchick Government
Fundamentally grounded upon our Feudal Laws, that our Magna Charta and Charta
de Foresta, are only some Indulgence and Qualification of some hardship or
Rigor of them, that the Excommunication adjudged to be by the Statute of 25 E.
1. ca. 4. And the aforesaid 25 E. 1 ca. 4.
dire Anathema's, and Curse pronounced in that Procession through
Westminster Hall, to the Abbey Church of Westminster, against the Infringers of
those our Grand Charters are justly and truly to be charged upon the Violaters
and Abusers of our Feudal Laws and Ancient Form of Government, who ought better
to assert them, and that the Coronation-Oaths of all our many Kings and
Princes, swearing to maintain the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, which have
for those many Ages past so highly satisfied and contented the Common People,
and good Subjects of England, do enjoin no other than our Kings and Princes
strict observation of the Feudal Laws, and their Subjects Obedience unto him
and them, by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and his and their
Protection of them in the performance thereof, and from no other Laws or
Customs, than the Feudal Laws have our Parliaments themselves derived their
original, as Eginard Secretary unto Charles Eginard en la vie de Charlemaine.
the Great or Charlemain, who Reigned in the year after our blessed Saviors
Incarnation, 768. consisting of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, if not long
before had their more fixed beginning.

How then can so grave and learned a Professor of our Laws, and after an
eminent Administrator of the Laws and Justice of the Kingdom, so either declare
to the World, that he has not at all been acquainted with our Feudal Laws, but
gained a great Estate out of a small, in a Government and Laws he knew no
Original thereof, and make many things to be grievances of the People, which
are but the Kings Just Rights and Authority, and the Peoples Duty, and their
grievances in doing or suffering their Duties to be done as if disobedience
(which in our Nation has too often happened) were a Franchise of the Land, and a
Right to be Petitioned for by the People.

But howsoever Mr. Will. Pryn being better awake, could be so kind a Friend
unto the truth, as to give us notice that the Abridger of the Parl. Records
left out much of what he should have mentioned, viz. The Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, Commons, Citizens, Burgesses and Merchants of England, in the
Parliament Petitioned the King not only for a Pardon in general, and of Fines
and Amerciaments before the Justices of Peace not yet Levied in special, but
they likewise subjoin a memorable request, says Mr. Pryn, omitted by the
Abridger, that in time to come the said Prelates, Earls, Barons, Commons,
Citizens and Burgesses of the Realm of England, may not henceforth be* charged,
molested nor grieved to make any Common Aid, or sustein any charge, unless it
be by Common Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Lords, and Barons, and other People
of the Commons of the Realm of England, as a Benevolence or Aid given to their
King in his want of Money, wh(...)h King Henry the 3d. sometimes had, when he
went from Aboey to Abbey declaring his Necessities, and King Richard the Third
that Murdered his Brothers Sons to Usurp the 1 R. 3. ca. 2.
Crown, flattered the People they should no more be troubled with, when it was
never (...)ked before the Reign of King Henry 3d or (...), by any of our Kings
or Princes, until the urgent Necessities of our blessed Martyr, for the
preservation of his People caused him once to do it.

Or such as the imprisoning of some few wealthy Men as obstinately refused to
lend him(...)e and small Sums of Money, because they would force him to call
such a Reforming and Ruining Parliament, as that which not long before happened
in Anno 1641.

Or such as their heavily complained of Charges levied upon the People by the
Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants in some seldom Musters or Military
Affairs, which a small acquaintance with our Feudal Laws might have persuaded
the Gentlemen of the misnamed Petition of Right, to have been lawful, or that
some imprisoned were not delivered upon Writs of Habeas Corpus, when there were
other just Causes to detain them, at least for some small time of Advice; And
if they will adventure to be tried by Magna Charta, will be no great gainers by
it, for Magna Charta well examined notwithstanding the dissolution of the
Tenures in Capite, is yet (God be thanked) holden in Capite, and loudly
proclaims our Feudal Laws to be both the King and the Peoples Rights, and
disdains to furnish any contrivances against their Kings, who were the only
free givers and granters thereof.

And the Statute of 28 E, 3. And all or the most of our Acts of Parliament, do
and may ever declare the usefulness of our Feudal Laws, and that Reverend great
Judge might have spared the complaints of Free-quartering of Land-Soldiers and
Mariners, or of punishing Offenders by Martial Law, and will hardly find any
to commend him or any Lawyer for their proficiency in their amassing together
so many needless complaints.

And that in full Parliament, The King then lying sick at Sheene, whereof he
died (and diverse of the Lords and Commons in Parliament coming unto him with
Petitions to know his pleasure, and what he would have done therein) nor no
Imposition put upon the Woolls, Woolfels and Leather (having as they might
think, as great an opportunity and advantage as the three great Barons, Bobun,
Clare and Bigod had when they forced the Statute aforesaid de Tallagio non
concedendo upon King Edward the first, and would not suffer him to insert his
Salvo Jure Regis) or any the Annaent Custom of Wool half a Mark, and of three
hundred Woolfels half a Mark, and of one Last of Skins one Mark of Custom only,
according to the Statute made in the 14th year of his Reign, saving unto the
King the Subsidy granted unto him the last Parliament for a certain time, and
not yet Levied.

Unto which the King gave answer, That as to that, that no Charge be laid upon
the People without common Assent. The King is not at all willing to do it
without great necessity, and for the defense of the Realm, and where he may do
it with Reason.

For otherwise all Monarchies may be made Elective, and the Will, and great
Example and Approbation of God disappointed, where the Subjects and People will
not be so careful of their own preservation, as to help their King, when his
and their Enemy has invaded the Kingdom, and the People may as often as they
please change or depose their Kings, when they shall resolve to stand still,
and not help to aid him as the cursed and bitterly cursed Moroz did, and be as
wise to their own destruction as the Citizens of London were in the late
general Conflagration of their City, or a foolish fear of breaking Magna
Charta, which could never be proved to have been any cause of it, they would to
save and keep unpulled down or blown up ten houses, and save some of their
goods, leave that raging and merciless Fire to burn twenty thousand houses in
their City and Suburbs.

And it was no bad Answer also, that that great and victorious King Edward the
third (as sick as he was) made likewise unto that other part of their Petition,
that Impositions be not laid upon their Woolls without Assent of the Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other People of the Commons of his Realm, That there
was a Statute already made which he wills that it shall stand in its force.

Wherein if they could by Fraud and Hypocritical Flatteries have entitled
themselves and their Faction-Mongers, and persuade them to make them the only
managers thereof, they will never be able to procure the so often deluded part
of the people to believe they would deal any otherwise with them than they have
done before, that is, when they gave them Stones instead of Bread, and
Scorpions instead of Fishes.

Which Petition of Right, so called, being read unto the King the second day of
June 1626. 3 Car. p(...)i.
his Answer thereunto was, the King wills that Right be done according to the
Laws and Customs of this Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due Execution,
that his Subjects may have no cause to complain of any wrong or oppression
contrary to their Just Rights and Liberties, to the performance whereof he
holds himself as well obliged as of his Praerogative, which not giving
satisfaction, he was again petitioned for a Fuller. Whereupon he came in person
and made a second Answer, that the Answer which he had already given them upon
a great deliberation appeared in the Judgment of so many wise men, that he
could not have imagined but that it should have given them full satisfaction,
but to avoid all ambiguous Interpretations, and to show them that there was no
doubleness in his meaning, and that he was willing to satisfy them in words as
well as substance, bad them read their Petition and they should have an Answer
he was sure would please them.

Which being read by the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Parliament read
the Kings Answer, which was to this effect, that he was sure was full, yet no^
more than what he had granted in his first Answer, for the meaning of that was
to confirm all their Liberties, knowing according to their own protestation,
that they neither mean nor can hurt his Praerogative. And he assured them, that
his maxim was, that the Peoples Liberties strengthen the Kings Praerogative,
and that the Kings Praerogative is to defend the Peoples Liberties; they might
see how ready he had showed himself to satisfy their demands, so as he has
done his part, and therefore if that Parliament has not a happy Conclusion,
the fault will be theirs he was sure of it.

Which being reported in the Town, so filled the People with Joy, as by the
Parliaments Order, the Bells and Bonefires every where proclaimed the comfort
and hopes of a deluded People, little thinking as it afterward proved, to have
their King and Defender of their Faith and Religion, manacled and betrayed into
the fatal consequences of a long lasting King and People, destroying
Parliament-Rebellion.

And on the last day of that Session, his Majesty before any Bill signed, spoke
unto both the Houses of Parliament, and told them, that he owed an account of
his Actions to none but God alone, that it was well known unto many that a
while ago the House of Commons gave him a Remonstrance how acceptable every man
might judge, and for the merit he would not call it in question, for he was
sure no wise man could justify it.

But since he was certainly informed that a second Remonstrance was preparing
for him, to take away his Poundage and Tunnage, one of the chief maintenance of
the Crown (a grateful return of his Answers to that they without any Just Title
would call their Petition of Right) by alleging that he had given away his
Right therein by his Answer unto that Petition; And is so prejudicial unto him,
as he is enforced to end this Session, some few hours before he meant, he being
willing not to receive any more Remonstrances, unto which he must give an harsh
Answer.

And since he sees that even the House of Commons, do begin already to make
false constructions, to what he had granted in their Petition, (which was in
truth rather a claim of his Rights than any thing that was their own,) least it
should be worse interpreted in the Country, he would make a Declaration
concerning the true Intent thereof, the profession of both the Houses of
Parliament, in the time of their hamering their Petition, was not to incroach
upon his Praerogative, (which appears to be the only design and drift thereof,)
(...) (...)ying they had neither intent or power to hurt it, therefore it must
needs be conceived, that he has granted no new but only the ancient Liberties
of his Subjects, (which understood as they ought to be, neither were to be
their Liberties or Rights, but his own, unless they would Petition him, that
they might be Kings and he their Subject) yet to show the clearness of his
intention, that he neither intends or means to recede from any thing which he
has promised them, he did there declare that those things, which have been
done whereby men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subject to be
trenched upon, (which indeed was the first and true ground of the Petition)
shall not hereafter de drawn into Example of their Prejudice, and in time to
come in the word of a King they shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Poundage and Tonnage, it is a thing he cannot want, and was never
intended by them to ask, never meant he was sure by him to be granted.

Commanded all that were there to take notice of what he had spoken at that
time to be the true intent and meaning of what he had granted unto them in
their Petition; but especially the Judges, for unto them only under him belongs
the Interpretation of Laws, for none of the Houses of Parliament joint or
separate (what new Doctrine soever may be raised) have any power either to make
or declare a Law without his consent.

Which all the Inveigling promising Petitioners were wiser than to make any
attempt to contradict when they foresaw it not to be possible by any parcel or
Rule of truth, but made what they thought they had so successfully gained to be
an Encouragement to proceed to other designs, in making themselves Governors
of their Kings, and to be of their Election, when God never gave them any such
Power or Jurisdiction, or appointed our Kings to permit their Subjects under
the color or pretense of Council, Advice and Approbation in Parliament, to be
as helpful to their Kings and fellow Subjects, as the Epheri in Sparta were to
make it their business to find out as many of the Errors in government, and
grievances of the people of their own making, and charge the faults upon their
Kings when they were of the Ephori's own making.

Or by what strain or stretch of wit, or squeezing the word Privilege, those
aforesaid Parliament Privileges allowed by our Kings to the House of Commons
in Parliament, viz. Access unto them, freedom of Speech, and from Arrests
during that their Employment could be made to laquey after, or be subservient
unto those many their evil designs which after ensued, having no proper or
peculiar Fixation as to other matters cannot in suo genere be of the nature or
kind either of Properties or Liberties, which are of another sort altogether
distinct and separate from them when property, if truth and rectified reason be
called to Council signifies no more, nor was amongst learned or common
understanding men accepted or taken to be then that,

Proprium cum suum cuique est separatum a Communitate Ita dictum quod maxim
prope est proprie peculiare and id quod Perot.
unius cujusque est maxim prope est quod proprium est Graecis (...) ab (...)
species.

Est etiam proprium stabile perpetuum certum semper propinquum Scalig. lib. 4.
Poetic.
omne quod habemus aut mutuum aut proprium est mutuum quod ad tempus habemus
nec postmodum. Donatuc.


Uno naturali nomine homines appellaremur, Jure gentium D. lib. tit. 1. 4. and
in Instit. lib. 1. tit. 5.
tria genera esse ceperunt liberi and his contrarium servi and tertium genus
qui desierunt esse servi. Libertas opponitur servituti libertatem Cicero
Paradoxis definit esse potestatem vivendi, ut velit noster Florentinus, ait
esse naturalem L. F. de Statum bom. 1.
facultatem quod cuique facere libet infra quod vi aut Jure prohibetur and
libertas non privata, sed publica res est Martianus ad l. si quis ff. de fidei
commissi libertas opponitur servituti unde convenire non possunt l. ergo ff. de
fide libert. proprium est suum cujusque diciturque quod non est aliis Lib.
(...) tit. 17.
Commune proprium sive proprietas quod allodium dicitur propterea quod ejus
proprietas solido Dominum est neque alteri ejus usu fructus est constitutum.
Leg. 4. F. de usu fruct. pe^ l. 4.


Jurisconsulti modo proprietatem solidum modo proprietatem tum usu fructu modo
usu fructum proprietati admixtum appellant sit leg. franc. lib. 1. ca 11. ut
unusquisque ab illo beneficio suam familiam nutritare faciat de sua proprietate
propriam familiam nutriat and si deo dante super se et familiam suam aut in
beneficio aut in Alodio Annonam habuerit.

And the Civil Law, that Universal Law of the World under the Sacred and Divine
can abundantly inform us, that there is amongst the Generations of the Sons of
Men not only a directum Dominium, but an utile, which made that to be rightly
said and believed of the Regal or Imperial Authority, Dominium in Universis in
singulis Seneca.
proprietas.

For Dominum est Jus et potestas re quaquam tum utendi quam abutendi quatenus
Jure Civili permittitur, and usus fructus dissert a solido Dominio and usu
frictus est D(...)m plenum quia cum usu fructus cohaeret proprietas nudum quod
et dilectum dici potest cum separatum est ab usu fructus 2. Instit. Dominium
directum et utile Dominii duo esse officia unum disponendi alterum vindicandi
per l. in rem aut Bart. in l. 1. de acquirend. Dominum.

And non est nostrum nisi illa quae oripi non possunt. And a Feudatory M^^ti^ii
Lexicon.
as a (...) in Capite, immediate or mediate are no otherwise in respect to
their Superiors, who first gave or created the (...), which can be no other
than Usufructs or (...)ding in the first that gave the Lands or (...)tes.

(...)homines liberi et legales homines ad nobiles olim (...) (...).
sp(...)nt ist^ (...) ^^xime eni^^ vulgi pars aliqua servitutis specio
coercebatur sit ut (...) mancipii non liceret qui vero manumissi assecuti
liberta^^^* Romany liberti et libertini inferioribus seculis ingenii
di(...)ur.

Legalis in Jure nostro dicitur qui stat rectus in curia non exlex non
utlogatus nec excommunicatus vel infans, sed qui in lege postulet and
postuletur hoc sensu vulgar illua in formulis Juridicis probi et legales
homines hinc legalitas pro condition illiusmodi L. L. Ed. confess. de eo an
Reus mortis misericordiam ipso tamen malefactor fide jussores de pace and
legalitate tuenda, Sureties for his good behavior. Francus tenens libero
tenens qui terras vel praedia a Domino suo libero tenet Ass. de Clarendon,
Hovedon, p. 549. si quis obierit Francus tenens haeredes remanent in tali
soisina quali pater suus habuit eo Had. 1193. page 725. venerunt in Angliam
nuncii Regis cum literis illius missi ad omnes Archiepiscopos Barons Clericos
and Francos tenentes.

And those our late Multipliers of Privileges of Parliaments, may consider
that proprietates dictae sunt res immobiles quas quis comparat comparare
libertates in L. L. Longobard. lib. 3. tit. 1. 5. 19. 20. Ubi proprietas mox
Alodus dicitur proprietatem adquirere in Libro Chronic. Du Fr^s^^.
Launsham p. 68. Testamentum Hadonidi Episcopi Caenomanum, villani proprietates
mea Iscommodiorum quam ta pecunia de Anserina et genitrice sua comparavi i(...)
prietates dicuntur res Dominicae ac propriae respectu eae (...) in beneficium
tenebantur Tabularum Brivat. ca. 33. Cedo aliquid de rebus proprietatis quae
mihi per conquestum evenerunt and ca. 335. de rebus proprietatis nostrae quae
ex attractu mihi obvenerunt Hinckmarus Remensis in Epistola ad Carolum Regem
quia ipsi vestri homines et proprietatem et beneficium in Regno vestro et in
mea parochia habent tradit. Fuldensis lib. 3. trad. 30. cum alia quae sibi vel
proprietatis Jure vel beneficiali Lege undecunque contingerent filiae suae ubi
proprietates opponuntur beneficiis que ad vitam possidebantur, et proprium idem
quod proprietas Author Quel. datum tibi est de proprio nihil habere Charta
Clodovei apud Rover. in Reom. page 30. tam ex munere nostro quam de paterno ^ut
proprio, aut de conlato populi seu de quolibet adtracto aliquid auserre
pr(...)at ca. 1. Anno 81^. ut omnis liber homo qui 4. ma^sos v(...)os de
proprio sive de alicujus beneficio habet Charta Lotharii Imp. apud Bessuim p.
260. curtes duas cum suis appendiciis nostris dar^mus praecepto et duos quod
Alodes nuncupant ejusdem loci Incolae, et sua propria.

Cicero defines Liberty to be potestas vivendi ut velint, at non vivit at
v^lit qui juxta sensus carnis suae et cupiditates, sed is solummodo Gibie^^ de
Liberate Dei and Creaturae.
qus vivit juxta rationem, Plutarchus et Epictetus eandem liberi definitionem,
idemque Arianus ex Epicteto eum dixit liberum esse cui nec impedimentum
praeberi possit volenti nec vis inferri volenti.

For amongst the too many claimed Privileges to be appertaining to the Members
of the House of Commons when they are assembled in Paliament, by virtue only of
their Kings and Princes Writs, as has been before mentioned, there are only
these which their Speaker petitioned for, for since the Dream of the men of St.
Albans in Anno 8. E. 2. expounded and managed, as Mr. William Petitt could
think or imagine for his best advantage, not knowing where it was run away from
him, and not finding it, and the bold Petitions of some of the House of Commons
in Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King Henry the 5th perceiving
that he could get no assurance or confirmation of it, by the Kings Answer
thereunto, as their Champion hoped that his Argument might prove as good as
that of the good men of St. Albans, and smite the Nail on the Head, therefore
was enforced when he saw the Kings answer in the same Record to silence it
rather than his admirers should understand it, and these claims of fancied
Privileges, were so little believed to accord to those their unhappy designs,
as there was no more demand or news afterward of them, in all our Kings and
Princes Raigns, until the Parliament in the Scottish League and Covenant, with
a factious party of our English in the years of our Lord 1637, 1638, and 1639.
when Philip Nigh a busy factious Minister and Arch contriver and propagator of
Rebellion, and some other special Commissioners were secretly sent from
England, to prepare the intended united Rebellion of England and Scotland, and
put the management thereof into a Method, most agreeable to the vizard of their
counterfeit Religion, and at the first a kind of supplicating Rebellion with
Petitions and Remonstrances, in their hands, as well as Arms, Ammunition, and
all other Warlike Offensive and Defensive Provisions.

And if our English Parliaments had any such Stock of Liberties or Privileges
proper for Members of an House of Commons to demand, it can be no less than a
wonder extraordinary, where those invisible Liberties or Privileges have
lurked or lain hid for more than 1000 years ever since Parliaments or Great
Councels have been holden or kept in England, under our British, Saxon, Danish
and Norman Kings, and the long succession of our many Kings and Princes until
that horrid long lasting Rebellion that had its rise in the years aforesaid,
and with great store of miseries and desolations continued until now, being
about 49 years, and that none of the many Speakers (other than Sir John Tibetot
in the Reign of Henry 4. which gave occasion to all the Speakers afterward to
crave pardon of the King if they should demand any thing more than was
befitting them) allowed by our Kings, and entrusted by the House of Commons in
Parliament in matters of so great weight and concernment as is pretended for
the public good, should so much neglect it since the 21 E. 1. or the times
since succeeding, as at their admission by our Kings and Princes to demand but
two Privileges, when they ought to have asked very many as their well-willers,
but no friends unto either Loyalty or true Religion, do without any grounds of
Reason and Truth desire to have allowed who could hear Queen Elizabeth give a
charge to some of the Speakers to inform the Members of the House of Commons
that she would not have them intermedle with matters of Church, and commanded
the Speakers not to receive any such Bills if they should be offered, and their
then learned Speaker Sir Edward Coke durst not adventure to object unto her,
his too much at other times adored Fictions and Fables of the modus tenendi
Parliamenta, and the mirror of Justice, and a very great misfortune it must
needs be to our Kings and Princes especially, that ever since Jack Cades
Rebellion in the later end of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, they should be
only troubled with the discords and troubles in their Councels which should be
most helpful unto them, which their neighbor Kings and Princes have not met
withal in their like Methods and Rules of Government.

The Kings of Israel were commanded to read the Law, which was not then
non-scripta, often References were made to the Book of the Chronicles. The
Decalogue was written as God had dreadfully pronounced, by Moses, and being
afterward broken, were wrtten again by the Almighty's own Finger, the blessed
Words, Commands and Examples of our Savior were written by the Evangelists,
St. Paul's Epistles, have happily come unto us, not by being not written, but by
having been written, the twelve Tables fetched from Athens and Sparta, and
brought unto Rome, were there hung up Aeneis Tabulis, and their Sibylline Books
were of great value, our Bid, Lambard, and Somner, have found our Saxon and
Danish Laws to have been written, and St. Edward the Confessors Laws were
written before they were hid under his Shrine, being not different from those
that have been afterward sworn unto by our successive Kings and Princes at
their Coronation; some Laws forced from King John, were reduced into his
Charter at Running Mede, our Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta freely granted
by our King Henry the third, and after thirty times confirmed in several
Parliaments, and ordered to be preserved in all our Cathedral Churches, did
certainly deserve the Title of Jura scripta.

When they might upon a sober and the strictest, not Fanatic, Rebellious
Enquiry be well assured that those necessary Privileges of Parliament, were
not to punish by their power but the Kings, the Infringers of those
Privileges, and that those which by a wicked or unheard of Antipolitiques or
their Impostuting Champions or men at Arms would have by a new Art or trick of
Juggling the Liberties and Properties of the people to be Privileges of
Parliament, may find that the words Privilegium, proprietates and libertates
never did or can signify any more than such Liberties, Privileges and
Properties in and unto those their own Liberties and Estates, which for a great
part of them had been gained by the Favor and Indulgence of their Kings and
Princes.

And should rather acknowledge that there is and ought to be no small
difference betwixt Privilegium and beneficium, and that privilegium in alterius
praejudicium many times happens to be and beneficium nec in Juris communis
detrimentum, nec in alterius damnum conceditur, as that certainly was of the
admittance of some of the Common people to be Members of the House of Commons
in Parliament in 21, or 22. E. 1. to be made privy unto the making of such
Laws, wherein they might be concerned and have an opportunity to Petition their
Kings for redress of any grievances happened unto them. And that concessio
Privilegiorum partim est expressa, Reynoldus Curick de Privilegiis, p. 22.
partim Tacita; Expressa, quae per concedentem verbis expressis tribuuntur
qualia sunt illa quae a Principe peculiari rescripto, vel aquovis alio
magistratu, vel superiore dantur, vel in volumen Legum redacta, ut Exempli
gratia, Privilegia Minorum, faeminarum filiorum familias and similia; Tacita
sunt quae praescriptione consuetudine vel per sententiam Iudem, cap. 4. p. 52.
and 53. and ^1.
acquiruntur; In concessione Privilegiorum observari debet ne contra Jus
divinum possumus and morale and ejusque abolitionem quicquam indulgeat vel
largiatur, (which would so have been if the parties supposed to have been
Privileged should extend them against their King and Gods Vicegerent.

And it neither was, or could be by any Rule of Law or Right Reason, any
Privilege granted unto any Members of the House of Commons in Parliament by
any of our Kings to their Speaker, or otherwise that any of our Kings and
Princes should not upon any occasion of High Treason, Felony, or breach of the
Peace, personally enter into the House of Commons, and cause to be Arrested any
of the Members thereof, when Queen Elizabeth caused Dr. Parry, one of their
Members to be Arrested, sitting the Parliament, for High Treason, and tried,
condemned, and executed for it by Sentence of her Justices in the Court of
Kings Bench at Westminster.

. 29.
Neither could they claim, or ever were invested by any Charter or grant of any
of our Kings or Princes, or otherwise of any such Privilege or Liberty, nor
was or is in England any Law, or Usage, or Custom that a Parliament sitting
cannot be prorogued or dissolved as long as any Petition therein exhibiteth
remained unanswered or not determined.

IT being never likely to have been so in a well-constituted government of a
Kingdom built and constituted upon sound and solid principles of Truth and
Right Reason as ours of England is, to have either often or always Ardua to be
considered of, or of those Arduorum quaedam most especially concerning the
defense of the Kingdom and Church of Eng. which were not only to make an Act
for the killing of Crows, of Paving of Streets, or that ex 24 H. 8. ca. 10.
se or per se naturally or properly it could be or ever was in any Regal
government in the Earth any Law or Custom to perpetuate, or everlastingly to
hold a Parliament, a thing altogether unknown, and unpractised by our English
Monarchs, who thought it enough at three great Festivals in every year, to be
attended with their Praelates, Nobility and Grandees, viz. at Christmas,
Easter, and Pentecost, and inquire into the State of affairs of the Kingdom
which many times did occasion as much of Advice and Conference amounted as to a
Parliament, some addresses upon home emergencies being then made Sir John
Spelman in vita Aelferdi Regis. Et Mat. Paris.
for Remedies of evils, happened or as fires been to be prevented, private
petitions seldom interposing, if in the inferior Courts of Justice, they might
otherwise have Redress, for that had been expressly forbidden by a Law L. L.
Canuti.
of King Canutus, and those Sumptuous Feasts, and Solemnities being of no
longer duration than the Festivals themselves.

And in so many inferior Courts that gave Remedies the people had no need to
trouble themselves or their Kings in Parliament with Petitions, especially when
in the 9th year of the Reign of King H. 3. A peculiar Court was granted by our
Magna Charta, and Erected 9 H. 3. ca. 11.
to give Remedies to all the peoples Actions and Complaints not Criminal with a
lesser charge and attendance in an ordinary and more expedite course, and when
they came with Petitions proper as they thought for Parliaments, they were to
be tried by Bishops and Barons thereunto by the King appointed, who by the
advice of the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices, and the Kings Sergeants at Law
were, if they thought fit to receive them or otherwise to reject them, with a
non est Petitio Parliamenti, and they that were received were many times
referred by the King to his Privy Council, and sometimes with an Adeat
Cancellariam, and at other times with a farther Examination to the Justices of
the Courts from whence the complaints did arise or with a respectuatur per
dominum principem, or referred to the Judges as against the multitude of
Attorneys, as in the Reign of King Henry 4. And Petitions were not seldom
answered with there is a Law already, or the King will not depart from his
Right. And when the Acts of Parliament were made in the 4th and 36th years of
the Reign of King Edward 3. wherein he granted that Parliaments should be
holden once in every year if need be, the Petitions of the people could not
avoid the like Limitations or Trials of them as the Laws required.

Certain Petitions having been exhibited by the Clergy To. Parl. 18 E. 3.
to the King, it was agreed by the King, Earls, Barons, Justices, and other
wise men of the Realm, that the Petitions aforesaid be put in sufficient form
of Law.

A time was appointed to all that would exhibit any Petitions. The first part
of a Petition the King granted, To. Parl. 20 E. 3.
and to the rest he will be advised.

The Commons did pray, that the best of every Country may be Justices of
Peace, and that they may determine all Felonies, to which was answered for the
2d the King will appoint Learned Justices they pray, that the 40 s. Subsidy may
cease.

Unto which was Answered, the King must first be moved*

They pray that the King may take the Profits of all other Strangers Livings,
as Cardinals and others during their Lives.

Unto which was answered, the King takes the profits and the Council (the
Kings privy Council) has sent their Petitions to the King (who was then busied
in his Wars in France.)

The Commons did pray, that all Petitions which be for To. Parl. 21 E. 3.
the Common profit may be delivered in Parliament before the Commons, so as
they may know the Indorsement, and have Remedy according to the ordinance of
Parliament, unto which was given no Answer.

The Commons having long continued together to their great Costs and mischief,
desire Answer to their Bill (which in the Parliament Language signified no more
than a Petition) and leur deliverance.

The Commons petitioned against the falsehood of such To. Parl 22 E. 3.
as were appointed Collectors for 2000 Sacks of Wool.

To which was answered, This was answered in the last Parliament, and therefore
Commandment was given to execute the same.

And the like Answer given ut prius to their Petition touching Robbers and
Felons.

They pray that all Petitions in this present Parliament may be presently
answered. To which (...) answered by the King, after Easter they shall be
answered.

The Parliament in Anno 6. E. 3. began upon Monday, ^
but forasmuch as many of the Peers and Memb(...) were not come, the assembly
required the continuance of the Parliament until the 5th of Hillary next
following, which was granted.

The Commons praying the King to grant a pardon To. Parl. 8 E. 3.
for the debts of King John, and King Henry the third, for which process came
daily out of the Exchequer,

The King answered, he will provide Answer the next Parliament.

No Parliament being after summoned until Anno 13. of his Reign when the Lords
granting to the King the 10th Sheaf of all the Corn of their demesns, except of
their bound Tenants the 10th fleece of Wool, and the 10th Lamb of their own
store to be paid in two years, and would that the great wrong or Male Tolt set
upon Wool be revoked, and that this grant turn not into a Custom.

That the keeping of the Kings Wards Lands may be committed to the next of the
kin of the same Ward.

That Remedy may be found against such as dying past away their Lands to
defraud the Lords of their Wardships.

The Commons made answer, that they knew and tendered the Kings Estate, and
were ready to Aid the same, only to this new device they durst not agree
without further conference with their Countries, and so praying respite until
another time, they promise to travel to their Countries.

Sundry of the Lords and Commons being not come, the Parliament was continued
from day to day until To. Parl. 15 E. 3.
the Thursday following. The Archbishop of Canterbury having been in the Kings
displeasure, humbled himself and desired his favor, and having been defamed,
desired his Trial by his Peers, to which the King answered, he would attend
unto the Common affairs and after hear others.

A Proclamation was made for such as would exhibit any Petitions, and a day
given therefore. To. Parl. 17 E. 3.


Anno 25 E. 3. The Commons pray, that process of Outlawry shall be in debt
Detinue and Replevin. To. Parl. 25 E. 3.


To which was answered, the like motion was in the last Parliament which had
the same Answer, and was then reasonably answered.

Anno 45. E. 3. it was agreed that ever Petition now exhibited may be by some
of the Lords considered. To. Parl. 45 E. 3.


The Commons pray, that the Extracts of Greenwax may mention at whose suit such
Amerciaments were lost in what Term, and what Plea, and between what parties.

To which was answered, let the same be provided the next Parliament (which was
not summoned until in Anno 47. E. 3.) In Anno 47. of his Reign after Subsidies
granted the Commons prayed answers to their Petitions, which was granted, after
the Chancellor had in the name of the King given them great thanks, he willed
that such of the Commons that would wait on their Petitions might so do, and
the rest that would might depart, and so the Parliament ended.

They pray that Right may be done to every man's Petition.

To which the King answered, let that be observed which touches every private
person, our Kings and Princes having ever taken time to answer the petitions of
their Subjects,

. 30.
That in those affairs peculiar only to so great and venerable an assembly
which should not be Trivial or proper to Lower and Lesser Jurisdictions,
assigned for the determining of Lesser matters for the public Ease and
Benefit. Our Kings and Princes have a greater burden and care upon them, as
Gods Vicegerents besides that of Parliaments, to manage and take care of the
Kingdom for the benefit and good of themselves and their People.

FOR our Kings and Supreme Magistrates, having many other as well necessary as
ordinary, and Common affairs to look after, and have regard unto as the care of
Peace at Home and Abroad, Defense and Protection of their People, Commerce,
Intelligence and Correspondence, with Allies and Neighbor Princes guard of the
Seas, and reducing of Parliament Councels to speedy Actions, could not admit a
long consult, which in our former and more happy Parliament Assemblies were
seldom above forty days, and many times with lesser periods of time found to be
sufficient to dispatch the great and Important occasions thereof.

For the care of three great Kingdoms and a multitude of Accidents daily,
hourly, or oftener happening, ordering and disposing Competent Magistrates and
Officers therein, observation of their well or ill managing their trusts,
rewarding and encouraging the good, and punishment of the bad, with the
administration of fit Remedies to all that complain of grievances and
oppressions committed by or amongst such a multitude of people, with the very
great difficulties of keeping Peace abroad with Neighbor Princes, and
preserving their own Subjects from being Injurious to theirs, or receiving
wrong from others, may put a Prince into a necessity of 1 Reg. ca. 3. v. 6, 8,
9.
having in his own person more than Argus his Eyes, or Briareus hands, and give
him no, or a very small time of rest, and to ask of God what Solomon did when
he took upon him the government of Israel, being a great People that could not
be numbered or counted for multitude, give therefore thy Servant an
understanding heart to Judge the people that he may descern betwixt good and
evil, for who is able to Judge so great a People?

And with greater reason as being to govern a stubborn and Rebellious people,
high minded and proud, with the riches gained thereby, many of whom have
perplexed and troubled him and themselves with their needless and destructive
Fears and Jealousies, without which the burden would not be so heavy as it is
And can never seem light if those Fault-finders and Quicksilver Brained State
Politicians would but consider how great it is in the daily exercise of that
government, have hitherto made and kept us happy, all which put together, might
be enough to load an Atlas, and would never be so well done, or prove so
effectual for daily and public good if they should tarry either for the coming
of Parliaments, or for long and perpetual* or disagreeing Parliaments.

And cannot be deemed to be of little moment or concernment if an estimate be
taken of the cares, charge and troubles to preserve the public Peace both by
Sea and Land, Leagues and Alliances, Intelligence, Correspondence and Amity
with Foreign Princes and States, the least breach of Peace with whom might
disturb our Peace and Commerce abroad, and transport Invasions and War upon us
at home, with sending and receiving of Ambassadors, giving audiences and
dispatches to theirs, and sending Instructions with ours, besides their sitting
in Council with their Privy Council, commonly three times in every Week of
extraordinary concernments, make not some addition thereunto, Sundays scarce
excepted, and not that day or every day in every Week besides can pass, but he
is troubled either with petitions for grants or favors, protection from
oppressions, and redresses for greivances, either delivered by the petitioners
themselves, or by one or both of the two Secretaries, or the four Magistri
Supplicationum and Libellorum Masters, as they are called of Requests, who by
their monthly turns of waiting, have commonly an audience twice in every
month, of our Kings and Princes, who are as the mercy seat upon Earth, the
Pool of Bethesda, the Asculapius Temple, the Balm of Gilead, Asylum sanctuary
or refuge to help all the distresses and calamities of their people. And that
in all our Parliaments since the beginning of the Reign of King Edward 3. they
have inter their quaedam Ardua taken always into their care, not only those of
England but of Ireland, Scotland, Gascogney, Guernsey, Jarsey, and the Isles,
though they have no Burgesses or any other representing for them as England
has had since the 48th year of the Reign of King Henry the third, which
considered with the many cares of collecting and gathering in his Revenue and
well ordering of his Aerarium or Treasury, without which no King or Prince can
be safe or great, and protect and defend himself and his people from Injuries
and Contempt, which put all together may give Gods appointed watchman of our
Israel, besides their more weighted and occasional business in Parliament,
scarcely time to slumber or sleep, or enjoy his natural refreshments or
divertisements without the addresses and Importunities of his almost always
wanting and complaining Subjects, which they that will be at leisure to peruse
all the orders of himself and his privy Council and treasury References upon
Petitions in the Secretary of State and Master of the Requests Books, and the
Reports and Returns thereof, with all that are contained in the patent close
Rolls, fine and liberate Rolls of every year, besides the Writs Remedial
granted out of the Chancery, from which no man as our Laws say, is to return
sine Remedio those of the Common or Ordinary sort in every year amounting to no
smaller a number than eighty Thousand in a year, which by Law were anciently
intended not to have been granted but by immediate Petitions to the King,
howsoever are now dispatched of Course, as it has long been by his Majesty's
not a few subordinate Officers, very much to the ease and relief of his People,
who have so long enjoyed those benefits and accommodations as those Writs of
Course, without the trouble either of our Kings, or their more especial Court
of Parliaments as Anciently as King Canutus Reign, who began his Reign in the
year of our Lord L. L. Canuti.
1016. and from thence so continued until the Reign of King John, wherein a
Writ of Novel diseisin is noted in To. Claus. Johannis.
the Margin of a Roll to be de cursu, (from whence the Cursistors in Chancery
have taken, and do yet keep their Name, not a Cursitando, as Fleta (who wrote
about Seldom. dissert. ad Fletam and Fleta, ca. 13. 18 E. 3.
the Reign of King Edward the 2d.) terms them Juvenes and pedites little Lads,
who carried and fetched Writs to and from the Great Seal, but Clerici de Cursu
mentioned in the Oath, ordained to be given unto them in Parliament in Anno 18.
E. 3. Insomuch as when Simon de Montfort that Married the Sister of King John,
and either his Father or himself, had about that time been the destruction of
the Protestant Albigenses and Waldenses in France, did in the time of the
Imprisonment of King H. 3. and his Son Prince Edward, whom he and his
Rebellious Partners had taken Prisoners in the Battle at Jews, take an
especial care, that in the absence of Thomas de Cantilupo the Kings Chancellor,
the Kings great Seal being committed to the Trust of Ralph de Sandwich, Keeper
of the Kings Wardrobe, assisted by Hugh le Despencer Justiciar of England, and
Peter de Montfort two special Rebels, to be kept until the return of the
Chancellor, and that the said Ralph should Seal brevia de Cursu, but those
which were de praecepto, were to be Sealed in their presence.

And when that Rebellion was afterward broken, and Simon de Montfort and the
most of his Rebel partners were slain at the more fortunate Battle at Evesham,
and the King restored to his Regality and Rights of government, he and his
Successors afterward did in all their Parliaments enjoy the power and authority
of Monarchs in their great Councels or Assemblies of Parliament, wherein by
reason of their great and important affairs in War a in France, Scotland, and
Wales, they could not be able to be personally present, but summoned and held
their no long lasting Parliaments by their Lieutenants or Guardians of the
Kingdom for the short continuance thereof.

31.
That our great Councels or Parliaments, except Anciently at the three great
Festivals, viz. Christmas, Easter and Pentecost, being ex more summoned and
called upon extraordinary emergent occasions, could not either at those Grand
and Chargeable Festivals, or upon Necessities of State or Public Weal and
preservation ex natura rei continue long, but necessarily required
Prorogations, Adjournments, Dissolutions or Endings.

FOR extraordinary occasions being not common or ordinary, and the Summons or
calling of fit and well capacited Persons, to those venerable or great Councels
of Parliament, for purposed sometimes especily Limited and Declared to be for
Advice and Aid, not in omnibus arduis only, but in quibusdam arduis, concerning
the defense of the King, his Kingdom and the Church, always howsoever declared
by the King himself, or such as he appointed, and there being other great and
little Courts enough in the Kingdom to dispatch and administer Justice, it
could not but put our Kings and Princes in mind not to trouble their highest
Court for small and trivial Affairs, but to believe that Canutus an Ancient
King of this Nation, who began his Reign in Anno Domini 1001. had reason by an
express Law to prohibit the troubling of him or his Parliament, or greatest L.
L. Canuti 16.
Council with small matters, when they might with more ease, less delay,
expenses and attendance, be determined at home, or in their proper Courts or
Places in these words, videlicet, neme de injuria alterius (Regi) quaeritur
nisi quidem in Centuria Justitiam consequi aut impetrare non potest Centuria,
autem Cominus quisque ut quidem par est intersit aut saltem debito absentiam
luat supplicio, and that Law might well be said to have been made by that King
sapientum Concilio, which might occasion the use of Receivers and Triers of
Petitions constantly appointed by the King or his House, or Council of Peers,
until our late times of Rebellion and Confusion (that great Council or Court,
never being intended by our Kings or their Laws to be a standing, often or
continual Court for ordinary Affairs. The wisdom of our Kings and their House
of Peers, having often rejected and not given any Remedies to Petitioners, that
might more properly be relieved in Inferior Courts.

For King Offa in the year 787. after the Incarnation Pryns Collection of the
Ancient Parliaments.
of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ had a 2d. Session in his great Council.

And therefore as all Parliaments have had very urgent and necessary causes of
Calling and Summoning them, by their Kings, so they were to have their
continuance and duration proportionable to the Business and Affairs, for which
their Advice, Assent or Approbation were required, and even in the
Ecclesiastical Councels, begun as early after the Incarnation of our blessed
Redeemer Jesus Christ as the year 446. The many Secular Businesses, as making
of Laws, and redressing of Grievances, in and by the Presence and Assistance of
our Kings, and many of the Nobility, continued until the Norman Conqueror, who
separated the Ecclesiastical and Civil Jurisdictions one from the other, and
the Attendance upon Parliaments, were not a little troublesome and Seldeni notae
in histor. Eadmeri.
chargeable to the Spiritual and Temporal Baronage, and therefore the Ancient
Custom of our Saxon Kings, was more easy and less burdensome unto the Prelates
and Nobility, when it required their constant and annal Attendance upon their
Sovereign at his Court, at the three great Feasts of the year, viz. Christmas,
Easter and Whitsontide, as the excellently Learned Sir John Spelman has
informed us, where the Bishops might give an account (as in so many Parliaments
which needed no Sir John Spelman in viea ^^redi Regis.
Summons, Prorogations or Adjournments, for it was not to be doubted, but that
almost every man might understand when those Grand Feasts or Solemnities began
or ended,) what had been done, or was to be done in their several Diocesses,
and the Earls within their several Counties and Provinces, of which Anciently
they had a Subordinate Government, and were to render accounts thereof.

When though not praecisely the very same in number as to the Festivals of the
year wherein our Old King Alfred and many of our succeeding Kings and Princes
used to be yearly attended by their Bishops, Earls and Nobility, whereby they
might the better often understand the Circumvolutions and various Accidents in
their Kingdom, in every year might have some resemblance with that of the great
Charles or Charlemain the hugely (as Eginard who was his principal Secretary
witnesses) powerful, valiant and virtuous King of France, which Kings Daughter
Bertha our Saxon King Ethelbert A ^ales Eginard(...) (...) de (...)A(...)
(...), p(...) 765. 736. and 64.
is said to have married, and at her Instance upon the preaching of Augustine
the Monk to have converted himself and all his Subjects to the Christian Faith
and Religion, and celebrated with great Solemnity and Magnificence the great
Festivals of Christmas and Easter, which with the addition of another being the
Feast of Pentiost, was never omitted to be sumptuously kept by all our
succeeding Kings until the latter end of the Reign of our K. H. the 3d. The
French with great Solemnity, holding their Parl. or great Coun* at their 2
great Festivals of Christmas and Easter. Unless any other great Affairs caused
them to summon those their great Councels at other times, which coming after
the Reign of(...). H. 3. to be 10 laid aside by reason of their many voyages
into Normandy long lasting and often Wars with France or Scotland, troubles and
discords at home as Parliaments especially when after the 48th year of the
Reign of King Henry the third the attendance upon Parliaments was much more
troublesome to the Commons in Parliament after their admissions into that great
assembly, though they had their charges and expenses in going, tarrying and
returning allowed them by King Edward the first which was first begun (...) mon
Montfort and his rebellious partners only in (...) H. 3. When the King was
their Prisoner in the (...) two Knights of the Shire for the County of York,
wh(...) those that were afterward permitted to be present by (...). Edward 1.
in the 22 year of his Reign, and in the Reign of our succeeding Kings did
esteem it to be a damage to to them in their other employments, affairs and
loss of time, better becoming their capacities until the impressions and
effassinations of Pride, Fear, Flattery, Ambition and Self-Interest had within
a small time after their aforesaid admission into Parliament, incited or
enticed them to be packt by Roger Mortimer Earl of March, in the Reign of King
E. 2. to Grant Aids to help to advance his wicked and accursed purposes, as is
expressed in one of the Articles and Charges against the said Earl in the 4th
year of the Reign of King E. 3. or to set up for a Trade or Factory for
themselves or their Friends, To. Parl. 4. E 3.
or such as they could purchase as a lamentable experience has of late years
told us.

And we find no such Doings or Factorings before that or 49. of King Henry the
3d. For King Athelstone held a Parliament at Exeter, and the succeeding Saxon
and Danish Kings, Summoned and held their Parliaments at several places, and
Dissolved, and Met again, as their occasions, and the more weighty and
extraordinary Affairs of the Kingdom required.

The Norman Conqueror, and William Rufus, and Henry the 1. other than at their
aforesaid Grand Festivals, did neither restrain themselves to certain times or
places, either as to the Summoning Continuing, Proroguing or Adjourning of
their more than common or ordinary business, which requiring short Councels,
and an hasty Prosecution, or putting into Actions what their deliberate Advices
had resolved upon, could necessarily produce no long continuances, but were not
seldom without Prorogations or Adjournments, as Pryns Collection of the Ancient
Parliaments.
Mr. Pryn and all our Ancient and Contemporary Writers and Historians have
plentifully testified.

In the 9th year of the Reign of King Henry the 2d. A 9 H. 2.
Parliament was called at Westminster, where by reason of the frowardness of
the Archbishop Becket, and his Suffragan Daniel in the Life of King H. 2.
Bishops, the King was displeased, and the Parliament ended.

In the 20th. year of the Reign of that King, he called 20 H. 2.
a general Assembly of the Bishops and Nobility at Clarendon, where John of
Oxford the Kings Clerk was President of that Council, and a charge was given
for the King, that they should call to memory the Laws Ecclesiastical of his
Grandfather King Henry the 1st. and to reduce them to writing, which was done,
the Archbishop and Bishops putting their Seals thereunto, and taking much
against the Archbishops will their Oaths to observe them.

In the 33th year of his Reign, a Council of Bishops, 33 H. 2.
Abbots, Earls, Barons, both of the Clergy and Laity was holden at Gaynington
sub Elemosinae titulo vitium rapacitatis, Daniel ibidem 110.
included therein says Walsingham, requiring Aid toward the Wars of
Jerusalem, the Kings of England and Walsingham Ypodigm. Neustriae.
France, resolving to go thither in Person, the King of England taking upon
him, and wearing the white Cross.

A Parliament was called at Nottingham by King Richard the first, after his
return from his Captivity, which Hovedon part posteriore.
continued but four days; a Parliament in 7. Johannis; Mat. Paris 247.
a great Council or Parliament was holden at London, and Adjourned to Reading,
whither the King not coming at the day appointed, it was three days after
Adjourned to Wallingford.

In the Reign of King Henry the 3d. His Great Councels or Parliaments, were
many times Prorogued or Adjourned, in whose Reign the Popes Nuncio, Summoning
Mat. Paris and Daniel in the Life of King Henry 3.
the Praelates of England to give an Aid to the Pope, they excused themselves,
and alleged that the King was sick, and the Archbishops and Bishops were
absent, and that sine iis respondere non possunt nec debent, whereupon the
Nuncio endeavoring to adjourn that Convocation, they refused to come again
after Summons without the Kings License, in 6 H. 3. a Parliament, 7. a
Parliament in 8. a 3. Anno 10. a 4th. Anno 11. a 5th. a Parliament in 16.
another in 17. Anno 19. a Parliament, Anno 21. a Parliament, Anno 22. a
Parliament, Anno 25. a Parliament, Anno 28. 2 Parliaments, Anno 35. a
Parliament, 36. a Parliament, 37. a Parliament, in 38. another being called in
Easter Term, which by reason of the absence of some Lords, who pretended they
were not Summoned according to Magna Charta, was Prorogued to Michaelmas
following, Anno 42. another Parliament at London, and for difficulty says
Matthew Mat. Paris.
Paris, Prorogued to St. Barnabas day, and thence Adjourned to Oxford.

And thence in the same year adjourned to London, in Anno 48 two Parliaments
were called at London, 51. a Parliament at London, Anno 53. another at
Marlburgh (but in truth) in Anno 47. as appears by the Parliament Roll.

There was a Parliament at Westminster in the third year of the Reign of King
Edward 1. another Anno 4. one at Gloucester Anno 6. another at Westminster Anno
7. one Anno 10. 13. another at Acton Burnel, and one afterward in the same
year at Westminster, another in that year at Winchester, another afterward in
the same year at Westminster Anno 18. two Parliaments were holden at
Westminster, the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, Quo Warranto and fines,
seeming to be made at several Parliaments or Sessions, Statutes of Vouchers,
Wast and de defensione Juris made in Anno 20. E. 1. probably made in like
manner Anno 21. De his qui ponendi sunt in Assisis, and another ut supra de
malefactoribus in Parcis, the Statute of Consultation Anno 24. A Parliament in
Anno 25 at London, another at Bury, another at Salisbury, 26. At York held at
another time a Parliament, ^nno 27. a Parliament at Westminster, and another
Anno 28. for Persons appealed, and a Parliament wherein were made the Articuli
super Chartas Anno 30. The Statute of Quo Warranto, 31. a Parliament, Statutes
of Conspiracy and Maintenance in Anno 33. And in the 34th year of his Reign,
before the Writ of Summons could be executed, sent another Writ to Adjourn the
Parliament, and by his Writs, Prorogued or Adjourned some, if not many of those
other Parliaments.

In the 5th year of the Reign of King Edward the 2d. a Parliament being
Summoned to be holden at Westminster, 5 E. 2. (...). 17. To. Claus. dors.
it was Prorogued before they could meet, and Writs were sent to signify that
they need not come.

In the 18th year of his Reign, having Summoned the Earl Marshal to be at a
Parliament, to be holden at 18 E. 2. To. Claus. in dors. m. 15.
Winchester, secunda dominica quadragessima prox. futur. and being informed by
some of the Nobility, that by reason of the shortness of time, they could not
sufficiently provide themselves, Prorogued the Parliament to Octabis Paschae
prox futur.

In the Printed Statute made at Lincoln in 9 E. 2. Mr. Pulton has by his
Modern Ph(...), mentioned that Statute to have been made by the Assent of
t(...) (...), Earls, Barons, and other great Estates* but the origi^^l Record
is only Prelates, Countz, Ba(...) (...) (...).

And in 5 E. 3. it was mistakenly (...) by the Abridger, that all the Estates
in full (...) (the King being not with his Power of Pardoning (...) other his
Rights of Sovereignty comprehended (...) that notion) did agree that none of
them should retain, sustain, or own any Felon, or other Common Breaker of the
Law.

And the whole Estate (whereof the King was not likely to be one) moved the
King to be Gracious to Edmond Son of the late Earl of March, who asked what
they would have done, since King Edward the 2d. was murdered by the procurement
of the said Earl, they Answered for certain Lands Entailed; the Kings Answer
was, that the same should be done at his pleasure.

In Anno 6 E. 3. The Parliament Adjourned (which was done by no other than the
King) because most of the Estates were not come.

The Archbishop of York, and his Suffragans, and Clergy came, but the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his, did not by reason of the contention betwixt
them for Superiority of bearing up their Crosses, whereby the same was not only
a loss of an opportunity for Scotland, but also an insupportable charge to the
whole Estate, says the Erroneous Abridger of the Parliament Records by a new
Re-assembly, (which could not be intended of the King, who then was there
resident at his Palace of Westminster,) to which they were Summoned.

For the efficient Formal and Final cause of our Parliaments or great Councels
being vested in our Sovereign Kings and Princes, and in no other solely and
incommunicably, none of their Subjects did or could ever rightly understand or
believe that any of those great Councels or Parliaments summoned upon great and
weighty emergencies of State accidents or dangers which were to be suddenly
heeded by preventing or avoiding imminent or Impendent evils by their wary and
deliberate consults put into a speedy Execution, could ever receive a certain
and continual fixation, or be obliged thereunto, for that besides the fertility
and growth of Hydras and innumerable mischiefs and Inconveniences, not long ago
woefully experimented, it would altogether contradict and be against the nature,
reason and being of our Kings and Princes, summoning or calling of Parliaments
according to the ancient and Laudable constitutions of our Nation. It being as
unusual as improper, to Summon or call Parliaments, pro quibusdam arduis, when
Hannibal is not every day ad portas, but sometimes ruining himself and his Army
at Capua, when our Kings have their continuum Concilium, private Council and
cares in a perpetual watch for the preservation of them and their people, when
the Ardua are but the well foreseen Accidents and Dangers likely to happen and
fit to be prevented, and it is not pro omnibus arduis, but quibusdam, and the
Civil Law can inform us, That Accidens appellatur quod adesse aut abesse potest
preter Subjecti corruptionem and de donat ante nupt.

Accidens is defined to be, 1. Quod Accidit. 2. Quod inheret Subjecto oppositum
substantiae. 3. Quod est extra essentiam rei ut neque intra attributa
essentialia, neque desinitione Essentiali exprimitur.

For a Fleet of well Rigged and furnished Ships does not call a Council, or
cause all the Commanders, Captains and Pilots to come on board the Admiral for
every little storm or quarrel of the Winds and Seas.

Nor our Generals of an Army at Land call a Council of War for every small
alarm or beating in of the Scouts.

And our Kings without Assent or Act of Parliament have appointed Terms or
times for the orderly dispatch of Law affairs in the distribution of their
Justice in their many other Courts of Justice. And our inferior Courts Baron,
and Leet and Hundreds have been contented with lesser Periods.

And a standing perpetual Parliament either in Actu or potentia was never yet
known or used in England, when its Constitution, Writs of Summons and Usage
does at all times and should declare the contrary.

And as extraordinary Accidents, dangers and emergences in a Kingdom and
Government, and their greatest concernments are in no wife to be slighted,
delayed or neglected, but suddenly endeavored to be prevented, escaped,
avoided or lessened, though it be to no small charge, attendance and trouble
put upon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Members summoned and caused to
convene and come from several parts remote or further distant, as in their Duty
and Allegiance they are obliged to attend their Sovereign, and come to the
General Consult of a Parliament, so is it to be considered, that the Speculator
and Prorector of our Kingdom and Nation under God, (just allowances being
always to be made of natural rests and refreshments, and competent care of
health) cannot be Master, if he could, of much time, whilst he is to encourage
and maintain the Public Good of his People, and Guard them from any evils or
inconveniences which do or might assail them, in his care and distribution of
Justice in all the complaints and Petitions of a numerous and mighty People, in
the issuing out of Writs, Edicts and Proclamations, which do every day, and
hour in the year, almost employ his Ministers of State and substituted in their
several stations and qualifications, Sundays, and the grand Festivals in every
year not always escaping, and the not to be expressed almost perpetual cares of
a Kingly and Monarchick Government, largely attested by the many Patent,
Charter and Clause, Rolls, brevia Regis, Rescripts, Commissions, Certioraris,
Writs of ad quod dampnum Inquisitions cum multis aliis in the Raigns of our
Kings and Queens, now lodged and preserved in the Tower of London, the
Exchequer, and the Treasures thereof, with the Records of the other Courts,
with what else could be rescued from the ravage of War and Time, together with
the Memorials of their Secretaries of State, Privy Council Table Books
referrences, and the returns thereof, hearings of causes, complaints and orders
and redresses thereof, with a necessary Inspection and Survey in and of all the
affairs and conditions of his people, and their well or ill being when the
cares of government were so accounted to be an heavy burden for Moses in his
conduct of an affrighted and oppressed people of Israel driven out of Egypt
with six hundred thousand men on foot, besides Women and Children with their
Flocks and Herds in Exodus ca. 12 and ca. 19.
their traveling and unsettled condition through the wilderness, toward their
hopes in the Promised Land of Canaan, with murmuring enough in the hearing and
determining of their Suits and Complaints one against another, raised in Jethro
his Father-in-Law such a compassion of his Labor and Toil therein, as he told
him, Ibidem ca. 18.
he would surely wear away both himself and the People, and therefore
Councelled him only to reserve hard matters unto himself, and appoint out of
the People able Men, such as fear God and love the Truth, hating Covetousness,
to Judge the People in smaller matters.

Wherein they that shall rightly consider the cares of Kings and Princes, and
the trouble of preserving and doing good to a far greater number of People (not
seldom as unto too many against their Wills) may think themselves to be happy
under the Protection of Gods Vicegerent, and bound to obey with cheerfulness
his Providence therein, and that it was never intended by our less murmuring
and more grateful Ancestors, to make perpetual extraordinaries, or a standing
Court of Parliament, which could not fall within the Reason, Necessity or
Practice of any good or rational Government, and if it could as it never can,
must of necessity tear in pieces our happy best Established Monarchy, and
Sacrificing it to an inexorable misery, leave our Posterities to be tossed and
driven in and upon the Waters of Strife, Self-interest and Vain Imaginations,
and in the fear, without any cause of an Arbitrary Power of our Kings, never
like to happen over-hastily, and madly run into the Arbitrary Power of a
multitude, or some prevailing Party of plundering and pretending Reforms
amongst them, many of which is and will be the worst of all Arbitraries of a
Rude, Ignorant, Unreasonable and Senseless multitude, with the greatest
certainties of miseries, as fatally as inevitably likely to happen.

. 32.
That Parliaments or great Councels de quibusdam arduis concerniug the defense
of the Kingdom and Church of England neither were or can be fixed to be once in
every year or oftener, they being always understood and believed to be by the
Laws and ancient and reasonable Customs of England ad libitum Regis, who by our
Laws, Right Reason and all our Records and Annals is and should be the Elsings
Ancient and Present manner of holding Parliaments in England.
only watchman of our Israel, and the only Judge of the necessity, times and
occasion of summoning Parliaments.

FOR notwithstanding that by an Act of Parliament made in the 4th year of the
Reign of King Edward 3. It was accorded that a Parliament should be holden once
in every year, and more often if need be; And in an other Act of Parliament
made in the 36th year of the Reign of the aforesaid King Edward it is said,
that for the maintenance of the Articles and Statutes (made in the said
Parliament of the 36th) and redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances which
daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden as at other times was appointed 4.
E. 3. ca. 19.
by a Statute, yet the latter Act of Parliament was but with reference to the
former, and that imparted 36 E. 3. ca. 10.
no more than that a Parliament shall be holden once in every year, and more
often if need be* and howsoever that in the 50th year of the Reign of that King
the Commons renewed their petition that a Parliament might be holden, that
Knights of the Parliament might be chosen by the whole Counties, and that the
Sheriffs To. Parl. 50. E. 3. and 1 R. 2.
might likewise be without brocage in Court, the King only answered to the
Parliament, there are Statutes made therefore to the Sheriffs, there is answer
made to the Knights, it is agreed that they shall be chosen by common consent
of every County, and in Anno Primo R. 2. petitioned the King that a Parliament
might be yearly holden, in a convenient place to redress delays in Suits, and
to end such Cafes as the Judges doubt of, which the Consequences after will
show, were only to be at the pleasure and will of the King, as his prudence,
care and necessity of himself, and the public good should necessarily advise
if the true Interpretation of both those Acts of Parliament, could, as it never
can bear any other signification, for although that which next followed that
Act of Parliament, made in the 4th year of the Reign of that King, was in the
next year after, yet that which succeeded that was in Anno 6 and not printed.

For the Parliament was for a few days Adjourned, and 6 E. 3.
being after holden at York, was for a short time likewise Prorogued, and
afterward the Assembly being not come, was Adjourned until the 5th of St.
Hillary next following at York, and from thence again to a Reassembly at the
same place, at the end of which Re-assembly, the Commons had License to depart,
and the Lords were commanded to attend him the next day, at which time the
Parliament was Dissolved.

The Duke of Cornwall, the Kings Eldest Son as Guardian 13 E. 3.
of England, by the Kings Letters, Patents, held the Parliament at Westminster,
and a memorandum made to Summon the Parliament at the 5th. of St. Hillary next
following. And the Commons upon the Kings demand of an Aid, allege that they
cannot agree thereunto without further conference with their Countries, pray a
respite of time until they return from thence.

For that sundry of the Lords and Commons were 20 E. 3.
not come, the Parliament was Adjourned for some few days.

In regard the Commons had so long continued at 21 E. 3.
their great costs and expenses, they desire Answer of their Bills, and a
deliverance.

Lionel Duke of Clarence the Kings Son, held the Parliament. 25 E. 3.


The Parliament for certain causes was Adjourned until (...). E. 3.
Monday next, after the Feast of St. Edmond the Martyr.

After the Petitions of the Commons not before Answered, were read, and
answered before the King, Lords and Commons, the King Licensed the Commons to
depart, (...)* E. 3.
and the Parliament ended.

And although in a Parliament holden in Anno 4. E. 3. ca. 14. It is accorded
that a Parliament shall be holden every year, and more often if need be, yet in
Anno 5. there being one, there ensued none after until 9. in 10. there was one,
from thence until 14. none, in 15. another, (...) E. 3.
after which none until 18. after which none until 20. thence none until 23.
none after until 25. thence none until 27. and in that of 25. were 6. several
Sessions, wherein several Acts of Parliament were made, in Annis 28. and 29.
Parliaments were holden, but none afterward until 31. thence none until 33.
thence every year until 36. In which an Act was made, that for maintenance of
the said Articles and Statutes in the said 36 years ordained and redress of
diverse mischiefs and grievances which may happen, a Parliament shall be holden
every year, as another time was ordained by a Statute in 4 E. 3. cap. 14. in
37. and 38. Parliaments were holden, from thence none until 45. another in 47.
another in 50.

In Annis 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. none, in 8, 9, 10, 11. and in every year after,
during his Reign a Parliament. R. 2.


1, 2. Parliament in one year, in 2. a Parliament, in H. 4.
3. one, in 4, 5, and 6. one, in 7. none, in 8. one, in 9. one, in 10. none, in
11. one, in 12. none, and in 13. one.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Parliaments none in 6. but in 7, 8. and H. 5.
9. were Parliaments.

1, 2, 3, 4. were Parliaments, but none in 5. and 7. H. 6.
in 10, 11. Parliaments, in 12. and 13. none, in 14, 15. were Parliaments, in
16, 17. none, in 18. one, in 19. none, in 21. and 22. none, in 23. a
Parliament, in 24. none, a Parliament in 25, in 26. none, in 27, 28, and 29.
were Parliaments, in 30. none, in 31. one, in 32 none, in 33 one.

1. one, in 2. none, in 3. and 4. were Parliaments, in E. 4.
5. and 6. none, in 7. and 8. Parliaments, in 9, 10. and 11. none, in 12. one,
in 13. none, in 14. one, in 15, and 16. none, in 17. one, but in 18, 19, 20,
21, none, in 22. one.

But 1 Parliament, though he lived a few years after. R. 3.


In some part of whose Reign. many of the Acts of H. 7.
Parliament being not to be found, the first that appears amongst the Printed
Acts of Parliament, was in the 3. year of his Reign, 2 Parliaments were held in
that year, and a 3. in the 4th. year of his Reign, none in the 5. and 6. but
one in the 7th. and no more until the 11th one in the 12th. and no more until
19.

1. And thence none until the 3. and after every year H. 8.
a Parliament until the 8th. year of his Reign, (In which the like misfortune
happened unto the Parliament Rolls for many years, as it did in the Reign of
his Father King Henry the 7th.) in 14, and 15. there appears to have been an
Act of Parliament, and from thence no more until the 21. and thence a
Parliament in every year until 30. and in that year none, but in 31. and thence
every year a Parliament until 36. wherein was no Parliament, but in 37. one.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A Parliament in every year. E. 6.


1. Mar. 2. Sessions, 1. and 2. Philippi and Mar. and 3, 4. Mar.
and 5.

A Parliament was in the first year of her Reign, and Eliz.
from thence none until 6. and thence none until 8. from whence none until 13.
thence to 15. and afterward none until 18. and from thence none until 23.
thence none until 27. none in 28. and but one in 29. none in 30. one in 31.
thence none until 35. thence none until 39. thence none until 43.

1. one, in 2. none, Parliaments in 3, and 4. none in Jac.
5. and 6. from 7. none until 18. thence none until 21.

In Primo Caroli Regis 1. in 2. none, in 3. and 4. another. Car. 1.


No complaints being in those Internals of Parliament made for want thereof,
and that blessed Martyr having granted to the great inconveniences of his
Regality and necessaries of his Monarchicque, more than was fit for his
Subjects to ask which was dearly after paid for after by many a suffering Loyal
Family in the late long Rebellion, did in the granting of the Act of Parliament
the Exact Collection of Proceedings in the Parliament from the 3d. of November
1640. until the Month of June 1641
16th. day of November, 1640. for a Triennial Parliament to be holden in every
3d. year, declare unto them in these words, viz.

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons,
you may remember when both Houses were with me at the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, I did declare unto you two Rocks I wished you to eschew, this is the
one of them, and of that consequence that I think never Bill passed here in
this House of more favor to the Subjects than this is, and if the other Rock
be as happily passed over as this shall be at this time, I do not know what you
can ask, for ought I can see at this time, that I can make any question to
yield unto, therefore I mention this to show unto you the sense that I have of
this Bill, and obligation as I may say that you have to me for it, for
hitherto, to speak freely, I have had no great encouragement to do it if I
should look to the outward face of your actions or proceedings, and not to the
inward intentions of your hearts, I might make question of doing it.

Hitherto you have gone on in that which concerns your selves to amend, and yet
those things that merely concern the strength of this Kingdom, neither for the
State, nor my own particular.

This I mention, not to reproach you, but to show you the State of things as
they are, you have taken the Government almost in pieces, and I may say it is
almost off the hinges.

A Skilful Watch-maker to make clean his Watch, he will take it asunder, and
when it is put together, it will go the better, so that he leave not forth then
one pin in it.

Now as I have done all this on my part, you know what to do on your parts, and
I hope you shall see clearly that I have performed really what I expressed to
you at the beginning of this Pailiament of the great trust I have of your
affections to me, and this is the great expression of trust, that before you do
any thing for me, that I do put such a confidence in you.

Which was such an Assent to an Act of Parliament to ruin himself and his
Monarchy, as never was asked or imposed upon any King or Prince, not a vassal
unto any Prince or Republic, or by any King granted unto his Subjects, that
did not intend to make himself to be either a Subject to his Subjects, or a
fellow Subject unto he could not tell who, which that ensnared necessitated,
and every where almost betrayed Prince, did never intend or think to be
rational, or any thing but an oppression and force put upon him by too many of
his Rebellious Subjects, when he was so pinched and surrounded with Perils and
Hazards of the greatest importance, either as to the saving of himself, or his
Royal Posterity and three Kingdoms, when the Faction of 5, or 6, of some
ambitious and unquiet Spirits backed with a lurking Scottish contrived Universal
Rebellion, the villainy of some of the unquiet nonconforming Clergy, and the
Bestial ignorance of the Rabble had forced him to a condescension of an Act of
Parliament in the 16 year of his Reign, that if he did not summon a Parliament
once in every three years, his Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, or Commissioners thereof upon their Oaths after a certain prefixion of
days, and under a penalty to be incapable and suffer such Censures as both
Houses of Parliament should inflict, should be obliged to do it, wherein if he
16 Car. 1.
or they should in like manner fail, any 12 or more of the House of Peers
should do it, and cause Writs under the great Seal of England to issue forth
for the summoning of an yearly Parliament, all Clerks of Offices that were used
to officiate therein were commanded, under the pain of incapacity and
forfeiture of their Offices, and such other Penalties as that terryfying
Parliament should ordain, if any Sheriff, Mayor or Bailiff disobeyed, he or
they were to suffer the Penalties of a Praemunire, and the people were to
proceed to an Election, and send those that they Elected to the Parliament to
be holden once in every year wherein the King was to be personally present, and
he or both -- Houses within the year might adjourn, prorogue or dissolve the
same, the House of Peers might appoint their own Speaker, and the House of
Commons theirs, the King might nominate by Commission one or more to take of
the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and they that refused to be punished by the House of Commons, they
that sought to disturb or hinder those Orders for frequency of Parliaments,
were to endure the Penalties of Praemunire, take no benefit by the Laws, be
incapable of any Inheritance, Legacy, Gift or Grant, and be disabled to
purchase by themselves or any other, or capable of any Office, Use, or Trust.

. 33.
That all or any of the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament are not
properly, or by their original constitution intended or otherwise entitled, or
properly, truly, justly, lawfully seized or to be styled or termed Estates,
neither are to be so understood or believed to be; and being to be no otherwise
than subject to a temporary Election, and by the authority of their Kings Writs
paid their wages and charges, by those that sent and elected them, can have no
Just or Regal Right thereunto.

FOr that the Title or usage of the Word Estate cannot bear or carry any other
acceptance, interpretation or signification than a party or condition of men
elected by a Community composed of several sorts of men anciently and
originally (the Electors and the Sheriffs themselves excepted) as their
Procurators or Attorneys to be present in Parliament ad consentiendum iis, to
consent unto, obey and perform such things as the King by the advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal should be pleased to ordain.

For the word Status or Estates truly, legally and properly understood either
now or anciently, can have or receive no other signification, Etymology,
Interpretation, common use, proper or true understanding or meaning than,

Status est duplex publicus est dignitatis and honorum l. cognitionem l. 5. F.
De extraordinariis cognitio privatus est hominis conditio ipsum privatum
concernens and spectatur in Spelmanni Glossar.
tribus in liberate in Civitate in familia l. Fin. F. de cap. dim: Ideo statum
mutare dicitur qui mutat illud Jus quod habet in isto casu servi statum non
habent Call. 9. Unde dici solet servus caput non habet Minsh. statum unde
capitis diminutio quod status diminutio Meulf. p 71. Statum mutant liberi omnes
qui vel (ivitatem vel libertatem, vel familiae Jus amittunt Call. 5. Status
personarum conditionem significat sicut Ingenui libertini servi Call. 9. 29.
prat. Status dicitur conditio qualitasve personarum qua quis plurimum potest,
appellatur in Institutionibus Jus personarum Call. 6. Gradum pro existimationis
and honoris loco usurpari, notum est hinc in Gradum reponere est disjectum
restituere Spieg. prat. Gradus in Agone literario tres sunt ut doctores legum
and seq. Baccularii Licentiati Doctores.

Status Curia comitatus Aula Regis Jacobus de vitriace lib. 3. page 1126. de
sapphedino primo die recepit ipsos (legatos Du Fresne Glossar.
Christianorum) in prima scala de Cairon ubi semper est status ejus Statutarii
sunt Magistratus qui statuta odunt, vel horum observationes invigilant, vel
secundum ea judicia sua odunt Charta Annum 1322. infrascripta statuta
conscripta per Dominos Jurisperitos electos per dominos statutarios Bulla p. p.
data Lugduni in M. pastorali Eccl. parisiensi lib. 19. ca. 15. Excommunicatos
nuncios, Statutarios et Scriptores statutorum ipsorum. Alia Bonifacii 9. p. p.
Anno 1391. Apud Goldastum to. 2 constit. Imper. Potestates vero Consules
statutarii and Scriptores Statutorum praedict. nec non consiliarii locorum
ipsorum qui secundum Statuta and consuetudines memoratas judicarent, etc.

Status, Statura Gregorius Taron. lib. 4. Hist. cap. 24. Celsum Patriciatus
honor donavit, virum procerum statu, in scapulis validum lacerto robustum,
etc. Mon. Sangallensis l. 1. cap. 19. de quodam Ep. qui cum familiaritate
illius animari caepisset in tantam progressus est proterviam, ut virgam auream
incomparabilis Caroli, quam ad Statum suum fieri Jussit, feriatis diebus vice
baculi ferendam pro Episcopali ferula improvidus ambiret.

Status, Seeds, Statum facere sedere morari, Ethelwerdus lib. 4. cap. 3.
Attamen oppressi lassatu desistunt pugne barbari and sterilem obticient tunc
victory Statum.

Status pro Stallo Monachorum and Cannnicorum in Ecclesia Galbertus in vita
Caroli Com. Flandr. n. 72. Status simul and seeds Fratrum dejectae sunt. Idem.
n. 98. Inter columnas quippe solarii specula and Status suos ex scriniorum
aggoribus and cumulis scamnorum prostituerant, Stephanus Tornacensis Epist. 12.
Assignetis ei statum in Choro, sicut habere solet, sedem in Capitulo Locum in
Refectorio statutum de Installatione Canonicorum Bononiensium in Morinis:
Assignaturque sibi status in Choro secundum qualitatem and capacitatem recepti,
and locus in Capituli.

For they must have no small influence upon the minds and reason of mankind, as
well as that which they designed, to have upon the Estates of those that would
be so credulously foolish as to believe them to be a third Estate, to be added
unto the former two very ancient Estates in times of Parliament, viz. The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and it must be a strong and strange kind of delusion as
much or more enchanting than the Magicians or Southsayers of Egypt that could
not expound the meaning of Pharaohs dreams or far exceed the Art of the Painter
that made Zeuxis Grapes so very semblable, or like unto them as the Birds were
made Fools, and essayed to eat them, or how should or would be self created
Estates think themselves to be such Estates, when if any such could have been,
or ever had been, they must rather have been the Estates or such Estates that
sent them, but not to be such Estates, but only as their Procurators, Attorneys
or Deputies, or what an efficacious strange Art must it be, that could when
miracles have been long ago ceased, make a shadow pass for a Substance, those
that are at home no such Estates, but they that were only sent, are no sooner
once admitted in Parliament, but suddenly and ex se they become parts of that
they would call the third Estate, when they that sent and helped to make them
Members of Parliament, know of no such Grandeur or title bestowed upon them,
how, or by whom when they were in Drink or Fudled at the time of the Election,
or Drinking Cheating day of various and senseless bribing, bargaining
partialities, shamefully exercised in those our late times of Rebellion and
Confusion; when some that were Electors (the Sheriff of the County being not
himself to be Elected, but commanded to cause the Election fairly to be made of
Burgesses for Cities or Towns justly sending Knights of the Shires, Citizens or
Burgesses to Parliament (not having a freehold Estate under forty shillings per
Annum, is at the same time thrashing in another Man's Barn, or at Plow, or at
some daily servile labor, and neither he or his High-Crown-Hatted-Wife knew of
any such honor fallen upon them, or how such an hic or ubique Estateship
vested in him, or how he that is represented should be less in degree or honor
than he that sent and helped him to be Elected, and it will be difficulty
enough for the third Estate Asserters to assail them from Perjury and Treason
in their endeavoring to usurp upon their Sovereign, and to be coordinate with
him, or to free them from the forfeiture of their Lands and Estates unto their
Mesne Lords.

And it is very probable that King Henry the third in the 52 year of his Reign,
and his Parliament did not intend 52 H. 3. ca. 10
to make the Common sort of People or smaller part of the Nation to be equal
with the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and Religious Men
and Women, who were by that Statute exempt from coming to the Sheriffs turn, or
being ranked with them as Estates; the Sheriffs turns being as Sr. Edward Coke
says ordinarily composed of the Bailiffs of Lords of Manors, Servants and
other Common sort of people, that Cokes 4th part Institutes.
Court having no Jurisdiction to try any Action other than under forty
Shillings value.

And there could not certainly be a greater parcel of wickedness, credulity and
ignorance hardly to be decerned or distinguished, how they or any of their
Adherents can harbor or give any entertainment to the least Embrio or parcel
of opinion, that all, or any of the Members in the House of Commons in
Parliament, are a third Estate when they themselves did so little believe it as
in their frequent Petitions in Parliament unto their Kings they could give
themselves no greater a Title than your Pauvrez Communs your Leiges, and being
asked their advice in Parliament touching some especial matters, denied to give
it themselves, but referred it unto the Council of his Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, at another time refused because they had no Skill or knowledge in the
affairs Walsingham Hypodigma Neustriae in vita E. 1. and To. Parl.
of Peace or War, (the principal parts of government) and in the 13th year of
the Reign of King Edward the third upon that Kings demand of an unusual Tax
upon the Common people, as they thought, prayed leave to go into their several
Counties to consult those that sent, and returned again, with an Assent and
Answer; And when King Henry the fourth appeared to be offended with them, came
sorrowfully before him, and humbly begged his pardon, could not as it appears
in several of our Parliament Records, when the protection of themselves their
Posterities and Estates were deeply concerned, give their Kings and Princes any
Aids or Subsidies without the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that
in the Reign of King Henry the fourth could not protect Sir Thomas Hexey one of
their Members from an Accusation and Punishment by the King, that in the Reign
of King Henry the sixth could not support their own Clerk, and in the Raigns of
several of our Kings have been enforced to pray Aid of them by their Writs out
of their Chancery to protect themselves and Moenial C(...)s 3d part Institutes.
Servants in time of Parliaments. That Queen Mary caused 39. of their Members
to be indicted in the Court of Kings Bench for being absent from Parliament,
wherein none of them though Plowden a very learned Lawyer was one, durst
adventure to plead or insist upon any their pretended Sovereignty of
Parliament, or that they were a third Estate or part thereof, That Queen
Elizabeth one of the greatest and most virtuous of Princess that ever weilded a
Scepter, and sat in our English Throne could upon no greater an offense of
Bromley and Welsh two of the Knights of the Shire for the County of Worcester
then endeavoring to Petition the House of the Lords to join with them to
supplicate her Majesty to declare her Successor, did forbid them to go to the
Parliament, but keep their Chambers, and shortly after committed them Prisoners
in the Tower of London, and did not long after, sitting the Parliament, Arraign
and try in her Court of King's Bench for High Treason Doctor Parry a Member of
Parliament, and caused him to be drawn, hanged and quartered, and may read that
in 16 R. 2. 19 R. 2.
in an Act of Parliament made against Provisions at Rome under a Penalty of
Praemunire the Commons by the name of the Commons of England three times
repeated not stiling themselves a third Estate, petitioned the King that the
Estates, viz. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal (herein acknowledging the
Praelates to be of great use to the King) might declare their resolutions to
stand to and abide by the King; and had never presumed so high as publicly to
print and declare that the Sovereignty is inherent and radicated in the people,
if they had not plundered or sequestered the Devils Library of Hellish
Inventions, Tricks and new found devices, or met with some manuscript of them
at some Auction, a Trick of trade newly found out by the Stationers. And
likewise prayed the King, and him require by way of Justice, that he would
examine the Lords Spiritual and Temporal severally, and all the Estates in
Parliament, to give their opinion in the cases aforesaid, whereupon the said
Archbishops, Bishops, and Praelates being severally examined, made their
Protestations that they could not deny or affirm that the Pope had power to
excommunicate or translate Bishops or Praelates, but if any such thing be done
by any, that it is against the Kings Crown and dignity. And the Lords Temporal
being severally examined, answered, that the matters aforesaid were clearly in
derogation of the Kings Crown and Dignity. And likewise the Procurators of the
Lords Spiritual being severally examined, answered in the name and for their
Lords as the Bishops had done, whereupon the King by the Assent aforesaid, and
at the request of the Commons did ordain and Enact the said Statute of
Praemunire.

And might be assured that in Holland and the united Provinces the chief of the
confederate Estates with those that represent the Reistres Schaff or Nobility
do usually sit at the Hague in Holland, and many times go home or send to the
Towns and places they represent to receive their orders or approbation, who
sometimes send their Deputies unto the Estates at the Hague with their
resolutions, so as there is a wide and great difference betwixt those which our
ambitious high-minded parcel of people that would be called Estates, and those
that are the true and real Estates of the principality of Ghelders and County
of Zutphen, Earldoms and Counties of Holland, Zealand, Aitzema's Re volutions
of the United Provinces.
Utrecht, and Friziss, Omland, and the Eu, and Lovers, who did so unite and
confederate themselves together with all those that would allye and unite with
them, as they promised not to infringe or break any of each of their
Privileges or Immunities (which our Members of the House of Commons in
Parliament have largly done, by ejecting, turning out and imprisoning one
another, putting others in their places, and making them receive their illegal
Sentences and unjust Judgments upon their knees) neither shall raise or make
any Taxes or Imposts upon each other without general consent (which ours would
be so styled Estates, have as largely done, as 48 Millions of English Money
have amounted unto) and in case any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be
null and void, the Lords Lieutenants and Governors of the said several
Provinces and Stadtholders thereof, and all the subordinate Magistrates and
Officers should from time to time take their Oaths to perform the same, and the
Governors of the Cities, Towns and Places in the said united Provinces do in
especial cases send unto their Stadtholders their Assent or Ratifications
before any thing be acted, which our pretending third Estates did not do, when
they arraigned and murdered their King at the suit of the people, when that
blessed Martyr King Charles the first asserted that they were not a tenth part
of the people, and he might truly have said that there were not above one in
every 200 of the deluded people of many Millions of his Subjects (Cromwels
Soldiers and Army, and the murdering Judges only excepted) and not all of them
neither that desired his death, or being so wickedly used.

And can never find any reason, record or president to warrant the imprisoning,
securing or secluding as they have lately called it, any of their own Members,
nor are to judge of the Legality or Illegality of the Election of their
Members, nor of any the pretended breach of Mr. William Pryn.
their Privileges, of which the King and Lords were anciently the Judges as is
evident by 16 R. 2. n. 6. 12 R. 2. n. 23. 1 H. 4. n. 79. 4 H. 4. n. 19, 20. 5
H. 4. n. 71. 78. and ca. 5. 8 H. 4. n. 13. Brook Parliament 11. 8 H. 6. n. 57.
23 H. 6. n. 41. 31 H. 6. n. 27, 28. 36. 14 E. 4. n. 55. 17 E. 4. n. 36. cum
multis aliis, but were always Petitiouers to the King for Public Laws and
redress of grievances or in the case of private persons, but very seldom
petitioned unto, and then but by sometimes the Upholsters and Merchant
adventurers of London, and though they had the free Election of their Speakers
granted, yet they were to present them to the King, who allowed or refused
them, and sometimes caused them to choose another, never did or could of right
administer an Oath to witnesses or others to be examined by the whole House of
Commons as the Lords in their subordinate Judicative power usually did, had no
Vote nor Judicature Cokes 4th part Institutes.
in Writs of Error brought in Parliament returnable only before and to be
judged by the King and his House of Lords, nor yet in criminal Causes upon
impeachments wherein the Lords are only subordinate to their Sovereign to be
Judges.

So as the improbability, impossibility and unreasonableness of the
super-governing power and pretended Supremacy of the House of Commons in
Parliament will be as evident as the Absurdity and Frenzy thereof will appear
to be by all our Records, Annals, Historians and Memorials, which will not only
contradict the follies of those that are so liberal to bestow it upon them, but
may give us a full and undeniable assurance that the representing part of part
of the Commons of England in Parliament from their first Original in 49 H. 3.
when their King was a Prisoner to a part of his Subjects, and they could then
represent none but Rebels, did not certainly believe themselves to be either
one of the 3. Estates of the Kingdom, or coordinate with their King, when in
the first year of the Reign of King Edward the second as Walsingham a Writter
of good account then living and writing after the 49th year of the Reign of
King Henry 3. has reported the people seeking by the help of the Bishops and
Nobility to redress some grievances which did lie heavily upon them, ad Regem
sine strepitu accedentes Walsingham Hist. E. 2. p. 97.
rogant humiliter ut Baronum suorum Conciliis tractare negotia regni velet
quibus a periculis sibi and regno imminentibus non solum cautior sed Tutior
esse possit.

And when they had any cause of complaint or any grievances cast or fallen upon
them by their fellow Subjects, or thrown or imposed one upon another, did not
calumniate their Kings by public calumnies or Remonstrances (for who would not
in the course of ordinary friendship, or in the case of Children or Servants to
their Parents or Master take it to be an ill piece of love or duty publicly to
abuse and rail at their Kings and those which were invited for helps in Council
worse than the accursed Chams discovery of his Father Noah's Nakedness, or Jobs
instead of comfort better censuring friends) did it in no worse expressions
than Walsingham has related, viz. Archiepiscopi Episcopi Abbato Priores
Comites Barons and tota terrae Communitas monstrant domino nostro Regi and
Walsingham in Histor. E. 1. 71.
humiliter rogant eum ut ea ad honorem suum and populi sui salvationem velit
corrigere and emendare.

And when they long after found themselves as aforesaid styled one of the 3.
Estates in some of the Parliament Rolls so as aforesaid mentioned could not by
any Grammar or reasonable construction, or by any Rules of any truth, sense or
reason believe the King to be one of the 3. Estates spoken of or at all
intended in the Journals or Rolls of Parliament, or understood so to be by the
parties speaking or spoken of or unto, the Sandy and britle foundation of which
ill digested opinion being not likely to get any room in any serious man's well
weighed consideration. Being only made use of as a Trick of Faction and
Sedition to exclude the Bishops and Lords Spiritual, on purpose to put the King
in their place, whereby to make him coordinate with them, and the House of
Peers, and help to justify as much as they could, the fighting against
Imprisoning, Arraigning and Murder of their King.

And being Elected and Introduced into the House of Commons, as Procurators
only, and representing for some part, not all of the Commons under their proper
limited conditions, ad faciendum and consentiendum iis, to such matters and
things as in that greatest of Councels in the Kingdom, should be ordained by
the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal there Assembled for the good and
welfare thereof, under the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, did not style
themselves Estates, or think they were thereunto entitled, when at the
Coronation of their former and succeeding Sovereign Kings and Princes, they
were in suo genere, though with different Species, Degrees, Estates and
Capacities comprehended under the notion of the vulgus or common People, for
until the 11th. year of the Reign of King Richard the 2d. they had no Title of
Estates allowed or given unto them, and if they could make any Title thereunto,
the Lords Spiritual or Praelates were the first, the Lords Temporal and
Nobility the 2d. under and subordinate to their King Supreme Head and
Governor, and the Commons who were dispares to the Peers of England the 3d.
who did notwithstanding long after in their Petitions in Parliament, take it to
be honor enough to call themselves by no higher a Title than the Commons. The
Kings Leiges, and his pouvrez Leiges, the word Estate, State, or one of the
Estates in Parliament, being by the Invention or Phraseologie of their Clerks
or Registers by hasty abbreviation, and in and but sometimes saving of labor
in the aforesaid 11th year of the unfortunate Reign of King Richard the 2d. by
Use and Custom fastened upon them as men, and many learned Authors have often by
an Incuria done, when in their writing of Ancient and Former things or times,
they have made use of words or expressions of the present times, as more
intelligible, as Duel for Battle or Camp Fight, Parliament for our seldom or
greatest Councels, hint for intimation or spoken of before, the last of which
being known only to have been here introduced in the late Covenanted Scotch and
English Rebellion, by Mr. Alexander Henderson, or the late Senseless, Proud,
False and Insignificant Titles of Honor, or Respect of an Alderman, assumed by
such as paid a great Sum of Money as a Fine, not to be an Alderman, and so
became revera no Alderman, with as little Reason as the Citizens Wives of
London, as low as the Meal-man's and Bricklayer's, do think themselves
clownishly handled or dealt with, if they be not at every word styled Madam,
cum multis aliis his nugis Curialibus, of the misusage and impropriety of words
misapplied, without any consideration had of the intention and true meaning of
the Authors, and the times wherein they lived, and the mode and usage of the
words in former and latter times made use of, for the better signification and
expression of men's meanings, either writings, reading, or modus loquendi, viz.
by an ignorant Bellum Grammatical, make Rebellion to be as necessary as
Religion, and Rebellion to be Religion. Who could not without the Power or
impulse of dreaming, or some wild imagination be Estates in very deed, when
they took and sued for their Wages in coming to the Parliament, tarrying and
returning, and have been told by some of our Kings in Parliament, that they
were but Petitioners, which they then did not contradict, which the higher
sphered Lords in Parliament, never did more than enjoy a Privilege Anciently
allowed, but rarely made use of by them in the hunting and killing a Deer, as
they traveled through Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts. tit. Parliament.
any of the Kings Forests or Parks, in their way to advise and serve their
Kings, in those their greatest of Councels, and in our Statutes and Acts of
Parliament, penned by the Judges and Council of our Kings, in their former and
much better Usage and Custom of drawing and penning our Acts of Parliament, of
late left only to be framed by Sollicitors, and the Prosecutors and Contrivers
thereof, so as the word Estates is rarely to be found therein.

And so little were the Parliamentary Commons of England obliged to the old
approved good Writers and Historians, as Asser Menevensis, Ingulfus, Roger
Hoveden, Gervasius Tilburiensis, William of Malmesbury, Matthew Paris,
Brompton, Knighton, and many others contemporaries to our British, Saxon,
Danish and Norman Kings and their Successors, and if their Testimonies will not
pass with these Reeord Scrap-mongers who would wrest and wring every thing they
can meet with to their Seditions and Treason hatching by false and wicked
glosses and misinterpretations, the Parliament and Statute Rolls that do every
where give evidence as an everlasting truth unto what that blessed Martyr King
Charles the first has so truly asserted in his Answer to the Rebel Parliament
19 Propositions, when the Secretary or Sir Edward Hyde by a mistake had allowed
them the Title of Estates, which being decryed by the Lawyers and Loyal Members
of the Loyal Parliament at Oxford then attending, viz. Sir Orlando Bridgman,
Sir Geffry Palmer, and Sir Robert Holborn, had not so passed but that the post
could not be recalled, yet howsoever the Rebellious party at London, that were
so willing to catch at that (as they thought) advantage, might have seen read
in the words cohaerent in the same Paragraph an exception in the words
following in a Parenthesis, viz. but never intended to have any share in the
government.

And they that heretofore did take it for an especial The Kings Answer to the
Parliament (...) in (...), Col(...)tions.
honor to wear many of the Peers and Nobilities Liveries, and glad to be
reteyners to them, were so modest as to be unwilling to assume the Title of an
Estate in Parliament, when in Parliament conferences, passing of Bills,
Messages, or other occasions the House of Peers sat covered that third Estate
if it could be so called, stood and are to stand uncovered.

And Mr. Pryn one of their greatest Champions that did more than he should to
magnify their Customs and Privileges, was at length constrained to acknowledge
that in all the Parliaments of King Edward the third Richard the second, Henry
the fourth, fifth, and sixth, Edward the fourth, and Richard the third, the
Commons in Parliament never claimed nor exercised an such Titles or Pryns
Preface to the exact ^ of the ^ecord, in the ^ ^ ^ ^.
Jurisdictions as of late years have been usurped by them or given unto who
never until they ran mad with Rebellion who never presumed or pretended to make
Print or Publish any Act Ordinance or order whatsoever relating to the People
or their own Members without the King and Lords Assent and Concurrence, never
attempted to impose any Tax, Tallage, Charge, Excise or Duty upon the people
without the King and Lords consent, never adventured to appoint any Committee
or subcommittee to hear and determine any particular business or complaint
without the report thereof to the whole House Cromptons Jurisdictions of
Courts, and Cokes 4 Institutes.
of Commons, without the privity or Assent of the House by way of transmission
or impeachment to their superior Authority and Judicature of the House of Peers
never attached, fined, imprisoned or censured any person by their own authority
without the Lords, as they have hundreds of late years done.

And that very famous Ancient and Great Republic of Venice Crowning their Doge
with an Imaginary Crown for Venice and two other real and very Crowns, the one
for Cyprus and the other for Candy, both Kingdoms revera in their actual
possession, yet as the lesser in the greater bound up and captivated under a
strange diversity of Forms and Cantons has not the Privilege to read a Letter
without the Privity or overlooking of the grand Consiglio or Venetian Nobility,
has besides their many great Varieties and Fragments of Magistracy, Offices
and Parts of Governments, cut into as many Parcels as they can to give every
one as much Relish and hopes as their largely extended dominions can afford,
are not without at the first 150, since augmented into the number of 3000 of
those which they style Nobility, Republic of Venice.
and makes a principal part of the first quality or concern in their
government, as our Bishops and Lords Temporal, the former being Barons as much
as the latter for their lives, although not as the latter in Fee or Fee-Tail,
and amongst the many particles or pieces of their mangled government can allow
their Doge to be the Superior, and more than Coordinate with all or any of the
Avogardoit di Communite, and the Pregadi that are to guide their chief affairs
of Estate, and consist of 120 Noblemen, some whereof have their rights of the
Lottery or Balloting Box, their greatest Council consists of the Doge,
Consiglieri the Consiglio di dioci, the third Consigliera de bassa, the three
Lords of the Raggioni Vecchio, the three Lords of the Raggioni Nuevo the
Cattaveri or the Inquisitors of truth, the two Censori, the three Provisori
delli dieci Savii (or special wisemen) and that which should be the wonder, the
College of the Savii are to have no Vote in the Pregadi, and they of the
Pregadi, can take no resolution except there be in it four Consiglieri, or at
least 60 of the Nobility be of the Quorum, or that they do ordinarily give
order to their Ambassadors in all parts of the World whither they have been
sent to Register, and give an account to their State or Senate, or whatever
they can be called of the the several forms of government in other Nations and
Kingdoms, and yet omitting the Feudal the best of all governments happily
experimented in the most of their Neighbor Nations and Kingdoms so
pertinatiously as they do, and have such an hotch potch or Gallimaufry of
mixtures as we say in England, as if they were again to be dislocated or taken
in pieces, that great republic planted betwixt the two great Empires of the
West and East would in all probability be on a sudden in as great misery,
distress and confusion, or greater than it was when they fled from the Ravage
and Fury of the Huns and Vandals into the Arms and Bosom of the Gulf of the
Adriatique Sea, and Mr. Seldom has informed us that in Seldens Titles of
Honor.
England in the Saxons time, and long after the middle Thanes and the Valuasers
were not honorary as the greater Thegnes or Barons were.

And it may be worthy our observation, that although Mr. Pryn in his careful
recapitulation before mentioned of the Lords Spiritual, the Bishops, and the
Earls and Barons, the Lords Temporal, and excluding the Commons until after th
49th year of the Reign of King Henry 3. does altogether negatively conclude
that there were no Commons then present, yet when he comes to rectify, as he
calls it, the mistakes of the abridger, does in Anno 5. E. 3. relate that the
Estates in full Parliament do agree that they shall not retain, sustain or avow
any Felons or Breakers of Houses, which the King having commanded before, is
truly and properly to be understood To. Parl. 6. E. 3.
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; And in another place of the said record
mentions that the whole Estate prayed the King to be gracious unto Edward the
Son of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, which could not enforce the King to be one
of the Estates, or that there were any other or more Estates than the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal.

Anno 6. E. 3. were Proclaimed the Articles agreed in the last Parliament, and
1, 2, 3. in another Parliament intended to be at York, it is said that most of
the Estates were absent, Sir Jeffry le Scroop by the Kings Command showed the
cause of summoning the Parliament, but for that most of the Estates were
absent, which might consist only of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the King
ordained new Writs of Summons to be issued. In a reassembly at York in the same
year, Articles of the last Parliament were proclaimed by the Steward and
Marshal of the King and the Commons (not then said Estates) had license to
depart, and the Lords commanded to attend until the next day, at which time the
Parliament was dissolved.

In Anno 8. E. 3. It was petitioned that no pardons be 8. E. 3.
granted unto outlawed persons by any Suggestions or means, but only by
Parliament.

To which the King answered, the Statutes made shall be observed.

That all men may have their Writs out of the Chancry, paying nothing but the
fees for the Seals, without any fine according to the great Charter nulli
vendemus Justitiam, unto which the King answered, such as be of course shall be
so, and such as be of grace the King will command the Chancellor to be therein
gracious.

Neither does it appear that the Lords Spiritual, who in the Reign of King
Stephen, held three several Councels in Secular Affairs, and of King Henry the
2d. were Dr. Brady in his History of England, from the Roman, British, Saxon,
Danish and Norman times, until 49 H. 3.
sundry times Mediators employed by him in Treaties betwixt him and the King of
France, or that the Lords Temporal, the other part of the House of Peers and
Baronage of England, subordinate under their King and Sovereign, did ever take
esteem or believe the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, jointly or
separately to be a 3d. Estate of the Kingdom, for they neither had or enjoyed
that Title or supposed Power. In Anno 17. of King John, in the Rencounter or
Rebellion at Running Mede, when in a pacification there made with some of his
robustious Barons, it was agreed, that if the Conservators (none of them which
were then nominated to be the Conservators of the Kingdom, being then called
the Estates) could not obtain a just performance of that constrained agreement
by a complaint made unto the King, or his Chief Justice of the Kingdom, populus
not then dreamed to be a 3d. Estate, might ^um pravare with a salvo or
exception to the Persons of him, his Wife and Children do it, and were not so
imagined to be, when the Popes Legate had by his Excommunication of that King,
and Interdiction of the use of Christianity in the whole Nation, constrained
him to do Homage to the Pope, by an Investiture of the Sword, Crown and
Scepter, and an yearly Tribute of 1000 Marks for the Kingdom of England and
Ireland, to the Church and See of Rome, that Engine or Trick of Sovereignty
Inhaerent in the People, or a 3d. Estate representing for them in Parliament,
not then being thought necessary for a ratification of those that would
magnify themselves with that Factious and Fictitious Title of a 3d. Estate,
which they durst not adventure to make use of, or mention in our Magna Charta,
and Charta de Foresta, freely granted by King Henry the 3d. his Son, and that
more than thirty times Confirmations, for the first whereof they believed they
had made a good bargain, when they had given unto that King the 15th. part of
their movables, and were not a 3d. Estate, or called so in the 42 year of the
Reign of that King, when the Derogatory Act of Parliament to Kingly Government,
was enforced from him at Oxford in the 42 year of his Reign.

Anno 13. E. 3. The Bishop of Durham, and Sir Michael de la Poole came from the
King with a Message to the whole Estates (which probably were then none other
than the Lords Spiritual and Temporal) concerning his Victories achieved in
France.

The Lords upon the Kings want of Money, grant to the King the tenth Sheaf of
Corn (their Bond or Bond-Tenants excepted) their (...)h Fleece of Wool, and
(...)h Lamb for two years, the Commons then not styled Estates, require time to
go into their Countries to advise with those that sent them, the Commons (not
Estates) return their Assent, and make several demands with a request, that the
Sheriffs of every County, may in the next Summons to Parliament, return two
Knights girt with Swords.

A general Proclamation was made, that all Persons having Charters of Pardon,
should resort to the Seacoast for the Kings Service, upon pain to forfeit the
same.

The Commons do give the King for his Relief 30000 Sacks of Wool, upon
conditions expressed in a pair of Indentures, whereupon the Lords promised to
send to the King, to know his pleasure, after long Debating, the Commons
promise to give presently to the King 2500 Sacks of Wool, so as if the King
liked the conditions aforesaid, the same should run in payment, if not they
would freely give it to him.

Remembrances of things not finished in one Parliament, to be done in another.

They granted unto the King, the ninth of their Grain, Wool and Lamb, for two
years to be Levied out of all Townsmen, the ninth of their Goods, of such as
dwelled in Forests and Wastes, a Fifteenth upon condition the King would grant
their Petitions, contained in a Schedule, (so willing were the Commons to
obtain, and get what they could from the King, and so little did they think
themselves to be a 3d. Estate, or an entire, or any part of Sovereignty.)

Sundry Bishops, Lords and Commons, were appointed daily to sit, until they had
reduced the aforesaid Grant into the form of a Statute, and was agreed upon by
the King, and the whole Estates, which could not be expounded, that the King
was one of those Estates, or the other, any more than the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, leaving the Commons to be no more than they were in suis gradibus, no
3d. Estate, which begins, To the Honor of God, etc.

And such Articles as were to continue but for a time, the King exemplified
under the great Seal, Know ye that with our Bishops, Earls, etc.

Certain Bishops and Lords requiring to be saved harmless against the Duke of
Brabant for great sums of Money, wherein they stood bound for the King, if the
Duke of Cornwall married not the Daughter of the said Duke, which was granted,
and all which Letters Patents were enrolled in Chancery.

And for that the King in his Style was named King of France and had changed
his Arms whereby,

The Abridger of the Parliament Rolls or Records, or Mr. Pryn the Rectifier or
misuser of them has given us a curtailed Abbreviation of the Parliament
Remembrances, in 14 E. 3. wherein all that the Abridger or Rectifier was
pleased to give us, was that Subjects were no longer bound to him than as King
of France, the Kings Letters Patents of Indemnity were granted beginning
Edwardus, etc. Know ye that where some people intend, etc.

When as in the Printed Statute according to the Parliament Record (for so it
may better be understood to have been the Abridger or Rectifier so miscalled
might have seen that the King by the Title of King of England and France and
Lord of Ireland, by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England,
reciting that whereas 14 E. 3.
some people did think that by reason the Realm of France was devolved to him
as Right Heir of the same, and for as much as he is King of France, the Realm
of England should be put in Subjection of the King and of the Realm of France
in time to come, he having regard to the Estate of his Realm of England, and
namly that it never was nor ought to be in Subjection to the obeisance of the
Kings of France, which for the time have been, nor of the Realm of France, and
willing to provide for the Surety and Defense of the Realm of England, and of
the Liege people of the same does will and grant and stablish for him and his
heirs and Successors by the Assent of the Praelates, Earls, Barons and Commons
(wherein if the Commons had in themselves an inhaerent Right of Sovereignty,
they would neither have been troubled with any such fears of the French
Government, or needed any such provision against it) of his Realm of England in
this present Parliament in the 14th year of his Reign of England and first of
France, that by the cause or Color of his being King of France, and that the
said Realm to him pertains, or that he came to be named King of France in his
Style, or that he has changed his Seal or Arms nor for the Commandments which
he has made or shall make as King of France, his said Realm of England nor the
people of the same, of what Estate or condition they shall be, shall not at any
time to come be put in Subjection nor in obeisance of him or his Heirs nor
Successors as Kings of France, nor be subject or obedient, but shall be free
and quit of all manner of obeysanee, as they were wont to be in the time of his
Progenitors.

For that Trick or Engine of metamorphosing the Sovereignty of the King into
that of the people and by excluding the Bishops and Lords Spiritual out of the
House of Peers in Parliament, unto which ab ultimo Antiquitatis seculo since
Christianity abolished Paganism they were as justly as happily entitled and
put our Kings and their Regalities in their places whereby to create unto
themselves a co-ordination, and from thence by the Intrigues of Rebellion a
Sovereignty in themselves, which was not in the former and better Ages ever
entertained or believed by our Parliaments when no Original pact or agreement
has been or can yet be discovered how or when the House of Commons came to be
entitled unto their pretended inherent Sovereignty, or to be seized thereof by
their representation of the people, or from whom they had it, or who gave it
unto them, when it may be believed God never did it, for he that never used or
was known to contradict himself, has in his holy word declared and said, per
me Regis regnant, which should not be misinterpreted and believed to be
conditionally, if the people should approve or elect them for which the
Gentlemen of Egregious Cavillations if they would be believed, should search
and see if in all the Books of God and Holy Writ they can find any revocation
of what God himself has said and often declared, for an undeniable truth, or
that he ever discharged and renounced it by as infallible Acts and Testimonies.

But if any one that believes Learning and the inquires after Truth, Right
Reason, and what our impartial Records and Historians will justify how or from
whence that Aenigna or mystical piece of Effascina of the Members of the House
of Commons making themselves to be a 3 Estate of the Kingdom, and a Creed of
the late Factio^s and Rebelling ever to be deplored Parliament, or from what
Lernean Lake or Spawn of Hydras came. It may besides the Pride and Ambition of
many that were the fomenters or Nurses of them be rationally (...) understood
to have none other source or Original besides don Lancifer himself then for Sir
Edwards Cokes unhappy stumbling upon his reasonless admired forged Manuscript
and Imposture called Modus tenendi Parliamentum in Anglia in King Edward the
Confessors Reign, there having been neither any Author or Record as Mr. Pryn
has truly observed to Justify or give any credit thereunto, but was as he has
abundantly prove^ a mere Figment and Imposture framed by Richard Duke of York
31. and 32. H. 6. by the Commons Petition and the Duke of Yorks Confederates by
the Rebellion and Insurrection of Jack Cade and his Rebellious levelling party
to make him that Duke of York Protector and Defender of the People, which ended
in the dethroning of King Henry 6. and though Mr. Hackwel of Lincolns-Inne a
learned Antiquary has adventured to say that he has seen an Exemplification
of a Record sent from England into Ireland to establish Parliaments there after
the form or Method of that Modus, yet when the learned Archbishop Usher pressed
him much to see it, he could neither show the exemplication nor the Record it
self, neither of which are yet to be seen in England or Ireland, only Sir
Edward Cokes Copy remains, but when or from whence he had it he was never yet
pleased to declare.

13. E. 3. At the request of the whole Estate (which may most certainly have
been thought to have been made to the King, not to themselves) those Articles
were made Statutes, and the Conditions were read before the King, and the
Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of both Benches, Steward of the Kings Chamber
and others were all sworn upon the Cross of Canterbury to perform the same.

17. E. 3. The cause of summoning the Parliament being declared amongst the
other things to be touching the Estate of the King (who was often absent in the
Wars of France) and for the good government (which they whom the erring
Abridger has styled the 3 Estates, viz. 1. The Lords Spiritual. 2. The Lords
Temporal.) 3. The Commons in Parliament were to consult of so as if the Commons
could be a third Estate, the King and his Estate and the government were,
necessarily and only then and always to be understood and believed to be the
4th Estate principal, Superior and Independent.

18. E. 3. At which Parliament and Convention sundry of the Estates says, that
ill Phrasing Abridger or Translator To. Parl. 15. E. 3.
whoever he was, were absent whereat the King was offended and charged the
Archbishop of Canterbury for his part to punish the defaults of Clergy, and he
would do the like touching the Parliament whereof Proclamation was made, and
being not absent, was neither likely to be angry with himself, or resolving to
punish himself.

The Chancellor in full Parliament declaring the cause of summoning the
Parliament, viz. The Articles of the Truce with the French King and the
breaches in particular thereof, the whole Estates (mistakenly so styled) were
willed the King that willed or commanded being no part of them unless it could
be believed that himself willed or commanded himself as well as others) to
advise upon them, and give their opinion thereof by the Monday next following.

20 E. 3. After the reading of the Roll of Normandy, and that the King of
France his design to extirpate the English Nation, the Messengers that were
sent by the King required the whole Estate (no such Title being in the Original
(whereof the King could then be no part if it was said to be the whole Estate
without him, for he could not be with them when he was absent in France, and
had sent his Messengers unto them) to be advised what Aid they would give him
for the furtherance of his Enterprise.

And Mr. John Charleton one of the Messengers aforesaid likewise bringing
Letters from the Bishop of Durham, Earls of Northampton, Arundel, Warwick,
Oxford, Suffolk, and Hugh le Despenser, Lord of Glamorgan, to the whole so
misnamed Estate of Parliament (when the King could not be one of them, not at
all being present) purporting that whereas the King at his Arrival at Hoges in
Normandy had made his Eldest Son the Prince of Wales Knight, he ought to have
of the Realm forty Shillings for every Knights Fee, which they all granted and
took Order for the speedy levying thereof.

25 E. 3. Sir John Matravers pardon was confirmed by the whole missettled
Estates (whereof the King could not be accounted any of them) for he granted
the pardon.

28 E. 3. Richard Earl of Arundel by Petition to the King praying to have the
Attainder of Edmond Earl of Arundel his Father reversed, and himself restored
to his Lands and Possessions upon the view of the Record, and and the said
Richard Earl of Arundels Allegation that his Father was wrongfully put to
death, and was never heard, the whole Estates says, that ill Translator
adjudged he was wrongfully put to Death, and Restored the said Earl to the
benefit of the Law (which none could do but the King who was petitioned, and
having the sole interest in the forfeiture, was none of those which were
wrongfully called the whole Estates)

37 E. 3. Where it is said that at the end of the Parliament the Chancellor in
the presence of the King showed that the King meant to execute the Statute of
Apparel, and therefore charged every State to further the same (the King could
not be understood to charge himself.)

After which he demanded of the whole Estates (so as before mistaken) whether
they would have such things as they agreed on to be by way of Ordinance or of
Statute, they answered by way of Ordinance, for that they (being to take
benefit thereby) might amend, the same at their pleasure. And so the King
having given thanks to all the as aforesaid miscloped, Estates for their pains
taken, licensed them to depart, which should be enough to demonstrate that the
Granter and Grantees were not alone or conjoynt, and that the King giving
thanks to the Estates did not give it to himself.

42 E. 3. The Archbishop of Canterbury on the Kings behalf gave thanks to the
whole (in the like manner mis-termed) Estate for their Aids and Subsidies
granted unto the King (wherein assuredly the Archbishop of Canterbury did not
understand the King to be any part of the whole Estate which the King gave
thanks unto.

The Commons by their Speaker desiring a full declaration of the Kings
necessity, require him to have consideration 4 R. 2.
of the Commons poor Estate.

The King declared to the Commons that it was as necessary to provide for the
safety of the Kings Estate as for the Commonwealth.

Anno 6. Regis Richardi 2. after Receivers and Triers of Petitions named,
Commandment was given that all persons and Estates (which imported no more
being rightly understood than conditions or sorts of men) (miscalled as
aforesaid) should the next day have the cause of summoning the Parliament
declared.

11 R. 2. The Parliament was said to have been adjourned by the common Assent
of the whole Estates (the first time of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
called the Estates without or with the Commons joined with them no such names
or words, appellations or Titles were either known or in use, nor any such
words or Titles as Estates being to be found in the Originals or Parliament
Rolls before Anno 11 R. 2. for no more appears in the Original than in and
under these expressions, viz. Et mesme le vendredi auxint a cause and ce fest
and solempnite de pasch estoit a progeno ii coveient le Roi les Seigneurs and
tautx autres entendre a devotion le Parliament and coe assent le toutz Estats le
Parliament estoit continez del dit vendredi tanque Lindy lendemain de la
equinziesme de Pasch adonquez prochem ensuent and commandez per le Roy a toutz
les Seigneurs and Communs du dit Parliament.

Quils seroient a Westminster le dimengo en la dite quinzieme de pascha a
plustaid and sur ceo noevelles briefs furent ^aiots a toutz les Seigneurs
somons au dit parliament de yestre a la dite quinzieme sur certain peine a
limiter per les Seiguro qui seroient presents en dit Parliament a la quinzieme
avaunt dite le quel Limdy le dit Parliament fust recommence and tenat son course
selont la request des Communs and grant de nostre Seigur le Roi avaunt ditz. And
then but the inconsiderate hasty new created word of the Clerks in a distracted
time, when the great Ministers of State in two contrary Factions, to the ruin
of the King and many of themselves, as it afterward sadly happened, were
quarrelling with each other, and all the Bishops so affrighted, as they were
enforced to make their Protestation against any proceedings to be made in that
so disturbed a Parliament.

In Anno 21. R. 2. The Bishop of Exeter Chancellor of England taking his Theme
or Text out of Ezechiel, Rex unius omnibus erat proved by many Authors that by
any other means than by one sole King no Realm could be well governed; For
which cause the King had assembled the Estates in Parliament to be informed of
the rights of his Crown withheld, which Oration afterward was to the same
effect seconded by Sir John Bussey Knight, Speaker of the House of Commons.

King Richard the second being as a Prisoner in the Tower of London made the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Hereford his Procurators to publish
his Rem(...) of the Kingdom to the whole Estates.

Which whether at at that time distinguished or divided into three does not
appear, viz. into Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons could not
comprehend the King, who was not to be present, but gave the direction and
authority to his said Procurators, and could never have been understood to have
been present, or one of them himself, or to have made such a prosecution
against or for himself.

After the claim made unto the Crown of England in Parliament by Henry Duke of
Lancaster, and a consultation had amongst the Lords and Estates (not expressing
that the Commons were a 3d. or any part thereof, it being then altogether
improbable that King Richard the 2d. or any other representing for him was
there present, and to make one of the said pretended Estates as much out of the
reach of probability, that King Richard himself was one, or a Person then
acting against himself, the Duke of Lancaster himself then affirming, that the
Kingdom was vacant.

And when the Usurping King Henry the 4th. openly gave thanks to the whole
Estates, (wherein is plainly evidenced) that himself neither was or could be
understood to be then, or at any other time one of the said Estates.

The first day of the Parliament the Bishop of London the Kings Brother and
Chancellor of England in the behalf H. 4.
of the King, Lords and Commons, declaring the cause of calling the Parliament,
and taking for his Theme Multitudo Sapientum, learnedly resembled the
Government of the Realm to the Body of a man, the Righthand to the Church, the
Left Hand to the Temporalty, and the other Members to the Commonalty, of all
which Members and Estates, the King (not deeming himself to be one) was willing
to have Council.

The Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor of England by the Kings commandment,
declaring the cause of the 9. H 4.
Summoning the Parliament, and taking for his Theme Regem honorificate, showed
them that on necessity, every Member of man's Body would seek comfort of the
Head as the Chief, and applied the same to the honoring of the King as the
Head. And in that his Oration, mentioning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses gives them no Title of Estates, but the Kings
Leiges.

In the presence of John Duke of Bedford Brother of To. Parl. 5. H. 5.
the King Lieutenant and Warden of England and the Lords and Commons, the
Bishop of Durham by his commandment declared that the King willed that the
Church and all Estates should enjoy their Liberties (which could not include
the King.)

It was ordained that all Estates should enjoy their Liberties 1 H. 6.
without the words Concessimus (which could not comprehend the King who granted
it to them, but not to himself.

The Chancellor at the first assembling of the Parliament 4 H. 6.
declared, that the King wills that all Estates should enjoy their Liberties,
(which must be intended to others that were his Subjects, and not to himself
that was none of them.)

The Archbishop of York Chancellor of England, declaring 6 H. 6.
the cause of Summoning the Parliament, said, the King wills that all Estates
should enjoy their Liberties, in which certainly he well knew, that the Person
willing or granting, was not any of the Persons or Estates to whom he willed
and granted that they should enjoy their Liberties.

The Duke of Gloucester being made Guardian or Keeper 9 H. 6.
of England, (by the King sitting in the Chair) the Archbishop of York being
sick, William Linwood Doctor of Laws, declaring the cause of summoning the
Parlia^ent, said, that the King willed that every Estate should enjoy their due
Liberties, which properly enough might be extensively taken to Military men and
Soldiers, the Gentry, Agricolis opificibus all sorts of Trades, Laborers,
Servants, Apprentices, Freeholders, Copyholders Lease-holders, single Women
and Children, Tenants at Will, and which never were themselves Estates, but the
several sorts and degrees thereof, wherein if any Law, Reason or Sense could
make the King to be comprehended, an inextricable problem or question would
everlastingly remain unresolved who it was that so willed or granted.

The King sitting in his Chair of State, John Bishop of Bath and Wells
Chancellor of England, in the presence 11 H. 6.
of the Bishops, Lords and Commons by the Kings Commandment, declared the
causes of summoning the Parliament, taking for his Theme or Text, the words
sussipiant montes Pacem and Colles Justitiam, divided it into three parts
according to the three Estates, by the Hills he understood Bishops and Lords,
and Magistrates, by little Hills, Knights, Esquires and Merchants, by the
People, Husbandmen Artificers and Laborers.

By the which third Estates, by sundry Authorities and Examples, he learnedly
proved, that a Triple Political virtue ought to be in them, viz. In the first
Unity, Peace and Concord, In the second Equity, Consideration and Upright
Justice, without maintenance; In the third, due Obeisance to the King, his Laws
and Magistrates without grudging, and gave them further to understand the King
would have them to enjoy all their Liberties.

Of which third Estates, the Chancellor in all probability, neither the King,
or they that heard him, did take or believe the King himself to be any part.

The 15th day of August, the Plague beginning to increase, the Chancellor by
the Kings Commandment in the presence of the 3 Estates, (the Clerks Translator
or Abridger being unwilling to relinquish their Novelty or Errors,) (of which
the commonest capacity or sense, can never interpret the King to be one,)
Prorogued the Parliament until the Quindena of St. Michael.

The Bishop of Bath and Wells Chancellor of England, 18 H. 6.
in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, declaring the cause of the
Summons of Parliament, said that the King willed that all Estates should enjoy
th^^ Liberties, which might entitle the King to be the Party willing or
granting, but not any of the Parties, who were to take benefit thereby.

It was enacted by the whole Estates, (which may be understood to be the King,
Lords Spiritual, and that the Lords of the Kings Council (none of theirs)
should take such order for the Petition of the Town of Plymouth, as to them
should seem best.

Letters Patents, being granted (by the King) to John Cardinal, and Archbishop
of Canterbury of diverse Manors and Lands, parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster,
under the Seal of the Duchy, were confirmed by the whole Estates, for the
performance of the last Will and Testament of King H. 5. though it was severed
from the Crown, and was no part of the concernment thereof, nor had any
relation to the Public, or any Parliamentory Affairs, the King himself that
granted the Letters Patents, could not be interpreted to be one of those whole
Estates, which were said to have confirmed them.

By the whole Estates were confirmed King Henry the 6th Letters Patents, of the
Erection and Donation of Eton College, and also of Kings College in Cambridge
with the Lands thereunto belonging, which might well conclude the King,
although he being the Donor, could not be believed to be any part of the whole
Estates, who by their approbation are said to have confirmed his Letters
Patents.

The Chancellor in the name of all the Lords in the 24 H. 6.
presence of the King, protested that the Peace which the King had taken with
the French King, was of his own making and will, and not by any of the Lords
procurations, the which was enacted.

And it was enacted that a Statute made in the time of King H. 5. that no Peace
should be taken with the French King, that then was called the Dolphin of
France, without the assent of the three Estates of both Realms should be
utterly revoked, and that no Person for giving Counsel to the Peace of France,
be at any time to come impeached therefore, which may demonstrate that neither
the Dolphin of France, nor the King of England, were then accounted to be any
part of the several 3. Estates of the said Kingdoms.

The King by his Chancellor declared that he willed 25 H. 6.
that all Estates should enjoy their Liberties, it cannot be with any
probability supposed that either he or his Chancellor intended that himself was
one of the said Estates.

The Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor of England, 28 H. 6.
in the presence of the King gave thanks in his behalf to the 3. Estates,
wherein no Grammar or Construction of Reason or Sense, will ever be able to
comprehend the King.

The 17th day of December, the Chancellor in the 29 H. 6.
presence of the King and the 3 Estates; (which is surely to be understood to
consist of other Persons separately and distinct from the King) Prorogued the
Parliament until the 20th day of January then next ensuing, at Westminster, and
upon the 28th day of April, was likewise Prorogued to the 5th day of May next
following.

The Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor of England, 33 H. 6.
in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, declaring the cause of
Summoning the Parliament, said, that the Kings pleasure was, that all Estates
should enjoy their Liberties, which could not signify that the King himself
was one of those Estates to whom he granted that favor.

The 25th day of December, the Chancellor in the presence of the King, and the
3. Estates by the Kings 38 H. 6.
Commandment, giving thanks to the 3. Estates (the King being then by the
Chancellor, or any other Master of Reason or Common Sense, not understood to be
any one of the 3. Estates to whom the thanks were given) dissolved the
Parliament.

An Act of Parliament was made, wherein was declared that King Edward the 4th
was the undoubted King 1 E. 4
of England, from the 4th day of March last before, and that all the Estates
yielded themselves obeysant Subjects unto him and his Heirs for ever, (the late
never to be maintained Doctrine of the pretended co-ordination of the House of
Commons in Parliament, as Subjects with their Sovereign in Parliament, and the
Government being not than that established, or ever to be evidenced otherwise
then God has ordained a co-ordination betwixt the King and his Subjects, which
is, that the People as Subjects should obey their King, and the King as their
Sovereign Protect, Rule and Govern them,) and affirmed the Reign of King Henry
the 4th to be an Intrusion, and only Usurpation.

The Chancellor, the King sitting in his Royal State, in the presence of the
Lords and Commons made an E. 4.
Eloquent Oration, wherein he declared the 3. Estates to comprehend the
Governance of the Land, the pre-eminence whereof was in the Bishops, the second
to the Lords Temporal (which the learned and men of that Age, and other
Chancellors understood to be no other than two separate and distinct Estates,
the one Temporal, and the other Spiritual, and the King to be Superior.

The Bishop of London Chancellor of England, in the presence of the King and
the 3. Estates, (the King being 14 E. 4.
none of them, but Superior over them all,) Prorogued the Parliament to the 6th
of June ensuing.

For where the Abridger, or Mr. Pryn possessing himself to be the Rectifier, or
Corrector, amongst his other faults and mistakings in his Epitomizings made it
to be in the Parliament Rolls of 6 Edwardi 3. that many failing to come to the
Parliament upon the Summons of the King, did put a charge upon the whole Estate
by a reassembly, he will find neither words or matter for it.

All that appears of the Title of Estates in the Parliament and Statute Rolls
of that year, is no more than the Prelates grants and gentz du Commune, or les
Prelates, Counts, Barons, gentz des Countez and gentz de la Commune.

No whole Estate mentioned in the Parliament Roll, 15 E. 3.
all that is said n. 42. is no more than a les requests des grantz come de ceu^
de la Commune, and de le Clergy.

That which is translated the Estate of the King, is no 17 E. 3.
more in the Parliament Roll n. 5. than les beseignes nostre seigneur le Roy,
and de son Royame.

Where the Abridger says the Parliament was to treat and advise touching the
Estate de nostre Seigneur le Roy, and le Government, and le salnette de sa
terre d' Angleterre, and de son people, and relevation de lour Estate, there is
no other mention of Estates than the Prelatz, grantz, and Commons de son
roiame, and charged les Chinalers des Countes and Commons to assemble in the
Chamber de Pinct.

A quel Jour vindrent les Chivalers des Counties and autres Commons, and gave
their advice in a Petition in the form ensuant a tres excellent, or tres
honorable Seigneur les gentz de vostre Commun soy recommandent a vous
obeysantment en merciant se avaunt come leur petitesse power suffice de and tant
tendrement pervez a quer and maintenir la pees a la quiet de vostre people,
etc.

Et en maintenance des autres Leyes as autres Parliaments devant ces heures
grantees vostre pour Commons sil vous plaist sa gree and semble a la dite
Commune and totes autres chooses poent suffisantement estre rewelez and Terminez
en Bank le Roy Commune Bank and devant Justices as Assizes prendre nisi and les
delays nient covenable soient aggregez and oustez ore a ce Parliament per
estatut.

En. To. Parl. 18. E. 3. Where the King desired the names of the absent Lords,
that he might punish them, there is no mention of the Clergy or Commons, or of
any Estates, and the King afterward desiring their advice touching his Treaty
with France, charged the Prelates, Countz, and Barons et Communs, to give their
advice therein.

Which they all did without naming themselves, or being styled Estates.

The Kings Letters of Credence sent out of France to his To. Parl. 20. E. 3.
Parliament in England, were directed a toutes Erchevesquis evesques, Abbes,
Priours, Counts, Barons, and toutz autres foialx le Roy, and vendront au dit
Parliament troter sar les beseignes le Roy, whereupon he demanded an Aid of the
said Prelates grantz and Communs.

And the Lords (without the Title of Estates having granted it,) the Chivalers
des Counties, Citizens and Burges des Cities and Burghs, Prioront de avoir
avisement enter eux, and in Answer thereunto, delivered a Petition unto the
King for redress of Grievances, (not by the name of the Estates) but a nostre
Seigneur le Roy and a son conseil (...)gentz de la Communes de sa terre ausi
bien des (...) and (...)de Counties.

Where it was supposed that a Pardon was granted, and ^ ^
a (...)to Sir John Matrevers of all his Lands by the whole Estates, there
appears no more in the (...)meant Ro^^ than that he Petitioned, A nostre
Seigneur le Roy and a son bon conscil, wherein he recited that Restitution had
been granted, de poiar royal nostre Seigneur le Roy par bor accord (...) Common
assent des Prelatz, Co(...)es, Barons, de son Roialme par plusieurs causes,
appearing in the (...)ings Charter of Pardon, and prayed quil p(...)st a nostre
dit Seigneur le Roy, and a son bon conscil par la bo^dance de sa Noble
Seignorie granter and la restitution scisdite p^usse estre ore renovelle en
cest Parliament quelle Petition lue fut respondue and endorse par les Seigneurs
and autres grantz du Parliament quil semble an conscil and la Chartre doit estre
renovelle and enter en roll du Parliament and est de Record sil plest au Roy,
and pour ceo and mesme cesse Petition fust pius monstre au Roy, and il ad
ottroie, and aussint est ottroio per la Commune soit la dite Chanre renovelle
per accord de tut le Parliament, and enter en roll de meisme le Parliament en le
meliour mannere and pourra estre pour bone and gremdre assurance del estat le
dit Johan, in and by which, the King repealing the Judgment given against him
in Parliament. Judicio predicto non obstante, says only, nos ad requisitionem
praedicti Johannis, and pro majori securitate status ipsius Johannis de assensu
praelatorum ducum Comitum, Baronum, and Comitatis Regni nostri Angliae in
praesenti Parliamento nostro existentium restitutionem praedictam ratisicamus
etc.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, and those many Suffragan Bishops and Clergy of
his Province, not at that time deeming themselves to be an Estate, Sovereign or
Governing either in or out of Parliaments, when in that Parliament they
Petitioned unto him in this manner, a nostre Seigneur le Roy supplient ses
humbles Chapelleius Simon par divine soefrance Erchevesque de Canterbury, and
ses frereres Evesques de sa Province par eux and tote le Clergy quil pleise a
nostre dit Seigneur le Roy pour le reverence de dieu, et de Saint Eglise et a
sa benignite a eux granter et confirm totes les liberties et privileges et
droits grantez et donez par lui et ses nobles progenitors avaunt ses heirs a
saint Eglise par leur Chartres Estatuts et Ordinances etc.

Where it was in the Translation mistakenly said, that To. Parl. 40. E. 3. n.
16.
the King gave thanks to the whole Estate, and licensed them to depart.

The Record is only, et si faict mercia le Roy as Prelatz grantz, et Communs de
leur venir et leur bone port en Parliament, et leur done congie a departir, et
issint finist le Parliament.

Anno 42. E. 3. When the English Abridgment or 42 E. 3 n. 7. and 8.
Translation says, that the Archbishop of Canterbury on the (...)ings behalf,
gave thanks to the whole Estate for their Aids and Subsidies.

The original in the Parliament Roll is no more than, et le Samedy suant les
Communs esteanuts en la dite chamber Blanch fueront charges quils faissent
leur Petitions, et quilles baillerent le meskerdy sumant.

Et le Lundy Suant les Prelatz grantz en mesme la Chamber esteant fut monstrez
a eux par lerchevesque coment le Roy leur mercy de grant Cuer de plusieurs
aides quils lui avoeint faitz et meement des darreine aid quils lui facerent
en le darrein Parliament des Subsides et Customs a lui grants de Leynes Quiers
et Peaux lanuz pour un temps et ce fut il que le grant fust chargrant a son
people nient moins per vint an demora au profit ou encres de lui per cause des
grant chargez et payements faits et sustemis ^y bien a Caleis Guines Pontiff,
et ses autres terres de la come d' Irland, et la march de escoce que leur plat
par tant avoir consideration a son Estat et honeur, eta sgrantz charges que lui
avoient fair et sustenue deners le march d' Escoce pour la salvation dicelle
pour cause qui semble plus la guerre qui pees par les respons des Escetz Sur
que les chooses les Prelatz et grantz en deliberation plein ove les Communs de
une accord granterent a nostre Seigneur le Roy en aid de son, et honeur somner
et gardez et les grants custages que lui coment fair, et mettre par diverse
voies les Subsides, et Customs de laynes, etc. par deux Aus prochein ensuant
qui pass horse du dit roialme.

After which followed the Petitions des Commons, without any Title of Estate.

The Chancellor on the Kings behalf, commanded the To. Parl. 4. R. 2.
Prelates, Seigneurs and Commons, there being to continue there until le
besoignes del Roy were finished, and not to depart without License, and the
Commons do in their Petitions style themselves no otherwise than voz pouvrez et
liges Commons.

Item prient la Clergy.

And the Commons made their Declaration in these and no other words, a nostre
Seigneur le Roy, et a son conscilpar la Commune d' Angleterre.

Item pry le Commune at coin ils se sentent de jour en autres our agenses
estre grievez par pluralitez des guerre as constage importables et plese nostre
Seigneur le Roy, et son sage conseil ordonne ent remede qur tieuxchargez autre
porter la Commune ne purra en null manner susteiner.

Unto which the King answered, le Roy le fa^^e volunters ses honeurs, et Estat
^ond^z salvez all which put together, do not declare the Commons, to be a third
Estate, and no ways agrees with the Abridgers Translation, that the Commons by
their Speaker, requiring the King to have consideration of their poor Estate.

He answered that it was necessary to provide as well for the safety of his own
Estate as for the Commonwealth.

Where the Abridger or Corrector Translates, after Receivers and Triers of
Petitions named, commandment was To. Parl. 6. R. 2.
given, that all Persons and Estates should return the next day, to hear the
cause of Summoning the Parliament declared.

The original says no more than, Touz ensemblez en my des Prelates et Seigneurs
avaunt duz appellez eux Chancellor Terminer Seneschall Chamberlain, et les
Sergeantz le Roy quat il beseignera, et tiendrout lour place ^n la Chamber
Mercalfe.

Et le Roy vous command et vour retornez le de maine per temps pur avoir
declaration en place especial manner sur les causes des le somonce avaunt dite,
et en oultre le Roy command a touz et avoient la dite somonce quils vieguent
de jour en autre audit Parliament et quils ne se absentent mye en de
protentdycell sans especial congie de lui sur peril q' appont.

The Bishop of Exeter Chancellor of England, at the assembling of the
Parliament, taking his Text out of the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Rex erit unus
omnibus, alleging the Power that ought to be in Sovereign Kings and Princes
whereby to Govern, and the Obedience in Subjects to Obey, and that all
alienations of his Kingly Privileges and Prerogatives were reassumable, and to
be repealed by his Coronation Oath, pour quoi le Roy ad fat assembler de Estatz
de Parliament a cest fair pour estre enformez si ascun droitz de sa Corone
soient sustretz on amemuser a sin que par lour bon advis and discretion tiel
remedy puisse estre mis and le Roy puisse esteer en sa liberty ou poir
Commune ses Progenitors out este devant lui and duissent de droit non obstante
ascun ordinance an contrary, and anisi le Roy as Tenez and les governera, in
which Speech of the Chancellors, no man as it is sufficiently probable, did
then ^nderstand the King to be a part of the Estates he was speaking unto, who
if they could then in a time of Faction and Trouble of State, that had then
affrighted and disturbed the greatest part of the Nation, have had any thought
or imagination, that their King was so comprehended in that Novel word Estates,
had a fair opportunity to have entered their claim to that Triumviracy, or never
to be proved Co-ordination, or which would be beyond a lurking Sovereignty, for
the Common People to resort when they please, and were in the same Parliament
afterward so little elated with the expression of the Clerk of the House of
Peers, in the entry of the Record of the Kings vacating of the Earl of Arundels
Pardon, par assent de touz le Estats du Parliament, as they made their
Protestation, and prayed the King that it might be Enrolled, that it was not
their intent ou volunte, to impeach or accuse any Person in that Parliament,
sans Congie du Roy, and if they had been any such Estates, as some of late
would entitle them unto, did not perceive themseves to have been then so great,
or in Partnership with their Sovereign or above him.

And thereupon the Chancellor by the Kings command likewise declared that,
nostre Seigneur le Roy considerant coment plusieurs hantes offenses and
mesfaits outestre faitz par le people de son Roialme en contre leur ligeance
and l' estat nostre Seigneur le Roy and la loie de la terre devants ces heures
don't son people esciet en grant peril and danger de leie and lour corpse, and
biens, and voullant sur ce de sa royalle benignite monstre (...) fair grace a
son dit people a fyn quils ayent le greindre courage (...) volonte de bien fair
de leur mieux porter devors le Roy en temps avenir si voet and grante de fair
and ease and quiet, and salvation de ^on dit people une generalle pardon a ces
liges fors^ris certaines pointz limitez par le sonuant la sui^e al party
forspris cyn quont persons queux plaira au Roy nomez and touz ceux qui serront
Empeshez en ce present Parliament, and dit oustre que le dit Roy voet que plein
d^oit and Justice soyent faitz a Chastun de ses liges qui en voilent complandre
en cest Parliament, and ad ordinez, and assignez Receivers and Triers des
Petitions en cest Parliament.

And did in pursuance thereof in full Parliament, excuse the Duke of York, the
Bishop of Worcester, Sir. Richard le Scroop then living, William late
Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander late Archbishop of York, Thomas late Bishop
of Exeter, and Michael late Abbot of Walton, then being dead of the ^xecution,
and intent of the ^ommission made in the tenth year of his Reign, as being
assured of their Loyalty, and therefore by Parliament restored them to their
good name

And Sir Edward Coke might have bestowed a better gift unto the Laws and
Lawyers of England, and his native Country, than that Pandoras Box or Circes
enchantment in his doted upon, or so much admired modus tenendi Parliamenta,
which he at an adventure, not knowing himself from whence that Bastard came,
but was as a Foundling so young, left in the streets, as it could neither
declare who was its Father or Mother, and that which was something marvelous,
none had the luck to find it, and in charity pay for the nursing of it, as
himself and the Name of that nurse, as unknown as the Father or Mother or
progenitors thereof, and made himself so much assured of it, as if he had been
present, when that Modus supposed to have been made by (...)ing Edward the
Confessor was read before King William the Conqueror, and approved by him, and
could not forbear but his fourth part of the Institutes, or Comment upon
Littleton, but he must frequently use it, but transmitted into Ireland, to be
there observed in King Henry the seconds Reign, which there as little to be
found Recorded and Authenticated, or Legitimated, as it has been in England,
as has been before mentioned, and grew so over-fond of it, as he has as he
thought, done no little piece of Service to after Ages, to insert it as an
especial part or undiscernable point or parcel of Law, although he might have
seen that Mr. Seldom would not not oblige himself or his Readers to walk along
with him in his over-credulity, and all our Records both of England and
Ireland, and all our Historians and Annalists, as well Coaeval as of nearer
times. as Ordericus Ingulphus Vicalis, Eadmerus, Malmesbury, Simon Dunelmensis,
Hovedon, Huntingdon, Florentius, Wigornensis, Nubugensis, Matthew of
Westminster, Matthew Paris, Trevisa, Chronica, Johannis Brompton, Walsingham,
Giraldus Cambrensis, Matthew Parkers Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brittanicae,
Hollinshead, Daniel Speed, Fox, Spelman, and many others cited by Mr. Pryn in
his manifest Proofs, Evidence, Conviction, Discovery and Refutation of that
modus tenendi Parliamenta, to be full of Falsities, Forgeries and Errors, a
fabulous Legend and mere Imposture, to furnish out Jack Cades Rebellion in the
latter end of the Reign of King Henry the 6. for the advance of Richard Duke of
Yorks Title to the Crown of England, and if there had been such a modus, it may
be more than an ordinary wonder, that the Conquered and Inslaved People Chroms
Litchfield.
of England should precibus and fletibus, beg of the Conqueror Sir Edward the
Confessors Laws, whereupon he Anno quarto regni sui Angliae, caused to be
summoned, concilio Baronum suorum per universos regni Angliae^ Consulatus
Angliae Nobiles sapientes, and in sua lege eruditos ut eorum L. L. Edward
Confessors.
leges and Jura, (...) consuetudines ab ipsis audiret Electi igitur de singulis
eorum patriae Comitatibus viri duodecim Jure Jurando primum coram Rege
confirmaverunt ut quoad possent recto tramice incedentes nec ad dextram nec ad
sinistram divertentes legum suarum and consuetudinum sancita patefacerent nihil
praetermittentes, nihil addentes, nihil praevaritando mutantes, a ligibus
igitur sanctae matriis Ecclesiae sumentes exordium quantum per eam Rex et
Regnum solidum subsis^ens haberet fundamentum leges libertates and pacem ipsius
confirmati sunt, there never having been before or since such a solemn Jury,
either in the Raigns of our British, Roman, Saxon, Danish and Norman Kings, or
their many succeeding Kings or Princes, sworn and impannelled by a King
himself, or in any Nation of the World, that any History or Record has been
able to give us an account, and yet in the Verdict and return thereupon made,
faithfully written and Recorded by two Bishops, there is not a word or
syllable, or any the least mention, or intimation of that modus tenendi
Parliamentum, or any the pretended Rights or Privileges of Parliament in those
our late infatuated and rebellious times, so quarrelled and grasped without any
manner of evidence and color, and although in the beginning of the Reign of
King Charles the Martyr, he could in the House of Commons in Parliament, weep
and lament with tears the supposed dangers with many he knew not what to call
them fears and jealousies, and procured many of his Fellow Members to bear him
Company, did take care out of his modus tenendi Parliamentum, to bless after
Ages with a parcel of its levelling Doctrine, which might make the broken
pieces of the Monarchy of England never able without God's mercy to be cemented
or Rushworths Historical Collections, or Pryns confuted modus (...) Parliament.
put together again, but remain incurable by that means and help more than
ordinary, which Mr. Seldom thinks was written long after the Norman Monarchy,
and the Title of it is so false, that it too much disparageth the Treatise.

And that fictitious modus has six distinct pretended Seldom tit. honor. part.
2. page 613.
Estates, wherein Sir Edward Coke was pleased to allow our King to be Caput
Principium and finis Parliamenti, whom all other mistakers, and the Bill or
Instrument that made Richard 3. an usurping King, made but three Estates, two
or three of which degrees or States never sat in Parliament before, or during
the Conquerors Reign, nor many years after, says Mr. Pryn, Et pacem non habet
in suo Pryns confutation of that (...)dus p. 601.
gradu, (as that modus is pleased to allow him, Et ita Rex solus est primus
gradus. 2. (gradus est ex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, and
aliis Clericis qui Baronias tenent, 3. gradus est ex procuratoribus Cleri, 4.
gradus est ex Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis magnatibus and proteribus,
tenentibus ad valenciam Comitatus and Baroniae, 5. gradus est de militibus
Comitatuum, 6. gradus est de Civibus and Burgensibus, and ita est Parliamentum
de sex gradibus, and sciendum est quod licet aliquis dictorum quinque graduum
post Regem absens sit dum tamen omnes praemonici sint per rationabiles
summonitiones Parliamentum censetur esse plenum.

And that special Engine or Machine of the Devil could not fail of a great
effect in the furnishing out and palliating that damnable and hypocritical
Rebellion, which for almost fifty years last past has miserably infatuated and
ruined England, with damage and mischiefs in abundance to Ireland and Scotland,
and the loss almost of some hundred thousand men's lives, and the ruin of very
many Families, unto which that modus tenendi Parliamentum was a complete
directory, and to all our Rebellious Confusions and Troubles after happening,
and introducing the Murder of the Blessed King Charles the Martyr.

And was not like to produce any better consequence than the dislocating and
tearing in pieces a most happy kind of Government, and transferring a well
established Monarchy into the said fatality of an Anarchy, no where to be found
amongst all the Monarchies of Christendom, or any other parts of the World, or
any the Ideas of Plato, or any Legislators of the World, Sir Thomas Moors
Utopia, or that which Gonzagua and his Geese found in that of the World in the
Moon, or that which would not long have satisfied Wat Tiler, Jack Cade, John of
Leyden, Massinello, or the Rabble of their State menders, or Propagators of
their Rambling Fancies, one part of which modus has this special Doctrine, Et
sciendum est quod duo milites qui veniant ad Parliamentum pro ipso Comitatu
vocem habent in Parliamento in concidendo and contradicendoquam Majores Comites
Angliae, and eodem modo procuratores Cleri unius Episcopatus Majorem vocem
habent in Parliamento si omnes sint concordes quam Episcopus ipse, and hoc in
omnibus quae ad Parliamentum concedi negari vel fieri debent, ex hoc patet quod
Rex potest tenere Parliamentum in Comunitate Regni sui absque Episcopis
Comitibus and Baronibus dum tamen summoniti sint ad Parliamentum licet nullus
Episcopus Comes vel Baro ad summonitionem venerint quia olim nec fuerat
Episcopus, Comes nec Baro, and adhuc tunc Reges tenuerunt Parliamenta sua sed
aliter est e contra licet Communitates Cleri and Laici summoniti essent ad
Parliamenta sicut de Jure debent, and propter aliquas Causas venire nollent ut
si praetenderent quod Rex non regeret eos sicut et assignaret specialiter in
quibus Articulis eos non rexerat, Parliamentum nullum est omnino (at their will
and pleasure) licet omnes Archiepiscopi Episcopi Comites and Barons eorum
pares cum Rege interessent, (a large Privilege if Sir Edward Coke were alive
to see, if he could with a Torch Fanatically lighted, it authenticated as such
Charters used to be with many Witnesses, for a farthing or small Candle will
never be able to do it,) and it seems that that part of the modus, or the
residue of that incredible Tale or Story was not ready at hand, when he was
Speaker of the House of Commons in Parliament, when Queen Elizabeth charged him
to tell that House, that it was only in her Power to Summon, Prorogue, Adjourn
and Dissolve Parliaments, which he without any contradiction of what she had
spoken unto him faithfully related unto them, and they as little denied, et
ideo oportet quod omnia quae affirmari vel informari concedi vel negari aut
fieri debeat per Communitates Parliamenti concedi quae est ex tribus gradibus
sive generibus Parliamenti Heywo^d Town^send Reports of the four last years of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
scilicet ex procuratoribus Cleri, Militibus Comitatibus Burgensibus qui
repraesentant totam Communitatem Angliae, and non de magnatibus quia quilibet
eorum est pro sua propria persona ad Parliamentum, and pro nulla alia.

And that levelling Doctrine will want a confirmation in a Record of 11 H. 6.
the original whereof is only thus.

Memorandum quod octavo die Julii Anno Regni Henrici Regis post Conquestum
undecimo ipso dom. Rege in Parliamento To. Parl. 11 H. 6.
suo apud Westmonasterium tunc convocato sede sua Regia in Camera depicta
residente praesentibus etiam tunc ibidem illustrissimis Principibus Bedford and
Gloucester ducibus ac Reverendissimo in Christo Patre Henr. Cardinal. Angliae
caeterisque quam pluribus Prelatis Proceribus and Communibus Regni Angliae ad
Parliamentum praedict. authoritate regia convocatus venerabilis pater Johannis
Episcop Bathon and Wellen Cancellarius Angliae causam Summoniconis ejusdem
Parliamenti ex ipsius domini Regis mandato egregio assumens pro suo Themate
suspiciant montes Pacem and Colles Justiciam in quibus Rex verbis asservit quod
triplex regni status potuit ut sibi videbat rationabiliter annotari (several
degrees or conditions of men videlicet, per Montes Praelalati Proceres and
Magnates per Colles Milites Armigeri and Mercatores, and in populo Cultores
Artifices and Vulgares, (used to be Elected to come to Parliaments in those
days) Quos quidem status enuncialius exponend. asserint and ser nonnulla
autoritates Historias and Exempla summaria demonstravit quod triplex deberet
virtus politica eisdem tribus statibus specialiter pertinere videlicet Prelatis
and Magnatibus pax veritas and vera concordia absque sictur. vel dissimulatione.

Militibus and mediocribus aequitas and mera Justitia absque manutenentia and
pauperum expressione vulgaribus vero vel inferioribus voluntaria Regi and ejus
Legibus (when he intended none of the three several States to be allowed the
Legislative Power) obedientia absque perj^rio and manutenentia.

Ex quibus si in Regno Angliae ^aliter se haberent maxima de conqueacencia ac
Regi and Regno Commoda quam plurima fine dubio pervenirent ad providend. igitur
qualiter in Regno montes praedicti pacem suscipiant Colles que Justitiam
vulgari populo administrant ipsi etiam populi vulgares eorum antiquis relictis
perjuriis divinis legibus and humanis plus solito fideliter obediant and
intendant prefat. dominus noster Rex ex sui sani avisamento concilii dictum
presens Parliamentum facerit convocari volens and concedens quod praefati
Magnates and Comitates praedict. (without giving either of them the Title of
Estates) omnibus and singulis libertatibus and quietanciis eis per nobiles
Progenitores ipsius domini Regis quondam Reges Angliae concessis and per eundum
dominum Regem confirmatis and minime revocalis nec per legem Angliae
revocabilibus set per eosdem Prelatos and Magnates, and Comitatem been and
rationabiliter usitatis gaudeant and ut antur dedit insuper prefat.
Cancellarius praedict. Communibus (without any Title of Estates) nomine Regio
firmiter in mandatis quod in eorum domo Communi antiquitus u^^tato in Crastino
convenirent and eorum prolocutorem eligerent, and sic Electum prefat. Domino
Regi (...) ea celeritate qua commode poterant realiter presentarent.

Et ut Justitia conqueri volentibus possit celerius adhiberi idem dominus
noster Rex certos Receptores and ^riatores petitionum in praedicto Parliamento
exhibend. constituit and assignavit.

Item 13. die Augusti Anno presento domino Rege and tribus To. Parl. 11. and 12
H. 6. m. 11.
regni statibus in presenti Parliamento existentibus (which being but a Phrase
or Expression of the Clerk could reach no further than the Chancellors meaning
in his before mentioned Speech, relating several so^s or qualities of People
then assembled in Parliament) post gratias redditas ex part domini Regis and
ejus mandato Communibus regni (without any Title or Style of Estate) tunc
ibidem presentibus deorum bonis diligentiis and laboribus circa ea quae sibi ex
part regni injuncta fuerunt exhibitis and ostensis praefat. dominus
Cancellarum de mandato ejusdem domini ulterius declaravit qualiter idem dominus
Rex ipsorum Communitat. relatione conceperat quod in Civitate London et
Suburbiis gravis pestilentia ceperat oriri qualiterque prefat. Communes
(without the appellation of Estates) plenam et particularum informationem et
nolitiam notarium extorsionum oppressionum manutent et aliorum defect. in dicto
regni habitorum unde idem dominum Rex certiorari affectabat per eosdem
nullatenus habuerint attendens etiam idem dominus Rex qualiter tempus
Autump^ale in quo magnatibus circa suas recreationes et deductas (without any
Title of Estates) insisquet Communibus (with no Title or Estates) circa suarum
messium congregationem intendere competabat similiter (...)propinguabat.

Quibus de causis et presertim ut prefati Communes (without any other Title) de
extorsionibus oppressionibus riotis manutentiis et aliis defectibus praedictis
particulariter informari possent ac dictum dominum Regem inde before edoteri
idem dominus Rex dictum presens Parliamentum usque xv. nam post festie scilicet
Michaelmis tunc proxim. futurum apud Westminster voluit prorogari ac illud
realiter prorogavit omnibus et singulis quorum interfuit firmiter injungendo
quod apud Westminster. dict. xv. die excusatione quacunque cessante
personaliter convenirent ad tractandum comitandum et consentiendum super hiis
quae tum ibidem pro pacis bono et Regis et regni commodo favente domino
contigerit ordinari, etc.

And it is not a little remarkable how a man of so great learning and practice
in the Laws of England, as the aforesaid Sir Edward Coke, should either be so
much bewitched with that modus tenendi Parliamentum, and at the same time so
much admire Littletons Book of Tenures as he believed many of his and
caetera's, or abbrieviations therein to comprehend some more than common or
ordinary point, or special matter of Law worth the enquiry, and not be able to
understand that the Feudal Laws were the Fundamental Laws of England, and
supporters of the Ancient Monarchick Government thereof, and were nearly allied
to the Civil or Caesarean Laws with their Patroni or Clients, and have
descended unto us from the Longobards, Britains, Saxons, Goths and Vandals,
and other Northern Nations, now and very anciently the Laws whereby for the
most part all Christendom is and has been Governed, and that that excellent
Book of Littleton, who was a Judge in the Reign of King Edward the fourth now
not above 219. years ago, contained a Compendium Summary and Practice of our
Feudal Laws, those best, most wholesome, firm and obliging Laws in the World,
then and long before used in England, should be so little acknowledged or
beloved by Sir Edward Coke, whose principal care and design has for a long
time been to disparage and bury them in Oblivion, by his overmuch magnifying
that fatal and grand Imposture of modus tenendi Parliamentum, made it to be the
Machine or Engine to batter and destroy our Fortresses of Loyalty, and should
not have allowed his Admirers as much or more than he did his and our
Littleton, to believe either that Empusa or Modus to be as a Creed to a People
in that Frenzy, and almost national infatuity, wherein to he and his beloved
modus had persuaded them, and by the help of the Master of all Craft and
Subtlety, turned our Laws out of their Ancient Inheritance, and by stiling our
Feudal Laws, the Common Laws by the Hocus Pocus Insolence, and Perjury of
Parliament Rebellion now almost of fifty years continuance, rendered us to be
like the Jews in their seventy years Captivity, who so forgot their Primitive
Language as they were enforced to crave the uncertain help of the Mazorites to
understand their own Language, and by creeping themselves into that which our
Rebel Innovates would have called a third Estate, made themselves the Governing
Essential and Constituent part of the Parliament, the generale Consilium or
Colloquium of the Nation, in arduis not in omnibus but quibusdam, being the
most useful, wholesome and profitable in and through all the Christian World,
and so experimented where they are kept in their due and proper Limits and
Boundaries in a due Obedience to their Kings and Sovereigns, and cause as many
as they can to believe them, that they as representing the People, (who never
trusted them to any or the like purpose) have an Inherent Right of Sovereignty
in themselves to accuse, depose, or murder their Kings, and Elect or Choose
another, turn a Monarchy into a Republic or Commonwealth, when there had not
been in England, within the memory of any true Record or impartial History any
one before, framed by a Factious and Unquiet Party of Rebels in Parliament,
under the basest of Hypocrisy that ever was practiced in the World, upon the
pretense of setting Christ upon his Throne.

And could not be content, until they had without any cause raised a Rebellion
against their pious Prince, and murdered him, forced from the People to
maintain those their ungodly doings by Taxes, as much as amounted unto 48
Millions of Sterling Money, besides the vast sums of Money and Riches gained by
the extorted Fines and Compositions from the Kings Loyal Party at Goldsmiths
and Haberdasher's Halls in London, the one for the 20th part of their Estates,
and the other for compounding for their supposed forfeiture for fighting to
defend their King against his Rebels, and their Plunderings, Sequestrations,
and Decimations of those with whom they had before compounded besides a Tax for
six Months of every Housekeeper in London, and its vast Lines of Communication
for as much as their weekly Diet amounted unto, with Money borrowed upon that
which they would call the Public Faith, which cheat brought that Godless Party
into their Repository of the Guild Hall in London abundance of Money, Plate,
Rings, Jewels, Silver Bodkins and Thimbles, many of whom after those villainous
Wars and Rebellions something appeased being in Poverty, have been the constant
Attenders at the House of Commons doors in Parliament, to enquire for Madam
Public Faith's Habitation, but could never be able to find it, and besides all
these wickednesses, could not think they had done enough, until they had added
unto their many sins, that no small sin of Sacrilege, by Sequestring the
Orthodox Ministers, Imprisoning of the Bishops, and sale of their and the Deans
and Chapters, Prebends and Cannons Lands, and their Woods and Possessions,
Banishing and every way Impoverishing them, shutting up all or many of the
Church doors in Wales, upon pretense of Reforming or Propagating Religion, but
gathering the Tithes into their own Purses, sale of the King, Queen and Princes
Houses, and Rich Movables, and of all their Lands and Revenues, the Coats of
their Yeomen of the Guard, and the Plate in their Royal Chapels; Allen a
Goldsmith, and Member of that House of Commons, picking out and exchanging the
Jewels out of the Kings Crown, and putting in counterfeit, plundered and sold
much of the Lands and Goods of the Nobility, displaced the Masters of Colleges
and Halls in both the Universities, without showing any cause more than that
they would put in another of their own Party, and began to gape, and lick their
Lips after a like Reformation of their Lands and Revenues, tore up the Brass
upon Monuments upon the ground, and made Money of them, because there was
inscribed upon them Orate pro nobis, and broke those Glass windows that had any
Pictures or Images in them, for fear of Superstition, made a Stable for Horses
in the Cathedral of St. Paul's in London, where heaps of dung might be as high
as the Roof, and Sawyers seen sawing in the Grave where the Bishop of London
was buried that obtained the City of Londons Charter of their Liberties from
William the Conqueror for which their more grateful Successive Mayors and
Aldermen, at great solemnities never failed at their coming to that Cathedral
in a kind of Procession to walk about it.

And the Othodox Clergy of the Church of England calumniated by Mr. John White
a Lawyer of the late seditious Edition, who being a Chairman appointed by a
Committee of Parliament, to relieve those that they would call plundered
Ministers, being the Factious Antichurch party, did so order the matter, as to
put out all the Orthodox Ministers, and taking his Notes and Examinations in
Characters, was able to interpret them how he pleased, and upon the Accusation
of a Cobbler at Lambeth, that the Learned Dr. Featly had Preached false
Doctrine, he must be turned out of his Benefice, and imprisoned at Lambeth,
wherein besides many other, if not all, he or his Notes were shrewdly mistaken,
when one Mr. Clopham a Minister was for Adultery Ejected, when it was proved
that by a fall from his Horse, he was so disabled in his Genitals as he could
not be guilty of it.

And the Ecclesiastical plunder Masters were to take a more than ordinary care,
that when their small comcompassion had been pleased to allow the Sequestered
Ministers Wives and Children a 5th part of their Husbands Benefices, that they
should have as little, and as hardly as could be of it, when after they had
tired themselves with their Petitions to the upper and lower Committees, they
had obtained an Order for that their small pittance found no other comfort,
after that they had traveled forty or fifty, or more miles unto one that
should pay it, then one who being more merciful and candid than the rest was
pleased to show a small common or private almost invisible note or mark in the
Order that they should not obey it.

Mean while about 100 of Sequestered Ministers of the West parts of England
could have no better a place provided for them than to be imprisoned at Lambeth
House, but a little before notoriously infected with the Plague, and ordered an
Alderman of London, whose Son is yet living to attend them with two Culverings
or small pieces of Cannon ready charged to fire upon them, as they were in the
Chapel serving God, and hearing Doctor Featly preach unto them, where they had
perished if God had not in mercy provided an escape for them.

And if this were or could be proved or justified to be a work for such a third
Estate, as that modus tenendi Parliamentum was so willing to provide for our
Laws, having in their Subordination to Gods Laws, and not opposite unto them
been truly believed, and said to have been derived from Right Reason, yet that
is always to be understood to be so, when it has received the Sanction of the
King, and are not agitated by the various wills, interest and fancies of the
People next unto madness.

And it might amuse and amaze all the men of Law and Learning in the Kingdom of
England, how Sir Edward Coke that has been attempted to be a man of so great
knowledge and experience in the Law, and entrusted with so many weighty Charges
and Offices in our Laws, as Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas,
and afterward of the Court of Kings Bench, and so great a Collector and
Remembrancer of the cases and judgments in the Law, with their various forms
and entries should have so often read in his so greatly beloved Book of
Littleton, the Chapters of Homage, and Homage Auncestrel, and Escuage assessed
in our Parliaments, could think it to be the Common Law of England, and that by
which it had for many Centuries past been Governed, and not to be by its true
and original Name and Nation, as well here as in all the other parts of the
Christian World the Feudal Law, and what else where those Feudal Laws used in
England, which our Learned Sir Henry Spelman and Dr. Zouch Mr. of Alban-Hall in
Oxford so largely and directly mentioned to have their beneficial Use and
Residence amongst us allowed and repeated by the very learned, the Sieur du
Fresne a Baron of France, and other good Authors and Historians. And if those
premises cannot be enough to satisfy us, Sir Edward Coke, if he were alive,
might do well to instruct us what Law that Homage and Escuage appertained unto.
And if there were any other Laws that this Kingdom was governed by when and by
whom they were introduced, and of how long continuance, for it may be hoped
that our Sons of Novelty will not be so impudent as to offer to obtrude upon
the World the Follies and Villainies of Wat Tiler and Jack Cade, our late
pretended Rebuplicans or their cheating Instrument maker Oliver Cromwell. Or
upon what other Laws than Feudal are our Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta
supported, and as often as thirty times in several of our Parliaments
confirmed, when all our many English Rebellions, troubles of State and
Commotions either at home at abroad have left it as a quiddam Sacrum more than
the safe guarded vestal fire amongst the Romans, or can show us in any of our
Records, Annals or holy Writ, wrested or misinterpreted, that the Dernier
Resort or Appeal has been or ought to be in the people, unless they can make
themselves or any others believe that there was something or more revealed to
them than was in the Scripture or Holy Prophets, for there was no third Estate
under our Kings to assist their Councels in Parliaments subordinate unto them
put upon them, nor intended to be by the 25 Conservators enforced upon King
John in the Rebellious Parliament and Battle at Running Mede, afterward
reduced to four, or when their Captain General Robert Fitz-Walter was styled
Mariscallus Exercitus dei and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, neither in Anno 42. H. 3.
being overpowered by some of his Rebellious Barons, where those 25
Conservators were turned into 24 the one half to be nominated by the King, the
other by the contending party at the Parliament at Oxford, or when that
afterward adjudged derogatory Parliament to Kingly Authority was referred by
King Henry the third and the Rebellious Barons unto the Arbitration of the King
of France or sworn to abide it, none of the Rebellious party were entitled
Estates, or in that after Rebellion and detaining King Henry the 3 and prince
Edward his Son about a year and a quarter they would not adventure to form or
imitate a general Council in that captive Kings name, those few that came were
not called or intended to be a 3 Estate in an House of Commons nor in any of
the many Rescripts or Mandates which Simon Montfort and his partner Rebels made
in their Captive Kings name nor in any Parliament after his Release or in the
Parliament of King Edward the first when he was pleased to suffer some of the
Commons Elected by his Writs to attend in the House of Commons in Parliament,
neither had they the boldness in all his long Reign of 35 years, or in the 17,
or 18 years of King Edward the second, or the fifty one years of King Edward
the third, or in the Reign of King Richard the 2 until the Title of Estates
crept in as aforesaid, and Mr. Pryn made himself after the Creator of them in
his misused rectifying.

And having as they thought turned the Tables the wrong way in calling our
Feudal Laws the Common Laws, which indeed they are, should be, and a long time
have been have so far put them out of their Right place, Order and Station, as
they think they have changed our Feudal Laws which are and should be the only
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom and Government thereof into a quite contrary,
and too many of our Lawyers have been so willing to forget them, as they had
rather now of late make us believe if they could the tricks of Attorneys to be
our Common Laws, than our more Ancient, Legal, Rational and Fundamental Feudal
Laws; Insomuch that one, that thinks himself no small one, has of late been
pleased to say very considerately as he thought, that the Study and Knowledge
of Antiquities was but like the picking up of Old Iron in the London Streets or
Kennels. As if the Prophet Jeremy had either mistaken or lost the Commission
which our Alwise and Omniscient God had given him, when he advised us Stare
super vias antiquas and inquirere veritatem, and such Lawyers of a late Edition
might find themselves hard put to it to answer the question how or from whence
proceeded or were derived our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which have for
so many ages past been legally taken and enjoined, and do and ought yet to
continue, if not from an ancient Fundamental Feudal Laws from what other Laws
of God or man were they derived, or any the various Customs or Usages of either
Heathen or Christian, fixed or established by by any other rational Custom or
Usage or unfixt and left only to the diverse Interests, Occasions and
Contingencies of every man's particular Interest and Affairs, and can never be
ascertained how long they shall continue in one and the same mind and good
liking, and where the Systeem of these Laws, Usages or Customs are or may be
found, or what Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy have been sworn unto or upon
them.

Whether upon the Old Custom of England of wrestling or choosing King and Queen
at the Epiphany or Twelft Night at Christmas. And if they would be a 3
governing Estate may think themselves not a little beholding unto such as can
either think or believe that they are or ought to be so in love with them as to
trust them as formerly they had done, and could tell their Brethren of Scotland
that their promises were but conditional, and did very lovingly alter order
their man of sin Oliver Cromwell to beat, subdue, and after their Laws and
Religion, promised the People of England, after that they had murdered their
King and Laws, that they would maintain and govern by the Fundamental Laws,
when they did all they could to subvert them, after they had coined it to be
High Treason in their cutting off the Head of the late Earl of Strafford, and
the Illustrious Family of the Prince of Orange, William the great Restorer and
Rescuer of the Ordines or States of Holland and West-Friezland, (without the
rest of their United Provinces) lying now interred under a stately Tomb at
(...) in Holland, with his well deserved Attributes could not escape their
Ingratitude, when to please that Protector of the English villainies, and
provide as well as they could for their self preservation, they made a League
and Agreement with that great Master of Hypocrisy, se neque Cel(...)um
Oransionensem Principem at que ex ejusdem familiae Linea quempiam provinciae
suae praefectum vicarium vel Archithalassim dehinc electum esse, neque etiam
quantum ad provinciae suae Ordinum suffragia a^^inet permissaros (obliging
themselves for the Residue) ut unquam eorum quisquam Declaratio Ordinum
Hollandie and West-Frisi^, Printed at Leyden, 1655.
Foederatorum provinciae militiae prae^^iuntur, which they persuaded themselves
would be sufficient enough to satisfy their particular Consciences, if they
could but procure their associate Confederates to be of the same persuasion,
and be as little to be trusted as themselves upon no other reason than that,
Quinimo eousque remedisse videtur ut ea quae reliqui provinciarum Ordines
perversa Indicarunt varia uti loquuntur deductionibus D. D. Ordinum Generalium
concilio judicata adeoque concepta adeoque conscripta fuerunt exhibita, Idcirco
jam ante inquirenti Nobiles ac provinciarum Hollandiae West Frisiaeque Ordines
neutiquam dubitantes quin nonnulli provinciarum ^^deratarum Ordines non aliam
ob causam minus convenienter indicarent rerum omnium statum and fundamentum and
quaecunque ex illo dependent ipsas denique veras rerum circumstantias haud
plane edocti fuerunt, nec quenquam fere quin postremum omnia and singula
eorundem acta factaque cognoverit sive alteri examini subjicere omni dubio
procul solitae sollicitudini Nobilium and procerum West Frisiae Ordinum quam in
salutem reipublica quotidie intendant attributum sic nunc demum secundum
promissa juxta decretum quarto die Junii proxime elapso praepotentibus D. D.
Ordinibus General. uti quoque literis deinde nono die exarat. and relinquarum
provinciarum Genesis potentibus B. B. Ordinibus exhibita apertam sinceram veramque
rerum omnium quae ad Instrumentum seclusionis pertinent detectionem foederatis
Ordinibus exhibere voluerunt simul etiam omni ex part nihil se quicquam in
universo hoc negotio actum concessum confirmatumque fuisse quin id omne extra
controversiam sibi absque alicujus provinciae damno, aut praejudicio agere
concedere seu confirmare labor licuerit in quantum patriae comodum ejusdemque
Incolarum and subditorum salus atque Incolumitas postulat, (being no good
excuse but an Oliver satisfaction either in Latin, English or Dutch,) but a
trick of Olivers, to work and model his own designs by affrighting them into
the height of Ingratitude, and an Act of Oblivion of their Oaths and League
with their formerly united Confederates.

And our English in the troubles and stirs betwixt King John and some of his
Barons, when there were Spelman. Glossar.
thirteen Knights in every County of England and Wales, sworn to certify the
Liberties of the People, Dr. Brady in his History of those times.
and in the Reign of King Henry the third the like number, there were no
Liberties of a third Estate to be found in either of them.

And when the tired self created Republic never before heard of, seen, felt,
understood or exampled in England, Wales, Ireland, or Scotland, and its vast
American Plantations, and knew not how like Phaeton to guide their Ambitious
Chariot, and the horses would for want of conduct be disorderly, run and tear
themselves, Chariot and all in pieces, and make the driver never more covet
exaltations, and fearing that the great Villainies and Oppressions which they
had for many years together committed, and pillaging of three Kingdoms might
shortly after retaliate and give them bitter Meat to their sweet Sauce, and
supposing that they might have no small assistance from their Hypocrite Oliver
Cromwell and his Rebel Army, did so suffer him and his Officers and Mechanics
to creep into their Parliament or House of Rebels as in a short time the one
part of the Army getting into London, and the other quartering or encamping
round about it, and intermedling with the Government, and procuring for
themselves and their Friends Memberships in the House of Commons in Parliament,
as no small part of them had wrought themselves into that House of Commons, and
the Speaker Lenthal with as much weathercock fidelity as Rebellion, fear and
folly had suggested unto him, ran away to the Army, who triumphantly marching
in a Militrary manner with their Cannon and Artillery, brought him back again
and seated him in his Traitors Chair, which kind of House of Commons being thus
tamed, became easily persuaded by a Pack of Demons on both sides to make a
formal surrender of that which they would call the Peoples Liberties which
could be no more than what was forfeited by Treason by them which had Rebelled
against their King.

And where then could remain, lurk or lie hid their so longed after third
Estateship, when Cromwell had overreached them with an Instrument of his own
making, and allowed them (especially when he pulled Mr. Pryn that had so
championed the business as he stuffed a large Book with arguments to evidence the
Supremacy of both Houses of Parliament, when a little before he had written a
Book of the Superiority of the House of Peers in Parliament, and was little to
be pardoned when Mr. Pryn the Barrister wrote against Mr. Pryn a Bencher of
Lincoln's Inn) therein not their third Estateship or any such Republican Title
at all, but in lieu thereof caused some of his Janisaries amongst whom was an
Irish Popish Priest with his Red-coat Musket and Bandaliers to pull out of that
House of Commons Mr. Pryn and diverse other of the Members, and imprisoned him
and some other in a Room or Alehouse under Westminster Hall for a night and
some short time after. And without any belief as is probable of Sir Edward
Cokes aforesaid new Modus tenendi Parliamentum made a frame or Modus of his own
with six Knights of every County where there were before but two, and in some
Boroughs fewer than formerly, and at another time pulled out their Members and
shut up the House doors, and called our Magna Charta when it was pleaded Magna
Farta, which was not the Method praescribed in Sir Edward Cokes modus which Mr.
Pryn says would be an absolute or certain way to introduce levelling or a
power in the Common people, or to aggrandize the power of a contrived
Parliament to govern the King, when that gentle fictitious modus is content to
allow the King, a Salvo dom. Regi et ejus Consilio Pryns confutation of the
fabulous modus tenendi Parliamentum in his brief Register of Parliament Writs.
quod ipsi hujusmodi Ordinaciones of 6. 3. or 1. of the Committee Postquam
scripta fuerint examinare and emendare valiant si hoc facere sciant and
valiant, Ita quod hoc fiat tunc and ibidem in pleno Parliamento and de assensu
Parliamenti, Et non retro Parliamentum, which last clause says Mr. Pryn quite
spoils Altars, and contradicts what the Community of twelve, six or three had
ordained.

And King Edward the confessor whom the many foregoing and after ages have
justly and truly reported and esteemed to be neither Oliver Cromwell or the
mistaken Sir Edward Coke with their several modi tenendi Parliamenta, did not
find either of them in his Recherches amongst all the Laws of the Mulumtians,
Mercian, Saxon and Danish Laws and other ancient Customs used in England in his
time when he was Monarch thereof, and Vicarius Summi Regis ordained Laws
concilio Baronum Angliae and leges 68 Annos sopitas excitavit excitatas
reparavit reparatas, decoravit decoratas, confirmavis confirmatas L. L. Edwardi
Confessor.
vero vocantur Leges Edwardi Regis non quod ipse primo eas adinvenisse dicitur
sed cum praetermissa fuissent and oblivioni penitus dedita a diebus avi sui
Edgari qui 17 Annis regnavit, ipse Edwardus quia Justa erant and honesta a
profunda Abyssu extravit (as if he had pulled them out of some Holes, Vauts or
Cranyes) eas revocavit and ut suas observandas contradidit, wherein there is
nothing at all that may be subservient to the wildest kind of Interpretation of
a modus tenendi Parliamentum which in the case of so great, Rational and
Fundamental general Council as a Parliament could not be believed to be omitted
in the making and framing K. Edward the Confessors Laws, nor can they be
conceived or believed to be made at one time but at several times during his
Reign, and in these although there are extant a very great commendation of the
usefulness of the Law of Friborghs or Tithings there is not a word or any thing
to be understood of the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament being a
third Estate.

For it appears in Anno 1244 in a Parliament holden at London, the King
consulted with the Bishops apart, the Earls and Barons apart, and the Abbots
and Priors apart, about the Popes not performing his promise concerning his
removal of the grievances of the Kingdom (where were none of the Common people
either as a third Estate or otherwise) which was before his imprisonment in Dr.
Brady's complete History of England until the end of the Reign of King Henry
the third p. 594. and 610.
the 48th year of his Reign by some of his Rebellious Barons, and in all his
Reign before there is often mention of his Bishops, Earls and Barons, Magnates,
and Grand Conseil, but nothing at all of Commons or a formed House of Commons
until the 49th year of his Reign, and not long before at a Parliament assembled
totam Nobilitatem Angliae.

For before the 42 year of that Kings Reign Nobiles Angliae tam viri
Ecclesiastici quam seculares, met in a Parliament at London, Ita quod nunquam
tam populosa multitudo ibi antea visa fuit, where the King informing them of
his necessities and requiring an aid, they (not any Commons but the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal) began to be very querelous, and remembering old
grievances as they called them, demanded the Justiciary, Chancellor and
Treasurer might be chosen by the Common Council of the Kingdom, which by the
Records and Annalists was never understood to be any other than the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament summoned to give their advice to the King
as the greatest men of wisdom and Estates in whom that and the obedience of the
Common people were Justly included, the choice of which great Offices of State
(Sir Edward Cokes modus tenendi Parliamentum having not then peeped into the
World to help to disturb it) the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then alleged to
appertain unto them, (not unto the Vulgar or Common people) and had been Justly
and anciently due unto them ab antiquo Justum and consuetum which had no longer
a date than the enforced Charter of King John at Running Mede, and the
collateral strange security at the same time given for the 25 Conservators of
the Liberties of the people, to maintain its antiquity, than something less
than 42 years before, which propositions the King denying, that Council was
dissolved without any Claim of the common peoples third Estateship or being an
Essential or constituent part of the Parliament, or to have votum decisivum
therein.

There was no such Modus tenendi Senatum or Parliamentum then so styled when
the Roman Empire began its rise, for shortly after though their Style or Title
was Senatus populusque Romanus yet their Historians tell us that they Livy.
had their Patritii, and Menenius Agrippa when the Rabble Vulgus or Common
people had made an Insurrection or mutiny and gone tumultuously into the Mount
Aventine, knew better how to bring them again into their Wits by a pleasant
well understood fable or Apologue of the head Members Belly and Paunch in their
Bodies natural, and our Republican 3 Estate men might read and understand that
those Common peoples Votes or Dictates were able to reach no further than their
Plebiscita, and never could arrive unto a Senatus consultum, that when Julius
Caesar came into our Britain before the Incarnation of our Redeemer, and that
Nation had planted Colonies here, they left us no Modus tenendi Senatum,
neither did Agricola (Governor here for the Roman Colonies who had taught our
Nation the Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
use of the Roman Gown and Civilities) teach them the modus tenendi
Parliamentum, or Senatum which Sir Edward Coke dreamed of, or inform them that
the Common people were a third Estate, or had an inhaerent Sovereignty in them.

In all the Laws of Dunwallo Mulumtius there was no mention of Law for a modus
tenendi Parliamentum, or in those of Mercia Regina Britonum, or in the time of
the Heptarchy of the Saxon Kings, or of King Ethelbert who reigned here in the
year after Christ 568. Neither in the Laws of King Ina who reigned in England
about the year 712. Or in the Laws of King Alured who began his Reign in Anno
871. and ended in Anno 900. and declares that he had ordained, collected and
put them together, Atque easdem literis mandavit quorum bonam certe partem
Majores sui religiose coluerunt, mul^a etiam sibi digna videntur quae sibi
observari melius commoda videbantur, ea consulto sapientum partim antiquanda
partino Innovanda videbantur curavit. At quoniam temeritatis videatur ex suis
ipsius decretis quenquam literarum monumentis consignare tum etiam se quidem
apud posteros L. L. Aluredi.
Justitiae suae fidem quae se magni fecerit quaecunque in Actis Inae Gentilis
sui Offae Merciorum Regis, Ethelfredi magni Ethelbaldi qui primum Anglicos
sacro Baptismate, tinctus observata digna deprehendit, ea collegit, congessit,
reliqua plene omisit.

Or in any of the Books if they were extant said to have been written by that
great King, viz. Breviarium quoddam collectum ex Legibus Trojanorum, Graecorum
Britannorum, Saxonum and Danorum as has been before mentioned.

Or in or by the Laws of King Edward who Reigned here in Anno 900. when iis
omnibus quae republicae praesunt etiam atque etiam mandavit ut omnibus quoad
ejus facere poterint aequos se praebeant Judices perinde ut in Judiciali libro
Scriptum habetur (no Warrant yet appearing for a Modus tenendi Parliamentum,
nor a third Estate overruling or voting their Sovereign) nec quicquam
formident, L. L. Edwardi Regis.
Jus Commune audacter dicant and litibus singalis dici quibus dijudicantur
codicibus statuit.

Or in the Laws of King Athelstan who Reigned here in the year 924. the
Heptarchy being then reduced to its pristine Estate of Monarchy, or in or by
his Laws in a Council holden at Exeter, or in or by any the Laws of King Edmond.

Or in or by any the first written Laws said to be of the Britains in the
Reign of their King Howel Dha styled the good, or in or by any the Laws of King
Eldred made in or about the year 948. or in or by any the Laws of King Edgar
who Reigned about the year 959. and styled himself favente dei gratia (not of
the people) totius Angliae Rex and Imperator, as he might well do when he was
Rowed in a Ship or Barge upon the River Dee in Wales by four of his Tributary
Kings.

Or by King Edward made in or about the year 950. in the Senatus Consultum,
League or Agreement made betwixt him and the Monticuli -- Walliae Angliae
sapientum and Walliae consiliis.

Or in the pact or agreement made betwixt King Edmond Ironside and Canutes the
Dane, when they were persuaded to spare the dire effect of a Bloody Battle and
leave the ^vent unto a personal combat betwixt the King and his Danish
Competitor in the view of both Armies, whereupon they both being ferried over
into the near Isle of Alney, the strong Ironside so wearied and almost
vanquished the Dane, as he willingly agreed to be content with the moity of the
Kingdom.

Neither does there any thing appear in or by the Laws of our King Canutus who
Reigned here about the year 1608. ex sapientum Consilio.

Or in or by any the Laws or Constitutions of William the Conqueror, or any of
our succeedings Kings or Princes.

And the late new Framers of new Governments calculated for the meridian of
their own Profit and Ambitious, Factious designs, might have better informed
themselves by the reading those mischievous Provisions imposed at a Parliament
at Oxford upon King Henry the third and his Son Prince Edward, which being
afterward by the King and the contending Barons referred to the Arbitration of
the King of France, a not long before enemy enough of King Henry the third with
an engagement on both sides upon Oath to abide by his award, those Provisions
were upon a full hearing before that King and his Great Council the Parliament
at Paris in the presence of all the contending parties adjudged to be null and
void as derogatory to Kingly government, as has been here before expressed,
that although in those Provisions there was another solemn Jury Impannelled in
every County to Enquire and Certify all and every the supposed Breaches of
Liberties and their Verdict under their Hands and Seals were returned into the
Court of Chancery, there is nothing to be found of the contents or complaints
expected, and that there being by those Provisions to be 3 Parliaments in every
year, one at Michaelmas, or 2 at Candlemas, and a third at the first of June,
Dr. Brady's History of England, p. 610. and 611.
and 12 to represent the Common people were to be Elected by the Barons, and
they that were chosen were none other than Bishops and Barons and the hautes
homes, so small was then the trust in the Vulgus or Common people, and so
nothing at all either in behalf or consideration of modus tenendi Parliamentum
or a third Estate or Sovereignty in the people, or can any rationally believe
that the Clerks in the House of Peers (which is the highest Court of Record
under their Sovereign, and the house of Commons none, but often supplicating
the other to Record and Inrol their Special matters and Protestations, and in
the Parliament of 11 R. 2. when the To. Parl. 11 R. 2.
five great Lords appealed five other as big as they of High Treason, and
throwing down their Gauntlets with Armies ready to attend their purposes, and
the Bishops had made their protestation and forsook their places,) might not by
a facile inadvertency have suffered the word Estates to have crept under their
Pens, and be a means of procreating some of the like unfortunate Errors, yet
were they now amongst the living and examined, they would swear they intended
none other than the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, but subordinate to the King,
especially when the whole tenor and current of our multitudes of Acts of
Parliament, except those few of Richard the 3. that murdered his Nephew the
young King to get into his Throne by flattering the people, and calling them
Estates, seem to have no acquaintance with that since misused word or
expression, as some have done by saying when he came once to sit in Chancery
the King can do no wrong.

And it might be more mavelous than the seven wonders of England that so
great an Elevation and belief should be in that mistaken part of Parliament,
(when in the storm and tide of a Faction and Sedition driving on a horrid
Rebellion in order to the Murder of their King they had in their more than
Pharisaical Fastings and Prayers with Protestations to make him a glorious King
put him into insufferable Fetters as it were of Iron) as to impose upon him in
the 16th year of his Reign to put the power of summoning the Parliament once in
every three years, if he should omit it, to the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of
the Great Seal under severe penalties upon their Oaths at a certain
praefixation of time, and upon his failing to any twelve or more of the House
of Peers, and every house might choose their own Speaker, and Administer the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to their Members, and that therein should be
omitted the title of Estates or some other Character of Grandetza, if it had at
all been justly due unto them.

When in December 1621 the House of Commons in Rushworths Historical
Collections.
Parliament by a Remonstrance made unto King James (not being able to show any
good Law or Reason to the contrary) did declare that they did not assume to
themselves any power to determine of Religion or War, nor did intend to intrude
or encroach upon the Sacred Bounds of his Royal Majesty, to whom only they
acknowledged it did belong to resolve of Peace and War, and the Marriage of the
most Noble Prince his Son. But as his Loyal and humble Subjects representing
the whole Commons of the Kingdom (who had a large interest in the happy and
prosperous Estate of his Majesty the Church and Commonwealth did resolve out of
their care and fear truly and plainly to demonstrate those things unto his
Majesty, which they were not assured, could otherwise come so fully and clearly
unto his knowledge without expectation of any other answer of his Majesty
concerning those higher points, than what at his good pleasure, and in his own
time should be held fit.

And in that great Ambition and Insatiable thirst of Liberties and Privileges
improperly tumbled and tossed one upon another, whereby the Subjects of England
have for so many Ages and Centuries past turmoiled and troubled their Kings and
Princes with Seditions and Rebellions, and Ruined themselves and their
Families, a more than ordinary care and heed ought to be taken, as very
necessary requisites thereunto, tam per acquirentem quam concedentem, says the
very learned Reynoldus Curick.

1. Reynoldus Curick, ne contra Jus divinum positivum Reynoldus Curick.
and morale in ejusque abolitionem quicquam indulgeat vel largiatur.

2. Ne contra Jura naturalia and Gentium.

3. Ne per concessionem Privilegiorum leges fundamentales infringat Inprimis
Juratas quia enim leges fundamentales sint quasi Anmia and nervi reipublicae,
and necesse est iis sublatis Rempublicam corruere.

4. Ne per privilegium quicquam in praejudicium Reipublice alienetur which our
Laws have heretofore taken an especial care to prevent in the not granting by
our Kings and Princes any Fair or Market without an Enquiry first had certified
by a Writ of ad quod dampnum in the Negative.

5. Ne Privilegium vergat contra utilitatem publicam.

6. Ne Privilegium in praejudicium damnum vel Injuriam tertii vergat.

7. Ne Prvilegium nimiam inequalitatem inter Subditos Importat aut exemptionem
aut Immunitatem a muneribus Ordinariis peculiarem, which in our Laws are to be
granted to men above 70 years of Age not to be impannelled on a Jury.

8. Ne super lite pendente nec contra rem Judicatum Privilegium ullum detur,
taliter enim Privilegium datum nullum est.

9. Ne per Privilegium Monopolium constituetur quippe Legibus aliis antiquis
and novis damnatum ac sua natura omnibus merito exosum.

10. Ne per Privilegium Sontes a Paenis promeritis eximantur.

11. Ut Privilegia sint rara potius quam nimia quae perinde ac multa leges
vitandae sunt.

Ex Privilegiorum nimietate omnes illi Privilegiorum abusus resultant and
realia dum per familias and successiones traduntur paulatim eo tendunt ut
Principem non agnoscant nullaque in re obtemperent personalia minus quidem
diuturne sunt sed multitudine vilescunt. Et in quos nimia congeruntur fere
praecipitant maleque sua opprimunt renumerativa sunt quamvis minus sunt
invidiosa ingratos tamen and superbos efficient Conventionalia venditioni
propria sunt, nec in beneficio ponunt etiam quae parvo sunt precio compararunt
uti scribit Adam Contzen. lib. 5. polit. ca. 18. and 56. nulla magis re quam
privilegiis contra dominos servi, contra patronos invalescunt Clientes, nec
dicere timuit omnium quae a ducentis Annis quae principatus Germaniae
Civitatesque concusserunt seditionum originem a privilegiis multis magnisque
manasse; hinc Fredericus Mindanus l. 2. de mand. ca. 13. n. 8. exclamat utinam
divi mortalium, Opt. Max. Imperatoris nostri non nimium privilegiorum
indulsissent vel concessissent, hac enim via tota Italia, polonia, and aliae
potentissimae provinciae Imperii Romani fraenam excusserunt ut itaque omne
incommodum evitetur adsit modus qui si absit.

Vertitur liberalitas in exitium tacitus lib. 3. Historium.

Requiritur etiam ex part acquirentis.

1. Ne per fraudem aut mendacium privilegium impotest.

2. Ne per vim aut metum.

3. Ut virtute potius meritisque quam nuda pecunia privilegia acquirantur.

4. Ut quamvis ad privilegium alicujus acquisitionem regulariter citatio non
requiratur, si tamen privilegium illud vergat in praejudicium tertii simile
privilegium quocunque modo habentis is de cujus praejudicio agitur adcibetur.

5. Ut privilegium adversus aliquem obtentum legitime eidem et Judici ordinario
istius loco insinuetur.

6. Ut in scripto vel instrumento privilegium obtineatur.

7. Ne impetrentur privilegia obscura.

8. Ne pecantur privilegia ludicra inepta et ignominiosa aut am antea Jure
communi concessa.

9. Ut privilegia impetrata been quoque sint clausulata.

10. Ne privilegia quae petuntur sint de genere prohibitorum nec ambitiosa.

And as to the end of Privileges they ought to be,

1. Bonum publicum. 2. Decus and gloria principis. 3. Stricti Juris
Temperamentum. 4. Meritorum aeque Recompensatio and ad been agendum invitatio.
5. Dignitatum, Ordinum et Munerum publicorum conservatio. 6. Personarum et
rerum secundum omnes circumstantias justus respectus.
As to the effect of Privileges.

1. Quod idem operentur atque Lex et Jus Commune. 2. Idem operatur quod
consuetudo vel Statutum. 3. Potentius est Jure Communi. 4. Fortius operatur
quam pactum. 5. Immunitatem a muneribus personalibus et Civilibus praestant, as
in our Laws the Kings protections of his Servants do operate.
All which Requisites in the pretended obtainers will not be warranted by the
invitation of the Rebel Brethren of Scotland, or by their Treaty with the
Blessed Martyr at Rippen when he was so necessitated, or by the long lasting
Rebellion of the English Parliament joining with them and obtaining their help,
or by the many underminings of Monarchy, and pretending false Privileges, or
the murder of him afterward, when he was at his Arraignment told by that
impudent Rebel Bradshaw (not then stiling them a third Estate) bidding his
Sovereign hold his Peace, for that the Vote of the House of Commons was the
Reason of the Kingdom.

When it ought every where to be acknowledged by the Rules of Reason and Truth
that Privilegia are so called a Privando Leges, and it should always be
believed that Du Fresne glossar.
peccandi potentia non est libertas, neque pars libertatis est indubitata
doctrina. Et quae omnium pene graviorum Authorum suffragio nititur hanc habet
Express D. Bonaventure in 2 distinct. q. 3. Nec habet tantum sed probat
plurimis rationibus hanc tradit D. Augustinus lib. de Arbitr. cap. 1. Gibieuf
de liberate dei and Creatur.
ubi docet peccandi potentiam non modo non esse libertatem nec partem
libertatis sed esse defectum ejus, Et dixit D. Tho. qui. 1. P. 62. Quest. dixit
Angelos quia peccare non possunt liberiores esse nobis qui pecca e possunt.

And Cicero defines liberty to be potestas vivendi ut velint at non vivit ut
velit, qui juxta sensus carnis suae and Cupiditatis, sed is solummodo qui vivit
juxta rationem; Plutarchus and Epictetus eandem Libertatis definitionem Nobis
dederunt, not that liberum esse debet dici cui nec impedimentum praeberi possit
volenti, nec vis inferri volenti, but if none of the fancied vast liberties
which the too many of our State or Government Menders would entitle their own
evil designs, and entail upon all that shall be so foolishly wicked as to be
deluded by them; and the costly searches of Mr. William Pettit amounting by his
own Report unto more than five hundred pounds in all that could be found in any
the Books and Manuscripts public or private of England, cannot reach or come
so near as unto a probability that there ever were in the British, Roman,
Saxon, Danish or Norman Raigns of our Kings and Princes, and their many Royal
Successors ever since or long before that, since the Creation of the World
either in Parliament, or without any mention of a third Estate inherent in the
people, and they must be content to go a begging for a belief in some lately
discovered Island, where they may dream any such stuff may be sound either as
their modus tenendi Parliamentum or a third Estate, as Subjects at the same
time governing their Kings and Princes, when by their Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, they are bound always to be obedient unto them as (next under God)
their SupremeHead and Governor.

And may curse their fate that every thing their scrutinies can assist them
with, should not with wresting, wringing and false and senseless
Interpretations appear at all to be for their purposes, but every thing clearly
against them, and sorrowfully repent that they or their Predecessors had so
unhappily busied themselves in destroying so many Props of the Monarchick
Government, as the Court of Star Chamber wherein did sometimes sit as Judges,
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and the Chief Judges of both the Benches
and the Barons of the Exchequer the Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the
Kings Privy Council, who as Judges in seveveral Courts did sit there upon
special occasions, and the procuring the King to take away the High Commission
Court in their miscarried designs of Levelling the Hierarchy and order of
Bishops; The want of which two very necessary and useful Courts has suffered
the Nation to be overflown with all manner of wickedness and Impiety.

And in that their overhasty carreer of breaking our English Monarchy like a
Glass into many small or little pieces needed not to have been so hasty but
have paused a little while and have considered, that as unto the circumstances
of Time, Place, Number of Persons, Usages and Customs in a variety of
contingencies, being the only ancient, proper and efficient cause of summoning
Parliaments, adjorning or dissolving them, there could not be a To. Parl.
probability of a modus tenendi Parliamentum either in King Edward the
Confessors Reign, or before or after, for that our Parliament Rolls and Records
do una voce plainly declare against it, and show that many times Parliaments
have been holden in the absence of our Kings by the Prince his Eldest Son, or
by some other of their Sons as Lieutenants or Guardians of their Kingdom, or by
the Queen Mother assisted by the Kings Justitary or other Commissioners, during
the Imprisonment of King Richard the first, or by the Queen Consort of King
John in his absence, or by King Henry the 4th in his usurpation upon King
Richard the second, when he unjustly made use of a Parliament summoned by him;
And there could not be a third Estate in the Reign of King Charles the second
when he had as aforesaid so unfortunately been ill advised to exchange the
Nerves, Sinews, Strength and Honor of his Crown and Government for a mistaken
Recompense of an Excise upon Ale, Beer, and Syder, and then there were but two
Estates, viz. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal subordinate unto their
Sovereign, and it would be a difficulty insuperable to find any Truth, Reason,
Evidence, Probability or Possibility that there is or ought to be a Sovereignty
inhaerent in the people, or if such Improbabilities were or could be, what
Method or contenting Equal distribution could be made thereof, amongst Learned
and Unlearned, Ambitious, Rich, and Poor, Rude, Ignorant, or better tempered
vicious or virtuous Women and Children or Fools, Madmen in their intervals or
without, when some have not improbably calculated the number of the Kings
Subjects in England only to be not much under five Millions, besides these vast
numbers in Scotland and Ireland; And who upon any or many discords like to
happen should be the pacifying Reconciler, Justiciary or Umpire betwixt them,
and what Charters, Agreements or Surrenders should be contrived or put in
writing betwixt them, concerning the Right use or distribution of that never to
be proved inhaerent Sovereignty in the people taking as Subjects the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, or that ever it was attempted before our English
Rebellions either in England, Scotland or Ireland, or can they give us any
reason or demonstration that it was ever allowed of, or that any pact or
Agreement was made to confirm it.

Neither is there any Modus tenendi Parliamentum, or any such thing or matter
as a three governing Estate in the solemn Recognition made in a Parliament at
Clarenden Dr. Brady's History of England and Quadilogus
in the Reign of King Henry the second of the Anitae Consuetudines or Laws used
in the time or Reign of his Grandfather King Henry the first, which the
Archbishops and Bishops verbo veritatis sine dolo, and malo Ing nio promised
faithfully to obey, and the Earls and Barons likewise.

And will be a Privilege never taught to the Athenians (sometimes the wiser
part of Greece by their great Legislator Solon, who after he had made them some
Laws feigned a Voyage or Journey to Salamia, and caused Plutarch in v^^a Solonis
them to swear to observe them until his Return and absented himself the longer
because he would not have them break them, as Pisistratus the Tyrant did
afterward to his own advantage persuade them to do; the Spartans under their
great Legislator Lycurgus and the many other little Commonwealths of Achaia
first fooled by Philip of Macedon, afterward by Alexander the Great his Son,
who conquered all that part of the World but Diogenes the Philosopher in his
Tub, now all into slavery the Ottoman Empire, had long before better business
to trouble their Heads with than the fond Imagination of a Sovereignty
inhaerent in themselves, although one of their most ^acred Laws in their Ten
Tables was, Slus populi sit Suprema Lex ne quid detrimenti res publica capiat,
Neither did the Romans those Cordatissimi Mortales, (as the learned Pettus
Cunaeus has styled them) and most Petrus Cunaeus de Republica H(...)m
watchful of their Privileges, the wary long lasting Republic of Venice or
the later Confederates of the United Provinces ever trouble themselves or any
other with such reasonless incredible Whimsies, it being impossible that
Subject and Sovereignty should constare vel consistere in uno eodenque
Subjecto. neither when Jeroboam drew away the Ten Tribes of Israel from the
Obedience of Rehoboam, and made as the Holy Scripture says all Israel to sin,
was there any such opinion amongst their Cabalistical Doctrines?

The Republics of Venice and Holland could not be capable of Leagues and
Treaties with Monarch and Foreign Princes as unto War and commerce, nor the
little Commonwealths of Genoa and Geneva, or those many Imperial free Cities
or Towns in or near Germany, or the Electors of the Empire or the Hanse Towns,
should they give entertainment unto such Fancies and Fopperies as a Sovereignty
in the people, neither would the Cantons of of Helvetia or Switzerland think
themselves well used to be obliged to such a Parcel of unpracticable folly.

And if those Egregious Cavillators can find no way of retreat for those their
notorious follies but to fly for Succor unto praescription, that will (if they
could as they will never be able to prove it (yield them as little comfort for
a Rebellious electing of some few Members into the House of Commons first
formed as unto a small number of them during the Imprisonment of King Henry the
third by Montforts Army of Rebels that would not mount unto a Prescription quia
mala fide, and if it could have come up to any thing like a Prescription, there
would be no reason or need for an Election of Members to be in the House of
Commons in Parliament by the Sheriffs by the Mandate or Warrant of the Kings
Writs, or how could a party drawn out of such a pretended inhaerent Sovereignty
in the people, rationally subsist when those their untruly supposed Rights or
Privileges cannot upon the most exact enquiry be found or discerned amongst
all the Records, Charters and Patents of our Kings and Princes, or those of any
of our Neighbor Nations of Christendom, or of any other Nation, White, Black,
or Tawncy, but do plainly contradict it and declare the quite contrary, and
will manifest it, to be the greatest Cheat and Villainy that ever was put upon
the Sons and Daughters of mankind either as unto a pretended inhaerent
Sovereignty or a third Estate, or the figment of a Modus tenendi Parliamentum.

Or how could any of our Kings Rightly and Justly style them a third Estate
when they could not choose a Speaker without their License, nor leavy their
Wages without his Writs directed to the Sheriffs for that purpose, nor punish
any that had arrested any of them or their maenial Servants whilst they
attended the King in their Service for him and their own good, and at all
conferences either in their own House or in the House of Peers were to stand
uncovered when the Lords sat covered, could not grant Tax or Aid without the
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and in King Edward 1. His Reign
and some of our after Kings have refused to intermeddle or give advice in
matters of Peace and War, but desired that the Council of the Lords as the most
able might be taken therein. In the 34, and 35. H. 8. the Knights and Burgesses
of Chester had no title of Estates, but the same King in the Act of Parliament
declaring in what Order and Manner the Lords should sit in the House of Peers
in Parliament, made no appointment for or concerning any of the House of
Commons, as if they had been no Essential part of Parliament, and that in the
great case of Mr. George Ferrars a Member of the House of Commons as well as a
Servant of that Kings upon a complaint that he had been imprisoned, and the
Kings Sergeant at Arms attending their Speaker, was beaten and abused the House
of Commons in Parliament complained to the House of Lords who remitted it to
them again, and no remedy or punishment could be had until it came to the King
himself, who without any mention or Title given unto them of a third Estateship
was pleased to grant it. And in Queen Mary's Reign 39. of their Members were
Indicted by her for not attending the Parliament, yet none either claimed a
third Estateship or to be tried by their Peers. Queen Elizabeth imprisoned
some, and at several times charged them and their Speaker not to intermeddle
with matters of Church or State, but all the Masters of any Understanding,
Reason or Common sense ought to understand them to be no other than Petitioners
and her Leige-men.

And it is well known that King James in his Instructions to his Son Prince
Henry, and his learned answer to Cardinal Peronius does assert the Jus Regium
to be the Right of Kings from God immediately, without any notice taken of a
third Estate.

But if those Kingly Government or Monarchy Reformers would but give their
contemplations and designs some little Respite, they might easily perceive the
frailty of the Materials out of which they mould would the Members of the House
of Commons into a third Estate, and might find Evidenee, Records, Reason and
Law enough if they have not forsworn them to desist from such an impossibility.

And it might better become their own busying themselves in the government of
the Kingdom, wherein they have no manner of skill or knowledge (to consult the
consequences and the Events, and having no knowledge of the causes, Mediume,
contengencies or treacheries too much or too often attendant in Princes affairs
not seldom also miscarrying for the Sins of the people, or of some Jonas in the
Ship deserving a punishment,) ought more seriously to weigh and consider how
little the people of England will think themselves hereafter beholding or
obliged unto them, when in a popular and abundance of Ignorance accompanied
with sin and wiekedness they advised King Charles the Second to dissolve by Act
of Parliament these Nerves and Sinews of the Crown, which the Judges of England
in the Raigns of King James the first and King Charles the first upon several
consults have declared to be so inseparable to the Crown of England as the most
potent and binding Act of Parliament that could be made will never be able to
disunite them; when they have thereby against their wills converted those
Tenures of Honor and safety to their King, and Protection, peace and plenty to
his people, and the Releifs and Herriots due and payable to the King, into a
Chimney-Money granted afterward by another Act of Parliament, and what a
profitable bargain they have made by forfeiture of all the Lands which they
held by and under their Feudal Laws converted into Socage, when by a Law made
by King Athelstan ever LL. Athelstani
plow Land in Socage was to find in Service upon occasion of War binos ornatos
atque instructos Equites, when by converting all the Tenures in Capite (that of
the Peers and Grand Sergeants excepted) into Socage they have given the King a
greater Revenue than they intended far exceeding the Revenue of the tenures in
Capite, (the honor of the King and safety of himself and the people excepted.

And that in those early times none were employed in Commissions or Places of
trust by our Kings and their Laws but Knights holding by Tenure in Capite
immediately, or mediately that King Henry the 2d in some of his Laws declared
none to be liberi Homines but those that were Military, and that if the Socage
men or Tenants of all the Possessors of Lands, and Tenements now in England and
Ireland must be in no better a capacity than as Villani, Servi, Bordarii,
Cotarii, and Tenants at will under domineering Landlords and be shut out of the
blessings of our Magna Carta and Carta de Foresta, and left as the people were
in the Reign of William the Conqueror, William Dr. Brady's History of England.
Rufus and Henry the first to the dire punishments (cases of Treason and Felony
only excepted) of plucking out of Eyes and cutting off the Genitals Legs or
Noses of the Offenders.

And it might be a meet question among the Heralds upon what foundation more
than 1000 Knights Seldens tit. Honor.
Baronets do now stand seeing that Ireland is turned into a Socage Tenure, when
the first original of them was to find in Capite so many men at Arms in the
Kings Service.

And having with the Prophet Jeremy called, cried out and advised many of my
friends stare super vias antiquds and inquirere veritatem, I lament and bewail
that the Monarchy of England that for more than 1600 years last past has been
so great and glorious amongst her Neighbor Nations, and has in this our last
Century of years been so unhappy ever since the beginning of the Reign of King
John, when Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury had in his Oration at the Coronation
of that unfortunate King declared to the Nobility and people there assembled
that he was created King by the Election of the Mat. Paris.
people and being reprehended and blamed for it by some of the Nobility, was at
that Instant or before that Assembly forced to excuse that inadvised Speech as
well as he could by saying he had so done it as knowing his force, nature it
might induce him to govern the more orderly, although he might have known that
the Kingdom of England was hereditary and that King Richard Dr. Bradys History
of England p. 457.
the first had by his last Will and Testament devised it unto him with all
other his Dominions, and caused the Nobility there present to swear fealty unto
him.

Which poison so thrown into our Body Politic, and by degrees creeping into it
may well be believed to have so fixed the venom thereof as it has from age to
age been the original Cause and fomenter of the very many mischiefs and
discords (some Intervals of quiet intervening) that have until the late long
Parliament Rebellion and the Murder of King Charles the first and ever since
unto this very day by those unhappy discords happened in our Parliaments General
Consiliums Colloquiums or conferences betwixt our Kings and Princes, and a
select number of his Subjects for mutual Aids in a general and reciprocal
concernment the best and most happy constitution that ever was or could be
practiced in any Kingdom if it could have escaped that Series malorum
Concatenation of discords that have of late been too often their Concomitants
either by some aversions to Loyalty, or by the Grand mistakes in the practice
thereof, and by the Common people making the Parliaments of later times to be
as their King, and he that is and should be their King little more than an
extraordinary fellow Subject.

A Right observation and account whereof may from one unto the other lead us to
the late blessed Martyrs fatal Murder, and that Pestiferous Doctrine that did
over much entice the Vulgus and ignorant part of the people, that there is and
ought to be an Inhaerent Right of Sovereignty in the people, it being not
unuseful for after ages to know and understand the same with the beginnings and
progress thereof, which for ought appears had its first original from Thomas
Becket. Archbishop of Canterbury, who had in the troublesome Reign of King
Henry the second, and at the time of the making the Assise and Constitutions at
Clarendon, such a peevish ambition and unwarrantable loftiness of Spirit as
after the King had in the presence of the said Archbishop and all the Bishops,
Earls, and Barons of England received their Recognitions and promises to
perform and obey them, they were sent unto the Pope to have his approbation,
who returned them to some with an hoc damnavit and toleravit as unto others.

And Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury promoted by the Pope against the
will of King John, discovering as a singular rarity the Charter of the
liberties granted by King Henry the first, did so please some discontented
Barons as they swore upon the Altar they would live and dye in the obtaining
those beneficial Laws and Liberties, begot a Spirit of unquietness in them,
which could not be allayed until the said Avitae consuetudines recognized and
all ratified by King Henry the second his his Grandson by the constitions ^at
^arendon, which begetting some little quiet broke out again in a worse manner
upon his Son King John in the constraint and unkingly force put upon him at
Running Mede, where those tumultuous Barons w(...) a great Army in battle Array
the better to attain their said Charter of liberties had promised to pay debts
but never intended it.

And were so faithless and unwilling to be his Subjects as what they by force
extorted from that oppressed Prince could never truly and properly merit the
name or title of a Charter, although he himself had been constrained so to call
it, and the King of France in his Exception to his award made as aforesaid many
years after had so styled it, yet those undutiful doings of theirs were
disliked by diverse of the Bishops that had been the Popes and those Rebellious
Barons Favorites who it seems did so little intend what they ought to do and
undertook as some of the Bishops could not deny to certify as follows.

Omnibus Episc. sidelibus Stephanus De igra. Cant. Archiep. To. pat. 17.
Johann. m. 20. dors
Primas, and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Card. Henr. Dublin. Archieq. Will.
London, Petrus Winton, Joscelin. Bathon. and Glaston. Hugo Lincoln. Walter.
Wigorn. Will. Coventr. Richardus Cicestr. and Magister pond Domini papae
Subdiaconus and familiaris, Salutem, Noverit Universitas vestra quod quando
facta fuit pax inter donum Regem Johannem and Barons Angliae de discordia
inter eas orta, lidem Barons nobis presentibus and audientibus promiserunt
dom. Regi quod quamcunque securitatem haberi vellet ab iis pace illa observanda
ipsi ei habere facerent praeter Castella and obsides (they having forced him to
grant them Castles as Pledges (Postea vero quando dom. Rex petit ab iis ut
talem cartem ei facerent omnibus etc. Sciatis nos astricto esse per sacramentum
and homagium dom. nostro Johanni Regi Anglae de fide ei servanda de vita and
Membris and terreno honor suo contra omnes homines qui vivere possint and
mori, Et ad Jura sua and and heredum suorum ad regnum suum custodiend. and
defendend. ipsi ei facere nollent, Et in hujus rei testimonium id ipsum per hoc
scriptum protestamur.

Although he had been so careful and willing to perform the agreement made with
them on his part as he directed his Writs unto his Subjects in every County in
the words following, viz. Rex, etc. vic. Forestar. viridar. Custodibus
Ripariorum and omnibus Ballivis suis in eodem Com. To. pat. 17. Johannis m. 23.
in Dors.
saltem, Sciatis pacem f^^niam esse reformatam per dei gratiam inter nos
Barons and liberos homines regni nostri sicut audire poteritis, Et inde per
Cartam nostram quam inde fieri fecerimus, quam etiam legi public preceperimus
per totam Ballivam vestram and firmiter tenendi volentes, and districte
praecipientes quod tu vic omnes de Balliva tua secundum formam Cartae
praedictae Jurare facias 25 Baronibus de quibus mentio fit in Carta praedicta
ad mandatum eorundem vel majoris partis eorum ipsis vel ad quos ad hoc
attornaverint per Literas suas patentes, Et ad diem and locum quos ad hoc
faciendum providerint praedicti Barons vel Attornati ab eis ad hoc volumus
etiam and praecipimus quod 12 Milites de Com. tuo qui eligentur de ipso Com.
vestri primo Com. qui tenebatur post susceptione lite rarum istarum in partibus
tuis de inquirendis pravas consuetudines tam de vic. quam de eorum Ministris.
Forestis, Forestariis, Warrennis, viridariis and eorum Custodibus and eis
delendis sicut in ipsa Carta continetur, vos igitur omnes sicut nos and honorem
nostrum diligitis and pacem regni nostri omnia in Carta contenta inviolabiliter
observatis and ab omnibus observi faciatis, ne pro defectu vestrum aut per
excessum nostrum pacem regni nostri, quod dominus avertat, iterum turbari
contingat, Et tu vic. pacem nostram per totam ballivam tuam proclamari facias
and firmiter teneri praecipias Et in hujus etc. Vobis mittimus Test me ipso
apud Runnimed. 190 die lunii Anno regni nostro 17.

And a Charter thus gained and forced by Rebels not designed and desired by the
King for ought appears and infringed only notwithstanding by the Rebels
themselves came after to be so little valued or esteemed to be valid or worthy
of a confirmation, by any Parliament or approbation of any of our Kings or
Princes in their very many Parliaments ever since, as that of Magna Charta made
in the 9th year of the Reign of King Henry the 3 granting those many Liberties
of the people of England, has been 32 times confirmed, and that of his Father
King John being after in that grand and dire Anathemation in the later end of
the Reign of King Henry the third enforced upon him was only read before them
unto him, and was in that our late Rebellious Parliament by the Agitators in
Annis 3 and 4 Caroli not so much as taken notice of, but altogether ecclipsed
and silenced as a Charter not deserving a recommendation to posterity.

King Richard the second, (Henry the fourth having succeeded and deposed him)
after his said Deposition was only styled Chevalier, as the Record following
will mention.

Inter Fines levatos tempore Henr. 4 in Com. Not. inter alia sic continetur ut
Sequitur.

Haec est finalis concordia factu in cur. Dom. Reg. (H. 4.) apud Westminster. A die
sci. Martini in quindecim dies An Reg Dom. Regis Angliae and Franciae primo
coram Willo. Thirning, Willielmo Rickhill, Johanne Markham, Willielmo Hankford
(it being that William Hankford or William Thirning that notwithstanding their
own Rebellions, could in some of the Reports or year Books of that Kings Reign
adventure to say that the Laws were never better administered then at that time)
and Willielmo Brenkslie Justic. Et postea A die Paschae in quindecim dies Anno
regni ejusdem Regis Henrici quarto ibidem conces. and concordat. fuit coram
eisdem Justic. and aliis Domini Regis sidelibus tunc ibi praesentibus, inter
Thomam Rempson quer and Richardum nup. Regen Angliae Chivaler defercient de
maneriis de Bingham, Clipston O the Hill Juxta plumton cum pertinentiis ac 32.
messuag. 34. virgat. terrae, 50. Acr. prati and 10 s. Reddit. cum pertinentiis
in Clipston O the Hill Juxta Plumton, Codgrave Kynalton Outhorp and Newton,
(...)t de advocatione de Bingham unde placitum praedictum scilicet quod
praedict. Nuper Rex recogn. praedict. maneria esse Jus ipsius Thomae habend.
and tenendi dicto Thomae and haered de corpore suo de dominis feodi illius per
servitia quae ad advocationem praedict. pertinent in perpetuum, etc. Et pro hoc
Recogn, etc. Idem Thomas dedit praedicto nuper Regi quingentas martas Argenti.

After the troubles of which King Henry the fourths usurpation, followed the
conquest of France by King Henry the 5th his Son, and the troublesome reign of
King Henry the 6th reviving again the Rebellion of Jack Cade, managed for the
Interest and by the design of the House and Family of York, begun again to wake
the long before laid to sleep conservatorship of Liberties, which must be says
Mr. Pryn of 12 of the Nobility, 6. of the Commons, and so from one unto
another, until the conservatorship of the Liberties of the people came to take
its rest in the house and Family of York, that was in deed the right heir of
the Crown of England, and the Kings thereof, the Givers and Protectors of the
Liberties of the Pryns 4th part of the Register of Parliamentary Writs.
People, which King Edward 4. well understood when he told Sir James
Strangwaies the Speaker of the House of Commons in Parliament in these words
following, viz.

James Strangwaies, and ye that be come from the Commons of this my land for
the true hearts and tender consideration they have had to my Right and Title,
that I and my Ancestors have had to the Crown of this Realm, the which from To.
Parl. 1 E. 4.
us has been long withheld, and now thanked be almighty God of whose grace
growteh all Victory by your true hearts and great assistance, I am restored to
that that is my Right and Title; Wherefore I thank you as heartily as I can,
and for the tender and true hearts ye have showed unto me, and that ye have
tenderly had in Remembrance the correction of the horrible Murder, and Cruel
death of my Lord and Father, my Brother Rutland, and my Cosen of Salisbury and
others; And I thank you right heartily, and I shall be unto you by the grace of
Almighty God, as Good and Gracious a Sovereign Lord as ever was any my noble
progenitors to their Subjects and Leigement, and for the faithful and loving
hearts and also the great labor that you have born and sustained toward me in
the recovering of my Right and Title which I now possess. I thank God with all
my heart, and if I had any better to reward you withal than my Body, you should
have it, the which shall always be ready for your defense, neither sparing nor
letting for no Jeopardy; praying you also of your hearty assistance and
continuance as I shall be unto you very righteous and loving Liege Lord.

And the bloody Wars betwixt the two great contending Families of York and
Lancaster, those Factions tired on both sides, and the Attainders and
Confiscations on both sides, in the Reign of King Edward the fourth, with the
Marriage of King Henry the seventh, with the Daughter and heir of King Edward
the fourth, his two Sons being Murdered by their Uncle Richard the third, who
died without Issue, and King Henry the eight his quarrelling with the Pope, and
confiscating the monasteries and Abbeys, gratifying many of the Nobility with
much of their Lands, and much obliging them thereby, and enriching many of the
Tenants and making them and their families to be Gentlemen that durst not own
or approach that Title before, and the short Raigns of King Edward 6. and Q
Mary busied by the one in the setting up of the Protestant Religion, and the
other in reducing Popery to its former Station, gave a long tranquillity from
State disturbances augmented by Q. Elizabeth's 44 years glorious and peaceable
Reign, not only in the propagation and defense of it here, but in many other
parts of Christendom, and gave a peaceable entrance to King James her next Heir
and Successor, who met with two Grand Assaults of Treason, the one of Sr.
Walter Rawleigh, and others, who fetching that Lawless Doctrine and Piece of
Law some hundreds of years before set up, that allegiance is due to the Crown,
and not to the person of the King, long before condemned in Parliament in the
example of Hugh le Despencer, in the Reign of King Edward the third, and the
other being the Gunpowder Treason, was miraculously discover ed almost, in the
very instant of executing thereof, and although villainously Wicked and Horrid
fell much short of our last long Rebellion both as unto the length of time and
Hypocrisy, shedding of Blood, Massacres, abuse of God and the Holy Scriptures,
and the levelling and utter destruction of a most Ancient and Glorious Monarchy.

King James in the 22th year of his Reign over England departing this life not
by taking an ill advised Medicine, to expel an Ague, as was villainously
reported, but upon a careful examination could never be proved to have been
other than Innocent, though recommended by the Earl of Warwick then as it after
appeared none of our Monarchy Favorites, King Charles the first his Son
succeeding shortly after, espoused the Lady Henrietta Mary Daughter of Henry
the fourth King of France made a League Offensive and Defensive with the States
of the United Provinces, and besides two well exercised Regiments under English
Commanders paid by the Dutch, sent unto them four gallant Regiments more under
the several Commands of the Earls of Oxford, Essex and Southampton, and Lord
Willoughby of Eresby, and a well Rig'd and Furnished Fleet against the King of
Spain landed at Cales, whence without doing the business designed they returned
home; The Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Bristol in the mean time accusing
in Parliament each other of Treason and Misdemeanors, acted whilst the King as
Prince was in Spain the one for the promoting the Marriage with the Infanta of
Spain, the other for hindering of it, whereupon followed the imprisonment of
the Earl of Bristol in the To were of London; and the King being put to great
charges in his sending Ambassadors and mediation in the obtaining a
considerable part of the last Palatinate to be restored to his Brother in Law,
and to be made an eighth Elector to be joined with the former seven, and with
the yearly payment of giving great pensions to the distressed King and Queen of
Bohemia his four Nephews and two Neices, under the burden of great Debts and
Necessities much augmented by the costly furnishing out a Fleet of Ships, and a
gallant Army to invade the Isle of Ree in France, to divert the King of France
from subduing of Rochel the Inhabitants whereof had supplicated him for Aid,
which produced none other effect but the loss of all his hopes therein by the
ill conduct of the Admiral to the loss of some gallant men, yet was so
unwilling to forsake those oppressed Protestants, as he after sent two if not
three other Fleets strongly furnished Ships with Men, Arms and Ammunition to
relieve them under more Skilful Commanders, who endeavoring all that men could
do, were constrained to return home and leave those Protestants to the
over-powering forces by Land of the King of France and in the midst of his own
pressures and great wants of Money, having no more of his own Royal Revenue to
support these expenses than about 800000 l. sterling per Annum for his Revenue,
much whereof by the usual Lickings and Cheats of his Trustees, Officers and
Receivers could never find the way to his Coffers.

And had been so incessant in his desires to help those oppressed Protestants
of France as to procure Money to assist them in that his last attempt, he
sending to the Citizens of London to lend him 100000 l. They answered they
could not for that they had heretofore lent unto his Father King James as much
upon Privy Seals which had not been yet repaid, (although it was but lent by
several Citizens to make up that some of Money (but if his Majesty would give
them a security by some of his own Revenues in Land to pay the first hundred
thousand pounds with interest for it, they would lend him another hundred
thousand pounds, and the particular men's names that lent the Moneys to make up
the first 100000 pounds were expressed in a Schedule, which done, as will
appear by the said Schedule which I have seen 12000 l. per Annum of old Rents
of Assise in Richmondshire, or in the County of York, were by the King conveyed
and granted absolutely unto some Citizens in trust for the City of London for
the payment of the said two hundred thousand pounds with the Interest as
aforesaid for the said one hundred thousand pounds lent unto King James, the
Wood and Timber only growing thereupon amounting unto as much as the aforesaid
Sums of Money lent with the Interest, which over-profitable bargain made by the
City of London for themselves they with a parcel of conscience (not of God) did
treat with the particular Lenders of the Money to King James, and for ten l. or
a very little in every hundred comed and took up their Privy Seals, but were
unwilling to trouble the King with the thought^s thereof to the damage of him
and disherision of the Crown of England, and being taken notice of and
complained of, a Commission was granted unto the Lord ottington, Sir Henry
Vane, and Sir Charles Harbord the Kings Surveyor to enquire thereof and certify
the King thereof, wherein they were so kind hearted, and the matters so
managed, as nothing more was heard thereof, but the City of London continues
in possession of the said Manors and Lands, or have spent the same in assisting
the late horrid Rebellion against him and together with it the CityOrphans
Money, for which it has been reported they are willing to pay them by
composition after the rate of 6d per. ponnd, caused a Bill to be exhibited by
his Attorney General in his Court of Starr Chamber against John Earl of Clare,
and Mr. Seldom for having only in their Custody two Books or Manuscripts
directed unto him by Sir Robert Dudley an Englishman living in Florence, and
stiling himself a Titular Duke of that Country, endeavoring to instruct him
in the method of raising Money by a Tax upon all the Paper and Parchment to be
used in England, caused Sir Giles Allington to be fined in the High Commission
Court for Incest and the Lord Audley Earl of Castlehaven to be arraigned in the
Court of Kings Bench for Sodomy, whereupon after Trial by his Peers he was
Condemned and Beheaded, suffered a great Arcanum Imperii in his Praerogative in
taxing or requiring an Aid of Ship Money, or for setting out a Navy of Ships
when the Kingdom was in danger, to be disputed in the Exchecquer Chamber by
Lawyers and Judges (which King Henry the fourth of France by a constant Rule in
State Policy would never yield to have done, imitated by Queen Elizabeth who in
some of her Charters or Letters Patents as unto Martin Forbisher a great
Sea-Captain declared de qua disputari nolumus) upon the case or question of 10
s. charged upon Mr. Hamdens Estate in Buckinghamshire of 4000 l. p. Annum
wherein all that could be raked out of or by the Records of this Kingdom was
put together by Mr. Oliver St. John, and Mr. Robert Holborn, theformer being
after made Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas by Hambden and the Rebel
party, and the later taking Arms for the King faithfully adhered unto him,
whereupon that cause coming to be heard, and all that could be argued for the
not paying or paying of it, of twelve Judges that carefully considered the
Arguments, and gave their opinions, there were ten concurred in giving Judgment
for the King, and only two, viz. Justice Hatton, and Justice Crook, who having
before under their hands concurred with all the other, and suffered their
subscriptions to be publicly enrolled in their several Courts at Westminster,
could find the way to be over-instrumental in setting our Troy Town all in
Flames whilst that pious Prince being overburdened with his own more than
common necessities did not omit any part of the Office of a Parens Patriae, but
taking more care for his People than for himself (too many of whom proved
basely and wickedly ungrateful) called to account Lionel Cranfield whom he had
made Earl of Middlesex, and Lord Treasurer of England, fined him in vast sums
of money, ordered him during his life never more to sit in the House of Peers
in Parliament, received a considerable part of his Fine, and acquitted him of
the residue.

And being desirous as his Father was to unite the Kingdom of Scotland in their
Reformed Religion, as the more happy Church of England was both as unto
Episcopacy and its Liturgy, that attempt so failed his expectation, as a mutiny
happened in the Cathedral Church of Edinburgh, and an old Wife sitting upon a
Stool or Crock, crying out that she smelt a Pape at her Arse, threw it at the
Ministers Head, whereupon a great mutiny began, and after that an Insurrection,
which to pacify the King, raised a gallant Army of Gentry and Nobility, with
all manner of warlike provision, and marched unto the Borders, but found them
so ill provided for defense as they appeared despicable, yet the almost
numberless Treacheries fatally encompassing that pious King persuading him not
to beat or vanquish them when he might so easily have done it, he returned home
disbanding his Army, and a close Favorite of Scotland, was after sent to
pacify them, but left them far more unruly than before, shortly after which,
Philip Nigh a Factious Minister that should have been of the Church of England,
but was not, with some other as wicked Persons were from England delegated to
Scotland, to make a Co^enant of Brotherly Rebellion against the King, and
accordingly the Scots being well assured, that their Confederates in England
would not hurt them, marched into England with a ragged Army with Petitions to
the King, and Declarations of Brotherly Love unto too many of their
Confederates, seized by the cowardice, or carelessness of the Inhabitants the
Town of Newcastle upon Tine, notwithstanding a small Army ill ordered, was sent
to defend it better than they did, so as the Scotch Petitioning Army quartering
there, and in the Northern parts, the King hastening thitherwards with Forces,
was persuaded to summon at Rippon a great Council of many of his Nobility,
whither too many of them that came being more affected to the Scotch Army, that
came like the Gibeonites with old Shoes and moldy Bread were allowed to be
free-quartered, and a Parliament suddenly to be summoned at London, whereby to
raise money for the discharge of their Quarters and Army charges, in the mean
time the Scotch and their Commissioners, with their Apostle Alexander Henderson
have license to visit London, where they are lamented, feasted and visited, and
almost adored as much as St. Paul was amongst the Macedonians or the Brethren,
who cried up their holy Covenant and Religion to be the best, the Church of
England with her Ceremonies, Common Prayers and Potage, not to be compared unto
it, the Parliament would help all, and the Scots Commissioners were so popular
and in request, as they seemed for that time to govern both the City of London
and Parliament, and by their peace, pride and plenty had generated Sedition and
Faction, and that combustible matter in England burst into a Fire which could
not be quenched, the Kings Privy Council could not please the five Members, nor
Kimboltons Ambition and Envy be satisfied without being made a great Officer of
State, but proved after to be a general of some associated Counties against the
King, God might be worshipped with a thriving Conscience, and the people taken
care for by plundering Sequestration, Decimation, Killing, Slaying, or
Impoverishing the Common Wealth or Weal Public. Pym who had been Receiver of
the Kings Money, and had not accounted for it in Twenty years, was once
endeavored to be pleased by being made Chancellor of the Exchequer, Hollis one
of the Secretaries of State, Sir Arthur Haselrig and William Strode were to be
put into great places, one to be Governor of the Prince, and the other as a
Secretary, and there being no special Office for the Lord Kimbolton, the hopes
of their being better Subjects and Counselors than the former begat their
after Rebellion, for which three Kingdoms, and the ruin and desolation thereof,
with the life of the Blessed Martyr King Charles the first might have been
spared, if that Treason had been punished by Law, the King having been informed
that some of the well-willers to the Scottish Rebellion had before hand conveyed
away their Estates, the next care to be taken, being to take away the Life of
Thomas Earl of Strafford, who was General of the Army of the King in the North
against the Scots, who coming up to London to accuse Pym, and the rest of the
five Members so called, found as he was knocking at the door of the House of
Peers, Mr. Pym gotten in accusing him of High Treason, upon which he being
Arraigned was Acquitted, when he was guilty of no Treason but they of
abundance, but that not giving satisfaction to their wicked designs, they
invented a way to have him again Arraigned upon a Bill in Parliament at the
Suit of the Commons of England, (which was the first Bill in Parliament of that
kind in writing that ever was before, to Interest, and proclaim the House of
Commons to be Coordinate and a third Estate, including the King to be in, or
ex se one of them,) many of the Preachers were found fault with, for
Arminianism and other Doctrines, by those that understood them as little as
they did the Word of God, that they preached up the Kings Power and Prerogative,
and Doctor Manwarring voted by the House of Commons in Parliament to be
punished and sequestered (whom the King afterward made a Bishop,) Mr. William
Pryn, Mr. Henry Burton, and Dr. Bastwick justly sentenced in the Court of Star
Chamber, the first having his Ears nailed unto the Pillory, and all of them
severally imprisoned in remote places were insolently voted out of Prison (an
attempt never before adventured upon by an House of Commons in Parliament, and
no such things as previous votings, in order to the fixing or carrying on evil
designs, were ever before used to be made in any of our Kings or Princes
Raigns) and were by multitudes of factious Londoners of the most Common sort
intermingled, brought in a seditious procession on Horseback through the
Streets with Rosemary in their Hats, or Hands. Mr. Pryn shortly after made a
busy and fiery Member of Parliament, the two former whereof were fanatically
reported to have had miracles or visions seen upon the occasion of that they
called their sufferings; Bills were put upon the Corners of the Streets in
London, to invite People to give a meeting upon a certain day at Grocers Hall
in London, to some Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, to prepare
Petitions unto themselves, some Troops of Factious Ministers, made themselves
the Conductors out of several Counties, of many a simple Innovator, with Papers
in their Hats, signifying no more than something they knew not what against
Popery, the Porters of London must put on their Sunday Clothes, and carry to
the House of Commons printed Petitions against the Kings enjoying the Militia,
where they were only informed that it was against Watermen of London's
carriying of Trunks, all the Boys in a Free School at Stamford in Lincolnshire,
enticed by the naughty Schoolmaster, to subscribe their names to a Petition
against Bishops, with other numberless Cheats, and trciks to make fears and
jealousies, and breed a Rebellion which might proceed as much as it could, to
break in pieces (never as they hoped to be repaired again, our Ancient and
flourishing Monarchy, the King makes a progress into his Kingdom of Scotland,
where they beg and importune him for the small Demesne Crown Lands, which he
had left, and when he would have reserved enough to have defrayed the charge of
his house keeping whilst he remained there, they would not trust him with the
Money, for fear he should provide Arms with it (when in the mean time a
Rebellion was begun in Ireland with a Massacre) from whence when he returned to
London, he was received by all the Citizens with the Hosanna of a Great seeming
Joy, but suddenly after ill managed by some Lords and Commons in Parliament,
their then too great Idol in a most Hypocritical way of a Remonstrance bearing
Date the 14th day of December 1641. at Hampton Court, wherein with all zeal and
faithfulness unto His Majesty, acknowledging his Royal favor and Protection,
Petition of the Lords and Commons to his Majesty at Hampton Court 14th of
December 1641.
to be a great blessing and security unto them, for the enjoying of all these
public and private Privileges and Liberties, and whenever any of them shall
be invaded or broken.

And because the Rights and Privileges of Parliament are the Birthright and
Inheritance not only of themselves but the Kingdom, but every one of his
Subjects is interessed (that is as to his protection only, whilst they are his
Subjects do honor and obey him, are so simpliciter, but not secundum quid) the
maintenance and preservation whereof does very highly conduce unto the public
peace and prosperity of His Majesty, and all His People, they conceive
themselves more especially obliged with all humbleness, and care and constancy
of Resolution, to endeavor to maintain and defend the same (as in an easy to
be conceived manner of threatening.) Amongst other the Privileges of Parliament
they do declare that it is their undoubted Right, that His Majesty ought not to
take notice of any matter in agitation and debate in either Houses of
Parliament, but by their Information (which would not only contradict, but
overturn the Reason Constitution, Records and Annals of all our Nation) And
that he ought not to propound any condition, provision or limitation, in any
Bill or Act in debate or preparation in either of both Houses of Parliament, or
to manifest or declare his consent or dislike of the same before it be
presented to His Majesty in the course of Parliament (so as they would have
their King to be as a Mute until they shall have finished all they would, for
otherwise one Interval might thwart another, how shall such a King be Master of
a Judgment, or have any? or was God to be prayed unto to give his Judgment to
the King or unto the People? or by what Rule of Right Reason should the King,
being of full age and sanity of mind, not be permitted the right use of the
Faculties of his Soul?)

And that the King ought not to conceive displeasure against any man for such
Opinions and Propositions as shall be delivered in such debate, it belonging to
the several Houses of Parliament respectively (which had their Original
contradistinct Powers and Customs) to judge and determine such Errors and
Offenses in Words or Actions that shall be committed by any of their Members in
the handling or debating any matter depending (which was contradicted by Queen
Elizabeth when she charged the Members of the House of Commons in Parliament
not to intermeddle in matters of Church or State, or receive any Bills of that
nature, and severely punished some Members that attempted to do otherwise.)

Yet they complained in their so strange a claim of those their never to be
found Privileges, that they were to their great grievance broken by the Kings
endeavoring to put a Salvo Jury to their Bill or Act of Parliament, forbiding
the pressing of Soldiers, (at that instant when there was so great an occasion
for the Wars in Ireland) and went much higher than the great Earls, the
Constable and Earl Marshal of England, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester
did when in a Parliament of King Edward the first, they denied him his
accustomed Salvo Jure, where he or his Privy Council or Council at Law adjudged
it necessary.

And therefore humbly entreated his Majesty by his Royal Power and Authority
(whereof it may (...) they would leave him as little as possibly they could^ to
protect them in those and all other their Privileges of Parliament: And for
the time to come would not interrupt the same, and that they may not suffer in
his Majesty's favor when he should be so greatly obliged unto his Subjects as
to restore again to his knowledge and Judgment, after the end of such a
Parliament, never before known in England, or any other Nation of the Christian
World, such a kind of Privilege, neither being possible to be found or heard
of on Earth or amongst the Antipodes, or in the discovery which Gonzagua's
Geese made of the Country of the Moon, where the Servants are reported to
govern the Masters, and the Children their Parents) And that his Majesty would
be pleased to nominate those that have been his Advisers that they may receive
such condign Judgment as may appertain unto Justice. And this his most faithful
Council, shall advise and desire, as that which will not only be a comfort to
themselves, but of great advantage to his Majesty, by procuring such a
confidence between him and his People, as may be a Foundation of honor, safety
and happiness to his Person and Throne.

And probably had never adventured to fly so high a pitch, if some of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament had not upon the Scotch petitioning Rebellion, and
entering into England borrowed 150000 l. upon their several personal securities
to pay their quarters whilst they were here, which Parliament Manacles of their
King would have amounted to more than the aforesaid Sir Edward Cokes figment,
of a modus tenendi Parliamentum used as he believed in Edward the Confessors
time.

And in the absence of Parliaments might have the Name and Title of King, until
they should make an occasion to Print a Remonstrance against him, or arraign
him.

And as a Prologue to their intended Remonstrance, Petition to the House of
Commons.
the next day they seeming not a little to congratulate his safe coming from
Scotland, did beseech him to give more Life and Power to the faithful Council
of his Parliament, and being necessitated to make a Declaration of their
grievances, Husbands Collections of Proceedings in Parliament
and the corruption of some of his Bishops, especially such as are in a near
trust and employment about him, and were diverse of them of his Privy Council,
and about the Prince his Son, and have thereby a dangerous operation in his
Council and Government in this time of a preparation for War betwixt his
Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, (which was then but procured and fomented by
confederacy) Insurrection of the Papists and Bloody Affairs in Ireland, for
prevention whereof they have engaged themselves and their Estates in the sum of
150000 l. Sterling, or thereabouts for the necessary supply of his Majesty in
his dangerous Affairs, therefore they prayed.

1. That he would concur with the desires of his Parliament, for the depriving
the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament, (which was the one half of that grand
Fundamental of the Laws and Government of England in the House of Peers in
Parliament,) and abridge their immoderate power usurped over the Clergy, to the
hazard and prejudice of the Laws, Liberty, and Religion of his Subjects, and
the taking away oppression in Church Government and Discipline, punishing such
Loyal Subjects as join together in Fundamental Truths against the Papists, and
by the oppressions of unnecessary Ceremonies.

2. Remove from his Council all the promoters thereof, and to employ such
persons in his great Affairs and trust as his Parliament may conside in, (which
was to govern him both in times of Parliament and without, when he has at his
Coronation taken his Oath to govern according to his Laws not any of the
Peoples.

3 That he would not alienate any of the forfeited Irish Lands, (which begot
good bargains for some of the ungodly contrivers, when they after purchased
their Rebel perjured Soldiers arrears for xvj. d. per pound.

Which being fulfilled, they his most great and faithful Council, (upon these
conditions) ^^all by the blessing of God, (as they would have it) cheerfully
undergo the expense of the War, and apply themselves to such other means and
Councels as shall support him, and make him glorious both at home and abroad.

In order whereunto the contrary way they did the 15th day of December 1641.
notwithstanding his earnest request unto them, print and publish it, wherein
(besides some of their own or their instigators, unquiet Spirits, ambitious or
evil designs, to misuse and Govern their Sovereign, plainly appearing may be
seen, and the many greivances of their own making, in the oppressing of each
other, and undertaking to determine of matters and Mysteries of State, and the
Arcana's and necessities of State, of which they could not possibly without
necessary Praecognita's, be competent Judg^s) they made a great addition to
that prologue, to their subsequent Rebellion, and abominable consequence of the
murder of that excellently pious Prince, insomuch is it may be over and over
again, a wonder to be ranked amongst the greatest, in what untrodden or dark
inaccessible Caverns of the Earth, these unknown and never accustomed
Privileges of the Parliaments of England, could lurk or lie hidden, when in
all the Conservatorships of liberties, devised at Running Mede forced upon King
John, the ^ovisions made at Oxford, in the Reign of King Henry the 3d. neither
any thing in the Raigns of King Edward the 2d and 3. and 4. and Richard 2d.
Henry 4, 5, 6. Richard the 3d the Usurper, Henry the 7th. King Henry 8. E. 6.
Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth and and King James had never such shackles desired
or claimed to be put upon any of them, unto which those Parliament
Remonstrants, were the more encouraged by that oppressed Princes having his
three Kingdoms, set on fire about his Ears at once; that of Ireland incited by
his condescensions to that of Scotland; and that of England, as busy as the
worst but gaining more by it, when the King had to pacify all, given them
license by an Act of Parliament, to continue in Parliament, without adjourning,
proroguing, or dissolving, until those great Sums of Money should be satisfied,
and Ireland quieted, which they never intended, but hindered and perplexed all
they could, although he offered to go thither in Person himself which they
would not consent unto for fear, least he should thereby get Arms and Power
into his own hands, to frustrate their wicked design, which that Republican
wicked party, durst never offer to Oliver Cromwell, the Protector of their
supposed Liberties, with any the least of those monstrous conditions, by them
called Privileges, but could tamely suffer him to make his own Instrument of
Government, alter the Course of Parliament, with more or less Members of the
House of Commons in Parliament, pull out and imprison diverse Members of that
House, and shut up the Doors, constitute a new House, of his mechanic and
ordinary Commanders, instead of a House of Lords, after the Republican partty
had made such an Act of Parliament as they could, that none should have benefit
of the Laws, who did not take an oath of engagement not to have any more a King
or House of Lords.

And to be disappointed as little as they could possibly in those their
intentions, made all the have they could to fire their Beacons of personal
Plots and dangers against themselves, the great Patriots of the Kingdom, and
Weal public, as they had done before against Popery, and therefore incredible
Plots and Conspiracies were discovered by one of their Members, who had an
especial faculty therein, and likewise by others, as a Plaster taken from the
sore of a man infected therewith, and brought by an Incognito in a Letter to
Mr. John Pym, the Lord Digby seen at Kingston upon Thames, with four Horses in
a Coach in a warlike manner, Horses kept and trained under ground, and a
dangerous design to blow up the River Thames with Gunpowder, whereby to drown
the Parliament Houses with many the like ridiculous fopperies to affright the
easy to be deluded silly Vulgar, and engage them in a Rebellion, and were in
the mean time to be secured themselves by a guard, for which they ^e^tioned the
King, who ordered the Justices of Peace to command the Constables of that
division to furnish one, but that would not accommodate their purposes, nothing
would help forward their more than ordinary designs, than a guard by the
Trained Bands of the City of London by turns, which being granted by the King,
suddenly after the Citizens Wives were so afraid of the danger o^ the Tower of
London, as they could not lie dry in their Beds, and the Lieutenant of the
Tower must be displaced, and a more confiding one put in to give them content
that never intended to be satisfied.

Which being done the Pulpits of the Prebyterian Scotized Clergy flaming, and
the Printing Presses, Stationers and Cryers in the Streets, as busy in the
publishing the Harangues of the House of Commons Members in proclaiming the
imaginary grievances, and he was a small man at Arms that had made and
published no more than one or two such Speeches, mean while Protestations were
ordered to be made in every Parish of England and Wales, to defend the King and
the Protestant Religion, the King going into London in his Coach has a Paper
thrown into it with a writing thereupon, To your Tents O Israel, the many Rude
people of the adjoining Hamlets came in droves to the Parliament, crying, No
Bishops, and for Justice, and as they pass by Whitehall Gate and knock at it
desire to speak with the King, who sends unto the Students of the Inns of
^ourt, with some Captains and Commanders to attend him as a supplemary Guard,
who came and had a Diet and Table provided for them, the Bishops do leave the
House of Peers with a protestation (patterned with one in 11 R. 2.) that they
could not sit there in safety, for which they were all made Prisoners in the
Tower of London, but were all afterward released, except Matthew Wren Bishop
of Ely, who remained there sequestered from his Bishopric, for something more
than 13 years, without knowing for what cause or crime until his late Majesty's
happy Restoration.

Mr. Henry Martin a Member of the House of Commons in Parliament, more fearing
the Anger of his Mistress than his God or King, begins in Parliament to declaim
against the King, saying, that he was not fit to Reign or Govern, and moved
that all the Regal Ornaments customarily lodged in the Abbey of Westminster
under the custody of the Dean and Chapter thereof might be seized; one Mr.
Parker made have to make himself an Observator of the Rebellious way with
dislocated Maxims, abused and wrested out of their proper meaning, and
Interpretations, viz. Quod efficit tale est magis tale, the King is Major
singulis, but minor universis, and salus populi est suprema Lex, which although
Learnedly answered by the more Loyal Orthodox Party to an ample Conviction that
should be, could not satisfy or stop the designed Confederacy and Rebellion,
but the ten Judges of the twelve that gave their Opinions in the case of Mr.
Hambden against him concerning the Shipmoney for the King, were by the
Parliaments Order put out of their Offices and Places; Justice Berkly one of
the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench taken Prisoner as he was sitting by
the Usher of the Black Rod attending the House of Peers, after which Mr. Denzal
Hollis came to the House of Lords, and with greater boldness than assurance,
claimed the Militia and Power of the Sword to appertain of Right to the People;
and Mr. Pryn writes and Publishes his Book of the Supremaey of Pryns
Sovereignty of Parliaments.
Parliaments, seconded by Mr. John Whites Book entitled a Politic Chatechism,
undertaking to prove by John Whites Politic Catechism.
our Laws the Resistibility and Forcing the Power of our Kings to be Vested in
the People, and the Judges were commanded by the Parliament without the King to
declare to the People in their Circuits, that the Militia is, and ought to be
in the Parliament as the Representative of the People (which was never before
done, read, seen, or heard of in England) which all the Judges obeyed, but my
honored Friend the worthy Sir Thomas Mallet one of the Justices of the Court
of Kings Bench, who not forgetting his very Ancient and Noble descent, plainly
and resolutely at every place in his next Circuit, declared it in all his
Charges to be in Law de Jure Coronae suae in the King, and for his so exemplary
Loyalty, was in the last place of that Circuit by Sir Richard Onslow Knight a
Member of the Commons House in Parliament with a Troop of Horse, as he was
sitting upon the Bench at Kingston upon Thames Arrested and carried Prisoner to
the Tower of London, and the Wind and Tide of fear and self-preservation did
then so impetuously drive Sir Edward Littleton, the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, (who some years before, when he was a young Man, made it a
part of his Praise or Olympic Game, to prove by Law that the King had no Law
to destrain men esse Milites,) and Sir John Banckes Knight Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, that they joined with the then Illegal concurrent
Votes of too many of the House of Peers, that the Militia which was the Right
and Power of the Sword, and Jus divinum gladii, and the totum aggregatum, and
support of the Government was in the People when our Learned Bracton has truly
informed us, that in Rege qui recte regit necessaria sunt duo, Arma videlicet,
and Leges quibus utrumqne bellorum, and pacis recto possit gubernari, utrumque
enim istorum alterius indiget auxilio quo tam Res militaris possit esse in tuto
quam ipsae Leges usu Armorum, and praesidio possent esse servatae, si autem
Arma defecerint contra hosts Rebels and Inimicos, sic erit Regnum indefensum
si Henr. de Bracton in pro^^io.
autem Leges sic exterminabitur justitia, nec erit qui justum faciet. Following
therein that opinion of Justinian the Emperor in his Institutes.

And did declare (not like men that had taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy before they were admitted into that House) that if any Person
whatsoever (wherein the King or his Command ought to have been excepted) shall
offer to arrest or detain the Person of any Member of that House without first
acquainting their House, or receiving further Order from that House, that it is
Lawful for any such Member, or any Person to assist him, and to stand upon his,
and their guard, and defense, and to make resistance according to the
protestation taken to defend the Privileges of Parliament, (which was neither
to commit or maintain Treason, or make that without the Kings Authority to be
Treason that never was, and their intolerable haughty Privileges so
incompatible and inconsistent with Monarchy demanded by the Petition of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, the 14th day of December 1641. can never be
able to withstand the dint and force of the Law, and Right Reason if a Quo
Warranto should be brought against them.)

Whereupon the King the 4th day of January 1641. coming into the House of
Commons in Person, (no such Company attending with Pistols at the Door as was
untruly reported) and being sat in the Speakers Chair, said, he was sorry for
the occasion of coming unto them.

Yesterday he had sent a Sergeant at Arms to apprehend some that were accused
of High Treason, whereunto he expected Obedience and not a Message, and that he
must declare unto them, that in case of High Treason no Person has a
Privilege.

And therefore he was come to know if any of these Persons accused were here,
for so long as those Persons accused for no slight crime, but for Treason, were
there he could not expect that that House could be in the Right way, which he
heartily wishes, and therefore he came to tell the House that he must have them
wheresoever he can find them, but since he sees the Birds are flown, he does
expect from them that they should send them unto him as soon as they return
thither, But assures them in the word of a King he never did intend any force,
but shall proceed against them in a legal and fair way, for he never meant any
other, (which they might easily have done, when they had his own Sergeant at
Arms attending that Honse for no other than such like purposes.)

The next day being the 5th day of January 1641. (notwithstanding that Treason,
Felony, and Breach of the Peace were always by the Laws of England, and Customs
of their Parliaments exempt, and never accounted to be within the Circuit of
any Parliament Privilege, for otherwise Parliaments, and great Assemblies well
Affected, or ill Affected would be dangerous unto Kings) they declare the Kings
coming thither in Person to be an high breach of the Rights and Privilege of
Parliament, and inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof, and
therefore adjourned their sitting to the Guildhall in London, (which they
should not have done without the Kings Order) that a special Committee of 24
should sit there also concerning the Irish Affairs, of which number was Sir
Ralph Hopton, that after got out of their wicked errors, and fought and won
sundry glorious Battles for the King against those Parliament Rebels, and some
few more of that their Committee deserted their Party.

And the Writ sent by King Edward the first to the Justices of his Bench by Mr.
Pulton styled a Statute made in the 7th year of his Reign, might have
sufficiently informed 7 E. 1.
them, and all that were of the profession of the Law in the House of Commons
in Parliament, that in a Parliament at Westminster, the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm have said that to the King it belongs,
and his part is through his Royal Seignory straightly to defend force of Arms,
and all other force against his Peace at all times which shall please him, and
to punish them which shall do contrary according to the Laws and Usages of the
Realm, and therefore they are bound to aid him as their Sovereign Lord at all
times when need shall be, and therefore commanded the Justices to cause those
things to be read before them in the said Bench, and there Enrolled.

The before confederated national Covenant betwixt England and Scotland being
by Ordinance of Parliament (for so they were pleased to call their no Laws)
confirmed under a penalty that no man should enjoy any Office or Place in the
Commonwealth of Engl. and Ireland that did not Attest and Swear it, which the
King prohibiting by his Proclamation sent unto London, the bringer whereof was
hanged, the King certainly informed of the traitorous practices, and other
misdeameanors of the Lord Kimbolton, and his aforesaid Associates, did as
privately as possible with the Prince Elector Palatine his Nephew, and no
extraordinary attendance go in person to the House of Commons to seize them,
because his Sergeants at Arms durst not adventure to do it, who having notice
of it by the Countess of Carlisles over-hearing his whispering to the Queen,
and suddenly sending them notice thereof, were sure to be absent, wherein he
being disappointed, did afterward by his Attorney General exhibit Articles of
High Treason, and other Misdemeanors against them.

1. That they had traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Kingdom, and deprive the King of his Legal Power, and place
on Subjects an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power (which shortly after proved
woefully true, and for many years after so continued.)

2. That they have endeavored by many foul aspersions upon his Majesty, and
his Government to alienate the affection of his People, and to make his Majesty
odious unto them.

3. That they have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army to disobedience
to his Command, and to side with them in their traiterous designs.

4. That they have traitorously invited, and encouraged a foreign Prince to
invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England.

5. That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Rights and
being of Parliaments.

6. That for the completing of their traitorous designs, they have endeavored
as far as in them lay by Force and Arms, to compel the Parliament to join with
them in their traitorous designs, and to that end have actually raised, and
countenanced Tumults against the King and Parliament.

7. That they have traitorously conspired to leavy, and actually have leavied
War against the King.

Whereupon the House of Commonsin Parliament the 3d. of January 1641. did
Order, that if any person should seal up the Trunks or Doors of any Members of
their House, (which in the case of the King for Treason, was not certainly
within the Virge of their Commission, or purpose of their Election either by
the King or their Countries, or their Indentures or Wages allowed, nor the
Privilege of Freedom from Arrest of their persons or goods, whilst they are
there in his important service) they should require the Aid of the Constable,
who by his Oath of Allegiance was not to do it.

And in another Declaration of the 7th day of January 1641. Printed and
Published, (which in this Kingdom, or any other part of Christendom was never
accustomed or allowed to be done,) were pleased untruly to affirm that the King
having sent a Sergeant at Arms to their Speaker to demand the persons aforesaid
accused, and being denied, came the next day in his Royal Person to demand
them, with Halberts, Swords and Pistols, attending without at the Door, (who if
they had been as dreadful as they would make it, would have been but necessary,
lest he might have been Stabbed and Assassinated, as Julius Caesar was
unguarded in the Roman Senate.)

Did declare that the Arresting of the said Accused Members or any other
Members of Parliament by prretence or color of any Warrant issuing from the
King only, (as if they were assured of a Co-ordination with him) is guilty of
the Breach of the Liberty of the Subject, and of the Privilege of Parliament,
and a public Enemy of the Common wealth, and that the Arrestnig of any of the
said Members, or any other Member, without a Legal proceeding against them, is
declared, a public Enemy of the Commonwealth, notwithstanding, they did
declare that they would no^ protect any Member that should be prosecuted by the
King according to the Law of the Kingdom, and the Rights, and Privileges of
Parliament, for Treason, or any other Misdemeanor (so as they which never were
yet a Judicature, or had ever any power to examine a Witness, might be the
Judges what was the Law or Treason) and will be as willing that Justice be done
against the Commons, as to defend the just Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, and Privileges of the Parliament of England.

That the Privileges of the Parliament, and Liberties of the Subjects so
violated and broken, cannot be sufficiently vindicated, (a punctilio of Honor
never before insisted upon by any of the Parliaments, or Subjects of England to
their Sovereign Kings or Princes,) without the delivering up unto them the
names of those that advised or councelled him thereunto, and the coming in his
own Person, the publishing of the said Articles, and Printed Papers inform
against the said Members, to the end that such persons may receive condign
punishment, (intending very likely to have it only left to their own lately
self-erected Soveraignships.)

The County of Buckingham Petitioned for Mr. Hambden, and did adventure to say,
that in their Opinion his Majesty's Accusation of him does oppugn the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament, which was according to the Protestation to
defend the King, and the Church, and Commonwealth.

The House of Commons the 15th of January 1641. examined Sir Edward Herbert the
Kings Attorney General upon several Articles concerning the Accusation for
Treason against the Lord Kimbolton, and the other Members, and whether he would
undertake or make good the said Articles, or any of them, if he shall be called
before the Lords, unto which he answered by my former expression, you may
discern what answer I cannot make or take, to make one Title of them, otherwise
than as my Master has informed me, and enabled me, for of my self I cannot,
nor will not do more than one that never heard of them.

Whereupon it was resolved by the House of Commons, that the said Attorney
General had broken the Privilege of Parliament in praeferring the said
Articles, and that a Charge be sent up to the House of Lords in the name of the
House of Commons against him, to have satisfaction for the great scandal and
injury which he has done to the said Members, unless by Thursday next he bring
in and make good, if he can, the said Articles against the said Members, or any
of them.

The 4th of March 1641. the King from Royston in his Journey toward York,
being deterred from his Palace at Whitehall, wrote to the Lord Chancellor,
commanding him to read unto the Lords the Copy of his Charge against the
aforesaid Members, and nominate a Committee to examine the Evidence thereof,
and also signified, that what his Attorney General had done therein, was by his
command, and according to his Duty.

But having declared that he found cause wholly to desist from prosecuting the
said Members, he had commanded him to proceed no further therein, nor to
produce or discover any proof concerning the same.

After many Messages and Petitions not to suffer the Queen to go with the
Princess of Orange her Daughter into Holland, nor to take the Prince into
Yorkshire with him, many Petitions and pretenses to have the Militia put into
their hands, absolutely to secure them from their (own coined) fears and
jealousies, and a denial of that but for a limited time, they having also not
failed in desiring strong Towns, Castles, Forts and Garrisons to be put into
their Custody, and voted Sir John Hotham one of their Members no Traitor, after
the King had Proclaimed him a Traitor for his denying him entrance, when he
Personally demanded it, into his strong Fortified Town of Kingston upon Hull;
and a 2 or 3 Remonstrance over-boldly Printed and Published to Idolize
themselves, and inflame the silly people, and made their Blockades,
Circumvallations, Trenches and Mines about our Monarchy, and too many of the
deluded people ready to betray and deliver it up, or gape at the spoil, which
might enlarge and better their formerly wicked conditions, and appointed Deputy
Lieuetnants, and Commanders in every County and City, took into their hands the
Kings Navy with the profit of his Customs, and all that they could by fear or
fraud get into the hands or clutches of their Wolves, Foxes and Harpies, Birds
or Beasts of prey; mean while the King laboring by many Princely Answers to
their Messages, Letters, and Proclamations to keep them from the Witchcraft of
Rebellion, the more they galloped into it, and nominate the Earl of Essex to be
their General, and a great contribution of Plate and Money as before has been
mentioned, to bring the King home to his Parliament, who might have been more
ready than they, had he not been encompassed without any cause, or provocation
with as many Treasons, Plots, Falsehoods and Treacheries as he had Hairs upon
his Head and Beard, with no small want of Money and Friends in the midst of his
three once flourishing Kingdoms, flaming, and on fire about his Ears, which
could not otherwise have brought such an accumulation of evils upon him.

And being somewhat supplied by many of his Exchecquer Receivers, who brought
unto him Remainders of Moneys upon their Accounts, (John Pym excepted, that was
the Kings and his Fathers Receiver in Arrear about 22 years, and could not be
at leisure, lest he should thereby hinder the managing of his Treason against
the King, and so would have made a trusty Chancellor of the Exchecquer for the
King,) marched as well as he could toward his Loyal Subjects of Wales, whither
to hinder and distress him the Earl of Essex, with his Army of Rebels
way-laying him at Edgehill in Warwickshire, where Loyalty and Rebellion
fighting a bloody Battle, and Robert Earl of Lindsey the Kings General being
hurt, and carried away Prisoner to Warwick Castle shortly after died, his Son
the Lord Willoughby offering himself an Hostage, being not according to the
Laws of War accepted, and the Rebels Cannons levelled against the brow of the
Hill, where the King and the Prince sat, but being disappointed, left the
Field, and retired to Warwick, and the King keeping it all that night, the next
day marched to Banbury and took it, from thence fixed himself at Oxford, to
which very many Parliament Men that were Loyal retired, and kept a true
Parliament, howsoever the Rebels made shift to get by parcels to London, where
they Publish how near they were to gain the Victor^ of which they could have
given a greater eertainty of the Lord Wharton had not hid himself in a Saw-pit,
and Stephen Marshal a Factious Minister had not mistaken himself, when in his
Parish Pulpit at Finching field in Essex, he had related an impudent Lie in the
hearing of one that had been in that Battle, that he had picked up Bullets in
his Velvet Cap to help the Rebels Soldiers, when a Soldier that heard him so
preach, could have proved that he at another time had confessed, that he was so
affrighted that he had run away four or five Miles from the place where the
Battle had been, before he knew where he was, after which they were so
unwilling to forsake their Treasonable hopes as they rallyed, and engaged all
the Friends the Devil could help them unto, insomuch as the War grew more and
more fierce, as at the Kings Besieging of Gloucester, the effascinated Citizens
of Londons Trained Bands came to raise the Siege, a sharp Fight was at Newbury,
where they were beaten, and Weemes a Scottish Cannoneer taken Prisoner, whilst
he was levelling at the Person of the King, in a Bloody Fight at Copreby Bridge
where the Rebels had the worst, and yet Weemes was pardoned, and left to do
more mischief, when all he could say was, in Good Faith his Heart was to the
King.

And the King was from place to place so victorious as he drove the Parliament
Rebels by the help of his Nephews, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, and the
gallant Conduct of Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Greenviles, and the courage of the
Cornish men (for which they had the Kings thanks publicly read and Registered
in the Churches) the Earl of Essex, and his Rebel Parliamentarians were so
driven and penned up at Lestichiel in Cornwall, as their whole Army, Cannon and
Ammunition, Bag and Baggage were seized, and the Earl of Essex, and some other
Commanders enforced to shift and save themselves in a Cock-boat, Sir William
Balfour getting away with some of the Horse, notwithstanding all which, and
that that over-tender hearted Prince had experimented more than once their
Rebellion was inexorable, and that neither his Protestation upon the Sacrament,
nor the word stamped upon his Coin for Religion, and the Privileges of
Parliament could make them forsake their Rebellious Principles, could not
forbear to bring them if possible out of that sin of Witchcraft, but when he
might with a victorious Army have beaten them at Bramford, did by some that
were hired to betray (...) Councels, (for by that time they had as much
lea(...) the Art of Bribery, as they had the glosses of Rebellion, rouse their
obdurate and feared Souls with Messages for Peace, and diverse Royal Ministers
and Citizens of London had petitioned them to make Peace with the King, who
sent the Earls of Southampton and Dorset unto their then called House of Peers,
who were answered and received uncivilly enough as to their own Persons, and
the King their Master that sent them, Printed and Published intercepted Letters
betwixt the King and the Queen, and relying more upon their confederating
Brethren of Scotland than upon their God, and the King his Vicegerent, in all
have sent to invite them to come unto their Aid, which they did, and before
they went home, had 300000 l. Sterling paid unto them for their Rebel
Assistance, which putting a stop to the Kings Victories, especially in that
unfortunate Battle at Naseby, and afterward at Marston Moore by a
misintelligence at the later betwixt Prince Rupert, and the Earl of Newcastle,
the King condescended to a Treaty by Commissioners at Uxbridge, where no other
reason could be accepted, but as if the King had been a Subject, and they his
Sovereign, they appeared willing to transfer unto their Scottish Brethren a
great part, if not all, of the Kingdom of Ireland, every attempt and
self-defence of the King, and his Loyal Party bringing no better comfort than
despair, he gave license to his good Subjects to retire into the Parliament
Quarters, or unjust Dominion, and compound for their supposed forfeitures
(which much increased their Treasure and Power) for fighting against the King,
when they fought for him against his Rebels, as if the King and they had been
but one Incorporation, and themselves the head, and the King could be a Rebel
to himself, and them at the same time, and Wat Tyler or Jack Cade, or the late
Massinello had Authority to make themselves Sovereigns, which they had not
impudence enough to adventure, for it must needs appear to all Mankind to be a
Gipsy juggling trick, or Proteisme never before heard of in any part of the
World.

The Noble Earl of Scarsdale refusing to compound, but retiring home, did ever
after cloth himself in Sackcloth, and every day to his death make a visit to
his Tomb.

The King thus vanquished by Clemency and hopes to out-reason their detestible
Rebellion, with all the secrecy imaginable, retired out of Oxford with a too
much overtrusted Groom of his Bedchamber riding out, as the man with Mr.
Hudson an Orthodox Loyal Minister, their Journey being designed for London,
where the King was informed that the City Train Bands were to muster the next
day after he should reach thither, unto whose Protection (not of the Scotch
Army then quartered at Newcastle upon Tine) he intended to place the safety of
his Person, whilst he should Treat further with his Parliament Rebels, (who
being sufficiently infected with their Parliamentary Rebellious never to be
warranted Principles, would have given him as little an assistance) whereof the
Rebels being informed before hand by their Colonel Rainsborough that granted
the King his pass, and did too well understand who was the treacherous Groom of
the Bedchamber man's Master, when the Loyal Party were afraid what was become
of the King, the Rebels could answer, they would shortly hear of him, who
coming near unto London, finding himself disappointed by the Training put off,
was enforced to coast about betwixt Branford and Highgate, and from thence
resolve to take his way to the Scottish Army, and cast himself into their
Protection, after that he had before met with so bad an effect of their
contrary Loyalty, whither being come, they, as if they had had no manner of
Intelligence of it before, write their Letters to their Brother Parliament
Rebels of their great amazement to see the King come unto them, and desire that
he may be brought home to his Parliament, (over which they had such an
influence as they almost governed them) in honor and safety, who fail not to
do it in promises, but would have him delivered to them, and sent to an house
of his own at Holmby in the County of Northampton, where he should not want a
guard of their own, whereupon the Scottish Commanders having fallen into a
deeper than ordinary consideration how they could with Honor, Loyalty, and
good Conscience deliver their Native King into the hands of his Enemies, and
going to voting, two great Commanders that in muckle manner had been obliged to
their King for many great favors, and might have balanced the Vote with a
great deal of facility in the Negative, were mightily suspected to have gone
privately along with them, that they were certain would make up the Majority
for delivering of the King up to his Parliament Adversaries, but took by all
means an especial care for themselves to Vote against the delivering of the
King into the hands of those that would love their own ends more than any of
his Rights or their Duty, and a bargain came so to be made, as the King was put
into the mercy of the English Parliament, and 200000 l. Sterling, which
amounted unto something more than Judas Iscariots thirty pieces of Silver, for
betraying Jesus Christ. And as Mickel as the 200000 l. were above the Scotch
Marks, or 13 d. halfpenny english, none or very little of it could ever after
find the way to the Pockets of the Scotch Plads, or blew Caps, and he had not
been long at Holmby, but he was in a Morning betimes fetched out of his Bed by
Cornet Joice a Fanatic Tailor, with some Troops of Horse sent by Cromwell and
Fairfax, into their Army, Quarters, and tossed from place to place until after
25 Treaties, Letters and Messages for Peace, they had from Treachery to
Treachery, and Villainy to Villainy contrived his execrable Murder.

The 2d of June 1642. the Lords and Commons in The 19 Propositions sent unto
the King the 2d of June 1642.
Parliament did offer their humble Petition and Advice, having nothing in their
thoughts and desires (as they pretended) next unto the Honor, and immediate
service of God, more than the faithful performance of their Duty to his Majesty
and this Kingdom, as the most necessary and effectual means thereof, to grant
and accept the 19 Propositions ensuing, viz.

1. That the Lords and others of his Majesty's Privy Council, and all such
great Officers and Ministers of State either at home or abroad, or beyond the
Seas, may be put from your Privy Council, and have no Offices or Employments,
excepting such as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament, and that
the Persons put into their Places and Employment may be approved of by both
Houses of Parliament, and that Privy Counselors shall take an Oath for the due
execution of their Places in such form as shall be agreed upon by both Houses
of Parliament.

2. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom may not be concluded or transacted by
the advice of private men, or by any unknown or unsworn Counselors, (Sir
Robert Cotton a great Antiquary with a well furnished Library, being often
consulted with by King James and that Prince in special matters,) but that such
matters as concern the public, and are proper for the High Court of
Parliament, which is his Majesty's great and supreme Court, may be debated,
resolved and transacted only in Parliament, (which was contrary to the
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of Parliaments in this, and all other the
Kingdoms of the Christian World, whereby the matters and business of Monarchy,
and the Regal Government were limited and restrained unto arduis, and non
omnibus arduis sed quibusdam) and not elsewhere, and such as shall presume to
do any thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to the censure and judgment of
Parliament, and such other matters as are proper for his Majesty's Privy
Council shall be debated, and concluded by such of the Nobility, and others, as
shall from time to time be chosen for that place by approbation of both Houses
of Parliament, (which would have Incorporated, and Associated the House of
Commons in Parliament with the House of Lords, which never was, nor ought to
have been otherwise than inferior unto the House of Peers in Parliament, and
therefore styled the lower House of Parliament,) and that no public Act
concerning the Affairs of the Kingdom as are proper for his Majesty's Privy
Council, may be esteemed of any validity as proceeding from the Royal
Authority, unless it be done by the Advice and Consent of the Major part of his
Council Attested under their hands; and that his Council may be limited to a
certain number not exceeding 25, nor under 15. And that if any Privy
Counselors place happen to be void in the intervals of Parliament, it shall
not be supplied without the assent of the Major part of the Council, which
choice shall be confirmed at the next sitting of Parliament, or else to be void.

3. That the Lord High Steward of England, Lord High Constable of England,
(which by Marriages and Descent had been Incorporated in the Royal Line,) Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal,
Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Governor of Ireland,
(the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of State,
two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron not being to be ranked with the Peers) may
always be chosen by the approbation of both Houses of Parliament, (the House of
Commons being never before accounted equal with the House of Peers, in Birth,
Honor, Wisdom, Education, Alliance, or Estate,) and in the Intervals of
Parliament by the Assent of the Major part of the Council, in such manner as
was before expressed in the choice of Counselors, (which in a matter of a much
less consequence in the Government of the Kings Household, was so little endured
by the Nobility of England, in the 10th year of the Reign of King Richard the
2d, as it was adjudged an incroachment upon Regal Authority, and high Treason,
and some great Lords suffered in their Persons and Estates for it, and others
glad to receive their Pardons for being confederate or Privy thereunto.)

4. That he or they unto whom the Government, or Education of his Children
shall be committed, shall be approved by both Houses of Parliament, and in the
Intervals of Parliament by the Major part of his Council, in such manner as was
before expressed in the choice of Counselors, and that all such Servants as
are now about them, against whom both Houses shall have any just exception
shall be removed (which before they had disclaimed, as Mr. Rushworths
Historical Collections Printed, and Rushworths Historical Collections.
allowed by them not long before had informed us)

5. That no Marriage shall be concluded, or treated for any of his Children
with any Foreign Prince, or any Person whatsoever abroad, or at home without
the consent of the Parliament, under the penalty of a Praemunire unto such as
shall conclude, or treat any Marriage as aforesaid, (which they had as
aforesaid disclaimed) and the said penalty shall not be pardoned, or dispensed
with, but by the consent of both Houses of Parliament, (that lower House never
having before, or since any power of pardoning or dispensation, nor that higher
without the Sanction or Authority of their Sovereign.)

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and Recusants be
put in execution without any Toleration or Dispensation to the contrary, and
that a course may be enacted by Authority of Parliament to hinder them from
making any disturbance in the State or Law, by Trusts or otherwise.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Lords may be taken away so
long as they continue Papists, and that his Majesty would consent to such a
Bill as shall be drawn for the Education of Children of Papists by Protestants
in the Protestant Religion, which was to take away the Privilege of Barons
holding by Tenure without conviction for Treason, and of Earls, Viscounts,
Marquesses or Dukes, which ever since the beginning of the Reign of King
Richard the 2d. were by that, and all succeeding Kings Letters Patents, to have
vocem locum and sedem in Parliamentis.

8. That his Majesty would be pleased to consent that such a Reformation be
made of the Church Government and Liturgy as both Houses of Parliament shall
advise, wherein they do intend to have consultation with Divines as is
expressed in their Declaration to that purpose, and that his Majesty will
continue his best assistance unto them for raising of a sufficient maintenance
for Preaching Ministers through the Kingdom, (when there was no want of the
Orthodox more Loyal and better sort) and that his Majesty would be pleased to
give his consent to Laws for the taking away of Superstitions and Innovations,
and of pluralities, and scandalous Ministers, (which in their account were only
of the Church of England and Loyal)

9. That his Majesty would be pleased to rest satisfied with the course that
the Lords and Commons have appointed for the ordering of the Militia, until the
same shall be further settled by a Bill, and that his Majesty would be pleased
to recall his Proclamations and Declarations against the Ordinance made by the
Lords and Commons concerning it, (which was to take away the Tenures, the Power
of the Sword, and defense of his People.)

10. That the Members of either Houses of Parliament, as have during the time
of this present Parliament, been put out of any Places or Offices, may either
be restored to their Place or Office, or otherwise have satisfaction for the
same, upon the Petition of that House, whereof he or they are Members.

11. That all Privy Counselors and Judges may take their Oath, the form
thereof to be agreed on and settled by Act of Parliament, for the maintaining of
the Petition of Right, (which was in many things more than ever they could
claim, or ever had, or could by Law have any Right unto,) and of certain
Statutes made by this Parliament which shall be mentioned by both Houses of
Parliament (as if they were in all Duty and Loyalty bound to make him a
glorious King, thought they could never have unking'd him enough, and brought
him to their murdering ever to be abhorred Tribunal,) and that an inquiry of
all the Breaches and Violations of all those Laws may be given in charge by the
Justices of the Kings Bench, and by the Justices of Assize in their Circuits,
and Justices of the Peace at their Sessions to be presented, and punished
according to Law.

12. That all the Judges and Officers placed by approbation of both Houses of
Parliament may hold their places quam diu se been gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether they
be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it: And that all persons cited by either
House of Parliament may appear and abide the sentence of Parliament.

14. That the general Pardon offered by his Majesty may be granted, with such
Exceptions as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of this Kingdom may be put under the Command
and Custody of such persons as his Majesty shall appoint with the approbation
of his Parliament, and in the Intervals of Parliament with the Major part of
the Council, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors.

16. That the extraordinary Guards, and Military Forces attending his Majesty
may be removed and discharged, and that for the future he will raise no such
Guards, or extraordinary Forces but according to the Law, in case of Actual
Rebellion or Invasion (an Imposition and Vassalage was never put upon any thing
that was like a King in Christendom, for the Kings of Scotland whilst separate
from England, and did homage to our Kings, had, when there was cause enough of
fear and jealousy, as now there was none, no such unkingly Vassalage put upon
him. King David had 24000 men for his Guard, who every Month came up to
Jerusalem, and our Saxon King Alured had his Guards by monthly courses.

17. That his Majesty would be pleased to enter into a more strict Alliance
with the States of the united Provinces, and States of the Protestant Religion
for the defense and maintenance thereof, against all designs and attempts of
the Pope, and his Adhaerents to subvert and suppress it, whereby his Majesty
will be much encouraged and enabled in a Parliamentory way for his aid and
assistance in restoring his Royal Sister, and her Princely Issue to those
Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and relieving the other
distressed Protestant Princes, who have suffered in the same cause.

18. That his Majesty would be pleased by Act of Parliament to clear the Lord
Kimbolton, and the 5 Members of the House of Commons in such manner that future
Parliaments may be secured from the consequence of that evil president.

19 That his Majesty would be graciously pleased to pass a Bill for restraining
Peers from sitting, or voting in Parliament, unless they be admitted thereunto
with the consent of both Houses of Parliament, which would have made him such a
King as never was, or can be found in any Christian or Heathen Kingdom or
Nation, and themselves such Subjects as until they could agree the matter
amongst themselves, or they should be couzened by some Republicans, and those
public Plunderers by some Cromwell cheat, those kind of extraordinary mad Men
and Fools of both Sexes, must have been all Kings, Queens and Princes, and that
which they would have called their King, to be but as a shadow or semblance, or
none at all; (which would have restrained the King from all power that other
^ings and Princes had to reward men of merit; when as Joseph had the Honor
done him by Pharaoh, that they should make him ride them second Chariot, and
cry before him, Bow the Knee, and as Mordecai who had preserved King Ahashuerus
Life, was Arrayed with the Royal Apparel, and rode Genesis ca. 41. v. 43.
upon the Horse on which the King used to ride, with the Esther ca. 6. v. 8, 9.
Crown Royal on his Head, and the Horse to be led by one o^ his greatest
Princes through the Street of the City, who sh(...) Proclaim before him, Thus
shall it be done to the man whom the King delights to Honor.)

All those (or which) their humble desires being granted by his Majesty, they
should faithfully apply themselves to regulate his present Revenue in such sort
as may be for his best advantage, and likewise to settle such an ordinary and
constant increase of it, as shall be sufficient to support his Royal Dignity in
Honor and Plenty, beyond the proportion of any former Grants of his Subjects,
of the Kingdom of his Majesty's Royal Predecessors.

And what he owed to himself, his Posterity, People, Prudence, Honor and
Dignity, as to have granted what they desired, they would too easily have
obtained their advantages of bereaving him of his Monarchy by such their
Propositions not fit to be advised, and Petitions neither to be made or
granted, more than Pepin the Mayor of the Palace at Paris ever had, when he
persuaded the last King of the Merovignian Line to indulge his ease, and leave
all his Affairs of State to his care and manage, which brought that Prince
within a short time after to be shaved, and put into a Monastery, and the great
Charles or Charlemain Son of Pepin established King of France, or the like
opportunities, which Hugh Capet the Ancestor of the now King of France, had by
his getting the Rule and Reins of the Government into his own hands, which did
the like to the Family of that Great Charles, and placed himself, and his ever
since flourishing Lineage in that Throne.

And would make him as small a King as Arise Evans a Fanatic Tailor in Black
Friars in London had proposed, (when Sir James Harrington had modelled his
Government of Oceana, Mr. Henry Nevil his Plato Redivivus, and Mr. Charles,
George Cock his Household of God upon Earth, and every one would be busy as he
could in shooting of his bolt) That a King should be Elected out of the Poorest
sort of Men, and have an 100 l. per Annum for his care and pains to be taken in
the Government, which would have been much better than the aforesaid 19 careful
manackling Propositions, when the Parliament must have been the King, and the
King only executive and as the Subject, and the Parliament from time to time
empowered to make Laws contrary to those which he and his predecessors had made
and governed by, and when they please is to execute quite contrary, and procure
a pardon when he can of God Almighty for it.

And having by the help of their Seditions and Rebellion gained as they hoped a
new Magna Charta for themselves as representatives for the people, their next
care and industry were employed not only to guard and keep what they had
thought themselves possessed of, but to add as many more advantages unto them
as the pressures and necessities of their King might join unto them, and
therefore when the Noble General Monk, after Duke of Albemarle had by Gods
mercy to King Charles the 2d under the mask of a Commonwealth by his wary
conduct in almost a miraculous manner reduced the King to his Kingdoms,
Dominions and Monarchick Rights, without, as the Parliament Rebels would have
persuaded him, the taking of the Rebellious Covenant, or the abstracting of any
of his Regal Rights, they did so contrive their matters, as in an Act of
general pardon larger than ever was granted by any of our Kings of England with
some small exceptions, prepared by two Sergeants at Law, that had Sailed along
with the Wind and Tide of that long lasting Rebellion, they had bestowed upon
it an especial praeamble, That whereas diverse Rebellions and Insurrections had
been by virtue of diverse Commissions of the King, and of the Parliament, as if
any could be guilty of High Treason, or other Misdemeanors, or could forfeit,
that acted by the Kings Authority, the King had pardoned all Treasons,
Felonies, etc. And as if they had nothing more to incroach upon the Monarchy,
did take it to be a breach of they knew not what Privilege for their murdered
King to send for a Printing-press from London to York or Oxford, and the
Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, after that huge pardon granted
by King Charles the 2d of the forfeiture of all the Lands in England, which
were in the Rebels possessions, with all their rich Goods and Chattels,
together with another Act to unbastardize their Children, and unadulterate
their Fathers and Mothers fastened, and entailed upon them by a new Fanatical
way of Marriage before Justices of Peace, as if they were only to part a fray,
or keep them from fighting, for which they seemed not to be at any rest or
quiet with themselves, until every County, City, Borough, Market Town and
Corporation, or Company of Trade had attended his Majesty with Addresses of
huge protestations of Loyalty and Obedience, and the expense of their Blood,
Lives and Fortunes, and all that could be dear unto them, yet too many of them
could after make their counterfeit Loyalty, with promises to live and dye with
him to amount unto no more than the breeding of Factions, and dislike of his
Majesty's mild and tender hearted Government, lampooning and scandalizing him,
robbing and pilfering his Royal Revenue, whereby to encompass him with all
manner of importunate necessities, as if the cheating and misusing of Kings had
been no small part of their Praerogative, contrived a most abominable
Association upon him and his Royal Brother, his now Sacred Majesty, to murder
and ruin them as they were to come thorough a narrow Lane from Newmarket to
London in the same Coach, and being disappointed therein, proceeded to infect
as much Copy of the Bill of Exclusion in the paper seized in the Earl of
Shaftsbury's Closet in Anno 1681.
as they could the Parliament, that should have been his best and most wholesome
Counsel, to make and enter into an Association upon their Oaths without their
King, to exclude and banish his Royal Brother, his now present Majesty, and his
Heirs and Successors, from the Royal Succession, for that he was suspected to
be addicted to the Religion of the Church of Rome.

Which being by the King and major part of the House of Lords contradicted, a
Force and Insurrection was contrived, and enough as they hoped listed and made
ready to accomplish it; but it being discovered by some that had been persuaded
to assist therein, and some of the Nobility being according to Law attainted of
High Treason, and forfeited, they would not leave prosecuting of him with their
Plots and Designs, until God the Appointer of Kings had called him to his mercy
from them that would have no mercy for him.

And having thus long abused their Kings with their Rebellions, and brought a
long lasting Series of mischief and miseries upon their seduced Followers,
could not rest satisfied if they should not give more Credit to their New
Commonwealth-Mongers, that would entitle them to the only power of summoning,
proroguing, adjorning or dissolving of Parliaments, and manackling of their
Kings and Princes, and did not think they had enough established it and
themselves, if they had not, when for Loyalty or any such matter they were to
eject any of their Fellow Members, caused them to receive their Sentence upon
their Knees, although they had committed no Offense, neither supplicated for
any pardon, or had it.

And another being as willing as some others to adore his own fancy without any
evidence of Truth, Law, or Right Reason, in his Wringing. Wresting and
Torturing of Tropes, Metaphors, Allegories, Improprieties of Words or Phrases
beyond their Right or common use, or what he had picked together out of some
lying Manuscripts, and abused Records by omissions of truths, whereby to put
his vain and groundless imaginations into some frame and method, has in his
Book Printed and Published, endeavored to make the House of Commons to be an
Essential and Constituent part of Parliament, and to have a votum Decisivum
therein, and has therein committed more dangerous errors than the late Author
of the Theory of the Earth, in his endeavoring to Animadversions on a Book
called the Theory of the Earth.
prove Noah's Flood to have been more from natural causes than the product of
God Almighty's Will and Infinite Power, declared by his more especial Servant
Moses, sufficiently confuted by the Reverend Father in God Herbert Lord Bishop
of Hereford.

And it must needs be said that he has over-dangerously handled Joves
Thunderbolts, and made himself as instrumental as he could to take the
Sovereignty from the King, and bestow it upon the People, whom he and his
Opiniotretees would suppose to be represented in Parliament, whereas he should
have only said, it was a constituted part of the Parliament from the 49th year
of the Reign of King Henry the 3d sub modo and forma during that Kings
Imprisonment under Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester and his Rebel Associates,
and were neither in Authority or Degree the same with the more Honorable, and
better Estated House of Peers, although in that then constituted House of
Commons in Parliament there were to be four Knights out of every County in
England to be Elected and sent thither, (few of them Dr. Brady in the History
of King Henry the third.
appearing) and that more or less they might have claimed, as they have lately
done the summoning of the Peers and the Nobility of the Kingdom, Electing the
Members of the House of Commons in Parliament, and they representing all the
People, might more easily have continued and maintained their Post and Station
of a never to be proved senseless and reasonless Sovereignty, which was not to
be seen, heard or read in this Kingdom, either in the time that it had been a
Roman Colony, or of the Great Arthur, or the Saxon Heptarchy, Norman Conquest,
and our many since succeeding Kings and Princes, and is, and has ever been
attended with so many possibilities of setting People together to kill, destroy
and ruin one another, as has no where in the habitable World, but in our late
English Frenzy and Infatuation, and most egregious Hypocritical pretenses of
Religion, whilst they for almost fifty years together, employed their Godless
time in murdering of their Kings and Laws, and the one half or more of their
Fellow Subjects Lives and Estates, and that Author can never prove that there
are two Supreams, nor find any way to agree them, which should be uppermost, or
which the lowermost.

And what pro Deus atque hominum fidem, could those liberties be, that they by
a pretense of Reformation of grievances of their own making had usurped upon
their King, to mould themselves and their wicked fellow Complotters into a
Republic, as they would have it styled, when it proved to be nothing but a
Society of Rapine plunder and villainy, whereof their Regicide Oliver Cromwell
had afterward cheated them, and was almost as great a mistake in what a very
learned Judge had said, when he was Member of the House of Commons, that the
King was primarily a Trustee for the People, yet it could not be so affirmed by
any Truth, Rule or Law of God or man as immediately from or by them, but only
as immediately from or by God commanded to take care of his People.

And a wrongful misinterpretation has been endeavored to be put upon some
part of our Reverend Mr. Hookers Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, as if he had
positively affirmed, that the King was a Trustee for his People (as he is
doubtless for his protection) when the late Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, and
Isaac Walton in vita ^jasdem.
learned Dr. Sanderson Bishop of Lincoln, has affirmed unto me that he having
heedfully, perused the Book written with Mr. Hookers own hand could discover no
such words therein.

So here is complexedly met and united a Systeme, and a Mass of the
Conspiracies, Factions, Seditions; Treasons and abominable confusions put
together and agitated, sometimes at one time, and after at others, from the
later end of the Reign of King Richard the first until the Reign of King
Charles the 2d in the dream of the Election of our Kings and Princes in the
Rebellion at Running Mede; some Barons in the Reign of King Henry the third
threatening to choose another King, and enforcing of Conservators of the
Liberties of the People, in the provisions Derogatory to Kingly Government made
at Oxford in the Reign of King Henry the third, and constrained of King Edward
the second.

And might have happened into a question unanswerable, what mischief our Magna
Charta, or Charta de Foresta had done unto our Nation, or upon what other cause
or reason those excellent Laws were granted by our King Henry the 3d, and so
dearly beloved, as they thought themselves utterly undone if they had not with
the 15th part of their Movables obtained them eisdem modo and forma, without
any substraction or addition, the same which have been continued and confirmed
by their several Kings and Princes above thirty times, and was such a caution
in one of their Parliaments, as the Bishops in their several Diocesses were
empowered to Anathematize all the Infringers thereof; and King Henry the 3d in
that direful Procession was constrained to walk through Westminster Hall the
Abby-Church of Westminster, with all the Bishops, Earls, Barons and Nobility of
England and Wales, holding burning Tapers in their hands, (the King only
refusing after the reading of the aforesaid Magna Charta's freely granted by
that King, and likewise that enforced upon King John his Father) and throwing
down their Tapers, wishing that the Souls of the Infringers thereof might so
burn and fry in Hells everlasting fire, being such a cursed obligation as was
never enforced upon any King or Prince by their people in any Nation of the
World, and might if Right had been done unto that distressed King, have been
deeply censured in foro Animae and gratitudinis: And if those Magna Charta's
have been such a darling of the people as they seemed to value it as their
Blood and Estates, how could they fall so much out of their love as they would
do all that they could to be rid of them, as if they had been Circe's Swine
tearing them in pieces, when they are for the most part a complete System or
figure of our Ancient Monarch Feudal Laws, and every Chapter therein loudly
proclaim them to be no otherwise.

And what have we got in Recompense of the overturning of our beneficial and
ever to be praised Feudal Laws, but the forfeitures of all our Lands and
Estates, if God and the King should be extreme and mark what is done amiss.

Or can any man of Learning Reason or Understanding, or any but one that is or
has been mad without Lucid Intervals, believe that St. Edward the Confessors
Laws have not deduced their Original for the most part, if not all, from the
Feudal Laws, when by the solemnest and greatest Jury of the World impannelled
by King William the Conqueror, they appeared sine dolo and malo ingenio, to be
no other than our Feudal Laws by which the Sovereignty did appear to be in the
King, (not the People) by which our Kingdom had been Governed, and did bear as
near a resemblance thereunto, as one Hen Egg does or can unto another in shape
or figure.

And what strange kind of Imaginary Sovereignty radically or otherwise at any
time was believed to reside in the people, when the Pope and his Legate
Pandulphus made our affrighted King John to do homage by laying down his Crown
and Scepter at the feet of his Legate, multum dolente Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, says Matthew Mat. Paris.
Paris) nor was the Tribute paid or thought fit to be paid thereupon for the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, though demanded of King Henry the third his
Son, or Edward the first his Grandson, but by all our Kings and Princes
neglected, it being an allowed Maxim in our Law that Angliae Rex nunquam
moritur, which could not be if all the People had been understood to have been
Sovereigns.

Or can any man believe that our English Ancestors did not think St. Edward the
Confessors said Laws LL. Edwardi Confessor. and Chronicon L^^^^f^ilde^s.
to be tantum sacrae, when they hid them under his Shrine in the Church of
Westminster-Abby, and afterward precibus and fletibus obtained of him to be
Governed by them.

Which William the Conqueror would not have granted until he had by the
aforesaid grand Jury examined and compared them, per sapientes and viros in
Lege eruditos, and the People of England and Wales have ever since, being about
619 years, never believed their Lives, Estates and Posterities to be in any
kind of safety, if the Conqueror and all the succeeding Kings and Princes did
not at their several Coronations take their Oaths to observe most especially
St. Edward the Confessors Laws, which they never failed to do, and has been so
taken both by his late Majesty, and this our present King.

And it would be a strange forgetfulness of Duty, and our Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, (upon which, and no other our Feudal Laws are built) to forget
them, and the care of our Souls, which the Britaignes in Armorica in France
could never do since the dread and fear of the cruel Invasion of the Scots and
Picts making them forsake their Native Country of England, and retire where
they now are, where they yet retain their Ancient Feudal Customs used in
England; which is that Ligeance est ordinaire en tous fiefs la quelle de sa
nature emporta obeyssance du vassal foy homage and autre les droits and devoirs
contenus en l'infeodation and anciens advouz and tenures.

L'homage lige ce fera en ceste form scavoir que le vassal l' Espee and
Esperons ostez test nue (ayant les mains enter celles de son Seigneur and se
enclynant) dira tells paroles mon Seigneur Je deviens vostre home Lige pour
tells chooses lesquelles Je releve and tien de vous ligement Custum^s de
B^^taigne ^n F^^ncep. 136. 137. 8^ 138.
en tiel vostre fief and Seigneurie lesquelles chooses me sont advenues par tells
moyens a cause de quoi Je vous doy la foy and homage lige and vous promittes
par ma foy and serment vous estre Loyal and feable porter l' honneur and
obeisance and envers vous me gouverner aynsi que noble homage de foy lige doit
fair envers son Seigneur Le Seigneur respondra come sensuit vous devenus mon
home pour rayson de tales chooses par vous dites and de chooses en tell me
promittant que vous me serra feal and obeysant home and vassal si que vostre
fief le requier and le Subject respondra Je le promets ainsi and lors le
Seigneur dira Je vous y recen sauf mon droit and de l' autrui.

Insomuch as when all the aforesaid concurrences of the Laws of God and Man,
Records and Annals, Truth and rectified Reason shall be united and laid
together, he must be an ill Subject, and a very great INfidel that cannot with
great assurance believe that the Blessed Martyr King Charles the first, and his
late Royal Majesty, and our now Gracious Sovereign have been much wronged in
their Regal Rights, Revenue and Authority, and had as their Blessed Father been
made likewise Martyrs, if the Divine Providence of God had not in favor unto a
sinful People prevented those very often attempts of Villainy.

And may put us thus preserved from a ruin and confusion impending upon a
Nation, (as unto too many of them) nursed and enriched by plain or palliated
Disloyalty, seeing his now Royal Majesty his Indulgent Brother, and Pious
Father, have taken their Coronation Oaths to observe the good Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, which are the same with our so often confirmed Magna
Charta's, and Charta de Foresta, the Blessings of this Nation, and ordained by
Act of Parliament to be read in all the Cathedral Churches of England and
Wales, the Infringers whereof have been as aforesaid so bitterly Anathematized.

And that the Honor, Dignity and Strength of the Nation may no longer remain
Ecclipsed, and that our weakness in the want of our most Honorable and Ancient
Monarchick Fundamental Feudal Laws may not be told, or made use of in Gath and
Askalon, and that our King may not be without the means to defend himself and
his People, and avoid the disadvantages and damages which Foreign Princes and
his Allies may put upon him in all his Leagues and Treaties with them
concerning his Imperial and Monarchick Crown and Dignity, and in matters of
Commerce, wherein all his People are not a little concerned, and that there is
now more reason and necessity than ever was that the Temporal Nobility, the
principal and most concerned part of the Nation, should, as they did in a
Parliament at Merton, publicly and seriously declare that noluerunt mutare
Leges Angliae.

Collapsa ruunt subductis tecta Columnis
Moribus antiquis stant res Britannae viresque.

FINIS.

