Ursa Major and Minor: OR, A Sober and Impartial ENQUIRY Into those Pretended
Fears and Jealousies OF Popery and Arbitrary Power, WITH Some Things offered to
Consideration touching His MAJESTY'S League made with the King of FRANCE, upon
Occasion of his Wars with Holland, and the United Provinces.

IN A LETTER Written to a Learned FRIEND.



LONDON, Printed for H. S. MDCLXXXI.

SIR,
IF a very long and sad, for many years together, often repeated Experience,
with the sense of very many National and Universal needless Miseries, which are
so certainly to be believed, as all the People of the Nation (the
wickedly-gaining Party by it only excepted) may safely make Affidavit of it,
were able to obtain any thing or prevail with us, not one, but every man should
think that it was and would be a duty Incumbent upon every Englishman, and
true Lover of his King and Country (for there be too many Counterfeits who do
not well understand either the one or the other) to abhor and fly as the
affrighted Greek, and Relator of the Strength and Gigantine Cruelties of the
monstrous Polyphemus, did with a Fugite o Fugite, from the Phantasms of those
ungrounded Fears and Jealousies, which ushered in, and fomented that Subversion
of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, especially when it is not yet gone out of
memory, how many Dismal and ever to be lamented Effects and Calamities the
inflamed and affrighted Vulgar and too hasty and inconsiderate Factious part of
the People, in the Years 1641, and 1642. with the Fancies of Popery, and
Arbitrary Power and Dangers rushing in upon us, viz. a Plague-Plaister supposed
to have been Attempted to be delivered to their great Champion Mr. John Pym to
Infect and Destroy him; Horses kept and trained under Ground; the Lord Digby in
his Coach and six Horses (upon his ordinary occasions) appearing at Kingston
upon Thames in a Warlike manner, with many other dressed up Bugbears, not
enough to affright old Women and young Children have brought upon us, and that
a Bloody and Costly War, Murder of their King and fellow Subjects, Rapine and
Spoil of each other; the washing over in Blood, and almost Destruction of Three
Kingdoms, and the Ruin of Church and State have been the Products of them. And
when all was done, could not assign any other Ground or Cause for it, than
Rebellion that Sin of Witchcraft, and the Relish and Content which was found in
the violation of all the Commandments in the second Table of the dreadfully, by
God himself, pronounced Decalogue; and as much as they could of the first, and
by yielding up their Discretions to the first Summons of their Fears of
Imaginary apparitions of Dangers, have made themselves to be well deserving, or
fit for the Reproach or Castigation which St. Paul used to a far less
intoxicated People, O ye foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?

Though your Learning, long Conversation, and large acquaintance with history;
together with your curious recherches and retrospection into the Affairs of the
World, and Ages past, a great Insight into the Politiques, and a strict watch
and observation kept upon the Causes, Effects, and Events of Actions of State,
and as many of the Reasons and Intrigues thereof, as are proper and do usually
come to public View, may sufficiently fortify you, against those kind of
Impressions, which have bespoken and taken up so much room in the Minds of such
as are less Cognisant, or do too much accustom themselves to make their
Designs to be the only measure of their own Errors in Judgment, which are not
seldom built upon guess or contraries; yet lest your great care and vigilance
in all the Concernments of the Protestant Religion, and the Property and just
Rights of the Subjects should raise in you more than ordinary Apprehensions,
and carrying you down the Rapid stream of those great mistakings, bereave you
of that Happiness which hitherto has attended the Temper and Tranquillity of
your Mind, and make you a Prisoner to those Fears and false Alarms, which your
more Sedate Thoughts, will I assure my self tell you are not to be numb'red
amongst those quoe in virum Constantem cadere possint, which can ever be able
to disturb the quiet and repose of a Man, who from the mountains of Time, has
looked further than yesterday, and by the Rules of Prudence, Policy, and former
Examples, may with more certainty than Astrology ever afforded, foresee what is
likely to happen.

I have adventured here enclosed to send you my Thoughts and Sentiments, which
I hope will not want your Candid Reception; especially when they shall but
bring before you and your judicious Censure the Considerations, that there will
be enough surely to satisfy and quiet the most timorous or melancholic
Persons (who too often trouble themselves with their own Imaginations) that the
increase of Popery since the Statutes of the first and 23th of Queen Eliz. and
3d of King James, in the year 1638. (when Liberty, Pretense of Religion, and
Conscience began to run out of their Wits, and never stayed until they came to
an Open and Horrid Rebellion) has been so little (although the Popish Party
have gained too many great Advantages by that and our many Divisions in Matters
of Religion and Church Government, and our late National Debaucheries and
Atheism, which do carry too many into the Delusions of Popery) As it may, if a
strict account were taken, probably enough ascertain us that there has been
rather a Decrease than an Increase of it. And that if Commissions, which will
be no way inconsistent with the Rules and reason of Law and good Government
were granted by His Majesty unto Orthodox, Loyal, Discreet, Sober; and
Unbyassed Persons in every County and City of England and Wales, to Inquire and
Certify how many Papists there are therein Resident, the Result and Conclusion
will assure His Majesty and His great Council of Parliament, that there is not
above Five in every Hundred of the Nation, if so many, that are guilty of
direct Popery, or Infected with it; and in Scotland not many more, unless that
small Number should happen something to be increased by the late addition of
the Jesuited Masquerade counterfeit Protestants.

And their increase in Riches or Estate, not like to be much, when they that
shall be Convict, and have no Lands or real Estate, are by the Statutes of 29
Eliz. to forfeit and pay 20 l. every Month.

And they that have Lands and real Estate are to pay 2 parts, the whole in the
3 parts to be divided by the Statute of 3 Jac. ca. 4.

And if that should not impoverish their Estates, and make them less terrible
than the Anakims, it would nevertheless be effected by the Maintenance,
Necessities and corroding of their Priests and Jesuits, with the multitude of
Papal Exactions and Contributions to foreign Colleges, and Religious Houses,
Pensions, Censes, Peter Pence, Procurations, Suits for Provisions, Expeditions
of Bulls, Appeals, Rescripts, Dispensations, Licenses, Grants, Relaxations,
Writs of Perinde valent, Rehabilitations, Abolitions, and other sorts and
natures of Breves and Instruments enumerated in the Statute of 25 H. 8. ca. 21.
And there said to be Infinite, with their many times costly Masses,
Indulgencies, Releases, and Purgatory favors, by which the common kind of
Papists are sure in their Contributions and Taxes charged upon them by their
wellgaining Superiors, or Conductors, the wrong way to have themselves and
their Families kept and continued poor and low enough, without the least of
danger of Surfeits or overmuch Satieties, especially when they are to live
after the excessive Rates of Household Provisions, and Expenses for Food and
Raiment, now more than formerly exacted, to the shame and disgrade of the
Protestant Religion, by a mighty and insupportable excess of Pride, Usury,
Brocage, and Cheating to maintain it.

Neither are their Numbers or Increase (considering their strict Observations
of Lent, very many Public Penances, Vigils, and Fasts, and Private
Mortisications) like to be as dreadful as that of the Children of Israel in
Egypt to the Egyptians.

Or of the Moors that had 800 years together Conquered and Overpowred Spain,
when the numerous Posterity of them were in the memory of Man, Banished and
sent home again into Afric upon so severe and short a warning, as they were
constrained to abandon and leave behind them all their Lands and Possessions,
and carry only such movables as a rigorous and short prefixion could allow
them.

Or to cause them to be Transplanted, as many of the Irish were, by Cromwell in
his Hypocritical, Zealous, and unmerciful Policy from their other more
comfortable Provinces in Ireland, as Ulster, Lymerick, and the English Pale,
into Connaught the worser part of that Kingdom.

And that there is no foundation to support those Panick Fears which have so
greatly and more then needs tormented the Minds of too many of the either
over-credulously fearful, or over-medling part of the People, and being only
more supposed than demonstrated to be a Grievance, and lying heavy upon some
kind of Spirits, will be as necessary to be taken out of their Minds, and as
well becoming a State Policy, and the Care of the Sovereign, as it was of our
King Henry the Third, who in the turbulent Commotions of his Barons and their
Adherents, and the Distresses which were put upon him, found it to be no
Mountebank's Medicine to Cure and assuage the Distempers of the all-discerning
and giddy Multitude, by granting out his Commissions into every County, to
inquire of their Grievances or causes of discontents; so as not to excuse or
Patronize any one Sort or Sect whatsoever, in their maintaining the Unchristian
and Damnable Doctrine of Killing or Deposing Princes for Maladministration of
Justice, or those that dissent from our truly Loyal and Religious Church of
England.

It may be a thing capable of wonder, and fit to be put as a Question to the
more Intelligent, How it should happen that Fears and Jealousies should so
disturb the Minds of such as endeavor to affright themselves, and others with
the Attempts and Dangerous Doctrines of the Popish Party, and the same persons
nevertheless to be so calm and silent in the fast-rooted, unrepented, and
offered in public to be justified groundless, ungodly, and disloyal Opinions
of too many of those that would be called Protestants, and accounted Zealots in
the Practice and Promotion of it, That a King is accomptable to the People for
breach of Trust, may be deposed, and is but Coordinate with both his Houses of
Parliament; and as not content with that which can never be proved to be due
unto them, would mount a great deal higher, and pretend that there is a
Sovereignty in the People; and that the King is but an Artificial Man, set up
or appointed by them; And suffer a Seditious Book, called, The Obligation of
Humane Laws to be publicly Sold, and never complained of, when it does all it
can to prove, That every man, how simple or illiterate soever he be, is to be a
Judge, whether the Law or a Command of his Prince or Superior be good or bad,
and direct or apply his Obedience unto it accordingly.

As if they had never heard or read of the folly and dire Effects of Rebellion
and Sedition in that of the Spencers, in the Reign of King Edward the Second,
That Allegiance was only due to the Crown, and not unto the Person of the
Prince; being exploded by two Acts of Parliament, and the Promoters Condemned
of Treason, and his Enforced resignation of his Crown to his Son King Edward
the Third, by the Faction of his Queen and Mortimer, and the deposing of King
Richard the Second by an overpower of the Army of Henry of Lancaster, and his
Party, occasioned by affrighting him into a seeming voluntary Surrender,
disallowed and detested by Succeeding Ages.

Or may we not rather commend and imitate the better temper of the Subjects of
this Kingdom before the 23d year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when in the
beginning of her Happy and ever to be praised Government, they never started at
her Indulgence to the Popish Party, or took it ill that she kept an Ambassador
at Rome, and was offered to have the English Liturgy, and Reformation
established by the Pope's Authority, if she would but acknowledge his
Supremacy, gave Aid to Don Antonio, a distressed Popish Prince toward the
Recovery of the Kingdom of Portugal, and so much assisted Mary Queen of
Scotland, a Papist and Mother to our King James (who if she had survived her,
was by Inheritance to have been Queen of England) against the Presbyterian and
Congregational Rebellious Party in Scotland, as they called her the Whore of
Babylon, and publicly Preached that she was an Atheist, and of no Religion.

Or can we do less than deem the English Nation in the Reign of King James, to
be happy in their enjoyment of so great a Tranquillity, as to be free from any
Suspicions of the Increase of Popery, when he was wrongfully accused by
Elphiston, to have written a little before his coming to the Crown of England,
a seeming friendly Letter to the Pope, and that the Pope had after he came into
England, sent a Cardinal to Seduce him into the Snares of that Religion;
wherein (although upon reason of State he had given his Royal Protection unto
Preston and Warrington, two Secular Priests, against the Practices of some
Jesuits, which Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, a professed enemy to Popery,
did allow as a thing not evilly done) his afterward Learned Books and Writings
against that Church, might have abundantly manifested the folly of such who
should but have imagined that he had any Inclination or good Will unto it.

For it cannot be unknown to you, that until the 16th year, and the after
succeeding years of the Reign of that peaceable and wise Prince, when his
Son-in-Law Frederick Prince Elector, and Count Palatine of the Rhine, had as
unhappily as rashly and unjustly, taken upon him to be Elected King of Bohemia,
and that by the designed Marriage of His late Majesty with the Infanta of
Spain, he endeavored all he could to allay and quench the Fire which the Wars
about that and the Palatinate had kindled in Germany, and had put too many of
our English into an humor and fit of Zeal, to desire the propagating of the
Protestant Religion by the Sword, no such Fears or Jealousies had gained a
Possession in the Minds of some unquiet People, who were in Duty as well as
Reason to have acquiesced in the Constancy and Care of that Religious King, for
the preservation of the Protestant Religion.

Nor escape your Observation, that the benefits of the Marriage with the
Infanta of Spain, being not well understood, and the misapprehension of a
Toleration of Popery to ensue thereupon, multiplying the supposed Dangers.

Having induced the House of Commons in Parliament in the Nineteenth year of
his Reign, to Petition that peaceable Prince, that the time was come that Janus
Temple must be opened, and the Voice of Bellona, not of the Turtle must be
heard, and therefore they thought it their Duty not only to provide for the
present supply of the War, but to take Care for the securing of their Peace at
home, which the dangerous Increase and Insolency of Popish Recusants,
apparently, visibly, and sensibly did lead them unto.

And yet in the same Petition did acknowledge, That they did not assume to
themselves any Power to determine of any part thereof, nor intended to
incroach, or intrude upon the sacred bounds of his Royal Authority, to whom,
and to whom only they acknowledged it did belong to resolve of Peace and War,
and the Marriage of the most Noble Prince his Son.

Unto which he did Answer, That his Son in Law's unjust Usurpation of the
Rushworth's Collection.
Crown of Bohemia, from the Emperor, had given the Pope and all that Party too
fair a ground, and opened them too wide a gate, for curbing and oppressing of
many Thousands of the Protestant Religion in diverse parts of Christendom; that
the Palatines accepting of the Crown of Bohemia, had no reference to the Cause
of Religion, and therefore would not have the Parliament to couple the War of
the Palatinate with the Cause of Religion, and that the beginning of that
miserable War which had set all Christendom on fire was not for Religion, but
only caused by his Son-in-Law's hasty resolution following evil Counsel, to
take to himself the Crown of Bohemia, and in the last year of his Reign in a
Speech to the Parliament, wished that it might be written in marble, and remain
to Posterity, as a mark upon him when he should swerve from his Religion.

And certainly he must be much an Infidel, and a great Master in the
Phantasticks, and School of Opinionastrete; that will not believe King Charles
the First his Son to have been a great Assertor of it, when in the fourth year
of his Reign, in a Speech to the Parliament, he declared, That he was, and ever
should be, as careful of Religion, and as forward as they could desire, and
would use all means for the maintenance and propagation of that Religion
wherein he had lived, and did resolve to die.

And in the Head of his Army, and very great Distresses afterward profess by
the taking of the blessed Sacrament, to maintain it, and took so great a Care
of it, as a Popish Book could not peep into England, but he speedily appointed
some of his Chaplains, or some other Learned Man of the Church of England, to
Print and Publish an Answer unto it, made many of his Coins of Silver to
Proclaim his resolution to Defend the Protestant Religion, Laws, Privileges of
Parliament, and the Liberties of the People, and died a Martyr, because he
would not deliver up his Subjects to a perpetual slavery of a never to be
shaken off Arbitrary Power.

And His Majesty that now is, being the Son and Heir of his Constancy in the
Protestant Religion, has been so much of that fixed and unalterable Resolution
as the Love of a Mother, and all those Obligations that a filial Obedience had
put upon him, could not dissuade him from enforcing the Duke of Gloucester his
younger Brother out of her Tuition, and Intention to breed him up in the Popish
Religion, and the Siren Charms of Militiere in his Book purposely Dedicated
unto him to make him averse to that Religion whose Pseudo-Professors had
murdered his Father, and been the Cause of those very many Miseries, Affronts,
Ill Usages, Wants, and Reproaches which he and his Royal Brothers endured in
the Twelve years longsome time of his Distresses, could never persuade him to
accept of a strong and powerful Aid of Catholic Princes for his
Re-establishment in his Kingdoms, nor incline him to do that to save Three
Kingdoms, which his Grandfather by the Mother-side, the Great Henry of France,
by reconciling himself to the Church of Rome, did to save only one, when his
Sufferings outwent and far surmounted any which his Grandfather had endured.

But if any would have our Laws the severest of which was Enacted in the
Conspiracy, and feared evil Consequences of the Gunpowder Treason, to be put
so much in execution, as to forfeit and take away two parts of three; the whole
in three parts to be equally divided of the real Estates of those who have
Lands, and Subject those that have no Lands to great Forfeitures and Penalties,
and incapacitate all, to bear any Office in the Kingdom.

They are to consider that it will be as hard as unequal for their King and
Common Parent, as well as ours to allow a Liberty and Connivance to those that
are of worse Principles, or at least as dangerous as the Papists, fought and
were active in our last Wars and Miseries against His Majesty, and His Royal
Father, and all that were their Loyal and Obedient Subjects, and deny it to
those that fought, were Sequestered, Plundered, and Suffered for them; that all
the Protestants in the World are not in England, and that amongst those in
England, there are too many (the more is the pity) who have so rent and divided
themselves from the Church of England, and do so much and so often vary in
their Judgments, Practice, and Opinions, as they appear rather to be no
Protestants, or very little embracing the Profession and Interest thereof; that
our Incomparable and Prudent Queen Elizabeth, could never have maintained and
supported so much as she did the Protestant Religion, as well Lutheran as
Calvinist, in the Parts beyond the Seas, and that of the purer and better
reformed Religion of the English Church at home by her Aids, Embassies,
Leagues, and Intercessions, if she had not requited the Catholic Princes with
the like Indulgence and usage to any of her Subjects that were of the Romish
Religion, and that neither the Rebellions of the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland, for the advance of Popery, many several Attempts to take away her
Life, and Plots to Dethrone her, could ever persuade her, or her Learned
Successor, notwithstanding the Horrid design of the Gunpowder Treason, against
him and his Posterity, and the wiser as they should be and better part of his
Subjects Assembled in Parliament, to be more than prudentially rigorous to that
Party, whose Friends in other Countries might retalliate any Severity used to
theirs; And although she made some fierce and smart Laws to affright those that
called themselves Catholics, for principles inconsistent with the Safety of
her Sovereignty, and its Government, which in all these Acts of Parliament
appeared to be more against the Emissaries from Rome, which came to Seduce and
lead them into such dangerous Errors, than to forbid any thing that was
Innocent in the private Devotions, religious and practical part of it; that
Great Queen and King well understanding that they could not by any Rules of
State, Justice, or Modesty, of which Princes when there is not so great
Inequality, as to give them an absolute Dominion over one another, are usually
very tender, require any Ease or Liberties for Protestants living under other
Princes, and their Laws, when they can neither promise or perform Mutualities
or Reciprocations.

And therefore the Learned King James when the House of Commons in Parliament
had Petitioned him to give some stop to the growth of Popery, one Cause whereof
they assigned to be the Interposition of Foreign Princes Ambassadors and Agents
in favor of Papists; Answered, That they might rest secure, that he would
never be weary to do all he could for the Propagation of the Protestant
Religion, and Suppression of Popery, but the manner and form they were to remit
to his Care and Providence, who could best consider of times and seasons; but
his Care of Religion must be such as on the one part he must not by the hot
Persecution of our Recusants at home, irritate Foreign Princes of a contrary
Religion, and teach them a way to plague the Protestants in their Dominions,
with whom he daily interceeded, and at that time principally for ease to them
of our Profession that live under them.

And in the 21th year of his Reign, in a Speech which he made in Parliament,
declared to the Lords and Commons, That it was true that at times, Rushworth's
Historical Collections.
for Reasons best known to himself, he did not so fully put Laws in Execution
against Recusants; but did wink and connive at some things which might have
hindered more weighty Affairs. But he did never in all his Treaties agree to any
thing, to the overthrow and dissolution of those Laws, but had in all a chief
care of the preservation of that truth which he ever professed; for as it was a
good Horseman's part not always to use his Spurs, and keep strait the Reins;
but sometime to suffer the Reins to be more remiss: So it was the part of a
Wise King, and his Age and Experience in Government had informed him sometimes
to quicken the Laws with Executions, and at other times upon just Occasions to
be more remiss: But as God shall Judge him, he never thought or meant, nor ever
in any word expressed any thing that savoured of it, and prayed them to root
out Jealousies, which were the greatest Weeds in their Garden.

For certainly to Consiseate two parts of three of a Papist's Lands, or
disinherit the next Heir, if bred up in that Religion, can never amount to the
avail of Protestants in Transylvania, Hungary, Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia,
Poland, Upper or Lower Austria, Piedmont, Flanders, Brabant, and the rest of
the Belgic Provinces, nor under those which were United and Confederate, the
Hause-Towns, Bearne, and some other of the Cantons of Switzerland, and the bad
enough already used Multitudes of Huguenots in France.

Nor can the Persecution or destroying of the greater part of the Protestants
beyond the Seas, to gratify the humerous pretenses, and causeless fears of the
more Imprudent, and lesser part of the Protestants of England, be by any rule
of right reason adjudged to be for the Protestant Interest.

And upon the like advice and reason may our fears of any Invasion upon our
Properties and just Rights disappear, and vanish as soon as they shall with any
eye of Judgment be but looked upon; nor will ever be able to endure the
touchstone of Truth, when our Liberties are so Impregnable, and fortified by
very many of our good Laws and Liberties, and by our Magna Charta, and Charters
de Foresta, more than Thirty times confirmed by Acts of Parliament for those
great Charters were never singly or by themselves so many times confirmed by
Acts of Parliament.

When by that excellent Law and Charter freely granted in the Ninth year 9 H.
3. ca. 29.
of the Reign of King Hen. 3. No Freeman may be taken or Imprisoned, or be
disseised of his freehold Liberties or free Customs, be Outlawed or Exiled, or
in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law
of the Land; no man shall be amerced for a small fault, or if for a greater,
saving to him his Contenement, and a Merchant saving to him his Merchandise, 9
H. 3. 14.
Earls and Barons shall not be amerced but by their Peers; the King will not
sell, deny, or defer any Man either Justice or Right; No Man of the Church
shall be amerced, after the quantity of his Spiritual benefit; but after the
quantity of his Lay-tenement, and the quantity of his Offense, and a Villain
shall not be amerced, but saving his Wainage, and that all things done to the
contrary shall be void.

Sureties or Pledges shall not be Charged for any Debts of the King, if the Ca.
8.
Debtor has Goods and Chattels to pay the Debt, and is ready to pay.

None shall be Distreined for more Service than is due. 10.


Common Pleas shall not follow the King's Court. 11.


Those that do commit Redisseisin shall be Imprisoned, and not delivered
without special Commandment of the King, and shall make Fine to the King for 20
H. 3. 3.
the Trespass.

By an Act of Parliament made in the Third year of King Edward the First, none
3. E. 1. ca. 6. 9.
shall be attached by any occasion, nor fore-judged of life or limb, nor his
Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels seized into the King's hands, against the
form of the Great Charter, and the Law of the Land.

No City, Borough, or Town, nor any Man shall be amerced without reasonable
Cause, and according to the quantity of his Trespass; that is to say, every
Freeman saving his Freehold, and Merchant saving his Merchandise; a Villain
saving his Gainure, and that by his or their Peers.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 25th year of his Reign. 25 E. 1. ca. 5.


The King will take no Aids or Prizes, but by the Common consent of the Realm,
saving the ancient Aids and Prizes due and accustomed.

Aids and Taxes granted to the King, shall not be taken for a Custom.

No Officer of the King by themselves, or any other, shall maintain Pleas,
Suits 6.
or Matters hanging in the King's Court, for Lands, Tenements, or other things
Ca. 25.
to have any part or profit thereof.

There shall be no disturbance of free Elections by face of Arms, Malice, or
Ca. 5.
otherwise.

By the Statute called Articuli Super Chartas, made in the 28th year of the 28
E. 1. 1.
Reign of the aforesaid King, There shall be chosen in every Shire by the
Commonalty of the same Shire, Three substantial men, Knights, or other lawful,
wise, and well-disposed Persons, who shall be Justices Sworn and Assigned by
the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal, to hear and determine where
before no remedy was at the Common Law, such plaints as shall be made upon all
those that do Commit, or Offend against any point contained in the great
Charter, or Charter of the Forest, which were ordained to be proclaimed at
four several quarters of the year in full County in every year, in every
County, and to hear the Plaints as well within the Franchises as without, and
from day to day without allowing any the delays which be allowed by the Common
Law; and to punish by Imprisonment, Ransom or Amercement according to the
Trespass.

No Common Pleas shall be holden in the Exchequer contrary to the form of the
great Charter, the Marshal of the King's House shall not hold Plea of
Freehold, Ca. 5.
Debt, Covenant, or Contract made betwixt the King's People, but only of
Trespasses done within the Verge, and Contracts made by one Servant of the
house with another.

The Chancellor and Justices of the King's Bench shall follow the King; so that
he may at all times have near unto him some that be Learned in the Laws, which
be able duly to order all such matters as shall come unto the Court at all
times when need shall require.

No Writ that touches the Common Law shall go forth under any of the Petit
Seals. 6.


By an Act of Parliament made in the 34th year of the Reign of the aforesaid
King, Nothing shall be purveyed to the King without the Owners assent. 34 E. 1.
2.


By an Act of Parliament made in the Reign of the said King, No Tallage or
Statute de Tallaglo non Concedendo fact' tempore. E. 1.
Aids shall be taken or levied by the King, or his Heirs within the Realm,
without the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the
Third. 1 E. 3. 6.


Aids granted to the King, shall be taxed after the old manner.

By an Act of Parliament made in the second year of the Reign of the aforesaid
2 E. 3. 8.
King, No Commandment under the King's Seal shall disturb or delay Justice.

No Bishops Temporalty shall be seized without good Cause. 2 E. 3.


Justices of Assize shall in their Sessions enquire of the Demeanor of
Sheriffs, Escheators, Bailiffs, and other Officers, and punish the Offenders. 5
E. 3. 12.


No Person shall be pardoned for an Utlary after Judgment without Agreement
with the Plaintiff, or Outlawed before Judgment, until he do yield his Body to
Prison.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 14th year of the said King, It was
assented, established, and ordered, that Delays and Errors in Judgments in
other Courts, shall be Redressed in Parliament by a Prelate, 2 Earls, and 2
Barons; who by good advice of the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Justices of the
one Bench and the other, and of the King's Council, as they shall think
convenient, shall proceed to make a good accord and Judgment. And that the
Chancellor. Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Justices of the one Bench and
the other, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices assigned; and
all that shall intermeddle in the said places under them, shall by the advice
of the said Archbishop, Earls, and Barons, make an Oath well and truly to
serve the King and his People; and by the advice of the said Prelate, Earls and
Barons, to increase or diminish, when need shall be, the number of the said
Ministers, and from time to time when Officers shall be newly put in, cause
them to be sworn in like manner.

A Declaration by Act of Parliament made in the 25th year of the said 25 E. 3.
ca. 2.
King's Reign.

What Offenses shall be adjudged Treason, and if any other Case supposed
Treason not therein specified, shall happen before any Justices, they shall
tarry without going to Judgment of the Person until the Cause be showed, and
declared before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be Judged
Treason, or other Felony.

By an Act of Parliament made in the same year,

No person shall be compelled to make any Loans to the King, or charged with 25
E. 3. rot, Parl.
any benevolence.

None shall be Condemned upon Suggestion, Imprisoned, nor put out of his Ca. 4.
Freehold, nor his Franchises without Presentment, but by the Law of the Land,
or by Process made by Writ Original at the Common Law, nor that none shall be
sent out of the Franchise or Freehold, unless he be duly brought to answer,
and forejudged by Course of the Law, and any thing done to the contrary, shall
be holden for none.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 5th year of the Reign of King Richard the
Second. 5 R. 2. ca. 7.


None shall enter into Lands where it is not lawful, or with force, under the
pain of Imprisonment, and Ransom at the King's Will.

A Penalty is to be inflicted upon a Clerk of the Exchequer, which makes out
Ca. 5.
Process for a Debt discharged.

By the Statutes of the Fifth and Fifteenth of King Richard the Second, 5 R. 2.
ca. 7.
where Lands or Tenements are entered and detained by force, the next Justice of
the Peace is Impow'red to view the force, and by the Power of the Sheriff and
County to remove it, and Imprison the Offenders; and by the Statute of 8th of
H. 6. whether it be entered by force, or it be continued and not entered by
force, may by a Jury impannel'd, and their Verdict, if the Deteiner has not
been Three years before in quiet possession, reseise the said Lands and
Tenements, and put the party ejected into his former possession.

A man Impleaded in the Exchequer, shall be received by himself, or any other 5
R. 2. ca. 9.
to plead his Discharge.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 12th year of the aforesaid King, The 12 R.
2. ca. (...).
Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Steward of the King's House,
the King's Chamberlain, Clerk of the Rolls, Justices of the one Bench and the
other, Barons of the Exchequer, and all that shall be called to ordain or make
Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers, Comptrollers, or any other
Officer or Minister of the King, shall be firmly sworn that they shall not make
Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers, Comptroller, or any other
Officer or Minister of the King, for any gift or brocage, favor or affection.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 13th year of the said King's Reign, (...)
(...). 2. ca. (...) and (...).
He that will that Swear he owes nothing to the King, shall be discharged, no
Bonds or Recognizances shall be taken for the King's Debts.

By an Act of Parliament made in the Second year of King Henry the 2 H. 4. 8.
Fourth, An Assize shall be maintainable against the King's Patentee of Lands
without any title found for the King by Inquisition.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 4th year of the Reign of the aforesaid 4
H. 4. 8.
King, a special Assize shall be maintainable against a Disseisor by force.

Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies are forbid, by a Statute made in the
13th year of the aforesaid King's Reign, and the Justices of Peace near
adjoining 13 H. 4. 7.
Empowered to hear and determine the Offenses; and if they cannot are to
certify the King and his Council thereof.

By an Act of Parliament made in the second year of the Reign of King 2 H. 5. 8.
Henry the 5th Commissions are to be from time to time awarded to Inquire of
the defaults of the Justices of Peace, Justices of the Assize, Sheriffs and
under-Sheriffs, in not suppressing and punishing the same.

By an Act of Parliament made in the first year of King Richard the Third. 1.
R. 3. ca. 2.
the Justices of Peace may let Prisoners to mainprize, that are Arrested or
Imprisoned for light suspicion of Felony or by Malice, and no Sheriff or other
Officer shall seize the Goods of a Prisoner until he be attainted.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 23th year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, A Jury Convicted of giving a false Verdict, if it be for any thing
demanded ^3 H. 8. 3.
above the value of Forty pounds, and concerns not the Jeopardy of a man's
life, shall forfeit Twenty pounds a piece, the one half to the King, and the
other to the Party that will sue for the same, and Five pounds a piece; if the
thing demanded be under the value of Twenty pounds, and every one of them in
the one Case, and the other make fine, and ransom by the discretion of the
Judges, before whom such false Verdict was given, never after be of any
Credence, nor their Oaths accepted in any Court.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 32 year of the said King, wrongful
disseifin 32 H. 8. 33.
shall be no dissent in Law, except the Disseisor shall have been five years in
quiet Possession without entry or continual Claim of those who have lawful
Title thereunto.

The Barons of the Exchequer are by an Act of Parliament made in the 33th year
of the aforesaid King, Authorized by Bills of Equity in the Exchequer 33 H. 8.
39.
Chamber, to acquit, discharge, or moderate all Recognizances, Debts, Detinues,
Trespasses, Wastes, Deceipts, Defaults, Contempts and Forfeitures, (Treasons,
Murders, Felonies, Rights, Titles and Interest, as well of Inheritance as
Freehold only excepted) according to Equity and good Conscience.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 5th and 6th year of the Reign of King
Edward the Sixth, Great Penalties were laid upon those that should buy or sell
Offices concerning the Administration of Justice, or any Offices belonging to
the King, all Contracts, Bonds, Promises. Covenants, and Bargains to be void,
both as to the Buyer and Seller, and the taker of any Gift or Promise to
forfeit his Nomination and Interest therein.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 31th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
31 Eliz. 3.


Three Proclamations shall be made in every Action Personal where an Exigent is
awarded, and the Defendant before the allowance of any Writ of Error or
Reversal of the Utlary, shall be bound to answer the Plaintiff, and satisfy
the Condemnation.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 43th year of the Reign of the aforesaid 43
Eliz. 6.
Queen, Every Sheriff, Undersheriff, or other Person making any Warrant for
the Summons, Arrest, or Attaching of any Person or their Goods, to appear in
any of the Courts of Westminster, or procuring it without Original Writ or
Process to warrant the same, being Convicted thereof, shall be Imprisoned
without Bail or Mainprize, until they shall have paid the party grieved Ten
pounds, with all his other Damages, and Twenty pounds a piece for their Offense
to the Queen, and (for the avoiding of Vexatious Actions) where any recovery is
had for Debt or Damages for less than Forty shillings, or not above, no more
Costs shall be awarded by the Judge, than the Debt or Damages recovered.

And by the Law Writs of Habeas Corpus una Cum die and Causa Captionis, are
granted by the Courts of King's Bench or Common Pleas; when any are Imprisoned
by the King, or any other without Cause showed to be Bailed if the Cause shall
not appear to be Just and Legal.

And if any Man Imprison any of the King's Subjects without just Cause, or
enter upon, or take away any of their Estates against the Tenor of our Magna
Charta, and Charta Forestae, and many of our other excellent Laws and
reasonable Customs, he may, although it be by the King's Command, if not legal
be punished for the same.

And our Magna Charta and Liberties are so Bulwarked and Fortified, as every
man may have reason enough to be assured, That the People of England and Wales
cannot upon any Emergencies and Violations of Laws, want relief or Redress.

When the Justices in Air Instituted by King Henry the Second to ride their
Circuits until they were by King Edward the Third changed into those of
Assizes, who in their Vernal and Autumnal Circuits, carrying the King's
Justice, and Care of it, into every Shire and County of England and Wales, to
prevent as much as might be their Travels and Expenses, to seek it farther from
home, did amongst many other Articles and Matters concerning the King and his
People, give in Charge to the Grand Juries of the several Cities and Counties
of their Circuits, which were Men of good Estates, Knowledge, Experience and
Concerns Sworn to present what they should be charged to Inquire of; and direct
them to Inquire and present false Weights and Measures, Lands seized into the
King's hands which ought not to be seized, or being ordered to be restored were
not, of those that were amerced without reasonable Cause, and not according to
the Offense, or by their Peers, without a saving to their Contenement; a
Merchant without a saving to him his Merchandise, and a Villain without saving
his Waynage, and not by the Oaths of good and lawful Men of the Neighborhood;
if any Earls and Barons were amerced but by their Peers, and after the manner
of their Offenses; and if any Man of the Church be amerced, otherwise than
according to his Lay-Tenement, and after the quantity of his Offense, and by
the Statute of Marleborough, made in the One and fiftieth year Star. of
Marieborough, Printed to be in 51 H. 3. ca. 5. but appears in the Record to
have been only made in Anno 47 H. 3. and without the Preamble published by Mr.
Pulton, as in 51 H. 3. Bract. lib. 3. de Corona. ca. 1. and Fleta lib. 1. ca.
19. and 20.
of King Henry the Third, of all other the breaches of the Laws and Liberties
granted by Magna Charta, and the Charter of the Forest, and other Articles and
Matters to be Inquired of, given unto them in Writing, and upon their Oaths to
answer distinctly what they did know Affirmatively or Negatively.

When the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, who do yet retain the power of
Justices in Air, do in every Easter and Michaelmas Term, by a Select Grand
Jury of the County of Middlesex, cause an enquiry to be made (although it were
to be wished it might be after the ancient manner by Articles delivered unto
them in Writing, to be distinctly answered unto) Offenses committed against the
King, and his Crown and Dignity, of all Confederacies, Champerties,
Maintenance, Trespasses, Extortions and Grievances done to the King's Subjects,
by any Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Servants, Officers,
Coroners, and Ministers of the King, or by any other whatsoever, of breach of
the Peace, denying of Bail on those who ought to be Bailed, and of all manner
of Oppressions and Grievances of the People.

When the numerous Justices of Peace in every County, being as too many of them
Baronets, Sergeants, and Men of Law, Knights, Elquires, and Gentlemen of good
Quality, Families, Estates and Education, are Sworn and employed not only to be
Guardians and Conservators of the Peace of the King and his People, to suppress
Felonies, Riots, and the lower and most Common sort of Exorbitancies and
Misdemeanors, but to take Care of the Execution of many Laws and Statutes
committed to their Trust, and with the Method and Order appointed by our Laws
and Ancient and reasonable Customs of presenting an Inquiry of Grievances by
our many Court-Leets, Sheriffs, Tournes, and County Courts, Subordinate one
under the other to the Superior Courts of Westminster, and they unto their
Supreme Authority, the King. It will be the Peoples own fault, and neglect of
their own Concernments; if any Grievances or Oppression pass undiscernable,
uncomplained of, or unpunished, or if any Arbitrary Power or Extravagances do
invade or break in upon the Nation, who by the fence and care of our Laws, and
many times Confirmed Liberties, which for more than 500 years last past, have
been building, repairing, and polishing to a perfection more than the Hebrew,
Greek, or Roman Laws did ever attain unto (the Laws which God himself made for
that peculiar people only excepted.)

And may, if by our Sins and Provocations of God Almighty, the Inspector of our
unparalled Misdeeds, and Punisher of them, when his wrath shall be kindled,
and have no longer patience, the Walls of our Happiness shall not be
demolished, our Liberties put to the Sword, and our Laws led into Captivity, be
as safe as Humane Prudence, and Laws can possibly make them.

More especially when our Courts of Justice at Westminster Hall, are governed
by Judges and Men of great Wisdom and Integrity, Sworn to observe the Laws, and
Judge according to their Direction; and our Lawyers at the Bars freely
permitted with fitting reference rightly to inform and plead their Clients
Cases.

And the King's high Court of Chancery, the Officina Justiriae, under the Test
me ipso, of the Watchman under God of our Israel, Superintending over them
gives Writs remedial to all that ask for them with helps for extraordinary
Emergencies, or to allay the Severity of Laws, and makes it its business to
punish and forbid Frauds and Oppressions. The Masters of Chancery Annually
stipended by the King formare Brevia originalia remedialia, and to be
Assistants subordinately to that High and Honorable Court in matters of
Account and References.

The Rule of Chancery being ever since the Statute of Westm' the second 13 E.
1. (...). 14.
made in the 13th year of the Reign of King Edward the First, quod nullus
recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio and Concordent Clerici, and the Officers and
Clerks of the Chancery thereunto appointed, are from time to time to do their
utmost endeavors to provide Remedies for all that Complain, Ne Justitia
deficeret Conquerentibus. And as to lesser Matters of Complaints, and often
Emergencies, Pensioneth by good yearly Salaries, 4 Learned and venerable Men of
worth, called Masters of Requests, or Supplicationum and libellorum who by
turns and courses each Master, being deputed to his Month, have their audience
Twice or oftener in that Time of the King, to give Answers to their Petitions.

And the King in matters wherein any of his Rights, and what appertains unto
him are concerned, gives his People leave by Petition, or monstrans du droit
Traverses oustre les mames, etc. to obtain what they can prove to be due unto
them, and where any of his Letters Patents are grievous and against the Law,
suffers them to be repealed by Writs of Scire facias brought against the
Patentees.

And if any of the People should be so unhappy in the Intrigues or Difficulties
of their Cases, as they cannot be relieved by any of those provided Remedies
from any supposed Arbitrary Power of their Prince, or any Illegal oppressing
Actions of one Subject against another, they have the Liberty of Appeals from
the Inferior Courts of Justice, to the Superior, and in Matters concerning
breach of the Peace, and of Misdemeanors within the Cognizance of the Justices
of Peace, may appeal from them to the Justices of Assize, and from them to the
King and his Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, of the Great Seal of England; and if
not by any of those ways to be relieved, are in Cases (not concerning
Freehold) not debarred their Appeals to the King, and his Privy Council, where
they are, the King himself being very often present, judiciously and
deliberately heard upon all the Pleas and Arguments which the Council Learned
in the Law on both sides, can make one against the other.

And Remedies also against all the Assaults of Grievances, are not difficult to
be come at in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and Courts of Admiralty, where when
the Subjects Complaints cannot be remedied, they do easily obtain the King's
Commission of Delegates to other Judges, and if that do not answer their
Expectations, may have a Commission of Adjuncts to other Judges to be added
unto them.

And in these or other Courts where the Potency of the one part, and the
Poverty of the other, has disabled the weaker, from attending the formalities
of Justice, or crowd of many other Causes, he may have a Commission ob lites
dirimendas, granted by the King out of his High Court of Chancery, to some good
and wise men to endeavor as much as they can a more speedy Remedy.

The Dermier Resort last Appeal and ultimum refugium of the People in their
seeking for Justice, being so necessarily Inherent in the Crown, as none but
they that wear it, can justly claim any Right unto it, but have always been
enjoyed not only by our British, Saxon, and Danish Kings before the Norman
Conquest, but all our Kings which Succeeded them.

And if there they find no help, are like enough, if therebe cause of Justice
in their Complaints not to fail of Relief by Petition to the King, when he is
assisted with the advice of his Lords and Commons in Parliament.

All which, with many other Laws and reasonable Customs, Privileges and
Liberties, like so many Cittadels, Block-houses, Outworks, and Strong Castles
and Forts, which diverse of our ancient and reasonable Customs, and Acts of
Parliament have in the making of other Laws from time to time been careful upon
all occasions to erect and build, to help to guard and protect their Liberties,
Rights and Privileges, together with the very great care which the Judges
restraining all non obstantes of Acts of Parliament, and Regal Dispensations
unto what the Law allows, or to the King's particular Concernments, do take in
all their Judgments and Decisions, Expositions, Applications and
Interpretations of Laws to assist and support the just Rights and Proprieties
of the Subjects in their Lands and Estates, and not in the least to prejudice
them in their Common Assurances by Fines and Common Recoveries.

The Severity used by diverse of our Kings in the Punishment of Briberies,
Extortions or Biased and Illegal flattering Opinions of Judges.

The Oaths of the Lords and others of the King's Privy Council, who are usually
the Greatest, Noble, and most concerned Men of Estate and Interest of the
Nation.

Oath of the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, well
and truly to serve the King and his People, and to do right to all manner of
People according to the Law and Usages of the Realm.

Oaths of the Judges to do equal Law and execution of Right to all the King's
Subjects, rich and poor, without having regard to any Person, to deny Oaths of
the Judges, 18 E. 3.
no man Common Right by the King's Letters, nor none other Man's, nor for none
other Cause.

Oaths of the King's Sergeants at Law, well and truly to serve him and his
People, and as duly and hastily speed such Matters as any Man shall have
against the King in the Law, as they may lawfully do without delay, or tarrying
the Party for his lawful Process.

The Oaths of other Sergeants at Law, well and truly to serve the King and his
People, and truly Counsel them.

Oaths of the Justices of Peace to do equal right to the Poor, as to the Rich;
after the Laws and Customs of the Realm and Statutes thereof made.

Oaths of the Sheriffs to do right to Poor as well as Rich, in all that
belongs to their Office, to disturb no Man's Right; nor to do wrong to any
Man.

And the Oaths of the Escheators, Clerks of the Chancery, and Coroners, with
the Oaths of the Officers of Courts, Under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs, well and to
execute Justice.

All which several Degrees of Men in the Nation would be as unwilling as any
others to have the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of themselves and their
Posterities or dearest Relations, sacrificed to a lawless and unlimitted Power
of their Kings and Princes.

And the Oaths of our Kings at their several Coronations to conserve the
Liberties of the People, and observe all the good Laws made by their Royal
Progenitors and Predecessors, with the Impossibility that ever the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, will consent to the abrogating of any of the
aforesaid Laws and reasonable Customs, be felones de se, or deliver up
themselves and their Posterities to the absolute Will and Pleasure of their
Succeeding Kings and Princes may abundantly evidence how safely and securely
the Property and Liberties of the People, until Rebellion, foolishly fancied
Fears and Jealousies with their Discords, distrust and plundering of one
another, shall put them under such another yoke as Oliver Cromwell had cheated
them into, may rest, and are like inviolably to continue for ever, protected
against any the Encroachments of Arbitrary Power, whilst they live under their
King's ancient Government.

Of which His late Majesty was so careful and so willing to dislodge all manner
of Jealousies out of the Minds of his Subjects, as he did in the Third year of
his Reign, give his Royal Assent, as they called it, unto their Petition of
Right, and made it an Act of Parliament, wherein he not only Confirmed their
Magna Charta, and Charta Forestoe; but the Act of Parliament assented unto by
King Edward the First De Tallagio non Concedendo: The Act of Parliament made in
the First year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, cap. 6. The Act of
Parliament made in the 25th year of the Reign of the aforesaid King, That no
Man should be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will. The
Statutes of the 28 E. 3. ca. 3. 37 E. 3. ca. 18. 38 E. 3. ca. 9. 42 E. 3. ca.
3. 11 R. 2. ca. 9. 17 R. 2. ca. 6. and 1 R. 3. ca. 2. Charged all his Petition
of Right, Anno 3 Car. Primi.
Officers and Ministers to serve him according to the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, as they tendered the Honor of his Majesty, and the Prosperity of the
Kingdom. Banished as he hoped for ever all their Fears of the Infringing of
their Liberties, and given cause of Content to them and that Parliament, to
such a satiety, such a fullness, and ne plus ultra, as unless they would have
been Consortes Imperii, and require to have a share in his Regality and
Government; there was no more to be asked or requested of him, or granted by
him.

Imprisoned shortly after in the Tower of London, John Earl of Clare, and the
greatly Learned Seldom, for but having Copies in their Custody of some
Florentine and Foreign Laws and Customs proposed by Sir Robert Dudley, a
Titular Duke of Tuscany, to be imitated by him here in England, as a means to
raise Money by Impositions laid upon the People, and caused his Attorney
General to exhibit a Bill against them in the Star Chamber for Disquieting his
Subjects with Fears and Jealousies.

And was so ready from time to time to Condescend to their Infirmities, and
give Satisfaction to them in all their Concerns and Scruples, as he suffered
those two great Cases of the Habeas Corpus, and the Ship Money wherein his
necessary Prerogative, for the good of himself and his People, was not a little
concerned, to be publicly and solemnly argued in the Course and Method of the
Laws in foro Contradictorio before the Judges, and showed no displeasure
afterward, but much kindness unto Justice Hutton, and Justice Croke, who in
the Case of the Ship Money had in their Arguments and Opinions delivered
thereupon against him in the Exchequer Chamber, dissented from all the rest and
greater number of the Judges.

And His now Royal Majesty treading the good old Paths of Queen Elizabeth, his
Grandfather King James, and his Royal Father, does in all Matters of difficulty
in the absence of Parliaments, where the Laws and Justice of the Nation are
likely to be more than ordinarily concerned, consult and advise with the
Judges, has not long ago Superseded one of them for some harsh usage, and
discontent given to the Country in his Circuits, and takes all the care he can
to choose and make Judges, and his Learned Council at the Law out of the most
able, honest, experienced, and eminent practisers of it, and has but lately in
several of his Speeches in Parliament declared and promised, that he would give
his consent unto any good Laws which should be by them desired for the further
securing of their Religion, Liberties, and Properties, and not long ago
answered private and particular Persons of ordinary Quality, Petitioning him
for Right to be done unto them in Matters of Law, and some of his own
Concernments, that God forbid, but his People should have Liberty to demand
right of him, as well as against any of their fellow Subjects.

They therefore who do over-busie themselves in the carrying about the Buz of
false and uncertain rumors, and the dreadful Imaginations of an Arbitrary and
Lawless Power, which may be hoped will never happen, nor be able if any should
desire it to Attack and Demolish those Impregnable Fortresses, which our Laws
right reason long continued good and reasonable Customs of England, have built
and provided against it.

And do make such lamentable Outcries and Exclamations against Arbitrary Power
before it happens, or they can perceive any likelihood of it, and in their
Ill-tutor'd Logic would persuade themselves and others it is so; because they
are pleased to fancy it is possible it may be so, and cannot be quiet, but do
think themselves ill used, if they may not be permitted like the Andabatoe to
fight with their own shadows, and be not a little commended, magnified, and
accounted good Patriots for it.

Blench at every thing, turn their Follies into all kinds of Fears and
Jealousies, and so strongly fancy them as if they were actually upon them, and
will not be persuaded but the King will deliver us up to Popery and Arbitrary
Power, and to that end the King of France has viewed and sounded our Ports and
Havens, and with great Armies is ready to invade, destroy, or make Slaves of us
and our Generations. But may do better to give some respite to those their
needless Affrights, and pausing a while sit down and consider,

What greater assurance his now Majesty, could give to his Subjects, or they
desire, than what he declared in his Speech to the House of Commons in March,
1661? Gentlemen, I hear and am very solicitous, I thank you for it, since I
presume it proceeds from a good Root of Piety and Devotion; But I must tell
you, I have the worst luck in the world, if after all the reproaches of being a
Papist when I was Abroad, I am suspected of being a Presbyterian now I am come
Home; I know you will not take it unkindly, if I tell you that I am as Zealous
for the Church of England, as any of you can be, and am as much in love with
the Book of Common Prayer as you can wish, and have prejudice enough to those
that do not love it; And do as much desire to see an Uniformity settled as any
amongst you; I pray you trust me in that Affair.

In the year 1664. tells them, I do assure you upon my word, and I pray you
believe me, That I have no other Thoughts or Design in my heart, but to make
you all Happy in the Support of the Religion and Laws established.

In the same year, when they brought him a Bill for the Repeal of the Act of
Parliament to exclude the Bishops out of the House of Peers; He said, I thank
you with all my heart, indeed as much as I can do for any thing, for the Repeal
of that Act: It was an unhappy Act in an unhappy Time, passed with many unhappy
Circumstances, and attended with miserable Events; and therefore I do again
thank you for Repealing of it, you have thereby restored Parliaments to their
Primitive Institutions.

In his Speech unto both Houses in Anno 1672. said, That he would conclude with
this assurance, that I will preserve the true Protestant Religion, and the
Church as it is now established in this Kingdom, and in the whole course of the
Dissenters, I do not intend that it shall any ways prejudice the Church; but I
will support its Rights and its full Power.

In January 1673. said, If there be any thing else which you think wanting to
secure Religion, there is nothing which you shall reasonably propose, but I
shall be ready to receive it.

In April 1675. said, The Principal end of his calling the Parliament now, is
to know what you think may be yet wanting to the security of Religion, and to
give my Self the satisfaction of having done the utmost of my Endeavors.

In February 1679. said to both Houses of his Parliament, I declare my Self
very plainly unto you, that I am prepared to give you all the Satisfaction and
Security in the great Concern of the Protestant Religion, as it is established
in the Church of England, that shall reasonably be asked, or can consist with
Christian Prudence.

6 March 1678. I do give you this assurance, that I will with my Life defend
both the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of this Kingdom.

In January 1673. If there be any thing you think wanting to secure Property,
there is nothing which you shall reasonably propose, but I shall be ready to
receive it.

Febr. 15. 1676. said to His Two Houses of Parliament, I do declare my Self
freely, that I am ready to gratify you in a further Security of your Liberty
and Property (if you can think you want it) by as many good Laws as you shall
propose, and as can consist with the Safety of the Government, without which,
there will neither be Liberty nor Property left unto any Man. And let all men
Judge who is most for Arbitrary Government, they that foment such Differences
as tend to Dissolve all Parliaments; or I, that would preserve this and all
Parliaments from being made useless by such Dissolutions.

And remember that there was a Time not long ago, when the Phanatick Party, who
at this Time are too great a part of England, and some of the Presbyterians
were not in the heretofore justly styled the Long and Rebellious part of a
Parliament so much afraid of Arbitrary Government as now they do seem to be.

When in that Long and Unhappy misnamed Parliament they procured to be Voted
down as many as they could of their Sovereign's Rights, Methods, and means of
Government in an Ancient and well Established Monarchy, overturned Peerage,
Episcopacy, Tenures, and many other of our Fundamental Laws, warranted by the
Laws of God and this Nation, and as if they feared that Rebellion, raising of
Armies, and Chacing and Fighting against their Pious and Religious King, who
never gave them any Cause for it (if any Cause at all can ever be assigned, or
able to justify Rebellion) should not be Sin enough, made all the have they
could to add Sacrilege unto it, and placed in themselves an Arbitrary and
boundless Authority over him, unto whom they had Sworn an Allegiance due to
Superiority, trampled upon all their fellow Subjects, Plundered, Sequestered,
and did all they could to Perjure the Loyal part of them, destroyed the
Privileges of Parliament, suffered some of their own Members to be pulled out
of the House of Commons, and Imprisoned by Soldiers and Red-Coats (one whereof
was by his own Confession an Irish Popish Priest) and by the Assistance of
their over-pow'ring Army, voted down, suppressed, and shut up the House of
Peers, as useless and dangerous, enforced themselves into a Republic and the
Nation, who by the Laws of God and the King, and their Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, were bound as well as themselves to the contrary, to Engage never
more to admit of a King and House of Lords, and in some of their Answers to
their Brethren of Scotland, who urged and taxed them with some of their
Promises concerning His late Majesty, said that they hoped they would not make
their Promises to be Obligations. And in their Declaration Printed and
Published to give Satisfaction to all the World, that would believe them of the
Reasons of their Actions; and turning themselves into a Commonwealth,
endeavored to assert that in all Promises a Tacit Condition and Proviso was
ever to be understood as annexed unto them, So always that they did not
prejudice or inconvenience the Party promising.

And forgetting that they had prosecuted the late Earl of Strafford, and caused
him to be put to Death, upon a pretense of his Subversion of Laws, which he
never did, but they themselves really and frequently did, Murdered their King,
Banished His now Majesty the Prince, and the rest of his Children, and used
their utmost endeavors to Extirpate all the Royal Progeny, scorned and abused
the Laws, tumbled, tossed and ploughed up the Liberties, Proprieties and
Estates of the Loyal Party, and made some Ignotos and invisible (they
themselves never knew) and who were less to be understood than King Oberon and
his Fairy Queen, to be styled the Keepers of the Liberties of England, voted
the Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer to be
dissolved, and ordered the Records thereof to be destroyed and thrown into the
River of Thames, and were not all that while in dread of any Arbitrary Power,
and a Standing Army, when to the great Charge of the People they could not
think themselves safe without it. But tamely suffered Oliver Cromwell, their Man
of Sin and greatest of Hypocrites to put a trick upon them, and teach them the
Truth and Doctrine of Divine Retalliation by dissolving the Relics of the
overlong Parliament, pulling out the remaining Members with Soldiers and
Musquettiers, and shutting up the Doors of that House of Commons, and could for
the Preservation of their illgotten Estates, like Isachar, bow down unto the
burden, and be well content to believe it to be no violation of the Privileges
of Parliament, no Arbitrary Power or Introduction to it, nor any Destruction of
the Liberties of the People, and suffer him upon the 16th of December 1653. in
the presence of the Commanders and Officers of his Army, attended by the
miscalled Lords Commissioners of the pretended great Seal of England, Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, diverse of the over awed Judges of the
Land, and many other Persons, said to be of Quality, to declare himself by an
Instrument in Writing of his own framing, Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; Disannul and Abrogate the ancient form of
Parliaments, constitute a New, and Ordain that the Persons Elected to be
Members for ever afterward should be approved by the major part of his
Council, and the succeeding Protectors; who were most of them Major Generals
and Commanders in his Standing Army of Oppressors: That an yearly Revenue
should be raised, settled, and established for the maintaining of Ten Thousand
Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty Thousand Foot in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
for the Defense and Security thereof; and a Convenient Number of Ships for
guarding of the Seas; besides Two hundred thousand Pounds per Annum, for
defraying the other necessary Charges and Expenses of the Government.

Which Revenues were to be raised by the Customs, and such other ways and means
as should be agreed upon by him and his Council.

That the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Royalties, Jurisdictions, and Hereditaments,
which remained unsold and undisposed by Acts or Ordinances of Parliament
belonging to the Commonwealth (except the Forests and Chases, and the Honors
and Manors appertaining thereunto) the Lands of the Rebels in Ireland, and the
four Counties of Dublin, Cork, Kildare, and Caterlaugh; Oliver Cromwell's
Instrument of Government.
the Lands forfeited by the People of Scotland in the late Wars, and the Lands
of Papists and Delinquents in England, who had not then Compounded, should
together with the Debts, Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Penalties, and Profits
certain and casual, due to the Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority
of Parliament, be vested in the Lord Protector and his Successors Lord
Protectors of the aforesaid Nations, not to be aliened but by consent of
Parliament; which made him no less an yearly Revenue, as some of his own Party
did calculate it then Eighteen hundred Thousand Pounds sterling, per Annum.

That for the preventing of Disorders and Dangers which might fall out both at
Sea and Land, he should have Power until the meeting of the first Parliament
(which was to be once in every Three years) to raise Money for the purposes
aforesaid.

And to make Laws and Ordinances for the Peace and welfare of these Nations,
which should be binding and in force until order should be taken in Parliament
concerning the same.

That the exercise of the Chief Magistrate, and the Administration of the
Government over the said Countries and Dominions should be in the Lord
Protector, assisted with a Council not exceeding Twenty one, or less than
Thirteen.

That he should in the Intervals of Parliament, dispose and order the Militia
and Forces of the Three Nations for the Peace and good thereof, with the advice
and consent of the major part of his Council.

That the Number of 60 Elected and chosen or approved as aforesaid (being easy
enough to be tempted by Preferment, or overawed by a standing Army) should be
deemed a Parliament for the Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland;
That he and every successive Lord Protector, should take an Oath that he would
not Violate or Infringe the matters and things contained in that Instrument of
Government.

And when afterward to prevent the Juries Scruples of Conscience and
unwillingness to give their Verdicts against the Law, and the King's Loyal
Party, as he would have them, erected in Westminster Hall his High Court of
Justice, or Shambles, as some of the People not unfitly termed it, adorned with
Red and Blood-demonstrating Colors, to Try and Condemn such Innocent Persons
as he should call Offenders; not according to the Law, but the unbounded rules
of his vulgar Reason of State, guided by a standing Army of 30000 Horse and
Foot, baffled and disgraced the Laws and reasonable Customs of England, maimed
and cut off as much as he could of it, as Adonizedek did the Thumbs and Toes of
his Captive Kings; altered and destroyed all he could the form and rationality
of the Proceedings thereof, and caused the Writs and Pleadings, form and frame
thereof to be translated, and only used in the English Language, on purpose and
with a design to Abrogate them, and make way for a new Fabric and Engine of
Laws, for the establishing of his intended absolute manner of Arbitrary
Government; encouraged and Pensioned Mr. White a professed Papist, and Mr. Hobbs,
Men of great Learning, which might have been better Employed, to Write and
Publish Books to vindicate and justify the necessity of an Absolute Power in
Supreme Magistracy; and others to Write and Publish their unsound Opinions,
that Copyhold Estates were a Badge of the Norman Slaveries; that the eldest
Sons or only Daughters in every Family had no right to any more than a double
Portion of their Father's real Estate; that University-Learning was needless,
with a purpose to Confiscate their Revenues; and Payment of Tithes unlawful;
permitted Servants to betray and sequester their Masters, Tenants their
Landlords, Wives their Husbands, and Children their Parents; only because they
were unwilling to be Perjured in their new Oaths and Engagements, or wretchedly
willing to forsake their Loyalty and the Laws of God and the Kingdom; suffered
his illiterate Commanders to threaten to pull the Gowns from off the Lawyers
Backs, and Publicly to declare, That it would never be well until their Gowns
were like the Colors taken from their Subdued Scots Brethren hung up in
Westminster Hall; made his Major Generals Governors in several Provinces, who
abusing and domineering over the Laws, Imprisoned men without Cause, and
suffered the Nobility of England to stand bare and uncovered before them, and
to be Arrested and Dragged in the Streets by Bailiffs and Catchpoles for Debt,
when they had nothing left to pay them; Prohibited, ejected Orthodox Ministers
to bring Actions at Law for recovery of their Rights; and all others to demand
or seek to recover at Law their Debts or other Rights, by any Actions or Suits
in Law or Equity, unless they took the aforesaid Engagement against the King
and House of Lords; tired and almost starved with tricks and delays, the poor
deprived Ministers Wives and Children of their fifth part of the Profits of
their Husbands and Fathers Benefices, which they seemed to allow unto them;
gave a considerable yearly Salary duly paid to Lilly the fooling and cozening
Astrologer, to foretell in his State as well as weather Almanacks, good or bad
Events, to Lacquy after his accursed Designs, and positively assert by his
pretended intimacy with the Stars, that in such a year before His Majesty's
happy Restoration, Prince Rupert, who God be thanked is yet living, was
certainly to be Hanged.

Constituted a House composed of his Army Commanders, and some other of his
Nymrods and Deputy-oppressors, many whereof had been formerly well instructed
in the Arts of Cobblers, Draymen, and Bodies-making, etc. and instead of an
House of Peers, called it the Other House. And when Mr. Coney a London
Merchant, being Imprisoned against the Law without a Cause shown, had brought
his Habeas Corpus to be Bailed, sent Mr. Maynard, Mr. Twisden, and Mr. Wadham
Wyndham his Lawyers, Prisoners to the Tower of London; for Pleading for him,
and the Liberties of the People; and called our Magna Charta, Magna farta;
Prohibited all Lawyers to Plead for any of the Sequestered Orthodox Ministry,
that would not crouch under, and kiss the Rod of their Persecution.

Many notwithstanding of those better now than they were before Informed
Members of that over long and unhappy Parliament, and continued to be Members
of Parliament through all the Changes; from thence to Oliver, and from Oliver
to his Son Dick, seemed not then to be out of love with those new Authorities
or over turning Rota's of Government, Laws, and Liberties.

And too many of the gaining and Phanatick Party, who might have foreseen the
dismal Apprehensions of an approaching Arbitrary Power, had in the days of
Oliver and his Son Mr. Richard so little a dread, or were not so much afraid of
it (when they had reason to have been a great deal more) as they being no small
Gainers by it rejoiced in it, thought themselves happily placed in the blessed
Land of Canaan, and Conducted into it by the hand of Heaven, and Singing a
Magnificat to Oliver, and a Requiem to themselves, and their chosen Posterity,
could be at no rest until they had obtained Declarations out of many Counties
and Cities, subscribed by the most considerable Men of their Rebellious and
Sacrilegious Party, and caused them to be Printed and delivered unto his
Counterfeit Highness, with Solemn Addresses upon their Knees, and other actions
of Veneration, by some of their most active Accomplices; wherein they styled
Oliver, Moses and Joshua; made up his Praises with almost Blasphemy, and prayed
for the continuance of his Care for their Protection, and as they called it the
Public Good; and were after his Death as busy with the like Adoration;
several solemn Declarations, Addresses and Thanksgivings to his Son Richard's
ridiculous parcel of Highness.

Wherefore they who were then so willing to bow their Necks under the hard
galling Iron yoke, which a Long Parliament by Color of a false Authority,
assistance of a standing Army, and a Rebel Brewer had put upon them.

And to take Arms against their own Happiness, and betray their own good Laws,
Liberties, Privileges and Customs to Usurpers, which were so unparalled, as
the Devil with a pair of Spectacles cannot upon the most malicious and exactest
search, find any Nation under Heaven so happy and blessed as England has been,
in the security of their Liberties, Properties and Privileges, since the
beginning of the Reign of King Henry the First, thorough the Reigns of all our
Succeeding Kings; who upon the least appearance or complaints of Grievances,
either as to particulars or generals, raro contingentibus; or but feared or
likely to happen, never denied good Laws and Remedies to their People, as all
our Law Books, Year-Books, Reports of Cases, Adjudged Parliament Rolls, and
Books of Statutes will abundantly testify; may with shame and horror of so
foul and grand ingratitude recall to their remembrance, that they that were the
Disciples of the late Wars and Usurpations, and gainers by the Ruin and Misery
of this, and two other Kingdoms, by their Arts and Power of cheating and haring
their fellow Subjects out of their Loyalty, Religion, Estates, Laws, and
Liberties.

Could be well contented to receive of His Majesty after his Return from his
Distresses, not only a Pardon (unto all, but a few excepted) of their great and
many Offenses and Misdeeds, after that he had by several Acts of Parliament
Unfornicated or Unadulterated the Wives and Husbands, and Legitimated the
Children of those that were mis-married, and taken away the Errors of their
Illegal Proceedings and Judgments, and Recoveries had at Law, in the time of
their many years abominable Rebellion; but the greatest acquital of Money,
Arrears, and Forfeitures due unto him, amounting unto many Millions Sterling,
that ever any People of England had and received of any of their Kings and
Princes at once, with an Addition afterward of another Pardon or Abolition of
a lesser size, for Offenses and Forfeitures since committed, and did not only
restore unto all the Cities, Boroughs, and Corporations of England and Wales,
their forfeited Charters, Privileges, and Liberties; but enlarged and gave unto
many of them, more than they had before.

And was so unwilling to Punish those that had done him and his Royal Father,
Mother, Brothers, and Sisters, those almost impossible to be forgotten or
forgiven most execrable Villainies, as he not only Pardoned, but gave them
profitable Employments: who to their shame cozened him all they could and
molded themselves into a Faction of Repeating as many Impieties as they had
been guilty of before, and was so over Clement and forgiving, as he employed,
and did not Punish one that was proved to have said after His Majesty's escape
from the Battle of Worcester, That if he had been taken, he ought to have been
stripped stark Naked, led through the Streets with a Bridle thrust through an
hole bored in his Nose, Whipped at a Carts tail, and afterward Hanged.

Are not to be very angry, or take it ill if they be charged with Partiality or
Injustice; or as great a Reproach as our Blessed Savior bestowed upon the
over-quick-sighted fault-finding Pharisee, who could espy a mote (as he thought
in another's eye, but not see a beam in his own) but rather retire into
themselves; and upon a more strict Examination of their past evil Actions,
abhor themselves in dust and ashes, cover their heads with shame, weep, repent,
and resolve to walk retrograde, and persist no more in the gainsaying of
Corah, Datham, and Abiram; wherein they perished.

When they who would make every body as much afraid as they themselves, do seem
to fear an Inclination in His Majesty to an Arbitrary Power, which he never
did, or is willing to exercise, can almost every day join with others in
Complaints of the no few of the Subordinate Magistrates, usurping it against
the mind and direction of the King and his Laws over their fellow Subjects, by
their Irregular courses; Condemning, and many times Imprisoning without Jury,
Trial, legal Hearing, or Proceedings.

And easily discern an yearly Custom of an illegally over-strained Power in the
Lord Majors of London; Electing and Drinking unto many or more than needs, in
the Choice of two to be Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the ensuing year;
and imposing and taking great Fines of the Refusers, unto whom he needed not to
have Drank, whereby to gain some Thousands of Pounds yearly for the Fines of
such as were unwilling or unfit to bear the Charge or Expense of those Offices,
and Imprison and Constrain them to pay them; which are seldom less than 4 or
500 l. upon every such Refuser. As if some fatal and successive Annual, or fit
of Thirst, or kind Drinking, was at a certain Time of every year to fall upon
the Lord Majors of that City to Drink more often, and unto more than he should
do. And they that shall happen to be so imposed upon, are sure to be out of
hopes of getting themselves discharged of Imprisonment, for not paying the Fine
by Writs of Habeas Corpus and Bail; which if the King should do every year in
the Choice of Three presented unto him to serve as Sheriffs in all other
Counties and Places of England and Wales, (no other City or Place therein
making use of such a kind and loving Device to raise Moneys) the Habeas Corpora
Bells would Ring in all the Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall; and His
Majesty would be troubled with the noise thereof.

And no small Arbitrary Power in their Courts of Orphants in London, by
Imprisoning a young Man in Newgate without Bail or Mainprise, that had lawfully
Married a City Orphant, and his Father in like manner for contriving it.

And we may often hear and observe in the Guilds, Fraternities, and Companies
of Trade, and their Mysteries in the City of London, an almost unbounded over
absolute Power in their Bylaws, which should be perused (as it is more than a
little probable they are not, or but very seldom or cursorily) by the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord 19 H. 7. ca. 7.
Treasurer, and the two Lord Chief Justices, and allowed by them or any three
of them, to be according to the Law; together with their giving of unlawful
Oaths, imposing of Taxes, Quarteridges, or Fines and Assessements as they
please upon the Poorer sort of the Companies of Trades, supernumerating their
Livery Men in their Companies, in making them to be twice as many as they were
wont to be, and enforcing them to Pay 20 or 25 l. a Man, and be at the Charge
of a reverend Gown faced with Furrs of Foynes or Budge; and Imprison Men for
not obeying them and their grinding superfluous Orders.

The Exactions and Arbitrary Power of the Church Officers in the City of
London, and its overgrown Suburb Parishes, in the Renting of Pews and Seats in
the Churches; making Strangers pay great and double Fees for Tolling the
Passing Bell, and Ringing of a Peal, when there was no such Matters; taking
great Fees for Burying of the Dead in the Church or Chancel; near an Husband,
Wife, Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, where before they have lain there a
quarter of a year, or a little time, they are sure to be taken up again, and
flung into a Common Vault, to lodge amongst those that were Buried far cheaper,
conniving at, or permitting the Parish Clerks, Sextons, or Grave-makers to sell
the broken and sometimes pillaged Coffins of the Dead to be made fuel for fire
or Bake-houses, cozening the Living and Dead, feasting and fatning themselves
upon every small Consultation and Parish meeting, for the good as they call it,
or little Business of the Parish; as for the putting out a Bastard or
Foundling, or poor Parish Child to a Beggar to beg with, and trouble the
Streets withal at a low weekly rate, and take the advantage to themselves of
reckoning by a greater, which have been the cause of such short Memories in
Parish Politics and Governments, as the Account of a Legacy of Three hundred
Pounds per Annum, as they may be now demised, in Houses and Tenements in a
London Suburb Parish, for as many hundred years ago, for the Building of the
Church yet standing upon its old Ruins, is so vanished as it is not at all to
be found, and a royal Charity of One hundred and Twenty pounds given in the
year 1625. by King Charles the Martyr in a Time of Pestilence, could never be
heard of, and the Church wardens or Collectors of a near London Parish have
been so overwatched for the good of the Parish, and thereby rendered so sleepy
or Lethargick, as they could not good People as they would be thought to be,
tell which way One Thousand or Two Thousand pounds have escaped out of the
Account, and the fault must be charged more upon the want of Honesty than
Arithmetic. And may be found as greatly mistaken in their no seldom Parish
Annual Legacies, Communion Charities, or otherwise; and in their Taxes or
yearly Collections for the Poor, which in some out-Parishes near London, have
amounted unto Two thousand pounds per Annum, and many times several Hundred
pounds per Annum in lesser Parishes; and yet the Poor pester the Streets, and
complain of their Parish-starving Weekly Allowances, when Houses of Forty
pounds per Annum therein, are by a constant yearly Tax burdened with Sixteen
shillings per Annum, to be quarterly paid toward the relief of the Poor;
though many Charities, and the yearly improved Rents of Lands assigned
thereunto, ought to have lessened it, or by their taxing or laying heavy
burdens upon such as shall disoblige them or withdraw their Custom from their
Shops, Taverns, or Alehouses, or to ease a Friend, or any that can make a
persuading Application unto them, or to charge one man more heavily than he
should be to ease another that might better bear it, will adventure to convert
the Moneys given for the setting up, or seeking young Tradesmen to their own
use, or of their own Children, Son-in-Laws or Kindred, and making their Wives
Jointures of Lands given to Charitable uses, which they cannot tell how to be
ill done in regard of that often misguiding, and misapplied, saying, That
Charity begins at home; take Five shillings at a time out of the Dish or
Basin of the Money given to the Poor at the receiving of the Sacrament, to
satisfy a wicked Churchwarden for his Attendance; and as much sometimes in
the gathering of Money or Benevolence for the Lecturer, who might have saved
that Money if he had Preached them into better Consciences; as when after a
long attendance they are to pay a charitable gift for the Marriage of poor
Maidservants, or to such of that sort as have served one Master or Mistress in
that Parish for such a number of years, do think the Devil will not be friends
with them, if by some lie or pretense as that the Rents of the Lands are
fallen, a Tenant broke or insolvent, they do not drive them to take a pittance,
or scarce half of what is due; and howsoever must give a Release or Receipt for
the whole: to the end that all may be reckoned, when a great deal less was paid.

And do think that they have as great an Authority under color of Public
good, not at all, or but little intended, to grind and do what they please, and
with as much Extravagancy in many of their illegal orders and doings within the
small compass of their little Dominions, as if all the rest of the Parish were
only of the Tribe of Issachar.

And every City, Borough, and Corporation in England and Wales, will not think
themselves furnished with Arbitrary Power, sufficient by their Charters, unless
by their Bylaws and subordinate Rules of Government, they can have some out
leaps and incursions, and enforce their Inhabitants to an obedience of their
many times unjustifiable Orders, Fines, and Assessements.

The Companies of Trade in London, whose Charters and Incorporations were
granted for the better ordering and governing of an honest and regular way of
Trading, with a conscionable and reasonable gain; not to spoil and falsify the
Manufactures of the Kingdom, and enhaunce the Price thereof, are not to suffer
Tricks to be played with it to deceive and abuse the People.

The Drapers cannot produce a Charter, or an Allowance from God or Man, to
cause their Cloth to be stretched or Tenter'd, to make 16 yards 20; and when a
new created Trade called a Cloth-drawer shall have hid, and cunningly dearn'd
up the holes or cracks in it by a device of Hot-pressing it so slick and smooth
it, as it shall feel and look rather like Silk than Cloth, sell it for 20, 25
or 30 s. per yard; which if it were not so misused and made to be almost old
before the Tailor can have shapt it into a Shute of Apparel, would be worth but
16 or 18 s. per yard.

And it is more than an Arbitrary lawless Power for a Goldsmith to melt down as
much heavy Money as he can come at into silver Plate; and sell Tobacco and
Powder-Boxes, Staff handles, Pomels of Swords, Cup-handles, and most of the
smaller pieces of Plate in the Kingdom, of drossy Silver, not half the value of
Sterling, and prove them to be touched or marked for Sterling, when it will not
be worth half the Money they do sell it for; fill Rings by an Imperceptible
hole with powder of Copper, and make the Buyer pay for pure Gold, when it is
for a great part no such matter. Insomuch as a great part of the Plate of the
Nation is now so much abased, as it is not half the value it should be.

It is a more than Arbitrary and illegal Power in the Vintners, who besides the
great Adulteration of the Wines beyond the Seas before they come hither, will
have the assistance of the Wine-Coopers to unwholsom them with Arsenick in the
Sack, and many other unhealthful mixtures in their other Wines, and by that,
and the Vintner and his Drawer's Deputy-Conjurations, can to please the humor
of the Customers, fit him out of half a dozen small Vessels or Bottles, and
laugh as they say in their sleeves, (and perhaps the Drawer may get a Sixpence
into the Bargain) for drawing it so specially to think how neatly they are
cozened; howsoever the rate must be what they shall set, though the King and his
Privy Council do often put a price upon their Wines; yet if the more honest
Drinkers will not pay the Vintner's own exacted Rate, for that which is good
they must take the bad enough to poison a Dog. And if some fall Sick upon it,
as many have lately done and dye, by no great quantity moderately drank of it,
that shall never disturb the Conscience of the Vintner, who thinks it for the
Public good, that he in a short time has from a poor Tavern-Boy made himself
worth 20000 l. or 30000 l. and his Wife the Mistress of a Pearl Neck-lace (not
Counterfeit, as his Wines were) of a great value.

And makes no doubt but although he Repent and come into the Vineyard of the
Almighty at a late, or but the eleventh hour, he shall not go without his Penny,
and if he purchase an Hospital, or some other charitable Uses, and leave it in
trust with as honest an one as himself, it will do the business.

The Brewers cannot believe their Trade can subsist without the aid of an
unjustifiable Arbitrary Power, who though they be allowed by the King, and
excused for the Excise of three Barrels of Beer in every score, and steals as
much as they can notwithstanding of the duty of the Excise from the King and
his Officers; and the Housekeeper pays the Excise for all that he takes of him.
Yet from his Beer (though Malt, Coal, and Hops be never so cheap) or Ale, the
best must be taken off, and the remainder being only water half boiled flung
upon the strengthless grains is sent and served to the Housekeeper for 6 s.
Beer with the Excise laid upon it, and made to be a Drink not fit to give
Beasts, quickly stinking and souring, and by the Opinion of the London
Physicians is a great, if not an only cause of the Epidemick and now more than
formerly Infection or Disease called the Scurvy, not so much as heretofore
taken notice of in the Bills of Mortality, and that Beer though always
over-hopped and imbittered, to supply the want of Malt, the People are
constrained to be content with; and if they will have it better, are to pay
Eight shillings a Barrel besides the Excise, for that which should be but Six.

All which, or a great part of it, might by the Justice and Laws of the Nation
be redressed, if the Vintners, who by a late Trick of glass Bottles, now used
in most Taverns, bespoken and made to be but or not so much as a Pint and an
half, instead of a Quart; and their elder Brethren the Brewers were but put in
mind as they ought to be of the Statute entitled Assisa panis and Cervisiae,
made in the 51 year of the Reign of King Henry the Third. And another Statute
made by that King in the same year called the Statute of the Pillory and
Tumbrell, both yet in force and unrepealed, whereby the Offenders, Vintners,
Brewers, and Bakers, are to be presented and amerced; and for every default,
the Baker is to be adjudged to the Pillory; and the Brewer and Vintner to the
Tumbrell, which was as it were in a Ducking-Stool (now sometimes used over
cleaner waters, and applied to notorious Scolding and unquiet Women) hanging
over some muddy and unwholesome water, being the Punishment of the Fossa or
stinking Pits, appropriate by the Grants of diverse of our Kings to the Lords or
Owners of great Manors or Liberties, having Assisas panis and Cervisiae.

Which ill doings of the Brewers in their unconscionable and unchristian-like
Arbitrary Power, exercised as far as it can be stretched upon their fellow
Subjects, are imitated by the Alehouse keepers, the Inferior and Retailing
Masters of the Tap; who would never have it be said or proved, that they come
short of their Founders great Abilities in the Arts or Knaveries of the Drink
Profession, or any of their Subtilties or Exactions. And therefore to make it
go with a double, at the least rate or price, or much more than it should be,
have to cheat and cozen the People in to an idle and ridiculous Expense,
devised several Names for Drinks, as they shall please to call them, though
there be little or nothing of the supposed Ingredients in them; as Cock Ale,
College Ale, China Ale, Scurvygrass Ale, Lymmon or Orange Beer or Ale, Hull
Ale, Northdown Ale, Sambach Ale, Doctor Butler's Ale, cum multis al^^s; For
which Adoptions, sundry of those Promoters of Drunkenness do think they shall
serve the Devil for nothing, if they be not paid a double or greater rate; and
by that means and those measures, make a shift to clear Four Pounds a Week, and
put it to griping Usury, and in a short time make themselves the Owners of 3 or
400 l. per Annum, and some of them 7 or 800 l. per (...): And in their
Ale-honesty can take no less in the Suburbs of London than a Penny for a Pint of
Ale, when in Southwark on the other side of the Thames, better Brewed and made
can be sold for an Halfpenny a Pint.

The Woodmongers or Colliers can leap over all our Laws as they list; and by
Confederacy keep back the Collier New Castle Fleet, and make them tarry in the
lower part of the River of Thames, and send up to London some straggling
Cole-Ships to scarce and enhaunce the price of Coals; insomuch, as until His
Majesty after many Complaints, and a tired Patience, had taken away their
Charter, they would at every extraordinary Frost or winterly weather, never
fail to raise the rates of Sea Coals in the space of a few Days, or less than a
Week, unto 5, 10, or 20 s. at a time, and sometimes as high as 3 or 4 l. a
Chaldron, to the great Affliction and Impoverishment of the poorer sort of
People; when they might as they have done since the taking away of their
Charter, have afforded a Chaldron of Coals with gain enough under 20 s. a
Chaldron.

Neither need we to have any Jury or Inquest impannelled in the search of an
Arbitrary Power, daily made use of in the City of London and Suburbs thereof by
the People over one another, the mighty over the weak, and the rich over the
poor. And the Usurer and man of Money, when he takes as much above the legal
Interest, for the loan of his Money, as the necessities of the distressed
Borrowers can persuade him unto, and upon the Severity of an Execution, or a
forfeited Mortgage of Lands double or treble in value to the Money lent, looks
as Nebuchadonozer, overlooked his Babylon, walks about like a Mogul, or some
unlimited Monarch of the East, and as pittiless to the Supplication of the
lamenting supplicant Borrower, and the tears of his Wife and Children, as the
Hunger-bitten Woolf is with the Lamb under his bloody Paws and Fangs; In
company of whom do march, the insinuating Imp of the Devil called the Tallyman,
with his closer and more Consumptive secretly biting Usury, lending Eighteen
Shillings to Market-Men and Women Heglers, etc. Such as cry necessary Food in
the Streets, instead of 20 s. upon the Tally and their own Security, at the
interest and rate of 12 d. duly paid every Week, although continued at that
pace a year together, being a cunning piece of Usury, far exceeding that of the
Jews; who in the Reign of our King Richard the First, were by the Common People
Massacred, and the Caursini the Pope's Brokers banished by King Henry the
Third, for much gentler Usuries followed by that of the lesser Pinching Money-
Improvers, who will lend 10 l. for no longer than a Month, and at that or every
Months end, call fiercely to have it paid in, to beget the former or a greater
Brocage.

When all the Trades of London and Westminster, and their largely overbuilt
Suburbs, can by an unreasonable and Arbitrary Power to maintain their unfitting
Pride and Luxury, impose and put what price they please upon their Work and
Commodities, and not a few do upon every occasion or opportunity of their
interest and advantage break and run over our Magna Charta, and other the Laws
and Statutes of the Kingdom. And when they trust their Customers, without which
there would be little or no Trade, do when such Buyers dream nothing of it,
clap an hard interest into the price; and if need be, in writing over their
Books again, make where it may be undiscernable an addition unto it.

The Mercers can order their Silks and Stuffs to be made slight and little
lasting, and half yard broad, when it should be a greater measure; and every
Month of May or Summer Season put a Nickname, or some Cabalisiical or Utopian
devised word upon it to make the Buyers give the more; and be fond of it.

And since our times of Mad-mens contriving Reformations, and opening the
passage to all manner of Tricks of Trade and Deceits; there is in every Week a
meeting of most of the bigger sort of Retailing Trades in London and
Westminster, where they do agree their Prices for some good part of time
afterward, and bind one another in Bonds not to sell under; and in the mean
time take more than ordinary Care to give the Manufacture-men but half the
Wages which they gave them Weekly before, whereby to engage them to make it
slight and leave the more room or liberty for the Seller to lie and swear the
Commodity to an higher price. Which makes the Stationers sell not only their
Paper at an higher rate than formerly; but so ill made, as either it will not
bear Ink, or must be as stiff, hard and uneasy to write upon, as if it were a
board, and requires a Pen of Iron or Steel, rather than the usual Pens to write
upon it; and the Parchments so ill dressed, as makes that which shall be
written upon either that or Paper, to be so little permanent and lasting, as
all our Memorials so written, are not likely to last or endure legible 10 or 20
years after in the largest expectation. The London Mealman will not think
himself in any way of hopes of gaining, or to be a Master of his Parish, if he
do not bespeak or calculate a Famine by an ill Weather, or some mischance like
to happen to Corn and Grain for the ensuing year, and will therefore hasten to
take advantage of it by raising it 2 d or 4 d in a Peck, and not keep any
proportion betwixt the rise of the Market, and that which he takes of as many
as he can persuade to give it; and having once raised his price, holds it as
long as he can at the same pitch, though the Markets were long before fallen,
and in the course of his Trade tricks, notwithstanding mingleth Chalk, Bean and
Rye Flower amongst that which he sels to his deluded Customers for pure Wheaten.

The Lord Majors of London, that have by our King's Indulgence and Charters
many Annual Profits and Perquisites, by and out of Provisions for Food brought
thither on purpose to take care that it should be wholesome, and the Lord Majors
and Justices of Peace that are by the Statutes of 23 E. 3. ca. 6. 13 R. 2. ca.
8. and 12 E. 4. ca. 8. Empowered and obliged to Assesse the price of Victuals,
and the gain of Victuallers; and to Punish such as do not sell at reasonable
prices, with respect had to what is sold in places adjoining; should not permit
the Clerks of the Markets to suffer unwholesome Food nor Butter made and mixed
with Curds, which will taint or stink in two or three days to be sold there;
nor a Trade to be set up of buying Barrels of Salt Butter, carrying it home and
washing it, and mingling it with other Butter, bring it again the next
Market Day dished up, and sold for sweet But ter at double the price. And it
would be well if the Lord Mayor of London and his Brethren would take more Care
than they do to purge that City of Arbitrary Power in the manage of Trade, when
there is nothing to be bought either for Food or Raiment, but is adulterated,
sophisticated, or cheated in the price or substance, not a liquid thing without
undue mixtures, nor of any other nature without deceit in the quantity or
quality thereof; so as not so much a Pins, Needles, and Thread can escape it;
though there be a City Argus, or Man employed in the keeping of the Knife at
Leaden Hall, to Cut all such ill-Tanned Leather as shall be brought thither to
be sold; and is to make Shoes and Boots for most part of the adjacent Counties,
as well as London: Matters are so handled betwixt the dim-sighted Knife, the
Tanner and the Currier, that by the Tanner's not allowing a due proportion of
Bark, or time of his Leather lying in the Tan-pit, the Leather of the Shoes and
Boots is not half Tanned, and keeps out wet or water little better than brown
Paper, which must not be a little prejudicial to the health of the English
Nation; who use not to walk with Sandals on their Feet in Countries almost
fried or toasted with the Sun, but in moist and foggy Airs, where Rheums,
Coughs, and Colds are and may be very obnoxious to their health.

And when these and other Trades have in no better a manner gained great
Estates, and enriched and persuaded themselves that their special Pleas; That
it was their Trade. Secondly, That they must live. Thirdly, Their Master or
Father did so before them. And Fourthly, That if they did not do it, others
would do it; will protect and carry them thorough the dangers of the next life,
will use so little Charity in this, as they can themselves by a lawless Power,
in the way either of their Malice or Oppression, cause others to be Arrested
and Imprisoned for some Months or Years to the ruin of the suffering party, by
Illegally demised Fictitious Writs for many Thousand pounds, when there was not
so many Thousand Shillings or Groats, and sometimes nothing at all due unto
them. And against all Law and right Reason, make their Friends, if any will be
so ventrous as to be Bail for them, to be Charged with all other Debts, to
which they were not Bail; if the Creditors do in the same Term declare against
them.

And at the same time make heavy Complaints against the King, or any of his
Servants or Officers of his Court, when they shall be but for some Days or
Weeks restrained of their Liberty by the Command or Warrant of the King or his
Council, for Contempts or Misdemeanors well deserving to be Punished, and in
all their Discourses make Hue and Cry against Arbitrary Power, and a Design of
introducing it by the King and his Council; when they might see and understand
that there is no such matter.

And could well enough perceive that the very many great and Importunate
Necessities and Disbursements, which daily thronged in upon His Majesty since
his Happy Restoration, for the defense and preservation of himself and his
People, and the repairing and setting up again of a battered and dispoiled
Monarchy, were not able to persuade him to lay aside the goodness and
gentleness of his Nature, or to call for those Dues which the Law had since
those Acts of General Abolition and Pardon afforded him, although in the midst
of those pressing Necessities, and very great want of Money, which daily
Importuning and Calling upon him did greatly distress and disturb as well his
Mind as Affairs; he was after his Happy Restoration unavoidably enforced to
pay many great Sums of Money owing by him in Foreign Parts, and the time of his
Troubles.

Great Arrears owing by Oliver Cromwell to the Seamen and Land Forces to calm
and pacify them.

Lost great Sums of Money in the Assessing and Collecting of the Subsidies,
Poll Money, and Assessements.

Has been at great Charges in procuring his Plundered and lost Housholdstuff,
Hangings, Plates, and Pictures, and the Redemption of the Crown Jewels; a great
part of which were by his Royal Father in his Wars and Calamities, Pawned at
Amsterdam.

Granted Eight thousand pounds per Annum of the Crown Revenue to George Duke of
Albemarle, and the Heirs males of his Body, who was so happily instrumental in
his Restoration.

Four thousand pounds per Annum upon the like account to the Earl of Sandwich
in Fee or Fee-tail.

Sixty thousand pounds given to the distressed Cavalier Party that sought for
him and his Royal Father; besides other great Gifts and Pensions to not a few
of his Subjects, either necessitated by Suffering for him and his Royal Father,
or craving what they could of him, or to sweeten, allure, and keep in quiet the
Schismatical, Rebellious, and contrary Parties.

Expended much Money in Repairing his if not almost ruined yet much deformed
and defaced Houses and Palaces, replenishing of his Parks, Stores, and
Magazines; Building of his House at Greenwich, with an Expense of Housekeeping
and bounty more than ordinary at his Return and coming into England; with the
Charge of Diet for the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and the Princess of Orange
and their Families, more than formerly chargeable by reason of the want of his
Purveyance.

In the Payment of 200000 l. to the old Farmers of the Customs Charged upon
Ireland more than that Kingdoms yearly Revenue, and their Parliamentary Aids
given by them amounted unto.

The Abatement of some of his Customs to advance the Fishing Trade.

Of his Chimney or Hearth-Money in London, and some of the Suburbs thereof for
Seven years, in Relief of those that Suffered by the Burning of London; made
and ordained several helpful Acts of Parliament for the Rebuilding of it.

Gave great Sums of Money out of his Customs toward the Relief of the Captives
at Algier.

Was at great Charges in keeping and fortifying of Dunkirk, until the quitting
thereof.

And of the Garrison and making the Mole at Tangier, and some of his Customs
assigned to defray the Charges of repairing the Peer or Port of Dover.

Adventures in the Guiny and Royal Company.

Two hundred and Twenty thousand pounds per Annum, necessary yearly Charges for
the maintenance of his Life-Guards Foot and Horse; besides many other great
Charges in the Raising and Disbanding of Forces to defend himself and the
Kingdom against Intestine Plots, Seditions, and a threatening Invasion from
abroad.

Of Building of many great Ships, and Frigots; and making of Forts in England,
Ireland, and Scotland.

In Magazines, Stores, and Provision for Shipping Ammunition, Ordnance,
Gunpowder, etc.

Of procuring the Bishop of Munster to make a diversive War upon the Dutch.

Charges and Expenses of the former Dutch War, and his Navy of an Hundred great
Ships and Men of War in several years and Summers, every single Ship in its
Victualling Pay and Ammunition; being as Chargeable as two Regiments of Foot in
an Army well Victualled and Paid.

Payment of an unreasonable and racking Interest, to borrow and procure Money,
and relieve his not easily to be satisfied necessitous and weather-beaten Court
and Servants.

Charges in the Collecting the Chimney Money, and the Losses and Defalcations
in the Excise-Revenue in the late great Plague, and Dismal Fire at London, and
Defalcations to the Farmers of the Customs for their Losses by the want of
Trade in the time of the Dutch War.

An Allowance or Imposition upon every Chaldron of Coals for a certain number
of years, toward the Rebuilding of St. Paul's Cathedral, and 39 other Churches
in London.

Two years Revenue of diverse Rents of Houses near London allowed to the Queen
Mothers Servants after her Death; all the Delinquents Estates who were greatly
Instrumental in the Murder of his Royal Father, given to the Duke of York for
his Support; together with the Profits of the Admiralty, Wine-Licences, and a
great part of the yearly benefit by the Post Office. With many other necessary
Regal Expenses.

And being since His most Happy Restoration to himself, but most of all to his
oppressed Subjects, who were thereby delivered out of a like to be perpetual
Bondage and Vassalage of their own framing, from which otherwise they could
never have redeemed themselves, and being kind and gracious to as many as he
could of his Suffering Party, and willing to persuade those that had been
altogether instrumental, and causers of his own and his Loyal Subjects
Miseries, to follow their Example, gave their never to be satisfied Rapines,
and godless greediness too many of the Employments, Places, Farms and Offices
under him; can notwithstanding with Samuel justly say, whose 1 Samuel 12. 3.
Ox, or whose Ass have I unjustly taken away; whom have I defrauded, or whom
have I oppressed?

Which if Right be done unto him, should not be gainsaid by his borrowing of
the Banker's Money, when they had sent it into his Exchequer at an high and
unreasonable Interest, and making use of it to furnish out his Navy, in or
against the approaching Spring, when the Ungrateful Dutch, having heaped their
Abuses and Injuries upon him and the Nation, were as Confident as the
Philistines were in the Case of the Children of Israel, when there was not a
Spear or Sword in Israel; That he could have no means or Money by the
frowardness and discords of some Opiniatrees and State-Reformers, to furnish
out his Fleet to prevent their designs of persisting in their disgracing and
domineering over him; the Trade of the Nation abroad, and affronting and
mastering of him at home.

And in the doing thereof he was Necessitate Necessitatum, driven by an
unavoidable and extreme Necessity, more than that which persuaded David to take
the Show bread from off the Altar to preserve the Public in himself, and
himself in the Public; from a fatal and otherwise utter ruin, and loss of the
Sovereignty of our British Seas, and the Guard and Benefits thereof justly
Claimed and Vindicated by his Royal Progenitors and Predecessors, and at no
time before in so much danger of loosing.

For his after-Actions and Cares of Repayment may Evidence that he intended
neither any wrong or Injustice to the Bankers, or the Owners of it; in that he
not only made a Provision to pay them the Interest until he could be able to
pay them the Principal; but did all he could, if his daily and public
Occasions had not prevented him to pay the Principal, which he long ere this
had accomplished, had not the War by the Haughtiness, Malice and Insolence of
the Dutch, often and very much decryed by the Sweeds and other Nations who were
the Mediators for Peace at Cologne, emboldened by our home Divisions, and want
of Supplies, lengthened it self beyond all Expectation. And has
notwithstanding in the Interim by his Protections Royal, and many other Cares
taken, done as much as he could to keep the Bankers from Arrests,
Imprisonments, and other Ruins impendant often happening and falling upon Men
indebted.

Although if Reports and the Laments of some that were concerned be not much
mistaken, a great part of that Money was belonging to many of his own Servants;
who by his Bounty and Places of Profit under him, had easily gained it; and
many of those who so heavily complained of that detention of their Moneys had
for their own advantages, entrusted it to the Bankers, who by an Imaginary
Credit far exceeding their own Estates, furnishing one man with another man's
Money, and paying out that which was but the same day or a little before come
in, had enticed a great part of the Money of the Nation into their hands. And
some, if not many of the Owners, did well enough understand that they did not
only furnish them and their Credits, upon all Emergent occasions of Profit or
Accommodation, by that kind of alluring much of the Money of the Nation into
their Custody; but his Majesty also at an high and intolerable Usury, which if
a strict enquiry were made by His Majesty, or Order of Parliament of the
particular Owners of the Money brought into the Exchequer by the Bankers, and
from thence borrowed and made use of by his Majesty upon his Public and most
urgent Affairs, would plainly appear.

And it will be as manifest, that he afterward gave no respite to his Royal
Cares and Intentions of Repaying it with the Legal or as much Interest as the
Bankers were to pay for it. And finding that the Fee Farm Rents amounting unto
Seventy thousand pounds per annum, sold at Sixteen years Purchase, which
nothing but a grand Necessity could enforce him to Alien; for that many of them
being the Tenths, were by two several Acts of Parliament annexed to the
Imperial Crown of England, for the maintenance thereof, and were as so many
Ties and Obligations, which made the Owners of these Lands to be dependant upon
the Crown, would not reach to a Satisfaction of his other Debts and Expenses;
which having been longer due, were more importunate than those of the Bankers,
did lately in a Speech to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, make it his
earnest Request that they would take the Necessity and speedy Payment of the
Bankers into their Considerations.

And when nothing of help could be obtained for that purpose, did by his
Letters Patents under his great Seal, with great difficulty and hardship, order
a part of his burdened Revenue to be assigned for the due and orderly payment
of the Interest until the Principal Moneys should be justly satisfied and paid.
So as his doings therein, or making use of that Money, if impartially and
judiciously weighed in the Balance of Truth and Judgment is not to be called a
seizure, or forcible taking of the Bankers Money, or to be ranked either as to
the necessity, or the thing it self, or the number of the persons concerned
with what King Edward the First, a Wise and Prudent Prince did do, when he in
the 22 year of his Reign seized into his hands ^vascon. (...) E. 1. (...)
Alman. (...) E. 3. (...) Concill. (...) H. 6th.
upon occasion of supplying the Public Necessities, all the Wools in the
Kingdom as the Merchants were lading them in the Ports, giving them Security
for Payment at his own Rates, and a long day, and a short price, and
transported them to his own best and readiest Sale; and at another time upon a
like necessity, seized all the Pope's Moneys, which had been Collected for him
by the Clergy of England, amounting to very great Sums of Money toward the
Wars of the Holy Land; gave Protections to those that had the Custody of it,
and retained and made use of it for his then pressing Public Affairs two years
and more, notwithstanding that the Pope had in the mean time sent unto him then
hugely formidable threatening Bulls, and Letters for it. Or the like done by
King Edward the Third in the 12th year of his Reign with all the Tynne, or with
what King Henry the 6th did by way of Purveyance of great Store of Grain and
Corn, and transporting it into Warrant Sub. Private. Sigil. 9 Eliz.
Gascony, where it was very dear, or by Queen Elizabeth of a great deal of Beer
Transported and sold to her use beyond the Seas, and by defraying a great part
of the Charges of her Wars in Ireland, with Moneys Coined of Tynne, with a
promise to make a Satisfaction for it; with Moneys made of Silver, which was
justly performed by her and King James her Learned Successor.

Concerning all which matters, fears, and jealousies, I can be confident your
Sentiments and mine will so little disagree, as your Judgment of the Ages past,
and observations of the rise and progress of our late Troubles and Miseries
which brought the greatest Shame and Scandal to the Protestant Religion,
professed in England and Scotland, that ever it had or could have laid upon it;
and cast an unhappy Reflection upon those that were in the parts beyond the
Seas; will not refuse me your Company in the Opinion of a Truth so
experimented, that the fruit of all those Artifices, rather than any just cause
of any such fears or apprehensions have yielded no better Effects than the
Ruin and Confusion of the former Glory and Honor of our Nation, by setting up
a Rebellious part of the People, the Offspring, as to some of their Levelling
Principles, of Wat Tiler, and Jack Cade to undo and Rule over the better sort
of the People, and the Poor to Plunder and rob the Rich.

And that therefore they which have been the cause of so many Mischiefs and
Evils which their and our Seri Nepotes will have reason enough bitterly to
bewail, and without God's great Mercy will scarcely live to see eradicated,
ought better to consult their Conscience; the Precepts and Examples of Wisdom,
Salus Populi, Interest of the Kingdom, and Honor of the King and Nation, and
abandoning their former Follies, and false Lights which led them and their
partakers into so great Sins, and made them to be the Causes of so many
National Miseries, not run themselves and others into the fear of one or two
uncertain Evils; but an Hundred which will be most certain, and can never be
recalled.

And I cannot but assure my self, that you will be ready to conclude with me,
that there is no Rational or just Cause of Fear that we can have by any
Infection contracted from the now Laws and manner of Government of France,
under His most Christian Majesty. (For until their Civil and Intestine Wars and
Ill Usage of Charles the Fifth, and Charles the Seventh their Kings, in their
greatest Distresses, that Nation had Liberties more than at present they have,
or are likely to enjoy.) And that our League with the French may as little
Prejudice us and our Laws and Liberties as it did those of the Dutch, when they
were in the strictest Alliance or Confederacy with them.

For no man can be so transported out of himself, as to believe that a
Neighborhood or a League for Civil and other Respects, can work any Prejudice
to the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Subjects of either Prince or State,
not granted away or Contracted for by such Leagues, when every days Experience
declares the contrary; for otherwise the Poles, whose King is Elective, and
their Laws so very much obliging him, as he cannot alter the Freedom and
Constitutions of the Peoples Liberties would be in danger of the Mohammedan
Extravagancies of Power to be brought in upon them, when their Kings have made
any Leagues with the Turks or Grand Seignior, and the Sweedish Nation in fear
of their Elective King's introducing the vast and unruly Power of the
Muscovite, whose Subjects being under a mighty awe, Ignorance and enforced
Obedience; have no more to answer when any State Affairs are enquired of them,
than that God and the Great Duke do only know it.

Insomuch as the Provocation of the Dutch being so great, and the Vindication
of the Honor of the King, Trade of the Nation, Safety of the People, and
Sovereignty of the Sea so necessary, as a War with them could not be avoided.

There was no other either visible or possible means to manage it with Prudence
or Success, than by the making of the League with France, who had pretenses of
his own to join with ours. In regard that Land-Armies and Forces were not able
alone to bring them to good Terms, without the assistance and aid of a great
and mighty Navy at Sea, which might be able to overcome and beat them in that
which was their greatest Strength, without which it would have been impossible
for the English or French jointly or seperately ever to have forced them to
reason.

The King of Spain, who would heretofore have been glad of such a Part'ner, as
the English to help to subdue those his formerly truly accounted Rebels of the
United Provinces, who by the help of the English and French, had in a War of
almost Sixty years together done him so very much wrong, and many Mischiefs,
was then become so jealous of the growing greatness of France, as he found it
to be his Interest to assist those that had so greatly damnified him, and were
no other than his Hogen Mogen Rebels. The Swede and Danes greatly concerned in
their Trade, and the Profit and Gain which they daily received by them in the
Baltic Sea, would not join in any War against them, and if they would have
been willing, were at too great a distance, and the forcing of passage would
have been as difficult and dangerous as it would have been Chargeable, and the
like might have been said of the Elector of Brandenburgh, who was in League,
Amity, and Interest with them, and the most part of the other German Princes,
being of small Power, far off, and inconsiderable, who might not make War with
any Members of the Empire (as the Dutch being part of the lower Circle of
Burgundy were) without the Approbation of the Emperor and their Diets, and the
Charge and little Success of hiring the Bishop of Munster to raise Forces
whereby to make a Diversion and Encumbrance upon them in our former Wars, with
them, had taught us what little good, and at how great an Expense that design
effected. And it is well known that an Army for the intended Recovery of the
Palatinate, was in the 21th year of the Reign of King James by an able and
select Council of War, and the Approbation of the Parliament, then thought not
to be sufficient with the Aid of the Dutch in their Provisions, and passage
under the Number of 25000 Foot, and 5000 Horse; and the Charge of 30000 l. to
furnish them with Necessaries. And when afterward Count Mansfeild a second
Hannibal, and one of the greatest Captains of his time in Christendom, had with
12000 Foot, and 200 Horse Levied here, and encouraged by K. James and the
Parliament; some promised Aids from France, and some other States and Princes
undertook to regain that wasted Country of the Palatinate, Shipped his Men, and
was at Sea with them, the King of France's denying Rushworth's Historical
Collections, 156. 158.
their Landing at Calice, and promised Passage; and the Province or States of
Zealand, when he attempted to Land his Men upon their Coasts, making a like
refusal, the Pestilence and Flux whilst they were at Sea penned up, and almost
stifled in the Ships, killed two parts in three of them, and the remaining
third part mouldring away, that Action and all the Design, hopes, charges, and
Endeavors of it miscarried and came to nothing.

And certainly the English War with the Dutch Petitioned for by the Parliament,
put and carried on with so much reason of State, and by so many very Important
Necessities, might Claim to be as well allowed to be without any detriment to
the Interest of the Protestant Religion, as other Wars betwixt Protestants
heretofore, have been upon Civil Accounts and Controversies. The Dutch upon a
pretense of their better defending themselves against any Attempts or Increase
of Power of the Spaniard, their then Enemy, did take and keep Wesell, and some
Towns in the Dutchies of Cleve and Juliers, and other Frontier Towns belonging
to the Elector of Brandenburgh, a Protestant Prince, the Justice whereof has
not yet been understood by the Learned in Politics and Affairs of State, were
not Encumbered with any Accusation of weakening the Protestant Religion, and it
must needs remain a Problem never to be determined, but put upon the File of
Eternity, what can be the Reason that Oliver Cromwell and his Party of Regicide
Rebels about the year 1654. upon far less Provocations, should so cheerfully be
aided and assisted in his Maritine Wars with the Hollanders, until he beat them
into a Peace and acknowledgment of the English Sovereignty over the British
Seas, enforced upon them the Act of Navigation, That no Commodities Transported
into England from thence, or of the growth of those Countries, or any other
Neighbor Countries should be brought by them but in English Bottoms, and made
them stink in the Nostrils of all Nations, and to be guilty of a most horrid
Ingratitude in the renouncing the Prince of Orange and his Illustrious Family,
and taking from them those Offices and Places which they and their Ancestors
had in their Defense so dearly purchased; and yet his Cromwellian Power was not
at all accused for hurting the Protestant Religion; or how our Wars with the
Dutch in the years 1664. and 1665. upon far less Provocation should be
Petitioned for by our Merchants, and both Houses of Parliament, and willingly
contributed unto, and not at all believed to be against the Protestant
Religion, and why the War now made upon greater Affronts and Injuries should be
an undermining of the Protestant Cause, or tend to a Subversion of that
Religion more than it did, than when Oliver could League with France, and its
Politic Cardinal Mazarine, and set the Dane to Invade the Sweed, and after
that to put the Sweed upon the Dane, on purpose to disenable him from assisting
His now Majesty, his near Allie and Kinsman without any prejudice supposed to
the Protestant Religion of either side, and be commended for it.

Charles the Fifth Emperor Imprisoning the Pope, and putting him to a Ransom,
made him not suspected to be a Calvinist or Lutheran.

Lewis the 13th King of France, a Catholic Prince, could heretofore make a
League with the Great Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweeden a Protestant, back him
with Leagues and yearly great Sums of Money to Deplume the Roman Eagle, and
make those glorious feats of Arms which he did accomplish to be the Ruin and
Disturbance of many a Popish Prince, and to be so formidable as to shake the
Foundations of the House of Austria, and the Pope and all the Partakers of them.

The now King of France could for a wrong done by others to his Ambassadors in
the Court of Rome, make the Pope himself submit to the setting up of a Pillar
of Infamy at Rome, to be a witness to the World of the Indignation of the one,
and Chastisement of the other; and has lately vigorously assisted the now King
of Sweden against the Danes and Elector of Brandenburgh, being all Protestants;
and did not think that he forfeited thereby the Title of the most Christian
King, and a great Maintainer of the Popish Religion, of which and much more
which might be said, there may be as many approved Examples to be met withal in
History, as there may be well digested Reasons in order to Public Peace and
Tranquillity alleged for it; so that they that would Criticize, and be over
Censorious, should if they would be just, whilst they Condemn His Majesty's
League with France, to be as a strengthening and weighing down of the Balance
on the Popish part, consider that the last King of France did by his League
with Gustavus King of Sweden, so advance the Protestant side of the Balance, as
it endangered all the other side, that the Villainies at home against His late
Majesty, and the setting up of Oliver and his League with France, depressing
the Spaniard, and making France so over-Potent, has ever since turned the
Balance, and disordered it. And that Balances may notwithstanding at other
times be rectified and made equilibrious without any damage to the Protestant
Religion, or the various Profession of it.

Which League of His Majesty with France, and that Active Princes Power and
concurrent Interest to enervate the dangerous neighboring greatness of the
Dutch overgrown Republic, did so little weaken the Balance on the Protestant
part, as the Event has clearly demonstrated it to have been the only means of
re-establishing the Prince of Orange his Nephew (no remote Heir to the Crowns
of England, Scotland, and Ireland) and the Heirs Males of His Body in the
Authority and Dignity of Stadtholder of the United Belgic Provinces,
Generalissimo of all their Forces and Armies by Land, and Admiral of their
formidable and to a wonder very numerous Fleets, of which by the contrivance of
Cromwell, the Professed Enemy of His Majesty's Royal Line and Family, and his
encouragement of the Faction of the De Wits, he had most ingratefully been
deprived (concerning which there appears not in the Petition of the Parliament
for a War with the Dutch, to have been any prospect or design) and rendered him
thereby together with the access of his Personal Virtues, Valor and Wisdom
(being not yet of the Age of Thirty years) not only the great Imitator of his
glorious Ancestors on the Fathers and Mothers side, but the probability (if the
over-hazarding of his Person does not shorten the hopeful race and course of
his life) of being the greatest Captain of the Christian World, an Honor of
the Protestant Religion, and the strengthening of it.

And it can therefore be no unwholesome advice not to set our own House on Fire
by needless Fears and Jealousies as we have done, or make our selves less wise
than the Seditious Rabble of Rome, who by the Wisdom of Menenius Agrippa, were
Charmed into a Pacification and quiet of Spirits by the Fable or Apologue of
the mutiny of the Members of the Body against the Belly or Paunch, which could
not be altogether so perilous as ours would be against the Head; for until the
Laws of God, Nature, and Nations shall be repealed, and the wiser part of the
People who have lived in the habitable World can by any of that Party or
Children of Contention, now living be convinced, and brought by any Rules of
right Reason or Wisdom to acknowledge, that Particulars in a Body Politic are
more to be heeded and taken Care of than Universals, the lesser part more than
the greater, a few more than a multitude, or that in the Body Natural the
Heart, Liver, Lungs, Arms, Back, Belly, Legs, Bones, Sinews, Muscles, and
Ligaments, with Hundreds of little Parts and Particles appertaining to that
excellent Frame and Structure of Man's Body can subsist, and do well when the
Head which gives motion and comfort unto all, and the least of them is Sick and
ruining for want of its necessary Support and Supply from them in their several
Offices.

We need not be at much pains in the search of Reason, that they who do
purchase the Occasions or Advantages of Contention, which may in the end,
howsoever contenting and profitable it may seem to be in the beginning or
pursuit of it, prove to be their own as well as others Irrepairable Ruin, and
do all that they can to disturb and mud the Waters that refresh and make glad
the Valleys of our Syon, should justly be accounted to be no wiser in the
Event, than he who having all his Goods in a Friend's House, set on fire by
some that designed it, and their own Benefit; (as our Neighbor Dutch were said
to have done in the Wars of Bohemia) or by some evil Accident, would so much
forget his Charity and Duty to his Neighbor, and care of himself, as to refuse
to aid or help him, either by Water, Ladder, Buckets or Engines, until he
should first have called him and his Servants to Account and Examination how
and where the Fire began, by whose negligence or miscarriage; what method, care
and order will be taken to prevent it for the future; and what Security he will
or can give, that there shall be no more such an accident hereafter.

And whilst he is thus overrunning his Discretion, and acting his own Folly,
and new sound Politics, suffer the Fire to do what it list, Burn the House and
all his own Goods, as well as those of his Friends and Neighbors in it.

When History and the Records, and never enough bewailed Experience of times
past might have told him, and all that have a mind to Imitate such a
selfruining madness, the dire Events, and many heavy and remediless Calamities
which fell upon the over-sparing and cautious Constantinopolitans; who denying
their Emperor a necessary and fitting Aid to defend them as well as himself,
made the Turks Master of all Greece, so renowned heretofore for Learning, and
that City and the Riches of it, a twentieth, or a very small part whereof might
have disappointed all the Tyranny, Bondage, and Slavery which they have ever
since been under, and are according to Humane Judgment like to continue to the
end of the World, in no better a Condition.

And now that Hannibal is ad Portas, Dangers on all sides encompassing and
crowding in upon us, we should neither forsake our selves and good old England,
which will surely be worth the saving; nor so much mistake that which was ever
accounted to be Reason, Wisdom and Forecast, as to undervalue the prospect and
the cares of Prevention, laugh at them as Pedantick Fopperies, or the dotage of
a Decrepit World; and like Jonas displeasing his God, fall asleep in the midst
of a Tempest.

But rather make have to return to our selves, and set before us the Wisdom and
Examples of our Ancestors and Predecessors, who in the care of themselves and
of the Private and Public, not separate but joined together, as well as of
their Kings and Sovereigns, would not be deterred by any Statemisfortunes or
Irregularities, or tempted by their Jealousies or Fears to suffer themselves,
as the Members and smaller parts of the Body, to languish and be destroyed by
neglecting the Head, and the Security and Safety thereof, or by not paying
their Duty and Reverence to their Kings, hate and ruin themselves, which in
all their Discontents and Murmurings against their Kings and Government, the
Anxieties, or Commotions of their Minds and Passions, or the Dispairs which had
sometimes seized upon them, they did so much seek to avoid, as they did not
refuse them Aids in all their Wars and Troubles Domestic and Foreign.

King Henry the Second (who after a very great and general Act of resumption of
the Aliened Crown Revenue, some whereof had been granted by himself, had
discontented many of his great Nobility) when all his Sons had Rebelled,
Warred, and taken Arms against him, wanted not a supply by Escuage from his
Subjects of England, to reduce them to Obedience, and make his Wars in France.

King Richard the First being unfortunately in his Return Incognito from his
warlike and glorious Expedition to Jerusalem, made Prisoner by an unworthy
Surprise of the Duke of Austria, and the German Emperor, enforced as some of
our Historians have reported, for his Deliverance to invest the former of them,
with the Superiority of his Kingdom of England, by the delivering of his Hat
unto him; which the Emperor in the presence of diverse of the Nobility of
Germany and England, returned unto him to hold the Kingdom of him by the Annual
Tribute of Fifty thousand pound Sterling; and his Brother John Usurping the
Crown in his absence, and Plotting with the Emperor and the King of France, his
mortal Enemy to continue him a Prisoner during his Life; both Laiety and Clergy
notwithstanding that he had by the persuasion of the Clergy more than of the
Laiety, been engaged in that very Expensive War, did so strain themselves to
redeem the Person of their King (the Kingdom and People at that time being
secure enough from Foreign Invasions) as they raised and paid One hundred and
fifty thousand Marks in pure Silver of Cologn weight (then a very great Sum of
Money) by Twenty Shillings imposed upon every Knights Fee, the fourth part of
the Revenue of the Laiety, and the like of the Clergy, a tenth of their Goods,
all or most the Chalices and Treasure of the Church (being then also not a
little) sold to make up the Sum: So as William Petit, or Newbrigensis, who
wrote his Book Gulielmus Newbrigensis.
in that time, says, Fere exmunita pecuniis Anglia videretur; England seemed
to be almost emptied of all her Money; and the like courses were held for
raising that then great Sum of Money in all his Dominions beyond the Seas.

King John likewise having resumed much of his Crown Lands, Murdered (as was
suspected) his Nephew Arthur the right Heir to the Crown, and thereby forfeited
the Duchy of Normandy to the King of France, of whom he held it; and in those
many Troubles and Distresses which were cast upon him by his unruly Baronage,
constrained to acknowledge to hold his Kingdoms of England, and Dominion of
Ireland, of the Pope and his Successors in Fee-Farm under the yearly Rent of
One thousand Marks per Annum; Charged his Earls and Barons with the Losses
which he had sustained in France, Fined and made them pay a seventh part of all
their Goods, had Two marks and a half granted unto him by the Parliament out of
every Knight's Fee; and within a year after a thirteenth part of all the
Movables and other Goods, as well of the Clergy, as of the Laiety.

King Henry the Third his Son, resumed all the Lands alien'd from the Crown,
had so great Troubles entailed upon him by the Contests of his boisterous
Baronage with his Father, as Lewis the French King's Son was called in by some
of them, received their Homage, and had London, and a great part of the Kingdom
delivered up and put into his Possession; but upon better Consideration was
afterward sent home again by those that Invited him, and the Barons of
England, having so little accorded with their Native King, as several Battles
were fought betwixt them, in one of which the King himself was taken Prisoner,
and in another released by the Valor of the Prince his Son, the managers of
that Rebellion Slain, and their multitude of Partisans reduced to Obedience,
being a great part of the Kingdom, by their Compounding with his Commissioners
at Kenelworth, to give him Seven years Purchase of the yearly value of their
Lands, which amounted to a very great Sum of Money, for a Pardon for their
Offenses, and a Redemption of their Estates; the Subjects and People of this
Nation did howsoever in order to their own Preservation, besides the fifteenth
part of all their Goods, for his Grants of Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae,
not deny him their Aids of Scutage, Fifteenths, and Tenths; there being scarce
a year wherein there was not a Parliament, and seldom any Parliament without a
Tax.

King Edward the First, notwithstanding his Writs of Quo Warranto brought
against all the Nobility, Great Men, Gentry, and others of England; Cities and
Buroughs Claiming Liberties and Privileges, wherein he did put them strictly
to prove them either by Grant or Prescription, seized and confiscated the
Estates of the Earls of Gloucester, Hereford, and Norfolk, Men of great Might
and Power; for their refusing to go and serve him in his Wars beyond the Seas;
the Earl of Hereford being Constable, and the Earl of Norfolk Earl Marshal of
England by Inheritance.

And their mutual Rancors and Displeasures with the grand Contests of them and
their Parties to procure the Statutes of Articuli super Chartas and de Tallagio
non Concedendo, were not healed without the Aids and Subsidies of his People.

The mis-government and mis-leading of King Edward the Second by his several
Favorites Pierce Gaveston and the Spencers, did not hinder him from the
Supplies of his People.

King Edward the Third, after a fifteenth of the Temporalty, a twentieth part
of the Goods of the Cities and Buroughs, and a tenth of the Clergy granted
unto him by Parliament in the Eighth year of his Reign, having consumed much
Treasure in his Wars, made for the Kingdom of France, which he claimed as his
Inheritance (wherein the English Nation, more than for the Grandeur and Honor
of their Prince, were not much concerned; but were jealous until an Act or
Declaration of the King in Parliament was procured to the contrary, that the
Conquest of France might have caused England to have been afterward dependant
upon that greater Crown and Kingdom) was notwithstanding the seizure, and
taking into his hands the Goods and Estates of three Orders of Monks, viz. The
Lombards, Cluniacks, and Cistertians, and all the Treasure committed to the
Custody of the Churches through England for the Holy War, forced to revoke
diverse Assignations made for Payment of Moneys, though he had received Three
Millions of Crowns of Gold for the Ransom of John King of France, whom his Son
the Black Prince had taken Prisoner, and was not put to lose any of his Honor,
Friends, Estate or Interest for want of the necessary Assistance of his
Subjects, who for the maintenance of those and other his Wars, were howsoever
well content to give him half of the Laieties Wool, and a whole of the
Clergies, and at another time the ninth Sheaf, the ninth Fleece, and ninth Lamb
for two years; and after many other Taxes and Aids granted in several
Parliaments of his Reign, and a Commission sent into every Shire to enquire of
the value of every man's Estate; The Treasure of the Nation being much
exhausted, found the People so willing to undergo that and other Burdens which
those successful Wars had brought upon them, as the Ladies and Gentlewomen did
willingly Sacrifice their Jewels to the Payment of his Soldiers.

That Unfortunate Prince Richard the Second his Grandchild, tossed and
perplexed with the Greatness, Ambition and Factions of his Uncles, and the
subtle underminings of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, the most powerful of
them, fatally continued and pursued by Henry of Bullingbrook his Son Duke of
Hereford, was not in all those his Distresses so unhappy, but that although
Rot' Parl. (...). R. 2. m. 60.
the Commons in Parliament had by their Petitions unto him complained, That for
want of good Redress about his Person, and in his Household and Courts, the
Commons were daily pilled, and nothing defended against the Enemy, and that it
would shortly undo him and the whole Estate; yet they were so mindful of their
Sovereign and themselves, as they not only afforded him very great Aids and
Assistances; but in the Fourteenth year of his Reign the Lords and Commons in
Parliament did Pray, That The Prerogative of the King and Rot' Parl. 14. R. 2.
m. 15.
his Crown might be kept, and all things done or attempted to the contrary
might be redressed; and that he might be as free as any of his Royal
Progenitors were: Rot' Parl. 15. R. 2. m. 12.
And in the Fifteenth year of his Reign, did in Parliament require him, That He
would as largely enjoy his Prerogative, as any of his Progenitors,
notwithstanding any Statute; and namely the Statute of Gloucester, in the time
of King Edward the Third; the which Statute they utterly repealed out of their
tender affection to the King.

King Henry the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth; although well understood to have been
Kings de facto, not de jure, (for so not seldom have been the Pleadings at the
Law of their Acts of Parliament) and although the later of those Kings being
Crowned King of France in his Infancy, and in Possession of that Kingdom, was
by his Meek and Pious rather than Prudent Government a great part of the Cause
of the Bloody Contests betwixt the Two Houses of York and Lancaster, which
ruined very many of the Nobility and Gentry by taking their several Parties,
and were by their Discords the loss of all the Kingdom of France, but Calice.
And that Richard Duke of York, had in Parliament so claimed and wrestled for
the Crown, as he was declared Protector of the Kingdom of England, enjoyed
notwithstanding the care and good will of their Subjects upon all occasions
either at home or abroad in times of Peace or War, by their Contributions of
Subsidies.

King Edward the Fourth in the brunt and hottest of the long continued bloody
Contentions of the two great Houses and Families of York and Lancaster, after
nine Battles won by himself, attested by his Surcoat of Arms which he wore
therein, hung up as a Trophy in the Cathedral Church of St. George at Windsor;
and his many struglings with King Henry the Sixth, and his Party, in losing and
gaining the Crown, again War with France, and compelling the crafty Lewis the
11th the King thereof, to demand a Peace, and consent to pay him 75000 Crowns
toward his War, Expenses, and a Tribute of 50000 Crowns yearly during the life
of King Edward, notwithstanding that he had in the second year of his Reign,
sat in a Michaelmas Term three days together in his Court of Kings Bench, and
gathered great Sums of Money of the People of England, by his Privy Seal
toward his Wars with the Scots, and in the Seventh year of his Reign, resumed
by Act of Parliament all the Grants which he had made since he took Possession
of the Realm, raised great Sums of Money by Benevolences and Penal Laws, had in
the Eighth year of his Reign granted him by Act of Parliament two fifteens and
a Demi, and in the Thirteenth year of his Reign, a Subsidy toward his Wars
with France, when the Actions, Courage, and Wisdom of Parliaments were so
uncertain, as there was in the space of half a year one Parliament Proclaiming
King Edward an Usurper, and King Henry a Lawful King; and another Proclaiming
King Edward a Lawful King, and King Henry an Usurper.

King Henry the Seventh, although that he sometimes declared, That he held the
Crown as won in Battle by Conquest of King Richard the Third, and at other
times by his better Title from the House of York, and his Marriage with the
Lady Elizabeth, the Daughter of King Edward the Fourth, and avaritiously took
all the ways possible for the enriching of his Treasury had diverse great Aids
and Subsidies granted unto him by Parliament.

King Henry the Eighth, notwithstanding that he had after many great Subsidies
and Aids, both as to the Money and manner of Collecting it; granted unto him
his Heirs and Successors by several Parliaments; and the first Fruits and
Tenths of all Ecclesiastical Promotions and Benefices, overturned the then
established Religion of the Kingdom, seized and took into his Possession the
great yearly Revenue of 600 Abbeys, Priories, and Nunneries, most of the
Hospitals and Colleges which had been given to Religious Uses with Anathema's;
with as many other dreadful Curses and Imprecations as the Minds of Men could
imagine to fall upon the Violaters thereof, amounting in the then yearly value,
unto something more than One hundred and Ninety thousand Pounds sterling, per
Annum; being at a then low and undervalued rate, scarce the 20th Penny of the
now since improved yearly value, excluded the Founders from their Reversions
and Legal Rights thereof; when the uses unto which they were first ordained
should be altered, or otherwise applied, Confiscated the very many rich
Shrines, Chalices, Plates, Copes, Jewels, Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold and
Silver, not only found in those Religious Houses; but in all the Cathedrals and
Churches in England; the Riches of all which could amount to no less than many
Millions of Money Sterling more, if not equal unto the vast and admired
Reserves and Treasures of the Venetian Republic, or that of many Popes
Provisions, reported to have been laid up in the Castle of St. John de Angelo
at Rome, in case of any Invasion or War of the Turks; and unhappily wasted,
expended, and gave away not only a great part of those immense Riches and Land
Revenue, but all the Eighteen hundred thousand Pounds sterling, which were left
him in his Father's Treasury; debased some of his Gold Coin, and made it
Current for a greater value than in truth it would yield. And the better to
gentle and pacify the People, who stood amazed at it, promised and undertook
that they should never more be troubled with Aids or Subsidies.

Was notwithstanding when afterward the Public Occasions required Aids or
Supplies, neither foreclosed by his Promise, or denied the assistance of his
People.

But the Lords and Commons in Parliament did in the 35th year of his Reign
assent to an Act of Parliament for the remitting unto him all such Sums of
Money as he had borrowed of them or any other, by way of Impress or Loan by his
Privy Seals, sithence the First day of January in the 33th year of his Reign,
and if he had paid to any Person any some of Money which he had borrowed by
Sale of Land or otherwise, the same Person, his Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, should repay it again to the King; and if any Person had sold
his Privy Seal to another, the Seller should repay the Money to the Buyer
thereof. And for a further Supply, did in the last year of his Reign grant unto
him one Subsidy with two Fifteenths and Tenths by the Temporalty, and one
Subsidy by the Clergy.

Whose Successors and Posterity have ever since not refused to Subscribe to
those Laws of God, Nature, and Nations; That Children are obliged to assist
both their Political and Natural Parents: The contrary whereof would be against
the Rules of Humanity and Mankind.

Judge Hutton, a greater Friend unto the Law then Ragioni di Stato, Reason of
State or Government, declaring in his Argument in the Exchequer Chamber against
the Ship Money, in the latter end of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, That
an Act of Parliament that a King should have no aid or help of his Subjects,
would be void and of none effect.

King Edward the Sixth, after the many Seditions and Troubles which assaulted
his Infant Government, and excellent endowments of Virtue and Piety, by the
Wars with Scotland, quarrellings of the Protector and Admiral, his Uncles on
the Mother's side; and the Plots of Dudley Duke of Northumberland was, although
he had taken into his hands all the Lands, Houses and Tenements formerly given
under dire Imprecations, and Curses for the quiet and welfare, as the People
then thought of the Souls of their Ancestors Children, Friends, and Benefactors
departed out of this World and gone into the next; together with the Colleges,
(given to Superstitious Uses) free Chapels, Fraternities, and Guilds, with all
their Lands, Goods, and Estates; seizure of Church Goods in Cathedrals and
Parish Churches, and such as had been imbezil'd, with Jewels, Gold and Silver
Chalices, ready Money, Copes and other Vestments, reserving to every Church one
Chalice, and one Covering for the Communion Table was not grudged in the last
year of his short Reign, one Subsidy with two Fifteens, and Tenths granted by
the Temporalty, and a Subsidy by the Clergy.

Queen Mary being a professed Catholic, renversed the Protestant Religion, put
many to Death, Banished and Persecuted all the Eminent Professors thereof,
Married Philip the Second King of Spain; and thereby endangering if she had any
Issue by him, to have brought England under the Laws and Yoke of his Spanish
Dominions, with the Bloody and Cruel Inquisition to boot; began to restore the
Lands of the Abbeys and Monasteries, and intended to relinquish all her right
therein; Lost Calice, which had been in the English Possession ever since the
Conquering of it from the French by King Edward the Third.

Made severe Laws against the Protestants, Abrogated all those that were made
against the Catholics, shook and tottered the Estates of many of the
Protestants great Nobility in their Lands, which had belonged to their
Monasteries and Religious Houses, and of many Thousands of considerable
Families of the Kingdom, who had those kind of Lands either given them by King
Henry the Eighth, or King Edward the Sixth; or had Purchased them of others,
who might well have foreseen their not Enjoyment of them, if she had but a
little longer continued her Reign, to perfect the entire returning to the
Church of Rome of her self, and as many of the People as she should be able to
force into it, was not in her short Reign without the Aids and Assistance of
the People, when the Public Affairs called for them.

Richard the Third, though for his Cruelties and ill obtaining of the Crown, he
merited not the Title of a King after his stabbing King Henry the Sixth,
whereof he died in the Lifetime of King Edward the 4th, and after his Death
procuring himself to be made Protector of the Kingdom during the Minority of
King Edward the Fifth, his Nephew; whose Guards when he had made to be
dismissed, and enticed him and his Brother into the Tower of London upon a Sir
Richard Baker's Chronicle.
counterfeit pretense of Safety and Honor, he procured to be Murdered. Did
the like to his own Elder Brother the Duke of Clarence, whom he contrived to be
drowned in a But of Malmsey; made himself King, and in the settling of his
wrongful Title and wicked Usurpation, made some good Laws; was notwithstanding
in the Second year of his Reign, besides the great Confiscations of diverse of
the Nobility, and other great Men, not refused an Aid or Imposition.

Queen Elizabeth, Inheriting the Courage of her Father King Henry the Eighth,
and the Wisdom and Prudence of her Grandfather King Henry the Seventh, the
happy Uniter of the White and Red Roses; having by a Provident Care made such a
Choice of Wise and ValiantSea and Land Commanders, Sage Counselors and
Ministers of State, and Judges of the Law, as no Prince of her Age or Time
could equal, did by a constant encouraging and employing no other than those
who made it not their only Business to seek their own Profits, but were as fixed
to her, as she was to them; by whom and her own careful Conduct and Guidance,
she withstood all the Assaults of Rome and Spain, and the Machinations which
their Jesuits could Plot or Promote against her and her most excellent steady
Monarchical Government; weathered out the Storms and Rebellions raised up
against her, with no single or few Attempts to take away her Life; supported
her Allies, and was a Bulwark impregnable not only to the more refined
Protestant Religion which she had planted and defended here in England; but to
those different Forms elected or set up by Luther, and Calvin, and the
Huguenots, in the Foreign and other Parts of Christendom, was in her glorious
and ever to be imitated happy Reign, as she made her Subjects as happy as her
self in the Councils, Love, Duty, and Allegiance of her Parliament and
assistance of her People for their own as well as her Preservation and Good;
who although they were by her limited not Journals of the four last
Parliaments of Q. Elizabeth, Collected by Heywood Townsend, a Member thereof.
to meddle with Church or State Government, forbid and sharply reproved for
meddling with the Successors, had some of their several Members, as Mr. Peter
Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley Prohibited to sit in the House of Commons, and
afterward Committed Prisoners to the Tower of London, sent for Sir Edward Coke
their Speaker, and charged him to deliver her Message to the House; which he
did not omit to do: That It was in her Power, to Call, Prorogue, Adjourn,
Dissolve or Determine Parliaments, and to Assent or Dissent: And in one of the
said Parliaments refused her consent to 48 Bills which had passed in both
Houses; informed the House of Commons, That she misliked their Irreverence
toward her Privy Counselors, Members of that House who were not to be
accounted as Common Knights and Burgesses that are Counselors, but during the
Parliament; whereas the others were standing Counselors, and for their Wisdom
and great Service were called to the Council of State; Blamed some that seemed
to make their Necessities more than they were, forgetting the urgent
Necessities of the Time and Dangers; would not have her People feared with
Reports; and speaking to them that she heard that upon the last Attempt of the
Spaniard, some had abandoned their Towns, fled higher into the Country, and
left all Naked; said, I swear unto you By God, if I knew those Persons, or any
that shall do so hereafter, I will make them know and feel what it is to be so
fearful in so urgent a Cause. And when the Commons had Petitioned unto her
against some grievances of her Purveyances, and Court of Exchequer; answered,
That she had given some Order to the Lord Steward for the redress of the
Purveyances; That she had as much Skill and Power to rule and govern her own
House, as any of her Subjects whatsoever to rule and govern theirs, without the
help of their Neighbors; and would shortly take further order therein, by the
advice of her Judges and Learned Council. Commanded the Speaker of the House of
Commons, That if any Bills should be there exhibited touching the Succession,
Matters of State, or Causes Ecclesiastical, he should not receive them.

Which several Speeches, Directions, and Messages of her Majesty, with many
others in all the time of her Parliaments, and long and happy Reign, were well
esteemed of; whose Birthday for now almost Fourscore years last past in
London, and many other Places of England, has upon every 17th day of November,
by Legacies of Annual Commemorative Sermons and Ringing of Bells, been
Celebrated, and was so happy in the Duty Allegiance and Obedience of her
Parliaments.

As a Prudent very Eminent and Learned Member of the House of Commons said,
That before he would speak or give any consent to a Case that should debase her
Sovereignty or Abridge it, I would wish my Tongue cut out of my Head.

Anno 43. of her Reign, A Bill being brought into the House of Commons for
Explanation of the Common Law, concerning the Queens Letters Patents, and
certain Monopolies; Mr. Spicer a Burgess of Warwick said, That that Bill might
touch the Prerogative Royal, which was as he had Learned, so transcendent as
the eye of the Subject may not aspire thereunto; and therefore be it far from
him that the State and Prerogative of the Prince should be Tyedly him, or any
other Subject.

Mr. Francis Bacon, after Lord Chancellor said, That for the Prerogative Royal
of the Prince, for his part he ever allowed it, and is such as he hoped should
never be discussed. And said Mr. Speaker, pointing to the Bill, This is no
stranger in this place, but a stranger in this Vestment. The Use has been ever
by Petition to humble our selves to her Majesty, and by Petition to desire to
have the Grievances redressed, especially when the remedy touchethiher in Right
or Prerogative. I say, and I say again, That we ought not to deal or meddle
with, or judge of her Majesty's Prerogative, I wish every man therefore to be
careful of this point.

Mr. Lawrence Hyde said, I do owe a Duty to God, and Loyalty to my Prince; I
made it, and I think I understand it; far be it from this heart of mine to
write any thing in Prejudice or Derogation of her Majesty's Prerogative Royal,
and the State.

Mr. Sergeant Harris moved, That the Queen might be Petitioned by the House in
all Humility.

Mr. Francis Moore, afterward Sergeant Francis Moore said, He did know the
Queens Prerogative was a thing curious to be dealt with.

Sir Robert Wroth a Member of that House did in his own particular offer 100 l.
per Annum to the Wars.

Upon a Debate of Monopolies, the Queen understanding that a List of such as
she had granted had been brought into the House; sent for their Speaker, and
declared unto him, That for any Patents granted by her whereby any of her
Subjects might be oppressed, she would take present order for Reformation
thereof; her Kingly Prerogative was tender, and therefore desired them not to
speak or doubt of her Reformation; but that some should be repealed, others
suspended, and none put in Execution, but such as by a Trial at Law should
appear to be for the good of the People; which being reported by him to the
House, filled them with unspeakable Joy.

Mr. Wingfield wept, and said, His heart was not able to conceive, or his
tongue express the Jov that he had in that Message.

And thereupon Mr. Secretary Cevill said, That there was no reason that all
should be revoked; for the Queen meant not to be swept out of her Prerogative.

And gave them a Caution for the future, to believe that whatsoever is subject
to a public Exposition, cannot be good.

And the Parliaments in her long and glorious Reign, were so unwilling to give
any disturbance to her Great and Renowned Actions for the defense and good of
her Self and her People, and all the Protestant Concernments in Christendom;

As in the First year of her Reign, a Parliament granted her Two shillings
eight pence in the Pound of Goods; and Four shillings of Lands, to be paid in
several Payments.

In her Sixth year, one Subsidy was granted by the Clergy, and another by the
Laiety together with two Fifteenths and Tenths; in the Thirteenth year of her
Reign toward the Charges of Suppressing the Northern Rebellion, a Subsidy of
Six shillings in the pound, by the Clergy, and by the Temporalty two Fifteens,
and a Subsidy of Two shillings and eight pence in the Pound; in her Six and
twentieth year, had granted her by the Clergy two whole Subsidies, and by the
Laiety three, besides Six Fifteenths and Tenths; with a Proviso, that that
great Contribution should not be drawn into Example; in her Fortieth year, had
granted by the Clergy three entire Subsidies, and as many by the Laiety, with
Six Fifteens and Tenths; and in the 42th year of her Reign, to furnish Money
for the Irish Wars, had Commissions granted to confirm the Crown Lands of
Ireland to the Possessors o^ defective Titles.

And all little enough, when in the same year Sir Walter Raleigh, a Member of
the House of Commons declared unto them, That the Moneys lent unto (...) (...)
yet unpaid, her Jewels and much of her Lands sold, and she had spared Money out
of her own Purse and her Apparel, for her Peoples sake.

And yet when in the Eighth year of her Reign the Parliament had offered unto
her four Subsidies, upon Condition that she would declare her Successor; she
magnanimously refused it, and remitted the fourth Subsidy, saying, It was all
one whether the Money was in her own, or in her Subjects Coffers.

Our King James being born and bred in the Kingdom of Scotland, where their
Laws are mingled with some Neighbor English Customs, drawn out of our Glanvil,
brought thither by their King James the First, who lived some time here in
England, and afterward so much Compounded and overborn by the Civil Law:
brought out of France long after by King James the Fifth, which with some part
of their Common Law, makes them to be so overmuch Civil and Canon, and a
Miscellany of them as they are very much different from ours, had so great an
affection to the Civil Laws; and those of his own Country, before he had
understood the Excellency of ours; that shortly after his coming to the Crown
of England he earnestly recommended to the Parliament of England, not only an
Union of both the Kingdoms, and the Subjects thereof; but of their Laws also:
And so much savoured the Civil Laws, as he complained in a Speech to the
Parliament of the Contempt of them, allowed or was much taken with the Comedy
of Ignoramus and Dulman; which was purposely framed to expose the Professors of
our Common Laws to a Derision of the People, and render them guilty of an
Ignorance of good Letters and Learning (which all of them, witness our great
Seldom, and some other of his Coaevals, could not justly be charged with) and
suffered it to be Acted before him at Cambridge with great Applause, and to be
afterward Printed and Published without any murmur or jealousy of the English
Nation, (that he endeavored to introduce an Arbitrary Power) who manifested no
unwillingness to give him Subsidies and Aids in Foreign as well as Domestic
Affairs, when he had occasion to require them.

All which the Cares and doings of our Ancestors for the Public and Common
good joined with their Duty and Allegiance to their Sovereign Kings and
Princes, may afford us convincing Reasons and Arguments, out of concluding
Premises that the Weal and Woe of Kings and their People, are like those of
Hippocrates's Twins, partaking each with other, and that the Fear of God,
Honor of the King, Self-Preservation, and Oaths and Duty of Allegiance; will
be more than enough to enjoin every good Christian and Subject, where the
welfare of the King and Public are concerned to be as willing to help the King
as he would himself.

And it cannot be deemed to be either unadvisedly or ill done by our English
Forefathers or Predecessors in the House of Commons in Parliament, in the
Seventh year of the Reign of King Richard the Second; when being required of
the King to give their Advice concerning a Peace to be made with the King of
France, And the Chancellor then said, That the King of Rot' Parl. 7 R. 2. m. 5.
and 19.
himself could well do it; yet for good will he would not, without their
Knowledge or Consent.

And it could not be Concluded without a Personal Interview of the King of
France, which for his Honor required great Charges, whereof he Charged them of
their Allegiance, to consult and give him Answer; unto which they answering,
That it becomed not them to Intermeddle their Council therein.

And therefore referred the whole Order thereof unto the King and his Council.

And being urged again to answer whether they desired Peace or War? for one of
them they must choose; They answered, Peace.

But when they understood that the King of France desired that the King should
hold Guyen of him by Homage and Service; they knew not what to say, only they
hoped that the King meant not to hold of the French Calice, and other
Territories gotten of them by the Sword; whereunto when the King replied, That
otherwise Peace could not be granted; and therefore willed them to Choose; They
in the end rather desired Peace.

But Peace not ensuing or being to be had, and the King by his Chancellor the
next year after in Parliament, informing them how that the King was Environed
with the French, Spanish, Flemmings, and the Scots who were Confederate, and
had made great Preparations to destroy him and his People, which 8 R. 2. Rot'
Parl.
was like to ensue, unless some means were used to resist it; That the King
Intended to hazard his own Person to whatsoever Peril which might justly
encourage all Estates willingly to offer themselves and what they had to such
defense.

And declared unto them the falsehood and treachery of the French in their
Treaty of Peace at Calice, when they finding the English inclined to it, had
departed from their Offers.

The Lords and Commons when they found the Honor of the King and Safety of the
Nation so deeply Engaged, granted unto the King two Fifteenths, Conditionally
that a Moiety of the Fifteenth granted in the last Parliament be part of it;
and so as if the King go not in Person, or that Peace be made the last
Fifteenth might Cease.

Can the sullen, rude, and ungodly Dutch (the most of whose Religion is Trade,
and all that can be gained by it) to maintain their Encroachments upon our
British Seas, obstinate Pride, and the greatest of Ingratitudes; Drown and lay
under Water a great part of their Countries to preserve the remainder from the
fury of their Enemies; endure the Assaults both by Sea and Land of two of the
mightiest Princes of Christendom; suffer their undrowned Cities to be Taken and
Garrisoned, and their People to lie under all the Miseries of a Conquering,
Overrunning, and Ruining Army by Land; Behold and see their Banks of Treasure
with their formerly great Riches and Credits, for which they had Circled the
Terrestrial Globe floating upon the Seas, and like the Dead Bodies of the Slain
of their People suddenly disappearing and sinking, whilst the Inhabitants
weeping as they work, were scarcely able when their numerous over-burdening
Taxes were paid to support their sad Souls in the Lodgings of their languishing
and carewasted Bodies with what was lest them of their Gains?

And shall not the Subjects of England, for the Vindicating of their Sovereigns
and the Nations long ago confirmed and allowed Rights in the British Seas, for
the Honor and Safety of the King and themselves, Protection of our Isles and
our Ships, which are not only the wooden Walls, but glory thereof; and the
Girdle of Strength encompassing them, lay aside their too often causeless Fears
and Murmurings; and out of their Luxury, Pride, Peace, and Plenty, spare that
which may well be contributed toward his and their own Aid and Assistance?

Shall our Brittannia that was wont triumphantly to sit upon her Promontories,
looking into her British Seas, viewing her Glories, and enriching many Nations
with her Merchandise; now like one affrighted, tremblingly look back, and
behold the Divisions of her People at Land, ready to make her and themselves a
Reproach and Hissing to all Nations, small and despicable in the eyes of those
which were accustomed to honor her? Shall the Tears lie upon her Cheeks? Shall
she cry out that her Friends have dealt Treacherously with her, and are become
her Enemies? Shall she recount unto them how our Discords at Land heretofore,
made the Romans Masters both of our Seas and Land; where the Conquerors
confessed, That Dum singuli pugnant omnes vincantur, That their greatest
Advantage was the Disagreement of the Conquered?

And will it not now be high time to believe what the Lords and Commons in
Parliament declared in their Petition to King Charles the Martyr, for our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties in the fourth year of his Reign, That Jealousies
and Distractions are apparent signs of God's displeasure, and of ensuing
Mischiefs.

And that the Distempers and Fermentation thereof more and more increasing, may
recall to our remembrance,

How little those Fears and Jealousies did profit Mr. Pryn, or his Adoring the
Soveraignity, as he once called it, of Parliament; when he was afterward
pulled out of the House of Commons, made a Prisoner, and driven to an utter
Detestation of their Arbitrary Power?

Or of how little avail they were to the restless spirit of Levelling John
Lilburn, when he was after as much out of love with the Republicans or
Cromwellians, as he was once with them; and wrote his Book, entitled (if my
memory fail me not) Of the Oppressed Men in Chains: And after his Cashiering
out of the Army, Imprisonment, Bafflings, and Trials at Law, lugged and carried
about with him Sir Edward Coke's Comment upon Magna Charta, and other English
Law Books to no purpose.

The Fears and Jealousies which had gotten Possession in the head of Alderman
Andrews, Lord Mayor of London in those wickedly pernicious Times could not
rescue him from the Title of Antichrist bestowed upon him by some of his own
Party.

And Oliver Cromwell, before he took upon him the Title of Protector of his
herd of Villains, Regicides, Murderers and Felons, was fairly threatened or
attempted to be Indicted for High Treason by Cornet Day, against the foolish
Fancies of their Wat Tiler, Jack Cade, John of Leyden, or Massianello rolling,
confounding, and never-resting Commonwealth.

Or how much did those Fears and Jealousies benefit the City of London, or
advance their Trade or Riches; when in the late Rebellion they forfeited all
their Charters, and the Liberties which they had in more than 600 years last
past obtained of their Indulgent Sovereigns; Perjured themselves, ruined much
of their Estates by being (some Good and Loyal Citizens excepted, who could not
be without great Sufferings) Instrumental in the Ruin of many of the Nobility
and Gentry, their Debtors and Customers betook themselves to Plunders and
Sequestrations of honester Men than themselves, Purchased with others the
Palaces and Lands of the King, Queen, Prince, Bishops, Nobility, and
Delinquents, as they styled them; for fighting against His late Majesty, when
they fought for him.

Bought at cheap Rates his Pictures, and sold the Ornaments of his Chapels,
Plate, Copes, and Vestments, not sparing the Coats of his Guard of Halberdiers,
pulled down his Statue at the Royal Exchange, with the basest and vilest
Declaration put in the place of it, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus; took away or
spoiled the Statues of William the Conqueror, and all the succeeding Kings of
the English Monarchy; which the love which they ought to bear to Monarchy,
might e're this time have persuaded them to have supplied. When the Mercers
Company of London had Revenue sufficient lest in Lands by Sir Thomas Gresham
Knight, that Prince of Merchants, the Founder of that Royal Exchange, for the
constant Reparation thereof.

And to how little benefit and small account did their fears and wilfulness
come unto, when in the late Dreadful London Fire, when they might at the first
in a little time have quenched it by Blowing up with Gunpowder less than
Sixteen Houses, or half a Street; they did suffer it to rage and do what it
would from the later part of the Saturday Night until the latter part of the
Wednesday Night next following; until it had Burned in that City and its large
Suburbs little less than Twenty thousand Houses, with St. Paul's Cathedral, and
almost a Hundred Churches; and had not been so unhappy if the Owners and
Neighbors had taken the Advice, or hearkened to the earnest Persuasions of His
Majesty, who on foot labored even at the Pumps, and cried out for Help amongst
them, and did all he could to persuade them to take that better course to stop
that Fire; but with other that gave the same advice, was answered (as the Duke
of York was at his quenching the Fire at the Temple, commanding an absent
Gentleman's Chamber to be Broken up to preserve his Books and Writings, and
preserve the contiguous Building from Burning) that to blow up Houses, or break
open Doors was against Magna Charta, and they might have Actions brought
against them. And in the interim whilst they were so distracted with their
Fears, as all the Care they took was to lugg and carry away their Goods into
the Fields or Churches; in the latter whereof the one helped to burn the other,
and leave their own or their Landlord's Houses to the mercy of the Fire; which
doing what it pleased, and raging so impetuously, made the whole City and its
Lines of Communication, and the Circum ambient Air to be like an Oven
overheated, as the numberless Sign Posts with their Signs fell on fire, and
leapt in sheets as it were from one Street to another, where it never had
stopped until it had destroyed and Burnt all London and Westminster, with at
least 60000 Houses therein, if His Majesty, and his Servants and Nobility
indefatigably Night and Day laboring amongst the remaining sad-hearted People
that tarried, had not upon the Wednesday Night, or Thursday Morning next
following, put the Fire (by blowing up some Houses) to a stand; and taught and
encouraged the then witless over-affrighted Citizens to subdue that mighty
Arbitrary Element.

Which City had been long after unbuilt, and left inter Rudera and Cineres, a
sad Spectacle to the World, if the continued Cares of His Majesty had not by
the Advice of his Parliaments, rescued them from Beggary and almost endless
Suits and Controversies betwixt the Landlords and Tenants, concerning the
Building up and Repair of their Houses.

And laid the burden of the Loss and Damage upon the Landlords, who were many
of the Nobility and Gentry, Colleges and Halls in the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridge, Companies of Trade, Hospitals, such as St. Bartholomew's,
Christ-Church, and St. Thomas in Southwark; Cum multis aliis, etc. By causing
them in consideration of the Tenants Rebuilding their Burnt Houses with Brick
in a safe and substantial way, to make them long Leases of Forty or Fifty
years; according to the several Circumstances of Reason, good Conscience, and
Equity without any Examination of their foolish Fears, in the saving of their
Goods, and leaving their Houses to the fury of the Fire; which in a few years
has by the Rich Tradesmens taking of five times more Money with Apprentices
than Fifty years ago was accustomed, amounting in the whole unto many Thousands
of Pounds, and some Mortgages; and the Sinful Liberty, and Arbitrary Power
which they have of late taken, in the raising of their Prices, and adulterating
and sophisticating all that they Sell, starving the Workmen, and disparaging
and falsifying all the Manufacture of the Kingdom; and some helps
beforementioned from His Majesty, together with his Building of Temple Bar; to
the wonder of many at home, and all Nations that Merchandise with her abroad,
been most beautifully Rebuilt, much better and more glorious than it was
before. And in the gorgeous Apparel and Attire of themselves, their Wives, and
Children; Stately Furniture of their Houses, and Expense of Diet; having drawn
a great part of the Riches of the Nation, to their dispose and command, do live
like Lords, and their Wives like Countesses or great Ladies of Honor, wallow
in Peace and Plenty, and it were well they would be more thankful than they are
unto God and their King for it.

Shall we be afraid, because things may be when we neither are or can be sure
that they are or will be, and terrify or molest one another with the
apprehension or possibility of it beforehand, when we might do better to be
quiet.

And if I should now Inquire of you how they have arrived to the height they
now possess, and become so fermented as to be the Disease Epidemical of the
Nation; you will I make no question without any the least of hesitation or
scruple, return me an Answer, That it is the twice a Day visited in London (by
almost every Tradesman, and many times by his Man, where too often they do Brew
and tun up Sedition and Treason) Coffee-Houses, or prating, Lying and Seditious
Schools in London, and its large Suburbs, and most of the Cities and Boroughs
of the Nation, the Mart of Lies and Fools bolts, and Mr. Muddiman's Cream of
Intelligence, Communicated twice a Week by his Letters to very many in diverse
Countries, who do largely Pension him, and to Country Coffee-Houses that pay
him a very considerable yearly Rent for his State-Informations; where Lectures
being read, and Annotations made upon them, and Guesses and Conjectures rashly
heaped one upon another, and put together; Faction spreads her wings and
carries it as fast as she can home unto too many of the Gentlemen and Farmer's
Houses: From whence it comes to be Chewed over again at every Conventicle or
Congregation Meeting, and repeated at every Market or Country meetings, and at
the Feasts or Entertainments each of other; which multiplies their fancied
Affrights and Dangers, and pleases them not a little, who would think
themselves or their Tittle tattle Trade undone if they should but hear of any
thing (which they might often, if they would but confess or understand it) that
is well done either in the Church or State; whereunto the Dissenters or
Conventicle Nonconforming Ministers, do bring no small addition, who can as
little hold forth, or prove that they and their numerous Proselytes and
followers are or ever will be without conversion, either good Christians or
Subjects, as they can Evidence that gaping, winking, snoffling, face-making,
howling, with as many frantic gestures in their Pulpits, as the Heathen
fatidici or Priests were accustomed to make, are Essential to Preaching; or
that all that they in their Extempore trash, babble to their seduced People is
by the Spirit or any gift thereof; all that they in those Places or stations of
teaching and promoting Disobedience and Aversion to the King, and his Laws and
Government, can be Canonical; or if so, how it should come to pass that in that
kind of crude undigested matter, there should be so many Blasphemies, wrestings
and abuses of Scripture, Tautologies, vain Repetitions, and ridiculous Stories,
Expressions and Exhortations to Sedition and Rebellion. The Product whereof
has sadly of late years appeared to have been not one, but many Sheba's,
blowing the Trumpets of Sedition, and Shimei's railing at, Lampooning and
reviling our David, by base calumniating libellous Papers without any Names
subscribed, put on his Table or Chair in his Closet, or affixed in places in
his Galleries or Walks by those that would be called his Loyal and most
Obedient Subjects, or such as have been thereunto instigated by Jesuits to make
their Sovereign out of love with them, or they with him, at the same Time when
his Sacred Person has been surrounded with Popish Plots, by Pistolling,
Stabbing, Poisoning, or Assassination; and those that are Trusty and Faithful
to him, and the well-established Government in Church and State, must have no
better Titles than Tories, Tantivies, or Popish affected Pamphlets and Books to
justify and incite Sedition, Treason and Rebellion, every day publicly Cried
in the Streets, or Sold in the Booksellers Shops.

All which the most savage wild and barbarous People or Nations of the World,
Jews, Pagan, Mahumetan, Latitudinarian, Papist and Protestant, Religious
Eastern and Western Churches, and even the cheating Bannians would disown,
blush at, be ashamed of, and abhor.

Unto which our Disasters both in Church and State have been great Additions,
and Kindle Coals; which have made not only many that have some Learning, and
are ex meliori luto, better born and bred; but the Mechanic and Illiterate
part of the People, to take themselves to be a kind of State-Menders, and to
make their small Capacities the rule and measure of their foolish Prognostics,
and are as like to hit the white or mark, as he that stands without the Doors
of an House a mile off it; and undertakes of himself without the help or
Information of the Inhabitants to know what is every day and night, hour or
minute thereof done within the House; or as some Mountebank Physician, who
without the Aid or Sight of the Patient, or any Inquiry into the Symptoms.
Indications or Progress of the Disease, should promise a never-failing Cure of
his Sickness or Distemper; and may as little deserve his Fee, as a Lawyer who
should adventure to give his Opinion, or direct his Client how to proceed in
his Action or Suit, without any knowledge at all of the Fact.

So as those State Almanack-makers, by such an Extravagant and uncertain
Ephemeris, would do well to be more modest and cautious in their Opinions, and
not to expose the Honor of their King and Sovereign to the foolish and
ill-digested Censures of themselves and others; and make themselves the
Conduit-Pipes to convey their Follies to the more Ignorant part of the People;
who although by God's mercy to a causeless murmuring Nation, from the Winter to
the Spring, from the Spring to the Summer, from the Summer to the Autumn, and
from the Seed time to the Harvest, when the Valleys sing, and the Earth is
laden with the Increase thereof, and so all along; not for one but many years
together they might understand how often they have sinned against the Divine
Mercy and Providence by their Complaints of the weather, too hot, too cold, too
wet, too windy, too dry; so as scarce one day in every ten of the year, can get
an universal liking or good word of the ways of God's Providence; and should
when they have found themselves every year so often and so greatly mistaken, be
once ashamed, and forsake that unquietness of Spirit, will not withstanding not
only continue those their mis-doings and humors in the Case of God Almighty,
as a Custom or Privilege belonging to their Farms and Husbandry; but in the
height of all their Peace (without which their Plenty would be blasted) so very
much traduce, scandalize, and mislike the Royal Cares of their King and God's
Vicegerent, and be so unjust and unreasonable in their Complaints and fault
findings, as though they sit under their own Vines, eat the fat of the flock,
lie down upon their beds of Ivory, sing to the Harp, rise up to play; enjoy a
Peace and Plenty to a Surfeit, and the Envy of all their Neighbors, and may
Weekly read and hear of the Miseries and Sufferings of many Neighbor Nations
by Wars and Invasions of one another; yet they must never be contented, but be
every day, and very often in every day finding fault with the Government. As if
the Government of the King, and the Government of the King of Kings, as to the
weather, were always to be blamed.

Whilst they ought rather to be so careful of themselves and their Posterities,
as to abominate those foolish ways of censuring Authority; and to take heed
that God do not Punish us for our unthankfulness, and abusing his so many and
all sorts of Mercies under a Prince.

Who besides all his other Royal Cares and Concessions, added unto those of his
famous great Ancestors and Predecessors, Kings and Queens of this Realm, for
the Preservation of his Peoples Liberties and Properties; did no longer ago
than in the 31th year of his Reign, for the better securing of the Liberties of
his Subjects in their Persons, and prevention of Imprisonments, by sending them
in Custody to some of the Islands; consented unto an Act of Parliament under
great Severities, Forfeitures and Penalties to be inflicted upon such as should
Imprison or Detain any Man after an Habeas Corpus brought, as well in the
Vacations as Terms.

And so far extended it, as upon the Committing of any Man Prisoner by himself
or the Lords of his Privy Council, Lord Chamberlain, or other great Officers of
his Household, they are allowed to be Bailed by the King's Justices of his
Superior Courts of Justice; although when they themselves shall, as they do
often, Commit or Imprison any man by their Delegated and Derivative Power from
the King, only they are not at all obliged to discharge any such Offenders upon
Writs of Habeas Corpus.

And by that and those multitudes of former Provisions which our Kings and
their Laws have made for the good and safety of their People from all the
incursions of Arbitrary Power, should not forget that there is not so much as
an Imaginary fear or danger that any Subject of England can be injured by any
Arbitrary Power or otherwise; for which a present and sudden Remedy may not be
quickly had or provided; and that it is now a received Maxim in our Common Law,
That the King can do no wrong, and that, id potest quod de Jure potest. So that
there are very few, unless such as would have the King to be as liable (which
our Laws did always forbid) to Coertions, Arrests, or Punishments, as the most
ordinary or meanest of his Subjects are or ought to be, or can be so ignorant
in the course or Proceedings of our Laws; but may understand, That if he should
cause any to beat or do any Injury or Trespass to any of his Subjects, the
Parties or Agents are by his and our own Laws to be responsible for it.

And believe that King James, who had reason to understand Government and
Affairs of State better than such kind of People, did not err or say amiss in
his Answer in the 19th year of his Reign to a Petition to the House of Commons
in Parliament, when he declared unto them, That None could have Wisdom to Judge
of things of that Nature, but such as are duly acquainted with the particulars
of Treaties, and of the variable and fixed Connexions of the Affairs of State,
together with the knowledge of the Secret ways, ends and intentions of Princes
in their several Negotiations; otherwise a small mistaking of Matters of that
Nature might produce more and worse effects than can be Imagined.

And remember that if Impossibilities could be possible, and every one that
foolishly fancies himself to be able, could be able to manage or Judge of State
Affairs; yet we have no Laws that do allow every Man (Cobblers and Illiterate
men not excepted) to be a Statesman.

And that St. Jude reprehending those that despised Dominions, and speak evil
of Dignities; gives us the Original from Epistle of Jud^, (...). 8. and 10.
whence it comes, for that they speak evil of those things they know not.

And therefore if they would but once resolve to be more obedient, seek and
embrace Peace and Humility more than they do; and follow the Council of the
Apostle St. Paul, to abstain from those that make Divisions;

And not take every thing that they do hear from foolish lying or malicious
Tongues, rackets and rebounds, to be a certainty of Truth, when there is
nothing at all to support it; unless they will acknowledge that their
understanding memories, and senses, are by the vain and uncertain Imaginations
of Fears and groundless Jealousies, misguided and led into a Frenzy; or
otherwise that they would under those Pretenses hide and cover their very
wicked Designs, until they can be effected, and seduce as many as they can into
their Party, to help to go through with it: might acquiesce in the Opinions,
Duty, Allegiance, Understanding Reason and Sense of many Counties, Cities and
Boroughs of this Kingdom; who upon the reading of his Majesty's Declaration,
showing the Reasons and Causes of his Dissolving the last Parliament, and His
Majesty's firm and fixed resolution to maintain the Religion and Monarchical
Government of this Kingdom, now by Law established, have by their many several
Addresses made their dutiful acknowledgments for His Majesty's Grace and
Favor therein, and the happy Government Peace and Plenty wherein they have
lived since His Majesty's happy Restoration; humbly offering to defend the
Rights and Prerogative of his Crown with their Lives and Estates, and
concurring with them therein.

Believe that when they have tired themselves with their feverish Dreams and
Fancies, and are awake and shall come to themselves, they will upon a more
knowing and sober inquest, readily find that there are more Dangers and
Mischiefs like to happen by Atheists, Debauchees, and Latitudinarians, not a
few of the Sectaries, and no small number of the wild headed Opinion-Mongers;
whose giddy Notions makes every thing that tends to their Interest or
Convenience to be Religion enough, and are so near Neighbors to Popery, as if
not speedily prevented, are like to gulf into it, than there is of any
Inundation of Arbitrary Power, or of the Common sort of Unjesuited Popery; and
that Popery it self would much abate, if the Atheists, Latitudinarians, and
Debauchees, and the daily Quarrellers with our Church and State Government
would better regulate their Brains, and not make themselves so much as they
have done the Seminary Seed-Plot, and Nursery of it.

And it may be a wonder beyond the Seven Wonders of England, and more than an
hundred added thereunto, That by a strange Effascination, so great a part of
the Nation, after that they might well have understood his just and happy
Government all the time of his Reign: had most wickedly Rebelled against His
late Majesty their Sovereign, vanquished and procured him in the hopes of
Peace, to deliver up unto them the remainders of his Strength and Garrisons;
Viz. Oxford, Newark, Worcester, and Wallingford; Imprisoned notwithstanding,
and hunted him to Death, and brought him upon a Scaffold before his own House
or Palace at White Hall, to be barbarously Murdered.

Where he declared to the Soldiers, Army, Officers, and Spectators after he had
received the blessed Sacrament, Administered unto him by the Pious and Reverend
Dr. Juxon Bishop of London; and performed his other Devotions Preparatory to a
near approaching Death, in his dying and last words, which ought to be believed
by all that had any thing of Humanity, or were ever but Christ'ned; That as to
his Religion, He died a Christian, according to the Profession of the Church of
England, and found it left him by his Father.

That he desired the Peoples Liberty and Freedom as much as any body whosoever,
but he must tell them that their Liberty and Freedom consists in having of
Government those Laws, by which their Lives and their Goods may be most their
own: It is not for having share in Government, that is nothing pertaining to
them. A Subject and a Sovereign are clear different things, and therefore until
they do that, I mean that you do put the People in that Liberty, as I say,
certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

It was for this, that now I am come here; if I would have given way to an
Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the Power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here. And therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your charge) that I am the Martyr of the People.

That in stead of a never enough to be repeated Repentance, with as much
satisfaction as was possible to make it available (not by sowing the Seeds of
another Rebellion) they should be so Sottish (which is more than a Frenzy or
Lunacy, which sometimes allows Intervals of understanding, of c(...)g again
unto themselves) as not only to continue those Fears and Jealousies, but to
hatch new and greater Additions unto them, which in most of the seduced
Multitude can have no other Ground or Foundation than their Ignorance, Folly,
and Illusion; and in the lesser number of that Party their Villainy, Treason,
and a Propensity to Act ever again a second Rebellion to support them.

Can they read or hear that the Turks or Mahometans in their ignorance do no
sooner find the least piece of Paper, or any other thing, with any writing upon
it, but fearing that it may be some note or discovery of their Sins which might
be carried to God Almighty, or their great Prophet Mahomet, do make as
Bes^equius relates, all the have they can to burn or destroy it?

And at the same time write, and hire to write, print, publish, and permit to
be Cried and Sold in the Streets, Pamphlets, and Books to justify as much as
they can their Perjuries, Sedition, Treason, Rebellion, and the Murder of His
Majesty's Royal Father, with all manner of Invectives against the Government
of Church and State; do they read or hear that Ath^ns, once the glory of
Learning and Wisdom, is by her variety of Humors, and change of Government (do
what the Sage Solon could) now become a poor ^i^^er Town under the Ottoman's
boundless Arbitrary Power and Slavery, and that the stout hearted Spartans
without their Ephori or King-Comptrollers, are now under as sad and slavish a
condition; and yet persist in their restless murmurings?

Or can they find any Reason or Justice, or so much as a color of either of
them to charge an Arbitrary Power, or faults of Government upon their King or
Sovereign, when they will so little obey his Laws and Statutes, as they do all
they can to contemn, over-turn, trample upon, and change them from better to
worse; from the best of Monarchies to the worst of Anarchies?

When their King can do no more than make or ordain good and wholesome Laws,
which with our former Laws are as Sir Edward Coke has said, the Quintessence
or best of all Laws in the World, and his Subjects will not obey them, or the
directions and care of his Commissionated Judges and Officers; but will amongst
themselves use Arbitrary Power, cheat, oppress and devour one another, and can
but do what he can, and pray to God to give them grace to observe them, and may
in that Case say as a King of Israel in another Case 2 Reg. ca. 6.
did to the Woman in the great Famine of Samaria, crying out unto him as he
passed upon the Wall, Help my Lord, O King; and he said, If the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall I help thee?

And until they shall have brought themselves to a better Temper, it will not
also be a thing unlikely, but that I having said so much to allay their Fears
and Jealousies may be tenter-hooked, by some of their Suspicions, bundled up
amongst their no few or unusual mistakes, and made to be either a Papist or
Court Parasite; but when they shall have searched the Devils Registeries, and
examined, pryed, peeped into, and Inspected all my Actions from my youth
upwards, must whether they have a mind unto it or not, give me leave to tell
them, and prove, what you do know as well as my self, that I am no Papist, no
Court Parasite, nor Flatterer of any Man; and that they will not be a little
mistaken if they shall think that I am not a very Loyal Subject of my King,
Dutiful Son of the Church of England, or not averse to an Arbitrary Power, or
that I can be any thing else then a Lover of the Truth, my King, the Church of
England, and my Country; and being also an honourer of your self in your doing
the like, shall desire always to continue under the Character thereof, and

June 17th. 1681. Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant.

FINIS.
Errata in the Authors absence.
PAge 16 line 5. for and a^, read, you are very solicitous for the Church, p.
9. line 28. read put, p. 10. line 31. read descent, p. 40. line ult. dele was,
read did, dele as she, et p. 41. d^le she made, et read make.


