Britannia Languens: OR, A DISCOURSE OF TRADE, SHOWING, That the present
Management of Trade in England, is the true Reason of the Decay of our
Manufactures, and the late great Fall of Land-Rents; and that the increase of
Trade, in the Method it now stands in, must proportionably Decay England.
Wherein is particularly demonstrated, That the East India Company, as now
Managed, has already near destroyed our Trade in those Parts, as well as that
with Turkey, and in short time must necessarily beggar the Nation. Humbly
offered to the Consideration of this Present PARLIAMENT.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
1689.

TO THE READER.
IT is a Truth beyond all Dispute and Controversy, sad Experience having too
evidently made out the Proof and Certainty of it, that the Trade of England for
many Years last past, has been so impolitickly and ill managed for the Nations
Good and Benefit, that it has been the true Cause of the fall of the value of
Lands, the decay of Farmers, and Graziers, and almost the utter ruin and
destruction of the choicest and best Manufactories of this Kingdom; and the
more the Trade of the Nation shall be enlarged in the Methods we now Traffic
in, the more mischievous and ruinous it must prove to the Nation; and unless
some speedy Care be taken by wise and prudent Laws, to prevent this growing
Destruction upon us, we shall most insensibly fall to the greatest Penury and
Want perhaps of any Nation in Europe; tho this Kingdom otherways by its
Situation, and the fruitfulness of its Soil, and by its brave Harbors for
Shipping, the choicest and cheapest Materials for the stanchest Manufactories
that are used throughout Europe; This Kingdom might be improved not only to
doubling the value of Lands, but by advancing our Manufactory so, as to command
the Trade of the Known World; and the Design of the ingenious Author of this
Book is, to demonstrate the above Assertions, by showing most unanswerably the
fatal Mischief that attends this Nation, by the Methods of Trade, that it is at
present engaged in, and giving also the true Notions of Trade, as to Interest
and Advantage of their Majesty's, and all their Subjects, and that with so much
Demonstration and Clearness, that the Author would not have probably toiled in
so ingenious Inquiries, but that he believed, could he intelligibly make out
the Truths above, whenever the great Assembly of Parliament should meet, they
would take it into their Wise Consideration. Themselves, as well as the whole
Kingdom, being concerned in the Affairs and Interest hereof.

THE Introduction.
IT has been the Common Design and Business of Individual Men in England, as
elsewhere, to obtain sufficient Revenues in Money to the end they may secure
themselves from Necessities and Shifting, and live plentifully; And yet it may
be undeniably and uncomfortably observed, That whilst every one has eagerly
pursued his private Interest, a kind of Common Consumption has crawled upon
us; Since our Land-Rents are generally much fallen, and our Home-Commodities
sunk from their late Price and Value; Our Poor are vastly increased, and the
rest of our People generally more and more feel the Want of Money; This Disease
having grown upon us in times of Peace, when no Foreigners have Exhausted us
by Warlike Depredations, may very justly amuse us; and the more, when at the
same time, we observe that some of our Neighbour-Nations, lately our Equals, or
much our Inferiors, are become so prodigiously Rich and Powerful on a sudden,
(I mean the French and Dutch:) Certainly these mighty Productions must have
some great and vigorous Causes, which have been very furiously working of later
years, and such as have not fallen under Common Observation: The Nations and
Races of People are the same, and the Countries of England, France and Holland,
stand where they did, they are not removed an Inch; nor do the English seem to
have lost their Understandings; they are as cunning in their private Contracts
as ever, and appear nothing inferior to the French and Dutch in most parts of
Literature; I question not but that they know all the Ancient Languages and
Histories as well, that our Academicks are as subtle in all the Criticismes of
Aristotle, that they have traveled as far into the most abstruse parts of his
Logic, Physics and Metaphysics; and yet have we still grown poorer and
poorer; So have we excelled in diverse necessary parts of Learning; We have had
as Able, Eloquent and Eminent Lawyers and Clergymen as ever, and as Notable
Physicians, and the Nation seems to have grown more Learned, and therefore
Wiser than before, by the late vast increase of these Ranks of men.

The present Disadvantages we are under, are therefore commonly attributed to
Accidents of diverse kinds, as men's present particular Fancies dictate, in which
the greatest part are contented to rest satisfied without farther enquiry,
whilst they have some Prospects of Gain in the Employments they are severally
Educated to; Some ascribe the fall of Rents to an overgreat increase of Corn,
by the ploughing up of Parks; Others to the modern Parsimony in Housekeeping,
the lessening of Gentlemen's Retinues, and leaving off the old laudable Custom
of plentiful Suppers, which they suppose occasions a less Consumption of
Victuals; others attribute this, and the want of Money in the Country, to the
great resort of People to London, and quarrel at the New Buildings, as the
Hires and Receptacles which draw them thither; others to the banking up of
Treasures in the Coffers of some unknown Grandees, Churchmen, Lawyers or
Citizens, of which they are highly confident, for else, they say, what is
become of the money? then for the late Progress and Trophies of the French,
many look upon them as the mere effects of the Despotick or Arbitrary Power of
that Monarchy, or of the personal cunning of some men now living in France; I
remember I heard one Gentleman say, that the French Genius was up, wherewith he
gave himself and others good satisfaction: Others will have it, that the late
Enemies of the French wanted Valor and Conduct, but that if the French had the
English to contend with, their Glory would soon be laid in the Dust: For the
Dutch, there are those who will argue their Riches and Populacy* to proceed
from the peculiar Industry of that Nation, and that such an Eternal Toil is not
supportable by any other; Others, to their small Expense in Diet and Habit,
others to particular Circumstances in the time and manner of their Defection
from Spain; to their Register of Titles and Contracts, and their cheap and
easy decision of Lawsuits.

Of all other things we seem to be most secure in the matter of Trade; we have
many who taking themselves to be born or entitled to so much a year in Land, do
consider Trade as no otherwise necessary in a Nation, than to support younger
Brothers, and are ready to thrust all Public Taxes upon Trade, that they may
ease the Land; Others who pretend to enquire into it, hear the Customs are much
risen of late years, and then rest satisfied that we have a mightier Trade than
ever: We have also some Merchants and Shopkeepers who get Estates, and buy Land
on a sudden, which is looked upon as an Argument of a good Trade; We find their
mighty and numerous Shops and Warehouses, full of goods, and do not hear them
complain of Trade, Or that Land is brought to 14 or 16 years purchase, or that
they buy at a much abated yearly value.

Some, indeed, justly apprehending a Disease in our Trade, by the decay of our
Home Manufactures, and an excess of Foreign Importations, have judiciously
expressed themselves in it; these Nations whilst in Embrio, have been ralleured
by our Modern Drolls, in their new Manufacture of Plays.

There are others, who with more Design and Gravity, tell us, That the Notions
of Improvements of Trade, are of a dangerous tendency, because they threaten
part of the present Jurisdiction of our Spiritual Courts, and the gain of many
Offices, by some requisite Toleration of Conscience, and other mittigations
relating to Trade, and upon this Occasion the same Objectors proceed to argue
the Improvements of Trade to be of as bad Consequence to the State, by filling
the Nation with Trading-Religious Dissenters, or by a necessary moderating of
the present Custom Rates: They also insinuate, that we ought not to look for
such a perfection of Trade under a Monarchical Government, but to dispose of
our selves otherwise as we can; We have others that say, Trade is a misterious
thing, and not intelligible in any part of it, without a long Apprentiship, and
therefore wholly refer themselves to the Merchants and private Traders; Others
that it is Mechanical, and not Gentleman* like.

But if it fall out that these are all mistaken Opinions, if Trade alone has
produced the aforementioned Effects in England, France and Holland, If the
rise and fall of Rents absolutely depend upon it; If Liberty and Property be
made valuable by Trade only, and are not valuable or safe without it; If a
Nation may be made strong or weak by the mere different Operations of Trade; If
the Taxing or burthening of Trade must reduce all Land-Revenues, if the easing
of Trade either in the particular Custom-Rates, or otherwise, will make the
whole Revenue of the Customs greater, or else much enhance all other public as
well as private Revenues; If a mighty Trade be consistent with a Monarchical
Government? (where there is Property and Liberty:) If it be a false and
officious Scandal to this form of Government, to affirm the contrary, if
England of all other Nations, be naturally most capable of the Advantages of
Trade, but yet the Trade of England of late years has been Consumptive; If the
late Policies of our Neighbour-Nations have rendered our old established Methods
of Trade insufficient, If we have diverse late innovated Obstructions in our
Trade, if this has caused an overbalance of Foreign Importations, If our
National Industry has been employed to enrich Foreigners, if our own
Treasures have been exhausted by our own Trade, and will soon be swept away in
the present course of it, Nay, even notwithstanding our late Prohibition of
French Goods, if the Objections against the enlarging and bettering of our
Trade arise from private Interests, in contradiction to the Public, or from
Passion or Humor, and if this be intelligible to every man of sense, that will
take the pains to enquire into it. Then certainly it must follow,

That it does much import all English Gentlemen, Owners of Land, and others,
who take themselves to be sharers in the National Interest to examine the past
and present State of our Trade, and to seek for a legal Regulation of it; And
that all private Interests destructive to our Trade ought to be relaxed, and
given up for the future.

Private Interest is that many headed. Monster, I am chiefly to encounter with,
in which if any particular person shall take himself to be concerned, I shall
desire him to consider, whether his own Condition would not be more truly
honorable and safe under more open Methods of Trade? I shall pray him to look
into the nature of mere private Interest, which if he do, he must confess it
the same Principle that leads men into Cheats, Thefts, and all those other
base, mercyless and execrable Villainies, which render the Actors Criminous, and
odious by the Sufferings and Injuries they bring upon others.

Then if any man's particular way of Gain be so prejudicial to Trade, as to
occasion the continual Beggary of Thousands of his Countrymen, is not this more
then equally mischievous to so many thousand Thefts? But what if this Beggary
must unavoidably cause many thousand actual Thefts, nay Murders and Enormities
of all kinds, and as it grows more Universal, must bring the Nation into an
impotent and indefenseable weakness? Have we any amongst us that will be yet
tenacious of such ways of Gain? Will they tell us that they are not punishable
by any Laws in force? it is pity they are not. So there was a time when in Old
Rome, there was no direct Law against Parricide: But that they may no longer
shelter themselves under this Umbrage, it were highly necessary that Laws were
made to control them, and to remove all Obstructions in our Trade.

That Trade is of this National Importance and Influence, and that the Trade of
England in particular, has been and continues under these Disadvantages, will,
I think, sufficiently appear to any indifferent Reader, by the following
Discourse; Of which having given the Reader a taste, by way of Introduction, I
shall proceed to what I have undertaken, and shall begin with some
Preliminaries, of which part are self-evident, and for those that are not
(being not able to say all at once) refer the Reader to the following Sections.

SECT. I.
Trade National or Private, Home or Foreign Treasures Imported by Trade,
thence Land-Rents, Popularly increased, the Revenues of all Ranks of men depend
upon Trade, People and Treasure make National Strength, particular Advantages
in Treasure, the difference between Ancient and Modern Wars, Navigation
supported by Trade, this necessary for the Security of an Island, and therein
the farther scope of the whole.

TRade is either National or Private: The National Trade does influence the
Wealth and Strength of a whole Nation, and therefore is not the only Concern of
Merchants.

Private Trade has regard to the particular Wealth of the Trader, and does so
far differ in the scope and design of it from the National, that a private
Trade may be very beneficial to the private Trader, but of hurtful, nay of very
ruinous Consequence to the whole Nation; as will appear.

I shall speak of National Trade, which is properly divided into Home Trade,
and Foreign Trade.

The Home Trade in every Nation has dependence on the Foreign Trade, if a
Nation has no Gold or Silver-Mines within its own Territory, there is no
practicable way of bringing Treasure into it (in times of Peace) but by
Foreign Trade: And if such a Nation be not enriched by Imported Treasure, its
Home Trade can only be managed by Exchange of Goods for Goods.

But if Treasure be Imported, then may its Home Trade be managed by buying and
selling for money.

And from hence may the Lands in such a Nation come to yield a money Rent,
which is the produce or profits of Land sold for money.

In which Case the price of Home Commodities, and consequently the yearly Rent
of Lands in a Nation which has populacy and property, will hold proportion
with the quantity of the National Treasure; and will rise or fall as the
Treasure does increase or diminish.

For where there is an increase of Treasure in a Nation which has property,
this will ordinarily diffuse amongst the people by the necessity and succession
of Contracts; and then the people having universally more money than before,
the Seller will not be so necessitous for money as before, and will have a
greater choice of Chapmen, who will be more able and ready to buy.

These numbers of Chapmen will inevitably raise the Market one upon the other,
as is demonstrable by common and undeniable Experience and Fact; And therefore
I shall lay it as a ground in Commerce, That the plenty of Chapmen, who have
plenty of money, will cause a higher and quicker Market for any desirable
Commodity, especially if the Seller be not so necessitous for money as to be
forced to snap at the first offer.

And that on the other side, where there be fewer Chapmen, who have less money,
and the Sellers themselves are more necessitous, they must and will sell lower;
This must inevitably happen in a Nation where there is little money.

For instance, If there were but 500 l. Sterling in England, an Ox could hardly
be worth a penny, nor could the Revenue of all England be 500 l. per annum, or
not above;

It follows then, that a Foreign Trade (by increasing the National Treasure)
will advance home Markets, and the value of Lands in England.

I shall admit that if a Nation can be Victorious in War, and can plunder the
Conquered, some Treasures may happen to be Imported this way; But certainly
those who consider it, will rather desire to be enriched by Trade than by War,
since in the Course of Trade, far mightier Treasures may be gotten with Peace,
Innocence, Security, and Happiness to the People, who cannot be Victorious in
War without Bloodsheds, Rapines, Violences, and Perpetrations of all kinds;
they also must be subject to perpetual difficulties and hazards in the
hardships and event of War, which will disturb or subvert the Home Trade, nor
can the Treasure of a People so employed circulate in the Markets to any
advantageous degree; or should we have any such Bravoes or Knights Errant as
would rather purchase Wealth by Fighting than by Industry, yet are these
imaginary Conquests absolutely impracticable at this day without the assistance
of Foreign Trade; as will be shown.

But first upon the former grounds I shall add, that a Foreign Trade (if
managed to the best advantage) will yet further advance the values of Lands, by
necessitating a vast increase of people, since it must maintain great
multitudes of people in the very business of Trade, which could not otherwise
be supported, (as will also further appear): All which having the Rewards of
their Labors in their hands, will still enlarge the choice of Chapmen to the
Sellers, and there being so many more persons to be fed and clothed, there
must be a far greater home Consumption of all the products of Land.

And hence must arise a kind of Competition amongst the people who shall farm
or purchase Land, when the Revenue of Land is certain, and grows higher daily,
as the Treasure and People increase, which must cause Land to rise as well in
the years purchase, as in the years value; nay, the very Earth must receive an
inevitable Improvement by their Industrious numbers, whilst every one will be
able and willing to possess and manure a greater or lesser part, according to
his occasions; there is hardly any Land in England but may be improved to
double the value, and very much to treble and more.

This necessary Improvement of Rent and Land is verified in the Foreign
instance of Holland, and in such of our English Lands as lie near great and
populous Corporations; And on the other side, we see that in Spain and Turkey,
and also in such parts of England and Ireland, where there is little Trade, and
fewer people, there lie great quantities of Land which yield little or no
profit; and hence I conclude, That the Revenue and Value of Land will
simpathize with the National Trade.

There are indeed certain Ranks of Men of honorable and necessary Employments
and Professions in every Nation, whose Revenues do not so immediately arise
from Trade; such are Officers greater and less, Lawyers, Physicians, and such
like.

But though these are not placed in the direct Channel of Trade, yet it is very
plain they derive their Revenues from it; being supported in their Grandeur and
Gains at the cost of the Land-Holders and Traders; who will be more capable and
willing to give them greater Gratuities and Fees, when their own pockets are
fuller; and as the People, Trade and Contracts do increase, there will be more
Lawsuits and Diseases, and ordinarily more Fees and Gratuities, so will there
be more Houses built, more Apparel made, and more Employment of all sorts for
Masons, Carpenters, Tailors, and men of all other middle and inferior Callings.

And from hence it also follows, That a Foreign Trade managed to the best
advantage, will make a Nation vastly stronger than naturally it was, because
money and people do ordinarily make National strength.

Money is necessary for the purchasing of many Provisions for War by Land or
Sea, as Arms, Victuals, Ammunition, materials for Shipping, and many others,
which being gotten, yet neither Soldiers nor Seamen will now adventure
themselves at the mouths of Cannon and Musket without pay, whereof the further
Consequence is that the Prince and Nation which has the greatest Treasure,
will finally have the Victory, and probably with little or no fighting.

For being enabled by their Treasure to keep themselves in a posture of War,
they will oblige their Enemies to the like Expense, till their Enemies
Treasures are exhausted, and then their Armies and also their Councils will
dissipate.

This shows the difference between the ancient and present Course of War, for
anciently the event of War was tried by frequent Battles, and generally
succeeded as one Nation was Superior to the other in personal Strength and
Roughness; But since the Wealth of the Indies came to be discovered and
dispersed more and more, Wars are managed by much Treasure and little Fighting,
and therefore with little hazard to the richer Nation.

And hence also does it appear that in the present condition of the World, it
is in a manner impossible for a Nation to gain Riches by Conquest and Plunder,
unless it has first store of Treasure at Home, which cannot otherwise be
gotten than by Foreign Trade.

Also money will command the Service and Lives of any poorer and rougher
Nation, It will purchase the Assistance of Foreign Princes, it will indear
their great Ministers, open their Cabinets, engage true and close
Correspondencies, and poison their Councils: It will pass unseen through
Rampires, Fortifications, and Guards into Cities and Forts, and will surprise
them without the tedious hazards of Seiges; It will purchase Governors and
Generals, and like Lightning will consume the Heart of a poorer Nation, whilst
its Countenance and Outside shall remain fresh.

So are people necessary to Guard the Treasures, and defend the Nation, who
will be more or less true and serviceable to the National Interest, as they
have a greater or lesser share in it; he that has somewhat of his own, and
lives Comfortably, will stoutly defend the Nation against Invaders; But if a
People be poor and miserable, their Condition being uneasy, it will be
indifferent to them who is Conqueror; nay they will hope for a better Condition
by turning the Tables; so is it of dangerous Consequence that the People should
become vicious, because it generally weakens their Bodies, Courages, or Faiths:
In all which the excellency of a great and well regulated Foreign Trade may be
discerned, since it will render the People Rich, and ordinarily Virtuous; as
will also appear.

But Foreign Trade may bring a particular advantage to an Island by a great
Navigation, without which its impossible for any Island long to defend it self
against a Foreign Enemy potent in Shipping, for the Invaders circling an
Island with their Ships, may sail from Place to Place, and Rob, Spoil and Kill,
before the Natives can, by long Land-Marches, apply their Courage and
Landforces to resist them; which must necessarily distract and weary out the
most valiant People on the Earth: this has been evident by many Demonstrations
in England, which has been often Conquered by Foreigners for want of a
sufficient Naval Force, particularly by the Romans, nay by the Saxons, Danes
and Normans; but has more often repulsed Foreigners, whilst we have been most
powerful at Sea; and therefore the constant Policies of this Kingdom have long
aspired too, and enjoyed a Sovereignty of the Sea, and kept a narrow and
jealous watch on Neighbour-Nations, least they should aggrandize their Naval
Strengths.

SECT. II.
The several kinds of Foreign Trade, of trading with Home or Foreign
Navigation, some general Application.

IT will be then proper to consider how a Foreign Trade may be driven to most
Advantage for the increase of National Treasure, People, and Navigation.

A Foreign Trade may be driven by a Nation with Foreign Navigation, or with
Home Navigation.

A Foreign Trade driven with Foreign Navigation, is when a Nation sells its
Commodities at Home to such Foreigners as come thither to Buy and Export them.

This sort of Forreign-Trade may enrich a Nation with Treasure more or less, as
the Commodities so sold are of greater or lesser quantity and value.

But it is very plain, that if the Natives had Exported the same Commodities to
the same Foreigners in Shipping of their own, the same Commodities would have
yielded a greater Rate in the Foreign Ports, because the Natives must have
been also paid for the Carriage; which by so much would have increased the
National Gain; wherefore it is more advantageous for a Nation to Export its own
Commodities by Navigation of its own.

But it will not follow; that it is therefore necessary or fit to confine all
Exportations to Home Navigation by Penal Laws, especially in England, as will
be shown.

Nor does it follow that a Nation which does Export its own Commodities, shall
be always richer than another that sells at home; for the Commodities of one
Nation sold at home may yield ten times more money at home, than the
Commodities exported by the other shall yield abroad, and therefore must make
it ten times richer.

This may be verified in the Trade of France; whose Commodies sold at home to
the Dutch, English, and others, for many years past, have brought vast
quantities of money into France, perhaps more than all the Neighbor Nations
have gotten by their exported Commodities, by which means, and no other, France
is become the Terror of the World, as I shall more particularly and fully show.

A beneficial Foreign Trade, with home Navigation, may be said to be of two
sorts:

The one consists in the mere Exportation of home Commodities into Foreign
Nations where they may be vended, of which I have spoken before.

The other, in Trading and Huxtering from Port to Port.

The benefit of Trading* or Huxtering from Port to Port consists in buying
Commodities cheaper in one Foreign Port, and selling them dearer in some
others; in which case the Nation Trading ordinarily gets more or less, in
proportion, as the Merchants buy for less and sell for more, and as the Stock
and Navigation employed in this sort of Trade is more or less.

The Dutch being to buy much of their Victuals, Clothes, and other necessaries
from abroad, and having little Commodities of their own to Export, put
themselves upon this Trading from Port to Port; which Trade they have improved
to that degree, that they are become, as it were, the Common Carriers of the
World, employing near 30000 Trading-Vessels, (including those which belong to
their Fishery.) In this way of Trade have this Industrious People yearly bought
up vast quantities of French Manufactures and Commodities, and uttered them
again for present profit in other parts of the World, not foreseeing those
dangers they have been bringing upon themselves and all Europe.

The English have never attained to near so Universal Manufacture as the
French, or so general a huxtering Trade as the Dutch; But yet until this last
Age had a greater proportion of each then the Dutch or French; their Trade has
chiefly consisted in the Exportation of their own Commodities, and Manufactures
made of their own home Materials; of which that of our Wool being the
Principal, was long thought and really still is, or might be, the greatest and
richest in the World; This, with our exported Tin, Lead, Iron, Allome, Fish,
and other valuable things, brought in a sufficient quantity of Foreign
Commodities to serve our National Occasions, Pomp and Ornament, and left an
Annual Increase of Imported Treasure, which in length of time had much enriched
the Nation, though our neat Annual Gain by Foreign Trade did never bring in
much above 250000 l. or 300000 per annum increase of Treasure, one year with
another (taking any number of 20 years together) as may be reasonably collected
by what will follow; nor was that a Contemptible Gain (as the Trade of this
part of the World formerly stood) since it had rendered this Kingdom as Rich and
Happy at home, and as formidable abroad, as any in Europe.

SECT. III.
Of Foreign Trade consisting in Exportation, of the advantages of home
Manufactures, and Manufactures, incidently other home Trades and Employments
are considered; and which of them enrich a Nation; of the Fishing-Trade, and
the annual exporting of Corn.

THe National Gain, by Foreign Trade, consisting either in vending home
Commodies to Foreigners, or in Trading from Port to Port; It may be fit to be
considered how these branches of Trade may be improved to the utmost.

Home Commodities vendible and exportable to Foreigners, are either such as
are Capable of little or no Manufacture, as Coals, etc.

Or else such as may be manufactured, which may be called the Principals or
Materials of Manufacture; such are Wool, Silk, Flax, Hemp, Tin, Iron, Skins,
Corn, and others.

Most materials of Manufacture are of small value whilst raw and unwrought, at
least in Comparison of the Manufacture, since by Manufacture they may be made
of five, ten, or twenty times their first value, according to the Workmanship;
which is proved by the Woollen, Silk and Linen Manufactures, and almost
infinite others; wherefore if a Nation has naturally any Materials of
Manufacture, it is far more advantageous to Export them in Manufacture, rather
than the raw Materials, because the Manufacture is so much more valuable, and
will make a return of five, ten, or twenty times more Treasure to the Nation
than the raw Materials.

Besides, it is most dangerous to Export the Materials of Manufacture, since it
may transfer the Manufacture it self into some Neighbor Nation, and with it
the incident Riches and Populacy; by which means a Neighbour-Nation may become
five ten, or twenty times richer and stronger than that Nation which does
Export its Materials, and those innocent Materials may in a short time return
in the shape of armed Men and Ships, to the Terror and Confusion of an unwise
and lazy People.

But if Foreigners will vend their raw Materials of Manufacture, it is
necessary, or highly convenient for a Nation to Import them, and put them into
Manufacture at home; after which, this Manufacture may be either exported and
sold for much more than the Materals cost, or being used at home, will prevent
the necessity of Importing the like from abroad, by which the Nation will save
to the value of the Manufacture: Thus do the French and Dutch manufacture
Foreign Silk, Spanish and English Wool, and many other Foreign Materials,
which they Export and sell again with prodigious advantage.

The sorts of Manufacture are so various, and almost infinite, that there is no
People so great or numerous but may be universally employed by it; There are
many which relate to Eating and Drinking, many more to Apparel of all sorts,
Furniture of Houses, Equipage, Navigation, War, Literature and Science,
unnecessary, but acceptable Toys, to gratify the humors and follies of Men,
Women, and Children, under all which generals, there are so many species of
Manufactures, that the very naming of them would make a Volume, some are of
simple Materials, some of mixed.

The Labors of the People bestowed this way, must necessarily glomerate the
Riches of the World, and must render any Nation a prodigy of Wealth; for whilst
vast numbers of Manufacturers are thus continually improving the value of some
Commodities or other, they work for the Nation where they live as well as for
themselves; If 100000 Manufacturers get 6 l. per annum a piece, the Nation must
gain or save 600000 l. per annum by their Labors, (supposing the Materials to
be meliorated only to the value of their Wages;) If the number of the
Manufacturers be greater, or if the same number gain more a piece, then is the
National gain still greater and greater in proportion: All which is too evident
in the present instance of France, and the contrary in that of Spain, which
although supplied with the Wealth of the Indies, is, for want of home
Manufactures, the poorest and weakest of all Nations, and the most dispeopled.

For by Manufactures, a Nation may support many hundred thousands of Families,
besides the mere Tillers of Lands and Keepers of Cattle, with increase of
people shall live well, without being a clog and vexation to the Landholders,
and shall be highly beneficial to the rest of the Natives in times of Peace, as
otherwise they will not be; and as the people increase, so may the kinds and
quantities of Manufacture; the very Women and Children may ordinarily get good
Livelihoods in Manufacture.

Hence must follow a sweet Harmony in a Nation which has property, when every
ones Hand and Head is employed, and when there comes a reciprocation of
advantage to the Landholders, and all others, as necessarily there must; And as
Manufacture seems a kind of debt to the laborious part of the people, who by
nature are entitled to live; so it is the highest of all Charities; as it is
most substantial and universal; What signifies the distribution of a little
broken meat amongst a few Wretches, in Comparison of the support of hundreds of
thousands of Families? And lastly, it is attended with the promised Rewards of
Charity, viz. Plenty, Glory, and Prosperity to a whole Nation.

This, and what has been said in the last Section, may administer occasion to
consider what sorts of Trades, Employments, and Professions do add to the
Riches of a Nation, and what not.

It is evident that all sorts of home Manufactures must advance or save the
National Wealth, the like may be said of those who are employed in the
Fishing-Trade, so may the Trade and Profession of a Merchant add to the
National Riches.

There are another sort of home-Traders, who live merely by buying cheaper and
selling dearer at home, such are Retailers of all sorts in the City and
Country, whom we call Shopkeepers; of which a convenient number are necessary
in every Nation to keep open Marts and Markets for the vending of Commodities;
These may advance their private Stocks and Estates by buying cheaper and
selling dearer, but cannot (merely by this way of Trade) add a penny to the
National Riches, so that it may truly be said of one poor Manufacturer, that he
adds more in a year to the Wealth of the Nation than all such Retailers and
Shopkeepers in England.

And if these Shopkeepers deal overmuch in Consumptive Foreign Wares, they
may assist in the beggary of the Nation; so may the Trade of a Merchant export
and exhaust the National Riches, if he trade overmuch in mere Consumptive
Importations.

And therefore though the gain of the persons employed be one main end and
design of all Trades and Employments, and in that respect they are all alike;
Yet they differ in this; That in some of them the persons employed do
immediately or ultimately gain money from Foreigners; But in the other, they
gain from the people, and from one another.

Of the last sort, are all Employments relating to the Law and Physic, so are
Offices of all kinds (which I do not say to insinuate any of these Employments
to be useless in a Nation, or to diminish from that due respect which ought to
be given to Men of Place.) There is no question but they are highly necessary
for the Regulation of the Body-Politick, and the Body-Natural; so are the
Clergy for the Information of Men's Consciences; and therefore in every Nation
convenient numbers of the people ought to be set apart for these purposes; But
as far as they are Employments, and intended for private gain, it is plain they
add no Treasure to the Nation, but only enable the persons so employed to share
and heap up the Treasures already Imported; The like may be said of all other
ways of living by mere Literature and the Pen, and some inferior Inland
Employments mentioned before; It must therefore be of dangerous Consequence if
the Trade of a Nation run into overmuch Shop-keeping, or if too many of the
people withdrawing themselves from Manufactures, and the beneficial parts of
Trade, should throng themselves into the Clergy, Law, Physic, Literature, and
such other Professions as bring no increase of National Riches; And the rather,
because these Employments and Professions are narrow, and can support but a few
Families in a Nation with convenience; so that it may endanger Depopulation,
and by their numbers will prejudice one another; Whereas Manufacture and a
great Foreign Trade, will admit of and oblige an increase of people even to
infinity: And the more the Manufacturers increase, they will the more enrich
one another, and the rest of the people; It may then be proper to inquire how
the Manufactures of a Nation may be increased and improved.

This may be done either by enlarging former Manufactures, or by introducing
new ones.

New Manufactures must be first taught, and then encouraged, and if made of
Foreign Materials, the Materials must be Imported, after which, as the people
find the sweet of their Labors, it is not to be questioned but that they will
throng into the Employment; they that want Bread, Clothes, and other necessary
Comforts, will be glad to obtain them honestly; Thus our King Edward the Third
(a Wise and Victorious Prince) invited over the Flemmings to teach his Subjects
the Woollen Manufacture; And thus have the French Policies invited over the
most Exquisite Manufacturers into France from all parts of the World; these
with their Scholars were first employed at the Charge of the Government; But
the Manufactures soon afterward diffused into the gross Body of the people.

Without these primary Encouragements and Superintendence of the Government, it
will be hard to nourish up any new Manufacture, or to enlarge any old ones, at
least, suddenly, to any great degree.

Amongst the Exportations, the Fishing-Trade ought not to be forgotten, since,
See Mr. Smith of Improvements, pa. 268, 269, 270. computes the whole profit of
this Fishery to be ten millions sterling: per annum, in a manner, all gained by
other Nations.
according to modern Calculations, the mere Fishing-Trade for Herring and Cod
on the Coasts of England and Scotland imploys above 8000 Dutch Ships or
Vessels, 200000 of their Seamen, and Fishers; And the Herrings and Cod sold by
the Dutch in Foreign Countries, do bring an Annual profit of about 5000000 l.
per annum Sterling to that Nation: besides which, it is accounted that there are
at least 25000 people more employed and maintained at Home about this
particular Navigation, making of Fishing-Nets, and the curing, ordering, and
preparing of the Fish, etc. besides the Island, Newfound-Land, and Green-land,
fishings of very great advantage.

But the ordinary Exportation of Corn out of the Annual increase, has been
accounted most dangerous, and of all others the most unprofitable, because of
the possibility of a dearth; which besides the hardships of it, will give
opportunity to Foreigners of drawing away vast Treasures in a trice.

But if a Nation does store up Corn in cheap years, the people will be secure
against a Dearth, and yet when Corn is excessive dear in Neighbour-Nations, may
then take their time to furnish them, and by that means will make much greater
Advantages than by ordinary Exportation; And for this reason have the modern
Policies of some wise Nations in Trade, contrived and erected public
Storehouses or Conservatories for Corn.

I shall conclude with the words of Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his excellent
Observations upon Trade, presented to King James. Amsterdam is never without
700000 quarters of Corn, a dearth in England, France, Italy, or Portugal, is
truly observed to enrich Holland for seven years after; For example, the last
Dearth six years past, the Hamburghers, Embdeners, and Hollanders out of their
Storehouses furnished this Kingdom, and from Southampton, Excester, and Bristol
only, in a year and half, carried away near 200000 l. Then what great
quantities of Corn did they Transport from round about the Kindgom? from every
Port-Town, from the City of London, and other Cities? it cannot be esteemed
less than two Millions: to the great decay and impoverishment of the People,
discredit to the Merchants, dishonor of the Land, etc.

Suppose then a Dearth or Scarcity of Corn happen once in twenty or thirty
years, the Annual Labors of the People in the produce of the exported Corn are
lost; it is also a bulky Commodity, and makes but a small yearly Return, and the
Foreign price and vent of it is very casual, and uncertain, for which Reasons,
of latter years, the ordinary exporting of Corn is used only by some poor
Nations, who have little other Trade, it is said the French King has Ordered
public Stores and Conservatories of Corn.

SECT. IV.
Of Foreign Trade from Port to Port, the Nature and Advantage of it, differs
from mere Carriage, and mere Importation; the necessity of a Home Storehouse:
The ordinary Exporting of Money or Bullion, of dangerous Consequence; how to be
avoided: The Fishing-Trade, and Trade from Port to Port are the Nursery and
Support of Seamen, and Sea-Towns; The Condition of Ours; The National
Advantages of England for all sorts of Trade, yet has the least share.

SInce the Trade from Port to Port will cause a great Navigation, and also
bring in very much Treasure, and therefore if it be added to the Trade of
Exportation, must render a Nation the Miracle of Riches and Power; I shall next
consider what this Trade from Port to Port really consists in, and by what
methods it may be driven most advantagiously to a Nation.

A Trade from Port to Port may be most properly so called, when a Merchant of
one Nation buying Goods in another, the Property becomes his, and he carries
them to a third Foreign Market on his own account; thus the Dutch buy up,
Export and sell the French Manufactures and Commodities; But if a Dutchman
carry French Goods to be sold in a Foreign Market, on a French man's account,
taking a certain Rate for the Hire of his Ship; this is not properly a Trade
from Port to Port, but is mere Carriage; which sort of Employment (though it
may seem least Reputable) may increase the National Treasure, as the Navigation
used in it is more or less, and may employ many Seamen.

A Trade from Port to Port does also differ from mere Importation, which is,
when the Merchant does Import Consumptive Commodities, which are spent at Home,
in which case, if the Importations are excessive, it may truly be called The
Disease of Trade, since it must cause an Exportation of the National Stock of
Treasure, and thereby may soon ruin a Nation, as will be shown; But so cannot
a Trade from Port to Port, truly so called, because the Goods bought being sold
or bartered off, at other Foreign Ports, must be ultimately converted into
more and more money, and thereby increase the home Treasure.

This Trading from Port to Port, does not wholly consist in the Carriage of a
Commodity from one Port directly to another; nor can be so driven to any great,
or ordinary Advantage; for the Merchants thus Employed, must either Trade
little, or else must glut the Ports they go to with an overgreat quantity of
Goods of the same kind; and therefore for the full Improvement of a Trade from
Port to Port, it is generally necessary, That the Merchants should first unlade
at Home, which will inevitably render a Nation so Trading a complete and mighty
Storehouse of all Foreign Manufactures and Commodities; and then from this
infinite Miscellany of Goods (as the Merchants observe their time for a Market
and the Ports they go to) they may freight their Ships with such sortible
Commodities and Cargoes, as are proper and vendible to advantage; Thus are the
Dutch Provinces become the mighty Storehouse of the World; See Sir William
Temple's Book of the Dutch Cap. of Trade, page 210.232.
the Plenties of the World do grow and increase in other Countries, but there
are the Stores, and thence do their Merchants furnish themselves for all sorts
of Voyages; Thus they Transport the Merchandises of France, Spain, Portugal,
Italy, Turkey, the East and West Indies to the East and North-East Countries of
Pomerland, Sprusland, Muscovy, Poland, Denmark, Norway, Liefland, Swedeland,
Germany; and the Merchandises of the last mentioned Kingdoms they transport
into the Southern and Western Nations, as Sir Walter Raileigh long since noted,
nor is a Trade from Port to Port practicable, or can be improved to any
considerable or valuable degree, unless the Nation be made an universal
Storehouse.

In the Trade from Port to Port there must be some kinds of Original
Exportation, because the Merchant cannot purchase Foreign Goods in a Foreign
Port for nothing.

And one would think it should hardly be a question, whether in this way of
Trade it be most profitable to a Nation to Export Manufacture, or other home
Commodities, or Money, or Bullion.

But of late years many of our Merchants very much contend for a Liberty to
Export Money or Bullion as advantageous to the Trade of the Nation, Stat.
restraining the Exportation of Money and Bullion are. 9 E. 3. Cap. 1. 2 H. 4. 5
th 5 R. 2. 2 H. 6. 6 th 4 H. 7.23. 19 H. 7.5.

The Exportation of Bullion Licensed by a short Clause of 15 Car. 2. Cap. 7.
entitled Trade Encouraged.


and have gotten an Act of Parliament to Legitimate the exporting of Bullion,
contrary to many other former Statutes, and now Bullion and Money also are
become our usual exportable Commodities.

But I shall oppose the ordinary Exporting of Money or Bullion in Trade,
especially as the Constitution of our Trade now is, for the Reasons following:

First, I shall admit that the exporting of Treasure in the Trade from Port to
Port may increase Treasure, provided that the Merchant makes wise Bargains, and
his Ships return safe, neither of which is altogether certain; But supposing
the Merchant be both so wise and fortunate, yet it is very plain that in this
way of Trade the Merchant cannot bring more new Treasure to the Nation than the
Merchant by his judicious and prosperous dealing and Voyage can Add to the
Original Sum he carried out.

But had the Merchant taken off and exported to the same value in home
Manufacture or Commodity, it is as plain that the very vending or bartering of
that Manufacture or Commodity, would have been a farther Gain to the Nation, to
the full value of the Manufacture or Commodity exported; since the Manufacture
or home Commodity sold would finally resolve into Treasure, nay, though the
Merchant gain but little or nothing in this case, yet the Nation must be a
Gainer to the value of the Manufacture or other Commodity exported.

As suppose a Dutch or English Ship go with exported Treasure to France, where
the Merchant buys French Wine for 1000 l. which afterward he carries into the
Sound, and there sells it for 1300 l. the Merchant has brought but 300 l. new
Treasure or Credit to the Nation; But had the Merchant Exported Herrings or
home Manufacture, and by Sale or Barter of his Fish or Manufacture had
purchased the same quantity of Wines, which afterward he sold for 1300 l. the
Nation must presently have a new Addition of Treasure or Credit for the whole
1300 l. In which last Case the Nation gets a new 1000 l. by the labors of the
Fishers or Manufacturers, besides the 300 l. got by the Merchant; if the
Merchant had got nothing, yet the Nation had gained 1000 l.

Secondly, In this last Case great numbers of Manufacturers, Fishers, etc. are
kept and well maintained at Home, whereas the ordinary Exportation of Money
must make them idle and useless; whereof the further Consequence is, that the
ordinary Exportation of Money must inevitably depopulate a Nation, if it be of
any great extent of Territory; so must the Exportation of Bullion be attended
with the same mischiefs for the same reasons: The Exportation of Bullion does
also open a way for the Exporting of Coined Treasure, without any hazards of
Seizure, by melting down the most valuable Coin into Bullion.

But I expect to be told that Hamburgh and Holland, etc. do allow of and use
the Exportation of Treasure.

To which I Answer, That there is no parallel between such Countries as these
and England; For these are little Territories, much consisting of Merchants,
their Agents, Factors, and Dependents, who live by mere Merchandise, that the
rest of the people being but few (in Comparison of what are necessary to people
so great and fertile a Nation as England) may be supported with much fewer and
lesser Manufactures and home Employments; and therefore that the Exporting of
Treasure must be less dangerous, and perhaps may be the more necessary there,
because by the fewness of people, and consequential restraint of Manufactures,
their Merchants may be confined in the bulk and variety of home Commodities to
Export.

If it be said that no Nation can be so stored with home Commodities, as to
Answer all Foreign Ports and Markets, and therefore that it may be sometimes
necessary to Export Treasure in every trading Nation; This perhaps may be true
in some degree; But this is another question; and in the mean time it remains
that it is most profitable to a Nation to Export home Commodities (where it may
be done) rather than Money or Bullion, and therefore that the Merchants ought
to be restrained from it as much as it is possible.

Then as to the other question, how far it may be necessary in a Nation to
Export Money in Trade, It must depend upon the greater or lesser Improvement of
the National Trade.

For as a Nation has a more universal Manufacture and Fishery, more Drinks,
Fruits, Curiosities, and Delicacies of its own, its Merchants will be more and
more enabled to Freight themselves outward with home Commodities; These mighty
Stores of home Commodities can only be had in great fertile and populous
Nations.

But suppose a Nation be not, or cannot be so fully stored with home
Commodities as to Answer all Foreign Markets, yet its Merchants first
Exporting home Commodities to Ports where they are Vendible, may by a Barter,
Sale, or Exchange of these, and an eternal Succession of Voyages and Contracts
make the Nation where they live a Storehouse to Perfection; and will then have
the choice of all Merchandises on the Earth to Export; and therefore may
ordinarily and beneficially Trade to any Foreign Port without exporting
Treasure; And if they may, they will, because else they will loose the benefit
of the Market for the goods they may Export; Thus even the Dutch originally
Exporting Herring, Cod, Earthen Wares, Woollen Cloth, Linen, and of late
Silks, and other home Commodities, and having by the Barter or Sale of these
completed their home Storehouse, can ordinarily buy at Foreign Markets,
without Exporting Treasure; By this means are the Dutch enabled to Trade as
they do to Swedeland, Liefeland, and Norway, where by selling or bartering of
their own and Foreign Commodities, they provide themselves with the materials
of Pitch, Tar, Hemp and Flax, necessary for Navigation, and with Timber, and
other Commodities, for their use at Home, and Trade abroad, whilst the same
Commodities cost the English some 100000 l. per annum, since the decay of our
Cloth-Trade into those Ports; which kind of Trade is doubtless advantageous to
some Merchants (else they would not continue it;) But does help to drain the
Nation of its Treasure.

I do not say they Dutch never Export Treasure, but that by reason of their
Foreign Storehouse they are under no such ordinary necessity to do it; and in
fact Export little or none to many other Countries, where the English Trade
with much: whereof I shall have occasion to say more.

I shall conclude, that where the Home and Foreign Trade of a great and
populous Nation is duly Regulated, and sufficiently Improved, there will be
little necessity to Export Treasure.

To which I shall add, That the Exporting of Treasure in a Nation, having ill
methods of Trade, must be yet more dangerous, because it facilitates mere
Importation, and in England is chiefly serviceable to it, as will appear.

If a Trade from Port to Port be Improved to any great degree, it must
necessarily very much increase the National Treasure, and numbers of people,
especially Seamen.

If 20000 Trading Vessels add 300 l. per annum a piece to the National Stock
yearly, the yearly National Gain must amount to 6000000 l. per annum, and so in
any greater or lesser proportion, as the Navigation or Gain is greater or less;
of which we have a plain Example in the Dutch, who in about Ninety years time
have arrived to a wonderful Wealth and Strength by it, though they have been
always forced to buy much of their Victuals and Materials of Clothing, all
their Materials of Shipping, and many other chargeable Necessaries from
Foreigners, which must be a prodigious Annual Expense.

A Fishing-Trade is one great and certain Nursery of Seamen, and brings Wealth
and Comfort to Sea-Towns; But a Flourishing Trade from Port to Port will make
better and more Seamen, enrich Sea-Towns more, and will Employ very
considerable numbers of people at Land, in Building, Manufacturing, Repairing;
and other ordering of the Shipping, Tackle, and Goods Imported and Exported,
besides the Merchants and their more immediate Dependants; Thus do we see the
Towns upon our opposite Shores abound in Riches and People, whilst our own
Sea-Towns languish more and more.

And from hence it may appear, that for the utmost advance of this Trade, it is
necessary there should be very much Shipping in a Nation, multitudes of
Seamen, great Stocks continually employed in Merchandise, great numbers of
Merchants, and lastly safe Ports and Harbors.

I shall end this with some retrospect to the last Section, by observing, that
no Nation in the World is naturally so adapted for a mighty Trade of all sorts
as England.

First, Because it has more excellent Native Commodities than any one Nation
in the World, as Copper, Lead, Iron, Tin, Allome, Copperas, Saffron, Fell, the
mighty Commodity of Wool, Corn, convertible into Beer, and Transportable,
besides near 100 others, which are capable of near 1000 sorts of Manufactures,
as Sir Walter Rawleigh observes.

That it is one of the most Fertile of Kingdoms, and therefore out of its own
Stores might support almost infinite numbers of people both for Manufactures at
home, and Trade abroad, especially as the Island might be improved.

That it has more and safer Ports and Harbors than almost all the Nations in
Europe put together.

That it is better situated for the Northern, Eastern, Southern and Western
Trades than any other Nation.

That the Herring and Cod, with which the Dutch drive so mighty a Trade, are
caught in our English Seas, upon our own Coasts and Shores, and may be managed
with more ease and advantage by the English, than by any other Nation.

And to conclude, That our People are strong and able for Work at Home,
generous and adventurous abroad, and such as all the rest of the World have
most coveted to commerce with, and naturally as ingenious, industrious, and
willing to labor as any part of Mankind, so long as they can have a reasonable
fruit of their Labors, which has been evidenced by many former undeniable
Experiences.

Notwithstanding all which Advantages, England has had very few considerable
Manufactures, some of which are lost, and the rest decaying; nor have we any
considerable remaining Trade from Port to Port, or Fishing-Trade, of which
there are doubtless some Reasons and Causes very fit to be understood and
regulated, since the Wealth, Strength, Happiness and Safety of England
immediately depend upon it; I shall therefore in the three next ensuing
Sections give an Account of such particular Obstructions in our Trade, as have
fallen under my notice.

SECT. V.
That our Home and Foreign Market is Encumbered, and prejudiced by
extraordinary and unequal Charges, and Cloggs in our Merchandise above what are
in our Neighbour-Nations, viz. In the building and furniture of our Ships,
Victuals, Sea-mens Wages, Customs, Interest-Money, etc. with the Consequences
in our Manufactures and Foreign Trade; more particularly of the decay of our
Woollen Manufacture: our Exportations now confined to our Importations and
Imported Treasure, how to be enlarged, our casual dependence on the Trade of
Spain.

SUpposing this or any other Nation had all the aforesaid Grounds of Trade,
viz. All sorts of Home and Foreign Materials of Manufacture, sufficient
numbers of People, and those instructed in Manufacture, supposing them never so
industrious, that there were no want of Ships, Seamen, or Stocks of Money,
Ports or Plenties at home, yet there is another thing necessary, which is a
good and quick Vent and Market for Commodities; without which all Manufactures
will decay and expire, all other Exportations must fail, and the Trade from
Port to Port can be no longer practicable or valuable.

For if the Manufacturer cannot sell his Manufacture, he has labored to his
great loss; so if a Merchant buy Goods at one Foreign Port which he cannot
sell at another Foreign Port, he has at least lost his Voyage, and the Charge
of it; so if the Market be not absolutely closed up, yet if it be prejudiced
and spoiled to any great degree, the Merchant or Manufacturer will either
discontinue presently, or will Trade less and less, and will fling up speedily
if the Market does not mend; for if men of Trade cannot sell for reasonable
profit, but will be forced to live much worse and poorer than other men of the
like degree and estate in the same Nation, they will not continue long in so
unprofitable a Toil.

The Home and Foreign Market bear such a Simpathy one with the other, that
Obstructions in the Market at home, may arise from Obstructions in the Foreign
Market, as well as immediately from Causes at home.

For if the Foreign Market for Exportable Commodities fail in any degree,
there must be a less and worse Vent and Market at home for these Commodities;
if the Foreign Market come to take off a lesser quantity yearly than before,
or at a lesser price, the Natives must sell a lesser quantity, and at a lesser
price, to their Exporters and Merchants, who will not buy more than they can
Vend again, nor so dear that they cannot vend them with sufficient profit.

Now the course of our English Foreign Merchandise has begotten an
Obstruction in the Foreign Market, because our Merchants are liable to greater
Charges in their way of Trade than the Merchants of our Neighbor Nations.

For all necessary Charge of the Merchant in his course of Trade is super-added
to the Original Cost of his Commodity, so that the Merchant, upon sale of the
Commodity Exported, is under an Obligation to pay himself his Charge, and yet
to sell so, that he may make himself a reasonable gainer besides.

Then if a Foreign Merchant bring the same Manufacture or Commodity to the
same Foreign Port with less charge, he will be able to under-sell the
English-Merchant as much as his charge is less, and yet shall get reasonable
profit.

And if the Merchants of other Nations be able to sell for less, they will, nay
perhaps must, (supposing that they drive an open Trade, and upon their distinct
Stock) for then being incapable of combining to Impose prizes, and desiring a
quick Market (which is the life of Trade,) they will be worked down by the
Foreign Buyers to take as moderate profit for their Goods as they can afford
then at.

The Consequence of this is, that the English Merchant must either forbear
Exporting, or else must sink his prizes on the English Manuactures, whereby the
English Manufactures must be stifled or discouraged.

It Is true, That if Nation has some rich and necessary Material and
Manufacture within it self, exclusive to other Nations, it has the Monopoly of
this Manufacture to the rest of the World, and therefore cannot be under-sold,
but may vend it so as to pay all extraordinary Charges with sufficient gain to
the Manufacturer and Merchant; which was heretofore the Case of England in the
Woollen Manufacture.

But if a Manufacture or Commodity be common to England and Holland, or England
and France, and the Hollanders or French can bring this Manufacture or
Commodity cheaper to a third Foreign Port than the English, the Hollanders or
French under-selling the English, will beat the English out of the Manufacture;
It is accounted that the odds of two per cent. nay of one per cent. will
produce this advantage.

An inequality of Charge on Merchandise must also influence the Trade from Port
to Port; For if the English and Dutch Merchant coming to the same Port with the
same Foreign Commodity* the Dutch can ordinarily under-sell the English; it
must also be of the same Consequence in this sort of Trade.

This happens to be the Case between the English and Dutch, the Dutch being
upon their defection from Spain, driven into great Exigencies, and therefore
becoming studious and emulous how to advance their Trade, have contrived all
imaginable ways how to Trade cheap, whose Example other Neighbouring-States and
Kingdoms have followed in a great degree, and the French amongst the rest,
whilst the English do not only proceed in their former more chargeable methods
of Trade, but have clogged their Navigation and Merchants more and more,
whereof I shall give some Instances, and shall leave the Computation of the
odds to the Reader.

First, The Dutch have found and long used such a way of building their
ordinary Trading Ships and Vessels, that they will sail with eight or ten men,
when an English built Ship of about the same Burden shall not sail without
near thirty men, so that the English Merchant must ordinarily be at more Charge
for Wages and Victuals by two Thirds than the Dutch.

Secondly, The English Customs for Foreign Goods Imported and Re-exported
(though half the Customs paid are returned upon Re-exportation) are near twenty
times greater than the Dutch Customs, and for home Commodities Exported, if not
for all, are greater than the Dutch or French Customs, which does work a
further Charge on the English Merchants. For,

Thirdly, By this means our English Merchants are ordinarily forced to keep
near a fourth part of their Stocks dead at home to answer Customs, so that a
Dutch Merchant may drive the same Trade with a much less Stock.

Fourthly, The late Act of Navigation, and the Act of 14 Car. 2. Cap. 11.
confining the English Trade to Shipping built with English Timber (which is now
exceeding scarce and dear.) The Dutch, French, Danes, Hamburghers, etc. can
have Ship-Timber in Germany, France and Denmark, for less than half the price
of ours. So by means of the same Acts of Navigation, have the Dutch and French
their Cordage, Masts, Sails, Tackle, Pitch and Tar, (being all necessary and
chargeable Ingredients of Navigation) very much cheaper than the English, so
that the Hollanders, or French, or Danes, nay, almost any other of our
Neighbors, can build and apparel a Ship, or fit up and repair, at a less
charge by half than the English can do; the reason of this is more at large
Discoursed by Mr. Roger Cook in his late Ingenious Treatises Of Trade.

And Fifthly, By means of the late Irish Acts against Importation of Cattle, 18
Car. 2. Cap. 2. and 20 Car. 2. Cap.
the Dutch and French can and do Victual their Ships cheaper with Irish
Victuals than the English can do in England, whereas before, England could
Victual cheaper than any Nation in Europe.

Sixthly, The English pay 6 per Cent. Interest for Money, and the Dutch but 3
per Cent. or less, Note, no Interest is allowed in France.
which is to our English Merchants of a strange ill Consequence, if we consider
our extraordinary Charges in Victuals, Wages, Shipping, and the money kept dead
to answer Customs, besides the Interest of the Stock actually employed in
Merchandise and Wars; for the Interest, with Interest upon Interest running up
continually, does still increase the Charge and Clogg upon our Merchants, but
especially must disable us to make England a Storehouse of Foreign Goods,
since although they should be bought and Imported as cheap as in Holland, they
must yet become dearer for Re-exportation by the odds in the Interest; if the
Annual Interest per Cent. were the same, yet the odds in the Stock employed
would produce a vast odds in the Interest.

Seventhly, The Act of Navigation obliging us to sail with of our English
Seamen (of which we have but a few in Comparison of the Dutch, who have at
least ten times more than we) has given occasion to our Seamen to raise their
Wages: To all which may be added our present Charge of Passes, supposing that
any Foreign Nation can Trade without Passes, or procure them for less money;
the like may be said of our late Charge of Ballastage, etc.

Nay the Dutch are so curious, that for more cheapness and convenience, they
build Ships of diverse makes, sorts of Timber, and manner of Tackling, for
almost every Trade: whereas the English build or use but one sort, and that the
most chargeable.

Suppose then, that the English and Dutch should both Manufacture Silk, Linen,
Woollen, etc. and that an English and Dutch Merchant buying up these
Manufactures at the same Rate at Home, should Export them to a third Port where
they are Vendible, it is plain that the Dutch Merchant being at less charge by
at least two thirds for Wages and Victuals, at less charge for Customs or
Port-Duties, at a less charge by half in building and fitting up his Ship, and
being so much eased in the Interest of money, and other the said particulars',
may under-sell the English Merchant a great many times 2 per Cent.

But much more will he be able to under-sell the English Merchant in the Trade
from Port to Port, because of the excessive height of our Customs for Goods
Imported and Re-exported, Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his time, observes, That if
an English and Holland Ship of 200 Tun a piece be at Dantzick, the Hollander
should serve the Merchant cheaper by 100 l. than the English, being sailed with
nine or ten Mariners, but ours with thirty, yet our English Carpenters keep
their old way of building to this day, and know no other.
or if an English Merchant go directly from one Port to another, he will still
lie under the other in equalities of Charge.

Nor are the English for the same Reason capable of any Employment in mere
Carriage for any Foreigners, unless, perhaps, during the Convulsions of a War
amongst other Nat^ons.

And for the same Reasons the English can never drive any considerable
Fishing-Trade, though we pay no Custom for Fish.

This cheapness of the Dutch, and other Foreign Navigation and Trading, does
not only give advantage and preference to their own Manufactures, but to the
Manufactures of all other Nations where there is an open, free and reasonable
Market; as suppose the Dutch buy French, German, or Italian Manufactures as
cheap as the English Merchant can buy the like Manufactures in England, he may
be able to under-sell the English Merchant and Manufacture in a third Port,
with gain to himself.

And hence it is that the Dutch, and other Foreign cheap Navigation, has
given rise and growth to the French, Dutch, German, Italian, and other Foreign
Manufactures; which, with the difficulties on our Trade at home, has worked us
out of near all our Manufactures, except what remains to us of our
Cloathing-Trade.

So the cheapness of the Dutch, and other Foreign Navigation and Trading, has
in a manner beaten us out of all the Trade from Port to Port, and
Fishing-Trade; the English retaining little from Port to Port, but the
East India Trade, for Callicoes, Pepper, etc. a Trade which continues upon a
particular reason, distinct from all the rest, as I shall also show in the next
Section.

And upon the former Reasons, and others mentioned in this and the two next
Sections, we must expect that the Dutch and French may in a short time destroy
our remaining Woollen Manufacture; the Dutch taking advantage of our
mis-management of our Cloth-Trade, of which I shall give a further account,
found ways of getting our fine Wool, which mixing with fine Spanish, and by
that mixture making a cheaper and more serviceable fine Cloth than with all
Spanish, have been long high Competitors in the Trade of fine Cloth, and have
actually beaten us out in the Northern Eastland and German Trades, and share
with us in the Turky-Trade, both Dutch and French getting what quantities they
please of our long and middling-Wooll out of England and Ireland (which they
now have cheaper than the English Clothiers from Ireland) do mix it with
French, Polonia, or other Foreign Woolls, (which are two thirds cheaper than
ours) and therewith make vast quantities of course Cloths, Druggets and Stuffs,
which being acceptable and Merchandizable, they Export to Spain, Portugal,
Germany, and most other Parts.

Their Competition in the Cloathing-Trade, joined with some Polonian, Silesian,
German, and other later Manufactures of course Woolls, have already sunk our
Foreign Market and Vent; this has sunk the price of our raw Wool, as
necessarily it must, and as their Manufactures increase, and ours does expire,
the French and Dutch must have our Wool for what they please; and if they
cannot have it at their own Rate at one of our Ports, they will go to another,
and our necessitous People having their Wool in their hands, will sell almost
at any Rate; which is so far the Case in Ireland already, that is there openly
Exported at 6 or 7 s. the Tod; and then if we compute what a Tod of Wool may
stand the French or Dutch in, considering their cheap mixtures of French,
Polonish, and other course Woolls, we may very suddenly expect to have our
English Woolls at about 4 s. the Tod; for if the English Clothier gives more
for his Materials than the French or Dutch, he cannot live: It is now in most
parts of England at about 12 s. or 13 s. the Tod, in some places at 10 s. where
of late years it was 30 and 40 s. the Tod.

The French and Dutch have long maligned this English Manufacture, and have now
made a mighty progress toward its extirpation, and therein of the great
support of our English Nation; (doubtless the Wooll-Sacks were placed in our
House of Parliament to give us a precaution of it:) The Dutch of late have been
somewhat checked in the Turky-Trade by the War; but the French are more
vigilant and vigorous in the increase and vent of their Woollen Manufacture
than ever; and the Dutch are now at Peace again.

I know some allege, that these Nations may support their present Woollen
Manufacture without our Wool, which our own English Clothiers, on their own
experience, deny; They say that a mixture of fine English, and fine Spanish,
makes Cloth so much cheaper and more serviceable then of all fine Spanish, That
it must needs beat out any Foreign Manufacture made of all fine Spanish,
(which is always near twice as dear as our finest English Wool) and therefore
have the English and Dutch near subverted the Venetian Cloth-Trade in Turkey;
On the other side, They say that the German, Polonia, Silesian, and French, are
so course of themselves, that although they may be wrought into an ill sort of
Composition, perhaps fit for Sails, or such like; yet it is not Merchandizable;
but in mixture with English or Irish; good dressing and dying will make very
vendible and serviceable Stuffs, Druggets, and course Cloths.

Nor is there any shadow of reason to believe otherwise, considering how
Ravenous the French and Dutch have been after our Wool, since they set up
their Woollen Manufactures; why have they and their Agents been lurking on our
Coasts and in our Creeks to fish it away for so many years? why have they given
treble as much for it as for Polonia and French? shall we think the Dutch and
French such Fools and madmen as to make so laborious and dear a Purchase of an
unnecessary Commodity? We are told of some fine Sclavonian Woolls which the
Dutch make use of, but withal that they are not comparable to ours; nor of any
considerable bulk; and are assured by those who should best understand it, that
no Nation but England has a sufficient store of Wool to drive a Foreign
Trade of any Consequence.

There is no question, but that if we did manufacture all our Wool, we might
again near Monopolize the Merchandise and Foreign Trade of Woollen-Cloathing,
though perhaps some Foreign Manufactures of course Woolls might be kept up for
the use of the ordinary poorer people at Home; at least it must be admitted,
that if we did manufacture all our English and Irish Wool, it would find vent
in the World, since it is now all manufactured in England, France and Holland,
and does find vent in the aforesaid mixtures; by which the bulk of the
Manufacture must be much increased.

Then if the question be how we shall arrive to the sole Manufacture of our own
English and Irish Wool, it must appear upon what has been said, that the only
safe Expedient must be by easing our Navigation and Trade equally with
Foreigners, in which Case having so much advantage in the Materials, we could
not fail of an answerable success in the Manufacture; long Experience has
demonstrated that the mere prohibiting of the Exportation of Wool is but a
Cobweb, the Dutch and French being constantly supplied with what quantities
they please to have, and ever will be, as long as their advantages in Trade
will enable them to give more for our Woolls than our English and Irish
Natives: for so long the Interests of our People will teach them ways to Elude
or Baffle the Prohibition; For this reason our late Act of 12 Car. 2. Cap. 22.
which makes it Felony to Export Wool, has nothing remedied the mischief. Upon
what has been said, I may further add, That those who think to better our
Trade in general by the forceable subversion of the Dutch Trade and Navigation,
are as much mistaken; since the Hamburgers, and other Trading States, the
French, and other Kingdoms, who have eased their Merchandise and Navigation,
would then take the place of the Dutch, and would share the Trade, and exclude
the English, unless our Trade were equally eased.

I shall conclude this Section with this farther Observation, That for the
opening of a sufficient Foreign Vent and Market for our Home Commodities,
whether Manufactures, Fish, or others; it is not only necessary to remove all
unequal cloggs on mere Exportations, but also those on Imported Goods; because
that whilst the English Merchant, by the Charges on Imported Goods, is
ordinarily disabled to Trade from Port to Port, the value of our English
Exportations must be in a manner confined to the value of the Goods Imported,
and consumed at Home, and the Treasure we Import in specie yearly.

Whereas were the cloggs on our Imported Goods taken off, we might yearly vend
of our own Home Commodities to the value of all the Foreign Goods we should
then Import and Re-export, to serve the Occasions of all other Nations, (for
these we might purchase by Barter or Sale of our own) whereby our Exported Home
Commodities would then amount to much more, probably to more than ten times the
value they now do yearly; All which in the course of Trade from Port to Port
would resolve into more and more Treasure and Riches of all sorts.

And therefore, let the Treasure now Imported in specie be more or less, it is
evident, that were our Merchants enabled to Trade from Port, as the Dutch, and
others, can and do, as our Manufactures, and other Home Commodities, Exported
yearly would be vastly more in quantity and value, so would the Treasure
Imported yearly.

Secondly, The Exportation of English home Commodity is yet farther confined,
when instead of home Commodity to answer the Imported Goods and Treasure, we
Export so much Treasure as we do; In which Case if the Treasure Exported be
more than is Imported yearly, this Kingdom must insensibly be beggered by mere
Trade.

This may be feared to be our Case, because there are very few Foreign Nations
(I think none worth the naming but Spain) where our Merchants can ordinarily
sell our Commodity for ready money, or with so much advantage, that they can
afford to return with the price received, but will be obliged to better their
Adventures by laying out the money again on Consumptive Foreign Goods, or else
apply it to satisfy Foreign Debts by Bills of Exchange; This many of our
Spanish Traders do, so that our Merchants Import much less Treasure than they
receive; and it may not be improper to be added here, that whilst the virtue of
our whole Trade (as now managed) does still depend so much on that with Spain,
our Support is very single and casual, and the Consequence must be fatal,
should the Spaniard be rendered either unable or unwilling to Trade longer with
us; our Case is already thus, far worse than it was, that Spain is grown poor
and weak, and the Dutch and French share and grow upon us in this Trade.

SECT. VI.
Other Cloggs on our Trade, viz. The late Acts of Navigation, which, with the
other difficulties have begot Monopolies; made our Navigation yet dearer, so
Foreign Materials of Manufacture cause mere Importations, hinder our Foreign
vent of Victuals, obliges a sudden Consumption of our remaining Ship-Timber,
particular dangers and consequences thereof; Our Navigation cannot be increased
whilst we are restrained in Trade: The exhausting of our Treasure must subvert
our Navigation: The advantages of Foreigners, of Trading by Companies, and the
different Nature of Ours, more particularly of our African and East India
Companies and Trade: diverse ill Consequences of Joint-Stocks; therein more of
Monopolies. Long Land Carriages to London; the Market there delayed. Odds in
Interest-Money must prejudice our Manufactures: private Interest observed. Our
affectation of Foreign Commodities: the prejudice of obstructing the vent of
Manufactures. Our Manufacturers liable to be imposed upon by our Merchants, and
by Ingrossers, a disadvantage by the Restitution of half Customs on the
Re-exportation.

IT being natural, That the continuance of one inconvenience should beget many
others, it has so fallen out in England.

Our Natives discerning the odds of Charge between our own and Foreign
Navigation, and being therefore tempted to Trade in Foreign Ships, or to deal
with Foreign Importers, (which threatened the subversion of our English
Navigation, and the Importing Trade of our English Merchants) instead of
Regulating our Navigation, the late Act of Navigation was made, whereby, and by
other Acts, 12 Car. 2. ca. 18. 13 Car. 2. c. 14. 14 Car. 2. ca. 11. 15 Car. 2.
c. 7.
our English Exportations are expressly or virtually confined to our own English
built Shipping, so is the Importation of Foreign Goods, or else to the
Foreign Natives of whose growths or productions they are; which restraint has
begotten, or (jointly with the other cloggs on our Foreign Merchandise) has
heightened, these farther Inconveniences.

First, It has given a Monopoly to our own Merchants, upon our Manufacturers
and People, for our own exportable Manufactures and Commodities.

Secondly, It has given a Monopoly to our own Merchants upon all the people of
England, for Goods Imported.

Thirdly, The said Act of Navigation obliging the English to buy Imported Goods
only at those Ports, or of those Natives, of whose growths and productions they
are, has given Monopolies to all Foreigners on the English for Goods of their
respective growths and productions; See Mr. Coke's Third Treatise Of Trade.
the Danes (for instance) taking advantage of it, very much raised their Prizes
and Customs upon us, for Pitch, Tar, and Timber, forcing us to pay near double
what we did, and to pay them in money, where we used to barter with them for
Commodity; the like may be said of the French, those of the Canary-Islands, and
others, particularly the Leiflanders, for raw Hemp and Flax; at the best we are
but at mercy.

Fourthly, This Act has made our Navigation yet more chargeable than before,
because the aforesaid Foreign Materials of Pitch, Tar, raw Hemp and Flax are
thereby made very much the dearer; It does also render English Ship-Timber
still dearer and dearer, which must more and more disable and discourage us in
the building of Ships for Trade, and gives a great and dangerous advantage to
our Neighbors in the building of Ships of War so much cheaper than we.

Fifthly, This dearness of Shipping must the more prejudice the vent of our
Manufactures made of our own Materials, and disable us in the Trade from Port
to Port, for the Reasons in the last Section.

Sixthly, The same dearness of Shipping, with the other unequal charges on our
Foreign Merchandise, must render all Foreign materials of Manufacture
imported much dearer in England than in other Neighbour-Nations, (such are
Hemp, Flax, Silk, and many others of great consequence) and then our
Manufacturers buying the Materials dearer, are obliged to sell their
Manufactures dearer, which must hinder their vent at home as well as their
Exportation abroad, and consequently the rise and growth of all our
Manufactures made of Foreign Materials, and accordingly we see our
Manufactures of Linen, Cables, Sails, Sea-Nets, and Silk of all sorts, are
some of them in a manner lost, the rest much decayed; which I the rather
mention, that this, and what I say elsewhere, may take off some ignorant and
unreasonable Reproaches against the English Manufacturers, for not selling some
Manufactures so cheap as in other Nations, since they are necessitated to it by
these and some other difficulties upon them, which I shall take notice of in
this and the next Section, as I shall have occasion.

Seventhly, This restraint to our dear English Navigation, and Charges on our
Merchandise, does by Consequence tend to introduce the Disease of Trade,
consisting in mere Importation; for as our Manufactures expire, there is a
farther occasion of Importing Foreign Manufactures, especially if on this, and
other Accounts, they may be sold cheaper here than our own: And hence it is,
that we have a prodigious increase of Imported Linnens, Silks, etc. and that we
are of late forced to buy much more of our Cables, Cordage, Sails, and diverse
other Manufactures from the Dutch, French, Germans, etc. than formerly we did;
in all which our Merchants must be greater gainers for a time, because our
occasions for Foreign Goods being greater, they Import and sell the more at
home; and from more and greater Sales must get the more money of our Natives,
and the rather, because of their Monopoly on the rest of the people for
Imported Goods, which does enable them to sell so at home, as to reimburse
themselves all their Charges, with extraordinary profit.

Eighthly, The said Restraint excluding great numbers of Foreign Ships from
our Ports must hinder the vending of great proportions of our Beef, Pork, Corn,
Beer, Clothing, and other Necessaries.

Ninthly, The dearness of the English Timber, arising from the scarcity of it,
the said Act does oblige us to a kind of impossibility, there being not Timber
enough in England to support any considerable Navigation, at least for any
continuance of time; which small remnant of Timber we are forced to spend so
fast in the building or repairing of ordinary Vessels, that we shall soon see
the end of it, and then in any great Exigence we must seek out for Foreign
Timber to build Ships of War, for which the Timber now remaining might be
reserved.

Tenthly, Whereas the increase and support of Navigation depends on the
ordinary Employment of Ships and Seamen in Trade, of which far the greatest
numbers are to be maintained in the Fishing-Trade, and Trade from Port to Port,
the English being, by the Acts of Navigation, and other difficulties, disabled
from those Trades, can never increase their Navigation, and upon a small
increase of Shipping must be over-clogg'd.

Eleventhly, The Act of Navigation giving Foreigners election either to sell
their Goods to the English at home, or to Import them into England, is so far
from encouraging our Navigation, See Mr. Coke's Treatises Of Trade, this
largely and most rationally discoursed.
that it has put it into the choice of Foreigners, whether theirs or our
Shipping shall be employed, which, with the dearness of ours, has already
increased the Navigation of our Neighbors, but has reduced ours.

And lastly, As the dearness of our Navigation and course of Merchandise
established by this Act does run us into an Excess of Importations, our
Treasures must be exhausted, and then the remnant of our Shipping must be
becalmed, and our Seamen will leave us, as they already do, which I shall more
particularly observe in the following Sections.

In the mean time it must be apparent, that if we had disposed our selves to a
cheaper way of building and sailing, our Trading-Ships (being as practicable
here as in Holland) and had eased our Merchandise and Trade to an equal degree,
these, and all other the aforesaid Mischiefs, had been prevented, and we might
have supported a more swelling and beneficial Navigation than that of the
United Provinces; who are so far from making use of any Expedient of this
Nature, that they allow Free Commerce to all Foreigners, and their Ships; nor
can the like Expedient be found in any Nation on the Earth, who have or aspire
to a great Navigation or Trade; It Is confessed the like Act was made by the
Rump, but 'twas on the occasion of their Dutch War, and intended (as it is said)
to exclude the Dutch from the benefit of our Trade and Ports; however it were,
we are not to learn the Rump might be mistaken in their Calculations.

If the people of a Nation have free Liberty to sell at home to all Merchants,
they must necessarily have the utmost choice of Chapmen for Manufactures and
home Commodities, and by consequence the best and utmost Market and Vent as far
as the Stocks, Treasures, Industry, Navigations and Occasions of the World will
bear, and it is known that the most thrifty Merchants, and near Livers, and
those that Trade most universally, and with the greatest Stocks, and cheapest,
are ordinarily able to buy dearest, and sell cheapest; and if our Natives were
un-confined, they would have Liberty to deal with any Foreigners on the Earth
thus qualified; But our Natives being restrained to our own Merchants, and
their own National Stock in Merchandise; let the particular Stocks of our
Merchants be never so small, let them Trade never so dear, or so little, let
them live never so high and costly, yet our Natives Manufactures and others
must pay for all, by selling cheaper to our Merchants, and buying of them
dearer; for the Merchants are in a capacity to buy so and sell so at home, as
to satisfy themselves, and maintain the Equipage they live in, with much
overplus.

But our Clothiers, and some others, have complained, that they are yet farther
confined in their choice of Chapmen, since the English Merchants are confined
to the Trading Companies and their stocks; which does first give me occasion to
consider the Constitutions of our English Foreign Trading-Companies, and of
what consequence they are in Trade.

This I shall do (as I think it will appear) without any partiality, protesting
that I bear no malice or personal ill will against any Company, or Member of
any Company in England, but on the contrary, have an high esteem for as many of
these and other Merchants as I am acquainted with, having found them very
worthy men, and such as much desire the general Good, and therefore hope they
will close with the Common Interest in what relates to themselves.

Particular men have too long flattered themselves with a corrupt opinion, that
they may gain by the common loss, and that it will hold out their times, which
I do not say with any particular Reflection on these, or any other Traders;
being the ordinary maxim or prudential of our cunning men of all kinds.

Of the first and more ancient sort are our Regulated Companies, or such as are
so called, such as are the Turkey, Hamburgh, Muscovy, and Eastland Companies,
whose Incorporations have been always accounted Legal, being intended for the
better Regulation of some particular Foreign Trades, and for the raising and
support of Common Charges, and for those purposes are enabled to act by
Committees.

The Members of these Companies trading on their distinct stocks, seem to leave
the same choice of Chapmen to our Manufacturers, wherefore I cannot observe but
that such Companies might consist with a Flourishing Trade, if according to
their Appellations they be really Regulated, (that is) provided all Englishmen
(according to their Right) be left at liberty to become Members, and Trade,
upon Terms that are not oppressive. Secondly, That these Companies be not
permitted to make such Bylaws for their private ends, as may prove
advantageous to the Members of the Company, but prejudicial to the Nation; a
thing very practicable, as suppose they should prolong their times of buying
our home Commodities, or confine the Market to some such particular places at
home as may be convenient for themselves, but injurious to our Manufacturers,
or other Natives, or should Trade to few Ports where they can have
extraordinary Rates and Terms, when they might Trade to more, and consequently
vend more Commodity; or should endeavor to set the Dice on Foreigners, by
Arbitrary prizes or otherwise, whereby Foreigners may be disaffected with our
Commerce; experience has shown that private interest has carried some of them
into such or the like irregularities, it would be too long to instance in
particulars, I shall only say, that those of the last sort made Foreigners the
more Impatient till they had set up their woollen Manufactures.

Our East India and Affrican Companies are of another kind, The present
East India Pattent granted 13 July 1660. That to the Affrican Company since.
and of a latter creation, having gotten Pattents of the Sole Trade of great
part of the World exclusive to the rest of his Majesty's Subjects, which they
manage upon Joynt-stocks; of which I shall show the general ordinary
consequences, and then examine how far they are applicable to the particular
Cases of these Companies.

First, in the nature of such Companies they must be as injurious as may be to
all home-Manufactures made of our own materials, and the vent of our other
exports, because by trading on a Joynt-stock they make but one buyer, and
therefore have a Monopoly for all exportable goods proper only for the Foreign
Nations within their pattents, and must contract the choice of Chapmen for all
other goods proper for these and other Countries; now the confining of the
Market and choice of Chapmen in any degree is dangerous and prejudicial to
Trade, and in a larger sense may be called a Monopoly, but it is far more
mischievous when the Election is totally lost, for then those who have the
Monopoly may, and therefore will, buy at their own prizes.

Secondly, for the same reason they must be yet more injurious to
home-Manufactures made of foreign materials; for first, they will sell the
materials as dear, and then buy the Manufacture as cheap as they please; which
must subvert any Manufacture in a trice, especially if made of foreign
materials bought cheaper by foreign Manufacturers; suppose then the East India
Company by their Commodity of Money, should so far divert the market as to beat
out the Turkey Company in the trade of Raw-Silks, at what rates would our
Silk-weavers buy raw-silks? or will it be said a Company on a Joynt-stock, will
so much value the National interest as to sell as low as the Commodity is sold
for in other Nations? or if it will be said, who will believe it? was ever any
such thing done either by the English, Dutch, or East India Companies? did they
ever yet endeavor to beat out one another in trade by low selling? No, this is
never the effect of choice; were a third East India Company in France on a
Joynt-stock, they would hold up the prizes; the advantage got to a Nation by
underselling is the effect of necessity, or high convenience; when the Sellers
being infinite, some of them are ready, and all long for dispatch and a new
adventure, whereby they work down one another to as low a prize as the
Commodity can be afforded at; of all which we have an undeniable example in the
present Affrican Company, who were no sooner Constituted, but they raised the
price of imported red-wood, which before was sold at 26. and 28 l. per Tun, to
80 l. per Tun, which must make our exported dyed Clothes of all sorts so much
the dearer; and being an intolerable rate, put our Dyers upon finding out the
use of Saunders, which they still continue; and as a farther confirmation of
this, and what I said before, I shall add, that after the Election of this
Company, all goods proper for that Trade only sunk at least 15 l. per Cent. nor
would the 10 th. part of the same goods be vended to the said Company as there
was before, to our Merchants driving an open Trade.

Thirdly, For the same reason such a Company must be as injurious to the Trade
from port to port; For having also a Monopoly in selling, they may and will
impose Arbitrary prizes on the buyers, and then the Merchants or Re-exporters
who buy goods so dear, must be undersold by any other Nation which drives a
free and open Trade to the same place from whence they are Imported; this is
self-evident, and therefore I should not instance in Fact, but that I have it
on good Authority; that even in the East India Trade, which is Alleged to be
out of the common Rules of Trade, whilst the Trade was open, viz. In the Years
54, 55, and 56. our Merchants sold the Indian Commodities so low, that they
furnished more parts of Europe then since we have done, nay, Holland and
Amsterdam it self; and that this very much sunk the Actions of the Dutch
East India Company: a thing which stands with reason; and which therefore
recommends an open Trade to India, if it may be so driven with long
continuance, whereof I shall farther consider.

Fourthly, These Companies having also Monopolies on these Foreign Natives
with whom they Trade, may set Arbitrary prizes upon them, for our
home-Manufactures exported; and will get more, by selling a little very dear,
then by selling much more at moderate profit: and though the Joynt-stock
employed be not sufficient to manage the Trade any thing near the full
advantage, yet those interested in it, will have reason to be satisfied with
the returns they make, since in proportion to the Stock, they may be very
great; and for the same reason, may be well contented to Trade to a few Ports
where they can have great rates.

5 ly, The industry, courage and ingenuity of all the rest of the Natives (by
which as much as by stock all Trade is improved) are shut out, which must not
only be a prejudice to the Trade in general, but is a hardship put on the rest,
who by their birth rights are equally entitled to all Trade; upon all which
accounts, the Legality of sole importing, sole buying, and sole vending, has
been formerly brought in question, and denied in our greatest Judicatures;
Stat. 21. Jacob. 3.12. Hen. 7. cap. 6th. 3. Jac. cap. 6th.
and should it be generally admitted, by the same reason, the rest of our
Foreign Trade might be enclosed to two or three more Companys, and then we
should have but three or four Chapmen or Shops for all Exported and Imported
Commodities; nay the whole might be granted or reserved to one Company, or one
man: in any of which Cases what would become of property? Such is the Case of
the general body of our Merchants already, that having in a manner lost the
Eastland and Northern Trades, they are shut out of the Affrican, Indian, and
Persian, Chinese, and other mighty Trades within those Patents: since this out
of the French trade, and therefore are thronged into the Streights, and other
narrow remnants, and yet is this the usual preferment of most of the younger
Sons of the Gentry of England.

Sixthly, Though our other Merchants on their single accounts export much
treasure, yet cannot it so easily be done, or not in so great Quality, as by
such a Company; whose Joint stock having a great credit, can take up as much
ready money as they want; whereas those who will not trust a single trader with
a 100 l. in money will trust him with 500 l. worth of Commodity, as common
exerience shows: and it is affirmed, that during our trade in 54. and 55. we
exported more Commodities, viz. cloth, and other things, then since we have done

To this is Objected, that the East India trade so far differs from others,
that it cannot be supported, or not with so much advantage and security, (which
I admit to be all one) without a Joint stock, which if true, there is no doubt
but it ought to be so managed. This then is one great Question, in the mean
time I hear nothing of this so much as alleged for the Affrican Company: the
reasons given, depend upon pretended Facts in India, viz. the necessity of
great common charges in gratifying and corresponding with the Indian Princes,
and keeping Forts and Forces for the defense of our Factories there, which they
say could never be supported but out of a Joint stock in Trade.

To which others answer, 1 st. that it may be true, great common charges are
necesssary, and much greater then our Company are at, but that common charges
may be raised by a regulated company on Goods employed in Trade, or on other
parts of the Traders Estates, if the Company are Empowered to make Levies,
which is no more then every Parish are enabled to do for Church-Poor and other
things: and that it is the same thing for a man to be assubjected to Levies out
of that part of his distinct stock which is not in trade, as it is to make good
any public charge or loss out of his Joint Stock.

Or Secondly, they say, that if this Trade be taken into the protection of the
Government, it will have the Joint stock of the Kingdom to secure it, the same
by which we are all secured: they offer what we were able to do in our open
Trade in 1654.55. and 56. But as a demonstration, urge the example of the
Portuguese, who in an open Trade (I do not mean in an Anarchy nor without
conduct and order) made near or full as great a progress in this Trade as the
Dutch, whilst their Government gave sufficient assistance, which they say,
also answers what has been objected from the supposed disorder of our Trade in
those parts, should it lie open, and the capacity the Natives would be then in,
of setting the dice upon the English: and as a further answer to this they say,
the same thing may be objected against all other open Trade in the World.

But then those for our Company, object the Example of the Dutch, who being a
Nation so wise in Trade, successfully manage the East India Trade by a Company
on a Joint stock; which being matter of fact, is beyond all the Argument in the
World.

To which is answered, that this Example proves that a Company in a Joint stock
may make a great progress in it, but does not disprove the like, or a greater
progress under a regulated or open Trade.

2 ly. That on the first custom of this Company, and ever since, the Dutch had
most of the Trade from Port to Port, and carriage throughout the rest of the
World; and therefore might with less disadvantage to the rest of the Dutch
Merchants enclose this to a Company.

3 ly, That that Company was occasioned by the distinct Bands or voluntary
Associations of Merchants in the several Provinces, See the present state of
the low Countries, Printed in 69. Written by M. A. Fellow of the Royal Society,
p. 154.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
who first undertook this Trade, which being soon after the Union, and the
Provinces having Originally separate rights, the said Associations had not so
good a correspondence as was necessary, which could never fall out under a
regulated Company of one Nation.

4 ly, That the constitution of this Company being intended for a present
Reconciliation of these interests, See Mandelsloes Travells, p. 285.
was Originally but for 21. Years, and was afterward continued, because the
Company growing so rich and powerful both abroad and at home, the Members were
generally chosen States, and therefore above any attacque at home from the rest.

5 ly, That as the Dutch Company is constituted, and have managed this Trade,
it has redownded to almost, if not fully to as general an advantage, as if
managed by an open or regulated Trade: in which they say our Company is much
defective; and that supposing a Joint stock necessary, or highly convenient,
yet if we might manage ours to more National advantage, it were but fit it
should be done.

To prove this might be done, those for a more open Trade urge, that our now
East India patent contains near or fully one third part of the World, and
therefore must have many hundreds, if not thousands of parts, Note the Affrican
Companys Patent contains from the Streights Mouth to the Cape of good Hope.
that whereas their privilege begins at the Cape of good Hope, it is from
thence above 4000 Miles, upon the Coast of Afric to the Red Sea, in all which
they do not Trade to one Port, and very little* if any thing, in the Red Sea:
which they say might be done to considerable advantage, and much more to
Persia, then we now do; That in India our Company do not Trade to above 20. or
30. Ports, nor vend our Woollen Manufactures at above 3. or 4. Ports, and there
very dear, who sell again much dearer, and to Ingrossers, which hinders the
vent: Printed in (77.) page 21.
that in China, or Japan, they have no Trade at all, where (to use these words
of the Author) of the Book in defense of the Company,) in all likelihood more
considerable quantities of our Woollen Manufactures might be vended, and from
thence in return thereof Gold, Silver, and Copper might be brought to supply at
least, in a great measure, the Trade in other parts of India, without carrying
so much out of Europe: But these Trades (he says) are not so easily gained as
some fancy, great hazards of considerable stocks must be run, etc.

Whereas, they say were a greater share of the industry and vigor of the
Nation now pent up, and greater stocks now worse employed, or idle, let into
this Trade, we might hope for a great Trade to the Ports now of no use to the
Company, for that in fact the Dutch Company Trade to all Ports in India, China,
Japan, etc. and drive a mighty Trade to Persia with the Commodities of those
Countries, viz. Spice of all sorts, etc.

2 dly. They say by this our want of a sufficient Commerce in India there is a
very small Navigation employed in this mighty Trade, of what might be, being
not above 20, or 30. Ships to and from India in a direct course, and in India
so inconsiderable that it is not worth the noting: That for this reason, and
because we there vend so little Commodity, our Company does Trade with vast
quantlties of exported Treasuri, insomuch that upon search of the Custom books
of the Port of London only, it appeared by the Entrys, that the Gold and Silver
exported for India by the said Company from the 2d. of March 1673, to the 11th.
of March 1674, amounted to 500. sixty odd thousand pounds Sterling; besides
what might be entered in the out-ports, and without entry privately exported,
which those that understand this Trade will not think a little: the Author of
the aforesaid Pamphlet confesses, that from the end of the Year 1674, to the
beginning of the Year 1675, was exported to India about 400000 l. more, in
which perhaps we have reason to be suspicious of his modesty: (It were a
National work to search the entrys for this and the other Years succeeding)
that it is the exporting of this Money that endears our Company to the Indian
Princes, and buys their protection, who otherwise might destroy them if they
would, our Company, having not above 2 or 300 people in it, their sort St.
George, including Factors and Agents of all sorts, and at Bombey fewer.

Whereas, that on the other side the Portuguese whilst they had the Trade of
the Indys, though under no Company, supported a vast Navigation there to serve
the occasions of those mighty Empires and their own; that since the Dutch have
supplanted the Portuguese; they have yet a greater, having there thousands of
Ships Trading from Port to Port in the Indies, Persia, etc. Besides 50, or 60,
(if need be) more Men of War, and keep great Armies in pay: That they have
gotten many spacious Countries, Islands, and Populous Citys of their own,
whereof Batavia is near as big and rich as Amsterdam; besides diverse Tributary
Kingdoms, whom they have forced into a profitable compliance, and were it not
for fear of the English power at home, could daily ruin us at their pleasure:
that by the greatness of their Trade in these parts, they gain so considerably,
that they can freight home their great Fleets with the most valuable
Commodities in the Indies; being the result of their industry in those parts,
not of their exported Money.

3 ly. That the Subscribers to our East India Stock were originally but few,
and the Stock but small, that diverse of the shares being now bought in and
consolidated into particular hands, there are not above 60. or 80. persons or
thereabouts considerably concerned in the Joynt-stock; that although the Stock
be not near sufficient to manage even the present Trade, and therefore could
admit of more Depositums of Money, which would let in a greater number of our
people, the Company to prevent the necessity of it, do take up 4 or 500000 l.
at Interest at 5 per Cent. which by their dear Sales at home yields them 20 or
30 per Cent. or more; that as the Trade redounds to the benefit of few at home,
so to as few in India, the Companies, Factories and employments being few, and
most lie divided amongst men of mean condition, who will depend solely on the
Company, being originally Hospital Boys or such like, and all others
restrained to Traffic, Frequent or haunt the Indies, or places within their
Pattent, by a Clause therein, under penaltys of Imprisonment, Seizures and
Confiscations, frequently and severely exempted by the Company, how legally I
leave to be examined: That upon this account, even those few Seamen or others
whom they permit to deal for themselves, can make little profit, being charged
with great Mulcts, made payable to the Company at their discretion for all the
Commodities they export or import.

Whereas the original Stock of the Dutch company was 600000 l and this in the
year 1602. and the Number of the Sharers in the Dutch Company of all sorts, See
Mandelsloes Travils 285. State of the Low Countries. 159.160. In 1608. the Dutch
East India Stock was made up near 3 Millions Sterling, besides great dividends.
Present State of the United Provinces pa. 163 our East India Stock actually
paid 1660 was but 368000 l. the Trade so ill, that in 1665. our effects were
sold at 70. per Cent. and farther Subscriptions refused: but the act of 15.
Car. 2. Licencing the Exporting of Bullion and foreign Coin, and the Company
betaking themselves to this Commodity, has occasioned the support of this
Trade to the present degree.
and of those considerably concerned, are vastly more, then in our English
Company, proved by their Ordinary Councils or Chambers of Curators of this
their Company in each Province; besides their Superior Assemblies, amounting
to great Numbers, all which are but Deputies of far greater Numbers; that
besides their Navigation Trade, Judicature, and War in the Indies, let in
Multitudes of others, into very profitable employments, so that in effect they
make up another potent Government, for the aid of their Nation in all
exigencies.

I have been the more copious on this particular Subject, first, because of the
apprehensions or pretenses of some, that our stupendous advantage in this
Trade gives us a kind of National security, so that no sooner can others
mention any defect in our Trade, but they are presently told of our Trade to
the Indies, the wealth of the Indies, and our Navigation to and in the Indies.

And yet I shall admit, though with little reputation to the rest, that our
East India Trade, such as it is, seems the most flourishing branch of the
whole, and therefore that the Gentlemen concerned in this Company have
evidenced their conduct in the present way of Trade.

2 ly, I shall not much contest but that the Indian Commodities consumed at
home, and re-exported, may (as the rest of our Trade is now managed) prevent
the exportation of near as much money to our Neighboring Nations, viz. by the
use of Callicoes instead of other Linnens, by a Barter of these and the rest of
our Indian Commodities in France and other parts for other Consumptive goods;
in which there is an advantage, because the less money we part with to our
Neighbors, they will be in the less capacity to hurt us, but this does not
prove the Indian goods re-exported bring in the Treasure exported to India,
since the whole, or a great share of it may be, and is by the circulation of
foreign contracts finally resolved into other consumptive Importations, of so
dangerous a consequence it is to export money.

But suppose the Indian goods, re-exported bring us in more Treasure, yet is it
evident from such Facts as I have mentioned before as are admitted by the
Company, and such as are indisputable, that this part of our Trade (which
before 1654. was managed by the like Company) was never improved to any great
or considerable degree, in comparison of the progress made by all other Nations
which have undertaken it: whereof there must be causes and reasons highly
necessary to be examined and regulated; I shall add, that for those other Facts
relating to the present debate which seem of less notority, they are such, as
to my knowledge were affirmed by many credible witnesses, and by them intended
to be proved before a Committee of the House of Commons, upon the occasion of a
Petition there formerly exhibited by the Clothyers, but having attended several
days, were never heard, because the Parliament was engaged in other things, and
afterward Prorogued: but I doubt not they are all ready to attest the same and
more before that Judicature; which I say, that it may not be thought that I
have highly or officiously reported any of the aforesaid allegations to the
same Judicature, I shall leave it to be determined by what expedients to
enlarge this Trade, being in a matter of this Importance contented to have
opened some questions and Facts relating to it: I am so free from any malice to
the Company, or any man so much as concerned in it or envying their gains, that
for a more easy Composure of things, I heartily wish there may be found some
more beneficial National and comprehensive way of Managing this Trade by a
Joint stock, that thereby the present Interests of the Gent. of this Company
may be secured, nay and improved; if this cannot be done, then submit it to
farther consideration how just and reasonable it is that these Gent. should
have compensation for what they shall really lose by the Dissolution of the
Company.

I shall conclude this with remarking, First, that the Dutch East India Company
Trading on a Joynt-stock, and therefore with as much disadvantage to their
re-exporting Merchants as the English, has been a means to preserve us this
Limb of Trade from Port to Port in Callicoes, Pepper, etc. and probably the
rather because our Trading in Money has so far debosh'd the Indian Market,
that the Dutch are not over-ready to deal for these Commodities, and therefore
principally apply themselves to their richer Spice Trade whereof they have the
Monopoly.

This restraint of our Market to our own Merchants and Companies, has yet
brought a farther mischief upon our Manufactures, because our Companies being
seated in London, our Natives are forced to bring their Manufactures thither by
Land Carriages, some of of which are so long that they are as chargeable as a
Voyage to Spain or Turkey, Quantity for Quantity; all which is superadded to the
original charge of the Manufacture; our Clothiers have also complained, that
when they have brought their Clothes to London, they have been frequently and
long delayed before they have been able to vend them; which whether it has
proceeded from any correspondence or Intelligence between the Companies, their
Committees or Agents their want of Stocks or universal Trade, or from the
dearness of our course of Merchandise, and the consequentiall obstructions in
the foreign Market, or from all together, I shall not positively undertake to
say: But certain it is that in this case our Clothiers for want of a quick
Market lose the Interest of so much of their Stocks as lies dead, which also is
superadded to the first cost of their Manufacture; but yet being made
necessitous by delay, and confined to the London Market, are forced to sell
cheap: and then are the poor Manufacturers most miserable, when on the one hand
the charges they are at oblige them to sell dear, but yet are confined in their
just demands.

It may be remembered here that the odds in Interest of Money between England
and Holland, and England and France, (where none is allowed to be taken under
the highest penaltys) must as much prejudice our Manufactures as our foreign
Trade, by the unequal charge it brings on our Manufacturers, which charge is
still increased as they are longer delayed.

The freedom of the Market being of so great importance; it must also follow,
that the like Cloggs and encumbrances put upon the Trades of Warehouse keeping
and Shop-keeping, must have ill effects on the National Trade, because these
Trades make up the public Marts and Markets, as has been said.

From the Contents of this and the last Section it may be observed, that it is
not only necessary to ease the course of Merchandise, but to remove all other
Cloggs and restraints on the home Market; for though our Merchants should be
able to Trade as cheap as foreigners, yet if it should lie in their
disposition to impose on the rest of the people, (whether Manufacturers,
Shopkeepers or others) the Merchants might gain much more then now they do,
but our Manufacturers and other Natives might be still sufferers in some
degree; it is too apparent that our English Clothiers have made so ill Markets
at London, that they have lived poorly and got little or nothing, whilst the
Merchants have lived splendidly and laid up money, the like may be said of
others.

And here it may be farther observed how predominant private interest has been
amongst us, and how finely it has spun the thread; our Land-holders have
thought to ease themselves by thrusting great part of the public Charges, upon
Trade, the Merchants in Exchange have gotten Monopolies on the Land-holders,
and people for all goods exported and imported; and of these some Companies
trading on Joint Stocks have got Monopolies exclusive to the rest; but at the
same time we have given all foreign Nations Monoplies on the English, in all
which we have been eagerly seeking to get advantages on one another, but have
laid our selves open to Foreigners; who (whilst we scrable for the present
wealth in the Nation) take it out of our fingers at their pleasure.

To which may be added as a farther obstruction to the growth of our
Manufactures, that our people have gotten a vain and imoderate affectation and
use of foreign Manufactures and Commodities; which must necessarily sink the
Market at home for our own of the same kind; for the same quantity of home
Commodity wanting of its former rent, must stagnate and lie on the owners
hands, who either will not be able to sell it at any rate, or must sell it much
the cheaper.

This deadness and cheapness of any Manufacture, on this or any other occasion,
will have a very ill Consequence; for it must presently sink the Manufacturers
wages and discourage the Master of the Work; and then in case the Market does
not mend in some reasonable time, they will withdraw both their labor and
Stock.

Nay this, or little better, must be the ordinary fate of all our Manufactures,
by the mere want of a Foreign vent; for as any of our Manufactures which
supply our National use, draws in more and more of our people till the
Manufactures becomes too bulkey to receive a full vent at home, it must then
equally stagnate on the hands of all that are concerned in it; at least render
them necessitous, and endanger the Manufacture: the increase of imported
raw-silk from Turkey in barter for our Cloth, occasioned the increase of our
Silk Manufacture; what is now like to become of it may be seen.

Before I go to the next Section, I shall yet observe these farther
inconveniences from the aforesaid constitutions and course of our Foreign
Merchandise.

First, That our Manufactures being confined to buy of our own Merchants and
Companies are not only subject to buy Foreign materials of Manufacture at such
prizes as they can and will please to afford them, but must be contented to buy
worse materials then other Nations make use of, in case our Merchants for their
own gain, or by negligence of their Factors, import worse.

2 dly, That Foreign materials of Manufacture being thus straightly Imported
into England, gives our Traders frequent opportunity to ingrosse Imported
Commodities, (both materials of Munufacture and others,) and thereby to impose
3 times the current prize in other Nations upon our Manufacturers or other
buyers, which must not only disable our Manufactures, but hinder re
exportation; this engrossing Trade is the daily design of a sort of Cunning men
amongst us; which with stealing Customs, and importing and vending Prohibited
goods, are the ordinary methods of getting an Estate on a sudden.

3 dly, The seeming ease we have by a restitution of half Customs upon
re-exportation, is so far from being really such, that it not only leav^^ the
great disproportion and charge mentioned in the last Section, but in Cases
where our imported materials of Manufacture are re-exported, being a further
unequal charge on our English Manufacturers; because that when re-exported and
sold, the Foreign buyers are eased of about half the duties paid, especially
if sold so near as Holland or France; of what consequence then must this be in
the Silk-Manufacture? (Supposing Holland or France could not be otherwise
provided of Raw Silk) and so in others, but more particularly in our Imported
Dying Stuffs, and Raw Sugars from the West Indyes, which are materials
peculiar to the English; but by this disadvantage in re-exportation are now
mostly Manufactured by Foreigners; of which I shall have occasion to say more,
upon Consideration of our present Plantation-Trade, in the mean time, upon what
has been already said, and what I shall add in the next Section, let any man
Judge how causelessely our poor people are taxed with dear Selling their
Manufactures, with Sloth and other inconsiderable Reproaches by such as live
at ease.

SECT. VII.
Foreigners eased in Trade; Other clogs of difficulties upon ours; Want of
populacy, incidently of extreme prizes of victuals, and how the duration of
Land-Rents may be secured, our people restrained from Manufactures; the Abuse
of the Act of 43. Eliz. 2. Act of 5. Eliz. cap. 4. Mere Prohibitions of no
value. Freedoms and pre-emtions of Corporations, with the Consequences:
Free-Schools and Scholar-like Employments: Foreign Protestants hindered from
transporting hither; want of Toleration of Protestants Dissenters; the
objections briefly considered: Elections in Corporations. Monopolyes of New
Manufactures: delay and charge in some Lawsuits. Tyths of Hemp, Flax, and
Fish, more of Customs, and incidently of Taxes.

FRom the foregoing Sections, it appears how dangerous it is to clog Trade. It
is like putting a pound weight at the end of a pole, which is heavier then 20.
times so much placed at the hand, for so a small impost or difficulty on Trade
shall work down all Land revenues more then the sums actually paid; Nay
Land-Rents will rise under greater Taxes, where home and Foreign Trade is left
open and free, as experience has shown in Holland and elsewhere.

2dly. That the charges and Clogs on Trade are to be estimated tolerable or
inconvenient by Comparison, as they are more or less then the charges on Trade
in other Nations, and therefore, That it is of high importance to watch the
policies of other Nations in Trade; if other Nations Trade with as much
disadvantage to their Natives as the English, they never outstrip us; But if
they ease and facilitate their Trade at home and abroad, So must we, else they
will beat us out.

What then are we to expect whilst our neighboring Foreigners continue to
have the aforesaid advantages upon us in course of Foreign Merchandise, when
also the home-vent of their Manufactures is not confined to the Merchants of
one Nation, nor Compnyes of one Town, when their Manstfacturers are not obliged
to the charge of long Land-carriages, nor oppressed with delays, but can sell
when and where they please, and to all Merchants Aliens, as well as to their
own, and therefore have an unlimitted and most profitable market.

The odds in Populacy must also produce the like odds in Manufacture; plenty of
people must also cause cheapnesse of wages; which will cause the cheapnesse of
the Manufacture; in a scarcity of people wages must be dearer, which must cause
the dearnesse of the Manufacture; But this populacy I speak of, must not be
understood of those people which the Extent of Territory makes necessary for
the mere tilling of the ground, keeping of Cattle etc. for in this sense there
is no doubt, but the grand Seigniors or Spanish Dominions are more populous
then Holland; The populacy I intend and which only can be serviceable to
Manufacture, are those exuberant numbers which cannot find Employment in
husdandry, nor otherwise but in Trade; in which sense France and the United
Provinces are most Populous; their Trade and people have grown up together, See
Sir William Temples Book of the United provinces Chapter 6.
having nourished one another; the like may be said of some parts of Germany
and Italy.

But on the other side England never was so populous as it might have been, The
peopling of Ireland here intended he was to supply the loss by the Irish
Massacre being computed at about 250000. persons besides what the growing
plentys of Ireland have invited over daily.
and undenyably must now be far less populous then ever, having so lately
peopled our vast American Plantations and Ireland; the decay of our
Manufactures has much depopulated our Inland Corporations of the Villages
Adjacent; the decay of our Fishing Trade our Sea-Towns; I know this want of
people is hardly credible with many who see no farther then their own ease and
gain; they will tell us, we have so many people already that we know not what
to do with them; which is true, and so they have in Spain, where their Villages
are in a manner forsaken, and many of their great Cities and Towns lie half
empty; most of their ordinary people having no employment at home, are gone to
America, those that remain chiefly consisting in Gentlemen, Lawyers, Officers
and Shopkeepers, with their necessary men of husbandry and servants: I must not
omit Priests and beggars, since to the honor and comfort of Spain they make
about a fourth or fifth part of the whole; there is little or no support for
other ranks of men: how near this we are in England let any man judge, or how
soon we shall come to it through the decay of our Manufactures; What an uproar
have we already in an English Parish if a poor young couple happen to marry, or
a man with Children chance to get into a house? how they are tossed from
Justice to Justice, and from pillar to post, Stat. 39. Eliz. 4th 7. Jacob. 4.14
Car. 2.12.
by virtue of the several Acts for settlement of poor? And what joy there is
when these clogs are removed? which acts and prosecutions regularly and daily
force many out of the Nation, and in effect banish them by Act of Parliament;
It Is like, that besides the Inquisition, the proud Spaniards had some such
expedients as these to be rid of this kind of lumber; they would be now glad
of those laborious drudges to encounter the populous French.

Being upon this Subject I cannot omit to observe the bad consequences of some
others of our late Laws, made to raise the prizes of Victuals, which doubtless
were projected for the raising Land Rents, viz. the Acts for Transportation of
Corn, and the Acts against the Importing Irish and Scotch Cattle, which had
they the full effects intended, must much assist both in depopulating the
Nation, and Subverting our remaining Manufactures; For if the Manufacturers buy
his Victuals at excessive rates, at what rates must he sell his Manufacture,
or how shall he live? especially in a time when his Manufactures fall upon his
hands daily? but this will mainly dissatisfy some, who will have no Manufacture
or Trade, if the price of the Victuals must not be excessive, for then say
they, how can the vallue of Lands be raised? to which I answer, First, that the
products of Lands do not wholly consist in Victuals, and that much Land is to
be applied to many other as profitable, and (perhaps more profitable ways) then
for mere Victuals, especially in a Nation abounding in Trade and People; for
this I shall refer to our Copious Books of Husbandry, which then may do us much
good, but little or none before.

Secondly, That though Victuals be not at a very excessive price, yet if there
be a quick and great market at a midling price, it will raise and hold up the
vallue of Lands, as experience has proved of late years.

But Thirdly, It is impossible the vallue of Lands can be much raised by the
mere raising of the price of Victuals, especially in a Nation but thin of
people; nor would such a Revenue endure or be tolerable; perhaps the Spanish
Dons did once raise the prizes of Victuals, or suppose they should do it now,
what weighty effect would it have, unless to drive all the rest of the
Spaniards into America? But that which will most certainly and durably raise
the Revenue of Land must be the increase of Treasure and Trading people;
suppose the people of England were trebled, it is plain that the Land must yield
treble the produce in mere Victuals, else the people must starve; but these
people will not starve, especially trading people, nor will they live needily,
or scarcely if they can help it, and will therefore set themselves and others
to the improving of all corners of Land in the Nation, till our Lands produce
more then treble the Victuals they now do, a thing very practicable, and then
supposing Victuals as cheap and cheaper then now, Land will ordinarily be
treble it is present vallue, especially if we consider how much may be then
applied to raise Hemp, Flax, and other necessary and profitable things, with
the increase of Wool, Hides, Tallow, etc. And as the people increase, By the
Maps of England it is found to contain 29568000. Acres besides that which is
allowed for Highways, all the United Provinces are hardly so big as Yorkshire.
so will the vallue of the Land; there is no doubt but England upon the utmost
improvement might maintain 6 times its present number of people, nay 10 times
with an indifferent use of that mighty plenty of Fish our own Sea affords us;
there is as little doubt but upon a great increase of people and money,
Victuals will be rather too dear, and that Laws may be then requisite to
restrain the price.

Such was the ancient populacy of England, that we had formerly Statutes made
in restraint of the exportation of Corn, our Flesh also found vent, though our
people kept Lents, Ember-weeks, and Fasting days; wherein they fed on Fish and
white meats, and yet we read of Famines in those days; whereas now we find it
necessary to export all the Corn we can, we eat very little Fish, and have made
Acts against the importation of Foreign Cattle (which by the way gave a
Monopoly to a few English and Welsh breeding Counties on all the rest of the
Nation,) and yet we thought our markets over-clogged.

But England is not only prejudiced by the paucity of people, but we have
another rank of Statutes which hinder very many of those we have from applying
themselves to Manufacture: one is the Stat. of 43 th. Eliz. cap. 2. which
according to the intention of it seems necessary now when we have such a vast
increase of poor; but such is the Arbitrary latitude given by the Act to
Overseers and Justices, that many of our Laborious people well able to work,
by clamor or favor get Parish maintenances, choosing rather to live lazily by
this means, assisted with some pilfering.

Then we have the Stat. of 5 th. Eliz. cap. 4. which (though it gratifies the
blind avarice of some of our Corporation men) is more prejudicial, by
restraining our people to work in Manufacture, unless they have served an
Apprentiship full seven years, which is so long a term of drudgery and slavery
before they can reap any fruit of their labors, that Parents are deterred from
putting their Children Apprentices to Manufacture; nor will many of our Youths
or young men be brought to it especially the most apt and docile, and those of
ripeness of years, of which many would be more perfect in 3 or 4 years then
others in 10, and therefore they betake themselves to other more easy and ready
Employments, or else live Idle.

The same Act does very strangely provide that no man shall take an Apprentice
for Woollen Manufacture in any Town Corporate, unless such Apprentice be his
Son, or the Father or Mother of such Apprentice have the clear yearly vallue of
40 s. Inheritance, nor in any Market Town or Village unless he be his Son, or
his Father or Mother have the clear yearly value of 3 l. Inheritance, which
clause apparently shuts out at least 5 parts of the people in 6, from the
Woollen Manufacture; and by consequence tends to the depopulation of our Inland
Towns, the increase of Rogues, Vagabonds and poor; These difficulties on Trade
begot the Act of the 43. Eliz. and many others of the like nature, and thereby
much work for our Justices.

Which by the way may give occasion to observe how vain it is to make Acts
against Rogues, Vagabonds, or Poor, nay against thefts or Murders, how little
the Houses of Correction, Whipping-posts, Pillories, or Gallows can prevail,
whilst our other Constitutions drive our People into necessities, nor any
prohibitory or penal Law, ever have the intended effect, unless the Grounds and
Causes of the mischiefs be removed; of which I shall say more when I come to
speak of our late Prohibition of French Goods. Amongst the restraints on our
English Trade, the enclosure of Trade to the Freemen of Corporations, and
Guilds, may be deservedly mentioned as one.

This Privilege is claimed by most, or all of our ancient Corporations, and
might be well intended at first by the Donors, but as now used is very
prejudicial; for the Power of admitting Freemen being generally lodged in a
Council or Committee of a few Freemen, any Forreigner (and such they call all
those who are not Sons or Apprentices of seven years standing to a Freeman in
the same Town) must buy his Freedom before he can exercise any open Trade
there; for which these Freemen are left at liberty to demand as great and
arbitrary Price as they please, or if they will, may wholly refuse; whence it
commonly follows, that Beginners in Manufacture, and other Trades, being
Foreigners, and having but small Stocks, can never obtain Freedom, and without
it are burdened and plagued with Bylaws, Penalties, Distresses, and Seizures;
nay, if a Man be exquisite in his Trade, he shall hardly get a Freedom for
Money, in a Corporation where there are more free of the same Trade; for then
he is looked on as a dangerous person, and likely to eat the bread out of their
mouths, (as they phrase it) in which they will gratify, and influence one
another, being the common cause, and can easily do it: The fewer Freemen there
are in a Trade, they think the rest may get the more; and thus are most of our
ancient Corporations and Guilds become oppressive Oligarchies, excluding or
discouraging the English Subjects from Trading in our greatest and best
situated Towns, where the Markets are; and which are therefore the most proper
and ready Seats for Manufacture, and other Commerce: For this, and the Act of
the 5 th of Eliz. our Corporation-men have only this to say, That care ought to
be taken, that none but persons skilful should exercise any Trade, which is
true; but the Law of necessity, common sense, and experience, provides
sufficiently for this, since an unskilful Artificer or Trader will not find
employment, and therefore must receive due punishment by his own Ignorance:
It Is confessed, Manufactures may be made deceitfully, which may disgrace and
prejudice our vent abroad; but this fraud is an Act of Skill, which cannot be
discovered or prevented, without the daily scrutinies of Judicious Persons; for
which our other former Statutes have already made some provision, but
defective; it were to be wished, there was a constant Judicature of Men knowing
in Trade in every County to supervise the sufficiency of Manufactures: In the
mean time this Argument for the support of the Act of the 5 th of Eliz. and
Freedoms must appear very fallacious, since both the Act and the Freedoms serve
only to exclude the English Subjects, and of those many of the most skilful,
from Trade, and by enclosing Manufactures to a few, hinder their growth, and
make them far dearer.

A farther inconvenience of these Freedoms is, That the pre-emption of our
Manufactures, and Imported Goods, in most of our inferior Corporations and
Cities, as well as in London, is in a manner enclosed to the Number and Stocks
of the Freemen, and is very much subject to their pleasures, by reason of
their union and correspondence in Counsels: So that he who would escape the
long Land-Carriages to London, and London Companies, must fall into the hands
of these other Freemen; these Freemen have generally so brave a time of it,
that they can live in ease and plenty, (every Shop resembling an Office) whilst
the laborious part of our Traders are ready to perish; which Privileges could
not have survived the Statute of 21 Jac. against Monopolies, but that they are
saved by a special Proviso in that Statute; so civil were the Burgesses of
Corporations at that time.

Our Trade being thus clogged, and the very Avenues to Manufactures so much
narrowed and choked up, it does not a little help to the subverting of our
Manufactures, and other Trade, that the Passages to other Preferments are made
so open and easy, at present I mean all those that depend upon Literature, in
which our Youth are led from step to step by all manner of Encouragements;
First, by the multitude of our late endowed Free-Schools, where every ordinary
Man's Son is taught Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, for a small matter; and then is
above Manufacture: Then we have two mighty endowed Universities, where there
will, at least, be hope of preferment, let the throng be never so thick; and
thence they have farther and more comfortable prospects; and in the mean time
live easy, at little or no charge, as Servitors, or on small Stipends, till
they become Scholars of Houses, etc. others of these Free-Sehool-Boys grow
Penmen of all sorts; and all these are a sort of Gentlemen-like ways of
living, which entitle them to be called Masters, which gives a main temptation
both to Parents and Children; who on the other hand, see the contemptible and
miserable condition of our poor Clothworkers, and other ordinary Artificers,
who at the best are called Mechanic Fellows; and what is yet farther
mischievous is, that our Youth thus educated, never reading any thing of
Manufacture, Exportation, or Importation, in Homer and Virgil, or their
College Notes, and being from thence carried to other Studies, which have no
cognation with Trade, can ordinarily have no sensation of the advantages of it;
like a Bowl which has a rub at hand, the farther they go, the more they are
divided from it; whence it has unfortunately ensued, that our Men of Learning
are either generally silent in this matter, or else, being inclined to think it
the sole concern of the dirty and servile part of the People, speak of it with
contempt, and some with reflection; by whom most others being influenced, we
are still pretending to be more accurate in Logic and Philosophy, (which
howsoever otherwise useful, do not add twopence a year to the Riches of the
Nation) we continue to squeeze all the sapless Papers and Fragments of
Antiquity; we grow mighty well acquainted with the old Heathen-gods, Towns, and
People; we prize our selves in fruitless Curiosities; we turn our Lice and
Fleas into Bulls and Pigs by our Magnifying-glasses; we are searching for the
World in the Moon with our Telescopes; we send to weigh the Air on the top of
Teneriffe; we invent Pacing Saddles, and Gimcracks of all sorts; all which are
voted Ingenuities, whilst the Notions of Trade are turned into Ridicule, or
much out of fashion.

In all which we are very short of the Policies of our Neighbors, the French,
Dutch, and other trading and wise Nations; who on the one hand have no Laws or
Constitutions to restrain or exclude their People from Manufacture, nor to
Ferret them away; and on the other, do consider Trade as an Honorary and almost
Sacred thing, and do highly esteem and cherish their Manufacturers, as well as
their other necessary Traders.

Now should these restraints and discouragements ono ur own People and Trade be
removed, it would doubtless much advantage our Trade in some time; but would
not bring us so sudden an increase of People* Manufacturers, Ships, and Riches,
as is highly requisite for the carrying on of a mighty Trade, or perhaps for
our National security; nor can these so suddenly be had, but from other parts
of the World, where they are moving; Men, Ships, or Riches, do not grow on the
Trees, nor yet drop out of the Clouds.

But we have such another rank of Laws against Foreigners, Besides the Common
Law these Statutes, 1 R. 3.9. 21 H. 8.16. 22 H 8.13. 32 H. 8.16. 25 H. 8.9. 14
H. 8.3. 4 H. 7.23. and many others of former date, to which are added 12 Car.
2.16. 14 Car. 2.11. and 15 Car. 2.7.
that we are not to hope Foreigners will come hither; I mean those which
disable Foreigners from trading in England; therefore we must first have a Law
of general Naturalization of Protestant-Forreigners, though to the displeasure
of many of our own self-interested ignorant Traders, nor will that do, without
a Repeal of the Act of the 5 th Eliz. Cap. 4. and a complete Regulation of our
Trade; for neither Manufacturers or Merchants will remove from their own
Countries hither to sit idle; nor will all this bring us over any great
Numbers, without some Toleration of their Consciences, no not of Foreign
Protestants, who differ much from us in several Points which they think
material; all which is demonstrated in Fact by the success of His Majesty's
Proclamation at the beginning of our last Dutch War; by which Foreigners, then
under the utmost terrors, were invited to the Liberties and Plenties of
England; but we see few or none of them came or stayed with us on this
encouragement: In this the Dutch have a further advantage upon us, See Sir
William Temples Book of the Dutch, Chap. the 6 th.
since they allow free Ports, free Trade, and all other National Freedoms to
Foreigners; whereby their People of all sorts, their Navigation and Stocks in
Trade, have increased continually.

So are the most considerable French Ports Free, (unless for Goods prohibited,
as in Holland some are;) no sooner was Dunkirke in the Hands of the French
King, but he made it a Free Port; so has he invited all Foreign Artificers
into France, by granting them as great, or greater Freedoms than his own
Subjects enjoy.

There are yet others of our Laws, which must prejudice our Trade of all sorts,
and give a farther advantage to the Dutch and French, I mean those which
inflict Penalties on Protestant Dissenters; not only because they may hinder
the transplanting of Foreign Protestant Artificers, or Merchants, but because
they disable many of those we have in England already, from carrying on any
manner of Trades; and if so, then in effect they are not People, since they
cannot answer the ends of People, but are rather the Trunks and Signs of Men in
a Nation, their Industries and ingenuities being locked up; Suppose two or
300000 of our own People disabled, it may be presumed more than a Million per
Annum loss to the Nation; what then may be our loss by the shutting out a far
greater number? perhaps ten times the number of Foreign Protestants, and those
of the richest the most mercantile, and the best Manufacturers of Europe.

That this is the Case of dissenting Protestants in England, must be very plain
to those who shall consider the Statute of 20 l. a month, and those Volumes of
other Statutes made before and since the King came in against Non-Conformists;
most of which were intended against Papists, and occasioned by former Popish
Treasons, but reach all Protestant Dissenters, who, besides the bare Penalties,
are liable to the daily charge and trouble of Informations, Actions, and
Indictment in our Courts of Law, and as many or more Libels and Presentiments in
our Spiritual Courts; our Constables, Churchwardens, and Grand-Juries are upon
their Oaths constantly bound to accuse them; if they omit, it is at every other
Man's pleasure to inform, and some or other will not fail of it; thus are
Dissenters brought into the hands of the Officers of both Courts, whose duty it
is to prosecute; these may delay for a time, whilst they are paid for their
favors, or until notice be taken of it, but no longer, and then must follow a
Seizure of Dissenters Persons or Estates, or both: Besides all which,
particular Justices of the Peace are by several late Statutes authorized and
obliged to Convent, Convict, and make Levies; which sufferings being
accompanied with a continual Anxiety of mind, our Protestant Dissenters cannot
possibly apply themselves or their Stocks to Manufacture or other Trade.

Whilst, on the other hand, See Sir William Temple, Chap. of Religion.
both the Dutch and French, and most other of our neighboring Nations, any
thing famous for Trade, allow Liberty of Conscience to Protestant Dissenters,
at least to such a degree, as to enable them to trade: Which is all that the
Interest of Trade requires; it is true, that now of late we have heard the
French King has given some greater discountenance to Protestants than
heretofore, (whether to gratify the Romish Clergy, who may be otherwise very
useful to his present designs, and whom he daily and visibly endears by all
signal demonstrations of favor, (if we may believe our Gazets) or for what
other reason, I shall not undertake to say) however not so, as to disable the
French Protestants from Trade.

What farther hardships he may put upon French Protestants, or other his
Trading Subjects, in case they shall have no other Asylum or Shelter to repair
to, time may show.

This being the Case in the matter of Toleration between us and these our
subtle and potent Neighbors, the Question is, what is to be done? A long
Surfeit of experience has demonstrated, that the Penal Laws, though
accumulated and imbittered to as great a degree as has been desired, are not a
sufficient expedient to reduce Protestant Dissenters. To purpose any thing
which shall subvert our present Church of England, is that which I shall not
do; conceiving it for the honor and safety of the Nation to support a
flourishing National Church, and that the present Protestant Church of England
has in all respects the best Title to it.

On the other side, to rest under our present Disadvantages by the want of a
convenient Toleration of Dissenting Protestants, must disable us from making
that sudden, and full improvement of our Trade, as otherwise we might, and as
perhaps may be found necessary for our support against those Foreigners who
already do, and daily will more exceed us in Treasures and People, if they
shall let in, and we continue to shut out, so mighty a share of each.

Here then there seems a difficulty, which deserves and requires our utmost
prudentials to clear, by a Toleration of Protestant Dissenters, consistent with
the preservation of our present Church of England in all its Rights; I am
persuaded none of the Generous Dignitaries, or Members of our Church, would
oppose such a Toleration; some there have been, who could never think
themselves happy, unless others were miserable, and have loved Cruelty for
Cruelty's sake; the most infamous for this was Phalaris, who was at last
brought to roar in his own Brazen Bull; nor is this a time for Men to gratify
their humors or passions this way, if it may prove perilous toward the whole;
rather let our Hearts melt with a tender and charitable Commiseration to these
our Fellow-Country-men, who by their Birthright are entitled to Magna Charta
equally with our selves, but are incapacitated to enjoy the advantages of it,
merely for Conscience, when by no other overt Act they have forfeited their
Hereditary Claims, when their sufferings undeniably demonstrate they are no
Hypocrites, and therefore that they suffer for what they cannot help; let us
observe, that God never planted or propagated his Truth by Temporal Power, that
he was in the small Voice, not in the Thunder, or the Whirlwind: Let us
consider the original meekness of Christians, whose Anathema's against
Dissenters were only accompanied with Admonishments, and mere Excommunications,
without any Writ to take the Body, or make Levies on Men's Estates; Let us
remember that we have flung off the Yoke of Papal Tyranny, founded on a
pretended infallible conclusive Church Authority, superinduced upon Christians
by a Conspiracy of Romish Priests, as subservient to their Ambition, Pride,
Ease, and Luxury; that if persecution were then wholly unwarrantable, it is now
far more incoherent. When our present Church professes it self fallible, and
both our Church, and all Protestant Religion it self, are derived from no other
Principle than the Fallibility of all Churches, at least in their Decrees; when
our first most famous Protestant Doctors carried on the Reformation in
opposition to their National Churches and Laws, such were Luther, Calvin, Beza,
and many others abroad, and our Martyrs at home, whose Glorious Sufferings are
celebrated by one of our own former and most Learned and Pious Divines, Mr. Fox.
as the chief Gemms which truly beautify our present Church: Let it never be
said, that the Interests or Temperaments of our present Church are inconsistent
with our National Wealth, Happiness, and Security, or obstruct our progress
toward them; this would give too great an advantage to her public and private
Enemies: Let us industriously amass all the just Considerations we can to
facilitate these great ends, by some Toleration of Protestant Dissenters, being
it is so important, I say of Protestant Dissenters, because these having no
foreign dependence on the Pope, have reason to be endeared and knit up to the
National Interest by the common protection and security of their Estates and
Families, equally with the rest: As for the Popish Party, I am confident that
after so many late accurate Treatises, and Authentic Narratives, of the
dangerous Principles, and horrid treasonable Practices, of the Priests, and
others of the same Party, none will think it necessary, or possible, that I
should add one syllable to prove that Party unfit for a Toleration.

Such being the high Motives to make us wish for a Toleration of Protestant
Dissenters, I shall, with all deference to Authority, and without any of those
passionate reflections which usually incumber this debate, briefly endeavor to
examine the dangers objected, which are,

First, an apprehension of a necessary great increase of Dissenters, and this
(as some will have it) to such a degree, as to swallow up the present Church; a
very strange supposition for those who have Scripture and Antiquity on their
side: On the contrary, it may be justly hoped, that the Church of England may
then reconcile all those whom Penalties cannot reduce; and the rather, because
when the Penalties are gone, all Parties must resort to reasoning and sanctity,
which are the proper and only means of making Impressions on Men's
Understandings and Consciences; Penalties may bring in Atheists and Hypocrites,
but can never work a real change in any Man's opinion, unless when the
sufferings of Dissenters proselyte others, (being a kind of Argument of the
truth of what is so asserted, at least amongst the vulgar or middle sort;) our
present Protestant Church of England must therefore have an advantage this way;
and yet on the other side, will retain that of being vindicated by the
Government, in as much as all public Divine Service in the Parish Churches
will remain in the form now used in our present Church, Dr. Heylin observes,
that after the Toleration of Protestants in France, the other Party in Religion
having the countenance of the State, and the Prescription and Possession of so
many years to confirm the same, is in as prosperous a condition, both for Power
and Patrimony, as any that acknowledges the Authority of the Popes of Rome.
Geogr. 176.
and all Church preferments enclosed to the Clergy of the same Church; which
Privileges, being consistent with a Toleration, may continue secured to our
Church by our present Penal Laws in force for that purpose, with an addition of
such others as may be thought necessary; whence it will follow; first, that it
will be more for the ease and convenience, nay and Interest of the Laics to
conform, rather than to seek farther for Dissenting Conventicles, whose
Ministers they must help to maintain; which Convenience, with the Countenance
of Authority given to the National Church, is a great matter, since it will
bring in all those, who being good Christians in the main, are yet little
affected with the Points in difference, which are the generality, as may be
seen by their equal resort to the Parish Churches before and since His
Majesty's Restoration. But secondly, it will then be yet more the interest and
advantage of all Clergymen to conform, by the great and Honorable preferments
they may this way hope for, which they cannot otherwise obtain.

The other grand Objection against a Toleration of Protestants, is the danger
of the Temporal Government; which seems yet stranger than the other, if we
consult our Reasons, which must tell us, that Men at ease will be better
satisfied than when in pain; that Men who are kept innocently and profitably
busy, who by their Industry can live well, support their Families, and gain
Estates, will be less apt to study, or do mischief to the Public, than those,
who being disabled from all such Employments, are daily goaded with penal Laws,
a condition which perhaps may be thought more grievous in England than the like
hardships in Turkey and Muscovy, where all suffer alike, when in England our
Protestant Dissenters hear much of Magna Charta, and see others enjoy the full
fruit of it, but are precluded themselves, and this for mere differings in
Religions belief. But why should I labor to evince that which Experience has
demonstrated; we have the great Instance of France, and the like in the Kingdom
of Poland, in Holland, Switzerland, Hamburg, and other parts of Germany; All
which Nations have been at peace, at least about Religion ever since the
Tolerations given, as some of them could never be before, particularly France;
which must appear to proceed from the pacifique virtue of Toleration, not from
the coercive power of Standing Forces, or despotick Monarchy, as some would
have it, because that of Poland is regulated, and the rest are Republics. It Is
notorious that before the French Toleration many of that National Church had or
pretended to have as fearful Apprehensions of the effects of it; but we see
what Councils did prevail even amongst the Popish Party, and what has
followed? We find France the most powerful of Nations, and the French King so
confident of his Protestants, that he long entrusted his mighty Armies, in the
hands of Monsieur Turenne, a Protestant till near his death: On the other side
we have the Example of Spain, whose execrable and inexorable Cruelties toward
dissenters has mainly Assisted in the present poverty and weakness of that
Nation: We may then conclude that Persecution is a stale piece of policy, which
perhaps might have born a debate in Harry the 8 th's time, but is now tried to
our hands: And let any man judge whether the French or Spanish Church be now
most flourishing, or most likely to continue; the French Church and Churchmen
will certainly get ground with the French Victories, for which they are as much
beholding to the French Protestants as to the rest. Let us not therefore be
wholly insensible that the Church of England may fall under the worst
circumstances of danger, otherwise than from Protestant Dissenters; as suppose
England should ever be reduced to such a condition as to be no longer able to
bear up against foreign Powers, what then would become of our present Church?
what sort of men would then push into our Bishoprics, Deaneries, and other
Church-Preferments? a Fatality which we ought therefore to provide against by a
Union of Protestant interests and affections and increase of Traders, as far as
safely we may; in which Foreigners are grown so nicely vigilant, that not long
ago we might observe the policies of the great French King and the great Duke
of Tuscany curiously Angling for the Jews; for when the French King had made
Marseilles a free Port (which was about 12 years since) the Jews planted at
Leghorn, induced by an offer of protection at Marseilles, and a sweeter
situat^on of that place, resolved to transplant, which the Great Duke
discovering, applied his utmost endeavors to prevent it; which he did by
making an Edict, That if any Christian bought a Jews house, it should be
forfeit. In England a Jew cannot buy a house. I am no Advocate for Dissenters
or Jews, but for the Common Interest of England, by which that of the Church of
England must stand or fall. And being now speaking of somewhat that concerns
Religion, there occur to my memory two plain Texts of Scripture, one is, that
of two evils we are to choose the least, and another that a Kingdom divided
cannot stand. I shall desire the Reader to couple these considerations with
what I shall say in the following Sections concerning the present posture of
this and our Neighbor Nations, and then he will not accuse me of having made
an unnecessary digression.

Whilst we are calculating the best expedient to bring in foreign Protestant
Artificers, and foreign Manufacture, it is fit that notice should be taken of
that Clause in the Act of 21 of King James chap. 3. which leaves the Inventers
of new Manufactures at liberty to obtain Patents for Monopolies for one and
twenty years, which Statute being in construction extended to all Manufactures
already used by Foreigners that are not used here, hinders the introducing, or
growth and perfection of any new foreign Manufactures, and makes it the
business of our more observant Travelers to hauk after Monopolies.

This is no question but several other obstructions to the Trade of England
might be observed, particularly that the carrying on of Elections in
Corporations of latter years with so much drinking, is very prejudicial to our
Manufactures; for men (upon this or any other occasion) being once debauched,
hardly ever retrieve themselves, and therefore lost to Manufacture and the
Nation.

Our Fishers have complained that in several parts they are forced to pay Tyth
for the Fish they catch on their own Coasts, in which the Dutch, and other
Fishermen have the advantage to the value of the Fish, and must therefore
disable our Trade of Fishery in those parts.

It has also been noted that the payment of Tyth out of our Hemp and Flax,
does as much disable the increase of Hemp and Flax in England, the rest being
made so much the dearer to the owner, that it is not vendible, as otherwise it
would be; and thereby prevent our great foreign Importation of Hemp and Flax.
These being things of so great Importance to the Nation, may deserve a full
Examination and remedy, whatsoever the particular interests of some Incumbents
of Churches may suggest to the contrary.

Lastly, we have a farther complaint from the Traders of all sorts, of the
tedious and chargeable proceedings in some Courts of Justice, occasioned by
Writs of Error, and Suits in Chancery, in which last Court many are hung up for
seven years and more, and are forced to expend much more than the money they
justly sue for: Our little Courts, especially about London, are as destructive
to poor Seamen, Manufacturers and other laborious people, where in a Suit for a
disputable Groat, or mere malice, they are easily lead in, or forced to spend
three or four pound; if but thirty or forty shillings it is enough to ruin such
poor wretches and their Families, which has caused many thousands to perish in
Goal, or fly from their Habitations and Country, since the erection of several
new inferior Jurisdictions.

Here again we may look back and observe the mischievous effects of private and
mistaken Interests, pride and humor; which I shall not recapitulate, but should
here conclude this Section; but that having mentioned the greatness of our
Customs amongst the encumbrances on our Trade, I am willing to clear my self
from insinuating or wishing any Diminution of His Majesty's Revenue; nor would
the moderation of the Customs work any such effect, (at least in the Judgments
of wise men who have considered it) were the other obstructions on our Trade
regulated; of this Sir Walter Raleigh took notice of very early in his
Observations upon Trade, presented to King James, in these words.

Of this their smallness of Custom, (meaning in Holland, Hamburgh, etc.)
inwards and outward, we have daily experience; for if two English Ships, or
two of any other Nation, be at Bordeaux, both laden with Wine of 300 Tun
apiece, the one bound for Holland, or any other the Petit States, the other for
England; the Merchant shall pay above 900 l. here, and other duties, when the
other in Holland, or any other Petit State shall be cleared for 50 l. and so in
all other Wares and Merchandises accordingly; which draws all Nations to
traffic with them; and although it seems but small duties which they receive,
yet the multitudes of all kind of Commodities and Coin that is brought there,
and carried out by themselves and others, is so great, that they receive more
Customs and Duties to the State by the greatness of their Commerce in one year,
than England does in two years; for the 100 th part of the Commodities are not
spent in Holland, but vented into other Countries; which make all the
Country-Merchants to buy and sell, and increase Ships and Mariners to transport
them.

My travels and meaning is not, neither has been, to diminish your Majesty's
Revenues, but exceedingly to increase them, etc.

All Nations may buy and sell freely in France, and there is free Custom
outward twice a year; at which times our Merchants do there make their Sales
of English Commodities, and do buy and lade their Bulk with French Commodities
to serve for the whole year; and in Rochel in France, and in Britain, free
Custom all the year long; except some small Toll, which makes free Traffic,
and makes them flourish.

To this he adds an Instance in Genoua, formerly the Storehouse of Italy: But
after they had set a Custom of 16 per Cent. all Nations left trading with them;
but that on the other side, the Duke of Florence, by setting a small Custom at
Leghorn, had brought all the Trade thither: Thus did this great Man of his time
express himself.

But admitting, that by the moderation of our Customs Rates, our present
public Revenue in Customs should be somewhat sunk; yet how easily might this
Revenue be made good by a Land Tax, or by some Excise upon Extravagancies, and
Foreign consumptive Commodities spent at home, without the least prejudice to
Trade? Thus do the Dutch raise far more than the Revenue of our Customs; and if
by this means the private Revenue of our Land must universally rise, and the
People better be enabled to pay any other Taxes, why should the Land-holders,
or any on pretense of Service to His Majesty, oppose it? Suppose His Majesty
had a Custom of 5 s. in the Pound on all the English Treasure exported, would
any Man for the sake of the Custom, and out of zeal to His Majesty's Interest,
promote the Exportation of all the English Treasure? How much this is the Case
of the present English Customs, does, and more largely will appear.

Certainly it was very unfortunate for England, That when Sir Walter Raleigh
wrote these and other his excellent Observations on Trade, our Councels were
under an earnest pursuit of the Plantation-Trade, on which great Customs were
projected; for so it has happened, that whilst our Neighbor Nations have been
vigilant to ease and facilitate their ways of Trade, the Trade of England has
continued under the former disadvantage, and is encumbered with new charges and
difficulties of later years; all which in Conjunction have worked us out in all
the Particulars mentioned before, and in diverse others; and in recompense of
these losses, our Plantation-Trade has robbed and prevented us of some
Millions of our People; amongst which very many being, or might have been
Manufacturers, the Nation has also lost many more Millions of Pounds in the
loss of their Manufactures.

SECT. VIII.
That a Nation may grow poor by Foreign Trade, viz. by an excess of mere
Importations, illustrated by some Observations; this facilitated by exporting
Money or Bullion; the fatal Consequences and Symptoms of a Consumptive Trade,
decay of Manufactures, other ways of living over-stocked, fall of Rents,
general Poverty, an increase of Criminals of all sorts, Depopulation; some
Application to the present Case of England, and amongst others the occasion of
the new Buildings about London; of Incontinency, Cunning, etc.

AS a Nation may grow Rich and Populous, and consequently strong by Foreign
Trade; so may a Nation grow poor and dispeopled, and consequently weak by
Foreign Trade; nor is there any possible or practicable way for the Treasure
of a Nation in peace, to be exhausted and exported into another Nation to any
considerable and sensible degree, but by Foreign Trade.

This must necessarily happen by the excess of mere Importation, viz. when the
Commodities imported from abroad, and spent at home, do cost more than the
National gain by Trade amounts to; as suppose such yearly Importations into
England should cost two Millions, and the National gain by Exportations or
otherwise should amount but to 1500000 l. the Nation of England must yearly
lose 500000 l of its Treasure by Trade, because so much must yearly be exported
by the English Merchants to satisfy the overbalance.

That the English Trade might fall into such a Consumption, is easily and
highly credible.

For suppose the utmost neat gain of our former English Trade amounted to but
300000 l. per An' one year with another; then if the Exportations and
beneficial Merchandise of England should become worse by 400000 l. per An' one
year with another than before, the Nation of England must lose 100000 l. per
An' of its National Treasure, though our yearly Importations be no more in
value than before; whence it appears, that by this means the same Importations
may become excessive.

So though our Exportations, and the beneficial part of our Merchandise,
continue as valuable as before, yet if our yearly Consumptive Importations grow
to be more in value by 400000 l. per An' than before, the Nation must also in
this case lose 100000 l. per An' by Trade.

But what if both the beneficial part of the Trade grow worse, and also the
Importations increase? Certainly this must cut deepest on the National Stock,
and must soonest grind it out; for then if the beneficial part grow worse by
400000 l. and the Importing part be increased 400000 l. per An' value, the
Nation must then lose 500000 l. per Annum; or suppose but to half those values
in each, the Nation must lose 100000 l. per Annum.

To accommodate these Hypotheses to England; first, we may conclude, that the
beneficial part of our Trade has grown much less and worse yearly, by reason
of the unequal cloggs and difficulties on our Home and Foreign Trade.

And that on the other side our Importations must as necessarily be increased,
both by the decay of our own former Manufactures at home, and by our modern
gawd'ry and affectation of foreign Goods; and as our Trade from Port to Port
has become more impracticable to any advantage, the Exporters of our remaining
Manufactures and other home-Commodities, must either come back empty, or else
must freight themselves homewards with such consumptive foreign Commodities, as
for Gawdry, Novelty, Cheapness, or Lyquorishness, will dazzle, tempt and bewitch
our People to buy them; in which course of Trade our Merchants may gain
considerable proportions of our remaining Treasures as long as there is any in
the Nation.

Nay, rather than sit idle, they will, and do freight themselves outward with
mere Ballast and Bills of Exchange (by which the Importation of foreign Bullion
or money is prevented: See Mr. Mun of Foreign Trade, Chap. 12. p. 83, to 92.
and that the over balance of Trade in any particular Country; causes the
Exchange to be high, so that the exporting of money shall save the Merchant* 10
l. per Cent. or more, as the exchange is.
) or if Bills of Exchange cannot reasonably be had (as they usually cannot to
those Countries where we are overballanced in Trade) then they export Money and
Bullion, and buy and import Consumptive Goods which are spent at home; which
kind of Trade deserves rather to be called Foreign Pedling, than Merchandise.

It may partly be remembered here, how much the beneficial part of our Trade may
be prejudiced by the loss of 100000 of our Manufactures, and what odds the same
loss may produce in our Importations, since if they get but 6 l. per Ann. a
piece, it must sink the former gain by Trade no less than 600000 l. per Ann.

And on the other side, that if a Million of Families or Persons in a Nation,
do one with the other consume to the value of 20 s. a piece more, yearly in
foreign Manufactures, Drinks, etc. than before, this must increase our
Importations to the value of a Million per Ann. which I observe here to show
how imperceptibly an overbalance of Importation may creep upon a Nation; and
that the Reader may with the less difficulty conjecture at the late and present
balance of Trade in England.

It must also much assist this Importing Trade, if the Merchants shall export
Money, or Bullion; especially in such a Nation as England, where a Trade from
Port to Port is not ordinarily practicable to any advantage: for in that Case
the Goods Imported being spent at home, the Treasure Exported must be lost to
the Nation; and as long as the English Merchant can have Bullion or Money to
Export, and can have a vent for his Importations at home, his private gain will
never oblige him to complain of the want of Exportable home-Manufactures, or
the Clogs upon Trade, especially in England, where our Merchants have such a
Monopoly of their Importations on the rest of the People.

This Consumptive Importing Trade must be of very fatal Consequence in its
Nature; for first, whilst the National Stock is greater, it will exhaust the
Treasure almost insensibly; but as the Treasure grows less and less, it will
work more palpably and grievously, because it will consume more and more of
that little which remains.

And as the National Treasure comes to be more and more diminished, the People
must generally have less and less, which must cause the price of all
home-Commodities, and consequently Land-Rents to fall continually, the home
Manufactures must be choked and stifled by Importations, so that both the
Farmers and Manufacturers must fling up; the values of their Stocks must be
contracted, and will be eaten out by Rent, Wages and other standing charges
before they are aware; men cannot provide against misfortunes which have unseen
Causes: and as home trade grows worse and worse, Industry it self must be tired
and foiled, to the great amazement, as well as affliction of the People.

For at the same time Liberty and Property may remain inviolated, many
Merchants shall grow rich and shall be well satisfied as long as there is
Vanity and Money at home; so shall their Retailers and Salesmen of foreign
Wares, such are Mercers, Lacemen, Linnen-Drapers, Exchange-men, Grocers,
Vintners and most others; there may seem to be the same Navigation for a time,
the Customs must also necessarily much increase as the Importations increase
(especially in England where the Customs on Importations are so high) and by
that means may cause a reputation and sound of Trade amongst many, when indeed
such a swelling of the Customs does only denounce their growing poverty and
ruin.

It may be these ranks of men, who stand not in the direct Channel of Trade,
may seem to flourish for a time, as Officers, Lawyers, Physicians, and others;
nay perhaps some Officers may have greater opportunities of gain during the
first Convulsions of a growing Poverty; since the necessities of men obliging
them to be more Criminous, it may for a while occasion greater and more
frequent gratuities, and a more absolute subservience; so may many Lawyers get
more than ever whilst men's Estates are rending to pieces, ( as doubless did
some Bricklayers get Estates by the burning of the City) So perhaps sickly men
whilst they can, may strain hard to secure the Faith and Care of their
Physicians with as good Fees as before, so some Clergymen Scriveners and
Penmen of all sorts, Usurers and such others may seem to stem the torrent
better than the Landholders and Manufacturers, whose Revenues immediately
depend on the home-market, and who make up the gross body and strength of a
Nation, many of these former ranks of men (being at ease themselves) may seem
insensible of the Common Afflictions, but must be gradually involved with the
rest.

And the sooner, because as men fling up their Farms and Manufactures, and
others are discouraged, multitudes of those that want Employments, observing
what other sorts of men continue to live at some ease, will naturally and
inevitably throng themselves into the like, viz. importing Merchandise,
Retayling, Shop-keeping, the Law, Clergy, and Priesthood of all sorts, Offices,
Scrivening, Soliciting, and Physic: by which these Employments must be so
over-clogged, that they will be hardly able to live by one another; vast
numbers of others must betake themselves to Inn-keeping, Ale-keeping,
Victualing, etc. and those who have little or no stocks or literature, and
therefore cannot crowd themselves into some of these ways of Livelihood must
lie on the Parish, or being higher or worse minded must fall to Cheating,
Canting, Shifting, Perjury, Forgery, Whoredom, Sherking, Chipping, Coining,
Buffooning, Tumbling, Pimping, Pilfering, Robbery, etc. for their ordinary
maintenances; the more honest or industrious will transport themselves into
foreign parts, as soon as they have opportunity, rather than live miserable at
home, especially if they have an Ireland and Plantations to go to; nor is it
possible (as I conceive) for any Laws or Penalties effectually to restrain the
swelling numbers of any of the former professions, but by opening the
beneficial and Comprehensive Employments of Manufactures, Farming, etc. nor can
the daily increase of Alehouses, or of Frauds, Perjuries and Criminals of all
sorts be otherwise corrected; no Statutes, nay, or Preaching, though never so
learned or florid, can prevail with necessitous men.

But the increase of these former more Gentleman-like, Scholar-like, Retailing
and Shopkeeping-Imployments, must yet bring a farther inconvenience, viz. a
more general affectation of Finery and Gawdery than before; for these being
sedentary and easy professions, will not only admit of, but occasion greater
curiosity in Apparel, Modes, and dresses than the active and laborious ways of
living by Farming or Manufactures. And as this Gawdery grows more in use it
will spread amongst the rest, and the People emulating one another, will be
gaudy as long as they can, though never so poor; which must support and
increase Foreign Importations, whilst every one is contending who shall have
the finest Foreign Livery, so will People thus at leisure most naturally fall
into the habits of drinking and other ill Courses.

Too many of these symptoms of a Consumptive Trade may be generally observed in
England; of late years any man who had but an indifferent Stock might have set
himself to Tillage, Grazing, Daiery, Clothing, Fulling, etc. in almost any
part of England, and might not only have maintained his Family plentifully, but
as his Sock and Ingenuity were more or less, might have left a fair Estate
behind him; it was not extraordinary for a man thus employed to get an Estate
of 3, or 4000 l. some 10, some 20, some 30000 l. whereas now, and of these
later years these home-imployments have been the usual Shipwracks of men's
Stocks and Estates in most parts of England, or so dull and cold that men can
hardly endure to live so meanly.

Our late Wealthy Yeomanry are impoverished, or much reduced in their stocks, a
man shall hardly find three in a County able to rent 3, or 400 l. per Ann. they
are forced to sink their Rents on the Gentry continually, or else to fling up
their Farms; much Land is fallen a fifth part, some a fourth part, some a third
part, some to half of the late Rent, (unless in some few Countys in whose
benefit the Irish Acts were made, and there Rents are not risen and are now
like to fall low enough:) by which continual contracting of Rents the very
earth seems to shrink and consume under us, and whilst many of our late opulent
and mighty Gentry since the general decay of their Revenues have been striving
to support the ancient honor and dignity of their Families, they are become
immerged and fettered in inextricable debts and securities; great numbers of
our Clothiers and other Manufacturers are undone, or have given up; the rest
remain under a languishing hope of better Markets: and multitudes of those
people, whose Labors brought Money, Trade and Comfort to our Corporations, are
now become chargeable burdens: it being computed that our Poor are increased
to near ten times their late number within this last twenty years, and that
their maintenance does cost the Nation 400000 l. per Ann. constant Tax.

On the other side, the increase of those sorts of men, whose Employments
either may prejudice, or else can add no increase of Treasure to the Nation, is
very visible; by which increase the inconveniences must be still the greater:
for where the foreign Trade of a Nation is so much driven in importations, the
increase of Merchants will oblige an increase of Importation; so an increase of
Retailers dealing in foreign Goods, will open a greater vent for Importations;
suppose such a Retailer sells for 10 l. per Cent. profit, the Nation must lose
about nine pence for every penny he gets, what then shall the Nation lose by the
Trade of a Merchant or Retailer, who by vending Foreign Wares shall get an
Estate of 10, or 2000 l. over and besides a profuse maintenance? Or what will
it signify to the Wealth or Glory of a Nation, or City, to have many such
10000 l. men as these? Have we any reason to rejoice in such a flourishing
Trade? These Retailers and Shopkeepers, gleaning the Money from the People,
hand it up to the Importers, who export this Commodity in Trade as occasion
does require; and as our Manufactures have decayed, so have Shopkeepers of all
sorts increased; our Cities and Corporations are stuffed with them more and
more; there being at least ten times more in the Nation than were 20, or 30
years since.

Thus also have we multitudes of more Lawyers, Attorneys, Solicitors,
Scriviners, and Penmen of all sorts, than of late years we had; which
occasions more Querks, Tricks, and Cheats in the Law. We have vastly more
Scholars and Clergymen, Author of the grounds and reasons of the contempt of
the English Clergy. page 141.
which a Late Author observing, thought it necessary to export Tunns of Divines
instead of Manufacture: This does cause an universal competition for Benefices;
of which the needy Laity taking advantage, make Simonaical presentations, and
thence must follow perjury in Institutions, and thence seared Consciences; but
of all other Employments we have the greatest questing after Offices; Men will
almost give any thing, say any thing, or do any thing for an Office; so that
some Offices which were thought hardly worth the meddling with of late years,
will now yield near ten years purchase for one life, which competition has
also in a manner virtually repealed the Statute against buying and selling of
Offices, and obliges those who buy trusts to sell trusts. We have also far more
Physicians, men of Medicine and Quacks, especially Pox-Doctors than ever, so
have we (with our poverty) far more Finery and Gawdery, more Daintyness,
Delicacy and Luxury.

So have we a vast increase of Innkeepers and Ale-keepers both in City and
Country, by which the common people are debauched, made impious, poor and
effeminate: all which mischiefs do in union cause the vast increase of new
Buildings in and about London; for most of the Offices are in London, or there
to be gotten, there is also the ready access to Church-preferment, and the best
and most easy Employments for Lawyers, Solicitors, Scriviners, Physicians, and
such others, and the rather, because the public Taxes and Importing-trade
drawing the money up to London, it will there be stirring as long as we have any
in the Nation; whilst the Country is left poorer and barer every day; and
therefore besides these higher ranks of men, the ordinary People who used
heretofore to begin upon Farming or Manufacture, hearing of money in London, do
post from the starving Country, and apply themselves to the selling of Ale,
Brandy, Tobacco, Coffee, Brokery of all sorts, letting of Lodgings in or about
London, and such like Employments, which too commonly end in Bawdery and the
Gallows, by which there is room made for new Comers and Tenants; I have heard
it said, that Madrid is grown much bigger and more Populous of late years.

From these and other sorts of People, both in City and Country, we have more
and more Criminals of all the sorts and species mentioned before; our Goals are
fuller and fuller, great numbers of which are yearly executed or transported;
vast numbers of others have betaken themselves to voluntary exile from this
their Native Country, in hopes of a better condition, rather than to endure
certain poverty or persecution for Conscience at home; besides those gone into
Ireland, and the Plantations, there are many thousands of Protestants gone from
us into the Low Countries, into France, into Germany, and into Poland, where
being Woollen Manufacturers, they have taught, and set up this Manufacture, and
thereby helped to work our ruin. These being of the most strong and able part
of our People, leave their Wives and Children, and other impotent and lazy
People at home.

And thus shall a Nation be inevitably dispeopled, as well as impoverished by a
consumptive Trade; Nay, it shall hinder the ordinary increase of People by
procreation, especially in a Nation where venereal sins are become general,
habitual and shameless; for the People being poor, or vicious, or both, dare
not, or care not to engage in the charge or virtuous Obligations of Marriage,
(unless here and there where a man gets a Catch with a Wise which shall be
equal to an Office,) but will rather use unlawful promiscuous Copulation, which
breeds no Children, but infinite Claps and Poxes to the common weakening of
Posterity, and present scandal of a Nation: (thus have our Women also lost
their choice of Chapmen for Husbands:) how many of our most beautiful Women
(which might have made good and virtuous Wives, and brought forth numbers of as
beautiful Children,) are for want of convenient Matches tempted, or forced for
a little money, to sell their souls to the Devil, and their delicate bodies to
lust and rottenness, nay to the Gallows, when proving with Child, the remains
of their natural modesty, will not in their extremities permit them to call
Witnesses of their, shame whilst the Gallants which beget them go free, and
glory in their great performance.

All which mischiefs of a consumptive Trade are yet more fatal, because the
growing vice and poverty which attends it, will generally bring a languor and
difficulty on men's understandings; as men sink in their Estates, their Spirits
and Thoughts will be lower and narrower, and their Minds clouded with anxieties
and cares, this (with the common disability of making advantages upon
Foreigners in the course of Trade) leads them into a kind of unhappy Cunning,
consisting in the overreaching of one another at home; and he will be
accounted wise, who by any means can shift himself out of the common wants, nor
will he think his own happiness small, ( especially if his beginnings were low)
when (like one standing on the Sands) he can behold the Shipwreck of others.

SECT. IX.
That a Consumptive Trade must render a Nation still weaker and weaker: How far
the mere establishment of Absolute Power, or mere Liberty and Property, may
alter the Case.

FRom what has been said in the first Section and since, it must also follow,
that a Consumptive Trade must render a Nation still weaker and weaker.

First, because it must still exhaust more and more of the National Riches, and
sink the value of Men's Estates.

If the value of private Stocks or Revenues are contracted, Men will be less
and less able to pay public Taxes; it is impossible for these that have no
Money to pay Money, or for those that have less to pay as much as those that
have more; and less Taxes must then also be more grievous than greater were
before; if a Man having 100 l. per An' or 100 l. Stock, sink 40 l. per Cent. of
his Revenue or Stock, it is equal to any direct Tax of 40 l. per Cent. and then
if a Tax or public Charge of 5 or 10 l. be super-added, it is equal to a
former Tax of 45 or 50 l. per Cent.

It must also disable a Nation to continue the Charge of a War, because the
quantity of Money diffused amongst the People will sooner be drawn out of the
Home-Markets; and then they can no longer raise Taxes, and when the Taxes fail,
what hope or dependence can there be in the courage of Officers, Soldiers, or
Seamen? or how shall the continual Supplies of Warlike Provisions of all sorts
be purchased at home or abroad?

There are yet other Concomitants of a growing Poverty, which must render any
Nation much the weaker, viz. discontents, uneasiness, and heart-burnings, which
when begun, are easily fermented into Convulsions, by which a Nation may be
disabled to exert even its remaining strength.

2. Perfidy and Treachery amongst all sorts; needy Men are readily tempted to
make a Merchandise of their own Souls and other Men's Lives and Estates, and
those who will betray one another for Money at home, will be equally wrought
upon by foreign Money, and then may be brought to barter of both Princes and
Countries; for being once corrupted, they must, like Women, for ever remain
slavishly true to the Intrigue, lest the Gallant should tell, of which
Histories give us many sad Examples.

But in a Nation where the value of Land, or Home-Commodities, are risen 40 per
Cent. he that had 100 l. Revenue or Stock, paying 40 l. Tax, retains what he
had; and if the National Treasure be much greater, it will support the charge
of a War much longer, and can hardly ever be totally exhausted, where there is
a considerable Annual Increase of Treasure by Foreign Trade: This exuberance
of a National Treasure will also generally support and secure the Spirit and
Fidelity of all sorts of Men.

It must therefore be of most dangerous consequence to a Nation impoverished by
Trade, if any other neighbour-Nation has at the same time grown much richer in
Treasure, since in the case of a War it will produce the like inequality of
Power; nay if any such richer Nation shall think fit to keep great Armies and
Navies in pay, (though in times of Peace) so must the poorer Nation, or else be
devoured at pleasure; and thus may a Nation, drained by the overbalance of
Trade, be beggered, and consequently overcome without fighting, as has been
intimated before.

So if a Nation grow generally more vicious, soft, effeminate, debauched,
dispeopled, and undisciplined than before, it must be much weaker than before,
wherein the danger must be much greater if any neighbor Nation grow far more
warlike, more populous and better disciplined than before.

In which case the better situated, more useful, strong, plentiful, and blessed
the Country so impoverished naturally is, and the more it does abound in
beautiful Buildings, Women, or other delicacies, it will the more forcibly
provoke the Appetite of a stronger Nation to its Conquest, the mighty Hunters
of the World are for the most desirable prey; so if a Nation thus weakened has
formerly been famous and redoubled for Arms and War; those who affect glory by
Conquest, must have the greater Ambition to vassalize its People.

From what has been said it must appear; first, That a Nation must be
estimated weak or strong by comparison, with the strength or weakness of
Neighbor Nations; if a Neighbor Nation grow ten times as strong as before,
the Nation which only retains its usual and former strength is weak; but the
Case must be yet worse, if whilst the one has grown ten times stronger, the
other has grown much weaker.

2. That in the present state of the World a Nation cannot grow poor by a
consumptive Trade with any Security.

In such a Case the mere absoluteness of a Monarchy would not prevent the
approaching fatality, (which I add because Hobbs and others call it a strong
Government) absolute Power may suddenly force away that Treasure which the
People have, but cannot create any, nor can it carry on a War, or even support
it self without continual vast expenses; and then when the Treasure is drawn
off into the hands of Officers and Soldiers, (who pay no Taxes) it will be
found, that the People (who have it not) can no more make Brick without Straw
in this Age, than heretofore; and will be naturally desirous to change their
Masters upon hope to be treated with less rigor.

Nor on the other side will the mere preservation of a legal Liberty and
Property secure a Nation thus impoverished, without a concurrent improvement of
Trade, for the Reasons before given; the Blessings which usually attend these
Freedoms wholly, or very much depend upon the Riches the People are possessed
of.

It must be confessed these Freedoms make a necessary step toward the
improvement of Trade; where an absolute Power is exerted, the conditions of Men
are little better than that of Brutes, being continually liable to
Imprisonments, Death, and Confiscations, at the Pleasure of others; nay perhaps
are worse, by the fears and terrors Men must be always under, even whilst they
do not actually suffer; which will take away the edge and life of Industry, and
will ruin or drive away the Merchants, and those who have Stocks in
Manufacture, who neither will, nor can labor all their lives for Wealth under
daily expectations of losing what they painfully get, which in this last Age
has obliged the French Monarchy to permit diverse Immunities to their
Manufacturers, and of late to their Fishers and other Maritime. Traders, which
have now gotten the reputation of established Laws; at least they are such as
are satisfactory to the French Natives, who cannot have, nor are acquainted
with better terms, and who are of themselves so numerous, that they stand in no
need of Supplies of People from abroad; and therefore of no greater invitations
of this nature to bring in Foreigners, and the rather, because their Trade is
otherwise so much eased and encouraged, (of which I shall have occasion to say
more;) so have the great Dukes of Tuscany in this last Age been curiously
vigilant to provide for the Freedom of Traders, both Domestic and Foreign:
The Dutch, Venetians, Hamburghers, and other Trading States do yet farther
secure the Liberties and Properties of their Natives, and others, under their
several Jurisdictions, by fundamental and unalterable Constitutions

Which being admitted, it does not follow that a Nation which has mere Liberty
and Property, without other requisite encouragements, shall drive any great
Trade; we have an Example in Genoa, at this day, a Republic, where, because
they set a Custom of 16 per Cent. on Goods Imported, they lost their Trade of
Foreign Merchandise to Leghorne, made a free Port by the Duke of Tuscany; what
then may we hope for from the mere Liberty and Property of the English, when in
England the Customs are generally higher, and our other difficulties on Trade
are yet more grievous than the Customs? by the Account we have from our first
Discoverers and Planters in America, most of these poor Nations had a
Home-Liberty and Property.

SECT. X.
Further presumptions of our late National Overbalance in Trade; an Account
from the Mint in November 75. and thence our former Balance of Trade estimated.

AS a further Evidence that our National Trade has been Consumptive, and that
I may silence the prevarications of some whose private Interest or Passions
(which are but the fermentations of their Interests) teach them to affirm the
contrary, I shall take notice of the following Account taken and Printed in
November 1675. for the clearing a Debate then before a Committee of Parliament,
entitled as follows.

An Account of all the Gold and Silver Coined in His Majesty's Mint within the
Tower of London, from the first of October 1599. being the forty first year of
the Reign of Queen Eliz. to November 1675. being 76 years, divided into four
parts; showing how the Coin of this Kingdom did increase in the three first
parts, proportionable to the increase of Trade and Navigation, and how much it
has decreased in the fourth part.

Gold and Silver Coined. Totals by Tale. Yearly Medium. From the first of
October. 1599. to the last of March 1619. was Coined four Millions seven Hundred
seventy nine Thousand three Hundred and fourteen Pounds thirteen Shillings and
four Pence; which was per An' two Hundred forty five Thousand ninety two Pounds
Eleven Shillings and six Pence. l. s. d. l. s. d. 4779314 13 4 245092 11 06
From the last of March 1619. to the last of March 1638. was Coined six Millions
nine Hundred thousand forty two Pounds eleven Shillings and one Penny; which was
per An' three Hundred sixty three thousand one hundred and sixty Pounds two
Shillings one Penny farthing. 6900042 11 1 363160 02 1 From the last of March
1638. to May 1657. was Coined seven Millions seven Hundred thirty three
Thousand five Hundred twenty one Pounds thirteen Shillings four pence farthing;
which was per An' four Hundred and seven thousand and twenty seven Pounds nine
Shillings one Penny penny. l. s. d. l. s. d. 7733521 13 4 407027 9 1 From May
1657. to Nov. 75. being 18 years and a half, was Coined three Millions two
hundred thirty eight thousand nine hundred ninety seven Pounds sixteen
Shillings and three farthings; about one Million of which was Harp and Cross
Money, and broad Gold, etc. re-coined; which deducted, there remains but 2
Millions two hundred thirty eight thousand nine hundred ninety seven Pounds 16
s. three farthings; which was per An' but one hundred twenty one thousand 26 l.
eighteen Shillings and four Pence. 2238997 16 121026 18 04 The total of all
Gold and Silver Coined in these 76 years, from the first of October. 1599. to
November. 1675. was Coined twenty one Millions eight hundred fifty one thousand
eight hundred seventy six Pounds fourteen Shillings seven Pence halfpenny. l.
s. d. 21851876 14 7

Yearly Increase. Total Increase The Coin yearly increased in the 2 d part,
from the last of March 1619. to the last of March 1638. more than in the first
part, one hundred and eighteen thousand sixty seven Pounds ten Shillings seven
pence farthing; the Total thereof is two Millions two hundred forty three
thousand two hundred eighty three Pounds one Shilling two pence. l. s. d. l. s.
d. 118067 10 4 2243283 01 02 The Coin yearly increased in the 3 d part, from
the last of March 1638. to May 1657. one hundred sixty one thousand nine
hundred thirty four Pounds 17 s. 7 d., the Total thereof is three Millions
seventy six thousand seven hundred sixty two Pounds fourteen Shilling ten pence
halfpenny. 161934 17 7 3076762 14 10

Yearly Decrease. Tot' Decrease. The Coin has yearly decreased in the fourth
part, from May 1657. to this present November 1675. being the last eighteen
years and half, two hundred eighty six thousand Pounds ten Shillings nine pence
halfpenny; the total whereof is five Millions two hundred ninety one thousand
and nine Pounds nineteen Shillings four pence farthing. l. s. d. l. s. d.
286000 10 9 5291009 19 4

This prodigious decrease of Coin in the last eighteen years, does undeniably
evidence a vast decay in our Trade: but since, even in these latter years,
there has been somewhat above 120000 l. per An' Coined, as appears by the
Account, it does seem to administer an Objection, that still there has been
some National gain by Trade, though much less than before.

But this does not follow, for if more Money has been exported yearly during
these last eighteen years than has been Coined, the National Treasure must be
diminished: Now if we have been over-ballanced, more Money must be exported; so
that it will resolve into the former Question.

It is a vain thing to say, that the exportation of Money in specie stands
still prohibited; so is the exporting of Treasure prohibited in Spain under the
highest Penalties; and yet because Spain is over-ballanced by consumptive
Importations, Foreigners continually carry it away; so that were it not for
their Mines, there would not have been the value of a Penny left in Spain many
years since; nor can their Mines so answer this mighty drain by a consumptive
Trade, but that the Treasures of Spain are drawn lower than in any Nation in
Europe.

And therefore though the ordinary Trading with exported Money is condemnable,
as that which tends to the subversion of Manufacture and People, and
facilitates mere Importation; yet I cannot recommend prohibitory Laws as a
means to stop the exportation of Money, unless at the same time the Methods of
Trade be regulated.

It Is now become more practicable by the Liberty given for the Exportation of
Bullion; for upon any great emergency for Bullion, (as for instance) upon the
going out of an East India Fleet, Standard-Silver has risen from 5 s. the
Ounce to 5 s. 4 d. the Ounce; which being about 10 per Cent. must not only
hinder the Coining of Bullion, but must cause our weighty Coin to be melted
into Bullion, and so exported as it has been noted before.

And upon the like occasions it is observable, that Guinnies rise to 22 s.
apiece, and broad ^old to 24 s. apiece, which does evince, that those who use
that Trade do not confine themselves to Bullion.

So it is notorious to those who understand our North^r^ and Eastern Trades, and
our Trade to France, the Con^ries, Turkey, etc. that we yearly export great
quantities of Treasure to those and other Countries, and that we do not stick
at Coined Money, being closely put up in Packs of Goods or Barrels, or however
may be made lawful and laudable Merchandise by melting; whence it is come to be
so commonly asserted a Commodity; and then if we look back and observe how
little has been Coined in the 18 years since (57) being but 121026 l. per An',
it must be highly credible, that we have exported much more Money yearly than
we have Coined.

But to make the overbalance yet more evident, it will be necessary to find
out, if possible, what was the yearly Treasure the Nation gained by Foreign
Trade, at any time in this last Age; and in the next place, how much our
Exportations and beneficial part of our Trade have since failed, and our
Importations increased in quantity and value.

The increase of Home-Treasure must either be in Coined Money, or in Plate,
made up for Home-uses; for all Bullion imported must either be converted into
one of these at home, or else be re-exported, and then it is not superadded to
the National Home-Treasure.

Now if we look back to the Account from the Mint, we may conclude, that during
those 76 years, our Trade did never add more to our Coin yearly than 407027 l.
9 s. 1 d. for any number of 20 years together; this being the utmost Medium
comprised in the Account.

And this being in the 18 years before (57, Plate Coined by the King at Oxon,
and Parliament at London.
) was not all the mere product of the Trade of these very years, for it is well
known that during those years we had good quantities of our own Plate Coined
into* Money, it is not possible for me to ascertain how much; but if it were a
Million, it ought to be deducted out of the Medium of those years.

So during those 18 years, our Trade might yet add less to our Coined Money,
viz. in case our Foreign Trade did then export any of our Coined Money, the
like may be said of any other of the said 18 years or Mediums in the Account;
and then must all the Money so exported be also deducted out of the Annual Gain
of those years.

I believe none will expect that I should adjust the yearly quantity of Money
exported by stealth in our Foreign Trade before (57,) I shall leave it to the
consideration of the indifferent Reader upon what I shall add; but it is
evident, that our Merchants did formerly use to export Money, by the
prohibitory Statutes made on that occasion*

It may be also further evident, that the yearly quantity of Money so exported
before 57 was considerable; for before the 76 years mentioned in the Account,
we must have had some stock of Money in the Nation, which supposing to be but
six Millions, then adding what more was Coined during the said 76 years, we
must have had near 30 Millions of Coin in the Nation before 57, had none been
exported; whereas no intelligent Man will say we had then half that Sum; which
if doubted I shall have occasion to enforce further; and if this be admitted,
the Consequence must be, that our Foreign Trade and occasions did even before
57 carry off near half as much Money as was yearly Coined; and then our
National yearly Gain in Coined Treasure would not be near to the aforesaid full
Mediums Coined, nor to above half the Mediums, (taking any number of years
together.)

Nor can we reckon or allow of above 50000 l. per Annum for increase of
Home-Plate, during any of the said 18 years, considering that much Plate is
always brought back to the Mint, or turned into Bullion, as other new Plate is
made; and that at this allowance for Plate, in any twenty years time there
would be a Million increase of Home-Plate in the Nation.

Upon the whole the Reader may observe what our utmost National Gain in
increase of Treasure possibly might be, and upon the aforesaid grounds may
deduct from any of the Mediums as he shall think reasonable, wherein I shall
not pretend to confine him, though in my private Judgment I cannot estimate our
utmost National increase of Treasure by Trade during any of the said 76 years
to be above 250000 l. per Annum, or thereabouts for any twenty years together.

Considering which, if the indifferent Reader shall reflect on what has been
said in the 5 th, 6 th, 7 th and 8 th Sections, if he there find that our Trade
has been under such difficulties, as must necessarily work us out of all the
parts of it, whilst our Neighbors are enabled to snatch it from us: If he
there find undeniable Instances of it in some Particulars, he may for the same
Reasons conclude the like in all others; and by Consequence that our National
Trade long before this, became less beneficial than it was by 250000 l. per
Annum; it has been always found most safe to be governed by the Causes and
Reasons of things, but the concurrent impoverishment of our People, and other
the Symptoms, Plague-sores, and Spots of a consumptive Trade do further
evidence it.

It is confessed it would be of great use, if the odds in our past and present
National Foreign Trade might be certainly stated; a difficult, if not
impossible task: Since it requires an ancient, as well as modern experience in
Foreign Trade, and not of any one Trader only, but of so many as have traded
into all Parts; of those that are curious, intelligent, and impartial, and have
minded the public Interest as well as their own; perhaps if a sufficient
number of such as these did assemble, they might, upon debate, and with
reference to their Books, bring the Compute very near the truth; but nothing of
this has been done of late; and whosoever shall promiscuously consult our
Traders apart, will find them various: Then for our Custom-Books old or new,
though they might be useful for some things, yet they cannot ascertain us in
the odds of the Foreign values of any Exported or Imported Goods, nor of the
quantity of Imported prohibited or smuggled Goods, nor (as I conceive) of our
former or present Fishing-Trade, (Fish paying no Custom) nor of the gain of
Carriage, nor of the Trade from Port to Port; without which the certain odds in
the Balance cannot be calculated; and therefore for my own part I rest chiefly
on what has been said; believing my self secure whilst I keep my self to the
rational part, which cannot be refuted but by Reason: Whereas I am apprehensive
that should I descend to examine our Balance of Trade by the particular
effects of the foregoing Causes, these being matters of Fact, and very many,
and most of them Foreign, and of less Notoriety, may be liable to Exceptions
or Cavils of particular Men, as their different Sentiments or Interests may
dictate; it being as easy to deny as affirm, and as hard for many Readers to
determine the truth in th^se matters; whereby the sincerity of the Relator may
be drawn into question; and at such times, when he shall have no opportunity to
defend himself: and I am not insensible, that amongst so many Facts as the
nature of this Subject has forced me to mention, (whereof I must speak much
upon the credit I give to others) it is impossible there may be some slips, even
by the transcribing of Papers: Upon these Considerations, I had thoughts of
laying aside part of the three next Sections as needless, and neglected
somewhat of that Curiosity I intended, but being perused and approved by some
Friends amongst the rest of these Papers, they have persuaded me to publish
them as they are, upon apprehension that they will enforce what I have already
said, though left so general, and will give the Reader a further useful light
into the past and present nature and condition of our Trade and Nation: and
since they do not bind up the Reader to precise Quantities and Values, can
admit of little alteration; in which I have been the more ready to comply, upon
hopes that I may awaken and spur on the virtuous emulation of others to a more
complete disquisition into the several branches of our Trade, and that the
Reader will think me the more excusable in this and the rest I have undertaken,
when he shall observe the present Subject so Copious, and so little labored by
other Writers, that I have no common Places or beaten Tracks to follow, as in
other Studies.

This I assure the Reader, that amongst the following instances, or elsewhere,
there are no wilful or effected errors, and that I have not affirmed any thing
which I do not know, but upon such Authority as I have reason to believe highly
credible, and am confident that whatsoever mistakes in Fact the Curious may
find out in what I have already said, or shall say, there are none such as do
in the least impeach the force or reason of this Discourse, and then must be
admitted immaterial.

To which I shall add, that by the following Essay, I do not pretend to that
difficult work of adjusting the present Balance of our Trade, but to evince,
that the former Balance of our Trade (as it may be computed from the aforesaid
Account, from the Mint or otherwise) is grown consumptive in some degree; which
I think will appear to the indifferent Readers satisfaction, upon consideration
of some late decays and defalcations in our Trade, wherein I shall confine my
self to such as have happened long after the beginning of the 76 years
mentioned in the Account, from the Mint, many of them within 20 years last.

SECT. XI.
Particular decays in our Exportations, and the beneficial parts of our Trade;
Instances in the decay of our Foreign-Trade for Woollen Clothing, in the
several Countries and Ports we Traded to, in the sinking of the foreign price
of this Manufacture, so of exporting Wool, in our foreign victualling Trades
for Flesh, Butter, Cheese, etc. in our Irish Trade, and Scotch Trade for almost
all sorts of Commodities: Irish Wool increased: The Expiration of the Irish
Acts will not now revest that Trade, but prejudice us more, and in what: decays
in our several former and late* Fishing-Trades, in our Foreign-Trade for
Stockings and Hats in our exports to the Canaries, in the Foreign-Price of our
exported Tyn and Lead, and the Price and quantity of exported Pewter, in our
Trade from Port to Port, our former and late prejudices in our
Plantation-Trade, incidently of our Navigation and other things.

I Shall begin with our Exportations, and as I shall pass from one particular
to another, in this and the next Section, shall desire the indifferent Reader
to put such an estimation on our losses in Trade, as he shall think reasonable;
and shall first instance in our Woollen Manufactures, as being our principal
Commodity, and certainly of the most general and necessary use, (and therefore
in its nature the best) in the World.

Before Edward the thirds time the Flemings Manufactured our Wool, and had the
Merchandise of it, which gave the original Foundation to the former Wealth and
Popularity of the Netherlands.

Edw. 3. observing the great advantages the Flemings made of our Wool, brought
over some Flemish Manufacturers, who by degrees taught the Manufacture of
Clothes of all sorts, Worsted and diverse others, particularly mentioned in our
Statutes of former times: and as the English more applied themselves to it, and
increased ours (as soon they did) so did that of the Flemings decay.

For first, the English had the materials cheaper than the Flemings, not only
by the odds in the carriage out of England, but because the raw Woolls
afterward exported were charged with great Customs and Duties to the King, as
appears by the Acts and Writings of those times.

Secondly, Because the Manufacture was continually encouraged, and taken care
of by Laws for that purpose, as also appears by our Statute-Book.

Thirdly, At that time we had none of the present Clogs on our Manufactures,
which have either become so by the better Methods of Trade first contrived by
the Dutch States, or have been grafted upon us by private or mistaken interests
long since Edw. 3 ds time. I do not find that there was any absolute
Prohibition of exporting Wool till the Statute of the 12th of His now Majesty,
chap. 32. yet the example of our cunning Neighbors now tell us, that
Prohibitions, accompanied with a due Improvement of Trade at home, are not to
be condemned.

The Flemish Cloath-trade was long since so far reduced, that we had the sole
Merchandise of it, yet it cannot be denied but the Flemings kept up a
Manufacture of a sort of Stuffs and Says, (but of no great bulk) the make
whereof the English had not been taught, till the Duke of Alva about 100 years
since by his Tyranny and Persecution for Conscience, drove away their
Manufacturers, whom Queen Elizabeth like her wise Predecessor Edward the third
entertained, seating them in Norwich, Colchester, and Canterbury, whereby these
Manufactures became incorporated into the English, to the great advantage of
those parts, and of the Nation in general: they also taught us the art of
making Tapestry.

Before this the English exported great quantities of our Manufacture into
Flanders, but doubtless more afterward, for which we kept a rich Staple at
Antwerp, the Dutch long after they became States were ignorant of this
Manufacture, whom we therefore wholly supplied, exporting vast quantities of
our Clothes thither, most Whites, which were there dyed and dressed, and from
these parts transmitted into the Southern and South-east Countries of Germany,
and many other Nations: we had also the sole trade up the Elbe, and thereby to
the North parts of Germany, Jutland and Holsteyne.

We had the sole Trade into Denmark, Norway, Swedeland and Liefland, and to the
great Territory of Poland (through Dantzick) by our Eastland Company, formerly
very flourishing, and called the Royal Company.

We had also the sole Trade to the vast Empire of Muscovy.

All which Trades are sunk to a small matter, the Dutch having set up mighty
Woollen Manufactures of all sorts, and the Flemings renewed or enlarged theirs,
our exports to those parts are very much reduced.

Our Hamburgh Company, by whom the North parts of Germany, Jutland and
Holsteyne were supplied, do not vend near half what they did, the Dutch and
other Manufactures having prevailed upon us in those parts, both for the Finest
and Coursest Clothes: what we now export to Hamburgh are a sort of Clothes of
between 3, and 7 s. a Yard, and of those not near the former quantity.

Then for our Eastland Trade it is sunk more, I have heard several Estimates,
all near concurring with what I find in Mr. Cokes third Treatise of Trade, Page
33, 34.
dedicated to Prince Rupert, viz. That this Company only heretofore usually
exported above 20000 Broad Clothes, 60000 Kerseys and 40000 Doubles yearly; but
of late years not above 4000 Broad Clothes, 5000 Kerseys, and 2000 Doubles. To
give this worthy Gentleman his due, he has written more materially on the
present subject than any man in this Age, in which he has not only
demonstrated his deep Judgment, but his great sedulity and sincerity in the
discovery of the truth, Page 112.
professing himself ready to make out whatsoever he has reported, before any
Judicature. There is too much reason and fact to warrant the great decay of
this Eastland Trade, when the Dutch Manufacture is arrived to such a degree,
besides which the Silesian and Polonian Manufactures of Coarse Woolls are
mightily increased, so that at Dantzick, our late great staple, we now sell so
little that it is not worth the naming; we now trade thither with Treasure,
whence we used to Import much; the like may be said of other Ports this Company
formerly traded to.

Then for Swedeland, the Natives have lately set up a Manufacture there of
their Coarse Woolls, as well as Denmark, Liefland and Norway, are very much
supplied by the Dutch, imposing greater Prices and Customs upon us for what
they vend, and insisting to have Treasure of us, where before they bartered for
Commodity.

To which I may add, That our late great Muscovy Trade is in a manner lost; the
same Mr. Coke takes notice that the Dutch send 1500 Sail of Ships into the
Sound in a year, and 40 to Muscovy, we do not send above seven into the Sound
in a year, of which two are laden with woollen Manufactures, the other five
with Ballast, (and are therefore to buy their foreign lading) and to Muscovy we
hardly send two in three years; during the late War we have sent somewhat more.

We had also the sole trading for woollen Clothing into France, of which we
vended thereto the value of 600000 l. yearly; but the French having for these
later years set up this Manufacture at home, do now supply themselves; and as
their own has increased, so have they laid greater Impositions upon ours, till
in (67) the French King set an intolerable Tax of about 50 per Cent. on all our
Clothing imported into France, This value of our exported Clothing to France
is avouched by our Ancient Traders thither, and so asserted in the Printed Book
in (77) in defense of our East India Company.
by which our Cloathing-trade to France became in a manner impracticable, nor
have the French any occasion to open this Trade to us again. 000000 We had also
the sole Cloathing-Trade into Turkey, Spain and its Dominion; and it must be
confessed, that we have supported our Turkey-Trade better than any other, much
occasioned by our importation of raw Silk from those parts, for which we used
to barter: but of late years the Dutch are great Competitors with us in the
Turkey-Trade, (though the English may have had the advantage whilst the Dutch
have been engaged in the late War;) the French have been long nibling at this
Trade, and both the French and Dutch largely share with us in the
Spanish-Trade. 000000
But what is yet more grievous, we import much Fine Cloth from the Dutch
yearly, and till of late great quantities of Stuffs and Druggets from the
French, which French Importation (only) amounted to the value of 150000 l. per
Annum, as Mr. Fortrey in his Book of Trade reports; how much of these, or other
French Goods may be imported for the future, may be guessed from what I shall
say in the last Section concerning the late Prohibition of French Goods; in the
mean time it may be observed, how far our late Monopoly of the Woollen
Manufacture is vanished.

We had also the sole Trade for Woollen Manufactures to the Kingdom of
Portugal, which Trade has been decaying several years, because of the
Competition of the French and Dutch, but of late has been worse than ever; by
reason that the Government of Portugal since the year 1660 has prohibited the
wearing of English Cloth; having set up this Manufacture of their own Wools;
we still drive a Trade thither hear the Complaints of these Clothiers, who
continue in the Manufacture. 000000 I may add, that our exported Wool is sunk
to about a third of its late price. 000000 And whereas before the said Irish
Acts, Foreign Ships did use to victual themselves out of the plenties of
England, the Irish being since forced to fat their own Cattle at home, and by
the cheapness of their Lands being enabled to sell cheaper than the English,
Foreigners do now victual their Ships out of the new stores of Ireland, and
cheaper than we can in England; by which we are beat out of the Trade of
Foreign Victualing? nay, what is yet harder upon us, the very English Ships do
now ordinarily victual from Ireland: this Trade of Victualling is also much
prejudiced by our late Art of Navigation, which does exclude much Foreign
Shipping from our Ports; and of what yearly loss this must be to the English
Nation, and more particularly to the English Land-holders, I submit to
Judgment. 000000 Also the English, before the said Irish Acts, Exported vast
quantities of Butter to France, Spain, Portugal, Flanders, Italy, and into
Ireland it self, and Cheese also; but the Irish by the Stop of Importation of
lean Cattle, being put to make another Rent of their Land, have set themselves
to the making of Butter and Cheese, and do not only supply themselves, but by
the cheapness of their Lands do under-sell us to these Foreigners, and have
therefore in a manner beaten us out of this Trade; and how much this must
affect the Dairies and Rents of England, and what the yearly loss to England
may amount to, I also submit to Judgment. 000000 So before the said Irish Acts,
England did furnish Ireland with Hats, Stockings, Dying Stuffs, Hides, Fruit,
Sugars, Tobaccoes, Silks of all sorts, Gold, Silver, and Silk Lace, and Ribbons
of all sorts. And before the Act of 15 Car. 2. cap. 7. Entitled, Trade
Encouraged (by which the Importation of Scotch Cattle was stopped) England did
furnish Scotland with wrought Wire of all sorts, Haberdashers Ware, as Hats,
Ribbons, Gloves, Buttons, Bandstrings of all sorts, Vpholsterers Ware, as
Hangings, Stools, Chairs, etc. all sorts of Cutlers Ware, as Knives, Scissers,
Sickles, Scithes, all sorts of Slop-sellers Ware, as Stockings, Caps, course
Shifts, and Frocks: By all which, the English Manufacturers and Nation made
considerable Gain. But the Commerce between between England and Ireland, and
England and Scotland, being stopped by reason of the said Acts, the Irish and
Scotch do otherwise supply themselves with these Manufactures, partly by the
like Manufactures set up at home, partly by such other Foreigners with whom
they now Trade: And the Scots upon occasion of the said Act of 15 Car. 2.
imposed a Tax of 90 per Cent. on all English Commodities Imported into
Scotland. 000000
It is a hard matter to put a just Estimate on these yearly Losses; for the
present I shall leave it to be computed by our Melancholic English Tradesmen.

By means of the same Irish Acts, we have also lost the Exportation of English
Hops and Beer from the Eastern, Southern, and Western Parts of England into
Ireland. 000000 And whereas before the said Irish Acts, England was the
Storehouse of Ireland, and did furnish the Irish with Foreign imported Wares of
all sorts, and our Irish Trade did maintain above 100 Sail of our Ships sailing
between, besides what were employed outward with Commodities of the growths of
Ireland; since the said Acts, the Irish are supplied by the Dutch, or other
Foreign Stores and Navigation, and are much increased in Shipping of their own.
000000 And as if the mischief of these Acts would never have an end, it may be
further observed, they were the occasion of Increase of Sheep, and thereby of a
vast Increase of Wool in Ireland, by which the French and Dutch Woollen
Manufactures are now more plentifully supported, and rather cheaper than the
English. 000000 And now the Irish, for the former Reasons, also furnish our
Foreign Plantations, with very much of their Butter, Cheese, Clothes, and other
necessaries of the growth and product of Ireland: Considering which, and that
those of New England, of late furnish the rest with Flower, Biscuit, Salt,
Flesh, Fish, etc. (all which were formerly Exported from hence) we may expect
our Plantation-Trade for Sugar, Tobacco, etc. must e're long be wholly driven
with Exported Money, or with foreign Goods bought with Exported Money, since by
this means, by the insufficiency of our own home-Manufactures, and the growing
Luxury of our Planters, we are forced to send vast quantities thither already,
particularly, foreign Linnens of all sorts, Paper, Silks, and Wines of all
sorts, Brandies, and other things mentioned in the next Section, besides great
quantities of Wines sent from the Madera's, paid by Bills of Exchange drawn on
our Merchants in Lisbon. The consequence of the Whole is, that the loss of the
Irish Trade, and the consequences thereof, have much assisted in the
Impoverishment of the English, (who bear almost all the Charge of the
Government) and will eat upon us more and more daily; and on the other side the
Irish, who lately dealt so cruelly by us, and are a Conquered People, are made
far richer on a sudden, and that the Irish Lands do much rise in Rent, whilst
the English sink. 000000
Having given this Account of our direct and Consequential Losses by the Irish
Acts, I expect to be Answered by some, That howsoever these Acts may have
prejudiced us for the time past, they are now expired, and that by Consequence
we shall now be let into all the advantages we had before the Acts made. This I
shall examine before I go further, and with that Impartiality as I think
becomes an Englishman, without being biased by the Situation of my Lands:
which if any man does, this Consequence must appear mistaken.

For first, The Manufactures set up in Ireland, will still Continue to the same
prejudice of ours; and it is highly probable (if not certain) that they will
Improve, by the cheapness of their Provision and Wages.

Secondly, Having now long used to fatt their Cattle (with which they do not
only continually Victual all sorts of Ships, but Foreign Towns, Armies and
Nations, particularly the French, and those of the United Provinces, besides
the Return they make by the Vent of their Hides and Tallowes) it is not to be
Imagined that they will be so mad as to give up this far more profitable Trade.

Thirdly, They will breed, manufacture, and Export as much Wool, Butter,
Cheese, etc. as before.

Fourthly, These Exportations obliging them to Commerce with the French and
Dutch, as before, it must be expected that they will generally still buy such
Commodities as they want of the Dutch and French; and much the rather, because
the Dutch and French, for Reasons before mentioned, can and will afford them
much cheaper than the English.

What Advantages shall we then have by the expiring of the Irish Acts? it is
confessed, that their Territory being large, most Fruitful, and now plentifully
stored with Cattle, they may carry on their other Trades, and yet furnish us
with abundant Stores of Cattle for our Money; which they already do, sending
many of their Cattle near or altogether fatt: supposing them lean, yet will not
this Nation get 3 d. a year by it, but will be a yearly loser. For the mere
Importing of Irish Cattle, did never advantage this Nation otherwise, than as
it secured the Irish in that base way of Trade, and from turning their National
Industry into a Competition with the English in other Trades; during which
time, what Money they received for their Cattle, they generally laid out in
London, or elsewhere in England, for the Commodities I mentioned before, and
others, by which Ireland was stored; But now I do not see how it can be
avoided, but that they will carry out all or the greatest part of the Money
they receive, in Specie, which may probably be little less than 100000 l. per
Annum, I conceive much more than double that Sum, Considering what Victuals and
other Commodities we freight from thence in our Voyages Yearly; so that the
Importing of these Cattle will not only 000000
greatly sink the Welsh and Northern Rents, but all other Rents in a little
time; which must demonstrate the further necessity of Easing and regulating our
Trade equal to the Dutch or French, who will otherwise thrust us out of this
Trade and all other, and will give a greater Vent to the Irish Commodities
daily. In the mean time we may observe, that we ought not to be governed by
such narrow Principles as the Situation of our English Lands, but by the
National Interest. Lastly, I shall add, That should we suppose a Complete
restitution of our losses in and by the Irish Trade, Yet Considering our other
defalcations in Trade, and our present Poverty, it would not restore the
Balance of our Trade, or not to any such degree, as to secure the Nation.

Our Fishing Trade has decayed continually of later years; we formerly
supplied France, Spain, Muscovy, Portugal, and Italy, with great quantities of
White Herring, Ling, and Cod-fish, which Trade is now lost to the Dutch,
French, etc. We have only the Trade of Red Herrings, which we retain; because,
before the Dutch can bring their Herrings upon their own coasts, Mr. Smith
cited before, reasonably computes other Nations gain, 10000000 l. per annum by
this Fishing Trade only, whereof the Dutch above 5000000 l. Mr. Mun in 63.
says, It was found that all our Exported Fish, of all sorts, amounted to but
140000 l. per annum, Page 184.
they grow too stale to be cured for Red Herrings: and what a miserable thing
is it for our poor starving Natives to see the Dutch, and other Foreigners draw
such Inestimable Treasures out of our own Seas, and at our Doors? This Fishing
Trade (bringing in no Custom) was insensibly lost in the pursuit of our
Plantation-Trade, on which great Customs are Imposed. 000000 So is our Iseland
Fishing very much decayed, where we have not a fourth part of the Trade we had
twenty or thirty years since; the like may be said of our Newfound-Land
Fishing; and our Groenland Fishing, where we had the sole Trade, is quite lost:
the Dutch had far beaten us out of these Trades, but the French of later years
have struck into a good share of the Whole, beating out the English more and
more; And by the loss of our Fishing Trade, our National Gain must not only be
vastly sunk, but our Sea Coasts are generally impoverished to a lamentable and
almost incredible degree, and our Nation is deprived of this great and
necessary Nursery of Seamen. 000000 Our Foreign Trade for Woven Silk-Stockings,
and Knit Woollen Stockings, is much decayed, by reason that these Manufactures
are set up in diverse foreign Countries, which (though perhaps they are not, nor
for Woollen Stockings can ever be so good as ours) yet they greatly hinder our
Foreign Vent; and our late great Trade and Exportation of English Hats to
Spain, is in a manner lost, being now mostly supplied by the French. 000000 Our
Exportations to the Canary Islands are vastly sunk in quantity and value, from
what they formerly and lately were; of which I shall speak more particularly in
the next Section. 000000 Amongst many other Excellent Materials, we have in
England great store of Tyn and Lead, capable of rich and mighty Manufactures in
mixture, and otherwise, as appears by our Imported Tynned Plates from Germany,
which are computed to cost England near 100000 l. per Annum; and then what does
that Manufacture bring into Germany from other Countries? This Art the English
were never taught, but have had a Manufacture of Pewter, made of our Tyn and
Lead, of which we made and exported far greater quantities to Spain, than of
late Years we have done, since the Dutch and others came to share with us in
that Trade, so did we export more of it into France and Holland, in which
Countries it is now prohibited. We now Manufacture very little of our Tyn and
Lead, but export these materials to be Manufactured in other Nations, to whom
we are little better than the Miners; and though some Foreigners have lately
taught us to make better Pewter than before, yet the bulk and exportation of it
is much less. Our exported Tyn is sunk more than half its former foreign
Price, and our exported Pewter above a third, as is also our exported Lead.
000000
Perhaps more instances might be given of decays in our Exportations of late
Years, though it may be considered that we never had many Exportable
Manufactures of very great bulk and value, nor in truth any but that of our
Wool; so that if we so much fail of our former gain in this Commodity, it must
strike deep on our former Balance; But much more if we also fail in so many
other Exportations and Beneficial Trades.

And after these losses in our Exporting Trade, a further Estimate ought to be
made of the decay in our Trade from Port to Port; for though the English never
were, nor since the Dutch began to trade could be, considerably Masters of this
kind of Trade; Yet may it be presumed, that whilst we kept the Monopoly of
Cloth, our Merchants by the Barter and Vent of this Commodity had then more
advantageous Opportunities of Buying and Selling Foreign goods in Foreign
Ports; and the rather, because it not only gave the English an extraordinary
Reputation, but a real preference in those Parts they then principally Traded
to; besides, the former Privileges the English long enjoyed in Muscovy, enabled
them to so much of this kind of Trade as related to that Empire, which
advantage we have lost by the resumption of those Privileges, whereof I shall
say more.

But perhaps I may be told, That all our before mentioned Defalcations in the
beneficial parts of our Trade, have been made good by the Accession of the
Plantation-Trade in the Reign of King James, (being within the Compass of the
76 Years mentioned in the Account from the Mint) and by the Increase of it
since; and I the rather expect this Objection, because this Trade remaining
enclosed to the Subjects of the Crown of England, who for Want of other Trade
are thrust into it, it makes a great noise amongst us; I shall therefore speak
more particularly to it, than yet I have, that I may leave no Holes for
Starters.

It may be Alleged, and must be Confessed, That this Trade has employed a
good number of Ships, and has brought in great Customs; but nothing of this is
to the present question, being only, Whether it has advantaged the Nation in
its Annual gain of Treasure; which I conceive this Trade has not, if balanced
with the losses the Nation has received by it.

All the Gain England can or ever could receive by this Trade, must be in the
Return and Result of those Commodities we import from the Plantations, (viz.
Sugars, Tobaccoes, Dying Stuffs, etc.) in Exchange for so much of our Butter,
Cheese, Beer, Woollen Clothes, Hats, Shoes, Iron-work, and other
home-Commodities as we Export thither.

Now that the Labors of the same People in Fishing or Manufactures at home
did, and would have produced a greater Profit to the Nation than these
Plantation-Commodities, I think no man, considering what has been said before,
can so much as make a question. In fact our Fishing for White Herring and Cod
was deserted for this Trade, and the Continual transplanting of multitudes of
our Manufacturers and other people, has inevitably more and more sunk and
disabled us in all Manufactures and home-Employments.

Then for the supposed advantage we have in the Vent of our home-Commodities to
the Plantations, it is plain they are but our own People; and it must be
undeniable, that had the same People stayed in England, they would have taken
off a far greater Quantity; for whereas we now furnish them with some small
part of their Victuals, we should then have supplied them with All, viz. with
Bread, Flesh, Fish, Roots, etc. which now we do not; and they would have taken
off far more of our Butter, Cheese, Clothing, Drink, and other home
Commodities, when they had them at hand, and had been put to no other shifts.

But our infelicity is yet greater; for our Plantation-Trade (though at the
best far less valuable to the Nation than the same People and their Labors at
home) is yet grown much worse than it was 20 or 30 Years since, and must grow
worse and worse Continually.

This must notoriously appear by what has been said in this Section, when by
means of the late Irish Acts, See before.
and for other Reasons there mentioned, we are forced to Export unto, and
furnish these our Plantations with so much less quantities of our own, and so
much greater quantities of Foreign Goods than formerly and lately we did.

Besides which, by a further Improvidence we have lost other advantages in this
Trade: Our Re-exporters being to receive back half the Customs (which in this
Trade are very mighty) it has followed, that the Dutch coming to be furnished
with our Sugars and Dying Stuffs much cheaper than the English, (as being
charged not with half the Customs) have been by that means able to set up and
beat us out of the Foreign Trade of baked Sugars, of which they bake and vend
above 20 times the quantity the English do; so do they now use far the greatest
part of our Dying Stuffs, gaining near as much, if not more, by these
Manufactures than the raw materials yield the English.

Then, if this Trade did originally subvert or weaken several better Trades,
and besides is now less valuable than it was, instead of an Improvement, it
ought to be reckoned amongst the defalcations in our present Trade. 000000
And though it be not so direct to the present question, I shall add, That we
have little reason to boast of our Navigation in this Trade, when it was the
occasion of the loss of a more certain and beneficial Nursery of Seamen and
Shipping in our Fishery, when at the same time the Strength and Business of the
Nation have been so much contracted by the loss of our People, when our
Planters of New England having gotten a Considerable Navigation of their own,
do Trade from Port to Port in America, and have in a manner beaten us out of
that kind of Employment in those Parts; and when the Irish Shipping, together
with the growing Plenties of Ireland and New England, threaten the like in the
Trade of Exportation and Importation. To all which may be added, what we ought
to expect in case the Dutch may retain and Cultivate Surinam as far as it is
capable, since it will produce as good Sugars and Tobaccoes as any part of
America, and as much as will serve the greatest part of the World, if not all.

Nay, these Plantations may be Considered as the true Grounds and Causes of all
our present Mischiefs; for, had our Fishers been put on no other Employment,
had those Millions of People which we have lost or been prevented of by the
Plantations, continued in England, the Government would long since have been
under a necessity of Easing and regulating our Trade; the common Wants and
Cries of our People would infallibly have obliged it; but much of the Industry
of the Nation being turned this way, and the Plantations affording room and
hopes for Men of necessitous and uneasy Conditions, and our Laws mentioned in
the Seventh Section, posting them away, they have deserted the Nation
Continually, and left us intricated and fettered in private Interests and
destructive Constitutions of Trade. And thus, whilst we have been projecting
the Increase of Customs, we have fed our selves with the Shadows of Trade, and
suffered other Nations to run away with the Substance. I am assured, that the
English at Jamaica are now near, if not fully treble what they were when Sir
Thomas Muddiford was Governor there, and then they were at least 20000; whence
some Conjecture may be made at the rest.

SECT. XII.
Instances in late Increases and Excesses of our Foreign Importations, and
therein of the Decay of some other of our own Manufactures which supplied our
Home-Vses, viz. in Linnens of all sorts, more dear fine Linnens used;
incidently of the late and present Huswifery of English Women: In Ticking, in
Imported Woollen Manufactures from Holland, France, and Ireland; In Cordage,
Cables, Sayls and Sea-Nets; in Iron, in Brandy, in Wines of all sorts, these
risen in price; the particular odds in our former and present Canary-Trade; in
Coffee, in Earthen Ware, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, and Foreign Timber bought
dearer, and far more Timber Imported: In Imported Silks of all sorts; in Laces,
and many other things, and thereupon our late French Overballance Considered.
To which Added, our late losses by the French Capers, and Money Exported to
France by our Travelers, etc. The National Overballance inferred, this cleared
by a Deduction of our Trade, with Relation to the Dutch and French, and therein
of their gradual Increase, and our Decay in Trade; Whence the Growth of the
French and Dutch Revenues and Strengths observed; a farther Calculation of our
late and present Overballance; incidently of some farther Advantages in Trade
Foreigners have upon us.

IN order to take a right Measure of the Overballance, it is observed in the
Eighth Section, That if the beneficial part of our Trade become worse, and the
Consumptive Importations increase, it will sooner induce an Overballance, and
will cut deepest on the National Stock of Treasure.

Now it will much evidence the Increase of our Importations, if any of our own
Manufactures which are of necessary Use at home, are lost, or impaired in any
Considerable degree of later Years, because, the People must be then supplied
by the like Foreign Goods, to a greater degree than before.

I shall first instance in Linen, lately a Considerable Manufacture in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and the Parts adjacent; it was also the Huswifery of our
English Ladies, Gentlewomen and other Women; which general Employment of our
Women, (although most designed for the private Uses of Families) did keep very
many Thousands of Linen Looms at work in England, and did supply the greatest
part of our National occasion for Household and Course Linnens of all sorts.

But all this Manufacture of Linen in Cheshire, Lancashire, and elsewhere, is
now in a manner expired; and the Huswifely Women of England now employ
themselves in making an ill sort of Lace, which serves no National or Natural
Necessity; most of the rest spend their times much worse, or are idle, bringing
a Scandal on themselves and their Families; so that there is hardly a working
Linen Loom left in a County: which Idleness and Unprofitable living of our
Women, gives the Dutch a farther great Advantage upon us, whose Women are
mainly serviceable in Trade. And hence has followed a great Increase of
Foreign Imported Linnens from Holland and Germany, Dantzick, etc. much of
which since the Decay of our Cloth-Trade into those Parts, we buy for Money,
Bullion, or by Bills of Exchange, besides a prodigious Increase of Imported
Linnens from France, which of later Years has been estimated to cost the
Nation at least 500000 l. per Annum, which must now be supplied from other
Foreign Parts, and dearer, if our new Prohibition be observed. It has also
occasioned a far greater Home-Consumption of Indian Callicoes, etc. bought with
Money; and the rather, because the English of all sorts use more Linen than
ever, in their Apparel, Beds, Curtains, Hangings, etc. 000000 This Importation
of Linen is also become far more chargeable, by the more general Use of Dear
Fine Hollands, and other fine Foreign Linnens of great Value; which till of
later Years were only worn by some People of Quality, and by them very
sparingly. 000000 Thus also is our Manufacture of Ticking in Devonshire and
Somersetshire much impaired, and much more Foreign Ticking Imported: Such is
our Importation of Linen, that at this day an English Linnen-Draper who deals
for 80000 l. per Annum in Linen, does hardly sell 200 l. per Annum English of
all sorts. Suppose 000000
all the People in England one with another bestow 5 l. a piece more in
Foreign Linen Yearly, than they used to do; what a Vast Sum must this
amount to? And this being of so Universal Use, how soon may the Increase of
this Importation alone turn the Balance of the English Trade? There is hardly
any Nation in Europe but has a Manufacture of Linen, at least for Home-Uses,
except England; from Scotland we have much, and in Ireland it is a growing
Manufacture much encouraged.

To this may be added the New Importation of Woollen Manufactures, viz. Cloths,
Stuffs, and Druggets from Holland and France, of a great yearly value,
mentioned in the Eleventh Section, but proper to be remembered here. 000000 And
it ought not to be forgotten, that no sooner had the Irish learned to make
Frize, but presently Irish Frize became a great fashion in England. 000000 Our
Manufactures of Cordage for Ships, Cables, and Sea-Nets, are also much decayed
from what they were, much occasioned by the late dearness of Imported Hemp and
Flax, as has been intimated before, and we are therefore forced to import much
more of these Commodities from the Dutch and French; the Act of Navigation not
Prohibiting the Manufacture; which is worthy to be observed. 000000 There has
been a great Increase of imported Iron from Swedeland, Flanders, and Spain; by
this means many Iron-Works are laid down already in Kent, Sussex, and Surrey,
and elsewhere; and the rest must suddenly follow (if the Importation
continue,) which will bring at least 50000 Families in England on the
Parish-Charge, and must sink the price of all the Woods now employed for
Iron-Works to little or nothing. Imported Wire has already beat out our
home-Manufacture of Wire. 000000 Our English Distillations of Strong Waters of
all sorts, did formerly serve the National Uses, but of late years, our People
at home, and Mariners abroad, have been supplied with Imported Brandy from
France and Germany, which being hardly known in England within less than 20
years, has of late cost the Nation above 100000 l. per Annum. 000000 So has
the Importation of all sorts of Foreign Wines, vastly increased of later years,
especially out of France. We have also bought French Wines dearer than
formerly, and have bought them with our Money, Bullion, or by Bills of
Exchange; but formerly with our Exported Commodity. 000000 Besides which, we
have vast quantities of Imported Spanish Wines, which till of later years, The
Canary Wines are computed at about 13000 Pipes yearly, which at 20 l. per Pipe,
amounts to 260000 l. per Annum; and that our Commodities Exported thither, do
amount to about 65000 l. per Annum.
we also Purchased with our exported Commodities, at the rate of 10 l. per
Pipe, but now at about 20 l. per Pipe, and mostly with Money, Bullion, or Bills
of Exchange; so that it is Computed that of later years it has cost England
near 200000 l. per Annum, in Imported Spanish Wine, over and above the value of
our Commodities Exported to the Canaries. 000000 So, even before the stop of
French Wines, we had very much more Portugal and Rhenish Wines Imported and
consumed at home than ever; besides Italian, Greek, and Smyrna Wines; if the
Importation of French Wines continue prohibited, we must expect as much more of
these and Spanish Wines as will answer our present General Debauchery: many of
these Wines were hardly known in England of late years, and the rest far more
sparingly drunk; but our Imported Wines do now in the Whole cost the Nation the
greater part of a Million per Annum. 000000
Thus do we swallow and piss out inestimable Treasures, and contemn our own
excellent and more wholesome Drinks, which might be improved to a much greater
Perfection, both for our Use at home, and Trade abroad; and whilst every one is
an Ambitious Pretender to a Critical Palate in Wine, and is ready to impeach
the Guilty Drawers for Mixtures, Molossus, and Arsenick, we are contented to
let our Brewers abuse our own Liquors as they please.

And as if the English could affect every thing because it is Foreign, we have
also a new chargeable Importation of Coffee, which of all others seems to be
most useless, since it serves neither for Nourishment nor Debauchery. 000000 We
have also had a vast Increase of imported earthen Ware from Holland, most of it
made of our own Earth and Lead. 000000 To these ought to be added such other
Importations, as are now bought much dearer than formerly, spoken of before,
but fit to be remembered here: Such are Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, and Timber from
Norway and Liefland, being also mostly bought with Money, since the decay of
our Cloth-Trade into those Parts; and of these the yearly quantity of imported
Timber of all sorts is vastly increased of later years, by reason of the Decay
of our English Timber; so that we are over-ballanced in our Trade for these
Commodities several 100000 l. per Annum. 000000 Nay our so much boasted Turkey
Trade is so far infected by the general Disease, that we now yearly Export
almost as much Treasure to Turkey, as the value of our Cloth Exported thither
amounts to. Of late years we Exported little or no Treasure thither; Nay, I
have heard that formerly we Imported Treasure thence. In Exchange for the
Treasure and Cloth now Exported, the principal Commodity we Import is raw Silk,
this serves our own Silk Manufactures most consumed at home, except
Silk-Stockings, for which our chief remaining* Foreign Markets are Cales and
Hamburgh. This Cloth-Trade depending on the vent of Imported Silk at home, is
already considerably checked by the continual Increase of Imported raw Silk
from the East Indies, where our India Company buy it with Exported Treasure;
this year they here Imported more than ever. This last Sale they exposed to be
sold no less than 563 Bales of Raw Silk. 000000 The English formerly wore or
used little Silk in City or Country, only Persons of Quality pretended to it;
but as our National Gaudery has increased, it grew more and more into Mode;
and is now become the Common Wear, nay, the ordinary Material for Bedding,
Hanging of Rooms, Carpets, Lining of Coaches, and other things: and our Women,
who generally govern in this Case, must have Foreign Silks; for these have got
the Name, and in truth are most curious, and perhaps better wrought, as being
most encouraged. Of the same humor are their Gallants, and such as they can
influence; and most others. Our ordinary People, especially the Female, will be
in Silk more or less, if they can; though never so plain, stained or tattered:
Whence has followed a vastly greater Importation, and home-Consumption of the
dear Silk-Manufactures from Venice, Florence, Genoa, France, and Persia, and of
late from Holland; where they have improved their Silk Manufacture to a
considerable bulk and perfection. This our Affectation and Use of foreign Silks
having apparently much increased, within about Twenty or Thirty years past,
must produce a great Odds in the Balance, and besides has much contracted the
home-vent of our Woollen Stuffs and Cloths, and Beggered our own Silk-Weavers.
And it may be here taken notice of, as one of the mischievous Consequences of
our present Importing Trade, That our Merchants to preserve their only
home-Market, must bring in such curious and serviceable Foreign Manufactures as
will beat out our own. This Importing Trade agrees well with our Shopkeepers,
who can get more by Foreign Commodities, (of which, few or none know the Prices
but themselves, and the Merchants.) 000000 We have also of late a very
chargeable Importation of Laces from Venice and Genoa, but most of later years
from France, all which are commonly called Points de Venice, amounting to a
vast Sum yearly. 000000
Of All others our late Overballance in the French Trade, has been most
Prodigious; and such have been the Arts to attain it, that it would require a
particular Treatise by it self: But it will be necessary to what I have
undertaken, to give some brief Account of it, and in what it did consist; and
the rather, that something of the Variety of the French Exportable Manufactures
and other Goods may Appear. I shall begin with what Mr. Fortrey reports in his
Book twice Printed, and Dedicated to his now Majesty, In Anno (63) and (73)
and therefore I presume of good Authority.

He tells us, That upon a Jealousy the French King had conceived of the
Balance of the English Trade, there was an Estimate thereof given in to the
French King; whereby it appeared, that there was yearly Exported of French
Goods by the English, to the value of 2500000 l. Viz.

1. In Velvets plain and wrought, Sattins plain and wrought, Cloth of God and
Silver, Armosynes and other Merchandises of Silk which are made at Lions, of a
great value.

2. In Silk-Stuffs, Taffeties, Poudesoys, Armosyns, Clothes of Gold and Silver,
Tabbies plain and wrought, Silk Ribbands and other such like Silk-Stuffs as are
made at Tours.

3. In Silk Ribbands, Galloons, Laces, and Buttons of Silk, which are made at
Paris, Rouen, Chaimant, S. Eslieres in Forests.

4. A great quantity of Serges, which are made at Chalons, Chartres, Estammes,
and Rhemes; and great quantities of Serges made at Amiens, Crevecoeur,
Blicourt, and other Towns in Picardy.

5. In Bever, Demicaster, and Felt-Hats, made in the City and Suburbs of Paris,
besides many others made at Rouen, Lions, and other places.

6. In Feathers, Belts, Girdles, Hatbands, Fans, Hoods, Masks, gilt and wrought
Looking-Glasses, Cabinets, Watches, Pictures, Cases, Medals, Tablets,
Bracelets, and other such like Ware.

7. In Pins, Needles, Box-Combs, Tortoise-shell-Combs, and such like.

8. In Perfumed and Trimmed Gloves, that are made at Paris, Rouen, Clendosme,
Clermont, and other places.

9. In Papers of all sorts which are made at Auvergne, Poictou, Limosin,
Champaigne, and Normandy.

10. In all sorts of Ironmongers Wares that are made in Forests, Auvergne, and
other places.

11. In Linen Cloth that is made in Brittany, and Normandy, as well Course as
Fine.

12. In Household Stuff, consisting of Beds, Matresses, Coverlids, Hangings,
Fringes of Silk, and other Furniture.

13. In Wines from Gascoigne, Mantois, and other places on the River of Loyer,
and also from Bordeaux, Rochel, Nante, Rouen, and other places.

14. In Aqua-vitae, Cider, Vinegar, Verjuise, and such like.

15. In Saffron, Castle-Soap, Honey, Almonds, Olives, Capers, Prunes, and such
like.

16. Besides 5 or 600 Vessels of Salt laden at Maron, Rochel, Bovage, and the
Isle of Oleron, and Isle of Rhee.

But that the Commodities Imported out of England into France, consisting
chiefly of Woollen Clothes, Serges, Knit Stockings, Lead, Pewter, Allom,
Coals, and all else did not amount to above a Million yearly, which left the
overbalance 1600000 l.

It Is true, that since this there was an Estimate of the French Overballance
taken in England by some English Merchants, from the Entries of the Port of
London, by which it was computed, that the French Overballance amounted to
about a Million; This was presented by our Merchants to our Lords Commissioners
upon a Treaty of Commerce with France in (74.) (which came to no conclusion)
and afterward to the Parliament; which seems to impeach the Estimate of the
French Overballance reported by Mr. Fortrey, as to the Quantum.

This I need not contend, since if the French Overballance had been no more
than a Million, it was enough to impoverish us, considering our Importations
from other Foreign Nations; But that I may not totally desert Mr. Fortrey, I
shall take notice, that this English Computation was taken from the Entries of
the Port of London only, from whence there may not be any so Just a calculation
for all the rest of our Ports; and that the Entries do not comprehend any of
those French Commodities which were prohibited by our former Laws, and are
therefore Imported without Entry, which are accounted to amount to some
Hundreds of thousand pounds yearly, perhaps near to another Million. But on the
other side, that the French Entries must be certain as to the Exportations from
France; that Mr. Fortrey would not be willing to falsify with His Majesty of
England, nor the French Ministers with the French King, in a matter so
important.

Nor is it to be thought that our Importations from France decreased in
quantity or value since Mr. Fortrey wrote, to the time of the Prohibition, but
rather increased; whereof our Merchants then gave an instance in Wines and
Brandies, from the Entries of the Port of London, as follows:

From Mich. 1663. to Mich. 1664. There was Imported into the Port of London
6828 Tuns of French Wine, and then the quantity of Brandy was so small and
inconsiderable, that it deserves not to be noted.

From Mich. (67) to Mich. (69). There was Imported into the Port of London in
the said two years, 17000 Tuns of French Wine, and of Brandy about 3000 Tun.

From Mich. (72) to Mich. (74) Was Imported into the Port of London 22500 Tuns
of French Wine.

From Mich. (71) to Mich. (73) Was Imported to London 7315 Tuns of Brandy.

From Mich. (73) to Mich. (74) Was Imported to London, as near as can be
computed 5000 Tuns of Brandy, and every Tun of Brandy consuming about 5 Tuns of
Wine, makes the quantity of 25000 Tuns of Wine.

This I the rather take notice of here, because from hence it does also appear,
that the Additional Impositions on French Wines and Brandies by our Parliament
in (67) did not make the Importation of them less tolerable or practicable than
before, and therefore were only Impositions on the English Subject.

Nay, the French have been able to raise the Prices of their Wines and Brandies
upon us, even since (67) as the same Merchants represented. For,

In (67) Langoon Wine in France was not above 43 Crowns per Tun, clear aboard.
In Anno (68) the price was 47 Crowns. In Anno (69) 54 Crowns. In Anno (70) 52
Crowns. In Anno (71) 55 Crowns. In Anno (72) 50 Crowns. In Anno (73) 56 Crowns.
In Anno (74) 70 Crowns.
And all sorts of Clarrets are risen double the price, since the year (67).

So said the Merchants in the year (74) and whosoever will take the pains to
look into the Custom-Books, will find a mighty Increase of Imported French Wine
and Brandy since (74) to the time of the Prohibition; and that, for several
years last past, our Importation of French Linen, Silks, and other
Commodities, have also continually grown upon us, whereof we have an infallible
Evidence in the continual Rising of our Customs.

I have heard that the quantity of French Wines Imported in 1676. made about
36000 Tuns of Wine, and that about the years (50) (51) and (52) the quantity
yearly Imported was about 3000 Tuns of Wine.

But on the other side, the French Policies have been as industrious to
suppress our English Trade, upon which they have gradually imposed more and
more Taxes, and at last so great, that it amounts to a Prohibition; as may be
Instanced in our Woollen Manufacture.

In the year 1632, the Duty on an English Broad Cloth Imported into France, was
6 Livres.

In Anno (44) it was raised to 9 Livres.

In Anno (54) to 30 Livres.

In Anno (64) to 40 Livres, and yet did the English continue to Export
considerable quantities of our Woollen Clothes into France.

But in Anno (67) being after Mr. Fortrey wrote, it was raised to 80 Livres,
Mr. Fortrey first Printed his Book in (63)
which is about 50 per Cent.

A piece of Serge in Anno (32) per 1 Livre.

In Anno (54) 5 Livres.

In (64) 6 Livres.

In (67) 12 Livres, which also amounting to about 50 per Cent. was equal or
worse than an express Prohibition; so that all our Exportations of our
home-Commodities to France in the year 1669. amounted but to 171021 l. 6. s. as
it was Calculated from our own Entries (if my Copy be true.)

It will not be a Digression to show how Industrious the French Policies have
been to suppress our Trade to other Nations.

It is now about five years since that our Merchants, observing the Dutch and
other Neighbor Nations to be in War, Mr. Mun of Foreign Trade page 149.
Notes, That all the great Losses we receive at Sea in our Shipping, either
outward or homeward bound, ought to be considered in the Balance; for the
value of the one is to be Deducted from our Exportations; and the value of the
other from our Importations.
but ours in Peace; they had now golden hopes of driving a mightier Foreign
Trade than ever; for which purpose they thought it convenient to buy many
Dutch-built Ships, and somewhat the rather because they had lost many Ships in
the late War: But the Act of Navigation standing in their way, they obtained
His Majesty's License for it.

But thereupon, there presently came out a French Edict for the seizing of all
Ships bought in any Enemie's Country, which did discourage many of our
Merchants from buying any Ships, yet many were bought and escaped safe to our
Ports; these and many English Ships our Merchants forthwith freighted and sent
out, in prospect of a swelling Trade, and vast Returns of Treasure.

But immediately there came out swarms of French Capers, who seized on those
Dutch-built Ships, though they had all necessary Passes; and from thence,
finding the sweetness of it, they fell to taking of our English built Ships, on
pretense they carried Enemies Goods, whereof they themselves would be the
Judges, and did actually seize all sorts of English built Ships, laden merely
on the account of English Merchants, they took mere English Coasters; nay, they
retook many of our Ships which had been actually discharged in France; they
plundered our Ships, and grievously beat and wounded our generous Seamen (who
never before dreamed of any thing but the Sovereignty of the Sea) and killed
many.

Then were our Ships carried into the French Ports, and our Merchants put to
prove the property of their own Ships and Goods before French Judges, in the
new erected French Admiralties, by a long and tedious proceeding; by which, and
also in the French Court, and by the Treachery of their own Agents, they were
put to vast Expenses.

There were about 400 Sail of our Merchants Ships seized in this manner, many
of which the French thought fit absolutely to condemn; and such as were
released were kept, some three Months, some six Months, some twelve Months, and
some longer, and then were Discharged with great Damage, by Plunder and Expense
in France, besides the first Violences; and after all, lost the intended Fruit
of their Voyages, of which, doubtless the French were very sensible: And what
is yet worse, the French King making the utmost advantages of every thing, got
Thousands of our Seamen by extraordinary Pay, to engage in his Service, to
which he does still indear them by Money, and all imaginable encouragements.

All which being done in times of Peace, could only be intended to impoverish
and disable our Merchants Trade and Nation, notwithstanding their pretense of
carrying Enemies Goods; this is evident as well from the said Edict, and from
the Nature of the whole Transaction, as by another Edict set forth by the
French King about the same time, giving Liberty of Trade to any Nation (without
exception) that would take French Passes; for it being foreseen that the
English would not take any, because of the English Claim to the Sovereignty of
the Seas, it left other Nations then at enmity with France, at Liberty to take
Passes, and by Consequence to Trade; who accordingly did, and traded without
control, particularly the Dutch: So did the Swedish Ships at the same time
openly Trade to and from Holland, and other Countries then at enmity with
France; without any Disturbance from the French Capers.

This might administer further Considerations; I shall only at present
accommodate it to the Matter in question, being the Overbalance of Trade;
which must needs have been the higher upon us, as our Merchants received more
Injuries and Losses of this Nature.

To this I shall add, that it is an incredible Sum of Money which our English
Gentlemen and Travelers of all sorts spend yearly in France, Here may be added
the vast Sums and Riches which already are, and Annually will be Transported by
Papists to France, and other Parts; but principally to France.
to learn unprofitable Apish affected French Fashions, and Modes in their
Carriage, Talk, Clothes, Eating and Drinking. It is below any of these English
Mounsieurs to enquire into the Trade of France; This Expense is not near
balanced by the Expense of the French Traveling Gentry, or others in England;
the French that come hither, being ordinarily such as come to get Estates by
vending French Manufactures, Wines and other Commodities, Dancing, Cookery,
etc* and when they are grown Rich, do generally Transport themselves, and their
Estates into France, and so Spirit away our Wealth.

Many of these Losses by the French, being not comprised in the former
instances, require a further ample Valuation. 000000 I believe other instances
may be given of the late Increase of our Importations, our National Luxury and
folly being such, that our Merchants find a home-Vent for almost all sorts of
Foreign Goods and trifles in the Universe: These I leave to be added by the
observation of others. 000000
In the mean time, considering what the utmost gain of our Trade might be,
during the 76 years mentioned in the Account from the Mint, it must be evident
from what I have already said, that we have been Overballanced many 100000 l.
per Annum, of later years. The Particulars I have mentioned in this, and the
last Section, being such as have happened, or worked more signally and
vigorously upon us during the years mentioned in the said Account; which (that
I may prevent Alterations) I shall endeavor to clear, by a brief Deduction of
our Trade during the same 76 years, which I cannot do without some Relation to
the French and Dutch Trades; of whose Rise and Growth, and their Consequential
Increase of Strength and Power, I shall therefore also give some Account.

I shall begin with that of the English:

Before the Dutch were cemented into States, the English had far greater
Advantages in Trade than any Neighbor Nation, by the greater Plenty of our
more excellent Oak-Timber, Victuals, Numbers of Seamen, home-Materials of
Manufacture, our great Woollen-Manufactures, our Fishery, and other our
valuable Commodities mentioned before: Besides the German, Flemish, and French
Trades. That of the Sound, and Streights, our Adventurous Merchants and
Mariners in Edw. the Sixth's time Discovered the North-East Passage by Sea to
Muscovy, which Trade was before driven by the Merchants of the Hans-Towns
across the Baltic: Such was our good success, that by the great Commerce our
Merchants brought, and by the Embassies and Applications of our succeeding
Princes, especially Queen Elizabeth, the Czar granted them a Free Trade at his
Port Archangel, (that is) without paying any Impost; which he would not grant
to others: whereby the English became possessed of the whole Trade of a great
Advantage; besides which, our Woollen-Manufactures were not a little improved
in Bulk and Value, by means of those Flemmings or Walloons driven out by the
Duke of Alva, and entertained by Queen Elizabeth; spoken of before.

In this Condition was our Trade when the Dutch United Provinces came to a
Settlement, being about 90 Years since; the Dutch hereupon found themselves
obliged to study all Imaginable ways of Gain by Trade; For the People driven
into these Provinces by the Spanish Tyranny and Persecution for Religion, were
very Numerous, the Country very narrow, and yielding little of the Necessaries
of life, and the Long and Continual Charge of their War with Spain very great;
from which Necessity followed much Contrivance and Industry, and thence those
Arts and easy Methods of Trade which have wrought so great Changes in most
Parts of Europe, if not throughout the World.

First there followed these Alterations in the Trade of Europe; the Dutch fell
into a mighty Trade or Employment of carrying and dealing from Port to Port,
far beyond what was ever used in these Parts before; which Trade they
engrossed, beating out the Antwerpians, English, and all others, Except in what
related to Muscovy, (secured to the English by our Privileges there) and what
related to Spain during their Wars with that Crown; the Portuguese, having
before found out the way by Sea to the East Indies, and having by that cheaper
passage beat the Venetians out of that Trade, and planted mighty Factories and
Forces in the Indies; the Dutch before, the Year 1600, being informed of the
Riches of that Commerce by one Cornelius Hou^man a Fugitive from the
Portuguese, eng^ged in a Trade thither, and in the Year 1602, by the Authority
of their Union, established their East India Company; who upon their original
Fund, being 600000 l. Sterling, made so great a progress in that Trade, that
besides several Considerable Dividends before made, upon a Compute in the Year
1608, their Stock was increased to Three Millions Sterling: and in this great
Carriere very speedily supplanted the Portuguese in this Trade; their success
was little less in the Fishing Trade for White Herrings, Ling and Codfish on
the Coasts of England and Scotland, which they extended beyond what we ever
did, incroaching daily on the English, being enabled thereto by their more
easy Methods of Trade; and the English the more disabled by our Application to
the Plantation-Trade in the time of King James, whereof the Wife Sir Walter
Raleigh, by the occasion of his Travels, taking notice, about 60 years since
gave a Caution of it to King James, showing the Reasons, and proving that the
Dutch then got 1372000 l. per Annum Sterling by this Trade, by the Accounts he
took at several Ports, (and yet he mentions not their Trade in the Streights,
and but one Port in France, viz. Roan:) notwithstanding which, the Dutch still
getting advantages upon us, had near beaten us out before the end of King James
his Reign; and soon after became Complete Masters of it.

Thus was this our Fishing-Trade, of great and certain Profit, and of high
Importance for the Support of our Navigation and Coasts, supplanted; in the
place of this, we had our Plantation-Trade, of which having spoken so much
before, I shall say no more, than that it brought in great Customs: Yet, not
forgetting, that King James succeeding Queen Elizabeth, (who to reduce the late
portentous greatness of the Austrian Family, had supported the Dutch) made a
Peace with Spain, which gave the English a particular Advantage in the Trade of
Spain for a time, viz. till the Dutch made a Peace with that Crown; and since
that has continued a very beneficial Market for many of our Commodities, being
there vended for ready-money: Our Trade to Muscovy remained secured to us by
our Privilege there, and our Clothing Trade by our Wool, and the ignorance of
other Nations in that Manufacture. We had a remaining Fishery at Groenland,
Iseland, and Newfoundland; we continued some other Exports of lesser Note
mentioned before; but the Woollen-Manufacture being our chief Jewel, we kept
the Monopoly of it during the Reign of King James, and for the greatest part of
the Reign of King Charles the First, and generally raised the prices; by all
which, and for that our Imports were less than of late they have been, the
Balance of our Trade, during the Reigns of these Princes, was kept up to the
degree, we may Compute it by the Account from the Mint, which though somewhat,
was but a narrow scantling, considering how prodigiously the French and Dutch
Trades were improved and grew up by us continually; yet have we since lost, or
much Impaired all these principal Advantages in Trade, as I have already shown.

Before I show how these Limbs of our Trade became so much disabled, it will be
necessary to observe what Influence the Dutch Trade had upon the French.

All the Exportable Commodities of any Note the French formerly, and till this
last Age pretended to, were Corn, Wine, and Salt: whereof that of Corn was as
Considerable as any; the other two being but sparingly Exported, at least in
Comparison of what have been Vended of late Years: besides these, they had
Skins, Tallow, and Woad, and some Fruits of little Consequence; which whole
Trade could bring in no great matter.

But the Dutch being ravenous after Trade, and like Bees thrusting themselves
into every Creek and Corner for Commodities to sell again, and barter away for
Profit, presently gave a far mightier Vent to the French Wines, with which they
not only plentifully supplied most other Nations, but drank good store
themselves, being their principal Home- Consumption; of Salt they took off yet
greater quantities, not only for present Merchandise, but to use in their
prodigious Fishery. As the Vent of these grew greater, more were provided in
France; hence also did their Infant-Manufactures of Linen, Silk, Paper,
Brandy, and those Numbers of others enumerated by Mr. Fortrey, and doubtless
many more, grow up to Giants; the hungry French tasting the sweet of the Gain,
did not fail to supply this busy People, though doubtless not without the
Conduct of an extraordinary Wisdom; Since it is apparent, that the Dutch manner
of Trading made the same Overtures to other Neighbor Nations; See before in
Section the 7 th. Page
the wise Sir Walter Raleigh observed how free and easy they had made their
Commerce by lowering their Customs and Duties: they let in the French
Protestants by a Toleration, and carefully Superintended the Increase of their
Manufactures. Thus as the French Shop came to have more things of Delicacy and
Variety, it drew in more Customers, and the English amongst the rest; and as a
great part of Trade is driven in Fantastical Dresses, and Toys of many sorts,
the French took care to provide an Abundance, with which they gulled the rest
of the World: Hence were their Princes at first called Fashion-mongers; but
they did not rest there, they soon became Portentous Tradesmen in the most
solid and valuable Commodities in the World, and thence Lord Mayors of the
Continent; doubtless the present French King thinks it his high Concern, and
values himself upon it, of which we have an Evidence in his nice and early
looking into his great Shop-Books or Entries, to find out the Balance of his
Trade with England, and by making his Shop easy in the Approach, viz. by his
increasing his free Ports, (for in truth, it would be a very strange Project of
Gain, for a Tradesman to set a Toll on every man that comes in at his Door) the
same appears by an hundred other instances.

Thus have the Dutch in a blind pursuit of their particular Interests, built up
a Prodigy of Power, which (having of late propagated a great Navigation of its
own, as I shall more particularly show) is now so swelling, and of so
Serpentine a Nature, that it is ready to devour those who first gave it life.

The yearly value of the late and present Exports from France, may be computed
by what the English only took off, which supposing to be more moderate than Mr.
Fortrey Reports, (which yet I do not admit) viz. but two Millions Sterling,
what a vast yearly Sum must it amount to? Since there is great reason to think,
and I speak upon the best Authority I can meet with, that the Dutch have taken
off seven or eight times more yearly than the English; For besides the mighty
quantities of Salt, Wine, and Brandy which they themselves Consume, they Export
vastly more of these, and All other French Commodities to other Nations; the
French Trade being indeed the principal Foundation of most of the ordinary
Dutch Trade from Port to Port.

Besides the Dutch, the Hamburghers, Lubeckers, Swedes, Danes, and most or all
other Mercantile Nations in this Part of the World, do yearly Freight
themselves at the French Ports, (which must be one reason, and perhaps as yet
the principal, why the French Language is become so Universal:) whilst the
French take very little Consumptive Commodity from these, nor yet from the
Dutch or English, but East India Spice, Callicoes, etc. a Trade which the
French King has also manifestly designed to engage in, by an Association and
Contribution of Stock in France, and his Attempts to get footing in diverse
places of the East Indies; some time will show what his Success may be, or
whether at a Lump, he hopes to Unite the Dutch Trade and Strengths in those
Parts to himself, by an Union of the Dutch Provinces and their Navigation to
his present Empire; and whether then our English Factories there, will be able
to preserve themselves against daily Violations, and utter Extirpation. In the
mean time upon what has been said, let the Reader compute, how many Millions
Sterling must already yearly enter into France, by the Annual Vent of so
Prodigious a Store of Commodities; it must be much the better part of Twenty
Millions. I find it affirmed by a small Piece lately Printed, Entitled, An
Account of the French Usurpations upon England; which seems Written by a man of
good Judgment, That from the Northern Countries only, the French Wines now
bring in 25 Millions of Florens; their Salt, 10 Millions of Florens; Brandy, 5
Millions; their Silks, Stuffs, Toys, and Fripperies, 40 Millions of Florens
more. What then do the French receive from all the other Regions of the World,
for these, and other things?

All which has been visible in the gradual Increase of the French Power, from
the time the Dutch Provinces began to Trade. It must be admitted that both
before and since the French Monarchy became Absolute (this being a great and
populous Nation) was able to bring Considerable Armies into the Field; but they
could get little or no ground by Arms on any of their Neighbors, or soon lost
what they got: The People were abject and recreant; and more the Ridicule, than
the terror of their Neighbors, the English and Spanish Treasures and Strengths
were notoriously too big for them; the English Conquered them several times;
the Spaniards more lately beat them out of Navarre, Naples, and Millan, and by
their Faction in France, drove Henry the 3d. out of Paris, and most of his
other best Cities, and afterward not above 80 years since supported the Holy
League with Arms and Money against Henry the 4th, under the Conduct of the Duke
of Mayence; both which Princes fell by the hands of Priests; for the Spaniards
were then the strongest side. This Superiority of the Spanish Power, made all
the Kings of France from Charles the 8 th, to Lewis the 13 th inclusive, glad
to seek a Support from the English; and the more to endear themselves, got to
be Knights of the Garter (except Francis the 2 d. a King of one year, and no
more) these were, Lewis the 12 th, Francis the 1 st, Henry the 2 d, Charles the
9 th, and the said Henry the 3 d, and the 4 th; if we go higher to Lewis the 11
th, who next preceded Charles the 8 th, we may Compute his Treasure and
Grandeur by a Reckoning found in the Chamber of Accounts at Paris, of 2 s. for
new Sleeves to his old Doublet, Heylin's Geogr. 236.
and three Halfpence for Liquor to grease his Boots; It Is like he was the
poorer, because he and the rest paid a kind of Tribute of 50000 Crowns per
Annum to the King of England for 100 years together; before this, they were
almost continually wasted by the English, till our Dissentions at home called
our Forces away, leaving Charles the 7 th, Predecessor of this Lewis the 11 th,
to take Possession of what he pleased, except Calais.

But soon after the French Ports were frequented by the Dutch Navigation, we
find the State of France begin to alter; He began his Reign in the year 1589.
and Reigned till 1610.

Next Lewis 13 th, who died 1642. and since, the present Lewis the 14 th.


the said Henry the 4 th, having reduced the Holy League, grew a Mighty Prince,
added la Bresse, Bearne, and Base Navarre to the Crown, and enjoyed a 10 years
Peace, though at last Murdered. Lewis the 13 th. was yet more powerful;
besides the Reduction of the Huguenots, and of above 300 Walled Towns then in
their hands, he added or revested to that Crown, the Dukedoms of Bar, and
Lorrain, and other acquests in Germany, Italy, the Belgic Provinces, and other
parts of the Spanish Dominions; in which, and in Italy, he was able at once to
maintain five Royal Armies in the Field; keeping no less than 120000 Men in Pay
and Action for many years together, besides his Garrisons; and yet is the Power
of France since vastly increased, whereof every man is or has reason to be
sensible. I shall refer the particular Consideration of it till the last
Section.

In the mean time, I shall only add what I find in Dr. Heylin's Book of
Geography, p. 238, (who being to give an Account of the Revenue of that
Country) tells us, That Lewis the 11 th, gathered one Million, and an half of
Crowns, Francis the 1 st. brought them to three Millions; his Successor Henry
the 2 d. to six; Charles the 9 th. to seven; Henry the 3 d. to ten; Henry the 4
th. from two to five Millions, Sterling. This he attributes merely to the more
Despotical Power, and greater Tyranny of the later Princes; and might be so in
some measure: For in the time of Charles the 7 th. whilst in War with the
English, there was an Act by the Three French Estates, that the King might
raise Money in case of Necessity; which Power, it is likely was not at first
used so moderately as it was after: However we cannot think Henry the 4 th.
could leap from two Millions to five Millions Sterling, without a great
Importation of Treasure, which does not grow on the Peoples backs like Wool;
the advance of the French Trade and Treasure, being the true Reason, we may
believe the Revenue of Lewis the 13 th. was raised to more than double this,
viz. Ten Millions Sterling; and that since it is doubled again, viz. Twenty
Millions, (as good Judges of it as I can meet with say, it is now above Twenty
Millions Sterling) For the Treasures of the World being drawn into France, as
into a Gulf, must answerably advance that King's Revenue, and diminish the
Treasures of other Nations; which it is probable is partly the Cause that the
Price of most Commodities in Europe are sunk; since according to the former
Maxims, if there be less Money in the hands of other Trading Nations than
before, they must and will buy for less.

Having thus far pursued the Growth of the French Trade, and Power; I shall now
return to the English, as they were invested with the several Trades before
mentioned in the time of our two last Kings, viz. King James, and King Charles
the First, and shall endeavor to show, First, how we come to lose the Monopoly
of the Woollen Manufacture; which was the Effect of many Concurring Causes; the
Dutch were generally vigilant after all Trade, and particularly this, so much
they shared with us long before, that they Dyed, Dressed, and Vended vast
quantities of our white Clothes Exported thither, by which they made an
incredible Gain. Sir Walter Raleigh about 60 years since, in his Observations
on Trade presented to King James, proves, England in 55 years, had lost 55
Millions of Pounds by the Dutch Dyeing and Dressing our white Clothes; But
withal, the Dutch by their vast Navigation and Universal Trading, gave them a
greater vent than we otherwise could do, unless by an equal Regulation of our
Trade, the English had been made as Capable; without any thing of that, this
course was taken; one Sir William Kokayne, and other Merchants, hoping to make
an advantage to themselves, got a Patent for the Dyeing and Dressing of our
Clothes, with Power to hinder the Exportation of our white Clothes; wherein we
have our two usual Expedients in Trade, viz. a Restraint to a Company, and a
Prohibition; by which our Vent was lessened, and the Dutch the more provoked to
attempt this Manufacture at home; to which they had great encouragement by
their Situation for the Trade of Germany; and the rather because our Hamburgh
Company, who by their Patent have the sole Trade on that Coast, for about six
or seven hundred Miles, kept but two Staples, viz. at Hamburgh and Dort, remote
from each other, and from many of those Countries which they supplied: So as
many of those who come to our Markets, must pass and repass, through several
Principalities with much Danger, and Payments of Tolls and Taxes; and besides,
we raised our Prices, and set such terms on the Buyers, that others as well as
the Dutch, were much disaffected; whereupon an Opportunity was offered: For
about the year 1636. Two hundred Families of our Manufacturers being about to
forsake Norfolk and Suffolk, and Transport themselves to our Plantations, by
reason of the then Persecution of Dissenters, the Dutch invited them into
Holland, where the Dutch did not only entertain them, but in Leyden, Alkmaer,
and other places, planted them Rent-free, and Excise-free, seven years. After
these went more and more Colonies, which settled at Rotterdam, Middleburgh, and
Flushing, where a fourth part of the Inhabitants are English, or of English
Extraction: Besides vast numbers of English dispersed elsewhere in those
Provinces.

The Dutch having gotten the Manufacturers, had half done their work; they
wanted nothing but Wool, which if they might have on any tolerable Terms, their
Advantages in the way of Trade, must enable them to out-doe us, this they
Imported from Spain, England, and Ireland, and elsewhere, falling a main upon
the Woollen Manufactures of all sorts; so that about the year 1640. they
pretended to something of a Cloth Trade in Germany, and soon afterward took
occasion to supply our Eastland and Northern Markets more and more; especially
with fine Cloth; getting ground upon us continually, they bought our Woolls
dearer at first, but have gradually sunk the Prices; our Vigilant Neighbors,
the French, started with them, or soon followed their Example, as did the
Flemmings, the Silesians, Polanders, and some others mentioned before; by all
which, these and other Parts of the World were as much supplied with coarse
Cloths, Druggets, and Stuffs; but the Dutch would not rest here; Trade was
their business, and they observed, the virtue of ours (such as we had) depended
wholly on Accidents, and particularly that of Muscovy on our Privilege; which
therefore they found ways to evacuate, by bestowing Money amongst the Grandees
of that Court, and furnishing them with an Objection against our Merchants, as
being Londoners, and therefore (as they insinuated) must be concerned as Actors
in the horrid Murder of His late Sacred Majesty, which it was in vain for our
Merchants to dispute, when the Judges were Fee'd on the other side; this
powerful Metal (whereof the Dutch are never sparing on such occasions, and
therein have a farther advantage upon us) had so radicated their Interests with
the Boyars, that notwithstanding all Applications in an Honorable Embassy to
the Great Czar from his now Sacred Majesty, by the Earl of Carlisle, our
Privilege could never be regained.

Soon after this, there followed two things convenient to be taken notice of
for the prevention of misapprehensions on either side; one was, that between
the year (50) and (60) we had an Accidental Opportunity of increasing our
Treasure with the loss of our People, viz. by the Stocking Ireland with
Inhabitants, and Cattle, after the Reduction of the Irish Rebels, and by
furnishing it with all sorts of Goods and Necessaries, then much consumed or
spoiled by the Wars and Disorders there; which on a sudden, brought us almost
all the Treasures of Ireland; which supposing but a Million and an half, or but
a Million, was considerable.

Another, which prevented us of as much Money as we thus got, if not of more,
and doubtless exhausted us of some; In the year 1654. the late Usurper Oliver
Cromwell (whose guilty fears made him Jealous of the English, and seek a
support from France) did in Conjunction with France make a fatal War upon
Spain; which, besides the seizure of our Spanish effects, and our vast Losses
at Sea in that War, interrupted our Trade with Spain, and gave the Dutch better
footing, but opened our French Trade; at once weakening the Balance of our
Trade, and the Balance of all Europe.

Thus it was before the year 1660. But in regard our Imports were then of far
less quantity and value than they were after, it is presumeable that our Trade
might be yet beneficial, especially considering our then Irish Trade; but our
Importations increasing, we find what Mr. Mun, a Principal English Merchant
thought of it, by what he says in his Book of Trade, Printed in (63.) But, as
appears by the Preface, Page 61.
was Written some time before; the words are these, The whole Trade of the
Realm for Exportations and Importations is now found to be about the yearly
value of four Millions and a half of Pounds; As for Mr. Mun's proposal to
Export Money in Trade, I have spoken to it before; and besides, he recommends
the Reduction of the Customs, and easing of Trade, which (if fully done) it
might be then convenient.
It may be yet increased 200000 l. more by the Importations and Consumption of
Foreign Wares, by this means we know the King shall be a Gainer near 20000 l.
(viz. by the Customs;) but the Commonwealth would lose the whole 200000 l. and
the King shall be sure in the end to have the greatest loss, if he do not
prevent such unthrifty courses as do impoverish his People. By which words, I
take it as very plain, that before he wrote, our Exportations and Importations
were computed to stand even; which is the more enforced by the latter words,
viz. That the Commonwealth would lose the whole 200000 l. the People be
impoverished, and the King the greatest loser at last.

Then if we compute our Losses since (60), nay, or (63), viz. By the means of
the Acts of Navigation, which (though first begun by the Rump, to the prejudice
of Trade in their time) have been since made Laws, and continued to our greater
and daily growing prejudice. 000000 By all our direct and Consequential Losses
from the Irish Acts mentioned before. 000000 By the Loss or decay of our Scotch
Trade. 000000 By the Stop of our Exported Clothing into France. 000000 By the
setting up of more Woollen Manufactures in Portugal, Swedeland, and the
Palatinate, (to which last Country went some Thousands of our Manufacturers
within less than Twenty years) and by the Increase of these, and of the
Silesian, Polonian, Dutch, French, and Flemmish Woollen Manufactures ever
since, by which our Vent must be answerably Contracted. 000000 By the continual
sinking of the Foreign Price of our Clothing. 000000 By the decay of our
Iseland, Groenland, and Newfound-Land Fishing-Trades. 000000 By the sinking of
the Foreign Price of our other Exports mentioned before. 000000 And lastly, in
a Lump by a continual vast Increase of our Importations of all Sorts and
Species mentioned in this Section, with an Exportation of Treasure answerable
to the Whole. 000000
Our Overballance appears to me to be so much of late years, that it might be
wondered how any of our late Treasures could yet remain amongst us, did we not
also Consider that our Trade by degrees, in length of time, had before the year
(60) brought a great Treasure into England, and that these our latest
Prejudices and Losses have not been working upon us many years. But if the
Overballance continue, it must soon sweep away what remains; which Mr. Fortrey
Prophetically foretold in these words:

Hereby it may appear how insensibly our Treasures must be exhausted, and our
Nation Beggared, whilst we carelessly neglect our own Interests, and Strangers
abroad are diligent to make their advantages upon us.

Sir William Temple, in his excellent Treatise of the Dutch does presage the
like.

Having laid it as a Ground, That

Whatever the Exportation wants in value, to Balance, Page 231, 232, 234.
the Importation must of necessity be made up with ready Money; he tells us,
That by this we find out the Foundation of the Riches of Holland, as of their
Trade, by Circumstances already rehearsed; for never any Country Traded so
much, and consumed so little; they buy infinitely, but it is to sell again,
either upon Improvement of the Commodity ( viz. by Manufacture) or at a better
Market: ( viz. in the Trade from Port to Port).

By all this Account of their Trade and Riches, it will appear that some of our
Maxims are not so certain, as they are Current in our Common Politics: As
first, That the example and encouragement of Excess and Luxury, if employed in
the Consumption of Native Commodities, is of advantage to Trade; the Custom or
humor of Luxury, and Expense cannot stop at certain bounds; what begins in
Native, will proceed in Foreign Commodities; and though the example rise among
idle Persons, yet the Imitation will run into all degrees, even of those, by
whose Industry the Nation subsists: and besides, the more of our own we spend,
the less we shall have to send abroad; and so it will come to pass that while
we drive a vast Trade, yet by buying much more than we sell, we shall come to
be poor.

Whereas, when we drive a very small Traffic abroad, yet by selling so much
more than we bought, we were very Rich in proportion to our Neighbors.

This appeared in Edward the Third's time, when he maintained so mighty Wars in
France, and carried our Victorious Arms into the heart of Spain, Whereas in the
28 th year of that King's Reign, the Value and Custom of all our Exported
Commodities, amounted to 294184 l. 17 s. 2 d. and that of our Imported, but
38970 l. 03 s. 06 d; so as there must have entered that year into the Kingdom,
in Coin or Bullion, or else have grown a Debt to the Nation, 255214 l. 13 s. 08
d. and yet we then carried out our Woolls unwrought, and brought in a great
part of our Clothes from Flanders.

Whence Two things may be remarked: First, That it is much in vain to increase
the value of our Exports, if at the same time we increase our Imports to a yet
greater value, being now (perhaps) an 100 times more than value.

Secondly, That although Edward the Third, revived the Order of the Round
Table, he did not perform his great Achievements by the mere virtue of Knight
Errantry; there is no doubt but our succeeding Princes were enabled to make
their Conquests in France, by the advantages of our former Trade, then far more
considerable than the French.

I shall only add, that this Consumption by our Importations, will not be
prevented, but rather augmented by our late Prohibition of French Goods; as I
shall demonstrate in the last Section.

SECT. XIII.
That a Considerable part of our late Treasure is exhausted: Application to our
Public and Private Revenues: Objections Answered, viz. The Plenty of Money to
be let on Securities, Stores of Money in London, Stocks in Merchandise, the
Over-weightiness of our Coin, etc.

AFter what has been said, it may seem little requisite to enquire whether Mr.
Fortrey Prophesied a-right, when he foretold the Exhausting of our Treasure.

If the Diffusive Body of the People be much Poorer than before, they have much
less Treasure than before; For Poverty is but the privation of Treasure. Now if
the Question be whether the Nation be Poorer, it must be undeniable from all
those Badges of Poverty I have mentioned before, if any of those particular Men
who find themselves at ease, are yet unwilling to believe it, they may be
further convinced from the universal Cries of the People, (at least from the
Land-holders, remaining Manufacturers, and their Dependants who make up the
gross and stanch Body of the Nation) they remember when it was otherwise, when
there was a far greater plenty of Money in all our inferior Cities,
Corporations, and Villages; when our Farmers had their Rents before hand, and
had Stocks for every Farm; when they and our Manufacturers got Estates, and
when vast Taxes could be readily raised; and therefore are the most proper
Judges of the odds, who feel the present Scarcity, and want of Money; they
cannot conspire in a Falsity of this Nature, but in so general and near a
Concern, The Voice of the People has been taken to be like the Speech of God.
Those that find their Stocks wasted, or much Contracted, their late Revenues
sunk, their home-Commodities yield much less value, their labors in
Manufactures turn to less Profit, or to none at all, the poor and their
Maintenances vastly increased, the Nation involved in Debts, Money very hard to
be gotten or raised in the way of home-Trade, with other Common hardships,
cannot be argued out of their Senses; Creed quod habes and habes, is no Logic
in matters of Interest, but amongst Fools and Madmen; or let Men be never so
good at persuading or believing, yet when their Estates and Stocks are thus
sunk, they cannot answer the Public Emergencies by Payment of as great Taxes
as before.

I should not say more to prove our National Treasure is much diminished,
(taking it to be indisputable; and being sensible, that the over-labouring a
Truth, may bring it in question) but having something to offer, by which (as it
seems to me) some nearer Conjecture may be made of the Quantity of Money thus
exhausted, I shall present it to the Reader, desiring his Excuse, if he think
it unnecessary.

So great was the Quantity of our late Harp and Cross Money, before the year
(60) that according to the best Estimate I can make or meet with, it made about
10 or 15 per Cent. of our Common Money in tale in the Country, and more in
London, which I do not take to be the mere Effect of our extraordinary Exports
in Trade, for the years then last preceding, but partly of the Plate then
lately Coined, and our Stocking Ireland; but more than either, from our far
less yearly Imports of all kinds several years before 1660.

I must refer it to the Memory, or other Information of the Reader, whether he
can comply with me in the aforesaid late quantity of our Harp and Cross Money;
whatsoever it were, this Money being taken in to be recoined in the year (60)
must, when recoined, produce the like Quantity of His Majesty's Coin; besides
which, according to the said Account in November (75) there had then been
2238997 l. more Coined since His Majesty's Restoration, and since the said
Account, there has been yet more Coined; which supposing to be but 600000 l.
had the Money so Recoyned, and since Coined with His now Majesty's Impression,
continued in the Nation, and the new Money under His Majesty's Impression,
must have been much above Three Millions, I conceive near Four Millions; and
then supposing we had Twelve Millions in the Nation, it would have been above
30 per Cent. of our current Money in Tale; of more, were our whole Treasure
less than Twelve Millions.

Whereas we see at this day, that the new Money of His now Majesty's
Impression, does not amount to above 5 per Cent. of the current Money in the
Country, taking one Payment with another, (especially in such Counties as lie
any thing remote from London) I think not so much.

It Is true, that in London, where the Mint and Merchants are, there is some
greater quantity of new Money, and perhaps somewhat more of late than usually;
because that by occasion of the late Foreign Wars, we have had somewhat a
better Vent for our English Cloths, and a greater Exportation of our Annual
produce of Corn: But yet in London it does not make near 30 per Cent. taking
one Payment with another; nor I conceive, more than equal the quantity of our
late Harp and Cross Money.

Now if the Money in His now Majesty's Impression, be less in quantity than the
Harp and Cross Money, it must follow, that notwithstanding all the Money since
Coined, we have less Money in the Nation than we had in (59;) if our present
new Coin but equal the Harp and Cross Money, it follows, that we have now no
more Money than in (59). And in either Case, that as much of our new Coin as
amounts to the said whole 2238997 l. and all the other Money Coined since
November (75) is also Exported: For though we may still have some Coin of each
of the succeeding years since (59;) yet if all of it put together amounts to no
more than the quantity of the Harp and Cross Money we had in (59,) our Stock of
Treasure cannot be more than it was in (59:) if less, then our present Stock is
less.

And if Millions of our new Money, Coined since (59) be gone, as, I take it,
it is evident they are; we may reasonably Collect that as much or more of our
old Coin, is also Exported (by the old Coin, I mean such as was Coined in the
Reigns of King James and King Charles the First, and before) of which we had
lately a mighty Store, almost all of it valuable and unclipped, especially the
Gold, whereof we had an abundance commonly passing in home-Trade and Payments,
there is no reason why these Coyns, being as valuable or more, should not be as
good a Commodity in Trade as the new.

And accordingly we may to our Comforts observe, that this late mighty Store of
old Gold, is in a manner totally vanished, those few pieces which remain, being
almost taken as Medals, never to be parted with.

If it be said that part of our old Gold is Coined into Guinnies, this will not
alter the Case, since our whole new Coin is no more in proportion to the old,
than before is noted.

So of our old Silver Coin, there is very little remaining, but what is much
Clipped, or worn; and therefore not valuable for Exportation. We have those yet
alive who can remember what a flowing Treasure we had in all Parts of England,
before we had any Harp and Cross Money, and are now sensible of the general
scarcity and Want of it.

This does let in a further Presumption, that our new Coin is diminished to a
much greater degree, than it appears to be: For, suppose we have now but a
moiety of all the old Coin we had in the year (59), It Is plain, that a moiety
of the Harp and Cross Money (had it remained) would now hold the same
proportion to the old, as the whole did in (59), and so will a moiety of our
new Coined Money; and thus will it be in any lesser proportions.

If the new Coin come to be less in proportion to the old, than it was before,
it is an infallible evidence of the Diminution of our Treasure, because the old
Coin could not increase; But if the new Coin come to be more in proportion to
the old Coin than before, this is no manner of Demonstration of the increase of
Treasure, since the decrease of the old Coin may produce this Odds.

Thus after the Consumption of our old Gold, we have more than Twenty Guinneys
to one Broad Piece; but I think no body will press it as an Argument of more
Gold in the Nation than we lately had; so having lost so great a part of our
valuable old Silver Coin, it is no Wonder if our new Silver Coin seems so much
as it does, especially about London; perhaps it has been a kind of Providence
that we have had so much Clipped and worn Money; since otherwise we might have
had as little old Silver, as we have old Gold; and might have been reduced to
our present Store of new Silver Coin, as we are to our Guinneys, which might
have afforded a weighty Argument of the Increase of our Treasure.

Upon these Grounds, and upon the common Wants, Necessities, and Decays
mentioned before, it may reasonably be concluded, That besides the loss of most
of those Millions Coined since His Majesty's Restoration, we have lost many
more Millions of the old Coin in Silver and Gold; I shall leave the quantity to
be computed by the indifferent Reader: Those who set out the said Account from
the Mint, taking notice of the great consumption of our Treasure by reason of
its being Exported, did by the same Paper, then estimate it to be reduced to
about four or five Millions, and by the Nature of that Account, they seem no
unfit Persons to make some competent Judgment of this Matter.

Whatsoever our Coined Treasure was when this Account was made, 'twas plainly
much less then, than it would have been, had none been Exported; and though it
must be admitted, that our late Exportation of our Annual Corn, and what other
advantages we had during the late War, may have somewhat helped us, yet we have
reason to think it farther diminished now, especially considering our losses at
Sea by the Dutch, and others, before we dis-engaged from the late War, and
since by the French and Algiers Pirates, and the money lately and daily exported
by Papists departed hence; to which may be added what we must now further
export by the expiration of the Irish Acts, and the dear buying of these goods
we imported from France, already added to the former Overballance of our
Importations.

Then let the Reader judge what we are to hope for in our private and public
Revenues, I shall only endeavor to put him into a method of conjecturing,
leaving the compute to his greater ingenuity and leisure. Suppose we have now
5, 6, or 7 Millions of Treasure in the Nation; let him consider how much of
this must constantly lie in the hands of Traders to attend the payment of
Customs, and the buying up of our vast importations; how much always is, and
must be actually collected in Taxes, and either lies in the Exchequer, or in
the hands of Officers; and how much does, and always will lie dead in Banks and
other private hands; and then, how much will at the same time ( I say at the
same time) be employed in the home-Markets to buy of the annual Produce of
Lands; perhaps it will not be half of the Whole: Then recollecting that we have
29568000 Acres of Land in England, what Rent can they yield, one with the
other. Admitting this whole Treasure at the same time stirring in the
home-Markets, our whole Land-Revenues could not be much; all the help we have
is, that we have many great wastes, which yielding little or nothing, a great
quantity of this floating money is applicable to the rest; and yet to our
sorrow we have found that our Rents are mightily sunk, which having not abated
so much or speedily as was requisite, our Yeomanry are generally impoverish't.

Then for our public Revenue, it is as plain, it must be confined to the stock
of Treasure be it greater or less. We have many who seem to resent the
narrowness of his Majesty's Revenue and Supplies, and are ready to expostulate
why they should not be equal to the French King's; let them consider what may
possibly be paid out of our Land Revenues thus contracted, and constantly
charged with the maintenance of our numerous poor; and besides, that the
English having by the constitutions of the Government an undoubted liberty and
property, are accustomed to live well, and their Representatives, being a part
of themselves, in whose disposition it lies to give supplies or not, will have
regard to their own and the peoples abilities: should they give extravagantly
it would be like Diego's Will, and must induce many of those sad consequences
mentioned before; what then if we should be involved in any long Foreign War,
or obliged to any great extraordinary public Charge in time of Peace, whilst
we remain under a consumptive Trade? which I intimate once more to show the
necessity of improving our Trade.

I shall now answer some common Objections.

The most usual is, That there is now as much money to be let on good
Securities in England, as there are Securities, or rather more; from whence
some infer that there is as much, or more money than ever in England.

To this I answer, That on the contrary, it only proves the scarcity of
Securities, and therein the poverty of the Nation; for personal Security for
money being in a manner lost; all the floating money to be let out at interest
is thrust upon Land-Securities; which (were they all good) would take off much
less money than was let out at interest when both Land and Personal Securities
stood: But, as the National Poverty has subverted Personal Security, so has
it crept into the Land; for men's estates are already so entangled with Debts,
that there is not one Land-Security in twenty that is good, as dear experience
has now taught us, Then, the Securities being grown so scarce and narrow, it is
no wonder that there is now as much money to be let out as there are
Securities, and more. Thus if a man had 1000 l. in the Isle of Shetland, he
would there hardly find any Security for it; which at this rate of arguing
would prove the Isle of Shetland richer than the Isle of Great Britain.

And upon this occasion I shall add, That there is no possible way for
restoring the Securities and Credits of England, but by restoring its Riches;
no Register can do it, at least comparable to the other; we may Register our
common Poverty, but nothing will make an ill man value his credit, or able to
satisfy for a Cheat, but his own private wealth; nothing can make a man who is
honestly inclined to do a foul thing, but Poverty and Necessity.

Another Objection, partly answered before, is, That there is still as much
money in and about London, as ever; from whence they would argue as much money
in the Nation as before.

I cannot admit this fact; if I did, the consequence is lame and frivolous;
however, because there has been such a pother made about the money in London,
I shall give some further account of it.

I agree that there are considerable quantities of money always lodging in and
about London, in some particular hands: But the reason is, because the King's
Revenue is paid in, and issued out, in and about London. There is also the
Mint, and there do our principal Merchants live, who Trade with so much
exported money or bullion, and keep money dead for the Customs. This is also
the great Port for Foreign Importations; and the Country Retailers, who buy
them there and vend them to the people, must send up their money to London:
Upon which and the like occasions, it is thought near half the money in England
is in London: The more is the pity; it were much better for the Nation that
there were more home-Manufacture, with Foreign Stores of re-exportable Goods,
and a less proportion of our money; and the rather because it stagnates for a
time in the hands of Merchants, Banquers, and Scriveners; and facilitates the
culling, melting, and exportation. This being the great Sluice of our Treasure
will necessarily draw it from all parts, as long as we have any in the Nation.

These Stores of money in London must rather evidence the poverty of the
people, who being over balanced by the money drawn out for Importations and
Taxes, and therefore incapable of answering those payments by Bills or Returns
to London; very much of our Taxes have been sent up in Carts and Wagons, and
our Country Retailers continually send up money in specie by the Carriers;
which must drein away that which remains, in a little time: Nor do those Stores
of money much spread, or benefit the general body of Traders, even in London;
who were never so poor or broke so fast (tho never so fine) as now. It is
impossible that the occasions, vanities, or the remaining stock of the Kingdom
can ever support such a prodigious Increase of Retailers and Shopkeepers as
are in and about London, being near 100000 in number, when in Amsterdam there
are not 5000.

Nor is it to be objected, That I have not computed our present Stores of
Merchandise or Foreign Effects as part of the National wealth.

First, because the present question is about the actual fruit and produce of a
National Trade in new Treasure; and not about the quantity of our Stores of
Merchandise or Foreign Effects.

It Is true, That if a Nation whose Trade is truly regulated, has a great
Storehouse of Foreign Goods, as in Holland, or great Foreign effects, it is
very possible and likely that these may produce new Treasure; and if they do,
then is the National gain in Treasure to be computed, and not before.

For on the other side it is impossible (even in a Nation that has a due
balance of Trade) that such Stores and Effects may produce no Treasure; for
the Foreign Stores being re-exported may be lost by the perils of the Sea, or
Seisures of Princes or Pirates: we may remember the late seisures of the
English, by the French Capers; the like casualties do attend Foreign Effects,
for which we may also remember when our Effects were seized in Spain.

But Secondly, Supposing none of those Casualties, yet (as a National Trade may
be managed) these stores and Effects shall produce no new Treasure to the
Nation; as when these Foreign Goods and Stores are, and must be spent at home;
and the Foreign Effects are continually by Bills of Exchange, applied to pay
for those Foreign Goods; so if the Merchants are sometimes forced to Import
and Coin some Foreign Bullion yearly, but yet Export it, or the like quantity
of Money or Bullion, the Nation gets nothing; and if more Treasure be Exported
than is yearly Imported, the Nation loses; in which Case the stock so employed
in Trade does prejudice the wealth of the Nation; since in the Whole it makes
up a monstrous Engine for the Bulgeing out of its Treasure; and that this has
been the Case of our English Trade, is plain enough.

Nor can the Foreign Stock in such a Consumptive Trade be of any great value,
since as some Effects are gotten by our Merchants in one Foreign Country, so
are debts contracted in another, as long as our Merchants can have credit; and
then perhaps our Foreign debts may be near the value of our Foreign Effects,
and probably more; or however, cannot be thought equal to our former stock in
Trade, when we were not over balanced.

There are yet other objectors, who admitting much of our Treasure Exported,
will excuse our Trade, and assign the cause of it in the over weightiness of
our Coin, and the undervaluing it in our Foreign Bills of Exchange, etc.

These are old inconsiderate fancies, sufficiently refuted before, yet I should
be more particular in it, had not Mr. Mun in his Book of Trade taken the pains
to clear this and the like objections by evident reason and instances, in six
several Chapters, beginning at pa. 62. proving withal, that nothing but the
Overballance of Trade can exhaust the National Treasure; to which therefore I
refer the Reader.

SECT. XIV.
People and Treasure the true Pillars of the National strength: The Odds in the
different Use and employment of people. The absoluteness of the French Monarchy
no cause of the present French Grandeur: The late Application of the French
Councils to the Increase of Trade, People, and Treasure; and the occasion
thereof. The greater excellency of the Form of our English Government. The
farther necessity of Improving our Trade from the Modern Treasures and Powers
of the French; of their Naval force, the Algiers Pyracy; how the French design
to engross all Maritime Commerce; our dangers from France; of the present
condition of the Dutch: That our late Prohibition of French Goods will not
disable that Monarchy, nor better our Trade; mere Prohibitions of no value: Our
great advantages in Trade above France and Holland: That a speedy Regulation of
our Trade etc. would secure us against all Foreign Powers, and Dangers at
home: Of Excises, and other Taxes. The certain Increase of his Majesty's
Revenue; hence, what occasion for a Parliament, etc.

FRom what has been said, it is evident that National power is not Chimerical,
but is founded on People and Treasures; and that, according to the different
condition of these its true Pillars, it immediately grows more vigorous or
languid: that sufficient stores of Treasure cannot otherwise be gotten, than by
the industry of the people; and, That till they have it, they cannot pay.

People are therefore in truth the chiefest, most fundamental, and precious
commodity, out of which may be derived all sorts of Manufactures, Navigation,
Riches, Conquests, and solid Dominion: This capital material, being of it self
raw and indigested, is committed into the hands of the Supreme Authority; in
whose prudence and disposition it is, to improve, manage, and fashion it to
more or less advantage; if any individual Manufacturer should permit his raw
materials to be Exported into Foreign Countries, or should himself make great
store of knots of felters in his Yarn, he would soon have a very slender, or
difficult business of it: so great an odds there is in the different
disposition of the ordinary industry of the people, that on the one hand, they
may be thrust on in the pursuit of private interest, destructive to the
public, and be obliged like Cannibals to live by devouring one another, (by
which they must continually and inevitably wound and weaken the public:) when
on the other, their ordinary labors, more aptly and industriously methodized,
shall as unavoidably aggrandize that Government which protects them; and this
without the Midwifery of those Arts, Shifts, and Projections, which otherwise
may be found necessary for its more present Support.

More particularly it appears, That the present French power, which is now the
admiration and terror of the World, has no other foundation; and therefore is
not derived from the mere despotick Form of that Government, as some would
insinuate, but from a prudent Relaxation of the Rigor of it toward the persons
and Stocks of the Trading part of that people; this Form of Government being in
its nature the most incompatible with Trade, of all others; nor probably had
Trade ever received any encouragement in France, but upon a necessity; this
Monarchy being become absolute, was yet low, poor, and despicable; beset round
about with Spanish Forces, Territories, and Allies, and poisoned with Spanish
Pensions within, and therefore ready to become a Spanish Province: It was then
that this Monarchy found absoluteness without sufficient Treasure was but a
trifle: That Arbitrary power might force store of Blood and Tears from the
people, but not of Money, unless they had it: It was then that the opening and
growth of the Dutch Trade presented an expedient of drawing in greater
quantities of the diffused Treasures of the World into France by a Machine of
home-Manufactures, than the Spaniards could directly from their Mines; which
therefore was embraced by the dying hands of this Monarchy, and supported and
improved ever since by a Succession of understanding men: which apparently was
not done by any peculiar virtue in this Form of Government, but by a necessary
Abating of its inherent rapaciousness, which otherwise would have swallowed up
every Sols of the stocks employed in Manufactures and other Trade, and thereby
would have driven away the people; as may be seen in the strong Governments of
Turkey, Muscovy, Spain, and others.

The French Councils discerning where the true strength of Empire lay, were not
so bewitch't with the lusciousness of their Arbitrary power as to seek any such
extreme execution of it; their policies have long gone another way, as may be
infallibly collected from the effects, and by other lights: So long ago as
Henry the Third's time of France, Bernard de Gerrard Lord of Haillan, a great
Politician in his time, presented an excellent piece to that King, entitled,
The Estate and Success of the Affairs of France, thereby representing by what
courses that Kingdom had been, or might be aggrandized or weakened; amongst
others, he highly recommends the Support of the Populacy, beginning thus The
people are by Justice to be preserved in liberty, Page 195.
as will to Trade as to Labor, and to do every thing belonging to their
degree; by these the Kingdom are maintained, and enriched in general, and
particular; if they bear the charge of Tailles, so are they to be cherished,
defended, and sustained by the Nobles, as formerly they were, and now ought to
be, from the violences and oppressions of their Neighbors, and by the King and
Justice from the insolence of the Nobles. For so it was, that the Nobles or
Gentry, being discharged of the Tailles, had given up the Constitution of
Estates; for which, they had been indulged with a kind of despotick power,
within their own particular Fiefs; from whose barbarities proceeded the
greatest sufferings of the people; whereof this Author is not nice or sparing
to give several instances too long to recite. I have troubled you with this
citation, because this piece was by the Author Re-dedicated to Henry the
Fourth, whom the Author tells in his Epistle, That his Predecessor Henry the 3
d. used to read it with an Appetite, and yet the Author goes so far as to
applaud the Ancient Constitution of the Estates or Parliaments in France,
affirming them to have been the mutual Succor, Medicine, and Remedy both of
the King and People in all their Calamities. Page 207.
If we come to the Reign of Lewis the 13th. under the Administration of
Cardinal Richelieus, we may Judge how vigilant the French Councils were in his
time, for the Increase of People and Trade, by two great Instances mentioned
before: First in the Toleration of Protestants, after a Victorious Reduction of
all their strengths by force of Arms: this mighty Prince and his wise Ministers
overcame all resentments to advance and cement the glory of his Empire; so that
it is observed by Dr. Heylin, That the Protestants never had the Exercise of
their Religion with so much freedom as they had, Geogr. 176.
after their reducing of their Forts and Garrisons to this King's obedience.
Secondly, by moderating of Customs and Port-duties on Merchandises, Bernard de
Gerrard of Finances.
which in the Reigns of his Predecessors been raised and accumulated by about
Twenty several Edicts; but in his time were in a manner taken off, as appears
by what Sir Walter Raleigh Represented to King James about sixty years since,
cited before; See before, Sect. 7 th.
but if we would at once discover how far the French Politics have inclined
this way, we may observe them as they are Digested and Refined in the
prodigious Book, so entitled, written, as appears, several years since, (the
Authority of which piece, though already famous, I shall give a farther account
of) where in the Chapter of Finances, it being first observed, French Politics
page 108, 109.


That a State is no further Powerful than proportionably to the Richness of its
public Treasury, and the greatness of the yearly Income that maintains it: it
is laid as a farther unalterable Maxim,

That the Fundamental Wealth of a State consists in the multitude of Subjects;
for its Men that Till the Ground, produce Manufactures, that manage Trade, that
go to War, that people Colonies, and in a word, that bring in Money.

To make way in France for the multiplying of Men, diverse courses are there
dictated to oblige both Men and Women to Marry, viz. By Freedoms and Exemptions
in Case they do, and have many Children, (now established by an Edict) and by
Penalties in case they do not; whence it may be observed, what Estimate the
French Politics put upon Marriage. In the Chapter of the 3 d Estate thus,
There cannot be too great a number of Husbandmen in France, Page 67.
by reason of the Fertility of the Country; and our Corn being Transported
into Foreign Countries, we ought to make great Stores of it, and have as much
as may be in a readiness, (which I am told is also so ordered by an Edict.)
Handicraftsmen and Artificers are no less useful; for besides, Page 68.
that Manufactures do keep men at work, and engage them, they are the Cause
that the Silk, the Wool, the Skins, the Flax, the Timber, and the other
Commodities that grow in France are made Use of, and that Country People have
the means to Barter these things, and put them off; especially being wrought
into Wares, not made in Foreign Parts, we shall grow further Principal
Manufacturers, as we already are of Hats for Spain, and Stuffs for all Europe;
a Matter of exceeding great Consequence. All this quickens Trade, and makes
Money pass to and fro, which promoteth the Public, and therewith at once every
one's private advantage: There must be Merchants also, for without their
Industry, the Artificers Shops would be Stores never emptied, the Granaries
would remain full of Corn, and the Cellars of Wines, etc. In the Chapter of
General Orders, Usury is thought fit to be Prohibited (which is accordingly
suppressed by an Edict:) I shall leave it to Enquiry, whether most of the rest
of these Politics relating to matters at home, are not established by other
Edicts; if the Reader would further observe, how curious the French Politics
are to provide for the Increase and true Use of Populacy, I shall refer him to
the Thirteenth Chapter of this Admirable Tract, directing the Education of
Children, and when it is fit to Marry them; and to the Chapter of Commerce, or
rather to the whole piece. By all I have said, it appears, that although the
French Kings have assumed an Arbitrary Power, the French Politics have not
rested upon this as a Security, but for the Aggrandizing of that Monarchy, have
found it necessary to relax and retire from the severity of this Power, and to
resort to popular Principles: a Matter, which may deserve the Consideration of
our New Politicians the Hobbists, who place all the virtue of the French
Governvernment in its absoluteness: In the mean time I shall add, that
notwithstanding what I have said, I do not pretend that the Condition of the
French People, though made tolerable to the French, is comparable to the
happiness of those whose greater Freedoms and Enjoyments are secured by
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions: But this I shall observe, That whereas
formerly, when this People were wretchedly poor, almost every small new
Imposition begot an Insurrection in France, as the said De Gerrard takes
notice, the French now pay twenty times greater Taxes, with much more
Satisfaction, because they are enabled so to do; and besides can live far more
plentifully than before, many of the Traders splendidly, and gain considerable
Estates: To all which may be added another particular, in which the late French
Politics deviate from the usual Jealous Maxims of Arbitrary Government; which
is a general care to instruct the Plebeians of all sorts* in the Discipline of
Arms.

The late swelling Power of Spain after the Suppression of the Spanish Cortes,
or Estates, derived from the accidental Discovery of the Indian Mines, and the
present Power of France after the Suppression of the French Estates, from as
accidental an Improvement of their Trade, have been the occasion that some out
of mistake, or design, have much applauded that Form of Government, when it
must be Confessed that the same Indian Treasure and Trade, would have rendered
the same Nations, under the continuance of the Estates, or England under its
present Government much stronger, and more secure, and this, by the advantages
in this Form of Government.

Despotick, or Arbitrary Monarchy, was for many Ages as great a Stranger in
this Part of the World, as Republican Government; As the European Nations by
degrees cast off the Roman Yoke, they had before their eyes the Example of
their former Mistress, the Commonwealth of Rome, which became Vassalized to
her own Servants, by the unlimitted Power committed to Dictators and Generals;
these assuming the Empire by force, and without title, were uncontrollable by
Law, and therefore did not only gratify their own Lusts, and just Fears of
being supplanted by all manner of Cruelties, but their Masters the Soldiers
also, by the Spoils of the Provinces; nay, and of Italy, and Rome it self; and
yet were they very frequently killed, deposed, and changed by the same force
which set them up: To avoid the Mischiefs on each side, as the Members of this
Empire resumed their National Rights, they universally cemented into a third
Form of Government, much the same with ours: which, if we truly consider it,
appears purposely, and wisely Calculated to prevent the Inconveniences of the
other two, and yet to take in all that is excellent in either; For first, we
have a fixed Royal Legal Sovereignty, which filling the seat of Majesty,
frustrates the Ambitious hopes of others from stepping into it; Then we have
the Constitution of Parliaments, by whose Intervention, Liberty and Property
are preserved: Thus Revolutions and Oppressions at home are prevented. Then for
the strength of this Government outward upon Foreign Nations, it must in the
Nature of it, equal, if not exceed any other, especially absolute Monarchy; not
only because its greater freedoms capacitate the People to Trade with more
advantage, as I shall yet more particularly show, but because the same freedoms
beget a kind of Generosity and Bravery even in the common sort, when
Absoluteness of Government debases their Spirits, and reconciles them to the
Ignominy of being beaten, at least till they acquire a kind of insolence by
long Service in War, which can hardly be called Courage. All Experience has
warranted this odds between Freemen and Slaves; but there is yet a farther
odds, when the Quarrel is National, especially if espoused both by the King and
Parliament; for then the individual Animosities of the Whole being engaged, the
People do not merely fight for Pay, but out of Principle, and in defense of
those greater Enjoyments they have at home, when the Vassals of Absolute
Monarchy are driven on by the fear of their Despotical Power, which they would
be glad to see subverted, and themselves delivered.

In an Absolute Monarchy, the Fate of the Whole depends upon the Prudence of
the Monarch; be his Empire never so flourishing, he may by one temerarious
Edict, or other Act, bring all into Confusion: How great must the Danger then
be, when the wisest of Mortal men are often transported by Passions, and
otherwise liable to Mistakes? The voluntary Councils of such a Monarch must
gratify his Power by Applauding or Complying with his Resolutions and
Sentiments: But what if there come a weak Prince? against which there is no
Security? Or suppose the King be left an Infant? then all goes to wrack: those
Armies which were the support of the last Predecessor, wanting Business and
Conduct, fall into Mutinies; all are working their Ambitious ends, many
contending for the Tuition and Public Administration; those that have it not,
supplanting those that have, whereby the Government is endangered: all which
was visible during the whole Infancy of the present French King, though he had
a Mother, and so faithful and wise a Minister as Mazarine: The high Animosities
of the French Princes and Nobles, carried them into continual Distractions and
Civil Wars; so that had the English, or any other Neighbor Nation, then been
in a Condition to have supported the Malcontents, they might have Subverted
the French Empire: which mischiefs are totally, or in a high measure avoided by
the Constitution of Parliaments; without whose consent, Laws cannot be altered,
or Public Innovations made; and who by their course of Impeachments are a
continual Check and Awe upon men of indirect and Ambitious designs: So that
(according to the excellent Motto of our own Sacred Prince) it may be truly
said of such a Monarchy, and its Parliaments, that they are to each other Decus
and Tutamen: what would have become of the French Monarchy when their King John
was Prisoner in England, had it not been for their Estates, or Parliaments? we
have reason to believe, That were that Crown and Nation brought into great
Exigencies and Distresses by any Foreign Power, they would be convened again,
the Constitution being not there absolutely dissolved, as the said De Gerrard
Observes; nothing can be fatal to such a Government, but a disunion between the
Prince and Parliament, and therefore a great part of the transcendent Policy of
this our Form of Government consists in the high Obligations and means of a
Union: the Prince being invested with the mighty Prerogatives of making War and
Peace, Calling, Prorogueing, and Dissolving Parliaments, and as many others as
fill Volumes, has such a Control on the Parliament, that it is generally to
be presumed, they will ever gratify him in whatsoever is any way consistent
with that Trust they are under; on the other side, the Parliament, being the
great and High Council, and their Consent requesite to all new Taxes,
whenever the Prince on any Emergency desires their Advice, or a Supply of
Money, the People must necessarily have time to represent their true grievances
to him, whose Princely favor and occasions, will then equally call upon him to
redress what is really amiss; in which Commutation he must have a far greater
advantage than any bare Tax he receives; since as it appears, the true strength
of all Monarchies and Governments depend upon well-being Abilities, and
Increase of the Populacy; which no other Prince has Comparably so certain a
means to understand and Improve, as he that has a Parliament: To all which may
be added, that mutual Affection which must naturally follow these Endearments,
and which must render the Prince and Nation much the stronger, never to be
hoped for in any other kind of Monarchy: There are yet farther Obligations to
this Union between the Prince and People from a just sense of those fatalities
which must follow a disunion; we need not resort farther than to the Fable
where we have an Account of a quarrel between the several Limbs of the Body
Natural, whereof the Consequence was, that every part grew presently Languid
and Impotent, and ready to yield it self a Feast to the Ravens.

If then there be the utmost Advantages on the one side, and Mischiefs on the
other, this is all humane Prudence can provide; God himself has done no more
in those Divine Institutions which he has projected for the Support, Felicity,
and Security of Mankind: against which, it has never yet been accounted any
Objection that they have been violated; nor is it any against the form of our
Government, that it has fallen into some Convulsions; as long as Men are Men,
there will be pravity and irregular Appetites amongst them, which in some Ages
and Circumstances may be able to give greater Disturbances than in others; if
in any Society of Men, unreasonable and destructive Propositions are insisted
upon, or reasonable and necessary ones refused, disunions are inevitable: This
I say in general, it is no part of my design to Rub up old Sores, nor will it, I
presume, be expected I should embroil the present Subject by vindicating Sides
or Parties; let the Consequences of former disunions be remembered.

But why should I dwell longer upon Arguments to evince the admirable Frame of
our Government, when it is so unanswerably demonstrated by its former Splendid
continuance for near 100 years? by the glory of our Princes, who, in
Conjunction with their Parliaments, ever were, and thought themselves the
greatest and happiest in Europe: by their stupendous Achievements in War, and
by the former ready Adherence, and large Contributions of our Parliaments, in
what tended to the Advantage or Honor of England; we had no other form of
Government in our Edward the Third, or Henry the Fifth's time, who Successively
found Supplies of English Treasure and Courage enough to Conquer France; our
Queen Elizabeth since, baffled the Despotick, and then tremendous Monarchy of
Spain, which continuing absolute, is (notwithstanding its vast extent of
Territory) one of the weakest in Europe: had our Henry the Seventh entertained
the Overtures of Columbus. or our Councils in the Reign of King James, or since
the wise Observations of Sir Walter Raleigh, or followed the example of France,
and other Neighboring Nations, in easing and improving our Trade, there is no
doubt but the English Treasures and Power had far surmounted both the Spanish
and French at this day: It is notorious that the Subjects of the late Dukes of
Burgundy, under the Constitutions of Estates, or Parliaments, for many
succeeding Ages, drove a mighty Trade, which gave those Dukes a long
Superiority over the Absolute French King, till the Dukedom became annexed to
Spain, and the Spaniards by their Persecution for Conscience, and Tyrannous
Attempts after Arbitrary Government lost both the Trade and Traders, See Sir
William Temple of the Dutch, cap. 1.
and Seven of the Provinces, whom they forced into a Republic.

Treasures are those Vehicles which carry out men of daring Spirits, mighty
Thoughts and Abilities into the Conquest of Foreign Countries, there is no
Nation but has a breed of People naturally more fit for these great
Performances than any other, who growing Generals or other Commanders at Land
or Sea; or Intendants in the greatest Negotiations, might, this way, prove
highly Serviceable to the Public, and find business for Penmen to write their
Memoirs, as in France they do: whereas, by the want of a sufficient
home-Treasure, the more Courageous sort, must either be Hackneys to
Foreigners, or degenerate into Hectors or Thieves at home, and are killed in
Brawles, or are hanged for Murders or Robberies. The more Deliberative
generously regarding the common Exigencies, more than their own, may lie under
the frowns of Fortune, and great Men, and be thought burthensom and dangerous:
there are many other Disadvantages which follow a National Poverty, as has
been noted before, which ought not to be ascribed to this or that mere Form of
Government, or temper of the People.

That a speedy and Complete Regulation of our English Trade may yet further
appear highly necessary, I shall briefly observe what have been the more Modern
Effects of this mighty Trade in France.

This may too plainly be seen by the great performances of the French in these
last Wars, in which, the French King has been able to maintain above 250000
Men in Arms, whom he has duly paid; and yet such have been his Treasures, That
he has not been obliged to put the event of the War to the push of a Battle;
but wearies out his Enemies with Expense from year to year, and being able to
lay up mighty Stores, can keep the Fields in the Winter, when his Adversaries,
though as valiant People as any on the Earth, are fain to lie at home: Thus
watching his Advantages, he has Taken and Burnt many strong Towns, laid many
Provinces wast, breathing out Death and Devastations as he goes. This he has
done in the face of the world, in a War with near 20 Princes and States, whose
lamentable Sufferings, with the Cries of their People, have long pierced our
ears; whilst the French King grows more Vigorous and Powerful, and his Armies
grow better Disciplined continually, and has at last reduced the Dutch and
Spaniards to the Terms of a dishonorable Peace, by exposing their Allies to
the French Power; which has obliged the rest to a Compliance on his own Terms;
and now he gives the Law to them All, keeping mighty Armies on foot to Invade
whom he pleases: But that which is yet more Prodigious is, that even during
this War, he has been able to carry on the Building of his present great
Fleet, consisting of about 200 Ships of War, plentifully Armed with Brass Guns,
and accurately built for Service; he has also furnished himself with abundant
of Naval Provisions of all sorts, at an immense Charge, every Ship having its
distinct Stores and Storehouse, and therefore may be made ready on a sudden:
At the same time, he has employed multitudes of Men in cutting of Canals
through Rocks and Mountains, in making, cleansing, and securing Havens upon the
Coasts opposite, or near to England (whither by degrees, in these two or three
years past, he has drawn down the greatest part of his Navy) and at the same
time has answered mighty Annual Pensions to the Swedes, and Swisses, (whose
lives he buys with his Money:) besides all the other vast private Pensions,
Gratuities and Aids he bestows in the Courts and Countries of other Princes,
(by which, perhaps he has made as great Advantages as by his Arms:) and yet
it is probable, that in all this he has not exceeded the bounds of his ordinary
Revenue.

That which most threatens the Trade of England, is his Naval Force, which none
of his Predecessors ever had, and were checked if they pretended to it; Queen
Elizabeth forbad Henry the 4 th. of France (on a sudden called the Great)
Building great Ships, else she would fire them in his Harbors: Since which the
French have desisted, till about the year 1664. as may appear by that excellent
Treatise, entitled, A free Conference, Printed in 1667. by the special
Appointment of the truly Honorable the Lord Arlington, where Page 49. we find
these words, Not above three years ago, France was hardly able to set out 20
Ships; (that is to say, Men of War) now they have 60 large Vessels ready
furnished, and well Armed, and do apply their Industry in every part to Augment
the number, etc. I shall forbear repeating some sharp Reflections which next
follow.

And that the French King might want no Seamen of his own, and might at least
share in the Gain of Navigation, he has for several years past endeavored by
all Imaginable Encouragements to establish a mighty Navigation in France; so
that for one Trading French Ship there was 20 or 30 years since, there are now*
40. For this purpose he has Propagated a Sea-Fishery, to a very great degree,
which Improves daily to the prejudice of our remaining English Fishery; and
besides, has yearly educated Supernumerary Seamen on Board the French Trading
Ships, at his own Charge; so that it is to be feared he will stand in little
need of Foreign Seamen for his Ships of War; or if he do, the Dutch have
Store, which perhaps he may have for his Money, as it is probable he may the
Fleets of Swedeland, Portugal, and Algiers; these his Allies of Algiers, (as
it is said, by the assistance of his Money upon a a general Redemption of French
Slaves) are on a sudden gotten from 10 to above 40 Men of War; Note, most of
that Fleet which the Algerines had (which was but small) was destroyed by the
English at Cape Spartell, and Bugia, about eight years since; They have since
Built 40 Men of War, from 20 to 50 Guns and upwards, besides Brigantines,
Galleys, etc.
and as soon as our Applications in France had prevailed with the French to
desist from taking our Ships, these Algiers Pirates fell upon us, and have
continually picked up our Merchantmen, and Vassalized our Seamen and other
People ever since; they now do it before our faces, in our Channel, finding
Harbor in the French opposite parts, which makes a great Addition to our late
Losses; and, which is yet worse, has so terrified our Seamen and Merchants,
that many already think it necessary to trade in Dutch and French Bottoms, a
Consequence which it is probable might be foreseen by some of our Neighbors, who
wish we had neither Ships nor Seamen.

At the same time our Gazetts weekly tell us of great Squadrons of French Men
of War, proudly ranging in all Quarters of the World, in the Mediterranean, in
the East and West Indies, and in our own Seas, viewing the Strengths and
Weaknesses, and Sounding and Commanding the Harbors of other Nations.

We find it said in the Free Conference, That France is our Hereditary Enemy,
and has so often tried what we are able to do against the enlarging of their
Empire, who have graven it deep on their hearts, the injury of the Title, which
to their shame England bears in all Public Treaties, and her Trophies in
reference to that Crown; This very France has no greater desire than to take
the Dominion of the Sea from us, etc.

If we look into the beforementioned French Politics, they assure us of the
same; of which piece, because I so often cite it; I shall first give the Reader
some present Account; and farther, when I have done with it: The English
Preface tells us, the Author was a Person bred up under Monsieur Colebert, and
to show his Abilities, writ this Treatise, and in Manuscript presented it to
the French King, which was favorably received; but afterward Vanity prompting
him to publish it in Print, the King looked upon him as one that had discovered
his Secrets, and turning his favor into frowns, caused him to be Imprisoned in
the Bastile, where he continued a long time, and afterward was Banished, etc.
it is like to some place where he should not be able to aver the same, or
disclose more Secrets; what opportunities he might have of learning Secrets by
his Attendance on Monsieur Colebert, whether he might over-hear the Debates and
Results of the French Councils, or whether Casually, or by order he had a View
of the Papers, and was but the servile Compiler, or bare Porter of this Scheme
or Manual of Policies, I leave to be examined; a stupendous piece it is, which
being written seven or eight years since, and presaging so great a part of what
has followed, gives so considerable an Authority to it self, that its Credit
need not depend upon that of the Author of the Growth of Popery; who, as it is
hinted in the English Preface, calls it the Measures of the French King's
Designs.

These Politics having first delineated the Comprehensive and steady
Foundations of the French Monarchy, Page 162, 163.
as built upon Trade, Treasure, and Populacy at home, they then proceed to look
abroad, and first they project the Engrossing of all Commerce at Sea, and this
at a lump, by employing part of this Treasure in Building a Fleet of Men of War
able to Command it, in which they say,

All things Conspire to give the French hopes of Success; the work however is
such as must be leisurely carried on, and perfected by little and little, so
great a Design continually Alarming Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, Friends
and Foes; a Precipitation of it would be its Ruin, Six or Ten years time might
be Allotted for it: The King may keep 100 Galleys, and 100 Ships in the
Mediterranean, and 200 Sail upon the Ocean, the more Vessels he shall have, the
more enabled he will be to recover the Expense made about them: The Sea will
yield Maintenance for the Sea, either by Commerce or War; There is Timber in
France, there is Cordage, there are Sails, there is Iron and Brass, etc. When
things have taken their Course, Seamen will be had in time, and the profit that
will accrue will afford Store, and bring them in from all Parts of the World.

The Fleets with the King might keep upon the Ocean, Page 165.
would make him Master of all the Powers and Trade of the North; yea, though
the Hollander and English should Unite against France, they could not avoid
their Ruin in the end; for how could the one or the other make good their
Commerce (which is all they have to trust to) if they were forced to keep great
Armadoes to continue it? The Point of Britain is the Gate to enter into, and go
out of the Channel: Fifty Ships of War at Breast, would keep this Gate fast
shut, and they would not open it but by the Kings Command. -- Thus there would
need no War almost to be made for all these things, nor His Majesty's Forces
hazarded: It will be sufficient to give his Orders to Foreigners; nor will it
be difficult to cut them out work in their own Countries, and by this means
stay their Arms at home, and make them spend their strengths there; something
of this in its place hereafter.

His Majesty's Power being thus strongly settled in each Sea, it will be easy
to secure Commerce in France, and even draw the Merchants thither from all
parts; I say secure Commerce; for till this be done, it will ever be uncertain
and dangerous.

It may not be improper to observe, with some reference to what has been
debated in the preceding Sections, what further Expedients the French Politics
dictate in this Chapter, for the securing of Commerce: Amongst others we there
find this Caution; It must be studiously prevented that Commerce introduce not
into a State-Superfluity, Excess, and Luxury, which are often followed with
Ambition, Page 169.
Avarice, and a dangerous Corruption of Manners: It is added, Page 171.
That it has been a question offered to debate, whether Traffic in France
should be managed by Subjects or Foreigners, to make a short decision; it is
evident that Foreigners must be allowed to gain our Merchandises, if we would
have them take them off, if we carry them into their Ports, we shall make less
Sales; yet, That our Merchants may share in the profit, they may enter into
Partnership with them, or be their Commissioners here, or Freight them
themselves, provided they sell at somewhat cheaper Rates, and so be content
with moderate Gain. Which passages I have cited to show, See Sir William Temple
of the Dutch, Page cited before, Sect. 12.
That it is no part of their Politics to increase Luxuries or Excess; nor to
enclose their home and Foreign Market to their own Navigation or Merchants.

I have been thus long tracing the French Politics, and our own unfortunate
Methods in the matter of Trade, and this out of a hope to occasion the
Restitution and Increase of ours; but have gone so far in the pursuit, that on
a sudden I have step't into a Scene of Horrors, by a necessary and inevitable
Apprehension of the Dangers we are in, from the present French Powers; it is
impossible for any man to close up the eye of his Reason, when he sees a
Ghastly Troop of Ruins making their regular Approaches against his Prince and
his Country, and therein threatening many Millions of poor Innocents, and of
these some Millions, who hardly know their right hands from their left, with
Butcheries and Violations of all kinds; in such a Case, Silence would be the
greatest and foulest of Barbarities, and no better than an Apostasy from the
sacred Duties of Allegiance and Self-Preservation.

Shall we flatter our selves with an opinion that the French have no
inclination to turn their mighty Treasures, Land and Sea-Forces upon us? How
poor, weak, uncertain and dishonorable is such a Security? Are we so tenacious
of every little pretense of Right at home, and so busy to get a Penny, and yet
shall be content to enjoy our Lives and Estates by no better a Tenure than the
discretion of the French? See The Buckler of State and Justice, Printed in (67)
by the special Appointment of the Honorable the Lord Arlington.
whose Councils are dark and inscrutable, and who by their late Invasion of
Flanders, contrary to former Leagues and Sanctions, and the then Assurances of
the French Ministers, have at least demonstrated, that they most intend what
they least profess; Is England become so despicable a Spot, as not to be worth
the Acquest? Is it not equal to Flanders, or the Island of Sicily? Is it not
evident that the present French King aims at the Trade of the World, and
particularly of the North? does he not want Ports? will it not be more grateful
to him to engross the Woollen Manufacture by securing the English Wool, than
to stand to our Courtesy? Has not England most other valuable Materials, by
which he might yet mightily enlarge the Trade of France? Can he hope to proceed
in his Conquests on the Continent, whilst he leaves so dangerous an Enemy at
his Rere? Does he not know the Spirit of our People? Are our Talbots, and
Bedfords forgotten? Did he not see us raise a considerable Army the other day
to check his Progress? Is he not exasperated by our late Prohibition of French
Goods, which touches him in the most tender Concern of his Trade? Does he not
think himself affronted in the face of the World? What can be so grateful to a
Prince Ambitious of Glory, and to the French Nation in general, as to render
those English, their Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, who have so often
Triumphed in France? Will they not endeavor to obliterate that Title England
bears in her public Treaties? Will not such an Acquist ennoble the name of the
present French King, above all those of his Ancestors? What a mighty and useful
Purchase will he have in a Seminary of able Men and Horses, whose value he has
reason to understand, and which he may then draw out into his Wars at his
pleasure, what spacious Possessions and Commanderies would England and its
Dominions afford to his French Officers, to whom it may be no little Temptation
to have the deflowring and violating of our most beautiful Women, being such as
the whole Earth cannot Parallel: A thousand other particulars might be
accumulated, of which it is not the least that here would be a vast accession
of Preferments for the numerous French Popish Clergy, and then what would
become of ours? And shall we think the French Councils are insensible of these
Advantages? Have they who have been nicely winnowing all the rest of their
Neighboring Countries, forgotten ours? if we resort again to the French
Politics, we shall have no reason to think so; we see before what they design
upon our Commerce, from thence they proceed to project Conquests at Land; The
French Romances spoke us nothing but Love and Honor, and in truth make a very
pleasing divertisement; but their Politics denounce Subjugation and
Vassallage: if we follow them from Country to Country, what they say of ours
will appear more considerable; thus they begin: It were to be wished that the
King did add to his Kingdom all the Low Countries to the Rhine, Page 153.
-- It would make him Master of the Northern Seas, etc. (what Progress the
French King has made toward this Conquest, and why he found himself obliged
to desist for the present, need not be repealed, no doubt but the French bear
it in Memory) Secondly, it were convenient the King had Strasburgh to keep all
Germany in quiet, etc. Page 154.
(Our Gazetts may inform us what Advances he has made toward the reducing of
this great strength, and he is now storing all his adjacent Magazines). "In the
third place he had need to have the French Comte to lay a restraint upon the
Swisses, etc. (This he has since gotten). In the fourth place, Millan is
necessary in respect of Italy, etc. (Of this we have yet heard no more than
that he has been bargaining for a passage by Casall). In the fifth place,
Genoa; -- Genoa would make the King Master of the Mediterranean Sea, etc. (This
he has so far proceeded in, that he has obliged the Genoeses to harbor his
Ships, and to almost what other Conditions he pleases. In the fifth Chapter,
dictating how France should act with Foreign Princes after a most exquisite
Scrutiny into the ill adjusted Councils, Beginning Page 183.
and Luxuries of the Spanish Grandees, it is said, Their Forces are not to be
feared, Page 186.
Scicily might easily make an Insurrection, Page 187.
etc.(We have seen what followed). Page 188.
Portugal is a perpetual Instrument for the weakening Spain, etc. (So it has
remained) The Venetians and People of Italy are wise; to reduce them to our
Intentions, we must work by downright force, etc. The Pope will ever Consider
France, because of the County of Avignon: The Hollanders will keep themselves
to our Alliance as much as possibly they may, -- They are rich. It were
expedient the King did interpose in their Affairs, and that some divisions be
sown amongst them: (we see what has ensued:) The Swisses are Mercenaries, Page
189.
who will always serve the King for his Money: ( so they have done ever since)
The King of Denmark is a Prince whose State is but small, etc. Sweden will
never break off from the Interests of France, we ought to consider them as
Instruments which for our Money we may make Use of to divert the English or
Holland Forces, Page 194.
when His Majesty makes any Enterprise which pleases them not, etc. ( Success
has verified this, and may further: Page 195.
) The Friendship of the Turk is good for France, to be made Use of on occasion
against the Emperor: (our Gazetts have informed us what Essays there have been;
and at last the Turk was brought upon Muscovy, whereby the Swedish Army in
Livonia was let loose upon the Confederates.

Of All others, these Politics speak most confidently of the Conquest of the
English; they observe, that We have no Friends, -- and are positive, that a War
of France for three or four years, Page 189.
would ruin us: Page 190.
(which it is evident must be said out of a sense they have of their odds in
National Treasure; for by the Import of the words and Context, they cannot be
spoken on supposition the French should attacque us unawares, (which God
prevent:) Hereupon it follows so it seems reasonable that we should make no
Peace with them, viz. the English; but on Conditions of the greatest Advantage
to us, unless the King think fit to defer the Execution of this Project for
another time: To make sure and quick work, It Is farther thought fit that ways
should be found to disable our Government by great Expenses, and by Disunions
and Convulsions; from which it is manifest, the French are well aware in what
the virtue of our Government consists, and therefore know how to strike at the
root: There are diverse indirect Expedients proposed, which I shall forbear,
being somewhat Prolix, and mixed with Contemptuous and Reflective Expressions:
It is enough to observe here from whence these French Politics hope for our
English Harvest, See before Page
and that this is the work at home before intended to be cut out for us.

This great Prince has thought fit hitherto to defer a formal War upon us, at
least, under that Denomination; but whether he has deferred the Project as
these Politics call it, may depend upon a Consideration of what he has been
visibly doing ever since; he has been since building his Fleet, amassing his
Naval Stores, Educating and Providing Seamen and Harbors, wasting and
disabling those Neighboring Empires and States, who being jealous of his
Power, might otherwise have interposed in his Carriere, getting those great
Passes and Strengths into his hands, by which they might have entered his
Country, he has been disciplining a victorious and mighty Army, and
exhausting us by his Trade, with a great Addition of loss by his Capers; (the
French are very curious at Cooking their Morsels before they eat them) and at
last has, as it were, forced a general Peace, even whilst he was Victorious,
by which he is left at entire Liberty: of which Peace, whilst it was under
Negotiation, and drawing to a Conclusion, a wise and noble Lord of our time,
gave this his sense to both our Houses of Parliament: The present Lord
Chancellor in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, on the 23 d of May,
1678.
The influence such a Peace may have upon our affairs, is fitter for Meditation
than discourse, only this is evident, that by the Preparations we have made for
War, (viz. in the raising of our late Army, etc.) and by the Prohibition we
have made of Trade, we have given no small Provocations to so mighty a King,
who may be at leisure enough to resent them if he please; and therefore it will
Import us so to strengthen our selves both at home and abroad, that it may not
be found a cheap and easy thing to put an Affront upon us. I need not inform
any English Reader, what fatal Apprehensions the same Parliament had of the
Consequences of such a Peace; they are in ordinary Memory; can we think this
Fleet of Men of War is built to be employed in the Fishery, or to lie and rot
in their Harbors? Can this Army profitably, or safely be supported Idle? Will
he suffer them to be tainted with Luxury? Will he hazard Animosities or
Factions amongst the numerous French Nobles (by whom this Army is Officer'd)
the Mutinies of the Soldiers, The Gazett for Monday December. 29. gives us this
Advertisement. Hamburgh, Dec. 22. The French have hired all the Vessels in this
River, and the Weser, which used to go to France, and return with Wines, on
which they mean to Transport great Quantities of Oats, and other Corn (which
they are therefore buying up in these Parts) to Calais, Dunkirk, and other
Places on that Coast.
or Insurrections of his own People? Will he not rather send these Armed Herds
to graze in our sweet Meadows, and to gather him fresh Laurels out of our
English Gardens?

It may reasonably add to our Fear, that we see the French King has lately
made so strict Alliances with Spain, and with Bavaria, by which he is farther
secured from any Inroads from those Parts; and that we also find him so
vigilant to prevent our Leaguing with the Dutch, and to come to some closer
Conjunction with them himself; in which his Ministers use the utmost Arts, mixed
with a sort of Menaces; I cannot but resort again to the French Politics,
where in the close of those Methods by which the French King may obtain an
easy and entire Conquest of England, we find it farther dictated thus, On the
other hand, Page 192.
our League with the Hollanders should be renewed, and they put into a belief,
that we should give them all the Trade still, because they have the knowledge
of it, and are proper for it; whereas ( as it is to be suggested) the French
have no Inclination that way, and Nature cannot be forced; they must be told
that now they are come to the happy time for advancing their Affairs, and
ruining their Competitors in the Sovereignty of the Northern Seas: we see these
Politics go through stitch in the business. And that upon the Whole they were
very unfit to be Printed; no man who had so much Wit as to be the real Author,
could have so little as to publish them; and the rather, because of Another
Secret amongst the rest very improper to be divulged

As for the Proofs against this Prisoner, they were as home and positive as
against the rest.

1. Dr. Oats declares how he came acquainted with him, See the Trial, p. 9.
by bringing him Letters from his Sons from a Seminanary in Spain; and then
Swears, That Langhorn did hold Correspondence with Le Chese and others, and
that the Witness carried several Letters to persons beyond the Seas; in one of
which he saw under his own hand, words to this purpose, That now they had a
fair opportunity to begin, or give the blow; with other expressions plain
enough concerning the Plot: and these he saw signed Richard Langhorn, and that
the Prisoner himself delivered them to him.

2. That he had order from the Provincial to give Mr. Langhorn an Account of
the Resolve of the Jesuits Consult for Killing the King, P. 10.
and that he did acquaint him therewith; and that the said Langhorn thereupon
lift up his Hands and Eyes, and prayed to God to give it a good success.

3. That he saw at his Chamber certain Commissions, P. 11.
which they call Patents; and that on his desire he permitted the Witness to
peruse several of them; and that there was one Commission to the Lord Arundel
of Wardour, and another to the Lord Powis, for the one to be Lord Chancellor,
and the other Lord Treasurer of England; and one to Mr. Langhorn himself, to be
Advocate of the Army; and that they were signed Johannes Paulus d'Oliva, by
Virtue of a Brief from the Pope: and Mr. Langhorn also told him, that he had
sent one of these Commissions by his Son, to be delivered to the Lord Arundel
of Wardours Son.

4. That Mr. Langhorn, being employed as Solicitor for several of the Fathers
of the Society, P. 13.
did prevail with the Benedictine Monks to raise six thousand pounds for
carrying on the Cause; and did say in the hearing of the witness, That he would
do his utmost for procuring the said Money.

5. That Mr. Langhorn was disgusted that Sir G. Wakeman was not content with
ten thousand pound to poison the King, and called him narrow-spirited,
narrow-soul'd Physician: for being a public concern, and to carry on the
Cause, it was no matter if he did it for nothing.

6. An Instrument was produced in Court, signed by Paulus d'Oliva, found in Mr.
Langhorns Chamber, long after Mr. Oats had given in his Testimony. Now Mr.
Oats swore, that the beforementioned Commissions were signed by the same
hand, and had the same mark; but they were all conveyed away, and this being
only concerning an Ecclesiastic business, wherein they thought there was no
danger, was left. However, this much confirmed Mr. Oates's Evidence, by showing
that Mr. Langhorn did use to receive Patents from, and had Commerce with the
Superior of the Jesuits at Rome.

In the next place comes Mr. Bedloe, and he swears that he went with Mr.
Coleman to Mr. Langhorns Chamber, P. 19.
and there Mr. Coleman gave him his Letters to le Chese, and the Popes Nuncio,
and others, open, to read and Register in a Book by him kept for that purpose,
and that he saw him read these Letters, which were concerning these designs in
hand; and that he Registered them in a Book in his Closet, whilst he and Mr.
Coleman walked in the outer room; and that afterward Coleman sealed up these
Letters, and delivered them to the Witness, who carried them to le Chese; and
that some of the expressions in those Letters were, That all things were now in
readiness, and they only wanted Money: That the Catholics were now in safety;
that Places and Offices had been disposed to them, and that all the Garrisons
either were, or suddenly would be in their hands; and that now they had a fair
opportunity, having a King so easy to believe what was dictated to him by
their Party, and that if they missed this advantage, they might despair of ever
introducing Popery into England. These were the very Expressions of some of
them.

2. That he brought other Letters from Harcourt to Langhorn to be Registered,
and Langhorn writ back, that he had received and would Register them; of which
Letters one was from the Rector of the Irish College at Salamanca, which
specified, That the Lord Bellasis and the rest concerned, should be in
readiness, for that they had sent some Irish cashiered Soldiers, with many
other Lay-Brothers, under the notion of Pilgrims for St. Jago, who were to take
shipping at the Groin, and to land at Milford-Haven in Wales, and there to meet
and join with the Lord Powis.

The only defense Mr. Langhorn could make, was like that of the rest of his
Party, by stout denyals, and endeavoring to invalidate the credit of the
Witnesses, by intrapping or confronting them in point of time or place.

1. He would make Doctor Oats an Approver, P. 27.
as having been pardoned for the same Crime; and alleged, that the Witnesses
had received Rewards and gratifications for Swearing against them. But to this
the Court answered, That it could not be supposed the King would Bribe his
Witnesses; and unless he could prove any reward to be given by Contract, or
subornation, it was no Objection, for that allowance of sustenance was usually
given of old to Approvers, etc.

2. He mustered up again their baffled Evidence from St. Omers, P. 33.
of whom one being asked how he came to take notice of Mr. Oats being at St.
Omers all April and May, and not in June and July as well, plainly answered,
(being not well instructed, or more simple than the rest) -- It was -- Because
the Question he came for did not fall upon that time: Which gives more light to
the suspicion, that they came with their Lessons in their Mouths, to save these
men's Lives, and their Churches sinking Credit; not to speak truth, but only
right or wrong confront the Kings Evidence: but in vain, for Dr. Oats
sufficiently asserted his Testimony by seven Witnesses, who now again proved,
as they had done the day before, his being in London at the time controverted.

3. Then Mr. Langhorn produced the Woman at the White-horse Tavern, P. 46.
where Mr. Oats had said the Consult was held; and she boldly averred, that
there was never a Room in her House would hold above a dozen people, and
therefore there could not meet 50, or 18 or 20 persons at a time. This was an
Objection Doctor Oats could not foresee, not thinking any body would have had
the confidence to allege it; and so was not provided with any Witnesses to
confute it: but as Providence ordered it no less than three several strangers
stood up in Court, that knew the House well, and being sworn, Attested, The
first, that he had known sixteen to dine often in one Room of that House; the
second, that he knew two Rooms, one backwards and the other forward, where
Thirty might Dine at a time; and the third, that at a Wedding he knew of above
Twenty that Dined together in one Room next the street. Nay farther, there was
a Gentleman of good Quality in Court, who declared, there have been Fifty in a
Room there; so that this Evidence, by such a peremptory falsehood, did but add
to the suspicion already too apparent on the rest of his Witnesses.

The matter being thus plain, the Jury did not find any difficulty that might
require a tedious Consultation, and therefore returning after a short
retirement, into Court, pronounced the prisoner Guilty; and then Whitebread,
and the other Four Convicted the day before, being brought to him to the Bar,
Mr. Recorder proceeded to pass Sentence of Death upon them all Six. But Mr.
Langhorn, either in consideration of the affairs of others in relation to his
Practice, which it might be convenient to adjust; or rather in hopes he might
have been wrought upon to make some ingenuous Confession, was Reprieved for a
Month, and then Executed on Monday the Fourteenth of June, persisting in the
most solemn and studied expressions of his Innocence; which that they might be
home and full, and consequently the more taking with the people, he had written
down in a paper, whether of his own penning, or prescribed unto him by some
Priest, is uncertain; and this he delivered to the Sheriff, referring himself
thereunto, as the last Expressions of his mind; and desiring it might be seen.

CHAP. XX.
The Occasion and manner of Mr. Robert Jennison's first Discovery; and the
Apprehension of one Caryl, alias Blunden, and his Letter beyond the Seas
concerning the Execution of Whitebread, etc.

WE have before related how Mr. Ireland insisted that he was in Staffordshire,
when Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, and one Sarah Pain, attest upon their Oaths that
they saw him in London. And this he not only alleged at his Trial, and
brought Witnesses to prove it, but made solemn Asseverations at his death, That
he never was in London from the 5th of August to the 14th of September. And
knowing that such a failure in circumstance of time and place, if they could
get it believed, would much depretiate the Evidence, they not content with what
had passed, revive it again at Whitebread's Trial, as you have heard, offering
fresh people to confirm it: And though the contrary was sufficiently attested
by three Witnesses on Oath, enough to convince an impartial Jury, or any body
else that considers the nature of a Papists Religion, and how far he may
lawfully, nay is bound to stretch his private Conscience, when it may be for
the public Emolument of their Church; yet it pleased Providence, as well for
the vindication and further illustration of Truth, as to shame these false
dissemblers, and expose their fallacious dealings, soon after to make a further
discovery, and detect their Lies in this behalf, by one that had been no small
Zealot of their Party.

For presently after that Trial, Charles Chetwind Esquire upon some discourse
concerning the same, was accidentally informed, That one Mr. Robert Jennison of
Grays-Inne, a person of good Quality, and formerly a strict Romanist, had
affirmed, That he was with the said Ireland about the middle of August in
Russel Street in Coventgarden: whereupon Mr. Chetwind resolved to enquire
further after it, being thereunto encouraged by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to whom
he had communicated what he had heard. Then tracing the business, he went to
Robert Bows Esquire who owned, that Mr. Jennison had signified so much to him
formerly in a Letter from Reading, dated the 19th of December. Hereupon several
of these Gentlemen repaired to Mr. Jennison, who after some unwilling Evasions,
ingenuously owned the same, and testified it upon Oath before Edmund Warcup Esquire
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, viz.
That coming up from Windsor on the 19th of August, he went to visit the said
William Ireland (with whom for some time he had been well acquainted, as being
Related unto him) and found him at his Lodging in Russel Street, who told him
he was then newly arrived by Post from Wolverhampton in Staffordshire; and in
discourse enquired how his Majesty and the Court were diverted: To which Mr.
Jennison replied, That he heard his Majesty took much delight in Hawking and
Fishing, but chiefly in the latter; which his Majesty followed early in the
mornings, accompanied only with two or three Lords: Whereupon Ireland replied,
He wondered his Majesty should be so thin guarded, he were easily taken off or
removed; or words to that effect. At which Mr. Jennison saying God forbid,
Ireland began to qualify it, saying, I do not say it is lawful; and some such
Expressions, which made him take little notice of it at that time; but
afterward hearing of the Plot, and that the King was to have been killed at
Windsor, he began to reflect upon these former words more seriously, and
related them to his Father and one Mr. Smith his Fathers Confessor, being then
at Wallworth his Fathers Mansion House in the Bishopric of Durham.

This and some other Depositions confirming the same, with the true Copy of the
said Letter, have since been published in print, and Mr. Jennison publicly
attested the same at Wakeman's Trial; the horror and detestation of this
hellish Plot carried on by the Romanists, having induced him to quit their
Communion.

Three days after the Execution of Whitebread and the other four Jesuits, viz.
23 June, was Apprehended by Captain Rich, one of His Majesty's Justices of
Peace for Surry, one Caryl, alias Blunden, supposed to be a Popish Priest, at
Lambeth-Marsh, at the House of one Mr. Woodinbrook, formerly an Haberdasher of
Small Wares in the Borough of Southwark; in whose Chamber was found the
following Letter, prepared to give an Account thereof to their Correspondents
beyond the Seas; wherein it is observable, what liberty they take to scandalize
the proceedings of Justice, and invent so many palpable notorious Lies; as that
of the Reprieve being brought to the Gallows, etc. to keep up their Reputation
with their Party. The words of the Letter were as follow, only in the Margent
we have added some necessary Observations.

IHS. MR. 23 June, 1679. My Dr. C.
ON the Thirteenth of June, being Friday, Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Harcourt, Mr.
Turner, Fenwick and Gaven of the Society, and Mr. Corker, were brought to the
Bar in the Old-Bailey: Mr. Corker moved the Court for a longer time, being
only warned the night before, whereas the other Prisoners had eight days
warning to prepare themselves; whereupon he was re-manded to prison till the
next day: Then was the Indictment read against the Five abovenamed Jesuits,
for conspiring the Kings Death, Subversion of Government, and Protestant
Religion. Then Mr. Oats swore, that on the Twenty fourth of April, there was a
Consult held in London, where the Kings Death was Conspired; and that he
carried this Resolve from one to the other, for their subscribing; and swore
particular Circumstances against each. To Corroborate this Testimony, other
Witnesses, Bedloe, Prance, Dugdale, and Chetwine, came in with A pretty way of
expressing plain positive Evidence of several Overt Acts of Treason.
Overtures to the matter sworn by Oats. Then did the Prisoners (after a most
solemn and It might be solemn, but could not be counted Religious by any but
you, whose Religion consists in Lies and Blasphemous Hypocrisy.
Religious Protestation of their Innocence and ignorance of any Conspiracy
against His Majesty) desire that their Witnesses might be heard, which could
demonstrate that Mr. Oats was actually at St. Omers in all April and May, and
most of June, when he swears he was in London at the Consult. To prove this,
about twenty Witnesses were produced, who did show evidently, by several
remarkable passages, how Oats was at St. Omers all the whole time. But the
Judge Scroggs asked each Witness as he did appear, of what Religion he was of;
and upon answer that he was a Catholic, the whole Court gave a shout of
laughter. Then the Judge would say to them, All absolutely false, though it
might have been the most proper way of Examining such bold young Villains; for
'twas apparent they did not speak their knowledge, but their Masters dictates.
Well, what have you then been taught to say? and by many scoffing Questions
(which moved the Court to frequent laughter) he did endeavor to take off the
Credibility of their Witnesses. Then the Butler, Tailor, and Gardener of St.
Omers offered to swear that they saw Mr. Oats all that time at St. Omers, when
he swore he was in London. After this, the Prisoners at the Bar produced
Sixteen Witnesses more, that proved Oats Another impudent Lie; and sure the
Jesuits themselves and the Staffordshire Vouchers, if they have any shame left,
will now blush at the story.
forsworn in Mr. Irelands Trial, because he was in Shropshire, when he attested
be was in London. Then did Gaven, one of the Prisoners, with a great deal of
clearness and Eloquence, and with a cheerful countenance, draw up their
justification, showing the force of their Evidences, and how fully their
Witnesses had proved Mr. Oats Not the least pretense for this old baffled
Scandal.
perjured: then he did lay open the improbabilities of such a Plot, and how
unlikely that Mr. Oats should be entrusted in delivering Commissions to
Persons of Honor and Estates, whom he never (as he acknowledges) had seen
before or since. This was delivered by Mr. Gaven, O brave Orator! sure this
Recommendation of such brave service done the Church, will hasten Gavens
Canonization, at least one score or two of years.
with a Countenance wholly unconcered, and in a voice very audible, and largely
and pertinently expressed. The Judge was incensed at this Speech, in which he
often interrupted him: but Gaven still urged, My Lord, I plead now for my Life,
and for that which is dearer to me than life, Ay, and Soul to boot.
the honor of my Religion, and therefore I beseech you have a little patience
with me! After this Plea of Mr. Gaven's, the Judge made his Harangue to the
Jury, telling them, that what the Prisoners had brought, was only the bare
assertions of Boys, who were taught it as a point of their Religion, to lie for
the honor of their Religion; whereas Mr. Oats, Bedloe, and others, were upon
their Oaths; and if Oaths were not to be taken, no Courts could subsist.

Then Mr. Oats brought forth four These four were no less than seven.
Witnesses which he had kept in reserve; an old Parson in his Canonical Gown,
an old Dominican Priest Is he so? The honester man he, to speak the truth and
shame the Devil and the Jesuits. -- But Proh dolor! Alas! how this grieves you,
that any one of your Religion should speak Truth when it makes against you.
Proh Pudor and Dolor! and two old women, that swore they saw Mr. Oats in the
beginning of May 1678. At this the whole Court gave a shout of And who could
forbear, to hear how undeniably your Novices were proved to be like their
Masters, most egregious LIARS? Nor yet did the Court laugh, but the crowd of
people, whom the Court took order to silence.
laughter and hollow, that for almost a quarter the Cryers could not still
them: Never was Bear-baiting more rude and boisterous than this Trial. Upon
this the Judge dismissed the Jury, to consider and bring in their Verdict; who
(after half an hours absence) brought in the Five Prisoners at the Bar all
guilty of High Treason. Thereupon the whole Court clapped Better so, than that
you clap your hands at the murder of the King, as some of your Tribe did at
that of your Enemy, his blessed Father.
their hands, and gave a great hollow. It being now eight at night, the Court
adjourned till next day at seven of the clock, which was Saturday: I was
present from five in the morning, till the Court broke up. The Prisoners
comported themselves Bravely said! Who would confess now? To be thus
Apostolified, would make one venture Purgatory.
most Apostolically at the Bar; not the least passion or alteration appeared in
them at the Invectives of the Judge, or at the Clamours of the People; but made
a clear and candid defense, with a cheerful and unconcerned countenance; and
(as Dear Sir, tell us his name; he was a Wit undoubtedly, unless it were your
self. A Jury of Turks have done strange things, and may acquit any body; but
these were a Jury of honest Christians, and therefore they found them guilty.
a Stander-by said) if they had had a Jury of Turks, they had been quitted. I
was with them both before and after their Trial, and had the honor of being in
my Function It Is pity you had not been caught giving the Knaves that Absolution.
serviceable to them; which I look upon, as that God favored me in, I hope for
my future good.

Next day Mr. Langhorne a Lawyer, Sir George Wakeman, Mr. Corker, Mr. March,
Mr. Rumbly, the three last Benedictines, were brought to the Bar; where the
Indictment being read against them for conspiring the Kings death, etc. they
pleaded all Not guilty. Then was Langhorne first tried, whose Trial held so
long, that they had not time to try the other four; and the Commission by which
they sat expiring that day, the Judge adjourned the Trial of the other four
till the 14th of July, and then the Judge commanded the Keeper to bring the
five Jesuits; whom with Langhorne Poor Langhorne! not one word of praise for
thee! methoughts thou lookedst as Apostolically as the best of them: but this
it is to be a Layman, and confess Jesuits Lands.
were sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered. Mr. Corker and Mr. March
are close Prisoners, and have been so this eight months, with whom I have been;
God has fitted, and is still fitting them as Sacrifices for himself: They are
very well disposed and resigned to Gods holy will. Mr. Rumbly has the liberty
of the Prison, with whom is Mr. Heskett; all cheerful, and expect the good hour.

On Thursday, the day before the five Jesuits were executed, my Lord Shaftsbury
was with Turner and Gaven, promising them the Kings Pardon, if they would
acknowledge the Conspiracy. Mr. Gaven answered, He would not murder his Soul,
to save his Body; for he must acknowledge what he knew not, and what he did
believe was not. On Friday the 20th of June, Mr. Whitebread on one Sled with
Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Turner and Mr. Gaven upon another Sled, and Mr. Fenwick in a
Sled by himself, were drawn from Newgate to Tyburn. Mr. Langhorne is for a time
reprieved, and promised Pardon, if he will (as it is reported) discover the
Estates of the Jesuits: he was their Lawyer. It Is certain my Lord Shaftsbury
has been often with him. In the way they comported themselves seriously and
cheerfully; Mr. Gaven had smug'd himself up as if he had been going to a
Wedding. When they arrived at Tyburn, they each made a Speech: 1. Assevering
their ignorance of any Plot against his Majesty. 2. Pardoning their Accusers.
3. And heartily praying for them. Mr. Gaven in his Speech made an

(...)
full to all, especially Laborious men, and is necessary for Victualling of
Ships.Both in France and Holland are great Excises on most, or all, ordinary
Meats and Drinks, in England on part of our Drink only, viz. That in Alehouses,
and Public Brewings, (I hope there never will be any such as shall burden
Trade.)

Our great Wastes, and void Lands, which are our present Grief and Scandal, may
on the Regulation of our Trade, prove highly beneficial to us, since they will
afford present room for a vast Increase of People, whether Foreign Planters,
or others; in the United Provinces, or France, none such are to be found.

And lastly, England is far better situated for the Fishing Trade, and other
Foreign Trade than either France, or the United Provinces, and its People are
naturally far more Adventurous and Valiant than theirs, as Experience has
shown, which makes no small odds upon National Contests, between Nations
emulous in Trade, when they fight upon equal Terms of Treasure, and Warlike
Preparations: and there is no question but our National Industry in Trade,
would be also more Vigorous and Successful, were it put into suitable Methods;
but otherwise can no more Exert it self than a generous Courser in a Horse-Mill.

From all which it must be evident, that were our Trade eased as in Neighbor
Nations, England would have the Superiority, since the same Causes must produce
greater Effects in England, being invigorated with these our National
Advantages, which no other Nation does or can enjoy.

The present Power of the French King would infallibly much Contribute to it,
which being arrived to such a swelling and tremendous height, does not only
intimidate all men of Trade and Wealth in France, especially Protestants; but
all the adjacent Provinces and People on the Continent, who either already
groan under the insupportable Oppressions and Insolences of the French, or are
under deep and Continual Apprehensions of being wasted by his numerous Troops,
grown Proud and Wanton with Success, and ready to make irresistible descents
upon any private Order; in which these his Neighbors can never think
themselves secure, because of his late sudden Invasion of Flanders: and would
therefore fly to our English World, as a blessed and safe Asylum, were it put
into a posture of being so. Then if the sudden Populacy, Treasures, Trade, and
strength of the small Dutch Provinces, were the Effects of the then Spanish
Tyranny in the Low Countries, what might we not hope for from far greater
Confluences of the richest and most Mercantile and Industrious Protestants, or
such as would be so, even from Holland and France, as well as from many other
parts of Europe? whose Stocks being transported by Bills of Exchange, and their
Manufactures with their Persons, and this on a sudden, would give the odds of
Srength and Treasure to the English, who no longer need to trust to the
fallible Security of Leagues, which are so often obstructed and broken by the
humor or perfidie of particular men, or frustrated by incapacity and
accidents: And therefore this patching and piecing a Strength together by
Leagues, is the dependence of small and weak Estates, such as those of Italy
and Germany; where they are always tricking and betraying one another; yet at
this time Leagues (though not to be wholly rested upon) may be of great, and
good consequence to England.

Had the French Monarchy never overawed the rest of Europe, as it now does, it
must be evident, that if our Trade had been regulated and eased equally with
the Dutch, all those Merchants and People which have settled in Holland, would
have planted here, where besides the former advantages, the extent of our
Territory, renders the Burden of Taxes far easier on particular men than in
Holland, where they are also at a much greater necessary charge for Garrisons
on their Frontiers; nay the very Dutch would have forsaken those Provinces for
England, or if any had remained, they would have been Carriers for the English,
as they have been to the French, and will rather be so for the future, if our
Shop were sufficiently furnished, because they will more willingly transfer the
wealth of the World to a Country where they themselves may securely share in
it, when they please, than to an Arbitrary Power, which may in a moment swallow
it up, and oppress those that brought it to any the most barbarous degree; from
all which, these things are most manifest: First, That nothing does or can so
formidably threaten the Trade, and by Consequence the Monarchy of France, as
the Modern Freedoms of the English, and some other Neighboring Countries.
Secondly, That the English Freedoms are at this day so great an advantage to
his most Sacred Majesty of England, that they are a Weapon left in his hands,
with which, and a Concurrent Regulation of our Trade, he may with ease and
assurance attain a Superiority over all the Monarchs and Powers of Europe put
together; he will cut the Grass under their Feet, and draw away their Treasures
and People, notwithstanding all the Policies can be used; no mere Prohibition
can stop those whose Interests, quiet, and safety, shall oblige them to depart:
In which, besides a sufficient Guard at Sea, (to use the words of the French
Politics) there would need almost no War to be made, nor His Majesty's Forces
hazarded. Thirdly, That for these Reasons it is most evident, that it does
highly import the French Monarchy, that the Freedoms of the English, and all
others in these parts should be subverted and evacuated, of which, whether the
French Councils, who have been so long and so curiously projecting the Grandeur
of that Monarchy, are insensible, I leave to be considered. Fourthly, It Is also
as evident, that upon such a Regulation of our Trade His Majesty's Revenue
being (by some Excise added to the then smaller Customs, and other his present
Funds) made but equal to what now it is, would infallibly swell higher and
higher yearly, as Trade, People, and Treasures shall increase; if these shall
become double, treble, or six fold what they now are, so would his Revenue:
then what extraordinary Supplies in Parliament might he not expect, upon a
National Emergence; nay, or for his own proper occasions, when by an increase
of People, the Burden upon particular men will be answerably eased, and by the
increase of Treasure, and the advance of private Revenues and Stocks, these
People should be enabled to give largely, and often; and this without any
prejudice to their home Trade, or Land-Rents, and therefore with such an
Alacrity, as is agreeable to that true Honor and Affection they really bear
him.

I need not observe how much it will be in His Majesty's Power to secure the
making up of his present Revenue by new Funds, should he graciously think fit
to compute by a Moderation of the Customs; but since I have now, and before
mentioned Excises, and have observed some men of Parts, almost to startle at
the naming of a new Excise, I shall thus far explain and vindicate my self, and
the proposal: First, I shall agree that such Excises as affect and over-burthen
the beneficial parts of Trade, are of pernicious Consequence. Secondly, that an
Universality of Excise is both inconvenient and unnecessary; But that there may
be Excises Imposed on many Superfluities, and Excesses, in Meats, Drinks, or
Equipages, or upon some imported Goods Consumed at home, which would be no
prejudice to any kind of Trade; being no clog upon our Exports, or Re-exports;
or perhaps, a very small Excise on ordinary Meats, Drinks, and Apparel, might
be supportable: I do not propound all, but some of these, in this Course there
will be this odds of advantage on the part of the King, That the Users,
Wearers, and Consumers, being this way made chargeable, His Majesty would be
less liable to be defrauded than in the Customs, which are perpetually
smuggled, and then the Imported Goods openly Vended, and used; This, on the
part of the People, That it will bring the like Obligations of charge on men of
Visible and Invisible Stocks, in, or out of Trade, as on the Land-holders; and
therefore I do not see any shadow of reason why Excises should appear such
Bugbears in England, especially to Land-holders, any more than in Holland, See
Sir W. Temple of the Dutch, Page
and in other Trading Nations, where the Public Revenues are made to swell
high by these small and almost insensible Payments. It is Confessed, that it
will be highly fit to provide for a fair and easy Collection, and against the
Extortions, Insolences, and Abuses of Officers; for which we need to go no
farther than to learn by what Methods they are collected and ascertained in
Holland, if any shall misbehave themselves, we have a free recourse to the Law,
as in Holland they have, but in France they have not, though perhaps now more
than ever. Nor are Excises, or somewhat in the Nature of them, so new amongst
us, if we regard the Ancient Tolls for things bought and sold in home-Markets;
which, although they now seem small, were before the Discovery and Diffusion of
the Indian Treasure Considerable, and originally belonging to the Crown, but
since appropriated to private hands by Grants, or long usages founded on Grants
from the Crown, which having also given Exemptions to some Towns, we may
presume them first intended for the ease of Manufacturers, of which the
Government had an especial regard: having said this, if the Reader will reflect
on All that I have said, he cannot think I have any design in beggaring the
English Subjects by an invention of new Taxes; 'twas Sir Walter Raleigh's
Opinion, that the smaller and more numerous Payments of Custom, would rise far
higher than before, which he Confirms with Fact; be they more or less, the
National Wisdom is at Liberty to exert it self in further Levies, by Excise,
Land Tax, Poll, or otherwise as there shall be cause.

Having now written what I intended on the present Subject, the Nature of it
may sufficiently assure the Reader, that I have not designed any peculiar Ends
of my own: On the contrary it has been a trouble, which I wish an abler hand
had undertaken, and being for the Public, may expect what usually ensues, when
men engage upon the cutting of Common Rivers, wherein they must have Contests
with every one, who has a Lands End abutting upon the Work, who will set a
greater value upon six foot of Earth, than upon all the Good the Country, and
therein themselves, and all their Posterity, might reap by the Accomplishment
of the Business: i^ which they are generally so tenacious, that they ordinarily
ruin the Undertaker, and thereby make great store of mirth for the Cunning men
of the adjacent Villages. I am not insensible how many men's Animosities I have
hazarded, by incountring their private Interests, or contrary Inclinations; a
thing no way grateful to me, being not one of those (if any there be) that, out
of any petulancy of humor, Love Contention, or Innovations, or that would
appear considerable by opposing something that is already thought so; or that
delight in stirring Sediments, or raking into fedities; I affect quiet as much
as any man, and account it my ordinary duty to give the least offense I can,
even to the little ones. Nothing but a Consideration of our present
Difficulties, and a hope to be Instrumental to the public felicity could have
moved me an Inch beyond these common Prudentials; to which I have yet conformed
as far as I can; I have touched no man's Person, and I presume I need not say I
have forborne Reflections, in which I do not think any one obliged to me, being
but what I have judged requisite for a Composure of things; it has been
absolutely necessary that I should represent our ill Constitutions in Trade,
and some of the most important Consequences, that from a general apprehension
of the Common Interest, there may ensue a National Union in those Methods which
may be most for the Public Advantage, and this upon the mighty Basis of our
present form of Government, and under our present most gracious Prince, whose
Glories I hope to see expanded by an exuberant increase of National Treasures,
People, and Royal Revenues, and to such a degree, as that the days of our Queen
Elizabeth shall appear but a faint Type, or dawning of the greater Luster and
Happiness of His now Majesty's Reign: This is what I wish for, and have to my
utmost endeavored, and therein the real Advantage of all Ranks of Men in the
Nation; If then these Excellent Ends appear obstructed by a sort of ancient or
Innovated Laws or Usages, who can speak of them, without much Resentment? In
which, I hope, I am Excusable. These are the Spells by which our innocent
People are inevitably lead into Courses destructive to the Public.

How can our Merchants or Shopkeepers now avoid Trading in Foreign
Consumptive Goods? Have they any sufficient Stores of Home-Manufactures? Can
our Merchants Trade from Port to Port as the Dutch and others do? or must Men
that are bred up to these Gentile professions, that are Men of Family,
Industry, and Fortune fling up, live lazily, or poorly? Who does not know how
many generous and intelligent Men, are to be found amongst our Merchants and
Shopkeepers of all sorts? Such as bear a true affection to their Country, and
are an honor to the Nation, and such as wish for a Regulation of our Trade,
and would be ready and capable to give all farther assistances, were they
called to it? This I wish to see, being not so conceited, as to think I have
said all that is material on this Subject; but on the contrary apprehend, That
there are very few Paragraphs of what I have written, but may admit of farther
Informations: In the mean time, from what has been already said, it must be
apparent to these and others, That as an open and free Trade would be far more
profitable to the generality of Merchants, so would it be far more honorable
to all; That the Consequential Increase of People and Wealth, would better
support our great Increase of Shopkeepers, Lawyers, Solicitors, Penmen, etc.
(of which the present Numbers would then hardly be sufficient) That the
benefits of our Clergy must receive an inevitable Improvement by it. And that
our great and famous City of London (which is the Seat Royal, where our
National Courts of Justice are, which is contiguous to our most secure Harbor
for Ships, which has the sweetest and most Commodious situation of any City in
Europe, and is so vastly peopled already) must by these advantages, for ever,
have the greatest resort and Trade of the Nation, (even under the utmost
Improvments of our Trade) which must then be incomparably more than now:
Besides, the vast advantage our Gentry would infallibly reap by the continual
Rising of their Rents, even such of these as desire more business, or gain,
will then have other and farther daily opportunities, by putting Stocks into
Manufactures, or Foreign Trade, and projecting and soliciting the Improvement
of either, or both. In Florence, the very Nobility and great Duke himself are
Traders; hence might our Members of Parliament be continually prepared to make
the most suitable Laws for the facilitating of Trade.

Lastly, Nothing can so effectually and certainly secure the peace of the
Nation, as the Regulating of our Trade, since it will set all Men's heads and
hands at work in all manner of Innocent and Profitable Employments, and
introduce a general satisfaction and Harmony.

Then, and never 'till then, shall we make up that invincible Phalanax, which
must not only be terrible to all Foreign Nations, but to all Enemies of the
Government at Home, when they find it supported by the solid Pillars of Trade
and Treasure, and a Consequential swelling Populacy and Navigation; which will
deter Men of sense from Treasonable Machinations, and of Fools there needs no
fear: Whereas the defect of these Supports must continually administer
temptation to all such as by reason of their particular circumstances, can hope
for any greater advantage or security, by the general ruin. The Body Politic
being in this like the Natural, more subject to new Distempers when it is
infirm before, but when stanch in every part easily bears off the Corruption or
Acidity of any malevolent humors,

The Trade of the World has long courted England, but never with so much
importunity, or with so much advantage as now: This great Lady affecting
Freedom and Security, has no Inclination to continue under the Arbitrary Power
of the French, nor the Uncertain fate of the Dutch; with these she has resided
only as a Sojourner, but is ready to espouse our Interest and Nation, and with
her self to bestow upon us the Treasures of the World; but if we still continue
inexorable and stubborn, things are grown to such a Crisis, That we may have
reason to fear this is the last time of her asking, and that she may suddenly
turn this Kindness into such a Fury as we shall not be able to withstand.

Shall we then embrace so advantageous Overtures, or, shall we still proceed in
our present Methods? I have heard it was a hard matter to reclaim the Irish
from drawing with their Horses Tails; shall the Irish now beat us out of our
Trade? Shall we continue rolling in Foreign Silks and Linnens? or be still
sotting in Foreign Wines, whilst they pick our pockets? Shall we be Curious
in Trifles, sneaking after our private interests? or like the blind Sodomites
groping after our filthy Pleasures, whilst the Wrathful Angels of God stand at
our elbows? Shall we like the Reprobated Jews be under continual Demications
within, See Josephus of the Siege and Destruction of Jerusalem.
whilst our Enemies are at the Gates? Shall those of the High City, those of
the Low City, and those in the Temple be picking out one another Eyes to
facilitate the Aggressions of more powerful Foreigners? or shall we be hunting
or grasping after false Shadows, and Imaginary Forms and Ideas, and neglect
that most valuable substance which we have already in our Mouths, and which
would turn into the most solid Nutriment, would we take the pains to chew it?

Which leads me to say, There is yet a farther Requisite to our happy procedure
in the Whole, of greater importance than any other; viz. a general Humiliation
of our selves toward God, accompanied with an abhorrence of our past
Intemperances, Corrupt Passions, Pride, Avarice, Lusts, Profaneness, mutual
Oppressions, Perfidies, and other Impieties, with such a Christian Meekness,
Charity, Purity, Truth, Holy Zeal and Resolution as may render us Capable of
his Mercy and Protection; perhaps one false step at this time, may be more
Irreparable than ever; it is certain we shall never be able to make a true one
whilst we are under the displeasure of the Almighty.

It is as undeniable, that the Laws which obstruct our Trade, cannot be
Repealed, or new ones requisite for its Improvement or Security be made,
otherwise than by a Parliament: Whether therefore, upon this and other
important Considerations, the Convening and Holding of a Parliament be not,
under God, (who does not work by Miracle) a necessary means to prevent the
Ruin of this Nation, and how Long it may now with any security be deferred, is
that, which I most humbly submit to the Determination of Authority.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
The Introduction. Page 1 SECTION I. Trade National or Private, Home or
Foreign Treasures Imported by Trade, thence Land-Rents, Popularly increased,
the Revenues of all Ranks of Men depend upon Trade, People and Treasure make
National Strength, particular Advantages in Treasure, the difference between
Ancient and Modern Wars, Navigation supported by Trade, this necessary for the
Security of an Island, and therein the further Scope of the Whole. p. 10 SECT.
II. The several kinds of Foreign Trade, of Trading with Home or Foreign
Navigation, some general Application. p. 19 SECT. III. Of Foreign Trade
consisting in Exportation, of the Advantages of home-Manufactures, incidently
other home-Trades and Employments are considered; and which of them enrich a
Nation; of the Fishing Trade, and the Annual Exporting of Corn. p. 23 SECT. IV.
Of Foreign Trade from Port to Port; the Nature and Advantage of it; differs
from mere Carriage, and mere Importation; the necessity of a Home Storehouse:
The ordinary Exporting of Money or Bullion, of dangerous Consequence; how to be
avoided: The Fishing Trade, and Trade from Port to Port, are the Nursery and
Support of Seamen, and Sea-Towns; The Condition of ours; The National
Advantages of England for all sorts of Trade, yet has the least share. p. 34
SECT. V. That our Home and Foreign Market is Encumbered and prejudiced by
Extraordinary and Unequal Charges and Cloggs in our Merchandise above what are
in our Neighbour-Nations, Viz. In the Building and Furniture of our Ships,
Victuals, Sea-Mens Wages, Customs, Interest-Money, etc. and Foreign Trade;
more particularly of the decay of our Woollen Manufacture: Our Exportations now
confined to our Importations and Imported Treasure, how to be enlarged; our
casual dependence on the Trade of Spain. p. 47 SECT. VI. Other Cloggs on our
Trade, Viz. The late Acts of Navigation, which, with the other difficulties,
have begot Monopolies; made our Navigation yet dearer; so Foreign Materials of
Manufacture cause mere Importations, hinder our Foreign Vent of Victuals,
obliges a sudden Consumption of our remaining Ship-Timber; Particular Dangers
and Consequences thereof: Our Navigation cannot be increased whilst we are
restrained in Trade. The exhausting of our Treasure must subvert our
Navigation: The Advantages of Foreigners, of Tradeing by Companies, and the
different Nature of ours, more particularly of our African and East India
Companies and Trade: Diverse ill Consequences of Joynt-Stocks; therein more of
Monopolies. Long Land-Carriages to London; the Market there delayed. Odds in
Interest-Money must prejudice our Manufactures: Private Interest observed. Our
affectation of Foreign Commodities: The Prejudice of obstructing the Vent of
Manufactures. Our Manufactures liable to be engrossed upon by our Merchants,
and by Ingrossers; a disadvantage by the Restitution of half-Customs on the
Re-exportation. p. 64 SECT. VII. Foreigners eased in Trade; Other Clogs of
Difficulties upon ours; Want of Populacy, incidently of extreme prices of
Victuals; and how the duration of Land-Rents may be secured; Our People
restrained from Manufactures; the Abuse of the Act of 43 Eliz. 2. Act of 5
Eliz. cap. 4. mere Prohibitions of no value. Freedoms and pre-emptions of
Corporations, with the Consequences. Free-Schools and Scholar-like Employments:
Foreign Protestants hindered from transporting hither; Want of Toleration of
Protestant Dissenters; the Objections briefly considered: Elections in
Corporations. Monopolies of New Manufactures: Delay and Charge in some
Lawsuits. Tithes of Hemp, Flax, and Fish; more of Customs, and incidently of
Taxes. p. 152 SECT. VIII. That a Nation may grow Poor by Foreign Trade, viz.
By an Excess of mere Importations, illustrated by some Observations, this
facilitated by Exporting Money or Bullion, the fatal Consequences and Symptoms
of a Consumptive Trade, decay of Manufactures, other ways of living
overstocked, fall of Rents, general Poverty, an increase of Criminals of all
sorts, Depopulation; some Application to the present Case of England, and
amongst others the occasion of the new Buildings about London, of Incontinency,
Cunning, etc. p. 121 SECT. IX. That a Consumptive Trade must render a Nation
still weaker and weaker: How far the mere Establishment of Absolute Power, or
mere Liberty and Property, may alter the Case. p. 137 SECT. X. Further
Presumptions of our late National overballance in Trade; an Account from the
Mint in November 75. and thence our former Balance of Trade estimated. p. 144
SECT. XI. Particular decays in our Exportations, and the beneficial parts of
our Trade; Instances in the decay of our Foreign Trade for Woollen Clothing,
in the several Counties and Ports we Traded to, in the sinking of the Foreign
Price of this Manufacture, so of Exporting Wool, in our Foreign Victualling
Trades for Flesh, Butter, Cheese, etc. in our Irish Trade, and Scotch Trade for
almost all sorts of Commodities: Irish Wool increased: The Expiration of the
Irish Acts will not now revest that Trade, but prejudice us more, and in what;
decays in our several former and late Fishing Trade, in our Foreign Trade for
Stockings and Hats, in our Exports to the Canaries, in the Foreign Price of
our Exported Tynn and Lead, and the Price and Quantity of Exported Pewter, in
our Trade from Port to Port, our former and late prejudices in our
Plantation-Trade, incidently of our Navigation, and other things. p. 155 SECT.
XII. Instances in late Increases and Excesses of our Foreign Importations, and
therein of the Decay of some other of our own Manufactures which supplied our
Home-Vses, viz. in Linnens of all sorts, more dear fine Linnens used;
incidently of the late and present Huswifery of English Women: In Ticking, in
Imported Woollen Manufactures from Holland, France, and Ireland; In Cordage,
Cables, Sayls and Sea-Nets; in Iron, in Brandy, in Wines of all sorts, these
risen in price; the particular odds in our former and present Canary-Trade; in
Coffee, in Earthen Ware, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax, and Foreign Timber bought
dearer, and far more Timber Imported: In Imported Silks of all sorts; in Laces,
and many other things, and thereupon our late French Overballance Considered.
To which are Added, our late losses by the French Capers, and Money Exported to
France by our Travelers, etc. The National Overballance inferred, this cleared
by a Deduction of our Trade, with Relation to the Dutch and French, and therein
of their gradual Increase, and our Decay in Trade; Whence the Growth of the
French and Dutch Revenues and Strengths observed; a farther Calculation of our
late and present Overballance; incidently of some farther Advantages in Trade
Foreigners have upon us. p. 177 SECT. XIII. That a Considerable part of our
late Treasure is exhausted: Application to our Public and Private Revenues:
Objections Answered, viz. The Plenty of Money to be let on Securities; Stores
of Money in London; Stocks in Merchandise; The Over-weightiness of our Coin,
etc. p. 222 SECT. XIV. People and Treasure the true Pillars of the National
strength: The Odds in the different Use and employment of people. The
absoluteness of the French Monarchy no cause of the present French Grandeur:
The late Application of the French Councils to the Increase of Trade, People,
and Treasure; and the occasion thereof. The greater excellency of the Form of
our English Government. The farther necessity of Improving our Trade from the
Modern Treasures and Powers of the French; of their Naval force, the Algiers
Pyracy; how the French design to engross all Maritime Commerce; our dangers
from France; of the present condition of the Dutch: That our late Prohibition
of French Goods will not disable that Monarchy, nor better our Trade; mere
Prohibitions of no value: Our great advantages in Trade above France and
Holland: That a speedy Regulation of our Trade etc. would secure us against all
Foreign Powers, and Dangers at home: Of Excises, and other Taxes. The certain
Increase of his Majesty's Revenue; hence, what occasion for a Parliament, etc.
p. 239
ERRATA.
The Copy by which the Print has been examined being imperfect, it is doubted
all the Errata's are not observed, but these following have occurred, viz.

Page 3. line 17. for hires re ad hives. p. 5. l. 7. r. notions. same p.l. 11.
f. of Improvments, r. and. p. 10. l. 3. r. populacy. p. 20. l. 17. r.
commodities. p. 23. l. 18. r. principles. p. 25. l. 26. r. commodity. p. 26.
l.f. with r. which. p. 27.17. r. manufactures p. 31. l. 25. f. 25000. r.
250000. p. 42. l. 8. r. re-export. p. 44. l. 2. after 90 add or 100. p. 52.
after for add some. p. 53. f. wars, r. wares. p. 57. l. 4. after high add our.
l. 5. after have, add near. p. 59. l. 2. af. make add a. p. 59. l. 13. f. Sails
r. Sailors. p. 71. l. 8. af. since add of. l. 9. bef. are ad they. p. 72. l. 2.
such as leave out as.

Mote, The next page is false numbered, viz. 129, and so forwards till page 160:
In which are these Errata's viz. p. 131. l. 19. r. erection. p. 136. l. 14. f.
custom r. constitution. p. 138. l. 12. f. these r. the. p. 140. l. 5. it their,
leave out it. p. 141. l. 26. f. exempted r. exerted. p. 144. l. 16. r.
notoriety. the same p.l. 28. f. highly r. hightly. p. 149. l. 4. f. rent, r.
vent. p. 150. l. 4. r. manufacturers. the same p. l. 19. f. prize r. price. p.
151. l. 3. f. being, r. bring. the same p.l. 24. r. in considerate. p. 152. f
of difficulties, r. and. p. 153. l. 11. af. never, add can. p. 154. he was, he
to be omitted. in the same marg. f. 250000. r. 150000. p. 156. l. 18. r.
manufacturer. Note, in Sect. 7. at p. 160. there follows p. 97. and so
forwards, wherein are these Errata's. p. 97. l. 25. af. that r. most. p. 101.
l. 6. f. and Virgil. r. or. p. 107. l. 9. r. propose. p. 109. omit and. p. 113.
l. 8. r. difference. p. 115. f. a, r. the p. 116. l. 1. r. manufacturers. same
p.l. 13. f. this, r. there. same p.l. 16. af. and r. are. p. 125. l. 1. leave
out partly. p. 126. r. those. p. 130. l. 22. f. a fair. r. an. p. 132. l. 19.
f. 2000 l. r. 20000 l. p. 154. l. 13. r. altercation. same p.l. 24. and 25. r.
affected. p. 155. l. 15. r. exported. p. 164. l. 23. f. art, r. act. p. 186. l.
1. f. here, r. have. p. 188. l. 20. f. God, r. Gold. p. 202. l. 2. to three add
near. p. 211. f. moderately, r. immoderately. p. 218. an addend. in the Margent
omitted* viz.

To these and all the rest, add what losses have accrew'd by enclosing our
African Trade to a Company and Joynt-stock, and by the Act of 15 Car. 2.7.
Licensing the East India Company, and all others, to Export Treasure and such
other late losses, as being mentioned in the 4 th. 5 th. 6 th. 7 th. or 8 th.
Sections, have been omitted in this and the last Section.

p. 220. l. 20. f. drive, r. drove. p. 221. l. 14. af. more then add their then
value. p. 223. l. 15 for yield, r. of. p. 225. and the, leave out and. l. 11.
of more, leave out of. p. 230. l. 25. r. greater. p. 235. f. impossible, r.
possible. p. 238. f. of felters, r. and. p. 242. l. 26. f. their, r. the. p.
252. l. 28. f. 100, r. 600. p. 253. l. 28. r. King's. p. 256. l. 10. abundant
of, leave out of. l. 24. f. parts, r. Ports. p. 263. l. 6. af. gain, add by. p.
266. l. 21. f. spoke, r. speak. p. 267. l. 3. f. repealed, r. repeated. l. 9.
af. and add that. l. 21. an addend. in the margent omitted, viz. The Genoeses
of late appear unwilling. p. 269. l. 39. f. our, r. their. p. 274. l. 1. f.
can, r. could. p, 296, af. cutting, r. new. p. 299. l. 22. r. benefices. p.
300. f. Phalanax. r. Phalanx. p. 301. f. malevolent, read malignant.


