ANTIQUITA^ Theologica and Gentilis.

OR, TWO DISCOURSES

THE FIRST, Concerning the ORIGINAL (...) CHURCHES, and their D^ rect or
Collateral Endowment^

THE SECOND, Touching the RELIGION of the GENTILES, their TEMPLES, PRIESTS*
SACRIFICES, and other Ancien^ RITUALS.

Work necessary for DIVINES* LAWYERS, ANTIQUARIES, HISTORIANS, an^ POETS.

By THOMAS PHILIPOT, M. A. an^ formerly of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, ^rinted by W. G. and sold by R. Needham at the Bell in little S.
Bartholomews, 1670

To his LEARNED FRIEND Sr PHILIP WARWICK Of Frog-Poole-Place in Kent, Knight.
SIR,
THis Treatise implores your Patronage as an Umbrella to over-shadow it, and
your Approbation to secure and support it; so that if its Leaves shall begin to
wither, being blasted with any malevolent Censure, they will contract new Sap
and Verdure, animated and improved with your Protection; it is ready to receive
its Death at your Command, and can entitle its Life only to your acceptance:
But, Sir, your Judgment and Candor are folded up together in an equal
complication and mixture; as you have Art to judge, so you have Charity to
forgive,

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Thomas Philipot.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have at last rallied into one Body some scattered Notions fitted and
intended originally for my private Memorials, and having knit and cimented them
together into one Frame or Contexture, make them the Object of thy Mercy and
Justice, by offering them up to be winnow'd by the public; so certain it is,
that the Readers censure is still the Writers Fate. They had for ever silently
slept in their own sheath and secrecy, had not the Importunity of some Friends
(whose Influence has always so vigorous an Impression upon me, that their
Desires are Commands, and their Requests, Obligations) engaged me to devote
them to a more General Inspection, yet there are some Errors by an unhappy
intertexture interwoven in this Discourse, which owe their double extraction to
the Pen and Press. Some things are omitted which may be added, as a just and
necessary Supplement; and some things inserted which may be pared away as a
superfluous Excrescence; as namely, page 3. For sometimes seated, read
sometimes were seated. And whereas p. 47. these words through inadvertency are
inserted, viz. (Having wrapped up this Discourse in as brief a Circumscription
as I could, I now proceed to discover a Scale or Register of those Recto^ies or
Vicarages, and their respective Patrons both ancient and modern, as they lie
empal'd in the Diocesses of Canterbury and Rochester) they must be obliterated
and expunged, as relating to another Discourse, which is almost ready for the
Press, and which I had once thought to ^ave annexed to this Trea^ise. P. 63.
For, But likewise with a Religious Ad^ress, read, With a Religious Address;
expunging (but likewise) which wa^ added before. P. 70. l. 14 For Frabrilibus,
read Fabri^ libus. P. 78. For He wa^ Jupiter Labradeus, read, H^ was styled
Jupiter Labrade^ us. P. 91. For Possidona read Poseidona, as derived from the
Greek (...). P^ 101. For Safety, read Tha^ Safety. P. 105. l. 4, and 5 For
Manturn ^roma, rea^ Manturna ^rema, and p ibid, l. 19. For Muncia read Murcia.

There may possibly be some other Mistakes, but of a more ^nconsiderable Bulk
and Di^ension, which a more curi^us Eye may unvail; but I ^ope a merciful one
will con^eal. Vale.

Imprimatur, Nov. 30. 1669.

Rob. Grove R. R. D Episc. Land. a sac Dom.

A brief Discourse of the Original Institution of CHURCHES, and their Direct or
Collateral Endowments.
THere having been much written, which has an aspect upon this subsequent
Discourse, and which lies scattered in the pages and Treatises of several
Authors: I thought it a ^aske not unworthy my pen, or a labor not unfit, to
improve the common interest, to collect those dispersed and divided no^ions
into one heap or Volume: and having thus knit them together, to offer them up
to the public disquisition.

Before I made farther in this Discourse, I must affirm that even in Paradise
there was Separation or Distinction of places, since God did more especially
exhibit his presence in that part of the Garden, when he descended to commune
with Adam, than in any other portion of it; and thence in the Sacred pages, it
is affirmed that Adam upon his Defection fled from the presence of God. In
Times subsequent to this, we find that there was no Nation so rude or wildly
Barbarous, but did set apart some solemn or public places for the Worship of
their imaginary Deities; if they Sacrificed to their Terrestrial Gods or
powers, that had the Care or Tuition of the Earth, they erected there Altars on
the plain Superficies of it; if to the Infernal Powers, they did it in Cryptis
and Abditis Speluncarum, in Grots, Caves, and other gloomy Recesses; if to the
Celestial or Supernal Deities they offered up their Sacrifices, they then
performed that Devotion, on the Brows or Tops of Mountains; and it is very
probable, that this later Custom of theirs, had its Derivation from the
Prosouchae or Oratories amongst the Jews, which sometimes seated near the
Margin of a Spring, Brook or River, but most commonly upon the Edge of a
Mountain, and it is as probable, that the Encaenia, or Solemn Feasts,
Instituted at the Devoting or Consecrating their Temples to the Worship of
their Gentile Deities, was first extracted from the Feast of Dedication amongst
the Jews; A Feast (say the Rabbis) wherein something was renewed, because
those things are only reputed consecrated, which are separated from their
Common, and dedicated to some new and Holier use.

From these Premises I may justly Collect, that God who always loved Order,
and was apt to hear Holy and prudent prayers, has often declared, that he
loves Public Places, because of their Order, Convenience, and Necessity for
the Solemnity of Worship, and has affirmed, that he will dwell in them, not
that they are Advantages to Him, but that he is pleased to make them so to us;
^n public places we decline singularity, as in our Retirements or Oratories,
we avoid Hypocrisy. But I have too much digress'd, I now proceed; And I shall
first endeavor to trace* out when Parishes were originally distinguished and
divided from each other. Secondly, I shall discover the Grounds and Reasons on
which Churches were Erected and Dedicated. Thirdly, I shall make a Survey of
their Frame and Contexture within, and how in times of an Elder inscription
they were contrived for the Celebration of Religious Performances, and other
practical Duties and Offices* Fourthly, I shall make some reflections on the
original institution of Oblations, Obventions, Tithes, and other Payments which
did both enhance and secure the Dignity and Livelihood of the Ecclesiastical
State. Fifthly, I shall represent in a Compendious Prospect, upon what
foundations, and upon what considerations the right of Patronage was invested
in Lay or Secular Persons. When Parishes were first divided, that instruction
or intelligence, (Antiquity exhibites to us from those Registers and Records
which might enlighten our knowledge as to that particular,) is perplexed and
obscure. The generally received Opinion is, That Pope Evaristus, under Trajan
the Emperor* about* the Year 110. peradventure observing that too diffused and
numerous a Multitude (like too much fuel cast upon the flame) did rather Choke
and extinguish, than any way multiply the heat of De^o^tion; for the more
regular and uniform performance of Religious Offices for the future, did
contract those throngs of new Converts, which were daily added to the Church
into their several Stations and Parishes, But this design of his being left
crude and imperfect by his Martyrdom, which happened not long after under the
Emperor abovesaid, It slumber'd in his Urn, until the Reign of Gali^nus* the
Emperor, and then Pope Dionysius taking the advantage of a benign and
propitious Edict, issued out by that Prince in favor of the Christians (from
whose farther persecution and torture he had not long before been deterred, by
(...)al menaces revealed from (...)en in many ominous and direful Prodigies)
reduced the first endeavors of Pope Evaristus to accomplishment and perfection;
which pious work of his received both strength and improvement from the
Religious undertaking of Pope Fabianus, and his Successor Pope Marcellinus,
about the Year 314. as Bellarmine in his Chronology out of the Writings of
Anastasius, and Luitprandus does abundantly testify.

In England this pious example had such an influence and favorable Aspect,
that about the Year 636. Honorius Arch-bp. of Canterbury began to circumscribe
the people under his Pastoral ^are and inspection, within the Boundaries of
their several divisions and Parishes, which design of his was farther
prosecuted, enlarged and confirmed by his successor Arch-bp. Theobal^, about
the Year 677. In which posture and condition this Nation has ever since
continued.

Parishes being thus instituted, there appeared a subsequent necessity* of
erecting of Churches and Oratories, where the Celebration of Divine Offices
might multiply the growth of Christianity, which was yet but in its Infancy and
Minority; after their first Erection and Establishment, Antiquity (as it is
evident from several Monuments of Venerable Inscription) imposed the Name of
Tituli upon them. For in the Life of Pope Marcellinus, we read that In Roma
ille instituit. 21. titulos; that is, in the Dialect of Elder times, one and
twenty Churches.

Now Titulus (as Sanctius observes) is Signum aliquod se^ Monumentum, quod
docet latere aliquid, aut accidisse cujus nolumus perire Memoriam.

Churches then were anciently called Tituli, either from a name Metaphorically
borrowed from Goods belonging to the Princes Exchequer, that had some sign
imprinted upon them, that they might be known whose they were; So the sign of
the Cross was put upon the Churches, to make it known they were marked out and
distinguished for Gods Service: or else they were named Tituli, because the
respective Presbyters did anciently derive and receive their several Titles
from them. See Baronius, Anno Domini 112. They were likewise styled Memoriae
Martyrum, because anciently Churches were built Supra Cryptas Martyrum; that
is, upon those Vaults and Repositories, where the Dust and Relics of the
ancient Martyrs were originally treasured up. Now, if you will know why
Antiquity with such industrious Piety did Erect these Monuments, now called
Churches, over the Ashes of these glorious Assertors and Champions of
Christianity, and after devoted them to their names; these subsequent Remarques
or Notes upon the first institution, will sufficiently insinuate to the Reader
the Reasons of this primary Consecration.

I. That the Memory of those excellent Persons might be so preserved, that
after they had received the glorious fate of Martyrdom it might not be buried
in so cheap a Tomb as Oblivion.

Secondly, That the example of such eminent Champions perpetuated in these
lasting Monuments, might in succeeding Ages excite others, if any fresh Onset
should be made on Christianity, with the same magnanimity to assert it as these
before them had done, since they beheld so Venerable an Estimate was set upon
their remembrance for dying for it.

Thirdly, That in future times they might be rescued from an ^njurious and
sacrilegious devastation, when Posterity should find they were devoted to the
Memory of those who had with such an inexpugnable passive fortitude defended
the Doctrine of the Cross, and had improved Christianity to a stupendous
fertility, with the double compost of their Ink, and of their Blood.

Having thus traced out the original institution of Churches, and the Reasons
of their Dedication; we shall now unlock their Doors, and view their
contrivance within, and there, upon a serious Survey, Antiquity we shall find
cast them into this Method and Order.

When the indulgent and liberal Piety of the Primitive Christians began more
visibly to mafest it self, those Churches they erected, were frequently, if not
generally built in an Oval Figure, or like some of our Ships long and narrow,
and bulking out on both sides, near the midst whereof the Pastophoria (we may
call them the Pews) for Men and Women were designed, and in the midst the
Bishops seat was placed, called in Greek Bema, from its assent, and in Latin
Thronus, from the ^minency of it. At the East end was the Altar placed, though
at Antioch its position respected the West. Not far distant from the Bishops.
Throne was the Ambo, or Reading Desk, where^t the Anagnostes. Read the
Scriptures Old and New to the ^aity; round about the Bishops seat sat the
Presbyters, the Deacons not sitting, but standing behind him, except the
^rimicerius Diaconorum, who was ever to attend the Bishop, and therefore stood
close by him, being always eldest in ^ime, though not preferred in affection.
The Ostiarii (Church Officers so styled) were designed to attend the Men's, as
the Deacons were obliged to wait the Women's Desks or Pews, by whose care and
inspection they were kept neat and in their just order, Younger Men and Women,
if there were any convenience of place, sat; if not, they were engaged to
stand, the Women behind the graver Matrons, the Men behind their Seniors; Boys
were placed with their Fathers, and Girls with their Mothers. See Bp. Montagues
Acts and Monuments of the Church, page 457. and 458.

The Absis amongst the Primitive Christians, was the upper part of the Quire
near the Altar, where Penitents by Imposition of hands were usually absolved.

In the Primitive times, these several stations in the several Respective
Churches were consigned to those who were blasted more or less (that is
gradually) with ^he censure of Excommunication.

First, those who were called ^tantes, were those who were ^ebarr'd the Lord's
Table. But ^s for the entrance into the Church, hearing the Word, ^raying with
the Congregation, ^hey were Entitled to equal ^iberty with other Christians;
^hey might stand by, and behold others receive the Sacrament, ^ut themselves
did not par^ake of that Sacred Mystery.

Secondly, The Succumbents were those who had admittance unto the Church, but
their sta^ion was behind the Quire or Pulpit, and they were to depart upon the
pronouncing the It a ^^issa est, with the Catechumeni (that is, such Pagans who
were gained to the Christian Faith, but not fully admitted into the Church,
because they wanted Baptism) and therefore tha^ they might not pray
promiscuously, with other Christian^ there was a place behind the Pulpit or
Quire allotted t^ them in form of a Cloister, called from them the
Catechumenium.

And Lastly, Though they might prostrate themselves o^ their knees (styled from
thenc^ Succumbentes) and offer up their prayers, yet this they might no^ do in
the Congregation, but only in that place which was the station designed for the
Catechumeni.

The Third sort of Penitents that were Marshalled under the denomination of
Audientes, were those who were permitted to ^dvance no further, than the
Church Porch, where it was al^owed them to hear the Scrip^ures read, but not to
join in ^rayer, nor to approach the Sa^red Table of the Lord.

The Fourth Catalogue of ^ersons under the sad Discipline ^f separation,
denominated the ^lorantes, were those who stood ^uite without the Church,
im^loring those that entered in with Tears, to Petition God for the Remission of
their formerly ^ontracted Offenses.

There were other Persons ^ikewise in the Primitive times, who were something
proporti^nate to these, and fell under a ^ive-fold Denomination. As first,
there were the Catechistae, that is, those who by Instruction and the
Discipline of Catechism were to be habituated to the Rudiments of Christian
Religion. Secondly, the Educati who were those who by hearing daily Lectures of
Divinity read, did improve those principles which were first planted in them by
Catechistical Infusion. Thirdly, the Competentes, who were those who could
render an Account of those Fundamental Truths, which lay folded up in that
compendious Scheme or Systeme called the Apostles Creed. Fourthly, the Intincti
Neophyti or Tirones, who were those that could not only untwist those
Principles that lay wrapped up in the Apostolical Symbol of Belief, but likewise
could unveil those other Doctrines out of which was woven the whole Frame or
Contexture of the Christian Religion. Fifthly, ^he Fideles, who were those well
matured or improved Christians, who being fully ra^icated and instructed in the
faith, were admitted to the Reception of the Sacred Eucha^ist.

So under the Law, there were the Proselites of the Gates, ^he Proselites of
Justice: The first of these were only tied to ^he observation of those seven
precepts which were styled the precepts of the Sons of Noah, because supposed
to be given by Noah to his Sons when he came out of the Ark, but were neither
circumcised nor otherwise conformable to the Law of Moses, which precepts were
these 1. That they dealt uprightl^ with every man. 2. That the^ Blessed and
Magnified the Nam^ of God. 3. That they Worshipped not any False Gods, bu^ to
abstain from Idolatry. 4. T^ refrain from all unlawful Lust and Copulations. 5.
To keep themselves from Theft and Robbery. 6. And from shedding of blood. And
7. not to eat the Flesh or Member of any Beast abstracted from it, when living,
by which all cruelty wa^ Interdicted. These though they were admitted to the
Worship of God, and to repair to the Temple, yet being uncircumcised, were not
suffered to converse with the Jews, nor come (...)to the same Court of the
Tem(...)e with them: but had the ou(...)rmost Court of that place, call(...)d
Atrium Gentium or Immun(...)rum. The other simply call(...)d Proselites were
represented under the Notion of Adopted ^ews, as being admitted to Worship God
in the same Court ^f the Temple with them, and (...)aring with them in all
their (...)iviledges, not differing from (...)em in any thing, but only their
(...)encalogy or Extraction.

Now there were four Courts (...) the Jewish Temple: First, (...)trium
Sacerdotum or the (...)riests Court, where was e(...)cted the Thusiasterion or
Al(...)r for Sacrifice, as likewise the (...)razen Laver wherein both
(...)riest and Sacrifice were assoil'd from their Pollution. Secondly, Atrium
Populi or the Peoples Court, appropriated likewise to the Proselites of
Justice, where stood the Braze^ Throne or Scaffold, on which Solomon and his
Successors were inaugurated; it was also stil'^ Solomon's Porch, from the many
Porches erected there by tha^ Prince to secure the People from the violent and
injuriou^ impressions of the Weather* Thirdly, Atrium Foeminaru^ or the Women's
Court, where was established the Poor man's Box, from whence in Sacred pages it
has contracted the Denomination of the Treasury* and from thence our Savior
is said to Teach in the Treasury, that is in the Women's Court. Between these
Courts was an ascent of 15 steps whereon were sung by the Levites the Gradual
Psalms, beginning at the 120, and concluding at the 134. Fourthly, there was
Atrium Gentium or Immundorum, devoted to the Service of those Gentiles who were
properly styled the Proselites of the Gates; this Court was divided from the
other Courts by an eminent Traverse Wall three Cubits high, adorned with
certain Pillars of equal distance, to which St. Paul alludes when he asserts
that our Savior by his Tragedy on the Cross had dismantled the Partition Wall:
And out of this Court Divines likewise affirm that our Savior did expel those
Buyers and Sellers that had defiled it by an impious and injurious Profanation.
So amongst the Levites, there were first the Punies or Tirones, who from their
Childhood till the Five and Twentieth year of their Age learned the Duty of
their Offices. Secondly, Graduates, who were those who having spent four years
Study in the Law were able to answer and oppose in it. Thirdly, Licentiates,
who did actually exercise the Priestly Function. And Fourthly Doctors or
Rabbis, who were in Degree the most Eminent.

Indeed many of the Jewish Ceremonies were imitated by our Savior under the
Gospel: The Apostles were answerable to the Missi or Messengers amongst the
Jews, being sent abroad into all Nations by Christ to gather in Sinners to
their Savior, being that peculium which of all others he counted most his Due,
having paid so dearly for it on the Cross: as they were amongst the Jews sent
by the High Priest to fetch in the Dues of the Temple. So also the Imposition
of Hands, a Form of Benediction amongst the Jews as ancient as Jacob himself,
Genesis 48. 14. in blessing Joseph's Sons, was often used by our Savior to the
same purpose. And even the two Sacraments are of this Nature: Baptism related
to the washing in use amongst the Jews at their admitting or Initiating
Proselites; and Christ's taking Bread and giving Thanks, etc. after Supper
(wherein the other Sacraments was first Instited) was directly the Post Caenium
amongst the Jews, not a peculiar part of the Passover Feast, but a Ceremony
after all Feasts very customary amongst them. So the word Ecclesia from the
Assemblies Sacred or Civil amongst the Jews is made use of to signify the
Christian Church which Christ was to gather together. So the Presbyteri or
Elders amongst the Jews are brought by the Apostles to signify an Order in the
Church, and Presbyteria Colleges of many of them together, called by Igna^ius
in Epist* ad Trall. Sacred Societies and Counselors and Assistants to the
Bishop, are parallel to the Sanhedrin or Council of Elders that were joined to
Moses in his Government, to facilitate the Burden to him. The Deacons amongst
the Primitive Christians were instituted in Imitation of the Treasurer or
Steward amongst the Jews, and consequently the place where the Goods which they
were to distibute were kept, was correspondent to their Gazo-philacium or
Treasury: So the Bishop also amongst Christians is a Transcript of the Head of
the Congregation amongst them. And the Christian Patriarchs were originally but
an Imitation of the Heads of the Tribes amongst the Jews: Something
proportionate to these were the (...) amongst the Spartans, who were the
Overseers and Governors of their Provinces and Cities, as likewise the

who were a peculiar sort of Governors, who had to do with the education of
Women especially in cultivating and Reforming their Lives and Manners. Amongst
the Athenians, likewise were the (...) who were chosen Magistrates, ten out of
every Tribe, whose Duty and Office it was to take care and cognizance of the
younger people. The Christian Censure of Excommunication was in Assimilation of
their Aposunagogia, whether it were a seclusion from Sacred or only Civil
Conventions it matters little, for the Civil amongst them, may be accommodated
to the Ecclesiastical amongst Christians, as the word (...) (which though it
signifies primarily any kind of Assembly and is so taken Mat. 6. so that it is
appropriated to a place of Divine Worship in other places of Holy writ) and the
several Degrees of it in the Christian Church, were proportionate to the Jewish
Niddui, Cherim, and Schammatha. Psalms, Hymns, and Songs anciently used in the
Christian Church, were parallel to 1. Mizmor a short verse. 2. Tehilla, Praise,
Celebrating God. 3. Schir, a Canticle, as that word is used in the Title of the
Song of Songs very customary amongst the Jews. And it is the conjecture of some
learned persons that our Savior instituted his Prayer vulgarly called the
Lords-prayer in Relation to those 18 Prayers or Benedictions called in the
Gemarra* composed or appointed Prayers; The 3 first of which, and the 3 last
respected the Glory of God, the 12 other intermediate were spent on those prime
Things that were necessary, either to the whole People, or every particular
Man. Lastly, others assert that that Clause, For thine is the Kingsdom, the
Power, and the Glory, or ever and ever, was annexed to the Lords-prayer, as
parallel to that Form of Speech introduced amongst the Jews in the Time of
Ezra, which was commonly interwoven in the Close of their Prayers, viz. srom an
Age to an Age. For whereas in all the conclusions of Benedictions before the
Days of Ezra, they were only wont to say srom Age; when the Sadduces perverted
this Form of Speech, and asserted there was but one Age, the Jewish Doctors did
determine that the Form should be, from Age to Age.

But I have made too prolix a Digression, I now return to prosecute my former
Discourse.

Churches being thus erected and established, the several denominations of
Ecclesiae Domus orationis, Aedes Sacrae, Coemiteria, Martyria, Kuriacae
Eucteria, by subsequent ages were imposed upon them, but seldom or never
Templa, or Naoi, until the Government of Constantine the Great, and then the
appellation of Templa was engraffed upon them, that Monarch by this commodious
and flexible condescension, endeavoring so to endear those that continued
spotted with the dark tincture of Paganism, that he might by degrees reduce
them within the pale of the Church; or secondly, by this Artifice or compliance
designing to charm and oblige them to mingle with the faithful in the
Celebration of those Divine Offices, whose performance did improve and enforce
the growth of the Christian Faith.

Having taken a compendious prospect of Churches, as to their frame without,
and their contexture within; I shall now survey that Revenue either fixed or
accidental, that made up the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, and my first disputation
shall be upon Oblations, which anciently were marshalled under the double title
of Cathedratica and Pentecos^alia.

Cathedratica were so styled, because they were paid toward the support* of
that Honor and Dignity which was due to the Episcopal Chair, and these were so
retrenched by the second Council of Bracara, and the seventh of ^oledo, that
they were not to exceed two shillings in the pound. Or else they were called so
because they were paid to the Bishop solemnly sitting in the Episcopal Chair.

Pentecostalia had that denomination conferred upon them, because they were
anciently payable to the Minister or Priest at Whitsuntide, and for that reason
vulgarly called Whitsun - Farthings, a moiety of which, and sometimes a third
part was returned to the Bishop of the Respective Diocese, toward the supply
and maintenance of so eminent a Function.

Obventions are the next, which exact our consideration, if you consult the
Lexicon Juridicum of Sclardius or Calvinus-you will find them thus discrib'd in
the word Obventio; Obventiones (say they) reditus Fruct usque omnes
significant, qui vel ex ipso corpore, velex industria hominis accedunt, veluti
mercedes, pensionesque ex locationibus praediorum urbanorum debitas, vec^uras
jumentorum, naulum navium. In brief, Obventions are sometimes a Revenue that
issues from things certain, but more frequently and for the most part they are
the result and product of these things which are of accidental contingency.

The first raising of Tenths and Fifths by Gregory the 9th. about the Year
1229. and after ratified and confirmed about the Year 1240, seems to have beer
that when the Court of Rom* did confer on Clerks and Chap lains residing with
them, Benesi ces in the Diocesses of Forraig^ Bishops, they out of a gratefu^
acknowledgment, gave the first whole or half years profits to the Pope. See Sir
Roger Twisden's Historical Vindication, page 84. When the collection of first
fruits did originally commence, is in debate amongst Authors, some asserting
that Pope Boniface the ixth. began to gather them about the Year 1399. though
others again, as Cardinal D'ossatt, Ranulphus C^strusis and Walsingham affirm
their payment to be earlier, and that Pope John the 22th. began first to
collect them about the Year 1316.

The last Ingredient that compounds the spiritual Revenue, which indeed is the
great Ligament that ties together all the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, is Tithes,
which are not only due by a right of assimulation; that is, because they were
paid under the Levitical Law, therefore by the Analogy of proportion they are
to be paid under the Gospel, but even enjoined by the Law of Nature it self:
And this may easily be evicted by this Argument. Whatsoever has been observed
to be paid in all times, in all places, and in all Nations, does result from a
common Dictate of Nature. But the payment of Tithes has been observed in all
times, in all places, and by all Nations; Ergo, the payment of Tithes does
originally result from a common Dictate of Nature. The Minor is supported and
made good by the general practice of Nations. The Sabeans, a rude and barbarous
Nation, forbad their Spices to be Transported, until the Tithes of them were
offered unto their God Sabis. The Tyrians, and after the Romans paid Tithes of
that increase they had obtained by Merchandise, and other Naval achievements
to their great Patron Hercules. The last of which paid them by a general assent
to the respective Deities; Hippona, Pomona, Messia, Almona, Tutelina, Cardua,
Par^ula, Lucina, Sestia, Statina, and Murtia, to whose protection, Horses,
Fruit, Corn, Women and public Laystals were generally devoted. And Cyrus when
he had carried Sardis by storm or Onset, by interdict forbad the plunder or
Ravage of the City, until the Tithe of the Spoil was sequestered and set apart
to be paid to Mars and Pallas; and Camillus, the eminent Roman Dictator, when
he had attaqued the City of Vei ^y assault, he particularly abstracted the
Tithes of that Pillage that opulent City afforded, to be consecrated to Apollo
and Jupiter. Hercules by the Trachinii was styled Kornopios, and worshipped
under the Notion of a God, that by his powerful influence rescued them from the
injuries of Flies; for so originally the Name imports: and Ipictonos by the
Erithrai, or the Inhabitants of the Red Sea, that is, such a God, and in that
capacity adored, that destroyed those Worms who were destructive to their
Vines; in memory of which signal protections, both these Nations abovesaid, as
well as the Tyrians, as the Learned observe, paid him Tithes, as a Symbol of
their exemplary Gratitude.

Jupiter amongst the Greeks was called Myiagrus, Myiodes, and Apomyios, all
which Denominations did only denote and intimate his Dominion over Flies, so
that the ancients (as Meursius and others observe) either paid him Tithes, or
something parallel or proportionate to them, for preserving their Sacrifices
from the busy and importunate Onsets of those ravenous Insects. See more of
this Discourse in Stachius, De Sa^r^siciis Gentilium.

The Persees that now inhabit Persia (being a Branch extracted from the ancient
Persians who upon their Pyr^theia worshipped their Fire-Gods, as a Transcript
of the Sun, who in their opinion was but an Original Globe of Flame; and whom
they adored sometimes under the name of Mithras, and sometimes under the
Appellation of Abraxas) although they are ruder than the wildness of a Desert,
and ignorant beyond the Fate of Barbarism, yet by the conduct of the Light of
Nature, though it shine in them but with a faint, and a glimmering Beam, they
have a separated Priesthood, to whom they pay Tithes, because by their
ministering to Divine Offices, their Devotion receives an happy Increase and
Improvement; as a late Treatise styled The Religion of the Banians and Modern
Persees, does abundantly testisie.

The Behedin or Laymen (says the Author of that Tract) anciently, and at this
day, pays Tithes to the Distoore, or Chief Priest, and in his absence, to the
Herbood, or Priest; or lastly, to the Daroo, or Churchmen, Officers of a
spiritual cognizance amongst the ancient and modern Persees who still
superstitiously worship the Fire.

I know it is objected, that this was only in some special cases, and they of
extraordinary emergency, because a Vow was still annexed for the payment of
them; which had they been due intrinsecally and ex natura rei, had altogether
been unnecessary and superfluous. To this I answer, that all Divines that have
treated of Casuistical Theology, do assert, that every act of sin upon its
immediate Commission is to be rescinded and expiated by as immediate an ^ct of
repentance; yet they al^o affirm, a Vow is of excellent ^se to promote and
quicken the performance of this so absolute^y necessary a Duty: So it is ^ere,
though Tithes are due in^insecally and ex natura rei, yet ^ Vow is of eminent
use and influence to improve their more ^ctive performance, and enforce their
more quick and effectual ^ayment; which Discourse is ^pported by Cajetan, in
that ^rief and rational assertion of ^is, which he thus delivers:

Non est inconveniens (determines he) materiam voti esse bonum, ad quod
quispiam alio nomine tenetur, ut ex duplici vinculo ad idem teneatur; vinculo
scilicet divini praecepti, seu juris naturalis, and proprii voti.

Having thus concluded these disquisitions concerning the Original institution
of Churches* and their particular endowments; I shall now from these subsequent
Reasons briefly discover how the Advowson or Patronage of Ecclesiastical
preferments became to be invested in Lay persons.

First, It was Ratione sundi* in relation to that parcel o^ ground on which the
Church was erected, which was of their original concession.

Secondly, Ratione fundationis by reason the Fabric of the Church it self, was
first erected ^t the Cost and Expenses of their proper Beneficence.

Thirdly, Respect^n donationis, ^n respect of the Donation of ^and, either
Glebe or Pasture, ^y them Enstated upon the ^ncumbent Minister of Priest, and
his Successors for ever.

Having wrapped up this Dis^ourse in as brief a Circumscri^tion, as I could; I
now proceed ^o discover a Scale or Register ^f those Rectories or Vicariges,
and their Respective Patrons ^oth Ancient and Modern, as ^hey lie impaled in
the Diocesses ^f Canterbury and Rochester.

A short View of the RELIGION and WORSHIP of the Ancient Gentiles
HAving mentioned some Ceremonies amongst the Gentiles in my precedent
Discourse, that probably entitled their first Genealogy to some Customs
amongst the Jews, I do not esteem it an unwelcom task if I shall take a
compendiou^ prospect of the Religion of those ancient Idolaters, which
consisted principally and chiefly in the Worship of Demons, i. ^ Inferior
Divine Powers, supposed to be Mediators between God and man; which opinion of
theirs was certainly extracted from the Jewish Doctrine of Angels, and the
Description of those Offices and Embassies those Seraphick Spirits were
concerned and engaged in here below, when they were Ministerial and subservient
to the execution of those Omnipotent Commands that were imposed upon them by
God above.

Now Demons in the Gentile Theology, were Deastri, or Medioxumi, an inferior
Species of Deified Powers, of a middle proportion, or degree between the
Sovereign Gods and mortal men; and this seems to be the affirmation of Plato in
his Symposio; and all the subsequent Platonists did manifest it evidently that
they did embark and concenter in the same Assertion. After him Plutarch in his
Treatise De defectu Oraculorum, deduces the extraction of this Distinction
between (...), or Sovereign Gods and Inferior Deities, or Demons, as high as
the Antiquity of Zoroaster; you may hear him speak thus, Magnas and difficiles
Dubitationes videntur (says he) solvisse qui (...) medio inter D^os and Homines
loco constituerunt, quod nos cum his concil^at quodammodo ac conjungit,
invenerint, sive haec Magorum and Zoroastris Doctrina sit, sive Thracica ab
Orpheo profecta, sive Aegyptiaca, sive Phrygica, etc. The Sovereign or Highest
Gods, which amongst them were properly styled (...) were those whom they
asserted, to have their residence in Heaven; yea, in the Sun, Moon, and the
residue of the other Planets, and their Retinue the Stars; from whence they
represented them under the Appellation of Dii Superi, and Dii Caelestes, whom
they affirmed to have neither Beginning nor End: And this is the Sentiment of
Apuleius, as you find him thus speaking, in his Treatise De Daemonio Socratis.
Immortales sine ullo vel Fine vel Exordio, sed prorsus a retro aeviterni. And
because they dwelt in the Heavenly Lights, as Souls lodged in Bodies. It is the
opinion of Plato in his Cratilus, that the Name (...) first was derived from
the everlasting Rolling and uncessant Motion of the Heavenly Bodies.

Now these Sovereign or Celestial Gods were in the vogue and Estimate of elder
times of so sublime and venerable an account, as they might not be profaned
with the address or approach of earthly Applications, or with the care or
managery of inferior and terrestrial Concerns, and therefore they brought in,
by way of supply, that middle sort of Divine Powers which they called Daemones,
to be an Order of Agents and Ministers, or else as Mediators between the
Sovereign Gods and Mortal Men; and this is that Plato affirms in his Simposium,
God is not (says he) approached by men, but all that Commerce and Intercourse
which is betwixt the Gods and Men, is performed by the Mediation of Demons or
Inferior Deities. And in a Discourse subsequent to this, in the Treatise
abovementioned, he descends to more minute particulars, and thus unvails his
Sense; Demons (says he) are Reporters and Transporters from men to the Gods;
again from the Gods to men, of the Supplications and Prayers of the one, and
the Injunctions imposed, and the Rewards due to the Devotion and Religious
Worship of the other. And Apuleius in his forequoted Treatise De Daemonio
Socratis, does excellently well ^ourtray these middle Powers Mediae Potestates
per quas and Desideria nostra, and merita ad D^os comineant inter mortales
Coelicolasque Rectores; hinc precum, inde donorum; qui ultra citroque portant;
hinc petitiones, inde suppetias, seu quidam utrinque Interpretes and
Salutigeri. For, says he, in the procedure of his Discourse, Neque enim pro
Majestate Deorum Coelestium fuit haec curare. It is not adequate to the Majesty
of the Sovereign Gods to manage these things of themselves.

Whence it is that Celsus in O rigen, strews these eminent Characters on his
Demons or inferior Deities, terming them Summi Dei, Satrapas, Praesides,
Procuratores, Duces, qui neglecti non minus laedere possunt quam Persarum,
Romanorumque R^gis Praesides and Ministri. To lodge no longer on this
Discourse, we will fold up all in the words of Apuleius in his Treatise De
Daemonio Socratis, Cuncta Coelestium voluntate, Numine and Autoritate ^iunt sed
Daemonum obsequio, opera and Ministerio. All things (says he) owe their first
efflux and emanation to the will, influence, and authority of the Celestial
Powers above, and to the obsequious industry and Ministry of the Demons, or
inferior Deities below. Indeed this Doctrine of Demons was so ^iveted and
incorporated into the Theological Principles of the Gentile world, that it was
a public Assertion, that the Souls even of Tyrants, and other impious men, had
a power after death, and that the product of these were the mali Genii, or the
torvi Daemones; hence they represented them under the affrightful Notions of
Erinnies, Eumenides, Larvae, Spectra, Lemures, and other horrid Appellations,
and erected Temples and Altars, wherein with Sacrifices and Oblations, they
endeavored so to mollify and appease their fury, that they might be redeemed
from that damage and prejudice which might else like a Black Tempest have
descended upon them.

This Discourse leads me to peruse the Original of these Demons, whom upon a
serious Scrutiny I find to be only the Souls or Spirits of some Deceased Heroes
Canonized and Deified by the Superstition of elder times, for some Monuments
and signal Trophies of their Prudence and Magnanimity bequeathed to the
entranced world: Indeed it was long before it could be believed that so
excellent persons could live; and when they saw they did live, they after
thought they could never die: and this Assertion is supported by the Testimony
of Hermes Trismegistus, an Author both of unquestionable veracity, and
antiquity, in his Asclepias, where having named Aesculapius, Osiris, and his
Grandfather Hermes, who were (as he affirms) worshipped for Demons, in times
parallel to his; he adds farther, that the Egyptians call them (namely the
Demons) Sancta Animalia, and that amongst them (naming the Egyptians) per
singulas Civitates co^i eorum Animas, quorum sunt consecratae virtutes.

Philo Biblius in his Preface to his Translation of San Coniat hon, the ancient
Phoenician Historian, delivers what he had observed and deduced out of the same
Author, and might be Ministerial to the improvement of their Understandings who
should read him; namely, that all the Barbarians, principally the Egyptians and
Phoenicians, from whom the rest extracted it, esteemed those their Dii
Medioxumi, who had found out any thing profitable for the Life of Man, or had
deserved well of any Nation, so that they worshipped these as Gods, erecting
Statues, Obelisques, Images and Temples unto them; and more especially they
gave the Names of their Kings (as to the Elements of the world) so also to
these reputed Gods; for they esteemed the natural Deities of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and those which were in these, to be solely and properly Gods; so that
their Deities were ranged and marshalled into two distinct Orders, the one
Mortal, and the other Eternal.

And to this purpose Hesiod speaks in his Poems, when according to that
luxuriant Latitude of Fancy, Poets entitle themselves to, he tells us, that
when those happy men, that flourished in the first and Golden Age of the world,
had abandoned this Life; great Jupiter promoted them to be Demons, that is,
Keepers or Guardians, Protectors and Patrons of Humane Nature, and Earthly
Mortals, Overseers of their good or evil works, Dispensers of Riches; and this
he affirms is that Majestic Royalty they are invested with. To abet all that
has been discoursed of before, Plato in his excellent Treatise De Rep. would
have all those that had fallen with Honor in the Field, to be enrolled in
Hesiod's Golden Register, and to be advanced to the pre-eminence and dignity of
Demons, and the Oracle to be consulted, how they should be both enterr'd and
honored; and accordingly ever afterward their Sepulchers to be approached
with the same Reverence and Esteem as Addresses were made to the Repositories
and Tombs of other Demons. And the same Honor and Canonization (he affirms)
in a semblable or proportionate Method should be attributed to all those who in
the time of their life, were excellent for Virtue, or eminent for Magnanimity
and Courage, whether they were ravished away by a violent Fate, or deceased
under the incumbent pressure of a great, but good old Age. Thus have we traced
out, and unvailed the Original Genealogy of Demons, according to the most
ancient Opinion, and general Notion of the Gentiles; But ^esides these
Soul-Daemons, and Canonized Mortals, their Theology asserted and introduced
another degree of Demons more elevated and sublime, which never had been the
Souls of men, or ever were linked to mortal Flesh; but were from the beginning,
or without beginning, always the same. So Apul^ius discovers to us from the
Sentiments of the Platonists, in his before recited Treatise De Daemonio
Socratis. Est (says he) and aliud superius, augustiusque Daemonum genus, qui
semper a Corporis compedibus and nexibus, liberi, certis potestatibus curentur,
Ex hac sublimiori Daemonum copia, autumat Plato, singulis hominibus in vita
agenda, Testes and Custodes singulos additos. This Order of Demons is in its
semblance or proportion exactly parallel to those separated and spiritual
Powers we list under the Notion of Angels, as the Species of Soul-Damons is
correspondent to those we marshal under the Appellation of the Saints departed.
The superstitious Gentiles muffled up in the Fogs both of a gross and an
affected and voluntary Ignorance, not only worshipped these Demons, or inferior
Deities themselves, but likewise to enforce and aggrandize that Adoration they
offered up to them, and render it more conspicuous, but likewise with a
religious Address reverenced those Shrines, Urns and Sepulchers that were
entrusted to be the Treasuries of their Relics. Plato who was cited before for
the Canonizat^on of those Heroes, who had generously offered up their Lives in
the Field, as an Oblation to the Interest of their Country, would have their
Shrines and Repositories to be worshipped (...), as the Coffins of Demons, which
ridiculous Devotion of theirs, or rather Folly is well represented to us by
Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromatum Lib. 6. in these words, as they are cited by
Vossius, De Idololatria, and M^de in his Apostasy of the latter times,
Existimant (scilicet Graeci) nihil re^erre, an has Animas (scilicet Daemones
quos invocant) Deos an Angelos dicamus: Jam vero qui sunt eorum Doctrinae
periti, in multis Templis tanquam Deorum statuas, omnes se^e Mortuorum Lo^ulos
posu^re, Daemones vocantes eorum Animas; eas autem coli ab Hominibus docentes,
^ut quae divina Providentia, prop^ter Vitae puritatem acceperint, ut ^ad
Hominum Ministerium, Locum qui est circa Terram obirent, sciebant enim aliquas
Animas, ex Natura, Corpore teneri. Out of which sober Reflections o^
Observations we may collect the Result of his sense to be this; that the
Gentiles supposed the like presence and power of the Demons at their Coffins
and Sepulchers, as they asserted was resident in their Images, as though there
perpetually remained some natural Obligation or Connection between the separated
Souls and their Relics; and therefore they established Temples over those
Tombs that were the Conservatories and Exchequers of their disbanded Ashes. I
shall subjoin the Testimony of Arnobius, a person very well versed in the
Rituals and Ceremonies of those elder times, having originally gathered the
Rudiments of his Education and Culture from the Schools of the Gentiles; who
thus speaks, lib. 6. adversus Gentes. Quid quod multa ex his Templa quae Tholis
sunt aureis, and sublimibus elata Fastigiis, ^uctorum conscriptionibus
comprobatur, contegere Cineres atque Ossa and functorum esse Corporum
scpulturas? Nonne patet and promptum est aut pro Diis immortalibus mortuos nos
colere, aut inexpiabilem si^ri Numinibus ^ontumeliam, quorum Delubra and Templa
Mortuorum superlata Bu^tis. I shall not need to disrobe ^he words of their
Latin Ve^ture, because the sense is almost coincident with the former, ^e
upbraiding the Gentiles for ^everencing their Temples as the Shrines of their
Gods, which were but the Repositories of mortal men.

Nor did they only worship the Sepulchers of these Demons, but likewise those
Pillars, Co^umns, and Obelisques established at first to their Honor and
Remembrance: And those which ^t first were but Index's and Memorials to
perpetuate their Fame, in procedure of time became Monuments to improve their
superstitious Devotion; which is excellently described by Minusius Felix in his
Octavius Majores nostri (says he) dum Reges suos colunt religiose, dum
defunctos eos desiderant in Imaginibus videre, dum g^stiunt eorum memorias in
statuis detine re, sacra facta sunt, quae fuerant assumpta solatio. From which
words we may collect, that the superstition of the Gentiles, esteeming the
adoration of Urns and Coffins too cheap and obscure, advanced and screwed up
their Wor^^ip to an higher pitch, and paid their Devotion to consecrated
Columns, and Pillars, and those that were at first erected only to establish a
remembrance, at last became Instruments to oblige a public Veneration; so that
those persons that were beyond their hopes when living, were above their Faith
when they were dead.

But the great Engines by which the Gentiles did exalt their Devotion, were the
Images of these Demons in whom they believed the Souls of these departed
Heroes (like Inmates) ^o lodge and inhabit; and this ^ve are informed by
Eusebius out of Porphiry, who affirms, that ^hey asserted that Gods had a
particular affection to their Portraitures a^^ Images; and that they were
circumscribed within the narrow Cloisters of those consecrated Statues, which
^eing dismantled, they immedi^tely subtracted their protecti^n: Hence issued
that Answer ^r Defense of the Gentiles, as Arnobius (lib. 6. advers Gent.)
makes them speak; Neque nos era, argenti materias aurique, neque alia quibus
signa conficiunt, eas esse per se Deos, and religiosa discernimus Numina; sed
cos in his colimus, eosque veneramur, quos dedicatio infert sacra, and
frabrilibus efficit habitare Simulachris. Which is likewise discovered to us by
a Pen more ancient than either of these, that is, Hermes Tresmegistus, who in
his Asclepias speaks in English thus; Because (says he) our Ancestors erred
much, through unbelief, concerning Deities, and had but easy regard of
Religion, and Divine Worship; therefore they contrived an Art to frame Gods (he
means Images) and because they could not create Souls (he means to those
senceless Bodies) therefore ^hey summoned the Souls of Demons and Angels, and
cloistered them up in their Images, and ho^y Mysteries, by which means ^lone
these Images have power ^f helping and hurting; which ^^us incorporated (he
says) are ^^iled by the Egyptians Statuas ^nimatas spiritu and sensu plenas.
The sum of all this Mystery is, that Images are made as Bodies (...) be
informed with Demons, as ^ith Souls; so that an Image ^as but an Ambush or
Engine (...) catch Demons, and an Arti^^e so to oblige them to a place, ^at
they might keep them from ^^ndoning it. And this was (...) reason they bound
their I^^ges with such massy Ligatures and Chains, hoping that by these
Restraints and Confinements they might so oblige them to fix their residence in
those Receptacles, that no Charm or Magical Address might seduce them to desert
that place or station they were not only engaged to protect, but likewise to
assert. A Transcript of which Charm or Address, as it is set down by Macrobius
i^ his Saturnalia, is here represented, the Words made to speak English, are
these that follow And thou especially, whosoever thou art, the Patron of this
City and People, I pray and beseech, and with your leave, require you, to
abandon the People and City of Carthage, t^ forsake the Places, Temples
Ceremonies and Enclosures of their City; to go away from them, and to strike
some terror and astonishment into that People and City; and having left it, to
come to Rome to me and mine; and that our Cities, Places, Temples, Ceremonies,
be more acceptable, and better liked of you; and that you would take the charge
of me, of the People of Rome, and of my Soldiers, or as we may know and
understand it; if you do so, I vow to build you Temples, and to appoint solemn
Sports for you. When they invoked the Infernal Gods to depart a City, they
touched the Surface of the Earth; when they mentioned the Supernal Deities,
they erected their hands to Heaven; when they recited their Vow, they affixed
their hands to their Breasts.

And indeed this may appear a probable reason why God so frequently in the
sacred Pages with the menace of the severest penalties, and other formidable
prohibitions, does deter the Jews from framing any Graven Images, to bow down
before them and worship them, because the universal Assertion of the Gentiles
was, their Gods or Demons were Tenants to those graven Mansions.

I should now represent a Register of those Tutelary Deities the Gentiles
styled their Dii Minores or Demons, or Dii Medioxumi, or Deastri; but before I
advance farther in this Discourse, I shall make some compendious Remarques on
those they called their Dii Majores, or their greater and more eminent Deities,
and then subjoin a Catalogue of the other. As for the Dii Majores, that were
the Protectors and Tutelary Guardians of the Grecian States, they were
circumscribed within a narrow Circle, their whole Number swelling but to a List
of twelve Namely, Jupiter, Juno, Saturn, Sol or Apollo, Luna or Diana, Mars,
Mercury, Minerva or Pallas, Neptune, Pluto or Orcus, Vulcan, by them styled
Mulciber; and lastly, Venus or Urania, or Lilithia, or Anaitis; for so she was
named by the Phoenicians, Syrians, and Arabians: To whom the Romans superadded
these eight, viz. Bereinthia, or Cybele, or Vesta; for under all these
Appellations she was adored by the Romans, which flowed from one and the same
Deity, Coelus, Ops or Tellus, Bacchus, Alcides or Hercules, Ceres, and lastly,
Proserpina, and Janus: Now to some of these they gave special Attributes; some
of the principal of which I shall now recite. Jupiter by the Romans was called
Jupiter Stator, or Jupiter the Stayer; because in a Fight between Romulus and
Tatius King of the Sabins, when the Romans began to retreat, Romulus vowed to
erect a Temple to him, under that Attribute, if he would infuse new courage
into the faint and drooping Romans, and stop the flight of the one, and the
victorious progress of the other, which accordingly (say the Roman Historians)
being effected, Romulus paid and accomplished his Vow, and Jupiter in
subsequent Ages, was in that devoted Temple adored, under that Notion.
Secondly, He was named Jupiter Lapis; hence per Jovem Lapidem jurare, does
frequently occur in the Roman Antiquities; now the reason of this Attribute was
this; In those public Contracts the Romans entered into, either with their
Allies, or Enemies, they cast away a Stone, with this Imprecation annexed to
it, May Jupiter that is the great Witness to this solemn Contract, so reject
and cast away us, as we do now this Stone, if we by a false and injurious
violation infringe this signal and public Stipulation. In relation to this
practice of theirs, Grotius in his Treatise De Jure Belli and Pacis, discourses
excellently well; his words are these: Qui per Lapidem jurat (says he) si
falsum juraverit perjurus est, quia non te audit Lapis loquentem, sed punit
Deus fallentem. And in another place he subjoins this reason to fortify what
he had discoursed of before. Neque honos ullus deberi potest Deo (says he) si
nihil praestet colenti; nec ullus metus si non irascitur non colenti. Thirdly,
He was Jupiter Labradeus, from his being portray'd or insculp'd on ancient
Coins and Images, holding an Axe or Hatchet, which amongst the Grecians was the
Symbol, and amongst the Egyptians, the Hierogliphick of Justice. Fourthly, He
had the Appellation of Jupiter Pistor, or the Baker; and the reason of this
Attribute was, because when the Gauls had besieged the Capitol, and much
distressed the Garrison, Jupiter instructed the Romans in their sleep to fling
out their Bread to them; which caused the Gauls to abandon the Siege, believing
the Capitol to be well furnished and stocked with Provision to secure it
against the Distresses of an approaching Famine. He had other Epithetes of less
Estimate; some of which I shall reflect upon, and the rest entomb in silence;
as Nenius, God of Hospitality, Philus God of Love, Neterius, God of Fellowship;
Homogenius, God of Kindred; Phratrius, God of Tribes; Enhoreius, God of Oaths;
to intimate to us, what a respectful or cautious regard men should have of
Hospitality, Love, Fellowship, Kindred, Tribes, and Oaths. But he had two
signal Attributes bestowed upon him by the Gentiles; namely, Jupiter Teretrius,
and Elicius: Jupiter Teretrius was called so from the Globous Figure of the
Earth, which is teres and rotundus, and which he is insculp'd with in ancient
Coins, sometimes supporting it in his hand, and sometimes treading upon it with
his Foot; or rather from terendo Hosts, from wasting and destroying the
Enemies of the Roman Grandeur. Secondly, He was styled Jupiter Elicius, ab
eliciendo Suppetias, because when the Romans were engaged in perplexed
difficulties, he rescued them from those prejudices by an extraordinary Supply
and Support.

Juno likewise had several Titles attributed to her. She was styled Nebo* and
Baaltiis amongst the Assyrians, and Soticena, Sospitatrix, and Opipena amongst
the Romans, because she was favorable and helpful to Women, in the agony and
pangs of Childbirth; hence that usual Address of the teeming Roman Ladies,
Juno Lucinafer opem. Then she was named Curetis, the Goddess of Soldiers; and
Populonia, the Goddess of the People: She had also the Epithet of Juno,
Gamelia, and Juga, or Jugatina, that is, the Goddess of Marriage; in order to
which, she had the various Appellations of Interduca, because she was supposed
to be assistant to persons at their Inter-Marriage; Domiduca, because she
conducted them home; Unxia, because the Posts of the house where the Nuptial
Feast was solemnized, were anciently anointed with Oil, the Emblem of Joy and
Festivity; and Cinxia, either because by her concurrence, the Cestus or Virgin
Zone was more successefully untied, or else because the Posts of the Bridal
Mansion were bound about with Chaplets and Garlands: She likewise was known by
the Title of Juno Caprotina' and was styled so because she was entitled to the
protection of the Trees called Caprosici, one of which bordered upon the margin
of the Camp of the Romans, when they by the Artifice of their Maid Servants,
gave a signal Defeat to Posthumus Livius, General of the Fidenates.

Saturn was styled Chronos, under which Notion they prefigured. Time, and from
hence the Ancients affirmed him to be the Son of Coelus and Ops, or Tell us,
because Time is measured by the Motion of the Heavens, and the Vicissitudes and
Seasons of the Earth; and therefore they painted him holding a Sith, to
suggest to us that there was nothing* which in the vulgar apprehension was so
inexpugnable, but the Sith of Time could mow it down, or subvert it. He was
likewise named Sterculius, becasue he first instructed men with Dung or Compost
to till and manure the Earth; and some antiquated Coins that still preserve his
memory, have on their Reverse the Sculpture of a Ship, by which is intimated,
that he was the first that taught men the Art of Navigation; for which he was
exceedingly honored by the Tyrians and Carthaginians, under the Notion of
Milcom and Moloch, both derived from the Punick word Melech, which in that
Dialect imports as much as King, as Milce does Queen; or else because he was
^he first that conducted Colonies unto Italy.

Sol, or Apollo, or Pboebus, called by the Persians, Abraxas and Mithras, had
diverse Attributes, with which elder times adorned him: He was named Hyperion*
because he was of highest Estimate amongst the Gentiles, and worshipped: with
more veneration than all the other Deities, as his Light, Mo^ion and Influence
is of more efficacy and vigorous Impression, ^han all the rest: He had likewise
the Epithet of Cyclops Di^i, and Diespaeter, or Diei pater, Father of the Day;
Erithaus, Red; Actaeon, Shining; Lampas, Bright^ess; Philogeus, Loving the
Earth; but the most eminent Attribute they decked him with, was Sminthius,
derived from a Greek word that signifies a Mouse; for when Greece was miserably
infested and harrassed with swarms of Mice, he by his power and influence
destroyed that heap of ravenous Vermin, and rescued the Country from that
total Ravage and Devastation they menaced to superinduce upon it: He had
likewise the frequent appellation of Clarius, extracted from Claros, one of the
Islands of the Cyclades. There is one Epithet that the ancient Phoenioians
bestowed on the Sun, which Mr. Seldom in his Discourse De Diis Syris, has
furnished me with, that is Abgol, Baal, or Aligabalus, which in the Syrian and
Phoenician Dialect imports as much as D^us seu Dominus Rotundus, Circularis seu
Volubilis, the Circular or Sphaerical God.

The Moon, called Luna, Cynthia, or Diana by the Romans, Artemis, by the
Greeks; Astarte, by the Phoenicians; and Belisama by the Syrians; had likewise
a Train or Retinue of Attributes: At Athens, she was named Brauronia; because
there was a Temple devoted to her Worship, by one Brauron an Athenian. She was
denominated Trivia, because she was worshipped where three ways met; and Lya or
Lua, either from Lues the Plague (as Scaliger believes) because she is the
cause of Infectious Distempers, which loosned the Soul from the Body, or else
from loosing that Girdle which Virgins were accustomed to untie in her Temple.
And lastly, she was styled Fascelides, from the Bundle of Wood in which
Iphigenia concealed that Image she stole from the Tyrant Thoas, who was
accustomed to sacrifice all strangers to this Deity, under the Notion of Diana
Taurica.

Mars was styled Odrysius, from that solemn Worship which was ascribed to him
by the Odrysii, a People of Thrace; and Gradivus a Gradiendo, that is, from the
several steps and progressions that should with caution and prudence be
observed in the conduct of War.

Mercury was adored by the Egyptians under the Appellation of Anubis, and had
the heterogeneous Figure of a man's body, but a Dog's head, which was amongst
them the Hierogliphick of Vigilance, Fidelity, and Sagacity. He was styled
Hermes by the Greeks, that is, the Interpreter; because the most dark and
gloomy things are opened by Eloquence, of which he was the Patron. He was named
Agor^us, from the Greek word (...) Markets, intimating that that dexterous
circumspection that should be employed in Contracts, and the prudent managery
of affairs in buying and selling was to be supported and improved by his
concurrence. Lastly, His Appellation was Hermaphroditus, because Antiquity did
assert, that the virtue of this Planet was Masculine and Foeminine; and
therefore he was anciently painted with a Lance in one hand, and a Distaff in
the other, to manifest that his Nature is both Masculine and Feminine; with the
one he excites heat, with the other he improves moisture.

Minerva is styled by the Greeks Tritonia, because she was educated by Triton a
God of the Sea; or else under that Poetical umbrage is couched the dangers and
prejudices wise men are exposed to, and that Learned men gather Knowledge and
Experience out of Difficulties and Troubles. She was likewise named Onca,
because one of the Gates of Thebes of that Appellation was entitled to her
especial Patronage and Protection.

Neptune or Glaucus was called by the Greeks Posidona, making the Image,
because of all the Elements, Water by reason of its smoothness and clearness,
makes and represents Images to us. He was also styled Sisicthonius and
Ennosigaeus, from his violent concussion or shaking of the Earth.

Pluto or Orcus was denominated Moth or Muth by the Phoenicians, which
signifies Death; hence he is styled by Homer implacable or inexorable,
inexpugnable, and most hateful, because the Gentiles did resent their
Dissolution with regret and horror.

Vulcan or Mul^iber had the Title of Ephaibos by the Greeks, and Vulcanus,
quasi volans candor, to show the Heat and Light of the Fire; he is styled
deformed, not that the Fire is so in it self; but that renders every thing
deformed that it consumes; or else he has the uncouth Title of crooked and
lame, from the oblique and unequally ascending Flame, smutted and eclipsed with
the annexed particles of Soot and Smoke; but still through those cloudy vails
there appears light, which by its refulgency and beauty obliges all eyes; which
caused the Poets to affirm, that Vulcan was the Husband of Aglaia and Venus,
that is, splendour and beauty.

Venus styled Nanaea in the Book of Maccabees, and Urania, Lilithia, or
Anaetis; for so she was called by Romans, Greeks, Phoenicians, Syrians and
Arabians, was apparelled with many Titles by the Ancients; she was styled
Morpho by the Greeks, which is the same with Venus Armata amongst the Romans.
Indeed almost all the Deities were depi^ted or insculp'd Armed, which
Pourtraicture among the Ancients was the Emblem either of Magnanimity, or
Majesty; and ^olias, an Attribute, I suppose ^onferr'd on her, for her (in
their opinion) successeful loosning of Prisoners Fetters, or else for her ^appy
contributing to the unty^ng of the Virgin Zone.

She was styled likewise Venus ^allipiga, that is, pulchras ha^ns Nates; if I
should untwist the Story on which this Epithet is established; there would
appear so much obscenity to be folded up in it, it would so stain and sully the
Paper, that it would scarce leave it white enough to do its penance in. I had
rather therefore obscure and wrap it up in a grateful silence, than rake any
farther in so unsavory a Dunghill.

Amongst the Romans she wa^ named Venus Libitina,, so that she was the Goddess
both of Generation and Corruption, of ou^ coming into this world, and o^ our
going out. She was nominated also Venus Cloacina, from Cloaca, a Sink or House
of Office, a Title the Romans bestowed on their public Strumpet^ or Curtezans,
that exposed an^ prostituted themselves for hire to the embraces of any person,
though never so foul and detestable.

Nor did she want her Attri^utes amongst the Phoenicians, and Saracenical
Arabians, by whom she was styled Salambo and ^abar, that is, as Mr. Seldom in
^is Book De Diis Syris, interrets it, Stella Lucifera, or the ^efulgent Star.

Berecinthia was styled Turrita, because she first taught men how (...) erect
Towers and Fortresses, (...)d to secure and circumscribe ^^eir Cities and
Towers with ^alls and Turrets; hence in ^^cient Coins she is always in^^lp'd
with a Tower on her ^^ad. She was named also Ve(...), a vestiendo, because she
first instructed men to wear Garments, or else to apparel the naked Earth with
Houses, and therefore from her the Roman Porches and Thresholds consecrated to
her, were called Vestibula; or because she was frequently taken for the Earth,
(as her Temple at Rome did import, which was built in an Orbicular Figure) she
might be called Vesta, because the Earth i^ attired and clothed with the
Embroydery of Grass, Flowers* Herbs, Plants, and Trees hence she is also
denominate^ Cybele, from Cubus, a Cube; t^ intimate to us the Earth's stability.

Bacchus had several Appellations, as amongst the Phoenicians he was named
Iar-Chus, tha^ is, as the Learned Bochartus renders it, the Son of Chus; and
from thence by the Greeks and Latins he was corruptly called Jacchus. He had
the Title of Zagreus, a Hunter, and Nebrodes. He had the Title of Nebrodes
conferred upon him (as Bochartus conjectures) being corruptly borrowed by the
Gentiles, from Nembroth or Nembrot, vulgarly styled in our Translations Nimrod.
Others extract it from his being attired in exuvio Hin^uleo, that is, in the
Skin of a young Fawn, or Kid, or as others assert, in that of a Colt. Bromius
was another Title con^err'd on him, which is derived from his protection of
Vines and Grapes. He was styled Le^aeus from the Greek word (...), which
signifies Torcular, a Winepress; and Lisius, Lyaeus and Liber, from the opening
and dissolving the Spirits by the heat of Wine, when they were too much
condensed and congealed with Melancholy. Another Attribute of his was Evan,
which in the Syrian and Arabic Dialect, is Hedera, or Ivy, because his
Thirsus, or Lance was bound about with Vine and Ivy Leaves. And so he was named
in Latin Cissius, from the Greek (...), Ivy. He was styled Aegobolus, from a
Goat being sacrificed to him instead of those humane Sacrifices which had
before stained and polluted his Altars, and Dithriambus, from his double
Triumph, over the Indians, and Arabians, and from Nisa, a Town inhabited by the
last; he was frequently termed Dionisius.

Hercules or Alcides, had in the Register of his Epithites two of signal
account, that is, Ogmius and Saxanus; the first Bochartus derives from the
Phoenician word Ogami, to wander; which may denote to us his various Excursions
and Expeditions into Lybia, Spain, and other places; the reason of the last is
this; being engaged in Battle, and Victory hovering with doubtful Wings over
his fainting Troops, by a Cataract of stones that were poured down from Heaven,
the Conquest was retriv'd, and the Enemy totally subdued and discomfited.

Ceres had the Title of Ambarvalis attributed unto her; but upon what
Foundation it was erected is uncertain; and from hence were the Feasts derived
which were dedicated to Her, called Ambarvalia.

Janus is by Bochartus deemed to be but a Transcript of Noah; first, because
Jajin in the Hebrew signifies Wine, of which Noah was the first Inventer.
Secondly, Because he was anciently insculp'd with two Faces, which is exactly
parallel to Noah, who looked backwards npon the old World that perished under
the angry Baptism of an Universal Deluge; and forwards upon the Universe newly
started out from that public lnundation. And thirdly, upon very ancient Coins,
where the Signature of Janus is insculp'd on the one side, there is the Figure
of a Ship endorsed or impressed on the Reverse, which preserves the remembrance
of safety and shelter that Noah received in that wooden Isle the Arc.

There were many other Epithetes that these Dii Majores of less moment and
importance, which were borrowed and extracted from some Hills, Cities, and
Regions where they were adored, which are exactly deciphered by Lillius
Giraldus in his Syntagmata Deorum, whither I refer the Reader.

Before I leave this Discourse, because it conduces much to the understanding
of ancient Coins, and Medals, I shall represent how the Fictions of the Poets
did describe these Deities to be drawn in their Celestial Chariots. Jupiter,
Sol, Mars, and Neptune had theirs conducted along by Horses; Bacchus had his
managed by Linces and Tigers; Saturn by Dragons; Diana by Stags; Luna, or the
Moon by Oxen; Juno by Peacocks; Cybele by Lions; Ceres by Serpents; Pluto by
four black Horses; Mercury in stead of a Chariot, had Wings annexed both to his
Head and Heels; Venus had hers attended on by Swans, Doves, and Sparrows, the
last of which is excellently well pourtrayed and descanted on by the Greek
Epigrammatist, and thus made to speak English;

When the Blind Boy does address
His Forces unto wantonness,
He then extracts Plumes for his Arrows
From his Mothers Lustful Sparrows;
But when again he would inspire
Mortals with a chaste Desire,
To plume a Dart, for such a Love,
He borrows Feathers from her Dove.
I shall now unweave a Catalogue as brief as may be of these Dii Minores, or
Semones, that is, Semi-Homines, which here follows; Summanus was the Principal
God or President of the Manes, by some conjectured to be Pluto. Consus was the
God of Counsel, by many affirmed to be Neptune, because Counsels should be as
obscure and hidden as the Flux and Reflux of the Sea. Pan or Faunus, Inuus and
Pales were the Gods of Shepherds, from the last of which, the Feasts called
Pallilia, celebrated on the days of the Foundations of Cities were derived; for
indeed those were but the nobler Transcripts of Sheep-cots; the last did
protect the Flock from the Rage of Beasts; and the first did secure the
Citizens from the fury of more Bestial men. Deus Averruncus was a Tutelary God
that vindicated Corn from Smut, and men from the Blackness of Disasters; he was
amongst the Phoenicians called Chamos. Nascio was the God of Births: Cunina was
the Goddess of Cradles; Rumina of Sucking; Educa and Potina, or Vict'a and
Potua were the Deities to whom was entitled the care of Eating and Drinking:
Subjugus, Virginensis, Manturn, Proma and Pertunda were ex^isae seu temeratae
Virginitatis Dii and Deae. Mena was the Goddess of Women's Monthly Prosluviums;
Egeria of Teeming Women; Carne was the Goddess of Flesh; Abeona and Adeona were
the Patronesses of Passengers, to protect their going out, and returning home;
Naenia was Goddess of Funerals; Lubentia, of Lust;

Volumna of Will or Desire; Vitula of youthful Wantonness; Vacuna was Goddess
of Leisure and Idleness; Muncia of Sinks; Laverna of Thieves; Feronia was
Goddess of Groves; Col^ina or Collinus were the Deities of the Hills; Jugatinus
had the care of Tops of Mountains; Silvanus had the custody of woods; Vallona
was the Goddess of Valleys? Peitho or Suada was the Goddess of Eloquence;
Pecunia of Money; Thalassius was the God of Marriage; Aius of Speech; Fidius of
Faith; Aristaeus had the Tuition of Bees; as Mellona was the Goddess of Honey;
Bubona of Oxen; Hippona of Horses: Nor did Actions want their peculiar Deities;
for Horta was the Goddess of Exhorting; and Agonius the God that brought
Actions to accomplishment; Robigus was the God of Smut; Terminus of Bounds; and
Priapus of Gardens and Seeds; Proteus and Vertumnus were the Gods of Merchants;
Sentinus was God of Senses; Vitunus of Life; Tutanus of Defense; Aeolus was the
Deity of the Winds, deduced from the Phoenician word Aol (as Bochar^us asserts)
which signifies a Tempest; Portunus or Melicertus of Harbors; Aucula was
Goddess of Maidservants; Diverra of Sweeping; Dice, of Lawsuits; Pomona was
the Goddess of Fruit; and Flora or Chloris of Flowers; Nodiotinus or Nodinus
was the God that had the Care of the Corn when it knotted; whilst the Flower
was wrapped within the Bud, Volutina; when the Leaves dilated themselves,
Patelina; whilst the Corn was in its milky Substance, Lactucina had the custody
of it; when it was digested and ripened, Matura; and when it shot forth into
Ear, Hostilina was entitled to its Tuition; Hebe was the Goddess of Youth;
Meditrina was the Goddess of Physic; Cardina or Cardea, of Hinges; Forculus
was the God of Doors; and Limentinus, of Thresholds; Intercido was the God that
rescued men from violent Slaughters; Pilumnus was a Deity that guarded corn
when it was Inn'd, from Hair, or any other destructive heterogeneous mixture;
Picumnus was a God to whom Antiquity ascribed the Manuring, and first
Cultivating of Fields; Levana was a Goddess that mollified that grief or sorrow
which was the Result of Disease, or any other Disorder or Misfortune; Carmenta
was the Goddess of Prophetesses; her Name was extracted from Carmen, because
all Prophesies anciently were delivered in Verse; Ossipago was a Goddess who
knit together and made solid tender Bones. Februa or Februtis was the Goddess
of Fevers; Pataecus Epitrapezius was the Guardian Genius of those Tables the
Gentiles eat at, whose Statue was usually affixed to them; Momus was the God of
Critics, a Deity so impartially severe in his Animadversions, that he was
permitted by Jupiter to make his Remarques upon himself, and the Residue of the
other Deities; Bona Dea, called likewise Fauna or Fatua, a Fando, was the
Goddess of Chastity; and because she appeared to be warped and distorted with
Enthusiasmes, when she delivered her Dictates, therefore, from her, all persons
that discoursed incogitantly, were styled Fatui and Fatu^; Haspocrates was the
God of Silence; he was anciently depicted with his Forefinger on his mouth, and
a Cap on his Head, which was the Symbol of Liberty; Angerona was the Goddess of
Squinzies, and of Silence; also adjoining to her Temple was that of Volupia,
Goddess of Pleasure, to intimate that none were to enter into her Temple, but
those who had undergone any Calamity with Silence. Nay Tempests, and Noxious
Fumes, and Privy had their Deities too; for when Cornelius Scipio had escaped
the danger of Shipwreck in that Sea which washes the shores of Corsica, he
consecrated a Temple Deae Tempestati; Cloacina was the Goddess of Privies, and
Memphitis of ill Odours; who had a Temple Devoted to her Worship near Cremona.

Indeed most of these Deities, if rightly considered, were but Effects and
Emanations of Gods Power and Providence, visibly manifested in his supporting
and upholding the Fabric of the Universe; and this Truth the Poets and
Philosophers of the Gentiles well understood, but designed to skreen and
conceal it from the Vulgar, by muffling it up in these Fabulous, and
Supposititious, but Artificial Notions of Gods and Goddesses.

There being an Alliance or Conformity between many of the Jewish Sacrifices,
and those of the ancient Gentiles, I shall in a succinct and summary Landscape
represent a brief Scale of those Solemnities from the Customs of the Romans and
Greeks extracted from Stuckius, De Sacrificiis Gentilium.

Before I make any farther progression in this Discourse, I shall take a brief
Survey of those Priests which did manage the Roman Sacrifices. And first, he
that had the charge of all subordinate or inferior Priests of the Sacrifices
and Festivals, was called Pontifex maximus, and Rex Sacrificulus, or the King
of Priests, because Kings did exercise this Office in elder times. But above
them all was the Pontifical College, which at first consisted only of eight,
but Sylla enlarged them to fifteen; these were to assist the Chief Pontifex, in
whom alone was the supreme power of all Religion, Festivals, priests, Vestals,
Vows, ^dols, Oaths, Funerals, and all other appendant Ceremo^ies, besides the
Charge of the Bridge styled Pons Subli^ius. He ^ad more privilege and Ho^our
annexed to his Office than ^he Kings themselves; for he ^ight ascend the
Capitol in his ^itter, which was unlawful for others; and whatsoever Crimi^al
fled to him for Refuge, was ^^at day secured from Punishment; nor was he to
render an account of any of his Actions* The Priests subordinate to him were
Luperci, the Priests of Pan Lycaeus, Potitii and Pin^rii of Hercules; of
Divination by the Chirping of Birds, Augures; and of Divining by Poultry*
Pullarii; then those who had the care of Altars, and made an inspection into
the Entrails of Beasts, who were styled Aruspices and Extispices. Curione^ were
the Priests who had the charge of each Curia or Ward for Romulus distributed
Rom^ into thirty Wards, and to each Ward assigned a Curio; ove^ these was Curio
Maximus; w^ may style him an Archbishop* The Priests whom Romulus instituted to
preserve the memory of Tatius King of the Sabins, were named Sodales Tatii. The
Priests of Mars were called Salii; their Catalogue at first was but twelve,
which afterward swelled to fifteen: These were chosen out of the Patritii, and
^hey were in march to dance so^emnly with their Targets, styled Ancilia, one of
which was pre^ended to have fallen down from Heaven. Arvales were Priests that
had the care of the ^ields, as the Feciales were those that had the charge of
the ^ar: The Priests that went al^ays covered with threaden ^aps, were called
Flamines, qua^ Filamines; these were as ma^y in number as the Dii majores, and
were subservient to that ^eligious Worship that was offered up to those greater
Deities, the principal of which was he who was devoted to Jupiter, and was
styled Flamen Dialis: The Priests who had the care of the Sybils Books were at
first but two, styled D^umviri; then they were improved to ten, and at last
enlarged to fifteen. Fauna or Fatua who for her Loyalty to her Husband, had the
Appellation of Bona Dea, had her peculiar Priestesses also. The Priests of
Cybele, styled Matter Deorum, were called Galli, whose Chief or Archpriest had
the Title of Archi-Gallus. There were other Priests called Triumviri and
Septemviri Epulonum, who had the conduct and charge of the public Feasts and
Games. Besides every lesser Deity was entitled to a Priest, and these had
their under Officers, called Camilli. The Servants of Flamen Dialis were sti^ed
Flaminei: The Guardians of their Temples were named Aeditui. Their Trumpeters,
^ubicines and Tibicines, their Criers that went before the ^riests, to injoin
the people to ^bstain from work during the ^me of Sacrificing, were styled
^reciae. Popae were those that ^ound the Sacrifices; Victima^i were those who
killed them. ^here was an Officer amongst ^e Greeks and Romans, that ^d the
charge and custody of ^e Lavatory, or Chernips, styled ^ Greek (...), ^here the
Priest was to wash and ^oil himself, before he performed the Rites of
Sacrifice* And now I proceed to describe the Sacrifices; and first I shall
survey those of the Romans, wh^ used to offer the Day before the Solemn
Sacrifice, a preparatory Victim called Hostia praecedanea* Their Succedaneae
were Sacrifices which succeeded when the former were not satisfactory* Weathers
that were led to Sacrifice with a Lamb on each side^ were styled Ambigui.
Bidente^ were Sheep designed for the Altar, with two Horns and tw^ eminent
Teeth. Ambarvale^ were Sacrifices carried in Procession about the Fields, as
Amburbales were those that were conducted in Procession abo^ the City. Heifers
untamed^ which never had been put under the yoke, were named In^uges. The
Priest having brought ^he Victim to the Altar, was ^ccustomed to pray, laying
his Hand on the Altar, Music in ^he Interval improving the So^emnity; after he
lodged on the ^ead of the Beast Corn, or a ^ake mixed with Salt and
Frank^cense; this was styled Immola^^, from Mola a Cake. Then ^llowed Libatio,
which was ^e tasting of the Wine, and ^rinkling it on the Beasts head; ^is
done, the Hairs between ^s Horns were plucked up, and ^st into the Fire; this
they en^uled Libamina prima: Then (...) Beast was killed, the Blood ^^ceiv'd
into Vessels, and the ^trails perused; at last it was (...) into pieces, one
Fragment was wrapped up in Meal, and then burned on the Altar; this was termed
Litare. After this they let themselves loose into all manner of Festivity. The
Sacrifices that were offered up, were styled porrecta, from an antiquated word
porricere, which imports as much as Dicare: Now each particular God had his
Sacrifice; White Beasts were sacrificed to the Supernal Gods and Black to the
Infernal Deities: the Bull was offered up to Jupiter, Neptune, Mars, Apollo*
Luna, and the Heroes. The Ram was sacrificed to Mars, an^ the Heroes wine was
devote^ to Ceres and Liber; the Goat t^ Aesculapius and Liber, Milk an^ Honey
to Ceres; a Horse to S^ and Mars; a Lamb to Juno an^ Faunus; a Dove to Venus; a
Do to Pan and Minerva; a Cock to the Lares; a Hog to Sylvanus; a Sow to Ceres
and Cybele; a Hen to Aesculapius; and a Child to Saturn. To each Deity they
likewise assigned a particular Bird: The Eagle to Jupiter; the Cock to the Sun;
^he Magpy to Mars; the Raven ^o Apollo, etc. There were also particular Trees
consecrated to them; to Jupiter, the Oak; to ^allas, the Olive; to Venus, the
Myrtle; to Pluto, the Cypress; ^o Baochus the Vine and Fir^ree; to Hercules the
Poplar; ^o Apollo the Laurel and Palm^ree; to Mars and Hymen the ^ine.

I shall now descend to represent in a brief Pourtraiture the Priests and
Temples amongst the Grecians, as likewise their trai^ of Sacrifices, and the
Right^ which attended them; I shall begin with their Priests and Temples: As
they had multiplicity of Gods, so they had various Orders of Priests; Those of
Jupiter and Apollo were Boys, eminent for Birth and Beauty ^ the Priests of
Cybele were to be artificial Eunuchs; Ceres, Bona Dea, and Bacchus had their
Priestesses; the Priests of Bellona offered up a Victim of their own Blood; the
Athenian chief Priests, styled Hierophantae, who were invested with a power
proportionate to the Roman Pontifices, dieted and congealed themselves with
Hemlock, to super-induce in them an Impotency toward Women. No man was to be
instituted a Priest, whose Body was impaired with any blemish. Their Garments
and Shoes were white, if they were the Priests of Ceres; outward purity being
the principal thing they entitled themselves to. The Priests that sacrificed
to the Infernal Gods, were attired in black Garments; but purple if they were
the Priests of the Celestial Deities. They glittered also with Crowns and
Miters, and were also adorned with Ribbands and Laces: Their Office was not
only to pray and sacrifice, but also to purify with Brimstone and Salt Water.
The (...) which was a Basket or Chest wherein were treasured up the first
fruits and other consecrated Relics, which had been offered up to Minerva,
was to multiply and enforce the Grandeur and pomp of their Panathenaian Feasts,
devoted to the honor of the abovesaid Goddess, born on the shoulders of the
noblest Athenian Virgins. The (...) was under the Notion of a Bishop or
overseer, to regulate their Sacred Mysteries. The (...) was he that attended
the Sacred Fire that glowed on their Altars; they had, as amongst the Romans,
their Criers and Preachers also, and likewise those who were the Guardians of
their Temples.

Now for their Temples, that of Minerva at Athens was erected in the most
elevated part of the City, as that of Jupiter at Rome was in the Capitol. The
Temple of Mercy at Athens, sti^ed the Asylum, which was a Sanctuary for
Delinquents, was established by the Sons of Hercules. Theseus had erected one
before styled Theseum, in imitation, and proportion to which, Romulus
instituted his Asylum at Rome. At first the Deities amongst the Gentiles had no
Temples at all; but were ado^ed either on Hills, or in Groves; ^^crops was the
first (as some ^ffirm) who erected a Temple (...) Athens, as Janus did in
Italy; before they had no other Temples, but the Sepulchers and Monuments of
the Dead. The Temples of the Celestial Gods, were established upon the Ground,
those of the Infernal under. Near Sparta, Jupiter had a Temple styled Scotinon,
from the Darkness of it, being obscured with Groves. There was also (...), the
Chapel of the Earth, and (...) the Chapel of the Destinies. The Places where
they established their Assemblies and Sermons were named (...). Their Temples
had the Denomination of (...) from those dark Exhalations that issued from
their Sacrifices and Incense. (...) was the general Name for Temples, because
the Gods dwelt in them, and because they were esteemed to be rendered holy by
Consecration, they were styled (...).

That part of the Temple where the Idol stood was named (...), the same with
Delubrum amongst the Latins.

(...) was derived from (...), ^o^^ut, or set apart, and did sometimes denote
the Temple, because it was separated from vulgar uses.

For such a Superstitious Honor did they devote to its Structure, that they
leaped over its Threshold, out of a dread they might pollute it by treading on
^t. Nor did they pass by any Temple without paying some veneration to it: And
such a confident security did they repose in these ^difices, that here they
lodged their Treasures, Sacrilege being then under the Notion of an execrable
Impiety: Nay, such a venerable esteem did the Gentiles ascribe to the Temple of
Apollo Pythius, that it was judged a Crime of a black Tincture but to walk in
it; and by the Law of Pisistratus was punished with death. Hence when the
Greeks would express any danger for acted Impieties, they would proverbially
affirm it had been better you had walked in the Pythium; and to admonish
persons from venting their Excrements, either Ordure, or Urine, near the
Confines of Consecrated Structures, the Images of Serpents were insculp'd over
the Gates of their Temples. And from hence that proverbial Adagy amongst the
Romans had its Birth and Extraction, Pinge duos Angues, locus sacer est.

I shall now proceed to offer up a concile Scheme of their Sacrifices
themselves, whose Mode and Method is thus deciphered; None were to approach the
Altar until they were first purified; nor must the Victim be laid on it, until
it had received its Lustration with Meal and Holy Water, gathered from their
Lavatory, styled Chernips. Some sprinkling of this Water was strewed on the
standers by, after a Firebrand snatched from the Altar had been first drenched
and extinguished in it, and then some sacred Meal was cast on them. This done,
the Priest offered up his Orizons, and then the Sacrifice was conducted to the
Altar with the Head downwards, if it were devoted to the Infernal Gods, but
upwards, if it were dedicated to the Celestial; the Heart, Spleen, Liver and
Fat were offered to the particular Deities, the residue of the Victim was a
Feast for the Priest and People, consuming the Remainder of the Day in a
licentious and vicious Festivity: when the Greeks sacrificed to Vesta, and the
Romans to the Lares, they devoured the whole Sacrifice; hence Lari Sacrificare,
was to eat up all: Persons of a meaner capacity offered Meal or Cakes, the same
with the Roman Mola, to which those of richer Demeasne added the mixture of
Wine and Oil. These frugal Sacrifices are styled by Pindar, Supplicating
Sacrifices, suggesting to us, that there was frequently more Devotion
manifested in these mean and thrifty oblations, than there was in more splendid
and pompous Victims: They were accustomed to try if the Sacrifices would prove
acceptable to their Gods, by placing a Cake upon the Head between the Horns,
which were in solemn Feasts gilded; if the Beast was composed and quiet; it
was judged to be a fit Sacrifice; but if disordered and tumultuous, it was
rejected. In all Sacrifices Vesta was first invoked; to intimate the antiquity
and necessity of Fire (of which she was made the Patroness by the Grecians) in
those oblations. In the morning they used to sacrifice to their gods, in the
evening to their Demigods or Heroes. The Greeks did not as the Romans, grind
the Corn they placed on the Head of the Victim, but laid it on the Mass to
demonstrate the ancient Mode of Feeding, before grinding of Corn was
instituted. They were accustomed also after the Sacrifice and Feast, to burn
the Tongue of the Beast, and sprinkle Wine on it, to specify, that after
eating and drinking, the Tongue should be* obliged to Silence, and nothing
divulged that was uttered in times of Festivity: This Rite was also solemnized
to the honor of Mercury, who was in their Estimate the Patron of Eloquence,
and Deity of Sleep; and therefore about that time that was devoted to Repose,
the Tongue was sacrificed. The Grecian Priests were accustomed in an irregular
Dance to run about their Altars, beginning first at the left hand, to insinuate
the motion of the Zodiac, which is from the West, and was by ancient
Astronomers styled the left part of the world; then they began their measures
at the right hand to demonstrate the motion of the first Sphere, which is from
East to West. Bloody Victims in the public vogue fell under the notion of
impure; but Mirrhe, Frankincense, and such like, had the milder Appellation of
pure* Oblations conferred upon them. The Fleshy Mor^els of the Sacrifices were
styled ^heothyta: The persons who collected the consecrated Corn, were named
Parasiti. The Officers that officiated at the Sacrifices, were entitled
Orgeones. Philothytae were those superstitious Devoto's, that upon any
occasion, though never so despicable, did offer up Sacrifice. And because much
Wine was drunk after the accomplishment of these Solemnities, which dissolved
both Priest and People into Excess and Disorder, therefore Critics extract the
Greek word (...) from (...), after Sacrificing.

Having taken in pieces most of the Ingredients that compounded the Gentile
Superstition, I shall now describe those Festivals customary amongst the
Grecians and Romans; first because they were a principal part of their
Religion: secondly, because many held some correspondence and proportion with
the Feasts of the Jews; so that it is probable they were first copied from that
Original.

I shall begin with those of the Greeks.

And first, they had their Theoxenia, Feasts devoted to the whole Retinue of
Deities, and therefore styled by the Latins Dies Pandicularis and
Communicarius; it was principally observed by the Athenians, and consecrated to
the Honor of Foreign Gods, or the Gods or Genii of Hospitality; sometimes
likewise they were devoted to Apollo, who from* thence is styled Theoxenius
They entitle their first institution to the Dioscuri, or Castor and Pollux.
Anacalypteria were Feasts dedicated by the Rusticks to Ceres and Bacchus upon
the Inning of their Corn and Fruit; it was also observed by Brides upon their
entrance into Marriage, because then the Bride that had been before cloistered
up in her Fathers House, began to be revealed and discovered; hence the
Presents the Bridegroom endowed her with, had the Appellation of Anacalypteria.
Anthisteria were Feasts devoted to Bacchus, observed in the Month
Anthistorion, supposed by the Learned to be August, named so because the
Athenian Children were then crowned with Garlands of Flowers. Aletis was a
Feast that preserved the memory of Icarius and Erigone. Anthesphoria or
Theogamia were Feasts offered up to Proserpina; the first was named so because
Pluto ravished that Goddess, when she was gathering of Flowers.

Apatorion was an Athenian Feast maintained for four days, or as some assent,
only for three.

Ascolia were Feasts dedicated to Bacchus, deduced from (...), a Bladder,
because in the midst of the Theater they were accustomed during these
Solemnities to dance upon Bladders blown, and oyled, only with one foot, that
by falling they might foment Mirth. Boedromia were Feasts celebrated at Athens
with clamor and running in the Month Boedromion or September.

Charistia were Love Feasts, where those of Consanguinity entertained each
other with gifts and Banquets.

Chytria were Athenian Feasts observed in the midst of November, wherein all
seeds were promiscuously boiled, and devoted to Mercury and Bacchus.
Diamastigosis was the scourging Feast amongst the Spartans, in which the
principal Youth were scourged in the view of their Friends, at the Altar of
Diana. Diosia, were Feasts entitled ^o Jupiter; here they appeared not with
jovial, but with sad and dejected Aspects. Elaphebolia were Feasts consecrated
to Diana in the Month Elaphebolion, or February, wherein Stags were sacrificed
to that Goddess. Ephestia were Theban Feasts devoted to Tiresias, who had been
a successive mixture of Man and Woman, and therefore at that time they attired
one first in a Masculine, and then in a Feminine Habit. Gamelia were Feasts
offered up to Juno, as the Protectress of Marriage, in the Month Gamelion, or
January; as likewise was that Feast styled Hecatombe, solemnized in the Month
Hecatombaion, or July, where several Sports were exhibited to the People,
wherein he that was most eminent, was recompensed with the Guerdon of a Brazen
Target, and a Myrtle Chaplet. Elenephoria were Athenian Feasts wherein certain
sacred Relics were carried about in a Consecrated Chest, by Priests devoted
to that Service.

Gacinthia were Spartan Feasts entitled to the honor of Apollo and his Boy
Hiacinthus.

Hypoca^stria were Feasts consecrated to Minerva, for rescuing persons from the
prejudice of casual Fires.

Usteria were Feasts at Argos, named so because a Sow was at that Solemnity
offered up as a Victim to Venus.

Lampteria were Feasts ascribed to Bacchus, into whose Temple in the Night,
they were accustomed to carry flaming Torches, and to place Goblets full of
Wine in all the Avenues of the City.

Thea were also Feasts devoted to Bacchus, in whose Temple three empty Vessels
were miraculously replenished with Wine in the nightime, when the Doors were
secured with Locks and Bars. The Chief Priestess that did officiate at their
Celebration was entitled Thaia, and from her the Residue Thyadae.

Theoina were Athenian Feasts consecrated also to Bacchus, as he was Patron of
Wine.

Trieterica were Feasts likewise ^elebrated to the honor of ^acchus every
third year.

Megalesia were Feasts entitled (...) Cybele, in which some remark^ble
Spectacles were exhibited (...) the People.

Metageitnia were Apollo's Fe^vals, who from these was sti^d Metageitnius, and
the Mo^th in which they were ce^brated was denominated Metageitnion, which some
assert, was May, others July.

Monophagia were Feasts amongst the Aegeans, where it appears they did eat in
common of one Dish.

Munichion was the Feast of Minerva, solemnized in the Por^ of Athens, named
Munichium, and in the Month Munichium or April.

Nephalia were Feasts so denominated, because sober Sacrifices without the
brisk supplement o^ Wine, only consisting of a mixture of Honey and Water were
offered up at that time to Sol, Luna, Venus, Urania, Mnemosyne, Aurora, and the
Nimphs and Muses.

Nuctelia, were Feasts styled so because then Night-Sacrifice^ were devoted to
Bacchus, wh^ from them was named Nuc^elius.

Oinesteria were Feasts that gathered that Appellation from a vast Cup filled
up with Wine, which Beardless Youths being to cut their Hair, consecrated to
Hercules,

Ornea were the Festivals of Priapus, who was styled Ornea^es, from Ornis a
Town of Pelo^onnesus.

Oschophoria were Feasts at A^hens instituted by Theseus, when ^e returned
mourning from ^reet, upon intelligence of the Decease of his Father Aegeus,
(...) which the noblest Youths ^arried Vine-Branches into Mi^erva's Temple.

Panathenaia were the most eminent Feasts celebrated* every fifth year at
Athens to the honor of Minerva; at this time several Spectacles were exposed
to the People; the Youth then were accustomed to dance in armor, styled
Perriche, from ^yrrhus, the Inventer. The Image of Pallas was then embarked in
a Ship named Panathenaica, whose Sail had the Appellation of Peplus, whereon
the Effigies of Enoeladus was pourtraied, destroyed by Pallas. In this Feast as
they did in the Feasts named Ephestia and Promethea; it was their usage to run
extravagantly with Lamps or Torches: He that achieved the Conquest was
recompensed with a Pot of Oil, whose first Institution was ascribed to Pallas,
and not any but he, was licensed to transport Oil out of the Attick Territories.

Puanepsia were Feasts that extracted this Title from Beans and other Pulse
consecrated to Apollo; these Feasts were devoted to that God in the Month
Puanepsion, which some affirm to be October, others, July.

Sciora were Athenian Feasts, which had this Epithete bestowed upon them from
that Umbrella or Fan styled in Greek Scioron, and Sciadion, born about then in
Procession, and which was designed to skreen and rescue persons from the heat
of the Sun. These Feasts were dedicated to Minerva, styled from them Scirada,
and were observed in the Month Sciorophorion, by some Conjectures deemed to be
March.

Thargelia were Athenian Feasts devoted to the Veneration of Apollo and Diana,
and were celebrated in the Month Thargelium, or April: In this the first
Fruits of the Earth, as Earnest of her Fertility, were offered up to these
Deities, and boiled in the Pot styled Thargelos.

I shall now describe the Roman Festivals, and those were either fixed and
determined to a certain Revolution of Time, as the Stativae and Nundinae, or
else solemnized when some extraordinary emergent occasion did exact their
observance; such were the Sementivae and Pagonalia, Feasts celebrated at the
Sowing of Corn, and erecting of Villages; and these styled by the general Name
of Imperativae and Conceptivae. I shall now descend to unravel Particulars.

Opalia were Feasts ascribed to Ops.

Saturnalia were dedicated to Saturn, about the Suns entrance into Capricorn;
during* the Solemnity, the Heads of Slaves were covered with a Pileus, as a
Symbol of Liberty, and attended by their Masters.

Feriae Latinae were devoted to Juno, and observed upon the Hill Albanus, by
Romans and Latins.

Quinquatria was a Feast of five days to the honor of Minerva, solemnized
after the Ides of March; the first day was set apart for Sacrifice, the other
three for Gladiators, and the last for Expiations.

Natalitia were Feasts devoted to the Genii, in which it was held ominous to
shed the Blood of Beasts, since these Celebrations were wholly dedicated to Joy
and Festivity.

Lupercalia were Solemnities devoted to Pan, in gratitude to him for protecting
the Sheep from Wolves; in it the Youth used to traverse the Streets naked,
gently striking all that were obvious, with Leather Thongs; Virgins by a
purposed Design exposed their hands to the Impression, hoping that Address
would improve in them a future Pregnancy.

Agonalia were Feasts observed in January, to Agonius Cod of Actions and
Enterprises.

Carmentalia were offered up in January, to the Prophetess Carmenta, Evander's
Mother.

Compitalia were Feasts in May offered up to the Lares, and solemnized in
Streets and Highways, where the Heads of Poppies and Onions were devoted as a
Victim to them instead of the Sacrifices of Infants, whose Blood before by a
barbarous effusion, had sullied and defiled their Altars, until prohibited by
the Interdict of Junius Brutus.

Matutalia were Feasts in May, consecrated to Matuta or Leuco^hoe; in these
Feasts all Maidservants were excluded, but one, whom each Matron was to smite
^n the Cheek, because Matuta* distorted with Jealousy, that her Husband's Love
was more warm to her Maid than her self, was so worried with a Frenzy, that
she extinguished that, and her self at once in the Sea.

Veneralia or Vinalia were consecrated to Venus; at these Festivals Gardens
were dedicated, and much Wine poured out, in those Temples where Sacrifices
were devoted to her.

Lemuria were Feasts observed in May, to pacify the Lemures, or Night-Ghosts;
at this time it was an Usage to fling Beans about their Houses, hoping by this
Artifice to expel those Goblins from their infested Mansions.

Feralia styled so a ferendis epulis, from carrying of Viands to the Urns and
Sepulchers of their Deceased Relations, were Feasts in February, dedicated to
the Manes.

Terminalia were dedicated in February also, to Terminus, God of Marches and
Bounds; these Feasts were observed to ciment all emergent Animosities between
Neighbors in relation to Bounds.

Vertumn^li^ were Feasts observed in Oct^b^^, to Vertumnus God of Merchants.

Consualia mere Celebrations ^n August, dedicated to Consus, ^he God of
Counsel; at this ^ime the Horses and Asles were Crowned, and redeemed from
^abour.

Saliaria were Solemnities in March, devoted to Mars, whose Priests at this
Feast, danced with Targets in their hands.

Liberalia were observed in March, to the honor of Liber or Bacchus; the
Priests at this Solemnity, sacrificed Crowned with Ivy Chaplets.

Cerealia were consecrated to Ceres in April, because then she retriv'd
Proserpina; the Ceremonies that attended this Festival were performed only by
Roman Matrons.

Palilia were celebrated in April also, to Pales the Deity of Shepherds.

Vulcanalia in August, preserved the memory of Vulcan.

Meditrinalia were in October offered up to Meditrina, Goddess of Physic,
because in that Month, the Romans took an Essay of old and new Wine as
Medicinable.

Neptunalia in June, were solemnized to the honor of Neptune.

Portunalia were Feasts celebrated in the mouth of the River Tiber, to Portunus
God of Harbors.

Mercurialia and Brumalia were observed in November, to Mercury and Bacchus,
who was styled Brumus and Bromus.

Robigalia were dedicated to Robigo, God of Smut, in April, to redeem the Corn
from Smut.

Fontinilia were held in October, at which Feasts Fountains were imbellished
with Garlands.

Augustalia were solemnized in October, to the honor of Augustus, because in
this Month that Prince returned to Rome, adorned with the Laurels of Victory
and Conquest.

Laurentalia and Angeronalia were Feasts celebrated in December; the first were
entitled to Acca Laurentia; the last to Angerona, Goddess of Anguish and
Silence.

Majuma and Floralia were Solemnities observed in May and April; the first
devoted to Venus; the last to Flora; the Rites that improved these
Celebrations, were so obscene and infamous, that I had rather fold them up in
that Vesture the Women then disroab'd themselves of, than prostitute and expose
them to the public View.

The Ludi or Festi Saeculares were celebrated at Rome, semel in saeculo, once
in an Age, that is, in the Computation or Calculation of the Romans, once in an
hundred years.

The Festi or Agones Capitolini were consecrated to Jupiter, as Guardian or
Protector of the Capitol, at which Festival Poems were either chaunted or
recited to the honor of that Deity, by the Roman Poets; he that was most
eminent for those Labors, was rewarded and adorned with a Chaplet or Crown of
Laurel, from which Investiture, it is probable, our Modem Poets Laureat did
extract their first Denomination.

He that will peruse this Discourse represented in a larger portraiture, let
him view Rosinus Meursius, De F^stis Graecorum, or Hospinian De Origin
Festorum, and Steuchius, De Sacrificiis Gentilium; in all which he will find
what I have compendiously folded up in this Treatise, there more diffused and
dilated.

HAving mentioned the Augures, Aruspices, and Extispices in the Body of this
Treatise, I shall as an Appendage to this Discourse, subjoin a Summary
Description of the several Methods of presaging or Divination amongst the
Ancients; which here follow:

And there was, 1. Auspicium, quasi Avispicium, taken from the flight of Birds,
either on the right hand or on the left; (and hence the Proverb comes, Avi
sinistra, good Luck, because in giving or going, the right hand is opposite to
the Receivers left) or from the number of the Birds, whence Romulus had
promised to him the Empire, before his Brother, because he had seen the double
number of Vultures: or lastly, from the nature of them, whence the said
Romulus, seeing the Vultures, was (says Florus) Spei plenus, Urbem Bellatricem
fore, i^a illi, sanguini and praedae, assuetae, aves polliceb intur.

2. Aruspicium, ab Aras inspiciendo, in which the Soothsayers observed whether
the Beast to be sacrificed came to the Altar willingly, or not; whether the
Entrails were of a natural color, and exulcerated, etc. or whether any part
were defective or wanting. All Histories afford Varieties of examples in this
kind; I need give no particular Instance. A kind of Divination said to be
practiced first by the Tuscans or Hetrurians; instructed in the knowledge
thereof, by one called Tages, who appearing to certain Plowmen out of a Furrow,
taught them this Mystery, and so vanished. This was also styled Extispicium.

3. Tripudium, so called quasi Terripudium, and Terripavium, from the trembling
or shaking of the Earth; was a conjecture of future Successes, by the
rebounding of Crumbs cast unto Chickens: We have an instance of this in the Life
of Tiberius Gra^chus, who being seditiously busy in promoting the Law Agraria,
was forewarned by the Keeper of his Chickens to desist from that Enterprise,
because when he had thrown the Crumbs to the Coop, there came out but one of the
Chickens only, and the same without eating, retired again; which was taken for
an ominous Portent, as the greedy devouring of them had been an auspicious
Omen; but Tiberius contemning the Advertisement, and pursuing his Design, was
the same day destroyed.

4. Augurium, so called ab Avium garritu, was a prediction from the Chirping or
Chattering of Birds; as also from the sounds and voices heard they knew not
whence, nor on what occasion. In which latter kind the death of Caesar was
divined, from the clattering of Armor in his House; and the poisoning of
Germanicus, by the sounding of a Trumpet of its own accord; In the former, an
Owl screeching in the Senate House, was deemed ominous to Augustus; and a
company of Crows following Sejanus to his House, with great noise and clamor,
was judged to be fatal to hat great Favorite; and so it proved.

It is to be observed, that the Priests that managed these Mysteries were
attired in Chlaena, that is a Garment (as Ferrarius de re vestiaria expounds
it) of Purple Cloth, lined with Wool, to whose Treatise, for more ample
Information I refer the Reader.

It is now expected I should unvail that mysterious Learning of the Ancients
that lay folded up in the Aenigmatical and Allegorical Mythology of the
Gentiles; but this I hope I shall accomplish in a Treatise I am now designing
to offer up to the public view, Entitled, The Original Growth, and
Improvement of Heraldry, wherein I believe I shall give the World and the
Reader a plenary satisfaction: I had almost forgot to decipher the several
Species of Music in use amongst the Ancients, especially the Greeks at the
solemnization of their Festivals, and other Rituals above said, some part of
which was in subsequent times, when the Mists of Infidelity were dispelled,
annexed to the Retinue of Christian Ceremonies, and introduced into the
Basilica's or greater Churches, about the Year 300* which was the time of their
Erection, the Christians by this Artifice endeavoring so to oblige and endear
them, that they might bring them to be enamored on the Faith of Christ, when
they should see that a prime Rite of theirs was adopted into the Family of its
Religion, and made to wear a Christian Habit, that before was invested with a
profane one. But because I shall be a little more diffusive on this Subject, I
shall give this brief Original of the ancient and modern Music, and so
determine this Treatise.

When Music was introduced into those Churches, Antiquity called the
Basilica's, or their greater Churches, and which we now style Cathedrals, which
were erected about the Year 300, is uncertain; only it is probable, that about
this time of Constantine it was incorporated into the Christian Discipline, and
that upon two Considerations; First, as Augustine well observes, Ut per
oblectamenta aurium assurgeret animus ad Pietatis affectum; that by the
Obligation of the Ear, the mind might be raised to an affectionate delight in
piety; or secondly, that by an easy and symbolical compliance with the
Gentiles (in whose Temples, to improve the solemnity of their Sacrifices, and
other public Devotions, Music was in use many Ages before) they might so
engage and endear them, that they might bring them by degrees within the pale
of the Christian Church: Indeed this was customary in the Primitive times for
the Bishops of* those Ages, observing that the Gentile Priests used the Ring,
Staff, and Mitre (as Philostratus asserts) practiced those Rituals too, and in
the highest detestation of their Follies, thought they might wisely enough
imitate their innocent Customs, and Priestly Ornaments, and hoped they might
better reconcile their minds to the Christian Religion, by compliance in
Ceremonials, than exasperate them, by rejecting their ancient and innocent
Ceremonies; for so the Apostles invited and enticed Judaism into Christianity.
Now amongst the Ancients there were three Distinctions of Music; First, the
Ethick or Lidian, which consisted of Long Notes or Spondees, fit to calm the
Passions, and raise the Affections, and this is supposed to be that Music
which Elisha called for to ^nvite the Spirit of Prophecy unto him, 1 Kings 3.
15. And was practiced by David, to recom^ose the disordered Spirit of Saul.
Secondly, There was the Dorian or Active, consisting (...) Dactils, or one long
Note an^ two short ones; it was styled s^ because fitted to open and dilat^ the
Spirits, when they were to much fixed and congealed wit Melancholy Impressions.
Thirdly, There was the Enthusiastic^ or Phrigian, called so, because i^ was
much in use amongst tha^ loose, ungoverned People, an^ was composed of
Tribrachies, o^ short Notes fitted and design'^ for the improvement and
excitation of Amorous Passions.

And now I hope this Di^course will have an Harmonio^ Influence upon the
Readers affections, since it is last determination concludes in Music.

FINIS.

