THE Second Apology FOR THE PROTESTANTS OF IRELAND, By the Author of the First.
SHOWING The Necessity of their Flight and Desertion; And that the present
Destruction of Ireland has conduced to the Safety and Preservation of England.
In a Letter to Sir O. S.
SIR,
YOU have done me that Injury which you never intended me; you have deprived me
of a Nightssleep. For while I revolved in my mind your Discourse concerning the
Protestants of Ireland; the most uncharitable judgment past upon their
Afflictions; and the too visible disregard of their Persons, and slight esteem
of their service; I could gain no rest to my thoughts, nor slumber to my eyes.

That the Protestants of Ireland prompted by an ill-timed aversion to the
Popish Religion, and precipitated by an overhasty zeal for their own, have
abandoned their Habitations and Properties, and become Sojourners in other
Lands; and thereby are exposed to the charity and compassion of some, and to
the scorn and contempt of others; is so notoriously evident, that it needs no
Arguments to enforce the proof of it; but that their Retreat into England and
Scotland, and a prudential Endeavor for self-preservation, should be so
unkindly interpreted, and their Behavior subjected to a Censure so groundless,
and so unequal; is no way consonant to the calm dictates of Reason, nor
reconcilable to the common sentiments of Humanity. To hear them stigmatized by
their Enemies with the ugly Character of Rebels and Traitors; proscribed by
Proclamation, their Estates confiscated, their Goods plundered, and their
Houses and Plantations burnt and destroyed, is supportable from the Glory and
Satisfaction of suffering in a good Cause; to hear them condemned and cursed by
their implacable Enemies the Papists; ^r lamented by the invidious pity of
lukewarm and male-contented Protestants (who under a pretense of a nice, and
undispensible Allegiance, do grumble at the present Government, yet from their
Hearts dare not wish it in the hands of another) is neither the subject of
their wonder nor trouble. But that any Protestants of England (whom the
Ligaments of the same Religion and Blood have inseparably conjoined in one
Interest) should discover not only an insensibility of our miseries; but
aggravate them by Misprision and contempt; not only arraign our Actions, but
mis-judge our Sufferings; is a contemplation so abstruse, and so grievous, that
it would require the wisdom of Solomon to understand it, and the Patience of
Job to bear it. Yet all this is out done by a mere sensible stroke of
misfortune; we are upbraided with the King's Indifferency toward us (to give it
no worse a name). And because for Reasons and Considerations best known to
himself, he has thought it fit to command the Service of Strangers and
Foreigners, while the Gentlemen of Ireland walk the Streets neglected, and
unimploy'd; it is maliciously imputed to his dislike of their Proceedings; as
if unconstrained, and out of pure wantonness they had left their own Country,
to take the Air in this; deserted the convenience of a cheap dwelling at Home;
to pay dear for Lodgings in London; given up their Stock and Wealth to the lust
of their Enemies, only to make Experiment of the mercy of their Friends; cast
off the Homage of their Tenants, and trifled away their own Revenue, only to
become Pensioners to the Poor-mans Box, and the Brief-money.

To undeceive that sort of men, who are misled by Information, and whose
judgments are not distorted by prejudice, design or passion, I offer the merit
of the following Considerations.

First, That Ireland was actually under the Dominion and Exercise of Popery,
when England was only perplexed with the prospect and apprehension of it.

2ly, That there lay a necessity upon the Protestants of Ireland to relinquish
and fly, or to comply and submit.

3ly, That the Submission and Compliance of the Protestants in Ireland, had
unavoidably tended to the ruin of England.

4ly, That the Ruin and Destruction of Ireland has proved the means, and
occasion of saving and preserving England.

5ly, That the Protestants of Ireland had begun later, or persever'd longer in
their Opposition to the Popish Government, if they had not been assured of
Succors and Supplies from England, and disappointed in their expectation.

6ly, That the general adherence of the Protestants in England to King William
at his Landing, was not so important in the Enterprise, nor so advantageous in
the Event, as the Universal Defection of the Protestants in Ireland from King
James, before and after his Arrival there.

But that I may not proceed Dogmatically, or be suspected of so much Arrogance,
as to look for an implicit Assent to these Assertions, without a more
satisfactory Explication of them: I shall endeavor to illustrate the
Particulars very faithfully, and very briefly.

1. To demonstrate the first, there needs little pains to be taken; he that
will read the Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, and that exquisite
Treatise called Mephiboseth and Ziba, and other Papers written since the late
Revolution, will easily be convinced of the Truth of one part of that
Proposition, the other part is so fresh in every man's memory, that it were a
vanity to insist upon the proof of it. The Protestants in Ireland were not only
disarmed, and their Arms put into the hands of the Papists; the Military and
Civil List compounded of furious and inveterate Bigots; the Act of Settlement
eluded, and the Corporations poisoned with a Crew of Landless, Lawless,
senseless Intruders; but in despite and scorn of the Law, the Fopperies of the
Mass were openly represented, the Properties of the Church invaded, and the
Land infested with Swarms of Jesuits, Friars, and all sorts and Orders of
Regulars; while England was only alarmed with the humming noise of the
approaching danger, and awakened to a timely Preparation against the secret
Mines to overthrow her Charters, and the frequent Attacks made upon the Test
and Penal Laws.

2. Now when by the permission of Divine Providence, and the subtle contrivance
of those in Authority, the poor Protestants of Ireland were rendered
defenseless, and utterly incapable to make Resistance; they must indubitably be
reduced to that fatal Dilemma of complying with the Government, or withdrawing
from the malevolent influence and tyranny of it.

3. But had they been besotted with a supine submission to such exorbitant
Encroachments; had they continued in their Possessions, and truckled to the
Arbitrary Commands of those insolent Popish Bashaws; how had the Hands of the
late King been strengthened? his Army readily maintained by plentiful
Contributions, and continually supported by fresh Recruits? nay had they been
indulged to remain in a cold Neutrality, and permitted only to be Lookers on
(as in all probability the dread of their Number and Strength, would have
induced the other cheerfully and gladly to consent) what visible Impediment can
there appear to have hindered the Invasion of England by a numerous and potent
Army? the success whereof tho it had not terminated in a plenary Conquest
(which God grant may never be the fate of that renowned and happy Country) yet
the ruin and desolation that would have attended the Impressions of a rejected
Prince, seconded by the remorseless Troops of barbarous Irish and French (who
have sufficiently testified the delight they take in Burning and Devastation)
is not liable to the description of any Pen. If the obstinate standing out of
that single City of London Derry gave so wonderful a Diversion to the Enemies
Progress; how swiftly had he moved, and without control, to the reinstating
himself in the Thrones of Scotland and England; if the Gates of that place had
not been shut, and the Irish Garrison had been admitted in it? If the Courage
of those gallant Refugees in Eniskillin had been allayed by a Compliance and
Submission on Terms of the greatest Advantage; the forlorn party that invaded
Scotland had swelled to a vast Army, miserably embroiled that Kingdom, and done
irreparable damage to this.

4. The Proof and Confirmation of the next Assertion is couched and
comprehended in the former. If some of the Protestants of Ireland had not
considerately removed themselves with their Plate, Money and Effects, by a
lucky foresight of the Tragical Consequences of their stay. If others (out of
an abhorrence of Popery, and concurring with the Resolutions of England) had
not voluntatily renounced their Allegiance to a deposed King, broken up House,
retrenched their Families, disbanded their Followers, and with much difficulty
and hazard transplanted their Persons into England and Scotland; it is apparent
how considerable an Accession this had brought to the present Possessor;
whereas by the substraction of their wealth, and the withdrawing their Persons,
the Irish Interest has been in a great measure impaired, tho to the unspeakable
detriment of them that escaped. To this let me add, that if the confident
assurance of the entire possession of Ireland, and thereby securing a Retreat,
and Harbor for the French Fleet, had not amused that unfortunate Prince, and
prorogued the Invasion of England (which beyond doubt can never be safe while
Ireland is subjected to its Enemy) he had long since disputed his Title upon
the spot, and endeavored to retaliate that vengeance upon the English, which
has been entailed on the Irish Families, and transmitted from one Generation to
another since the time of their Conquest.

5. To evince the Truth of what is next asserted, I must appeal to the
Gentlemen of the several Provinces in Ireland, whether they were not
continually flattered with promises of Commissions, Men, Money and Arms from
England; whether every puff of wind that arose from any point of the East or
South, did not infuse fresh life into their drooping Spirits? Whether they did
not hourly expect the Landing of some English or Dutch Forces to cover and
conduct them, while the same methods practiced in England for the restitution
and establishment of Religion, might be reacted there? It was this that
animated and inspired the Inhabitants of Londonderry (the last stake and pledge
of the Protestant Interest in Ireland) with so much precipitation to shut their
Gates, and keep out a Popish Regiment just approaching to enter the City, upon
the seventh day of December 1688, and stoutly to maintain it, till by
Capitulation it was made a Proetstant Garrison. This encouraged the People of
Eniskillin, in imitation of them, to shut their Gates on the 11th. of December
following, and to refuse the Entrance of two Irish Companies, appointed to have
their Quarters there. This made the Protestants in Munster assemble with what
Horse and Foot they could call together, to avoid a Massacre, and to join with
such Forces from England, as might rescue them from the Tyranny and Slavery
under which they lay prostrate. This occasioned the Association published in
Conaght by the Lord Kingston and the Protestants who had been plundered of
their Goods and Stock, and were forced for safety of their Lives, to retreat to
Sligo, no way doubting of immediate succor and relief from England. This
brought forth that Declaration of the Gentlemen in the Counties of Down, and
Antrim, who having employed Agents into England, and received repeated
Assurances of a speedy and vigorous Assistance, began to form themselves into
Regiments, and to prepare for their Defense against a vast Irish Army then
formed, and threatening to break in upon them. Thus in all Parts the Protestants
stood upon their Guard, longing, and languishing for Help and Relief from
England: but miserably failing in their expectation, and the Irish Army
pressing into their Frontiers, while they were utterly destitute of Arms and
Ammunition, the Men raw and undisciplined, and no experienced Commanders among
them; they were constrained to fly before their bloody and enraged Enemies,
leaving their Houses furnished, and their Goods and Stock as a Prey to them:
which in all humane Probability had easily been prevented, if they had not
depended on the promised Aid from England.

6. I have no intent to lessen or extenuate the noble Undertaking, and prudent
Conduct of the Lords and Gentlemen of England, in their Invitation, and
Conjunction with the Prince of Orange, to redeem the Nation from the Tyranny of
Pope^y, Slavery, and Arbitrary Government; and placing the present King in the
vacant Throne of Him, who spontaneously Abdicated the Government. It was a
glorious, and a grateful Action; all the Protestants in Europe rejoice at it;
and Posterity will praise their Doings. Nevertheless I am bold to say, that the
public appearance of the Protestants in England, to abet the Design of King
William, and to follow His Fortune, was neither so important at the Time of
acting, nor of such Advantage in the Consequences, to encourage the Protestant
Party, and to dis-animate the Popish: as the early and universal Defection of
the Protestants in Ireland from the Command and Government of the late King
James. This will appear evidently, if we consider the State and Circumstances
of the two Kingdoms, and, setting both in a true Light, pass an impartial
Judgment on each of them. When the Prince of Orange arrived in England, He came
into a Country, where Popery was an uneasy Nuisance, obtruded by Craft, and
diffused in Corners; where there was a Royal Army on Foot of Principles quite
contrary to it; and the Number of Protestants exceeded that of the Papists, in
the Proportion of Two hundred to one: Whereas, when King James Landed in
Ireland, He found Popery predominant, and established by Force, though against
Law; an Army of Forty thousand desperate Papists, under the Command of bigoted
and inexorable Leaders, with a Rabble of as many, armed (though not for Fighting,
yet) for Rapine and Plunder, and which served as a Seminary for the furnishing
of Recruits; the Papists exceeding the Protestants in Number, more than three
to one. In England, though the Militia was discountenanced, and disused from
Exercise, yet they retained their Arms; and the Protestants through the Kingdom
kept what they had, without Inspection, or Prohibition; and they continued
Masters of their own Horses: whereas in Ireland the Protestants were utterly
disarmed, (those of the Church of England by a strict Proclamation requiring
all Officers of the Militia to deliver in the Arms of their Troops and
Companies into the next Store, under a severe Penalty; and the Dissenters by a
positive Order from the Government to take away all Arms from such as did not
go to Church) their Horses taken from them, not leaving a pad Nag to ride on,
and prosecuted as Rebels, upon Refusal. It is true, in England there was an
Invasion made upon their Charters, and Men were here and there thrust in of
loose and Atheistical Principles; some injurious and illegal Attempts were made
on the Universities; and the Reverend Bishops (the Pillars of the Church, and
Champions of our Religion) were affronted, and impeached; the Magistracy was
closetted, threatened, and some arbitrarily superseded; at the Helm of
Government some were pricked in, who being actuated by no Instinct of
Conscience, or Honor, joined in a Conspiracy against the Laws and Liberty of
the Country, and, like inanimate Tools, were employed in the Propagation of the
Catholic Cause: but in Ireland the Corporations were stuffed with Irish
Papists, with Rebels, and the Sons of those Murdering Rebels in 1641; though
Priests were not actually instituted and inducted into the Church Livings, yet
they were placed in every Parish, and the Mass-House confronted the Church;
though Popish Bishops were not actually inaugurated in the Sees, yet they
received the Profits of vacant Bishoprics; the Revenue was managed by Papists;
the Commission of the Peace entrusted to them, and generally to them only; the
Sword of State placed in the hands of the Earl of Tyrconnel; and the Majority
of the Privy Council made up of sworn Enemies to the Protestant Religion: So
that to work a Change in England, was neither so difficult nor hazardous in the
Attempt, nor so remarkable in the Revolution; as the bold Adventure of the
Protestants in Ireland under all Moral and Political Disabilities to capacitate
them for such an Undertaking. And whereas the Acclamations of the People in
England, the Desertion of the Army, and the general adherence of the Nobility
and Gentry to the Prince of Orange at His Landing, prevented a Civil War, and
the Effusion of Blood, and the present King became quietly vested in the
Throne, and Government; the universal Defection of the Protestants in Ireland
assured and established Him in the Possession; since by these means King James
was not only deprived of the Aid and Strength of Two hundred thousand Men, but
by the stout opposition made in Londonderry, Eniskillin, and other Places, His
Affairs were wholly embroiled, His Designs frustrated, and his determined
Invasion of Scotland, and an uninterrupted Progress into England, absolutely
prevented, and defeated.

It is altogether superfluous in me to offer these Things to your
Consideration, who have so great a Sense and Knowledge of Affairs, and are
better furnished with useful Notions and Remarks upon all Public Transactions.
But I have done it to comply with your Commands: and if you will give your Self
the Trouble to supervise and correct this hasty and imperfect Essay, and render
it fit for the View of others; possibly they may be convinced, that the
Protestants in Ireland have super-errogated in their Zeal to Religion and the
present Government, though they have been Self Homicides of their own Fortunes
and Estates; and that they do unquestionably deserve rather to be reputed
Living Martyrs for their Religion and their King, than to be traduced with a
needless Removal of their Persons hither, and an unaccountable Reason of their
stay here. And I am no less confident, that when it shall please His Majesty to
suffer Himself to be undeceived, He will find it requisite to countenance and
smile upon a great Number of Men, who to their own certain Ruin, and without
the least prospect of future Advantage, have abandoned all, and run into a
voluntary Exile, to serve Him, or to avoid the Necessity of serving His Enemy;
and that he will judge it expedient, if not necessary, to put Armies into their
Hands, (who best know how to deal with the Irish) whom Self-Interest
corroborated by immovable Fidelity and Loyalty, will inspire with an
Opportunity to promote the speedy and effectual Reduction of the miserably
harassed Kingdom. I am,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, G. P.

Licensed, Jan. 27. 1689/90. J. F.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead in Fleet Street. 1690.


