THE MINORITY OF St. Lewis.

With the Politic Conduct of Affairs by his Mother Queen Blanch of Spain,
during her Regency.

BEING A Relation of what happened most Memorable under his Reign during the
Year, 1226, 1227, 1228, and 1229.

LONDON Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, at the Post House in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1685.

To the most Illustrous Prince, HENRY DUKE of NORFOLK, Earl Marshal of England,
Earl of Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk, and Norwich, Baron Mowbray, Howard, Seagrave,
Bruise de Gower, Fitz-Allan, Clun, Oswaldestrey, Maltravers, Talbot, Verdon,
Lovetot, Furnival, Strange, of Blackmere, and Howard of Castle Rising,
Constable and Governor of His Majesty's Royal Castle and Honor of Windsor,
Lord Warden of Windsor Forest, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Norfolk,
Surrey and Berks, and of the City of Norwich and County of the said City, and
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.
MY LORD,
I Should not have presumed to approach with an Address of so small importance,
a Personage of your Dignity and Grandeur, in whose present station all the
Honors, and in whose Person all the Virtues of your Illustrious Family so
eminently shine, but for this consideration, that there is an obliging
condiscention which ever attends upon true Nobility and Native Greatness: But,
my Lord, I have this moreover to plead, that in this so small a Volume there,
are such Arcana Historiae, and such well weighed Characters of persons, that
those even of the highest Sphaere and Employment may, I judge, think a few
hours not ill bestowed in the perusal of them. The last pretension I lay to
your Graces pardon, is, that I have taken care to give your Grace as little
interruption as possible, to your more weighty affairs, in striving to express
the ambition I have of paying my Mite of those honors and respects which you
merit from all the world, and thereby of aspiring to the Title of

MY LORD, Your GRACES most humble, most obedient, and most dutiful Servant.
Edw. Philips.

The MINORITY OF St. Lewis. OR, A Relation of what happened of most Memorable,
under his Reign, during the Years, 1226, 1227, 1228, and 1229.
NEver any Christian Prince merited of History more solid, serious, and
univerversal Praise than Lewis the 9th of that Name, King of France, firnamed
the Saint; and consequently never any Christian Prince has been so ill treated
by the generality of Historians, both French and Foreigners, Ancient and
Modern, Good and Bad, of all sorts of People, and of all Religions. The
Heretics of latter times happily offended at the Reason he gave for refusing to
go to see the Body of Christ become visible in the hands of a Priest, namely,
that he had no need of ocular Testimony to convince him of a Truth, whereof he
was already so well satisfied, have with that prejudice represented even the
most Heroic of his actions, that, were their Credit valuable, this Prince
could certainly be allowed no better a Character than any of the nine last
Kings of the Merovingian Race; They will needs have that haughtiness wherewith
he treated his Brother Charles of Anjou, who after he was crowned King of
Naples and Sicily let loose the Reins to license, pass for an Effect of secret
Pride and Ambition; they brand with rashness and imprudence the two Expeditions
he made against the Infidels, and will have the extraordinary Charge he was at
in those Undertakings, no other than Profuseness and Prodigality. That
Majestic Air which he expressed in all his Actions, and which descended to him
from the Queen his Mother, they interpret to be only a natural Surliness and
Austerity of humor in him: and though more Covertly, they forbear not to
censure his frequent Visitations, and regulations of Hospitals The plainness of
his habit they attribute to a poorness of Spirit in him, and from his aptness
to conceal and pass over all private Injuries offered him, they are ready to
accuse him of Pusillanimity and Cowardice. His Conversation though obliging
enough, they account too Reserved and Morose, considering the Familiarity and
Freedom that had been allowed to Courtiers in those times.

They cavil at the sincerity of his Answers both by word of mouth and in
writing to foreign Ambassadors, in the Affairs he had to concert with the
Crowns of England and Spain; they tax him of too much Severity in the Execution
of his Laws, especially, against the Jews, and of too much adhering to
particular Justice to the prejudice of the public in the renuntiations he made
to the Duchy of Guien and Kingdom of Castile.

Nor is this noble Prince and Saint King Lewis better dealt with by the
Catholic Historians, though perhaps not with such an apparent and designed
prejudice, and that by Reason (for a more probable cause cannot be guessed at)
of that pragmatick Sanction which came forth under the Name of this Prince,
occasioned by the quarrel he had with the Court of Rome. They looked upon as
Criminal the zealous Concerns he had for the Rights of his Crown, and upon this
pretense took upon them to bespatter all his actions without Limit or
Distinction.

Of this last sort of Writers some there are, who not daring to launch out into
those high Intemperancies, have yet fallen into another default equally
disadvantageous to the glory of this Royal Saint. They have a conceit forsooth
that there is no extraordinary Sanctity to be found but in Monasteries, or at
least that it is not to be attained but by such Mortifications of the body as
are there in use, and upon this presupposal they carry on the main part of
their design throughout all their Writings, so that they make it not so much
their buisiness to represent this holy King Lewis such as really he was, but
such as in their Opinion he ought to have been, that is to say, in stead of
making him a great King as he was they set him forth a very Monk of the most
reformed Order. Insomuch that in a Manuscript Imbellisht with curious Figures
in Miniature which came to light about 12 years after his death, he is
portrayed in several Exercises of Penitence, the most severe and bloody that
were than practiced in Cloisters. Moreover, one Richard a Monk of the Abbey of
Enove de Votsge, describes him yielding to the Temptation of a certain Jacobin
who urged him to take upon him the Order of St. Dominick, and from which
nothing but the powerful and incessant Interposings of the Queen his Mother,
Philip the Hardy his Son, and Charles of Anjou his Brother could have diverted
him. Matthew Paris an English Benedictin, an Historian otherwise the most
faithful and best informed of his Time, brings in our Princely St. Lewis at his
restitution of Guien to the English, uttering himself in a Speech no less void
of Sense then Regal Authority, and gives him a very lame at least imprudent
Character, when he tells us that without fear or respect of the Barons of his
Realm he had given up to the English, those other Provinces which Philip the
August his Grandfather, had alienated from them in the Reign of King John, and
reunited to the Crown of France.

But this is not all that has been vented of unhandsome by these three above
mentioned Authors, who all of them lived in the very Time of St. Lewis. It Is
strange to consider how scant they are in recounting the Virtues of this
Prince, as to his Quality and Estate, how they bury, if I may so say, in
mysterious silence the great Care he took to acquit himself handsomely of all
things that belonged to his Kingly Office? how they smother the best part of
all his most glorious Actions, and speak openly of those only which were
obscurely either begun or ended? never considering all this while that David in
the midst of all his plenty, and keeping a Court not differing in outward
Splendour from that of other Kings, was yet a man no less at least, if not more
after Gods own heart than Racab, observing the utmost Severities of Life which
the old Law required. In fine, as if this Prince were destined to be the Mark
of all Injustice, the Modern Historians have almost all of them in this point
followed the Example of the Ancients, whether it were that they only contented
themselves to copy them out as it were, for want of the Originals by which they
were to have been supplied and mended, or, that they chose rather to take upon
Trust what they found in Print, than to bestow the pains and time to search and
consult Manuscripts.

The design therefore of this work is to rectify and turn to advantage the
Mistakes of others, and to remove those Inconveniences that have ensued upon
them, at least as far as can be done by touching upon them briefly, not having
here time or place to represent all things in their full proportion; and I
shall think my self very happy, if without being wounded I can handsomely make
my way over so many Thorns, since doubtless there can be nothing more conducing
to the Dolphins Instruction than to be presented with a true Character of that
person among all his Ancestors, whose Life next to that of the Incomparable
Lewis, the 14th. it most imports him to contemplate; and if I should be so
unhappy as not to succeed, I shall at least gain this Advantage that the
Correction of my Errors will instruct others more dextrous to arrive at a safe
Haven.

St. Lewis came into the World the 25th. of April, in the Year, 1215: and those
who relate him born of a barren Mother, and make his Birth a Miracle wrought by
the Prayers of St. Dominick, are certainly ignorant that he had an Elder
Brother called Philip, who dyed in his Minority. The Prince his Father lived
till near 30 Years of Age a private Life, contenting himself with the Kings
Grace and Favor, and the hopes of succeeding him one day, when the Course of
Nature and the Fundamental Law of the Land should call him to the Crown. He was
named Lewis, and the astonishing fierceness of his Countenance in time of
fight, which increased or diminished proportionally to the danger he was in
procured him the Surname of Lion, however, he never resembled this Animal but
when he was engaged in Military Affairs, being at other times the most obliging
and complaisant of all men living; not to mention those his other Excellencies
which will afford a noble Character to him that shall undertake to write his
Life: but in Relation to what has been said of him, one Instance of his
Moderation cannot be omitted, since thereby was divulged upon the noblest Stage
of Europe his readiness to perform the Command of God, who promises a Reward
both in this Life and that to come, to those who give due Honor and Obedience
to their Parents.

King Philip the August after the death of Queen Isabel of Hainault his first
Wife, by whom he had Prince Lewis, espoused Angelberge of Denmark, a Princess
without Compare, the fairest and most virtuous Europe could boast of. But the
Inconstancy of Man is never so deplorable as in such like Conjunctures, wherein
he changes in a moment not only from excess of love to excess of hatred, but
which is worse, from the excess of love to the utmost Indifference. Philip, the
Morrow after his Nuptials with Angelberge, entertained a strange aversion for
her. He first excluded her from his Bed, next from his House, He sued out a
Process for the dissolution of the Marriage and found the Bishops ready enough
to comply with his Resolution upon pretext of an Imaginary kindred between the
two Spouses: upon their Sentence immediately ensued another Marriage of the
King with Agnes of Tullet, other wise called Mary Princess of Bohemia by whom
he had several Children: Angelberge bore her Divorce with a Patience never
enough to be applauded. She not only not opposed the Kings design, but forbore
to return into her own Country, for fear her. Presence should animate her
Relations to Revenge the Affront she had received. All the favor she desired
was that she might be permitted to reside in France, where she led so holy and
retired a Life that all her Enemies, her Rival her self not excepted, could not
but admire her, and pity her Condition.

However, Canute King of Denmark thought himself obliged in honor, though she
oftentimes conjured him to the contrary, to appear for his Sister Angelberge,
and thereupon demanded justice in her behalf of Pope Celestin the 3d. insomuch
that his Holiness remonstrated the whole Affair to the King by Cardinal
Meilleur, who not being admitted to a favorable hearing, addressed himself to
the Prelates that attended the Court, to little purpose God knows, for all the
benefit he reapt of this Negotiation was a few insignificant Expressions of
their Compassion for the Queens Misfortune; and all his Eloquence, though he
was accounted the best Orator of his time, could not obtain one step of
advancement toward the reestablishment of this Princess. The Cardinal upon this
finding none to second him, returned to Rome, from whence the Pope, pressed by
the continual Importunities of the Danes, sent soon after into France as his
Legate, Peter Cardinal of St. Mary with order to assemble the Prelates of
France, and to put the Realm under an Interdict, in case the King did not
within a time prefixed receive Angelberge again. The Cardinal executed this
dangerous Commission with as much vigor as address; and the King not doubting
to come off by those subterfuges that occur in formal Trials consented to the
calling of a Council at Dijon, the Capital Town of Burgundy: the matter was
examined to the bottom, and the justest cause became the strongest. Those
Prelates of the Court Party who had pronounced the Marriage of Angelberge Null,
either touched with remorse of Conscience, or finding their Number not strong
enough to maintain it, revoked their Sentence, and the Council actuated by the
Cardinal, thundered out an Interdiction, only with this Reserve that twenty
days respite should be allowed to the publication of their Decree,

The King in stead of taking this limited Time to consider of a Concession,
rather laid hold of an advantage, thereby to make his Appeal from the
Determination of the Council, and to revenge himself of the Bishops who acted
thus, as he pretended, with a malicious design of opposing his proceedings; he
seized upon their Temporals, and to prevent the Assistance they might receive
from their Relations, for at that time the richest Benefices in France were in
the hands of persons of highest quality, he possessed himself of the third part
of Gentlemen's Estates. In the next place, Angelberge was removed from her
present place of Solitude, and confined to the Castle of Estampes, where she
was sequestered from all Society, but only of such as were the Creatures of her
Rival.

There were at that time in France scarce fewer Malcontents than Natives, and
though Prince Lewis could have no lawful cause for putting himself at the Head
of them, yet never could he have had a fairer and more plausible pretext: He
had yet neither Place of Trust nor Profit, neither Government of Town nor
Province; all he had to subsist upon was an indifferent sum of Money which he
received yearly out of Spain. He could not hope to make his Condition better
while he kept himself in the Limits of due Obedience, whereas had he Headed the
Malcontents, he might have assured himself of obtaining by Articles of
Accommodation whatsoever he could have desired, for since those People would
never have been reduced without him, the King must have been forced to have
given them an entire Satisfaction, nor could he have avoided above all things
the taking back of Angelberge.

But all this while Prince Lewis remained firm and unshaken in that Faith and
Duty which he knew to be owing to his Father, and his King, and owned himself
bound in Honor and Conscience to adopt upon all accounts his Majesty's
Interests as his own, and showed a more than ordinary Submission at a time when
all the rest of his Subjects meditated a general Revolt; in short, he gave an
Example of Fidelity not to be paralleled in the History of any Nation: Nor was
this unexampled Loyalty of his long without a Recompense; for having so
generously and virtuously refused an Illegal Power he was called to the Crown
of England by the universal consent of the Estates of the Realm. Three Years he
there peaceably reigned, and when at the end thereof, the Inconstancy of those
that had called him in unworthily retracted that Allegiance which both their
duty obliged them to, and his Virtue; Almighty God abundantly repaired that
detriment to him two several ways, the one was a perpetual Establishment of
the Crown of France upon his Posterity from his Eldest Son, the other an
Accession of the Crowns of Naples and Sicily with the Earldom of Provence which
fell contrary to all Expectation to the youngest of his Sons. But of the
worldly Blessings that attended Prince Lewis there was none he made greater
account of, or took higher Satisfaction in, than the Wife which God in his most
especial Providence bestowed upon him, viz. Blanch of Spain, the Daughter of
Alphonso King of Castile, Surnamed the Noble, a Princess who in that rude,
heavy Age wherein she had the Misfortune to be born, possessed all those graces
which were capable to draw admiration from the most accomplished Ladies of her
time. And as none durst dispute the Prerogative of beauty with her, so it was
absolutely taken for confessed on all hands that she infinitely surpassed them
in a Noble and Gallant Mien. The young Age wherein she was Espoused to Lewis,
for she was then scarce ripe for Marriage, rendered her so much the more pliant
and flexible in conforming to the humors and manners of the French Nation;
wherein she made so perfect an Improvement that she could not possibly have
been distinguished from a French Woman, but for that grave Severity which was
too Natural to be easily quitted by her, though at a time when she most
resigned her self up to Complaisance and Familiarity, Her Air as Majestic as
it was, had yet never any thing in it of disobliging, being ever attended with
words and actions full of Spirit and Vivacity, and a Gaiety of humor that
infinitely became her: She enjoyed so vigorous a health of body that till that
sickness took her which ended her days, she never was troubled with any other
distemper than a short quotidian Ague, which argued rather a strong
Constitution then any Intemperature of humors. Her beauty was not impaired by
Age, nor did the bringing of ten Children into the World any thing diminish the
freshness or delicacy of her Complexion. But that which singularly recommends
her above all that has been said is the clear judgment and exalted wit which
so qualified her for business, that she came not short of the most eminent
Ministers of Spain, either for quick insight, or prudent forecast in the
weightiest Affairs without the least of that heavy slowness and irresolution
which has been the fault of many, as she made appear by her management of
those no less difficult Transactions that happened during her Regency, then have
been known at any time; and with that Ease and dispatch that she was not
observed to have the least trouble or perplexity of Spirit. Her Piety was
neither superstitious, nor a Cloak for the carrying on of any Interest, and it
was an excellent saying of hers to her Children when she had their Education
under her Care; That she had rather see them buried than to abandon that purity
of Life to which their Baptism had called them. Her Chastity was inviolable,
however, that of all the rest of her Virtues was most disputed, both during her
Life and after her death. The worst that has been said of her in any of the
most Satirical Pieces that have touched her in this tender point is, that she
gave too much pretense to Calumny. She entertained indeed a Principle more
dangerous than could well consist with a Ladies Honor, that is to say, that
there are certain junctures which though rarely, might at some time or other
happen, in which Ladies might lay aside the outward Formalities of Honor,
provided they took care to preserve it inviolable in the Main. This I say,
Queen Blanch held for a Fundamental Maxim of her Politics, for Example, that
she might without scruple of Conscience endeavor to give Love to any Prince or
Potentate that could not by any other means be gained to her Interest;
especially, when it might prove a means to prevent or put an end to a War or
any intestine broil, to make an Experiment whereof too many occasions will
offer themselves in the Sequel of this History; But in the first place,
Forasmuch as the Sentiments of the Queen in this matter were no way prejudicial
to the Education of St. Lewis, it will he necessary before hand to show how
singular and scrupulously exact she was in this matter.

She undertook her self the Office of Nurse to this dear Son of hers, not
thinking it safe, (for where most Love is, there is most jealousy and
suspicion) he should suck of any other Milk than her own, upon this there
happened a Rencountre, which being not elsewhere to be found, though perhaps
purposely omitted as beneath the Gravity of History, cannot handsomely be here
passed by. One day when she had a violent hot fit of an Ague upon her, which
also lasted longer than Ordinary, a Lady of Quality who either to please her
Majesty, or in imitation of her, had taken upon her to nurse her own Son, being
then present, and seeing the little Infant cry for the Teat, took upon her the
boldness to give him the Breast, the Queen when the fit was over, called for
her Child, and offered him her own Breast, but the Infant put it by, either,
because having sucked so lately he was fully satisfied, or, because the fresh
Milk he had lately tasted, made him the more sensible of the burning heat of
that which his Mother now offered him. The Reason was easy to be guessed, and
the Queen her self suspected what had happened; She pretended an impatient desire
of returning her thanks to the person who had obliged her by being so kind to
her Child, during her Indisposition; The Lady hereupon expecting no doubt to be
a Favorite, owned what she had done, and told the Queen that the crying of the
Infant so sensibly touched her, that she could not forbear to give it what
Relief was in her power. But the Queen, instead of returning her the thanks she
expected, cast a most disdainful look upon her, and thrusting her singer into
his mouth, forced him to give up all he hadreceiv'd from her Breast. This
violent Carriage of the Queen gave surprise to all that beheld it, whereupon,
not to hold them long in suspense, the Queen told them they ought not to think
strange of what they had seen, for that she could not possibly endure that any
Woman alive should have a Right to dispute with her the Quality of a Mother; so
steadfast her persuasion was that the nursing of Children is a great part of
their Education.

Other Particularities of the Education of St. Lewis are not known, only in
general it is not unknown, how great Care was taken to place such persons about
him as were most capable to instruct him; but however these persons were, it
may without any injustice to them, be strongly presumed their Abilities were
not sufficient for the high Province they were set in, it being in an Age when
men of greatest Fame for Literature were but very indifferently learned, and in
a Kingdom whose Nobility at time lay under the scandal of that gross Ignorance;
besides, that St. Lewis came too soon to the Crown to have that leisure and
opportunity which were necessary for a serious Application to study. He was not
above twelve years, and about ten days over, of Age, when his Father King
Lewis the 8th. who had not reigned in France above three years, resigned him
his place by an accident, whose Circumstances have not been to this day
sufficiently made known.

The most potent Feudatary of the French Monarchy, next to the King of England,
was at that time Tibault the third, who Matthew Paris calls Henry Earl of
Champaign Brie, Chartres and Blois; the Sovereignty of which Estates had been
in his Family above 400 Years, and it was no less then 300 Years since one of
his Ancestors got himself immortal Fame by compelling the last King of Burgundy
(for the putting a stop to the persecution then on foot) to resign his Crown to
the Emperor Conrade. This Prince of all the Princes of Christendom of that
time, had the greatest Alliances; his Mother being the Daughter and Heiress of
the King of Navarre, his Grandmother Sister of Philip, the August King of
France; his great Grandmother, Princess of England; and her Mother of the
Imperial House of Suevia. He was of a large Stature, handsome, well made,
valiant and active, Especially, at the Exercise of the Lance, which was then an
Exercise and Divertisement much in use and Esteem; but withal, he was extremely
subject to passions, which of all others are most incident to persons of his
Quality and Grandeur, and that in so high a degree, that it was hard to
distinguish which was most predominant. He was born a younger Brother, but
waited not long before he became the Eldest, his Brother dying without Male
Issue, the Orphan Princesses he left behind found their Uncle instead of a
Protector the greatest Enemy and Persecutor they had; Nor had he accepted of
the Tuition of them, but only to gain an opportunity thereby of invading their
Estates, which he delayed no longer to do, then till he had made himself Master
of all their strong holds. The pretense he made use of to palliate his
Injustice, was too weak to have ever been made use of before in the like Case;
Namely, that the Earldoms of Champaign, Brie, Chartres and Blois were Fiefs
purely Masculine, that is to say, so firmly entailed upon the Martial, or
Arm-bearing Sex, as not to admit of any Woman whatsoever, though Married to the
General of an Army.

No less Criminal was this Earl in his amorous Inclination, nor did this
passion of his tend less to evil Consequences, the respect he owed to Lewis the
8th. his Sovereign, and the honor he had of being so nearly related to him,
not restraining him from loving Queen Blanch beyond the Limits of honor and
decency; and whether it were that he gave way to Presumption equally with Love,
or, that his Passion was moreover degenerated into folly; or, that he had
entertained an Opinion that Secrecy would more avail to the heighthning than
suppressing of his Malady; or lastly, that the Queens Virtue had driven him to
despair; he not only took no care to hide the fury of his amorous Flame, but on
the contrary sought all extravagant ways imaginable to proclaim it to the
World; he spent a great part of his time in making Love-songs, savouring more
of a flashy wit than of a true Elegance, or Spirit of Poetry: these he made it
his business to get presented to the Queen, he caused them to be composed to
Music, and sung to all sorts of Instruments, and either to keep them from
growing out of date, as it generally happens when the Novelty of a thing is
over, or, that their Memory of them might survive both the Author and the
Princess for whom they were made, he had them engraved in Copper, and exposed to
the sight of the whole world in the Galleries of his Palaces at Troy and
Provence, as if he were afraid least future Ages should be unacquainted with
his folly, or the time he lived in should want a fit Subject for Satyr. Such
was the excessive height of his Imprudence, which the King was not then in a
Condition to chastise, he thought it better to pretend Ignorance, than to
manifest his weakness by unprofitable marks of Anger. The English were then in
Arms for the recovery of those French Provinces which Philip the August had
taken from them, and France could not have hindered, had the Forces which were
raised to oppose them been disunited: He stood in need of the Aid of all his
Feudataries; and the revolt of this Count alone had been enough to ruin the
whole design. Thus was the King constrained to carry himself toward his Rival,
as Criminal as he was, and the Event proved that his Majesty had taken, if not
the most honorable, yet at least the most profitable Expedient. The Earl, who
was a person sufficiently Valiant, had brought a considerable Addition to the
French Army, of choice Troops, all consisting of his own Vassals, and fought
like a true Lover of that Age, that is to say, he had the Vanity to expose
himself to the greatest of dangers for the Love of his Lady; The English whom
he was the forwardest to attaque, were driven to stand upon their desence; and
the Towns of Niort, and St. John d'Angeli, which they had lately recovered,
were again taken from them by force; the Town of Rochel, to avoid plundering,
submitted to the French; so that at last the English, disheartened by so many
misfortunes, were glad of a Truce. The King was the more willing to agree to
it, as desirous to lose no occasion for the reuniting to his Realm the largest
of those Provinces which had been dissever'd from it ever since the declining
of the second Race.

Simon Earl of Monfort the greatest and most fortunate Captain of his Age, had
gained Languedoc from several petty Albigensian Princes, who at that time had
possessed it; but Amaureus his Son could not keep it, the Albigenses recovered
again the best part of it, and Amaureus chose rather to give up the rest for
the Constable's Staff of France, than to stand out till he was deprived of all
without any Recompense. He had yielded up his Right to the most Christian King,
and his Majesty being engaged in this War, as well for his own proper Interest,
as those of Religion, had a Rendezvous in Berry of all the Forces he could
bring together, as well his own as those of his Feudataries, with which he sat
down before the Town of Avignon, where the Albigenses after they were forced to
quit the Field, had brought the choice of all their Troops.

There was no want in the Town either of Provision, or any warlike
Accomodations which were then in use, nor were the French without Intelligence
thereof, yet they desisted not from attacquing the place, but by Reason of the
death of the famous Guy Earl of St. Paul, to whom they had been obliged for the
victory of Bovines, and of the wounding of 4000 of their men, besides, 2000
more slain in the ditches, they were forced to change the Siege into a Blockade.

The Besieged for all this were soon brought to a Capitulation, and the King
found therein the Keys of all the Albigensian Towns, except those of Toulouse;
the Year was too far advanced and the Soldiers too much tired to begin a new
Siege: Besides, it was impossible the French Cavalry could subsist about
Toulouse in regard the Albigenses had plough'd all the Meadows thereabout.
However, it was thought expedient not to lie at too great a distance from the
place, for two several Reasons, the one, to hinder the Spaniards from drawing
together those succors which they had promised to the Albigenses, the other,
because the French Army consisting chiefly of those Troops which the
Feudataries of the Crown had levied, had they been suffered to march home; the
Spring and the best part of Summer (so tardy must their return have been by
reason of the length of the way) would have been gone before, they could have
turned to the Siege of Toulouse. Upon this account it was that the King
resolved to take up his Winter Quarters in the Neighboring Provinces to
Languedoc, and had his Headquarters at Mont -- a Castle situate upon the
Frontiers of Auvergne. The design was new, there had scarce been any Example
thereof, since the Reign of the third Race in France, however, it might have
been the occasion of shrewd Inconveniences, and the Feudataries had infallibly
opposed it, should the King have gone about to put it in execution, without
having first obtained their consent in a Council of War.

It was in a full Council that the King discoursed them concerning this Affair,
but in such Terms as on the one side represented how absolutely necessary it
was for the whole Army to quarter in those places, on the other side, testified
the high Satisfaction he should take in gaining their Consents, he wanted but
little of his desire, all the Feudataries gave their hands except the Earl of
Champaign: the Queen then resided at Paris, and the Court was no longer able to
endure her absence. He thought himself sure of seeing her within a very short
time. And you may well imagine how it would relish with the most impatient of
all men living, to meet with a fresh Rencountre, that should debar him the
sight of his Mistress a whole Year longer. Thus netled therefore as he was, I
am not said he, in a full Council, against the Complaisance of the rest of the
Feudataries, but for my own part, I think it just, to stand so far upon my
Rights and Privileges, as to draw off my Troops into Brie.

This Answer seemed to proceed from nothing but a haughty, proud Resolution,
but the King was not so slow of apprehension as not to pierce into the true
Reason. His Majesty had just cause enough of anger against him upon such an
occasion, as had the rest followed his Example, might have proved of fatal
Consequence, and left him abandoned of all; nor could he refrain from
reproaching the Earl for this Affront, and threatening him, if he persisted
longer in these Expressions, to fall into his Territories with Fire and Sword.
The Earl who hated the King no less than he loved the Queen, pretended that his
Majesty ought to have showed some kind of respect toward him, and have treated
him rather as an Equal, than as a Vassal, since he was Heir to a Crown; that he
ought to take notice of those Menaces as serious, and not words of Course,
considering what extremity the Kings obstinate humor had transported him to,
he being too exact an observer of his word in such Cases. It was indeed above
an Age since Brie and Champaign had been absolutely free from all the
Calamities of War, and such was the plenty in general of the whole Country,
that the French Army might have found very good Quarters there, had it stood
with the Interest of the Kings Affairs. This Crime was the most heinous of any
the Earl had been yet taxed with, but it will appear by what has been already
said, that he was no Novice in committing the blackest of Enormities. Moreover,
his imagination agitated by the different passions which had got the Mastery of
him, began to entertain an Idea of Parricide as of absolute necessity at this
time.

He could not resolve upon attempting the Kings Life by open force, at a time
when he had all his Troops about him, nor was the way of Assassination much
more safe; It was now many Ages since any of the French Monarchs had been taken
off by this way, so ready the Nobility had been to take part with them, and to
revenge all designs whatsoever put in practice against. them.

No way was left but poison, and the French, who from the very first beginning
of the Monarchy, had had this practice in the greatest detestation, began
insensibly to have an inclination to it, whether it were that they were of late
grown more Ingenious in Malice, or that they had learned this way of giving
their Enemies a dispatch, either from the Infidels against whom they had born
Arms, or from the Greeks with whom they had of late been more than formerly
conversant. What kind of poison it was that the Earl gave the King was never
absolutely discovered, but sure enough, for the greater Secrecy of the matter,
such a Dose was given him as caused a lingering distemper. The King dissembled
for many days the violence of the Feavour which inwardly confum'd him, nor did
he to the very last so much resent the pain he endured, as the disturbances
likely to ensue as to public Affairs; Jealousy for its greater Satisfaction
finds out peculiar ways of taking Vengeance. The Earl had the pleasure before
he parted to see the King languishing on his death bed, and to foresee that his
leaving him in that Condition would augment his grief and vexation of Spirit.
However, he had the confidence for all this to go and wait upon the Queen, as
presupposing that she could hardly suspect the true cause of her Husbands
Malady; or at least, if she should come to under-it, she would be obliged to
conceal her knowledge, because of the need she would have of his assistance in
obtaining the Regency; Nor was it long e're the King finding his end to draw
near, made his Will, in which he appointed the Queen to be Governess of her
Eldest Son, and Regent of the Kingdom. He dyed thesventh of November, 1226, in
the 39th. Year of his Age, This last Will and Testament met with no opposition
on; whether it were that the Princes of the Blood and Nobility of the Realm
were wrought upon by those pathetical discourses which he made to them upon his
death bed, to oblige them to pursue his Interests; or, that their wavering
minds had not yet fixed upon those measures which were to be taken for a Revolt
intended; or, had they indeed been ready for any such design, they were watched
too narrowly by the Queen to bring it to Effect; For, notwithstanding she was
left a Widow at a Conjuncture capable of disheartning a Princess, who, though
of wit and spirit enough, yet wanted two qualifications which might render a
woman's Government supportable to the French Nation, that is to say, Credit and
Experience; however, she endeavored by all means possible to inform her self
of the Genius of a People she was to govern, and eafily apprehended that the
best way to prevent what ever designs might happen to be broached in France,
was to carry with all speed her Eldest Son St. Lewis to Reims, to be there
anointed King; and that nothing would so much conduce as this Ceremony to keep
within the bounds of their Allegiance a People, prepossessed with an opinion of
his being hereby made a partaker in the Sovereign Power. The extraordinary
haste that was made for the King's Journey into Champaign, hindered the Grandees
and Nobles from accompanying the King with the Splendour and Magnificence usual
upon such occasions, notice only was given, that the King was willing to
dispense with the trouble and charge of those great preparations, expecting
their Attendance in person only without any pompous Train, or numerous Retinue,
which in such an Affair as this would be but trouble-some and apt to breed
disturbance. This Ceremony was performed in the beginning of December 1226, by
the Ministry of the Bishop of Soissons, Premier Suffragan of the Archbishopric
of Reims, whose seat was then vacant. But Philip of France, the Kings Paternal
Uncle, first Prince of the Blood, Earl of Boulogne and Clermont, whether it
were that he took Exception to see himself preceded by the Peers of France, at
the Kings Inauguration, or, because the Regent had not confirmed the
Augmentation of his Appenage, which was promised him when he gave his content
to her being made Regent, what ever it were he repented him of what he had done
when it was but just too late to revoke it; He was the first man that labored
to destroy his own work though no man was more concerned than himself to
preserve it entire. He came short in deeds of Arms both of his Father and his
Brother, but equaled them both in wit, and surpassed them in Vigor and
Address: and though there were no other proofs then the Intreagues hereafter
mentioned, they are sufficient to discover him the most subtle, and dextrous
Prince of his Age. He represented, both by word of mouth and by writing, to all
the Nobles of the Realm, how they had been circumvented, how that a Spanish
Woman had found a way how to deprive them of the fruit of all their labors,
and that notwithstanding those Conquests which had been gained by Philip the
August in a War of 50 Years, to avoid falling under the English Power, and the
coming off with so much glory in so difficult an Enterprise, they were now in
danger of falling under that Yoke whereof in former times they had so universal
a dread; That the Queen whom they had declared Regent, was indeed born in a
Country which hitherto had neither any Antipathy nor Interest with France, but
that she was in Effect English, and neither could, nor ought to be considered
as others wise, though at a time when she took upon her the Government of the
French. That she was the daughter of Eleanor, Princess of England, and
Grandchild of a Queen of the same Name, who had detached Guien from the Crown
of France to unite it to England. That though she was the daughter of Alphonso
(surnamed the Noble) King of Castile, yet she was not married to the late King
Lewis as Infanta of Spain, but as Princess of the Royal House of England, where
the Daughters are called to the Succession of the Crown for want of Issue Male.
That this Marriage had been resolved on in a solemn Treaty with the English.
That the King of England had endowed her with the Earldom of Eureux, and 30000
Marks of Silver, and therefore had reason to expect from her a Recompense
proportionable to the establishment he had settled upon her. That nothing less
could be expected but giving back the Provinces conquered from King John
Lackland, which would be to the prejudice even of those Children which she had
brought into the World.

That it was the Regent's humor to desire rather to be accounted an ill
natured than an ungrateful Person, that this only consideration was sufficient
to render her unworthy of the administration of the French Monarchy; but that
there was another also no less apparent, nor no less considerable which was
this: The late King had formed a design, and put a good beginning to it of
uniting Languedock to the Crown, the chief obstruction to which by reason of
his Majesty's untimely death, would be the not taking of Toulouse; the Regent,
besides, that she was incapable of such an Enterprise, being too much concerned
as a Native of Spain, in opposing by all means possible the growth of the
French Monarchy on the Pirenean side, not to put off the Siege to another time,
under pretense of the Minority of the King her Son, when ever she should be
constrained to undergo the Importunities that must needs be made to her upon
this account, that the only Remedy to prevent these two Inconveniences would be
to depose the Queen from her Regency, and to put in her stead a Prince who on
the one side should have no obligation to the English, and on the other side
would be capable of commanding the Army designed for the taking of Toulouse.

This Harangue which the Earl made use of in the Nature of a Manifesto, laid
down nothing which in the main was not exactly true, but withal it was
enfeebled by a contradiction too plain to be unperceived. In the beginning of
his discourse, he presupposes her English, designing thereby to raise an Odium
against her upon the account of the Aversion she must needs have for France, on
the contrary, at the latter end, he will have her a Native of Spain on purpose
to render her suspected, and incapable of pursuing the Conquest of Languedock.
However, this Oration had almost all the success the Earl could promise himself
from it, since thereby he engaged to his Party the two sorts of People which
were then of most Credit in France, that is to say, those who had a more than
ordinary passion for the Grandeur of that Monarchy, and those who less soaring
in Ambition, pleased themselves, with the thought that this would be a great
means of rooting out the Heretics, and were carried on with wonderful
Application toward the Conquest of Languedock, as imagining it another holy
War; Of this number were the Duke of Burgundy, the Earls of March, St. Paul and
Bar; whose Association was of great importance to the Earl of Boulogne, and so
much the more for that they thought themselves tied to his Interests by the
strongest of humane Bonds to wit, Zeal, no matter whether true orfalse.

Having thus secured those who pretended to serve him out of pure inclination,
he made it his next business to gain those who act in all things as humor or
interest leads them: of this sort of persons the Earl of Champaigne was the
first he addressed himself to. This Prince found not that return of Love from
the Queen which he thought his Services merited, nor was he very much surprised
thereat, whether it were that he imputed the Queens Insensibility to those
impressions which the surviving Love of her deceased Husband had left in her
heart, or that he believed the case of her Honor obliged her to keep within
the bounds of exact decorum, at a time when she knew the Eyes of the whole
world would be upon her: but he was more thoroughly convinced of the vanity of
persisting in his Love, when he saw that the Queen, after she had taken upon
her the Regency, treated him no otherwise than common Civility obliged her to,
and that she neglect-him so far as not to make him a sharer in the Government
by giving him a place in the Council of State: his impatient humor stirred him
up to high complaints of her slighting Usage. Whereupon the Earl of Bologne who
was neither ignorant of his Amors, nor his ill success therein, concluded the
best way to draw him to a Revolt, would be to heighten his jealousy.

The Pope had sent Legate into France, a Prelate altogether agreeable to that
Court: he was called Romanor, being a Native of Rome of the lowest rank of the
Populacy; nevertheless, he was endu'd with such qualities as made him appear a
person of real Grandeur in all places wherever he came: he had an excellent
shape of body, and for a gallant Mien was not equaled by any; his delicate and
quick parts made him pass for a Miracle of wit, and the rather for that it was
very rare in that Age. In fine, all Europe could not boast so complete a
Courtier: to him France owed the Conquests that had been made in Languedock;
for it was he that called the Council at Bourges, wherein the continuation of
the war against the Albigenses was decreed; he that had disposed all the
Nobility of the Realm to serve in this Expedition at their own Charge; he that
had excommunicated anew the Earl of Toulouse; he that took off the Fathers of
the Council from showing him any favor, when he came in as a penitent at a
time when they least expected it. This induced the Queen to have a particular
respect for the Legate, whether moved by the mere consideration of his Merits,
or thinking her self obliged to treat with more than ordinary Civilities a
Minister of the Court of Rome, and one whose assistance she mainly stood in
need of to complete the Conquest of Languedock, and to keep the French in
subjection and obedience during so long a Minority; She consulted him in all
important affairs, followed his advice above all others, and of those passant
Civilities he desired for any of his friends she denied him none; these things
added so much to the count of Champaign's jealousy, that the Malcontents
could have wished for no better opportunity to bring him over to their Party.

The Earl of Boulogne represented to him that he ought in reason to disengage
his heart from a Spanish woman, who had been so lavish of hers as to part with
it to a Priest, and that he could not in honor have any other Sentiments for
her, than those of abhorrence and revenge, for the injury she did to the Memory
of her deceased Husband. There is nothing a man inclines to. more than to
believe things areas he would have them.

The Earl how ever was at a loss, and knew not what to think of her manner of
treating him; he could not imagine that so young and fair as she was, she could
confine her self all her life long to a languishing and disconsolate
Widow-hood, having an overture, which she might be glad to embrace, of enjoying
in second Nuptials the Heir presumptive of the Crown of Navarre; ail this while
he saw plainly that this Princess had no disposition to make him happy, though
to her own advantage; and since he could not dive into the true cause, and was
not satisfied with any of those he revolved in his mind; he fixed upon that
which had been suggested to him, never examining the probability of it, or
considering that it was infinitely more ridiculous than any thing he could
imagine beside.

Thus imputing the Queens indifference for him, to the love which it was
surmised she had for the Legate; upon this sullen supposition he resolved upon
the suppressing of a passion, with which he was even ready to burst. Upon this
he entered into the Earl of Boulogne's Party, and drew along with him his
Brother of Arms, Hugo de Dampmartin, Count of Ponthieu, whose Eldest Brother
was Renald, Count of Dampmartin, Auscon, Islebon, and Domfront. He having
married the Niece of King Philip the August, took the boldness and Authority
upon him, under pretext of this Alliance to besiege, and having taken it, to
raze down to the ground a Castle belonging to the Bishop of Beauvais, a Prince
of the blood, and Cousin German to the said Philip the August, who, glad of an
occasion to bring down this Count of Dampmartin, whom he knew to be the most
turbulent and dangerous person of his whole Realm, took speedy course with him,
and confiscated all his Estate. The Earl thus reduced from his former height
to a dependence upon others for maintenance, was forced at last to beg the
Kings pardon, but in vain; for all the Answer he could obtain of the King was,
that though he had no obligation to give an account of his actions to any one
whatsoever, yet nevertheless, he was content to remit the hearing of all
matters in Controversy to the Chamber Royal, and the Barons of the Realm.

But this proposal relished not at all with the Earl, for besides that he
expected no other than to be condemned, if they should proceed to the utmost
rigor against him; he knew well enough the power and credit his Majesty had in
that Court where he was to plead. So that seeing no other remedy, he took part
with the English, and had the misfortune to be taken with other Prisoners at
the Battle of Bovines, where he had languish'd out a long Confinement, though
in a spacious Prison, of about 22 Years, his Brother the Earl of Ponthieu not
being able to procure his Releasement. And indeed the two last Kings, Philip
the August, and Lewis the 8th. and after them the Regent, had ever held it as a
sure Political Maxim, that it very much imported to keep in durance all his
life time, that Vassal of theirs who was most potent and formidable, so long as
there was any advantage to he taken without any absolute violation of Justice;
so that there was no probability of this Earls deliverance but by force of
Arms. The Earl of Boulogne promised Ponthieu to act with all the vigor
requisite upon such an occasion for the setting his Brother free; and that if
it were not done before the Overtures of a Treaty of peace, the said Treaty
should never be concluded but upon Condition he were first released

The Earl of Boulogne being thus assured of those Feudataries who were nearest
about the heart of the French Monarchy, made it his next design to gain those
who were more remote, and more especially addressed himself to Jane Countess of
Flanders, and Hainault. This Princess was married to Ferdinand Infant of
Portugal, and Eldest Son of King Sanchius, who according to the Custom of the
Cadets of noble Families, had sought his Fortune in France, and behaved himself
like one of those old Knights errant so renowned in Story; and in truth he
lighted upon better fortune than ever he could have hoped for. Balduin Emperor
of Constantinople dying without Issue Male, had left King Philip the August
Tutor to his daughter Princess Jane, with power to marry her to whom he thought
fit. The King having a good opinion of Ferdinand's Merit; or, else not willing
to bestow her upon a French man, for fear of making him too potent, matched her
to this Portuguess, who had not made his pretension to her, but as resolving to
stand in Competition with any pretenders whatsoever, though their hopes were
built upon never so much better a Foundation. But no sooner was Ferdinand by
this Match become Master of two Estates, more considerable at that time than
the Crown of Portugal it self, but he stained his Reputation by a most horrible
Ingratitude. He suffered himself to be deluded by the same Renald de
Dampmartin, whom we have already mentioned, so far as to bear Arms for the
English against his Benefactor; for which deservedly he had the same fate,
being likewise taken Prisoner at Bovines, after he had received six wounds in
the body by the valiant Hugode Marevil, a Gentleman of Xaintogne. However, his
being taken Prisoner, troubled him nothing near so much as the course they took
with him afterward; for the King, who knew him to be the proudest Prince of
that Age, knew also what would most touch him to the quick, and bring down the
pride of his haughty heart; he caused him to be led in Triumph through the
Streets of Paris, in which disgraceful march he was saluted with such kind of
Language as the Mobile commonly bestow upon persons of his Circumstance. After
he had been kept for some time without any other hopes than of perpetual
Imprisonment, it was thought fit to give him up a Freeman to the tears and
submissions of his Wife, who was come to cast her self at the Kings feet, and
to let him live in peace, only all the strong places of Flanders and Hainault
were to be rased to the ground. Hereupon, he was shortly to have been released
upon Geoffry Son of the Earl of Brabant his standing surety for him; but
whether it were that Geoffry refused to yield to that clause of the Treaty, or,
that the King had taken fresh displeasure from any words Ferdinand had let fall
since this Negotiation, he was still kept a Prisoner, and his Wife thus
frustrated of her hopes of seeing him again at liberty, yielded to the first
invitation made to her of entering into the League; The Earl of Boulogne
encouraged by this so speedy and prosperous success, made his next Address to
two Brothers Princes of the Blood, viz. Peter Duke of Bretaign, and Robert Earl
of Dreux: As for the Duke of Bretaign, he was no less obliged to the Crown of
France, then the Earl of Flanders, and his Ingratitude was of no less tendency
to the violation of all Right and Justice.

Now for the better understanding of an Entreague which has not been
sufficiently made known, neither in the History of France, nor of any other
Nation, it is to be noted, that Rollando, the first Duke of Normandy, compelled
by force of Arms, the first Earl of Bretaign, to do him Homage for his Earldom,
in the same manner as the Dukes of Normandy have since done Homage for their
Dutchies to the Kings of France, that is to say, Bretaign became an arrier-fief
to the Crown of France. In this State it continued till the death of Covan --
Earl of Bretaign, who left Issue only one daughter named Constance. This rich
Heiress was courted by many, but Henry the second King of England pretended, as
Duke of Normandy, the Right of Marriage, and partly, by his Authority, partly,
by his Addresses of Courtship, obtained her, and had four Sons by her, Henry,
Richard, Geoffry, and John. He designed to leave to Henry the Crown of England,
to Richard the Provinces of Normandy, Main, Anjou, and Tourain, which fell to
him by Succession from his Father and Mother, and the Provinces of Guien, and
Poictou, which he had in Marriage by his former Wife Eleanor. Between these two
young Princes and the two daughters of the most Christian King Lewis the 7th.
there was a solemn Treaty of Marriage, and the King of England had Interest
enough to bring both to effect. John his 4th Son was designed for
Ecclesiastical Preferment; so that a Match having been proposed between the
Heiress of Bretaign, and the house of England, she must now of necessity be
married, if to any, to Geoffry King Henry's third Son. In fine, the was married
to him upon considerations merely Political, for his person was no way taking
with the young Lady; but his death soon delivered her, and left her to a second
Marriage more to her content; for she her self then made choice of Guy de
Thouars, a Knight, the handsomest and bravest person of his Age, by whom she
had but one daughter; her first Husband had left her big with Child of a Son
named Arthur, whose death was the more unhappy, for that he was deprived
thereby of such an accumulation of Successions; that of England and the French
Provinces thereunto appendant, fell to him by the death without Issue of his
Fathers two Eldest Brothers; and Bretaign being his at the same time in Right
of his Mother, he had doubtless in prospect, had he lived, the vastest Monarchy
that had been known since the partage of the Imperial Dominion of Charles the
Great; but John surnamed Lackland the only Uncle, who survived, procured his
death to get his Estate, and by this means the daughter of Guy de Thouars,
became sole Heiress of the Earldom of Bretaign. Philip the August, who taking
advantage of the villainy of John Lackland, had reunited the Duchy of Normandy
to the Crown of France, pretended that since Henry these cond, King of England,
had power as being Duke of Normandy, to dispose of the Mother, he both as Duke
of Normandy, and King of France together, had so much the better Title to
dispose of the daughter. The branch of Dreux was at that time the most proper
branch of the Royal Family: his appennage was small, he had neither Office nor
Government, his Alliances had not enriched him, and it was to be feared he
might lose his Rank for want of Estate; as it happened some time since, to the
branch of Cortenai, supposing his publih'd Genealogy be altogether exact. This
made Philip the August the more willing to give the Heiress of Bretaign to
Peter de Dreux, with this Condition, that Bretaign should henceforth be
immediately held of the Crown of France, that is to say, that it should no more
do homage, to whoever should be Masters of Normandy, in case that Province
should ever be again dismembered from the Crown. The Condition was advantageous
to both the new married Parties, since their Estates were now no longer held in
arrier fiefs; nor would depend for the time to come upon a single Duke of
Normandy, but only upon the first of Christian Kings. Nor did any one receive
prejudice by it, in regard Normandy was reunited to the Crown. No wonder then
if Peter de Dreux and his Wife accepted gladly the Condition, and observed it
in all particulars. But that soon befell the new Duke of Bretaign which is but
too frequent with men of slender virtue, that is to say, he suffered himself to
be drawn away, and transported by this flowing Tide of good fortune. The large
Extent of this Country of Bretaign, and its advantageous Situation, gave it a
very sufficient Title, and Merit in this Princes opinion to an absolute and
independent Sovereignty; besides, he was pleased to flatter himself with this
conceit that his carrying on so high a design, as the shaking of the French
yoke, would immortalize his Name to all Posterity: which great undertaking, the
better to accomplish, he was really persuaded that his siding with the Earl of
Boulogne, and his Party, was as fair an opportunity as he could have wished for,
taking it for granted, that if the Earl succeeded, he could do no less than
remit his homage of Bretaign in recompense of his declaring for him; In case he
did not succeed, the Regent in revenge, that she might oblige those Princes of
the blood, who had taken part with him, to desert him, would be glad to
condescend to what ever they should demand of her. Thus the Duke of Bretaign
turned Rebel upon false surmises, with which he fed his fancy; but the most
cross and untoward occurrence in his Revolt, was his drawing in upon a quite
contrary principle, his Brother Robert de Dreux.

This Person had a Soul so sensible of all benefits, and so prone to grateful
returns, that he thought he could not better testify the high obligation he
had to the Duke of Bretaign, for having left entire to him the Apennage of
their branch, than by serving him for, or, against whom soever he desired,
except the King. Thus he put himself under the Banner of the Malcontents, by a
Motive the most excusable that ever was, if any excuse can be admitted in
matters of Treason.

The last Prince of the blood that the Earl of Boulogne drew in to his Party,
was Robert of Courtenay, whom he found the more pliable to his Temptations by
discontent, because, the branch of the Dreux had been preferred before his by
the Match of Bretaign, and to engage him the more deeply, he had opportunity
given him to make himself Master of certain sums of the Kings money.

Raimond the 7th of that Name, Earl of Toulouse, surnamed the young, was before
hand with the Malcontents, to whom without staying for any Invitation from
them, he went and joined of his own accord, upon the first prospect he had of a
civil war. His main inducement to this proceeding, for he had none of those
pretenses which the rest made use of, was only to save himself by fishing in
other men's troubled waters. The Court of Rome, whose Thunders ruined without
Exception all those petty Princes upon whom they lighted, was altogether
inexorable toward this Prince, and would not quit him of those Ecclesiastical
Censures which had been pronounced against him, though the refusal thereof was
the greatest obstacle to the recovery of Languedoc, This Interdiction had so
powerful an ascendant upon his Subjects minds, that they thought they might be
very well excused from acknowledging him their Prince, with whom they were
forbidden to have any Communication or Correspondence, insomuch, as all the
relief and assistance he could get, was from those infected with the
Albigensian Heresy. This sort of people were at that time not so numerous as
the Catholics; and should the Regent take Toulouse, the Capital City of that
Country, there would be no possibility of the Counts reestablishment. So that
by thus engaging himself with the Malcontents, he thought on the one side let
the worst come to the worst, he could not be more unfortunate than he was in
that wretched Estate to which hehad been reduced; on the other side, the least
success should attend his Party would conduce to the recovery of his lost
Estate. The Earl of Provence, a Prince equally considerable, and his Cousin of
the house of Catalogue, came in last of the French into the Earl of Bolognes
Party, led by Motives which only concerned him at a distance; for he had no
reason to complain either of the most Christian Kings in general, or, of the
Regent in particular, against whom he could be no otherwise incensed, than by
those too deep reflections he made upon what might happen for the future, the
French as he thought, bordered too near upon Provence, their Neighborhood
rendered them suspected to him; when the French had a victorious King at the
head of them, his fear of being entangled in his Cousins Ruin kept him back
from aiding him against them; but after that this Warlike Prince was taken off
by Death, he thought, that though he could not yet with safety pluck off his
Vizard quite, and have recourse to open Arms in defense of the Earl of
Toulouse, who was yet but half ejected, he might at least securely act
underhand, so as to engage them the sooner in a Civil War, which was in a
manner already begun, to the end, he might give Advantage to the said Earl to
recover Languedoc, without being Obliged to any one but himself.

The greatest part of the Princes and Nobility of France being thus corrupted
by the Artifices abovementioned, the Earl of Boulogne's Faction was in all
appearance strong enough not to stand in need of the help of strangers, yet
nevertheless it was resolved no Aids should be refused, of how little necessity
soever; as if it were not enough for France to be torn in pieces by its own
Hands, but it must also borrow those of the most Ancient and Formidable Enemy.

King Henry the Third of England was a great Masterpiece of Fortune, that is
to say, he was equally an Object of her Favors and her frowns; he had for his
Father a Homicide, an Atheist, a Person dethroned, and under all Ecclesiastical
Censures, which followed him so close he could neither get Food nor Harbor but
in places and among People where he was not known: The Son had his share in all
these Calamities, but they attended him no longer than during the Life of him
who had drawn them upon his own Head. God, who, when he goes about to punish
Crimes, has an Eye upon the principal Actors, took pity on the House of
England. As soon as this Monster which it brought forth was cut off, Providence
was particularly concerned for Henry the Third, the Innocent Son of this so
Criminal Father, and settled him in the Throne of England, when there was not
the least likelihood he should ever ascend it; and this Affair, which seemed
altogether impossible by all the Intrigues of Policy, was brought to pass
almost in a moment, and that without either Trouble or Molestation, or Expense
or Blood.

There remained nothing now but to recover those Provinces of France which had
been won from England by Philip the August: And Henry thought now to compass
that, without striking a stroke, which he in vain attempted by force of Arms in
the Reign of King Lewis the 8th. viz. the re-uniting those Provinces to the
Crown of England, and that by pretending to take part with the Seditious
French, supposing the Regent finding it impossible to oppose him, and at the
same time to defend her self from those that went about to degrade her, would
immediately upon notice of his Landing in France with a puissant Army, seek for
an Accommodation, and offer him all that had been taken from the English, on
Condition he would turn those Arms against the Rebels which he had designed for
their assistance. So that he had no sooner received the Earl of Boulogne's
Message, which was merely to sift out of him, whether or no he inclined to
concern himself in the bickerings which were beginning in France, but he raised
a far more puissant Army than any of his Predecessors had ever led against any
of the most Christian Kings; moreover, under pretense of Obliging the
Malcontents the more, he undertook to Command the Army in Person, and to be
at all the Charges of Levying and Transporting sporting it; but the real truth
is, his going in Person was rather to hinder them from Treating with him by
Writing, choosing rather by his Personal presence to have an Ear open to such
Propositions as he presumed the Regent would soon make to him. Behold here the
whole Foundation of the League concerted under the Minority of St. Lewis, never
was there any one so Potent, or so cunningly driven on since the establishment
of the French Monarchy; nor can the Abilities of Queen Blanch be any way better
understood or expressed, than by the recounting of those Intrigues by which she
wound her self out of the most troublesome Exigences that ever Heroic Virtue
was reduced to, and made a shift to preserve the Crown in all its luster for
the King her Son.

The Malcontents had carried their Affairs with so much precaution and
Secrecy, that the Court had not the least Intelligence of them, and all the
suspicion the Regent had, was only grounded upon two actions, subject enough to
a dubious construction; the one was the great care which the Earl of Bologne
took to Fortify Calais, the Town of his Apennage, and the usual place of
Landing for the English; The other was the re-inforcement of the Garrisons which
the Duke of Bretaign had put, at the request of the late King, into the Castles
of St. James, Beuron, and Belesm. As there was just reason to apprehend that
these two Innovations happened not but upon some Mysterious account, the Regent
took an occasion hereupon immediately to bethink her self of her own safety;
and not knowing as yet either the number or the quality of those that had
combined for her Destruction, all that her Prudence could suggest to her, was
to give Order to those Military Officers who had most eminently testified their
Fidelity to her Husband, to raise what possible Force they could. It Is hard to
resolve, whether it were by Choice or good hap, that matters succeeded
according to her wish, but this is certain, that they acquitted themselves like
Men of Honor in the Commissions she gave them, and brought their Troops timely
enough into the Field to save the State, by preventing the Earl of Bologne from
seizing upon his Nephew the Young King, and by an Action so seasonable, even to
finish the War as soon as it was begun.

The Earl thus frustrated of his first Design, foresaw that it would not be so
easy a matter as he first fancied to himself to Degrade his Sister-in-Law,
wherefore the better to make sure of his Accomplices, he endeavored by all
means possible to make them irreconcilable with the Regent. He knew where the
greatest part of the Kings Treasure was kept, and there it was that he made his
second Effort, accordingly he seized on it, and distributed it to those of his
Party, with this Condition, that those who were nearest to him should have the
greatest share. This done, he led them toward Calais, there to join the King
of England, who following the measures he had taken from the Malcontents, was
to make his Descent at that very time. But there is nothing so uncertain as the
managing of great Enterprises, by reason of that general concourse of different
Causes whereupon they depend for success.

The Regent lost neither her Courage nor her Judgment at a conjuncture when on
the one side she had little or nothing to hope for; and on the other, very much
to fear. Never was there known to come out of her Mouth either Complaint or
Reproach. She knew exactly the bad condition of her Affairs, and used all the
Art of Dissimulation she was capable of to conceal what she thought, for fear
of discouraging those faithful Persons she had remaining about her. She guessed
at the Earl of Bologne's Design from the very moment he took his March, and
wisely gained her Advantage by the needless stop he made in Eureux, for the
hindering of his passage. Moreover, as she concluded that France was in all
likelihood inevitably lost if the Malcontents should join the English, she
had recourse to an Artifice which I cannot but stand astonished that no
Historians ever yet made mention of. There was in England a Person named Hubert
de Bourg, so considerable in all respects, that he was equaled by no Man,
either in Favor or Merit; he had a Wit beyond the Common rate, and his shape
was such as what Poets use to attribute to Heroes. He was at once both the most
accomplished Cavalier and the most expert Captain of his Nation; and never was
there Englishman a truer Lover, and more Zealous Patriot of his Country: He
served both King and Kingdom to that degree, that both had an equal share of
Obligation to him. It was by him that the Crown had been preserved in the
Family of the Plantagenets, and that England had not been made a Province to
the Crown of France. He defended to the utmost Normandy and Guien against
Philip the August, and had successively in the chief places of both these
Provinces held out long Sieges, and by his obstinate Resistance ruined whole
Armies, never yielding to come to Capitulation till such time as the very
Horses were all eaten up. Even the French his Enemies both admiring and
honoring him for his Valor, thought they could never enough commend him when
they saw him here in England; and how just their Commendations were, he ceased
not afterward to give them fresh demonstrations, since he alone it was who
snatched out of Prince Lewis his hands the Conquest of this Island. He it was
who by his Gallantry recovered the Town of Dover, and Defended it with that
perseverance, that all the French Forces sent against it, were not able to
re-take it. He afterward beat them twice, once at Lincoln, another time before
Bedford. In fine, he it was, who having disposed the English to acknowledge
him, set King Henry upon his Throne.

And as the Obligation of this King Henry was very great, so His Majesty's care
and study to recompense him was no less; he conferred upon him all the Principal
Offices in the State, except that of High Admiral, for he was Grand Marshal,
Lord High Treasurer, and Chief Justiciary all at one time. He bad the Charge of
the Transportation of those Troops which were designed for France, which Trust
while he was discharging with his ordinary care and vigilance, he received at
that very juncture a Present of 5000 Marks of Silver with a Letter which neatly
and wittily rallied upon his Vanity, by insinuating to him, that to make
himself the most Illustrious Person that ever England bore, he who had lately
settled the Crown of England upon the Head of Young King Henry his Master,
maugre all the Force of France, ought now to make it his next business to set
the Crown also upon the Head of the Young King of France, against all the
united Forces both of his own Subjects, and of England.

The weakness of Humane Nature never discovers it self more plainly than when
in a moment it yields to lesser Temptations, when at other times it has for a
long while withstood greater. This was the Case of Du Bourg, who after he had
been inflexible to the vast Offers of Philip the August and Lewis the 8th.
suffered himself at last to be overcome with a petty Present and a poor
frivolous bait of Vain glory offered him by a Foreign Princess. He Equipped
forth but half the number of Ships necessary for the Transportation of the
English Army; and when the Noblemen, who had almost all in general provided to
attend the King personally in this Expedition, came to Dover to see their Goods
disposed of on board the Ships, there was not room nor Convenience found for
them; nor could it be doubted but that either the Knavery or Negligence of Du
Bourg was the cause, whereupon immediately Complaint was carried to the King.

Du Bourg was sent for to give an account to His Majesty, but when he came, he
made so lame a Defense for himself, that the King incensed against him, called
him Old Traitor, and drawing his Sword, had certainly run him through the Body,
had not the Earl of Chester, an intimate Friend of Du Bourg, put by the thrust,
and given Opportunity to other Persons interested in the Fortune of this
Favorite, to interpose in his behalf, and to avert His Majesty's displeasure
for the present. In the next place, they made him keep out of the way, till
such time as they had made his Peace, which was not long; for the King, however
touched in the most sensible and incurable part, namely, that of Ambition, yet
in the end suffered himself to be convinced that the old Obligations he had to
this his Favorite ought to weigh with him more than the injury lately
committed. He gave him his Pardon freely, and in some time received him into
his wonted Grace and Faour.

The Regent encouraged with the success of her first Project, namely, her
obstructing with so much ease the passage of the English Army over into France,
put in execution a second Design, as no less bold and difficult in appearance,
so also no less advantageous in case it succeeded: She was not ignorant how
strong and fervent a Passion she had raised in the Heart of the Earl of
Champaign, and had a shrewd conjecture that the despite of seeing himself
treated with so much indifference was the only cause which induced him to
engage with the Malcontents, and accept of the Supreme Command of their Army.
She had moreover too good an Opinion of her Charms, not to believe she could at
any time when she pleased reexcite the Earls Love, and by never so small an
expression of her Favor, call him back to his Devoir. It was now a fit time to
make proof hereof, and the Regent resolved to put it in agitation her own way,
that is to say, with an Air wherein to appear Obliging, she would nevertheless
remit nothing of her wonted reservedness.

The Message she sent to this doubly Revolted Lover was only this in short,
viz. That she should not be sorry to see him. And this Complement, though the
shortest and slenderest certainly that ever was in this kind, produced an
effect the strangest that ever was heard of in the French History in matter of
Love. It sufficed to tie the Earl more strongly than ever, to the Chains of his
Passion and her Interests, and to make him forget in an instant all the
Coldness she had ever showed toward him; he lost that acuteness of Wit which
was so Natural to him, and conspired with the Regent to deceive himself. He
fancied that all of a sudden she began to have a tenderness, though there were
all appearances imaginable to the contrary; and this fancy of his was so
strongly rooted, that he detached his Troops from the Rendezvous of those of
the League, under pretense of going to beat up one of the Quarters of the Kings
Forces, and carried them to join the Army which he feigned he was going to set
upon.

His Desertion put the whole party of the Rebels into such a disturbance and
confusion, that all the Princes and Grandees thereof were not able to compose
it. The most expedient way by which they thought to Remedy it, was immediately
to make choice of another General, and they had the good hap to agree
unanimously upon a Person whom they judged worthy to take upon him so important
a place; such an ascendent has extraordinary Merit even upon the most Criminal
minds. They all fixed their Eyes upon Enguerrand, the second of that Name, Lord
of Couci, a Gentleman of Piccardy, of a Reputation too well received for any
one not to submit to receive Orders from him. His Valor surmounted the common
rate of Humane Actions, and the proofs he gave of it in the Wars of the Holy
Land carried a greater semblance of Fable than of Truth, and might, though
true, have better passed for Romance than what we read in the most Romantic
stories. He had both Conduct and Honesty; and doubtless he had preserved the
Empire of Constantinople in the French Line, had they promoted his Marriage
with that Heiress, instead of Matching her imprudently, as they did, to Peter
of Auxerre.

For what reason he entered into the League against the Regent is not known,
but certain it is he refused the Command of their Army, and that not either for
want of Courage, or despairing of Success. All Men are not easily carried away
to all sorts of Crimes; and Heroic Virtue may, like the Sun, be capable of
some spots that may obscure it, but never be totally darkened, no more than this
King of Stars can wholly lose its Light. Couci moreover knew the vast
difference between barely being of a Party in a Revolt, and being the Head or
Chief of the said Party; and his Honesty became awake, if I may so say, when it
saw it self exposed to the most dangerous of Civil Temptations. He never
thoroughly foresaw the Consequences of his Engagment till he was just upon the
Precipice; that is to say, till he found that the Charge which the Confederates
would have conferred upon him was designed to spur on his Ambition, by lifting
him up to a higher pitch than ever he aspired to. Besides, he comprehended the
sense of those Mysterious words, and the quality of Parricide which lay lurking
underneath, startled him; he was afraid of losing, in his advanced Age, that
Glory which he had acquired in his Youth; and was unwilling to survive himself,
by suffering those Laurels to fade in France which he had gained in Palestine.
He testified so great an aversion for the Generalship, that they durst not
mention it to him a second time: And since the Memoirs which are extant of this
great Personage make no further mention of him, it is to be supposed he quitted
the League, and immediately retired to his Castle of Couci, there to spend the
remnant of his days in a more innocent and quiet course of Life.

His refusal augmented among the Rebels that Disorder which his acceptance
would have composed, and in fine, shattered them all to pieces. The Earl of
Toulouse, who had promised to take the Field, kept his Forces in their Quarters
in the Town which bears that name, and the Earl of Provence forbore to declare
himself till such time as he saw what Remedy could be applied to the making up
of these Breaches. His keeping off was no less happy than prudent; for as much
as the Earl of Bologne being now convinced that these Designs formed against
his Sovereign, could never succeed in the end, having so untoward a beginning,
was the first who quitted that Work whereof he himself had laid the Foundation,
and made an Accommodation apart with the Regent: What the Conditions were, is
not known, but sure enough they were not very Advantageous, since on the one
side his Apennage was not at all augmented, and on the other side, the Regent
had no Money to give him. A little after, the Earl of Dreux returned to his
Duty, obtaining only the confirmation of the partage made with his Brother the
Duke of Bretaign.

The falling off of so many Persons of the first Rank, one would think, had
been enough to have broken the League, nevertheless there were Princes and
Gentlemen enough still left to continue it, and the Regent knew well enough
that there would be a Party of the Rebels still on foot, so long as there might
with ease be sound a way to remove all pretext which should hinder them of a
Retreat in Bretaign and the Low Countries, in case they should chance to be
beaten in a Battle. It was a difficult matcer to remove all at once two such
grand Refuges; and the Regent, after she had along time exercised the utmost of
her Wit and Cunning, effected as yet but half of what she pretended to. The
Duke of Bretaign remained still inflexible, and Threats wrought now no more
upon him than Promises had done before, so that the Regent as much exasperated
as wearied out with the Obstinacy of this Prince, turned more efficaciously her
Policy another way.

It was now about a dozen Years, that the Earls of Flanders and Dampmartin had
lain languishing in Prison; and as these two Persons were very near both
Criminal alike, it seemed but just that there should be as little difference
put in the Favor which was to be shown them as there had been in their Guilt,
and was in their Punishment. But their Tempers were not equal; the Earl of
Dampmartin was of a Humor so ill contrived, that it was not possible to have
any kind of Indulgence for him which he would not be apt to abuse. The League
wanted a Head, and that very thing was sufficient to obstruct his Deliverance;
for had he been let out, he had certainly gone immediately and joined the
Rebels. The Earl of Flanders had more of Honor in him, and was not irregular
in matters of Generosity, except in such Rencounters where he distinguished it
not sufficiently from those Vices which are designed to pass for it; he had in
his Soul a fund of goodness, which facilitated his return to his Allegiance,
however he had been carried away by Passion or Weakness. The Regent being
informed of the strong part and the weak of this Portuguez Prince, resolved to
give him that Liberty which she denied the Earl of Dampmartin; and as she never
attracted so much Admiration as in matters of loud importance, so she
particularly accompanied this with so many Obliging Circumstances for the Earl
of Flanders, that he not only remained firm himself to the Interests of his
Benefactress, but also accepted of the Leave given him to return to his Wife,
merely upon this very account, that he might take her wholly off, as he did,
from the League, and oblige her to call home those Troops which she had sent
into the Rebels Camp.

The Entreagues of Court were succeeded by the formalities of Justice; the
Regent after she had disjointed the League, summoned the principal members to
meet in Parliament at Chinon, and afterward at Tours. The Members summoned
appeared neither at the first, nor second Citation, but when they were
commanded to appear the third time at Vendome, and had but twenty days time
allowed them for their appearance; they consulted among themselves what they
had best to do: The most furious of them were of opinion, that they might leave
the matter to be judged by Foreclusion, and only bring it to a review when the
war should be ended; but the wiser sort were of a contrary judgment, alleging
that it was always a troublesome thing to be cast in Causes of what nature
soever, and that an Arrest could not possibly come out against them without
leaving a blot upon their memory; Hereupon they concluded, that it would be
necessary to appear by Proxy, and if the Reasons they brought for the defense
of their Cause, were not sufficient to satisfy her, they would at least serve
to convince the People, that they were not so culpable as the Regent gave out;
but neither the one, nor the other of these Councils were followed, and the
resolution they took was like the way of all seditious Assemblies in this, that
they chose the very worst of all Expedients proposed. It was carried by the
plurality of voices, that the Princes and most eminent Lords of the League,
should repair to Vendome, with a very small Train, to persuade the Regent that
they had a sincere desire of a reconciliation with her, presuming, that the
Regent deluded by this fair pretense, would not fail to bring along with her,
or at least send, the King her Son, to Vendome, with a small guard, by reason
that on the one side, the presence of this young Monarch would be absolutely
necessary, on the other side, she would be cautious of giving the occasion of
suspicion to a People, who testified with so much frankness their readiness to
submit to their Sovereign, which would be obvious, in case they should see him
attended with a greater number than was usual upon such like Ceremonies; that
the Confederates who were Masters of Estampes and Corbeil, might without being
percei'd draw out of those two places, as many Forces as would be sufficient to
carry off the King; and that the Regent having lost him, by whom she held her
Authority, would be constrained to seek for an agreement with those whom she
seemed before so much to slight.

Who the Author was, of this pernicious Council, is not certainly known; some
Historians say it was the Duke of Bretaign, others, the Earl of March; but from
whose brain soever it proceeded, it was so exactly adjusted to the Conjuncture
of Affairs at that time, that nothing but Divine Providence which took
particular care of the preservation of St. Lewis, could have frustrated the
design. The most sagacious wisdom of this world has its Intervals, and
sometimes commits such failings as folly it self could not be guilty of
greater. Seldom are long administrations without some error, as if the
government of States were a kind of Sea, where at one time or other there must
needs be Shipwreck. The Regent had hitherto followed the Maxims of most
exquisite prudence, and her Enemies, who felt the sharp Effects thereof,
admired her no less than her friends, who had the advantage of it, but all was
spoiled at one dash; For whether it were that she hoped suddenly to conclude a
Peace, or, that she relied too much upon the judgments of her blind
Counselors; she sent the King her Son to Vendome with a very weak guard.

Never were there civil wars in France, but had this inconvenience attending,
namely, that the designs of one party, though never so secretly carried, were
in a moment known to the other; The Earl of Champaign had excellent Spies in
the Army of the League, and never failed of being informed from time to time of
whatever designs were formed among them, in regard the chief of those who were
most privy thereunto, held correspondence with him, consequently, he had
immediately notice of all the particularities of the design laid for seizing
the sacred person of the King. He advertised hereof the Regent who was then at
Paris; for there the Council of State detained her, as supposing the presence
of this Princess would discover the correspondences of the Rebels in that great
Town.

The Regent was not so much troubled, though heartily angry at her self, for
her indiscretion, at the error she had committed, as in pain, till she had
found out a way to remedy it, nor was it long e're her admirable inventive wit
prompted her to a way which answered her desires. She wrote to the King, who
was in the Bourg de Chastres, to secure himself in the Castle of Montleher,
till such time as she could send Forces sufficient to deliver him, and in
regard the Army Royal was at too great a distance, she had recourse to the
Citizens of Paris.

The Queen assembled all the Colonels, and other Officers from their respective
Quarters, and in a most pathetick thetick Speech represented to them the
greatness of the danger the King was in, and the more effectually to move her
audience, she gave frequent interruptions to her Speech with tears and sobs:
and after she had thus mollified their hearts, she pricked them on with the
thoughts of what immortal glory would attend them in being the Instruments of
their Monarchs Preservation: Moreover, she gave them to understand how little
hazard they would run, provided they made haste, since the Rebels who designed
to seize upon the King, at the passage of Estampes, would fall into their
mouths without going farther, the Colonels then having assured her that they
would presently go, and get their Companies together, and hasten their March,
she provided experienced Underofficers, to order and conduct them. The
Parisians arrived at Montleher sooner, and with greater force then could have
been imagined; and having drawn up in a large Battalion, they set the King in
the midst of them, and brought him back along with them to their Town, before
the Rebels had determined what measures were to be taken to oppose them: But by
the same way that the Earl of Champaign came to know their design, they came to
know that it was he who discovered it to the Regent. However, the extraordinary
desire which they had to be revenged of him, did not yet so far blind them, but
that they foresaw it would be incomparably more advantageous for them to make
use of the natural inconstancy of this Prince, and to draw him once more over
to their Party, than unseasonably to endeavor his present mischief. The Duke
of Bretaign, who had no Children but one Daughter, whose beauty was charming
enough to raise the drooping Spirits of an ill treated Lover, had she not been
endowed besides with a Province of large Extent, offered the Earl of Champaign,
provided he would take part with the League, to put into his possession the
Princess of Bretaign, and to permit him either to espouse her himself, or to
bequeath her to some other Prince of his house. This offer as advantageous as
it was, the Earl refused, whether it were that he was not yet persuaded, that
the Regent considered him no otherwise then as a property to be made use of,
or, as hoping the two last Services he had rendered her, would produce at
length the Effect which he had in vain expected, by all his former assiduities
once more; he made his Love triumph over his Ambition, and all the fruit he
drew from these Temptations, was to advertise the Regent thereof, to the end
she should be sensible, that if he yielded not, she was the sole cause The
Rebels more offended at his refusal, than they had been at his deertion,
conceived so implacable a malice against him, that they left the Regent to her
quiet and repose, and resolved to turn their Arms against Champaign; they
conspire his ruin by a particular Treaty, and as they foresaw that the Regent
was too much obliged to abandon him to people whom he had not quitted but for
her; they found a pretext so plausible, that she durst not apparently assist
him, without committing a notorious piece of Injustice.

Divine Providence had not utterly abandoned the two Nieces of the Earl of
Champaign, though defrauded of their Right, by their Uncle. The Eldest named
Alice, had the fortune to be married to Hugo de Lusignan, the first of that
Name, King of Cyprus; The goodness of Henry Father of this Princess, doubtless
procured her this Match, and the Lord of Joinvile, the most credible of all the
Historians that write of St. Lewis, has a passage concerning this matter,
which it will not be from the purpose here to abbreviate: Henry Earl of
Champaign, the Eldest Brother, and Predecessor of Thibault, was of so free and
liberal a disposition, to give to all sorts of People, especially the poor,
that he was thence sirnam'd the Large, that is to say, large hearted, or
bountiful. He had no particular Favorite, only there was one Artaud a Citizen
of Troyes, who had insinuated into his familiarity, whether it were, that there
was some conformity in their humors, or, that the Earl had the more
consideration, for Artaud, in regard he was the richest of his Subjects. One
day when they were together at Church, a poor Gentleman presented his two
daughters to the Earl, and besought him to bestow something upon them to marry
them off. They were handsome, and of an Age so fully ripe for Marriage, that in
case they stayed much longer unprovided for, it was to be feared their virtue
might be in danger. Artaud knew well enough that the Prince his Exchequer was
much exhausted, and brought low; and as he had many times taken upon him to
answer for the said Earl, without being thought ill of for his pains, so upon
this occasion he smartly told the Gentleman, that the Earls Liberality had
already brought him so low, that he had hardly any thing left to give.

There is nothing so ungrateful to the quality of a Prince as Poverty, and
therefore nothing so ill to be brook'd by them as the reproach thereof; The
Earl now incensed at the too much liberty, or, to say better, sauciness of
Artaud, told him he lied, and that he had yet enough to give, if it were but an
Artaud; and at the instant of his pronouncing the word Artaud, he made signs to
the Gentleman to seize upon the Citizen, and to demand what Ransom for him he
pleased. The Gentleman accordingly took hold of him, carried him away to
Prison, and there detained him till he had paid 500 Livres, which served for
Portions for the two Damsels.

The Rebels took hold of Count Henry's Liberality, to concern themselves in his
behalf to their own advantage, maintaining, that it was a thing not to be
endured, to see the Eldest Daughter of him who had relieved so many poor People
kept out from her hereditary Estate; and accordingly offered their assistance
toward her reestablishment. The Queen of Cyprus took them at their word, and
the Champaigneses seeing them enter their Country with two Armies, one
commanded by the Duke of Bourgogne, the other by Hugo de Lusignan, Earl of
March, let open the gates of all their Towns, before Earl Thibault could bring
up the Army Royal to their succor. The Rebels success gave them opportunity to
take new measures, they abandoned all the pretense they had formerly made use
of against the Regent, and declared themselves her Majesty's most humble
Servants, they protested they had taken Arms only to restore the Queen of
Cyprus to that Estate she laid claim to, they offered to lay down their Arms,
as soon as their most Christian Majesty's should have beheld with satisfaction
and approbation the reestablishment of this Princess, and to decide the
difference between her and her Uncle, by a fair combat, presuming, there were
no less than 300 Knights, as well on the one side, as the other. Their
Majesty's accepted the submission of the Rebels with this reserve, that they
were to have the Sovereign decision of the affair in hand, after they had tried
all ways which their prudence should suggest to them, to bring the Parties to
agreement, but that above all things it was expected his most Christian Majesty
should be invested with the Right of Sequestration, that is, should have the
Title of all the Estates in Controversy deposited in his Royal hands.

The Rebels who found that this Expedient would not turn to any account to
them, rejected it, and the Regent sent Forces enough into Champaign, to
dislodge the Earls Enemies. She foresaw in the end, that in pronouncing a
definitive Sentence upon so nice a Process, her Authority and Reputation would
be much exposed and brought into danger; for that if her Sentence were
favorable to the Earl of Champaign, all the French would be ready to tax he of
notorious Injustice, especially if she should make it her business in this
affair, to serve her pretended Lover, all the Satirical wits would begin to let
fly at her, with more fury than before: on the other side, if she should decree
the Queens reestablishment in her Estate, of the house of Champaign, she would
be liable to be censured of Ingratitude toward Count Thibault, to whom she owed
her Regency at least, if not her Life. In short, which way soever she gave her
Sentence, all outward appearances conduce to this persuasion, that the Arrest
would be subject to a review, because otherwise the Duke of Bretaign, and the
rest of the revolted Peers, would not have been assistant in it; so that the
business could not but go well on the fair one's side: and this the Regent
brought the better about by a trick, which in brief was as follows. She
represented to the Queen of Cyprus, that the Rebels sending for her, was but to
make her endure a long continuance of affliction, after a short flash of joy,
for that no sooner should she be put into the possession of her Fathers Estate
by their means, but she would be driven out again, and that she plainly foresaw
the Rebels would not be in a capacity of restoring her the second time;
wherefore since her engaging with them would signify so little to her, there
remained but one Expedient by which if she would take her advice, she might
come off with honor. That she had but one Son, who in regard he was obliged to
reside in Cyprus, would not be able to preserve the Inheritance of Champaign
any long time, though she her self should leave the peaceable possession of it
to him: that her daughters would never find Matches in Cyprus answerable to
their quality, that therefore it would be much better for her by yielding to an
accommodation with Count Thibault, to receive a present sum of money, and such a
portion of Land in France, as would put her into a capacity of matching her
daughters into Sovereign houses, than by standing out to be reduced to a
Condition of having nothing to give them.

The Queen of Cyprus was not without those failings which are usual with
persons of little or no experience in the World; she despaired of ever bringing
to pass those affairs, in which she was bauk'd at first, and had too much
impatience in the midst of ill fortune, to wait the turning of the Tide. She
had entertained a belief that it was not the will of God she should ever be
Countess of Champaign, because she had twice in vain made her pretensions to
it, and in the heat of this persuasion, she consented to a Treaty, without
communicating the affair to any of those that had been the occasion of sending
for her over into France: She was contented to accept of 40000 Livres of ready
money, and the Counties of Brienne and Joigni, for all she pretended to of her
Fathers and Mothers Estates.

Earl Thibault was not so indiscreet to refuse an agreement which was of such
advantage to him, but he wanted money, and the sum he was to raise was so
considerable, that his Subjects harrass'd by the quartering of so great Forces
as had lately been among them, were not able to furnish him, and no less unable
to assist him, were the rest of the Feudataries his friends; so that if it were
any where to be had, it must be had out of the Kings Exchequer; but the Regent
was too prudent to take any thing out from thence, but upon very good Terms,
and what ever obligations she and the King, her Son, had to the Earl, when all
things came to be weighed in the balance of Truth, it would easily appear that
he had done them as much harm as good, having poisoned the Father of the one,
and the Husband of the other. His power too great for any Vassal, gave him the
boldness to commit this crime, and the only way to be revenged on him for it,
was to reduce him to such a Condition, that his Successors should never dare
to have any thoughts of the like attempts, as not being able to execute them
with Impunity. In short, the design in hand was to weaken the house of
Champaign, and this present occasion was too favorable to be neglected. The
Regent waited the time when this Sum should be desired of her, and when the
business was moved, she made answer she was ready to lend, provided such
Security were given for the repayment thereof, as was fit to be accepted by a
King's Mother, and Governess. The Earl offered her Majesty to engage those
Counties he possessed in the heart of the Kingdom; but it was answered him,
that this kind of Engagement would be subject to grand Inconveniences and
hazards, both as to the repaiment of Principal and Interest; and the care which
was to be had to repair wastes, and make Improvements; that it became a
Governess to avoid as much as possibly she could, all kind of Embarasments in
the affairs of her Pupil: In fine, if the Earl had a mind to sell, she was
willing rather to purchase than to lend money. The Earl saw well enough that
they went about to ruin him, in so subtle a manner, as that he should have no
certain foundation or pretense of complaint; he was a man of too much sense and
spirit, not to be troubled to see himself thus dealt with, and to find by these
proceedings, that the Regent was far from ever having any inclination for him:
but it was no time now to declare his resentment, and he foresaw that in case
he refused to relinquish a part of his Inheritance, he should be sure to lose
all; Upon which he consented to sell the King, his Earldoms of Charters, Blois,
and Sancerre, and the Viscountship of Chateaudun; and out of the money of this
sale, Her Majesty deducted 40000 Livres which she paid immediately to the Queen
of Cyprus,

The Rebels by this Transaction being frustrated of the pretense, they had of
treating the Earl as an Enemy, and on the other side, not being able easily to
resolve upon forgiving him, found out another Expedient, which was no less
advantageous to their Party. They laid Treason to his Charge, impeaching him of
the untimely death of his late Sovereign Lord King Lewis the 8th. by poison
given him, and offered to undergo the severest penalties that could be
inflicted upon false accusers, if they did not plainly prove him guilty of two
Crimes, which rendered him unfit for humane Society, that is to say, of high
Treason against his Sovereign Lord, and of being a Traitor against his Country.
This they urged with Arms in their hands, and the danger which threatened the
Crown, from their impetuous heat, was thought so considerable, that all the
grand Ministers of the Kings Council were of Opinion, that the best way would
be to give, them some satisfaction. The Count himself was of the same Sentiment
for quietness sake, and it was with his own consent, that the Queen upon Treaty
with them, made the chief Condition of their laying down their Arms, to be the
Earl of Champaign's taking upon him the Croisada, and setting out immediately
for the holy Land, attended with a hundred Knights at least, to be maintained
at his own Charge.

This was a very notable Expedient, in regard it equally pleased both Parties;
For on the one side, the Earl found it very advantageous to him, in regard,
both his Crime met with a far gentler punishment than it really deserved, or he
could have hoped for, had he been brought to Trial; and his Reputation was in a
manner salv'd, by going in a crowd of so many innocent persons, as daily went
upon this Expedition, upon no other motive than their most ardent zeal. On the
other side, the Rebels also obtained what they desired; for, besides that they
had a long time of deliverance from their Enemy, and the satisfaction of having
put him upon an Expedition, from whence few valiant men live to return; If the
accusation wherewith they branded him were not made out in full, it was at
least in part, for admitting, there were among the Croisado'd Champions many
innocent persons, there were also many culpable; and as diverse Princes and
Great men led Armies over into Palestine, merely for the accomplishing of those
religious vows they had made for the recovery of the holy places, where Jesus
Christ had been conversant, and died for the Salvation of mankind; So there
were others, of no less grandeur, who undertook this Voyage, or rather
Pilgrimage, as a penance enjoined, and to obtain absolution of those
Ecclesiastical Censures, which they lay under. And this was the case of Henry
the second, King of England, who, for his Assassination of St. Thomas of
Canterbury, had this penitential Voyage enjoined him by Pope Alexander the
third, which our Earl of Champaign so willingly accepts.

Civil wars and the Defluctions of the body end much after the same manner,
that is to say, by discharging themselves all at once upon the weakest part,
and throwing on it a greater weight than it is able to bear. The French were
almost brought to a right understanding, yet nevertheless would not easily
consent to lay down their Arms; they earnestly pressed to be employed in
prosecuting the design of Lewis the 8th. and there was reason to fear, lest the
refusal of their demand might occasion new troubles. Never was there a fairer
prospect of the Conquest of Languedoc; the longer the delay, the greater would
be the difficulty, and the Interests of State were not to be neglected, so long
as they were seconded by those of Religion. In order hereunto, the Regent
resolved to drive the Earl of Toulouse to the utmost extremity; and the better
to assure her self of the greatest advantage possible in all humane appearance,
she made it her first business to deprive this Prince, whose ruin she
designed, of the surest refuge he had to trust to.

It has been already observed that the Earl of Provence was his Cousin, and a
Prince in like manner as himself, of the house of Catalogue. Languedoc had
expectation of assistance more ways than one. Those of Provence were in a
Condition to aid them, if not directly, yet at least indirectly, being at that
time the most free from war of any people in France, and their Prince the most
mony'd man of any Prince in Europe. Money was the main thing the Earl of
Toulouse wanted, and but for the want of which he could not have wanted
Soldiers, notwithstanding all the Excommunications thundered against him from
the Court of Rome. Above all things therefore the Earl of Provence must of
necessity be taken off; him the Regent knew to be a sincere man and a most
punctual observer of his word; wherefore she represented to him, by secret
Messengers, that he was now grown old, and could not, if he regarded his
health, and considered his true Interest, engage himself in the Earl of
Toulouse his quarrel, without drawing an inevitable war upon Provence, let him
use all the faution he could. That he had only our daughters, and the Earl of
Toulouse but one, so that since the house of Catalonia was drawing toward a
period, he could not better consult for the honor and advantage of his Family,
than by making an Alliance with that of France, which beyond all dispute, was
the noblest in the world. That the Eldest of the Provencian Princesses could
not be more happily matched than with the young King of France; that this
proposal was not so much upon the account of her Estate, as of her matchless
beauty, and the charming sweetness of her Nature; and to evince to the Earl
that this Alliance was not in the least promoted, in reference to the uniting
of his Estate to the Crown of France, there should be a renunciation made to
any such pretension upon the contract of Marriage of the King, with his Eldest
daughter, and free leave given him to divide all he had among his three younger
daughters, or to give it to her of the three, whom he preferred before the
rest. The Earl of Provence could never have been more easily tempted than by
two such soft and obliging Proportions, as the concluding his Life in
Tranquillity, and repose, and the liberty to dispose his Estate as he pleased;
For besides that, he was much of the temper of those effeminate Princes, who
hate nothing more than business: he was overtaken with the vice of those who
happen to have Children in their old Age, that is to say, he loved the Princess
Beatrice his youngest daughter better than any of the other three, to her he
designed to leave Provence, and as a man is apt for the most part to give way
to the belief of what he earnestly and constantly desires, he persuaded himself
that in preferring the youngest, he should do no wrong to the three Elder
daughters, since it was his intention to leave them his Treasures which he
looked upon as treble the value of his Sovereignty.

He fancied, if the King of France by marrying of his Eldest daughter, showed
himself an approver of what he had determined, who ever should have the two
next in Marriage, would not dare to gainsay it; and he had so great confidence
in the Regents word, that he doubted not in the least of her promise, however,
she deferred the Nuptials for some years by reason of the minority of the young
Couple. All these Considerations disposed him so perfectly to a Compliance,
that he beheld the ruin of the Count of Toulouse with as much insensibility,
as if he had been neither his Relation, nor his Neighbor. In fine, the Regent
being well assured that the Albigenses could not receive any succors from
Provence, and out of fear of any supply to come to them from Spain, in regard
the Aragonians and Castilians were at wars together, sent the French Army into
Languedoc under the Command of Imbert de Beaujeu, Constable of France, a
Captain, whom Simon of Montfort first advanced in the war.

The Earl of Toulouse did not all this while lie still; but whether it were that
he perceived the League would not last long, or, whether he grew sensible of
the error he had committed in not taking advantage of the perplexity the Regent
had been envolv'd in, to recover entirely what he had lost, he made haste to
take the Field, and laid Siege to the Town of Castle Sarasin, the strongest
next Avignon, of all that the French held in Languedoc; he found it well
Garrisoned, and a place of too great strength, what ever he had fancied, for
him easily to take, which was the principal cause of his utter ruin, since the
unprofitable attempts he made to take it by Force cost him all his best
Soldiers: and thinking it derogatory to his honor not to take it by Storm, he
lost so much time in making his approaches and Batteries, that when at last he
was driven to accept of it by Surrender, the besieged were scarce got out
before the French Army returned into Languedoc.

It was no less powerful than that which had been there before, under the
Command of King Lewis the 8th; for besides that, scarce any one of the
Feudataries was wanting, the Clergy resolving to pluck up Root and Branch, all
that was remaining of Heresy in the Kingdom, thought it not enough to send
those Soldiers which they were obliged to set out by the Fiefs they held of
the Crown; their zeal carried them yet farther, and the opinion they had, that
it was a holy war they were engaged in, because the Popes Legate marched with
the Cross at the Head of the Army, made them open their purses wider, and they
doubled those Companies formerly raised. Nor was this their Liberality thought
altogether enough to express their Devotion, some of the Prelates who were able
to endure the hardships of war, put on Arms themselves, as Amelius Archbishop
of Narbon, and Foulk Bishop of Toulouse.

The Secul^^ no less encouraged by this Example then by the plenary indulgence
the holy See granted, flocked from all parts to take the Field, and added by
their concourse so much strength and power to the Army, that the Earl of
Toulouse was forced to quit the Field. The Albigensian Towns which rose against
the French, at the first report of their divisions; seeing them afterward so
strong repented of their inconstancy, and endeavored to prevent the universal
desolation wherewith they were threatened; the extreme rigor which was
exercised against the first that stood out, striking terror into the rest. The
Constable no sooner appeared before any Town, but the Keys were immediately
surrendered, even the Garrison of Castle Sarasin made Proposal to the Burghers
of the Town, to come to Capitulation before Summons sent; So that this strong
Town which had before endured a long Siege, sent their Deputies to the French
before they sat down before their Walls. All submitted but Toulouse, and this
great Town whose Colonies had formerly peopled so many Countries of Europe and
Asia, was now forced for its defense, to admit of a foreign aid, drawn from all
the Neighboring parts, even those most infected with Heresy. In the Siege of
this place, the French who were become better instructed than formerly, by the
Experience they had gained before Avignon, ordered their affairs with very much
prudence and conduct: they designed, it is true, to take Toulouse by Storm, but
it was by such Methods as Military Discipline taught them. They gained ground
by degrees, and managed their Instruments of Battery with wonderful address;
and by their incessant and impetuous playing made wider Breaches in the Wall
than the besieged, though considerable in number, were able to repair: by which
means the Town was reduced to inevitable danger of being lost: the Towns men
remembered that the Town of Avignon had been given over to plunder and pillage,
and that their's had no reason to expect more favor, as being neither less
rich, nor less criminal. Thus not coming to a clear sense of their misfortune,
till at a time when it was too late to avoid the danger, they fancied it
greater than really it was, and their disturbed Imagination caused them in a
moment to lose that respect which till then they had preserved for their
Sovereign, as Criminal and unfortunate as he was.

They formed a Conspiracy, so much the more dangerous, by how much the better
it was regulated. They sent Deputies to their Earl to advertise him, that if he
would not that very day bestir himself effectually to treat in their behalf,
they were resolved themselves to treat the next day without him. The Earls
strength in Toulouse was at that time not very great; for though he had a
little before the Siege brought into the Town a number of Albigenses out of the
Neighboring parts which were most devoted to him, upon the account that their
Goods or Estates, being seized by the Catholics, their chiefest hopes were in
him for redress. It was the fate of the greatest part of these Heretics to be
slain either in the Sallies that were made for the burning of the battring
Engines, or in defense of the Walls; so that the Townsmen who in the beginning
of the Siege were the weakest part of the Defendants, were become in the end
the strongest: and thus the Earl of Toulouse was constrained to take Laws from
those to whom he had intended to have given Laws, and desired leave of the
Constable to send to the Regent to assure her he was ready to receive what
Conditions her Majesty should be pleased to impose upon him.

The Constables Interest preserved Toulouse from pillage, and all manner of
violence, in regard he was promised the Government. His power extended so far,
as to conclude a Cessation of Arms, and he signed the agreement after he had
taken such Sureties as were requisite upon such like occasions. Here it is that
a most proper opportunity offers it self to speak of Queen Blanche's Grand
Master piece, in matter of Negotiation; and the Treaty here following, is held
to have been one of the best managed Treaties that ever was concluded for the
advantage of France, since it was first a Monarchy; however, it cannot be here
represented entire, since the Regent had but one part in it, the Court of Rome,
and the Court of France being both equally concerned; and the Pope's Interests
being neither managed with less heat, nor taking up less time in debate than
those of the King of France. The same Legate we have already mentioned, had
here a great opportunity of showing his vast abilities, and the notable
proficiency he had made in the knowledge of the Cabinet: here he laid the
Foundation of those acquisitions, the holy See soon after gained, and to this
day possesses in France.

The more particular mention of the Intrigues of this great Minister of State,
will be best reserved for a discourse, wherein the Rights of the most Christian
King to the Town of Avignon, and the Earldom of Venaisin shall come to be
examined. Here we shall only observe, that the Regent was too prudent to assent
to the Earl of Toulouse his Propositions offered in Council, or, to conclude an
Accommodation with him in that haste he proposed. She was yet scarce disengaged
from a civil war raised principally against her Authority; and she was too
discreet to imagine, that the readiest way to oblige the remaining part of the
Rebels to lay down their Arms, would be to determine the affair of Languedoc,
the greatest affair that had been known in France, since the third Race,
without the advice of the Barons of the Realm. It was therefore thought fit to
invite the Barons to a Conference with the Deputies of Toulouse; and the Town
of Meaux was made choice of for the place of Assembly, not only as being most
commodious for the Feudataries, whose Residences were almost equally distant
from it, but also in respect of its nearness to Paris, by which means the place
would be the more easily supplied with such a quantity of Provisions as would
be necessary for such an Assembly, and so great a Concourse of People.

The pleasant Season of the Year viz. 1228. made the Resort of People the
greater; and such as for their past faults feared the Courts displeasure,
obtained of the Regent all necessary assurances both as to their coming, their
stay, and their return; but it was no very easy matter to quiet their minds as
for the time to come, and the Regent her self went about in vain to satisfy
them by ordinary means. They went, or to say better, ran to the War of
Languedoc, with a Transport of Zeal, which gave them not time to make such
Reflections as concerned their own proper Conduct, till after such time as
Heresy was almost subdued. They had considered the Earl of Toulouse as an
Enemy to the Crown of France, so long as they had their Swords in their hands;
but from that very moment that they laid down their Arms, their Aversion so
totally ceased, that passed all at once, and without any Medium from the
extremity of Vengeance, to extremity of pity. It was no extraordinary thing to
them to see Rebel Vassals ruined, and the Reign of Philip the August had given
sufficient Examples thereof. There was not any of those whose Estates they had
seen confiscated, so culpable as the Earl of Toulouse, since besides the Crime
of high Treason, both as to God and man, which he had more than once committed:
he was, if not the Author of a very dangerous Heresy, yet, at least, the
entertainer of it from the first broachers, and the cherisher of it, as I may
so say, in his bosom: he thought it not enough to hinder Royal Justice from
seizing on the Persons, and enquiring into the Crimes of those who taught it in
his Province; but he himself became a Preacher thereof, contrary to the Genius
of the French Nobility, who had at that time an Antipathy both for the
Doctrine, and those who were engaged in it. He alone had perverted more
Catholics than all the rest of the Albigenses, and to complete the measure
both of his obdurate pravity of Nature, and of the misfortune that attended it,
he relapsed into the same Heresy he had consented to abjure; which alone was
enough to render the Court of Rome irreconcilable to him.

There was now no place left for Excuse or Complaint, and there were such
Circumstances in his Degradation, as have scarce been known in the Case of any
other Criminal. He furviv'd a War which had been undertaken chiefly for his
chastisement; he submitted himself before he was driven to the last Extremity:
he came to Terms in a Town, wherein he might have held out a longer time by
much: he pretended to no hopes of Favor, but in the Clemency of their
Majesty's.

The Indulgences formerly used by the most Christian Kings, to the Natives of
France, bred up in the same Principles, were now no less favorably applied to
the Earl of Toulouse; for never were Fiefs seen to change their Family; and the
Relations, especially the Descendants of Criminals, had always the Forfeitures
of the Estates remitted to them, provided on the one side, they were never
partakers with them in their Crimes, and on the other side, were capable of the
Homage required. All this while the Earl of Toulouse, his Fief, was by the
Female side; for it was well known that a Woman brought it into the house of
Catalonia. The said Earl had only one daughter, who being but nine Years of
Age, could not possibly be charged with the least concernment in any of her
Fathers Crimes. Languedoc had been possessed by his Ancestors for 22
Generations, and it would have been thought hard for the misdemeanour of the
present possessor to ruin a Family, wherein 21 Persons successively have been
free from all Tainture. In fine, if it were advantageous in one sense, for the
Regent to augment her Authority, by reuniting to the Kings demeans the Estate
of one of the most considerable Peers of France, it would be dangerous in
another sense, since upon such an attempt as this, all the rest of the
Feudataries of the said Crown, as well in general, as in particular, would be
concerned to hinder it, for fear this one Spark kindled should raise a Flame
great enough to catch hold of each of them in their turn, and give them such
occasions of discontent, as must needs incite them to a Revolt; so that in the
end the necessity of their punishment, would be an inevitable occasion of
empairing that Grandeur, which at present gave luster to the Crown.

The French came off handsomely enough, in the declaring of what they had in
their mind, and the Regent who had heard them more than once; found a way to
satisfy them without neglecting in the main, the Interests of her Son. She
agreed with the Earl of Toulouse his Deputies upon Conditions more advantageous
than he could have hoped for: she consented that their Prince should be
reestablish'd in the possession of Languedoc, upon Condition, only the
Fortifications should be demolished: she permitted him the quiet possession of
this large Province as long as he lived, and let him know withal, that she
designed nothing less than to keep the Princess his daughter out of her
hereditary possession: on the contrary, she would take care to preserve it
entire to her Posterity. It was her opinion the Princess could not be better
provided for, than by being espoused to Alphonso of France, Earl of Poitou,
being of the same Age with her, neither did she demand any other Security for
the Earls performance of his word, but that the Princess should be brought up
at Court. She insisted indeed, to have the Articles of Marriage inserted in the
Treaty of peace, and thereby handsomely took occasion to have this one Article
slipped in, viz. that in Case both the young married Persons should dye without
Issue, Languedoc should be again united to the Crown of France, as indeed it
happened. Her pretense for this Article was, that no person might receive any
prejudice, since St. Lewis was to espouse the Eldest Daughter of the Earl of
Provence, presumptive Heiress of the Princess of Toulouse; and in Truth, she in
such fort concerted this great Affair, which gave jealousy to all the world,
that no body could find any cause to murmur at it.

The Earl of March by this means was gained, and his only daughter contracted
to John of France, the King's youngest Brother.

Thus the Earl of Bretaign was left alone in the League, whose obstinacy was,
that he chose rather to be exposed the sole Mark of all the French Forces now
united together, than to accept of those advantageous Conditions offered him by
the Queen. The very Civilities she showed him at a juncture of time when all
things seemed to conspire his ruin, exasperated the spirit of this Capricious
Person; and because the Consciousness of his own guilt represented to him all
kindnesses and good Offices done him as Counterfeit, he consequently fancied
what the Regent did to oblige him, to be but mere Formality, and done only to
draw him into a farther snare; and upon this false presumption, he instantly
went and treated with England. The Regent was soon advertised hereof, and
resolved to lose no time in driving on the business to a Head, the Winter began
to come on very sharp, and the time was overpast for setting out the English
Fleet to Sea, for the relief of Bretaign, which was now brought to do Homage to
the King of England, the French encouraged by the presence of their most
Christian Majesty's, went directly, and after a short Siege took the Town of
Angers, which King Lewis the 8th, having taken from the English, had put into
the hands of the Bretons.

The Queen had no sooner dispatched what she went about in Anjou, but with the
same Expedition and Diligence as she had marched thither, she returned and laid
close Siege to Belesme, the Capital City of Perch, and the strongest place the
Enemy then had. It was thought impregnable, but the Rams and other Engines of
Battery having at last thrown down the Walls, made it appear to be otherwise.
The besieged came to Capitulation, but not till such time as the Besiegers were
almost tired with continual labor, for they had as hard a task to defend
themselves from the rigours of the Season, as from the Arms of the besieged.
the extremity of Cold causing such a Paralytick Distemper among them, that
those affected therewith, could hardly escape death, the only way was, to sit
basking continually by a good fire side. Thus, through one, or other obstacle,
their Majesty's found it a difficult matter to march their Army into Bretaign,
and this probably was the main Reason, why they sought out another Expedient
for the putting an end to the War.

The Regent sent to the Nobility of Bretaign, and represented to them, that
their Lands would certainly be laid waste, if they did not immediately put
themselves under the Kings Protection, that the danger she warned them of, was
very near at hand, and that their Duke would not be able to help them: then she
made her Address to the Parliament of France, and required to have Bretaign put
into the King's hands, the Parliament yielded to her demand, and acquitted this
Province of their Homage to their Duke, who thereupon, was deprived of the
principal Refuge he had to trust to, and his Troops now no longer consisting of
such Gentlemen, as held of him by any Tenure of Land, dropped away by degrees,
and were all dispierc'd in a short time; He was driven in fine to this Dilemma,
either to keep himself shut up in some strong Town, or, to pass over into
England: the first of these two extremes would infallibly bereave him of his
Liberty, if not of Life also: the second, by forcing him to quit his Party,
would reduce him to a private Condition. Those who by chance or accidentarrive
to Sovereignty, more grievously resent a fall, than those whom a natural Title,
and the Laws have invested with a power of Reigning. Thus straightened and
perplexed, he resolved at a Venture to submit to whatever the Regent would
impose upon him; and in Conclusion, came off with the Surrendry of the Lands,
which the house of Bretaign possessed in France, besides, the Duchy; and
giving in Security both for himself, and his Heirs, that the said Duchy should
from that time forward, never hold of any but the Crown of France. The firname
of Mauclerk stuck upon him to future Ages, for having so ill taken his measures
with the French Rebels, and with the English, that in the end he was left alone
to bear the whole bront of the Controversy. And now Queen Blanch had no more
to trouble, or, obstruct the quiet administration of Her Regency, but through
the vain Attempts of those that labored to oppose Her, was so much the more
strongly fixed and established therein.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Novels, and Plays Printed for R. Bentley, and S. Magnes.
NOVELS.
1 ZElinda, a Famed Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4
Count Gabales. 5 Hatag; or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Madam Lavalier,
and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Madam Colonna's
Memoires. 9 Queen of Majork, two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of Portugal. 11
Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress. 14 Fatal
Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of Love. 18
Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and Qu.
Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis, 23
Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two Parts. 26
Meroveus, Prince of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28
Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a Young Noble Man.
PLAYS.
1 Tartuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous
Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy.
8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. 10 Gloriana, or the
Court of Augustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mithridates King of
Pontus. 13 Oedipus King of Thebes. 14 Caesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the
Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17 The Fond Husband, or
the Plotting Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 19 Fool
turned Critic. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22
Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. 26 Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 27
Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 29 Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 30 Hamlet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marriage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limberham, or
the Kind Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes of Morocco, by the Wits. 37
Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 38 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna
Bullen. 39 King Leir. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 41 Town-Fop, or Sir
Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en tout, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice, 44 Country
Wife. 45 City Politics. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King and no King.
49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy. 51 Grateful Servant.
52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or the Second Part of the Soldiers Fortune.
54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valiant Scot. 57 Constantine. 58
Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers. 61 Woman Rules. 62
Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love-Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar. 66 Fatal
Jealousy. 67 Monsieur Ragou.
FINIS.

