Licensed, Febr. 21. 1675/6.

Henry Oldenburg.

THE PRESENT STATE OF Tangier: IN A LETTER To His GRACE, THE Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, And one of the Lords Justices there.

To which is added, The PRESENT STATE of ALGIERS.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange. MDCLXXVI.

THE PRESENT STATE OF TANGIER: In A LETTER To His GRACE, The Lord Chancellor of
IRELAND, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
BEing conscious to my self of my own very great incapacity to render such an
Account as may be delightful and satisfactory; I am ashamed so unprofitably to
divert you from better employments, and so palpably to discover my own weakness
in the following Description of the City of Tangier, and the Territory
thereunto belonging: wherein howsoever I had rather bewray my folly in this
abrupt Narration, than administer an occasion to be suspected in my readiness
to obey your Commands; and therefore I presume to present to your Grace these
hasty Notes, resolving to deal truly and impartially, according to what I have
seen and observed, and what has been related to me by credible persons.

On Saturday the 12 of June last, early in the morning, we entered the Passage
into the Streights, between Cape Spartel and Cape Trafalgar, in one of His
Majesty's Frigots: from the Cape to Tangier, (the wind blowing fresh from the
Land) a most odoriferous smell, like to the Fume of Cedar or Juniper,
entertained us; which I conceive to be a mixture of pleasant sents arising from
the variety of sweet Trees and Herbs growing there wild: the Coast rocky,
rugged, and full of Hills, yet very safe for Ships, very green with Grass and
Herbs, and full of Trees. When we came into the Bay of Tangier, there fell a
most vehement storm of rain, which continued an hour, and (as it is said) was
more than was seen at that time of the year in any man's memory. Being saluted
with a thousand shots of great Guns from the Mole, the Castle, the Forts, and
the Ships riding in the Bay, we landed, where we were met by the Mayor and
Corporation in their Gowns, and conducted through a Guard of Soldiers from
thence to the Castle.

The City of Tangier is in the Latitude of 35 degrees. 35 min. situated very
pleasantly about the middle way between the Entrance and the Mouth of the
Streights, in a large Bay like a Semicircle, in plain sight of the Coast of
Spain, being less than six Leagues distant from it: the weather naturally very
hot and scalding, but so tempered with Friscoes and Breezes both from Land and
Sea, that the Air is rendered very tolerable; the Sky always bright and serene,
no Rain (nor hardly a Cloud) being seen there for three parts of the year: the
Levant-wind, (which blows very often and very strong, especially during the
months of July and August) as it makes the weather more cool, so, besides its
unkindness to Ships, it is not very agreeable to Health; many people,
especially such as are sickly, being then faint, and more dis-composed. The
City seems to have been one of the greatest in the World, which is apparent by
the old Walls and Ruins, extending S. E. about two miles, as far as old
Tangier, (where stands a heap of ruined Buildings, a pleasant River,
wonderfully stored with several sorts of good Fish running near it, and a large
Stone Bridge over it, but now broken) and stretching N. W. near three miles,
and beyond Teveot-Hill, (so called from that Renowned Person the Earl of
Teveot, who there was cut off the by Moors) and a pretty Brook, called
Jews-River, running about the middle way. I dare not take upon me the part of
an Historian, or go about to give an exact Account of the Annals of this Place;
but only in a few words to deduce the Summary History of its several Owners,
till it came into the Hands of His Sacred Majesty, (whom God long preserve over
us, and that City under Him.)

Tangier, or Tingis, was first built (as some say) by those fugitive
Canaanites, who in the Fields adjoining erected Pillars, with this Inscription
in the Phoenician Language, importing in English, We flee from the face of the
Son of Nave, the great Robber: Or, as others, by Tinga, Wife of Antaeus, slain
by Hercules. I shall not mention what Leo Africanus says of it, because
himself allows it fabulous. It was a City of great note and esteem, when the
Carthaginians contended with the Romans, and gave Name to all the adjacent
Country, but is said to have been buried by Caesar in the Ruins of Juba its
King; but by Claudius (who first made Mauritania Tingitana a Roman Province) to
have been restored, and made a Colony, called Traducta Julia: From thence it
continued the Metropolis of Mauritania, until Constantine the Great laid it to
the Diocese of Spain; in which condition it continued during some time of the
Empire, until about the year 642. Suintilla King of the Goths in Spain, added
it to his Dominions. So that they seem to err, who report, this City, and its
dependant Country, to have been possessed by the Vandals, invited into Africa
by Boniface, in the Empire of Valentinian the third. It continued subject to
the Goths, longer than Spain did: for though Osman, the third Caliph Successor
of Mahomet, conquered the rest of Barbavy; yet Tingitana was still held by the
Goths, and afforded retreat and shelter to the Sons of Vitiza, the true Heirs,
during the Usurpation of Roderic the last King, and also some years after his
slaughter, and the subversion of the Gothish Kingdom in Spain, by Musa and
Tariffe, Lieutenants to Vlidor Vlit, the Saracenical Caliph. The Moors, when
they held this Town, had here a Public School or University, where their Youth
were taught Letters; as also an Hospital liberally endowed by Joseph a Ben
Teifin, the second of the Almora Vides, who founded Morocco, conquered Fez, and
subdued all the Moorish Roytelets in Spain, adding this to his large Dominion.
Under his Successors of the three Races, (the Almoravides, the Almohades, and
lastly the Merines) Tangier was their chief Port for Spain; for in this Bay,
and that of Alcazzer, not far from the Point, did Alboacen embarque his Army
for Spain, confisting of 400000 Foot, and 70000 Horse, who were discomfited by
the Christians at Salado near Tariffa: by which blow, the power of the
Miramemolins was so broken, that their Empire declined very fast both in Spain
and Africa, their civil dissentions also hastening their downfall; in which decay
of the Merin Family, Tangier was deserted by the Moors, as most of this Coast
was, on the approach of Alphonso the fifth, King of Portugal, who took
possession of it An. Dom. 1472. whose Successors held it with continual Wars,
and various Successes with the Xerisses, until the year 1669. when it was
delivered to that excellent and much-lamented General, the Earl of Sandwich,
for the use of CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain. But whosoever desires
a more particular and satisfactory account of these things, may consult
Herodotus in Vita Cambysis, Procopius, Enagrius, Josephus, and Bochartus his
Phaleg, Plutarch's Sertorius, etc. the Histories of Spain, written by Mariana
or Turquet; of Portugal, by Osorius, etc. of Africa, by Leo, and others.

It is certainly a very sweet and well-chosen place, at the foot of a very
great Hill, on which the Castle stands, on a Declivity, but yet insensible,
of an irregular square, and fenced with a high, thin, oldfashioned Wall, (much
like to that of Droghedah in Ireland) having only two Gates, one toward the
Country, called Port-Catharina, a wonderful strong, and well-contrived
Entrance; the other to the Sea, called the Watergate. The Streets are
extremely narrow, (which is absolutely necessary in all places where the Sun is
so much Vertical) which makes the Town seem much smaller, and less considerable
than it is: but were they extended at the rate of the new Streets in and about
London, it would take up a great deal of Ground, and appear a very large Town.
The Houses are low, and generally little, with Spanish Roofs, almost flat,
(which is the cause that it makes the less show) the Walls generally of Stone
and Mudd, the covering crooked Tiles, the In side and Cielings of Slit Deal, or
Pine: There are many of the Officers and principal Townsmen, who have fine,
large, commodious, and well-furnished Houses and Gardens; and indeed the Houses
are for the most part very pretty and convenient, hardly any without a little
Garden, but extremely beautiful and delighting, full of sweet Herbs, and
pleasant Trees, especially Vines, which running up upon Pillars made of Stone,
and Espaliers made of great Reeds, (which for that purpose they commonly Nurse
in a corner of the Garden, and annually cut down for that use) all their Walks,
and Back-sides, and Spareplaces, are covered and shaded with Vines, mightily
laden with excellent Grapes, of diverse sorts, sizes, and shapes, and some very
early ripe. The Air, taking one time with another, exceeding temperate, not so
sultry as many times of the day in Ireland, nor so sharp as many of the nights
there. It is observed, that the Inhabitants here (as of the adjacent Country)
are much subject to sore eyes, which I am apt to impute not to any innate
quality of the Air, but to the dryness and continual brightness of it.
New-comers are welcomed constantly with strange Blisters and Pimples, like to
the Smallpox, which is generally attributed to the biting of Muskitoes, (which
are just the Gnats in some parts of England, but a little more pert) and
Chinches, (which much resemble Ticks, but that they leave so intolerable a
stink when they are killed) but I rather think it to proceed from an Ebullition
of the Blood, upon change of the Air, it happening most severely to such as
drink much water at their first coming. There can be no place in the World
better accommodated with Water, and the best that can be tasted; no Garden in
the Town (at least on the North-West-side) but has a Well, and some many; and
in the Marketplace is a handsome large Conduit, with a very fair Cistern, and a
Cock continually running on each side: the Water is brought to the Town in most
admirable and costly Aqueducts, made formerly by the Romans, and said to come
from the Foot of Mount-Atlas; but where the Passages are, no man can discover,
till you come within two hundred paces of the Lines, and there they may be
seen, curiously made of Brick and Stone; and at every twenty yards, or
thereabout, a little Well, into which the Gravel, Mudd, or any other Filth does
fall, and when they are filled, it is easy to empty and cleanse them. I have
often wondered that the Moors (such inveterate Enemies and Haters of all
Christians, especially the Tangerines) should forbear cutting and spoiling the
Aqueducts, or poisoning the Water; till I understood, that it is a point of
their Law and Religion, not to destroy any thing that is made for the natural
and necessary use of Mankind, (which is the cause that they so curse and
exclaim on the Christian-Dogs, when a Party has been sometime sent out of this
Garrison to burn their Corn.) The Land about the Town is very rich and pleasant,
abundantly luxuriant in the production of fine Flowers, (as Narcissus, Crocus,
Iris, etc.) and sweet smelling Plants, which with so much care and cost are
nourished and reared in the Gardens of Europe; so that the Hay made there by
the Garrison, is only a withered Nosegay of Rosemary, Thyme, Marjoram,
Pennyroyal, and other sweet smelling Herbs. In the Gardens are very good Pease,
Beans, Artichokes, (Asparagus growing wild in the Fields) Strawberries,
Lettice, Purslane, Cucumbers, etc. but Melons, so plentiful, so various in the
shape and kind, and so delicious, that it cannot be described to understanding
and belief. The common Fruits of this Place are Apricocks and Peaches, (which I
cannot say are so good as in England, and I conceive the cause to be, that they
are Wildings, and not mended by Inoculation) Figgs, which bear twice a year,
and Mulberries, (much better) Oranges, Lemons, Limes, Citrons, Pomegranats,
Plumbs, some Cherries, but not worth eating, some Pears and Apples, but very
scurvy, (which probably arises from the cause before hinted, that no pains are
taken in Grafting;) but the Grapes are certainly not to be paralleled in any
place of the World. They ordinarily use Calabashas, a kind of a long Pompion,
and Simnels, in stead of Cabbage and Turnips, but they are no way comparable to
either of them. The Fields about the Town were heretofore much more delightful,
when they stood full of Orange Trees, Lemons, Olives, Pomegranats, Figgs and
Mulberries; but some time since, there being no timely provision made for
Firing, the Soldiers were necessitated to cut them down, and burn them, for
want of other Fuel. There is a very great and curious Wood near the Town,
green all the year, which I daily saw out of my Chamber-window; and though I
did not hold it convenient to take a nearer survey of it, I was told, by such
as in time of Peace have been in it, that it is a ravishing Wilderness of
Oranges, Lemons, Figgs, etc. Scarlet-Oak, and Cork-Trees; and in stead of
Briars and Thorns, thickened with Damask Roses, Groves of Myrtle, Jasemine, and
Bushes of Rosemary.

The Hay-Harvest uses to be about the middle of May, and is completely made in
two days. Barley and Wheat are cut down in June; the Grain trodden out by Oxen,
laid up in Caves, and the Straw kept for Food for Horses and Cattle: And in the
Month of August, the Stubble through the whole Country is set on fire, partly
to destroy the Vermin, which otherwise would become insupportable, and partly
to enrich the Ground, there being no other manure used. The Seasons seem to be
opposite to those in England and Ireland, and quite inverted: for whereas there
from May to All-Hallontide, the Ground is green, and pleasant, and covered with
Grass, and from thence to April dry, white and withered; on the contrary, all
the Verdure and Sweetness in Barbary, rank Grass, and variety of Flowers and
Herbs, is from November to April; but from thence to November, the Ground dry,
white, withered, and burnt with the Sun; this I mean of the Country, but the
Gardens are perpetually green, and produce two Crops in a year of almost all
Garden stuff and Sallads: nay, the Cows, Asses, and Horses, (directly contrary
to the usage of England) do live all the Summer upon Hay, and chopped
Barleystraw, (which is brought in Barca-luengos from Spain) and upon Grass in
the Winter. If a Peace were made with the Moors, all manner of Fresh Provisions
would be as good as in England, and as plentiful and cheap as in Ireland: the
Beef and Mutton is not so generally fat, but as sweet and juicy as in any other
place: Hens, Chickens, Capons, Geese and Turkies, are extremely plentiful, and
very good; the Pigeons very large, and very fat; but the Ducks are certainly
the best in the World: for being kept from Puddles and dirty feeding, and
fatned with Oatmeal and Pease, the Flesh of them is quite changed in color and
taste. I have eaten here Plover, Curlew, and Bustard, and very good; the
Partridge, though much larger, does not please me so well as those of England
and Ireland: but here are a sort of Birds about the bigness of a Pheasant, the
Spaniards call them, Pesones de Campo, which I must commend above all the Fowl
that ever I tasted. In the mean time, no place under Heaven, perhaps, is better
furnished with excellent kinds of Fish, and great plenty; here are (beside
Soles, Gurnets, Mullets, Turbets, Lobsters, Eels, Shrimps, etc. in common with
England) Cod-fish, Bonito's, Old-women, Porgo's, Salmonetto's, Rock-fish,
Star-fish, and many other, for which they have no name. The Castle of Tangier
is situated most securely and most delightfully upon a very high Hill,
overlooking the Town, Country, and Harbor; Fortified, beside its Foundation,
on inaccessible Rocks, by four the most regular, high, and well built Bastions
that can any where be seen; several excellent, and inexhaustible Wells within
it; and is, in a word, to all appearance, a place impregnable; all the
Storehouses of Ammunition and Provision, many Houses, Streets and Gardens
contained within it, and very near the third part of as much Ground as is in
the whole City, being divided from it by a Wall that reaches to the Sea. The
Upper-Castle, or the Governors House, is very noble, large and commodious, and
owes its beauty and conveniences to the care and generosity of that excellent
Person, the Earl of Middleton, late Governor, and does afford a most
incomparable Prospect, all Ships that pass to or from the Mediterranean sailing
under the sight of the Windows: out of Foraging-Port, the Gate that looks to
the Sea, an even, plain, and very pleasant Walk leads to Charles Fort, a strong
and well fortified Place, and Commanded by Captain Charles Daniel, whose
Ingenuity I must not forget, that has so curiously beautified the Fort,
without impairing the Strength, having on one side made a most delightful Walk
between the Wall and the Graft, about twelve foot wide, and near two hundred
yards long, curiously Gravelled, and covered close with Vines, which run up
upon Pillars, and afford a cool shade on the hottest day. On another side he
has his Melon-Gardens, and not far from thence his Garden for Flowers and
Herbs; so that Charles Fort, which is the great terror to the Moors, and which
they dare not come near, is the greatest delight of the Inhabitants of Tangier,
and continually visited like Spring-Garden. There is another House of Pleasure
within the Lines, which they call by the name of White Hall, a place where the
Ladies, the Officers, and the better sort of people, do refresh and divert
themselves with Wine, Fruits, and a very pretty Bowling-Bare. The Mole is in
its design the greatest and most noble Undertaking in the World, (all other
Moles, as at Genoa, Malaga, Algier, etc. not deserving more than the name of a
Key, in comparison of it) it is a very pleasant thing to look on; and if it may
be finished according to His Majesty's purpose, who has spared no cost upon
it, it will not only secure the Bay and Ships in it, but in time render Tangier
very considerable and advantageous to His Majesty and His Kingdoms: It is now
near four hundred and seventy yards long, and thirty yards broad, several
pretty Houses upon it, and many Families; on the inner side twenty four Arched
Cellars, and before them a curious Walk, with Pillars for the Mooring of Ships.
Upon the Mole are a vast number of great Guns, which are almost continually
kept warm, during fair weather, in giving and paying Salutes to Ships which
come in and out: for the most part of the year there are employed in this work
three hundred Men, and several Carts with good Teames of Horses continually
going with Stone and other Materials between the Mole and Whitby; which is a
little English Hamlet, planted by that industrious and ingenious Gentleman Sir
Hugh Cholmely, where are about twenty Families, beside at least an hundred
Laborers and Soldiers lodge there every night, and are sufficiently defended
by Guns and Forts from any Attaque of the Moors. It is very pleasant to see how
busy every man is there in his several Trade; the Smiths, Carpenters, Sawyers,
Coopers, Wheelwrights, Carters, Masons, Miners, Drill-men, Quarry-men, and
Stone-cutters, making a pretty confused Music, and very pleasant to such as do
not pay for it. There were in Tangier, when the Portugueses left it, seventeen
Churches and Chapels; but now there are only two; one whereof, with a large
scope of Ground, a Convent, and Lodgings for the Churchmen, and very
commodious Outhouses and Gardens, is left to the Portuguese Inhabitants, and
is indeed a fine Church, delicately beautified all round it with neat and
costly Altars: the other, a pretty plain Chapel, formerly dedicated to St.
Jago, and now to Charles the Martyr, is the Protestant Church, and very well
filled on Sundays. There is also an Hospital for sick and wounded Soldiers,
very well provided for; and an Exhibition of 200 l. per ann. for maintaining
and breeding the Orphan-Children of Soldiers or Townsmen.

Tangier, and the Territory belonging to it, is at the present governed by the
Earl of Insiquin, a Person of very great Abilities, and immovable Loyalty. In
whose time though it unluckily fell out, that a party of men were cut off by
the Moors, yet it ought to be no Impeachment of his Prudence and Conduct. For
the Garrison being extremely scarce of Provisions, the Stores exhausted, and
nothing to be had from Portugal or Spain, (whither he sent Vessels with ready
money to buy Meat, but could get none) and the Corporation by a Remonstrance
laying before him how ill the Stores were furnished both in quantity and
quality, he called a Council of War, by whom he was with one consent advised
and entreated to send a Party out to fetch in a Prey of Cattle; and accordingly
on the 19th of September he sent out a Party of 500 men, under the Command of
Sir Palms Fairborn, (being the rather induced to it by the encouragement of
James Hamet, a Renegado- Moor, recommended to the Governor as a fit person to
be a Spy) the Forlorn consisting of 100 Soldiers, and about 35 Volunteers,
marched two miles beyond the Body, and were suddenly encompassed by a great
Party of Horse, who lay in Ambush, and all slain, except Captain Alexander Mac
Kenny, who commanded 15 Horsemen; and being dismounted, lay among the dead
bodies, till he found an opportunity to steal into the adjoining Wood, where he
lay that night, and attempting to return to the Garrison next day, he was met by
the Moors, and carried prisoner to Tetuan: He gave an account by Letter, that
sitting in a Tree, he saw the Moors gather 80 bodies from among the dead, of
such as were most considerable among them, and having laid them in a
Funeral-Pile, and performed their accustomed ceremony in howling and lamenting,
burnt them, leaving a great number of the ordinary sort mingled among the dead
bodies of our men: In the mean time the main Body, being divided into two
parties, one commanded by Sir Palms Fairborn, the other by Captain James
Leslie, made a safe and honorable Retreat, though furiously attacqued on all
sides by a great number of Horse and Foot, performing their parts even to
admiration. This action was a very great terror to the Moors, who never lost
so many men, since the English possessed the Place; and thereby were feelingly
convinced, that the Christians would fight for their Lives, which before they
would not seem to allow, all the former Losses having happened upon treacherous
surprises, and at such times when our men were not provided for a fight. The
Garrison consists of 1440 Foot, and 30 Horse, and is certainly a Body of as
brave, bold, well-trained men, as are to be seen any where in the World; they
are paid 6 d. per diem in meat, and 3 d. in money. The Town is for the most
part peopled with His Majesty's Subjects, who live neatly and pleasantly, and
are generally of a kind and hospitable disposition: The Corporation consists
of a Mayor, six Aldermen, and twelve Common Council-Men, all annually elected,
and then approved and sworn by the Governor. Every Sunday the Mayor and
Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns, and the Common-Council-Men in Purple, do pay a
civility to the Governor, coming up to the Castle, and from thence attending
him to the Church. There are in the City about 200 Families, beside Officers
(who have, and keep very good Houses) and Soldiers, who have very convenient
Quarters assigned them, Strangers, the Inhabitants within the Castle, the
Dwellers on the Mole, and at Whitby. Among the Inhabitants there are some few
of several Nations, as French, Spanish, Portugueses, Italians, and diverse Jews
both of Barbary and Europe, who are great Dealers in Trade, and have their
several Synagogues within the Town: I say, several, for although they agree in
the common Reading and Veneration of the five Books of Moses, their Denial of
our Savior Jesus Christ, and their Hatred to Christians; yet they are not free
from their little Schisms, as appears by a passage since my coming hither,
which may perhaps be worth the relating.

On the 9th of July last, a Petition was presented to the Governor by Joseph
Artnitel, Samuel Mexias, Joseph Benjamin, and Moses Benazara, in the name of
the Barbary-Jews residing in Tangier, setting forth that Abraham Cohen, an
Amsterdam-Jew, did continually affront, molest, and disquiet them, that they
could not attend their Callings: whereupon Abraham Cohen, and the
European-Jews, being summoned, and the matter heard, it appeared that they were
on both sides in Faction and Fire, for that the said Abraham Cohen and his
Fellows did drink Wine, and traded in Swines-Flesh; for which cause the
Tangier-Jews had made their complaint to the Sabios of Tetuan, who had actually
Excommunicated the said Cohen, and the rest: but the Governor perceiving
knavery in the business, and that the inhibiting the European-Jews to bring
Pork into the Town, might be out of design to hinder the bringing in of
Provisions; and that their Appeal to the Moorish-Jews at Tetuan, and the
publishing of an Excommunication, was a very great presumption, and an affront
to His Majesty's Government; commanded the Barbary-Jews within a few days to
dissolve the Excommunication, and to renounce the Authority of Tetuan, or any
other Power, but of the King of England; or else he would turn them and their
Families out of Town: which took good effect, caused a Peace among them, and no
more was heard of it. The following Address was made to the Mayor of Tangier by
Abraham Cohen, etc.

Forasmuch as certain Tetuan-Jews, who at present are residing in this City of
Tangier, have given out, that they have a Decree from the Sabios of Tetuan, by
which they do Excommunicate all and whatsoever Jew and Jews, who shall join in
Communion with Abraham Cohen to say their Prayers: We the Underwritten, do
supplicate, that they may give us a Copy of the said Decree, to the end we may
not fall into a Praemunire, and to amend our selves in case we have failed, and
to undergo that chastisement which shall be due to us in conformity to the Law
of Moses.

Tangier, this 21 of Tamos, Anno 5435. Abraham Cohen, Jaacob Cohen, Jacob del
Canio, Isaac de Mexias.



Upon an Order from the Mayor, the Decree was produced; which, for the
satisfaction of your Grace, who may be pleased with such a curiosity, I have
set down, as it was Translated out of the Hebrew Language into English.

To the Holy Congregation of the City of Tangier, whom our Lord preserve, Amen.
After having desired your joint Peace, Peace be unto you, your Fellow-helpers,
and all those that are joined with you, Amen.
WE send this unto you, by reason of one we received from you, complaining in
what manner Abraham Cohen treats you, of his Abuses, and what he has done to
your Congregation; and if it be so as appears by your Letter, it is a sign that
he is not of the seed of Aaron the High Priest, loving Peace and persecuting
it, loving the Creatures, and endeavoring to have Differences at Law with
them; and it is not a new thing with him to desire the continuance of Lawsuits
wheresoever he lives, but also to fasten them on others; and thus he made his
Disturbances in Sally, and separated a House of Prayer for himself, and in the
end pretended to confirm what the Learned say, Every House of Prayer that is
not designed to a good intention, cannot be confirmed: But on his side it
signifies little what he can do unto you, for that we once, by reason of the
complaints you made, used our utmost diligence to set you up a House of Prayer,
that so you might have no Communication with him; and yet you do join and meet
with him; now you seek after him, you have no reason to complain: Yet
notwithstanding all this, if sufficient Testimonies shall come, signed by those
that are not concerned on either side, we will do unto him here what the Law
requires: But without this, by reason of the evil Offices that you say he has
done, and does you, and for things he does contrary to the Law, as drinking of
Wine, making profit of those things which he cannot do according to Law, and
acting several things of the like nature, We order, That no Jew enter into his
House of Prayer to pray with him, much less rehearse the Ten Commandments with
him; and whosoever shall enter into his House of Prayer to pray with him, and
rehearse the Ten Commandments with him, he is Excommunicated by the Justice of
Heaven and Earth: And the same Excommunication reaches any one whatsoever that
shall drink of the said Wine, make any profit thereof, or of goods of the like
nature; and whosoever shall do any thing of what is above recited, and break
our Order, there shall be used to him, the same as is usual to those persons
that are Excommunicated, No Jew shall speak to him, much less shall he come
within four cubits of him, and he cannot be esteemed for one of the Ten. We say
no more.

Tituan, the 18 of Sinan, 5435. Jacob Aboab, Isaac Bivas.


There remain in Tangier many marks of the Roman Greatness, Ingenuity, Arts,
and Architecture: as,

1. The strong, vaulted, well-compiled Foundations of Houses, (in the digging
up of which great store of Medals are found, of Corinthian Brass, Copper, and
Silver, stamped with the Effigies of their Emperors, and Consuls, and with
other Mottoes and Fancies.

2. The outside of the Rock next to the Bay, between the Watergate and the
Mole, on which the Town-Wall is built, which is faced with Rows of little Walls
from the Water to the Foundation of it, equally distant one from the other;
which served not only to strengthen the Foundation, and to keep it from
sliding, but also for an Amphitheatre; and on these Rows of Seats did the
people sit to behold their Pastimes and Shows upon the Water, the whole Bay
being under the view of it.

3. The curious Arches and Vaults, among which I saw one built with Brick and
Freestone, of an unknown length, about eight foot wide at the Floor, and about
ten foot high; the half of which Arch is standing, and serves for a curious,
close, cool Walk.

4. The Aqueducts, of which I have given an account before. I shall not mention
the Salt Pits, (though a pretty curiofity, cut out in the Natural Rocks that
lie on the surface of the Ground within the Lines) nor the strange, deep,
narrow Pits cut into the Rocks, (of which I cannot apprehend the use, unless
for Burying-places) because they may be the work of the Portugueses. But one
thing I must mention, a Remain of the Moorish Grandeur, the Ruins of a most
rich and sumptuous Structure, some of the Floors whereof are yet to be seen,
made of small Roman Bricks two or three inches square, of diverse colors, the
sides of the Walls lined with delicate Mosaic Work; and in one place is an
Inscription of Arabic Characters cut in Stone, not worn by time, though done
more than three hundred years since, very easy and plain to be read, the
Letters not being cut into the Stone, but the Stone cut away from the Letters;
and because this is a piece of great Curiosity, as well as Antiquity, I have
caused it to be Transcribed from the Original, and afterward Translated.

The Translation of an Arabic Inscription contained in a Stone of Marble, at
the Entrance from the Vestry of the English Protestant Church of Tangier,
called, CHARLES the Martyr, formerly a Moorish Convent.
In the Name of God, Amen.
AMemorandum of the holy Convent, under the Almighties Obedience, which God
preserve in his Grace and Favor:

Being a Register and Roll of the Revenues and Lands belonging to the said
Convents Incommings, as well those which are situated within the City of
Tangier, as without the same; together with their Limits and Districts, and how
far the said Revenues do extend themselves.

Those situated within the said City, are, viz.

First, A Shop wherein Herbs are sold; and another where Starch is made and
sold; with another Shop nigh unto the Halbardeers; and another Shop somewhat
higher, where Oil, Figgs, Reasons, and such like Ware is sold; and a third Shop
adjoining to the former. And moreover, four other Shops, situated in the
Butchers Row, adjoining joining to each other: all which Shops afore-specified,
have each of them a little back-yard: and also another Tailors Shop under the
Arch; with another Shop belonging to the Wafersellers, next adjoining to the
Bakehouse; and another Shop where Chopped Straw is sold, and Tinder and Match,
and such like Commodities; and another Moiety of a Shop where the Waterbearers
refort, below the Spinters, the other half of which belongs to one, called
Majanez; and from thence on the other side of the Street, hard by the Shop
where Spicery Wares are sold, and where the Cutlers do live, there is another
Shop, equally high with the said Convents situation; as also a House situated
in the Street where the Stonecutters do live; a little higher than the Potters
dwellings.

Moreover, The Convent and its Church, is situated toward the West, and does
contain a Courtyard, surrounded with Houses or Lodgings; to wit, round about
the whole situation; also the said Convent has a Free School, being a large
and vast Room, in which the Inhabitants Children are taught to Write and Read;
besides which the Convent contained all such Lodgings and Conveniences, and
other necessary Offices and Accommodations as behoved, and were necessary and
requisite for the entertaining and lodging of the Priests, Clerks,
Lay-brothers, and other Ministerial Persons to the said Convent belonging and
appertaining. Besides which, there was another Shop, fituated at the foot of
the said Convent; and yet lower than that, a second Shop, where Earthen Ware,
as Pots, Pans, and Dishes, are usually made, etc. And this is the Revenues
which the said Convent does enjoy within the said Cities Walls.

The Revenues belonging to the said Convent situated without the Walls, in the
Country abroad, viz.

Consist in One hundred fifty and four several Fields and Gardens, with Houses
and Wells intermingled here and there; as also with some Orchards for Fruits,
and Summer-Houses for Recreation; all which are set down in the Moorish Roll,
with their Moorish Names and Appellations thereunto annexed; which being
conceived to be too tedious and superfluous to be here specified, are omitted,
as being of no moment nor benefit to be Read, but rather a trouble and
vexation, etc. being only bare Moorish obsolete Names, at present not known,
nor in use, etc.

Finally, The said Moorish Roll is closed in this manner following, viz.

And thus we have specified all the Revenues and Incommings of the said
Convent; and to the end it may remain to posterity, we have Engraven it in this
Stone, on the last day of the Month called Rabbea the second, In the Year Seven
hundred forty and three; And thus we have made an end thereof, etc.

God be praised, Amen.

It is to be observed, that since this Arabic Inscription was Engraven on the
said Stone, there are 343 years past, it being according to the Moorish Account
the year 1086. and with us according to the Christian Computation, the year
1675. etc. Which is only set down to show the meaning of the said Arabic
Inscription and Antiquity, for the better satisfaction of your Grace, who may
please your self with such a Curiofity.

The first Governor of Tangier under the King of England, was the Earl of
Peterborough, a Person of Noble and Generous Qualities, a great Friend to the
Soldiers, and very likely to have made the Place considerable, had not His
Majesty, upon some greater Employments, called him home.

In whose room was sent that excellent Soldier the Earl of Tiveot, whose Fame
will be fresh, while there is a Stone standing in Tangier: he was of
indefatigable Industry, a complete Soldier, a resolute Man, and in all
probability had he lived to this time, would have enlarged the Demeans of
Tangier to a very great compass: but in the midst of his Endeavors, he was by
false Intelligence betrayed to march out with five hundred men, (most of them
armed only as Pioneers) and were all, except a very few that escaped, destroyed
together.

Immediately after whose death, Sir Tobias Bridges, who Commanded the Horse,
was by joint consent of the Officers, voted to the Government; which he held
till

Col. John Fitz Gerald, (a Gentleman as well of known Valor, and tried
Experience, as of an Ancient Family) was made Deputy Governor.

And so remained until the Lord Bellasis was sent over, whose Gentleness,
Prudence, and Moderation, did mightily endear him both to Garrison and Town: but
his indisposition urged him, within less than a year, to get His Majesty's
Leave to be recalled, much to the sorrow of that Place.

Upon his return, Col. Henry Norwood was appointed Deputy Governor; who not
only terrified the Moors by his Arms, but out-did them in their Wit, and
managed the Government of that Place with very great Honor to the King, and
Advantage to the People.

Then the Earl of Middleton was appointed Governor, a Person very famous for
his Conduct in War, of great Courage, and as great Experience, of excellent
Learning and Parts, and Liberal beyond Example: He made the Governors House,
of a Portuguese-Dungeon, to become a very Noble Palace; caused the Castle, with
the Storehouses of Victuals and Ammunition, to be separated from the Town by a
strong Wall; and would have done many brave Things for the Good of that Place,
but falling into a Flux, he was much weakened; and rising one night to call for
a Candle, he stumbled over his Servant, who lay cross the Threshold fast
asleep, and with the fall broke his Arm short at the Shoulder, and within a few
days died.

After his death, Col. Roger Alsop was appointed Deputy Governor; who, if his
Legs were answerable to his Heart, would give convincing Testimonies of his
great Worthiness of that, and a much better Employment.

The Earl of Insiquin is the present Governor, whose Character to Write, were a
kind of flattery to commend before the Face; and to your Grace especially, who
so well know him, I need say but this, He is of greater Abilities than either
himself would discover, or his Friends could expect, till he came to the Trial
of them; and I cannot doubt but that His Majesty will find him to be most
useful for His Service there, or in any other Place.

And now, my Lord, having led you a tedious Walk round our little Town, and
narrow Lines, (which may be paced over in the time that this Paper may be read)
I am to beg pardon for this most impertinent Interruption; which I cannot but
hope for, because innocently intended: And as I have reason to believe, your
Grace will not read it twice; so I seriously promise, you shall never be
troubled in this manner again by,

My LORD, Your Graces most Obedient Servant, G. P.
Tangier, Sept. 29. 1675.

THE PRESENT STATE OF Algiers.

LONDON: Printed for H. Herringman, 1676.

THE PRESENT STATE OF ALGIERS.
Their First Rise. The Several Changes of the Government. The Manner of the
Present State, and the Principal Persons in Credit. What People the City of
Algiers consists of, and the Number of the Inhabitants. Their Militia, and the
Discipline thereof. Their Naval Forces, and Sea-Discipline.
BY the Ancient Records of the Divan Hoggi, or Public Secretary, it appears,
that the City was formerly Commanded by the Genoeeses, who kept a constant
Garrison in the Castle, that stands at the head of the Mole, of about three
hundred men, until the defeat of Bajazett by Tamberlain the Great, when two
Brigantines of fugitive Turks put in there for shelter; who conspiring with the
Arabs and Moors, Then the Divan was kept in the Cassale, the Aga was kept in a
Cage to preserve himself from the fury of the multitude.
in a few days after, on a Holy Day, (as they were at Mass) fell upon them, and
became their Masters. Whereupon, as having before practiced the Trade of
Piracy, they armed all the Vessels they could make themselves Masters of, and
in short time had One hundred and fifty Sail in Corso. They builded then
likewise the Cassale, where the Public Treasure is kept, and the principal
Magazines for Arms and Provisions, and formed a Government by a Divan, who was
to sit every Saturday to consult of Public Affairs, till in the year of the
Hegira 810. in respect to the Grand Seignior, they admitted Bashaws of his to
precide in the Divan, and Govern them; (only keeping in their hands the Command
of the Cassale:) The first whereof was called Osman Bashaw, allowing them 12000
Dollars per annum out of the pay, besides an allowance of all sorts of
Provision for his whole Family and Officers.

Under these Bashaws (who above the said allowance found ways to exact great
Treasures from the Moors and Inhabitants, in so much that some of them, after
their ordinary three years residence, have been known to carry away 200000
Dollars, besides Jewels, etc.) they lived with great Obedience, notwithstanding
all the said Oppressions, until the time of Vsuff Bashaw, a Gallant Prince, and
one that made it more his business to increase the Conquests against the Moors,
than to mass up Wealth, for which reason then, upon the Petition of the Public
Divan, his Commission by the Grand Seignior was renewed. He took Constantine
from the Moors, Bugia from the Christians, Bona from the Tuniseenes, marched
with his Army into the Zachary, A desert Country only affording Dates.
sixty days South-East, and continued his Conquest four months march toward
Angola, all which are to this day Tributary to Algiers: So having been two
years in the Camp, he returned in great triumph, accompanied with all the
popular applauses imaginable. But all this could not secure him from the secret
conspiracy of his Kia; who, having had the sweetness and benefit of the pay in
his absence, made a faction against him, murdering him in the Bettistan, or
Marketplace, in the year 1642. Since which time, though they have received the
Bashaws sent by the Grand Seignior, yet have they never admitted them to sit in
the Divan, or to meddle with Public Affairs, but they have been muzled,
receiving only their ancient allowance, the extraordinary Revenues being wholly
taken away; so that this place being not of so great profit as was formerly, it
has not been so greedily sought for at the Ottomans Port, witness this present
Bashaw, called Ismael, who has lived here now near fifteen years.

After the said Rebellion, there has been a person chosen out of, and by the
Divan, to sit over the pay, and had the Title of Governor. To his care was
committed the receipt and payment of all money brought into the Public; and
his presence required at the pay of the Soldiers, which is every two months.
Thirteen persons have succeeded in this Office, of which but one is found to
have died in his bed, the other having been poisoned, or murdered by some
means or other. The last that served in that Office, was Ally Aga, who was cut
in pieces by the Soldiers in the year 1672. after their Ships were burnt in
Bugia: When the said Ally Aga came to the Government, the Divan consisted of
Bulga-Bashaws, Geo-Bashaws, and Youde-Bashaws, in all above one thousand
Persons, besides that the Soldiers would come into the Divan upon any Foreign
Affair that was to be debated; so that it was a rabble of people, and a
confused multitude, until he found a way to reduce them to forty eight, of each
quality beforementioned, viz. 144 persons in all, whereof himself was the head.
The day that he was murdered, all the Soldiers were in Arms in great
confusion; some that were of his party fled and escaped, others were killed in
the Streets, and in their Houses: the Bashaw then brought out the Grand
Seigniors Bandera, and made Burgone, That all Soldiers should come under it;
which they readily submitted to; so that it was believed the Bashaw would be
brought into the Kings House, or place of Judicature, and the former Authority
of his Predecessors not only restored, but also the Keys of the Cassale given
him, when in the middle of the tumult, a bolder fellow than the rest cried out
to bring in Mahomet Raise Treig, formerly Admiral, Present Government.
but at that time in disgrace: this cry was seconded by all the Seafaring
people, and in less than half an hour it was determined to fetch Treig to the
Kings House. The Old Man knew not whether they came to Kill, or to Crown him:
But so soon as he came there, he was given to understand that they had chosen
him Governor; which he obstinately refused, until some that had occasioned his
coming thither, cried, Father, Will you let us suffer by your Humility? Upon
which he made a bold speech to the Soldiers, telling them, If they gave the
Government into his hands, he would be absolute, and no ways controuled by the
Divan; whose Counsel he would willingly adhere unto, but the Decisive Vote
should be left to him. They, unwilling to refuse him any thing at that time,
did above all this deliver unto him the Keys of the Cassale, never before in
the possession of one man, but kept by Eighty Bulga-Bashaws that attended there
by turns, Eighty every week going up and exchanging the other Eighty; and so
they proclaimed him by the Name of Dey, making him Superintendent over all the
Militia by Sea and Land, Director of the Cadees, and Head of the Divan. To his
assistance they joined Babba Hassan, The Divan is reduced by this Governor to
24 Yeo-Bashaws, 24 Bulga-Bashaws, 24 You-Bashaws; in all 72.
one that married his daughter, a stout Turk, and well learned in the Mohammedan
Law; to his charge is committed all Receipts and Payments, so that he has the
same Office former Governors had, he is entitled the Dey's Lieutenant, and
General of the Army: without the City, he acts in all respects with as absolute
power as the Dey himself, and neither of them makes use of the Divan for any
thing but trifling affairs.

The Aga.
THere is also an Aga, (or Lord Mayor of the City) exchanged every two months.
This Office is taken gradually, as will be seen in the manner of the Militia:
He is attended by eight Grand Chomes, and several other Officers; has Drums
and Trumpets, and other Music allowed him, and twelve thousand Doubles to
defray the charges of his Agaship. He is the second person in the Divan, Caya
or Kia.
and has a Kia that acts like a Chamberlain of the City, and decides all
Differences that happen between one Inhabitant and another, unless it be some
criminal cause, and then he carries them to the Deye; or a cause in Law about
the Title of Houses, and then he sends to the Caddee, who is to determine the
matter gratis. All other Places of Trust, Civil as well as Military, are wholly
in the disposal of the Deye, or his Lieutenant Bobba Hassan, who so well
understand each other in the Government, that hitherto nothing has been
contradicted which one has proposed or acted.

The City consists of diverse sorts of people, as,

I. Cololies.
Cololies, or the Sons of Turks born there, which for the most part are brought
up to Handicraft-Trades: for since the time of Maharam Bashaw, which was in the
year 1625. the Cololi made a conspiracy against the Government, and seized on
the Cassale, and blew it up, wherein was by estimation five hundred Barrels of
Powder, hoping by this means to bring the Government into their hands, but they
were presently overcome, and it was then decreed that none of the Cololies
should ever be capable of any Public Office by Land for the future; yet they
are continued in pay, and may rise to forty Dobles per month, according to
their merits.

II. Jews.
THe Jews, whereof there are two sorts, the Natives consisting of thirteen
thousand Families, which for the most part are Handicraftmen and Brokers; the
other Christian Jews, so called because they are bred up in Spain, Portugal and
Italy, and go habited like the people of the Country from whence they came;
these are for the most part Merchants, and cunning fellows above the rest.

III. Tagareens.
THe Tagareens are banished Moors from Andalusia, of which there is about eight
hundred Families: they are the principal people that deal in Slaves, and are
great Armadores to fit out Ships against the Christians, being for the most
part very rich.

IV. Jerbeenes.
THe Jerbeenes, so called from the Isle Jerbis near Tunis; these are all
Merchants or Pedlars, and may be about three hundred Families, besides Comers
and Goers, who may have six or eight Barks and Vessels yearly Trading between
Jerby, Alexandria, Tunis, Tripoli and Algiers.

V. Moors.
THe Native Moors, who have by little and little gotten Houses and Habitations
within the City, and are about seven hundred Families.

VI.
CAbiles, Biscaries, and Moors, from the Zachary, or Southern Country: they
serve as Porters, and are less esteemed amongst the Turks, than the Christian
Slaves: they attend the Soldiers to dress their Horses, and other slavish
services, for which they have no other reward but a little bread; they are in
number at least five thousand.

VII. Christian Slaves.
I Know not if it be proper to set down here the Christian Slaves also, that
according to the best Computation are constantly Eighteen thousand; of which
about Nine hundred are Gally-Slaves, whose lives are very miserable, the rest
are employed by their several Patrons, some in their Garden-house, or sent to
Sea, according to the professions and qualities of the Patrons, by whom for the
most part they are better treated than any Slaves in all the Grand Seigniors
Dominion, having the benefit to keep Shops, Taverns, to work upon their
Handicraft-Trade, paying their Patrons a certainty a month, not exceeding three
Dollars per month, according to the best agreement they can make; and what they
can make more, is not in the power of the Patron to take away from them; by
which means many thousands of Captives have obtained their liberty by their own
industry. They have also liberty to say Mass, and hear it every day in the week
at the respective Banyards, and places allowed for that service. The
Protestants also have a place to preach and pray in, which is performed in the
English Consuls House by the several Nations, English, German, and Dutch, etc.
Protestants have the benefit of the Hospital.
They have also an Hospital maintained by the King of Spain, with an allowance
of twelve thousand Dollars per annum, a Doctor, Chi^urgeon, and Apothecary,
with two Fathers of the Order of St. Trinidad to say Mass. There is also a
Vicar General, who has allowance of six thousand Dollars per annum out of
France, being left as a Legacy by the old Duchess of Orleance.

All these abovesaid are commanded by the Levant-Turks, which in all exceed not
sixteen thousand. Out of which they have three Camps, or marching Armies, and
thirteen Garrisons to be supplied, besides the Ships and Galleys at Sea; so that
in the Town to Govern this vast multitude, is seldom left more than two
thousand Soldiers.

It would fill a very great Volume to relate the Differences and Heresies they
have one among the other in their Religion; but all the Mahometans frequent one
and the same Meskitos and Churches, and are not so inveterate one against the
other, as the several Sects amongst the Christians.

Militia.
THe Militia consists of two sorts of Soldiers, of which the principal are the
Levant-Turks, brought hither yearly by Ships employed to that service, as
occasion requires. At their first entrance into their pay, they are called
young Turks, and have four Dobles per month, four Loafs of bread per diem, and
a Lodging in the Casharee, or Public Quarter: his pay increases one Doble per
annum, and one Doble every time he goes into the Camp, and engages against the
Enemy, and one Doble for every head he brings from the Enemy. At the death or
removal of every Bashaw, or Dey, or Governor, the pay increases one Doble per
month, until his pay amount to forty Dobles per month, and his bread to eight
Loaves per diem; then he is in full pay, and can rise no higher in pay,
although he has never so high an Office: so that the pay of the Dey himself is
no more than forty Dobles per month, and eight Loaves of bread, though he has
other Perquisites, etc. that amounts to a vast, but unknown sum. If a Soldier
marries, he loses the benefit of his bread, and lodging in the Casharee. A
Soldiers first Preferment is to be Spahee, or Trooper; from a Spahee he comes
to be a Steward of the Casharee, or a Quartermaster for his Tent: from thence
an Oude-Bashaw, and then a Yeo-Bashaw: the eldest Yeo-Bashaw is Kia, or High
Sheriff of the City; he in two months becomes Aga, or Lord Mayor of the City;
whose Office, as I said before, lasts but two months, and then he is misuled,
and past all Offices of the Government; stands in full pay, and is called
Missul'd Aga: It is usual to be thirty or forty years in pay before they come
to that Office.

But the poorest Soldier, and though never so ignorant and incapable, when his
turn comes, is set on Horseback, and has a rich Vest put upon him, and made
Aga for two months, which may be worth to him, besides the Honor, about five
hundred Dollars. There are many Soldiers that, after they arrive to be
Spahees, Sometimes an Aga is changed in two days, but he has the full
allowance for the whole time.
desire to continue so; and then they, next to him, take his Office: Of these
are about two thousand, that have their allowance for their Horses, and are in
full pay, keep ranging up and down the Country, and have Free Quarter
wherever they go amongst the Moors: They assist the Beyes to gather in
Contribution, etc.

Runnegadoes.
ARunnegado that is written in the pay, enjoys all the benefit that a Natural
Turk does, and is made Aga when his turn comes, as well as a Levant-Turk. If a
Slave turns Runnegado, it is at the pleasure of his Patron to have him written
in the pay, for he continues still a Slave, unless his Patron gives him his
liberty. There are of the Runnegadoes written in pay about three thousand.

Zwows.
THe next rank of Soldiers are called Zwows; these are Moors that List
themselves in pay upon any extraordinary occasion, and are durante beneplacito,
and their pay never exceeds twenty Dobles per month. But their Officers are
better paid, which are elective: These are always placed in front of the
Battle, with Muskets. To which may be added the Subby Anni, a sort of resolute
salvage Moors, that wait upon the Turks, and live upon the spoil of the Enemy:
They fight with Pikes or Lances only. Of the Zwows are in number and pay about
four thousand.

When they fight with the Moors and overcome them, all the spoil of the Enemy
is brought to the Deyes or Generals Tent, it being accounted a great crime and
disgrace for any Soldier to touch the worth of an Asper, but to get the heads
of the Moors, and bring them to the Deyes Tent, receiving for every head as be
fore has been said, a Doble per month in pay until he comes in full pay, by
which means they seldom or never give Quarter in time of fight; nor is there
between any Enemies in the World such an hatred as the Moors and the Turks bear
one to the other. Their Order of March and Discipline in the Camp, is so little
different from the Turks in other parts of the Grand Seigniors Territories,
that it will be needless to relate more of them.

Naval Forces, and Discipline thereof.
THeir Naval Forces four years since was the greatest part destroyed by the
English at Cape Spartle and Bugia: but they have since built about five and
twenty Sail of Ships, good Men of War, from twenty to forty Guns, and have at
present thirty two Men of War, and three Galleys, the List whereof I have
hereunto annexed, besides several Brigantines and small Crafts, and two Ships
upon the Stock that will carry fifty Guns each. The manner of maintaining is
different to any that I have either seen or heard of; for of all the said Ships
and Galleys, not one of them belongs to the Public, but all to private
persons, armed out as our Privateers in England.

The Soldiers know when their turn is to go into the Camp, at which time he
may not be absent.
THe Soldiers that go to Sea in their Ships, are not taken notice of when they
Embark, nor are commanded to that service; so that it is not easy to know how
many Men go in every Ship, being sometimes twice as many as at other times; and
if a Soldier lose a Leg or an Arm in the Seaservice, he is cut off half his
pay, and is incapable of any other Office in the Public.

The Armadors that fit out the Ships, provide no Ammunition for the small Arms,
but each Soldier finds his own Musket and Cutles, with Powder and Shot. For
Provision they have only Bread and Vinegar, and some few Olives from the
Armadors.

They lie always upon the Deck without Cabins or Hamacks, and are quartered in
time of fight not much different to what they are in our Men of War. The
Soldiers that are upon the upper Deck, and stand only to their Muskets, are
called the Tiffa. They have great encouragement for entering of the Prize if
they fight; he that gets an Ensign has a reward sometimes of three hundred
Dollars; and the like is given to the first, second, and third Man that enters,
according to the hazard he has attempted.

How they share their Plunder.
WHen the Prize is taken, there is no Powder belongs to any body, but all is
brought to the Mainmast and sold, and that money is kept and joined to the
rest. Then the Ship, Goods, and Slaves are sold for the most; one eighth part
of the Goods and Slaves belong to the Public, and half of the Hull of the
Ship, the other half belongs to the Armadors, after the Beylick or public part
is deducted, one half of the rest is the Armadors, the remainder belongs to the
Ships company, and is thus shared: The Captain has twenty shares for himself,
the Leiutenant five shares, the Gunner three shares, the Gunroom crew and best
Soldiers two shares, the private Soldiers one share; a Christian Slave has
two shares; a salvage Moor (of which many go to Sea) one share. There goes also
an Aga in each Ship, whose Office is the same of a Judge Advocate, and has a
greater Command over the Men than the Captain, except in time of Fight; He is
sent on Board by the Public to represent at his return any difference that
should happen on Board in the time of the Voyage; He has for his pains three
shares. All the Goods that are taken in the Prize, as well the Christians as
the Hull of the Ship, are sold by an Outcry, and the whole Sum kept entire
until all be sold; and then after the Public part is deducted, the Armadors
and Soldiers share the rest, as beforementioned.

Galleys.
THe Galleys are seldom armed out but in the Summer, and are rather a charge to
the Armadors than profit, having seldom taken any purchase considerable: The
charge of putting out a Galley is usually imposed upon such persons as are
known to be very Wealthy, who have a Banyard to keep their Slaves in, whereof
there are three, according to the number of the Galleys, to each of them
belonging about three hundred Slaves, out of whose ransom the Armadors do draw
no small profit, as having bought them commonly for an inconsiderable price,
and not granting them their liberty again but at a high rate, the poorest of
them pays one thousand Dobles, or about three hundred Dollars, with its
Port-charges included.

Territories.
THe Territories of Algiers are bounded on the East with Tunis: Two days march
of that City is a Town called Calla At-Sevan, where is a Garrison of twenty
Soldiers sent from Algiers. The yearly Tribute brought from thence is twenty
thousand Dobles.

The next is Tibuisa, a Garrison of the same force, and pays the like Tribute of
twenty thousand Dobles per annum.

The next is Biscary, lies South-East from Algiers fifteen days journey; has a
Garrison of one hundred Soldiers, and pays Tribute twelve thousand Dobles per
annum. The Soldiers of Biscary at their yearly exchange in their march
homeward, receive the yearly Tribute of thirty Negros, from a place called
Worgola.

The next is Constantine, a famous and strong City, so well seated and
fortified, that one hundred Soldiers who lie in Garrison there, are able to
defend it against ten thousand. It pays Tribute one hundred and fifty thousand
Dobles per annum.

Next to Constantine is Bona, which has a Garrison of one hundred Soldiers,
and pays one hundred thousand Dobles per annum, and one hundred Kintals of
Butter.

The next is Mesela, has twenty Soldiers, and pays Tribute ten thousand Dobles
per annum.

The next is Lemora, has twenty Soldiers, and eight thousand Dobles per annum.

The next is Berenan, a famous Castle built by the Christians, and seated
amongst the Mountains about seven days march South-East: it has a Garrison of
eighty Soldiers, and pays Tribute to the Dey, or General of the Army, fifty
thousand Dobles per annum.

The next is Giggery, which has a Garrison of twenty Men, pays fifteen thousand
Dobles per annum, famous for the great defeat given the French there in 1663.

The next is Buggi, where Sir Edward Spragge burnt their Armada, has a Garrison
of one hundred Soldiers, and pays twelve thousand Dobles.

To the Westward their Territories extend as far as two days journey from Fez
and Morocco. The principal and most remoted Town, is Trimesan, an ancient and
large City, well inhabited by the Moors and Cololis that are married and live
there: The Garrison consists of one hundred Soldiers, and pays one hundred
thousand Dobles per annum.

The next is Mastagan, a fine Town well fortified by the Seaside, has a
Garrison of one hundred Soldiers, and pays Tribute to the Dey one hundred
thousand Dobles.

Besides these, is, Shershell, Dellus, Kollia, Bleeda Millyeave, Masson Medden,
and diverse other Towns, inhabited by the Moors; and several Turks are married
and live among them.

For the Collection of the Contribution of all these parts, are three Camps
yearly sent out, besides the forementioned Garrisons which are yearly relieved.
To each of these Camps is a Bey, or General that Farms the Contribution.

The first Camp is called the Churke Mahallas, Commander Harradien Bey, and
rangeth all the East as far as their utmost bounds to the Eastward. His Army
consists of fifty Tents, in each Tent is forty Soldiers, he pays five hundred
thousand Dobles per annum.

[The Bey is usually a Person of Noble Blood, bred among the Moors, of which is
many so esteemed by them. He has an Aga in the Camp, as the Ships have at Sea;
and the Soldiers are as much or more obedient to the Aga than the Bey.] The
second is Mahalla Titera, or the Southward Camp, they consist of fifteen Tents,
and two hundred Spahees; they are Commanded by Dell Bey, who gathers
Contribution sixty days journey Southward, from whence he brings many Negroes
of Angelo, and sometimes Gold having farmed it for one hundred and fifteen
thousand Dobles per annum.

The third is Carpe Mahallas, or the Western Camp, they consist of sixty Tents,
and gather Contribution within two days journey of Fez, and all the Westward
part from Algiers. This Camp is commanded by Ben Ashia Melias, Brother to the
Captain that was taken in the Algier-Frigat. He pays the Public five hundred
thousand Dobles per annum.

Besides these Revenues, this City of Algiers receives from the Handicrafts-men
eighteen thousand one hundred and eighty Dollars per annum.

The Jews pay two thousand eight hundred and eighty six Dollars per annum.

The Farmers of the Wax and Hydes pay eighty five thousand Dobles per annum.

The French pay for the Coral Fishing at Bastion twenty five thousand Dobles
per annum.

The Genoveeses pay for the Privileges they enjoy upon Tobacco, ten thousand
Dollars per annum.

The Custom of Goods may amount to twenty thousand Dollars per annum.

Moreover, if any Turk dies without any Heir lawfully begotten, his whole
Estate goes to the Public: If he has one or more Daughters, the Goods of the
Turk are given her; but of a Moor the Daughter cannot inherit: This brings in
an unknown and vast Revenue, it having been computed some years to amount to
four hundred thousand Dollars.

From the poor Slaves there arises no small profit to the Public: for after
the Slaves are sold at the Badistan, or Marketplace, they are carried to the
Kings House, and entered again, where every farthing that is offered for them
more than was in Batistan, turns to the benefit of the Public, besides every
Slave pays to the Public fifteen Dollars for his head, and ten per cent. for
so much as he is redeemed for: Add to this the part of all Prizes, and what
else is exacted by the Revenues laid upon all sorts of people, which all
amounts to a vast unknown sum of money.

Every two months they pay their Soldiers; No Person is permitted to go into
the Treasury.
and what money remains, is sent up to the Cassale, from whence they have never
yet taken any thing: so that the mass of Wealth that is believed to be therein,
might very well defray the charges of an Army, fit to take both that and the
City; when it was blown up by the Collolies, that part stood where the Treasure
lies, and received little or no prejudice.

Their Trade.
THe Trade of Algier is the most inconsiderable of any great populous City in
the World, depending chiefly upon the success of their Pirates: among the Tukrs
I do not find ten Merchants, and they only use to Tunis and Alexandria, from
whence they are supplied with Linen Cloth, Coffee, and other Merchandise.

The Handicrafts-men are chiefly Collolis, or Sons of Turks, who being
incapable of Preferment in the Government, are brought up to earn their bread,
and are well improved in their several Arts. Every Trade and Profession has an
Emeene, or Master of the Company, whose care is in effect the same as the
Masters and Wardens of a Company in London; but more absolute, it being in his
power, and also incumbent upon him, to chastise any of them with blows, when
they shall deserve it, or lay what forfeit he sees cause upon any misdemeanor;
to force them to pay their debts, if for any Commodity belonging to their
Trade, and to demean themselves civilly. Each Trade lives in a Street by it
self. The Power given the Emeene is no small ease to the Governors. They have
a Fabric of Cloth, and Linen, and almost all things necessary for Mankind; so
that the Manufactories they stand in need of from Christendom, is so often
supplied by Prizes, that the Consumption of the place supplied by Merchants, is
most inconsiderable.

Of English, the Goods brought hither is chiefly Cloth, of which four hundred
pieces per annum is the greatest Consumption, some Iron, Lead, and Tin, but in
all not enough to employ one good Ship to make two Voyages a year.

The current money of that Country is Aspers, of which 232. make a Ryall of 8
8, a Coin that is altogether unfit for any other Country, being not full three
quarters of an Ounce of Silver in a Dollar of Ryall 8 8. They Coin also a
Substance of Gold, which is the just weight of an Hungarian, and is worth two
Ryalls 8 8, and three quarters in Aspers, so that a Merchant that brings his
Wares hither by selling them for the money of the Country, finds loss of twenty
per cent. to the pound in the exchange of Spanish money, that it has much
discouraged all Trade hither.

The greatest production of Merchandise to be transported of the growth of the
Country, is Wax, about three hundred Kintals per annum, Hydes about twenty
thousand, and nothing else worth noting; but of Prize-Goods no small quantity,
having been, as I have particularly noted, one hundred eighty and seven Prizes
brought in, in less than two years and an half.

All Goods that are not contrabanda to be brought from Spain and Italy, pay 11
1 2 per Custom, a Ship pays fifty Dollars Port-charges, and a Barrel of Powder
to the Cassabe.

The Weights and Measures are no ways altered since the time that several have
undertaken to give an account thereof.

A LIST of the Ships in Algiers.
Ships Names. Captains. Men. Guns. What in their Stern. Marygold Aly Raise
Canary 350 40 Marygold The Lion 350 40 Lion Red The Citron Tree Hamet Lagere
350 40 Citron Tree The Orange Tree Sampson Raise 350 40 Orange Tree The Moon
Regip Raise 350 40 Half Moon in a Ring The Sampson Asaph Race 200 40 Sampson
The Seven Stars Buffon Race 250 36 Seven Stars The Fountain Baker Oggia 250 36
Fountain The Lemon Tree Ally Raise 250 36 Lemon Tree The two Lions Biram Raise
250 36 Two Lions Muskitto Assaine Raise 250 34 Stambol Church, and 2
Calabashes. Pine Tree Mahomet Torsett 250 30 Pine Tree The Sun Cornet 200 28
The Sun Blew Yellow Rose Topall Oggia 200 26 Yellow Rose The Sun Fortass 200 24
The Golden Sun Three Roses Mustap. Chelett 200 24 Three Roses The half Moon
Biskaine 200 24 The half Moon The Flower Pot Mustapha Raise Canary 300 34 A
Golden Flower Pot The Green Rose Corally Raise 200 20 Green Rose Mustap. Reis
Genores 250 30 A new Ship The Star Mustap. Reis Greek 250 30 The Star Sun and
Pearl Hassan Raise 200 24 Sun and Pearl A Carvel Over Raise 150 16 The Pearl
Ashatt 150 16 Pearl The two Stags Mah. Raise Malles 200 20 Two Stags The great
Pearl Abducadre Raise 200 24 Great Pearl The little Lion Mustaph. Raise 150 16
Lion Rose and Pidgeon Bostanges 150 18 The White Rose and Pidgeon. Pearl and 3
Roses Taggarin 80 8 Pearl and 3 Roses Settia Vsuph Raise 80 8 Settia Regip
Raise 80 8 Mahamel Raise, the Deys Son 400 50 2 new Ships. Bashaw Ship 400 50 2
new Ships.

Seven Brigantines, and three Galleys.

FINIS.

