Dr. Oates's Narrative OF THE POPISH PLOT, VINDICATED: IN AN ANSWER TO A
Scurrilous and Treasonable LIBEL, CALLED, A Vindication of the English
Catholics, from the pretended Conspiracy against the Life and Government of
His Sacred Majesty, etc.

By I. P. Gent.

Humbly presented to both Houses of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poult over
against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

To the Most Renowned and Most Noble SENATE OF EUROPE, THE Lords and Commons OF
ENGLAND ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
Most Illustrious and Right Honorable,
A Certain Pamphlet has lately appeared in the World without any Name, which
has daringly presumed to call that Pretended, which you have adjudg'd and voted
Real, I mean the Popish Plot. And indeed it has been one of the chief designs
of the Papists ever since the first discovery, one of their most laborious
endeavors, as well by Writing as by slanderous reports, to vilify and render
insignificant that Evidence, which you have both approved and justified; though
not before you found it fairly fixed upon the Basis of important Truth.
However, that they might not triumph in the conquests of their Pens, as in the
success of their busy Councils, I undertook this brief Essay to stop the
career of the first, leaving the greater work to a more mighty Power.

I have not from hence taken any occasion in the least to wander among other
differences among us, but kept to the subject; firmly believing the
Infallibility of your Counsels after such a serious Debate, and that it was
impossible that your Prudence should be imposed upon by one single person, to
weigh and determine as you did. And I thought it would be more for the honor of
a National concern to dedicate this small Offering to your tribunal, then
guiltily to put my self forth into the World like the Popish Vindicator in
disguise. Which is the best Apology I can make, for the presumption of this
Public, but most humble Address of

Your Devoted and Most Obedient Servant, I. Phillips.

Dr. Oats's NARRATIVE OF THE Popish Plott VINDICATED: In ANSWER to A Scurrilous
and Treasonable LIBEL CALLED A Vindication of the English Catholics, etc.
CAtiline in the hight and heat of his Impious Conspiracy, at what time he was
designing the Murder of the Consul, the Massacre of the Roman Fathers, and the
Destruction of Rome it self by Fire and Sword, had yet the Confidence to enter
the Senate, and with a plausible Harangue to justify his Innocence. An attempt
almost as bold as his March to the intended Sack of his Native Country. In
like manner an Imp of the same Brood, a Traitor of the same facinorous
Principles (for the Abettors in such important cases as these are as bad as the
Contrivers and Actors) after such lucid and apparent Discoveries of Papistical
Catilines and Cethegus's, after so many Examinations of National Councils and
Assemblies, so many Convictions and Executions, so much unwearied pains and
high Expenses to disintangle the Guilty from the Noozes of the Law; has
presumed to steal into the World, a malicious piece of Labor in Vain, which he
calls in downright Gibberish, A Vindication of the Inglish Catholics from the
pretended Conspiracy against the Life and Government of his Sacred Majesty. A
specious Title indeed, wherein the Venerable Impostor, by condescending to
allow the King his due and undeniable Epithet of Sacred, thinks to charm the
Readers Ear, and lay the foundation of his Delusion. It is a thing very easy
to ascribe to the Anointed of God the inseparable Title of Sacred; but whether
such a Veneration proceed from the real Motives of Duty and Allegiance, or from
the glozing Inducements of constrained and Time-serving Adulation, is many
times greatly to be questioned: And indeed never more to be suspected than at
this time, from a Person who pretends to write a Vindication of the professed
Enemies not only of our most Sacred Monarch, but of all Protestant, or as they
otherwise term them, Heretical Princes. For if his business be not to Vindicate
those whom we Accuse, his Vindication signifies nothing. I must needs say
indeed, that his Title salutes us with the prospect of a very lame Story, and
an Enterprise undertaken by halves, in regard he only takes up the Cudgels for
the Inglish Catholics; as if the Foreigners were Saints: But he will find
himself under a foul mistake, and that he ought to have prepared his Fullers
Earth and his Rubbing Brush for both alike, both being equally sullied with the
same Crimes, and stained with the same bloody Principles.

The occasion of the Dispute is Truth. The Protestants would have her on their
side, the Catholics court her to take their part. To which purpose the private
aim of their Vindication is to prove there was no Popish Plot; the Public
design, to render the First Discoverer a mere Caitiffe; so not to be believd,
and consequently that England was at that time and still is governed by persons
either strangely credulous, and stupidly unwary, or else as strangely malicious
and Bloodthirsty. Ponderous Accusations to be thrown upon the Government and
Religion of a Nation.

In the first place therefore it behooves us stricttly to Examine, who this
Titan of a Vindicator is, who so boldly dares to Scale the Heaven of Sovereign
Majesty, and impeach at once the Prudence and Justice of Three Kingdoms. And
then for whom all this Bustle is made, for whom all this Toil and Labor is
undertaken; who these pretended Inhabitants of Salem are, that breathe out such
complaints of wrong and injury. Who if they once appear such as we more than
justly suspect them to be, will come very far short of their swelling
Expectations.

There is no question then to be made but that this Potent Vindicator is a
Roman Catholic; what Title he bears, or what Order he Musters under, it
nothing imports. For of all those Religious Fraternities, confirmed by those
Imaginary Vicars of Christ, called Popes, there is little or no difference to
be made. They are all grown corrupt; there is not one does good, no not one.
Pride was the Foundation of their Humility; Impiety of their Devotion, and
Interest of Ecclesiastical Policy confirmed and supported their Hypocrisy.

This is not only one Doctor's Opinion; for take them altogether Higglede
Pigglede, one with another, and then hear the Character, which the great and
Famous Mezeray, an Author of their own Profession bestows upon them. On ne
sgauroit, sans rougir Parler, etc. We cannot, without Blushing, says he, speak
of the Usury, the Covetousness, the Drunkenness, and Dissoluteness of the
Clergy in General; of the Licentiousness and Villainous Debaucheries of the
Monks in particular: The Luxury, the Pride and Prodigality of the Prelates; the
shameful Sloth, the stupid Ignorance and Superstition both of the one and the
other.

In another place the same Historian speaks in general, that Harry the fourth,
during his Reign, detected above Fifty Conspiracies against his Life, the most
of them contrived and fomented by the Churchmen and Religious Orders. Upon
which he makes this remark; So many pernicious Effects does indiscreet zeal
produce.

If you examine in particular the several Guilds and Societies of those
Papistical Votaries, that so numerously overspread the several Quarters of
Europe, you shall find the Benedictines Taxed and upbraided for their excessive
Pride of Habit, their Silken Garments and their gilded Shoes, for their
Gluttony and Epicurism, and for their excessive Wine-bibbing, in the primitive
times of their Institution. Nay, you shall find them conspiring to Poison the
Founder Benedict himself, because he held them too strictly to the Observation
of his Rules, From this Order sprang the Monks of Clugny, the Monks of
Camaldoli, Val' Ombrosa, Grandmont, the Carthusians, the Cistertians and
Bernardines, the Humiliates, the Praemonstrates, and several other Petty Orders.

As for the Humiliates, who one would in charity think, should have been the
most harmless and Dovelike people in the World, they were such a notorious
Generation of Vipers, that Pius the V. not able to endure their enormous
courses of living, and terrified with their intended assassination of Cardinal
Borromeo, their Protector, abolished the whole Order, and would no longer
suffer such Vermin within the Limits of his Jurisdiction. Of the Rest, you have
this lovely Character given in general, without any complemental or partial
exception, by an ancient English Poet.

Qui duce Bernardo gradiuntur, vel Benedicto,
Aut Augustine subleviore jugo,
Omnes sunt fures, quocunque Charactere Sancto
Signati veniant, magnificentque Deum.
Who Bernard's Rules, or Benedict's obey,
Or covet holy Austin's lighter Yoke,
They Are all a pack of Thieves, however they
Disguize their Crimes, or falsely God Invoke.
More particularly sit and admire the heavy Reproaches thrown upon all these
Sons of Corah, said to be the Monks of the third Classis, by Bernard Abbot of
Clairvaux, for their most Nefarious Luxury and Debauchery. Venture, says he,
dum nescit, oneratur; sed varietas tollit fastidium; and in another place,
Parcitas putatur avaritia, sobrietas austeritas creditur, silentiam tristitia
reputatur.

Petrus Cantor affirms the Monastical way of Liviug to be supported Ex
foenoribus and usuris Avarorum, ex mendaciis deceptionum et deceptionibus
mendacium praedicatorum mercenariorum, etc.

Petrus Cluniacensis will not allow the Mansions of the Monks to be other than
Synagoga Satanae. And of the Reverend Fathers themselves, says he, Quid illi
sibi de Monacho praeter nomen and habitum vendicant?

Honorius a Presbyter of the Church of Autun in France, speaking of all the
whole Rabble, Contemplare, says he, Monachorum Conciliabula, and videbis in
eis Bestiae Tabernacula, per habitum seculum fallunt, deceptos decepti
decipiunt, secularibus negotiis impliciti, in servitio Dei desides existunt.

If you survey the fourth Classis of Mumpers, Sturdy Beggars, Scrapcravers, and
Spittles, of which number are the Carmelites, Dominicans, Franciscans, Minors,
etc.

As for the Carmelites, certainly a worse Character cannot well be given to
men, than that which Nicolaus Gullus, the seventh General Master of their Order
has conferred upon them: Who not only in a very high measure impeaches their
Sloth, their Ignorance, their Lust and Luxury, but calls them Reprobates,
Stigmatized fellows, Vagabonds, Tale-bearers, Citizens of Sodom, and the Tail
of the Dragon, drawing after it the third part of the Stars. And these were
they that to uphold the credit of their Mumping Trade, reported and defended it
for truth, that the Virgin Mary went a Beging.

The Dominicans had their rise from Forgery, Fraud and Imposture, from feigned
Miracles, Visions and Apparitions of the Mother of Christ, now the derision and
Laughter of the World; and the Infernal Politics of Rome, which having
experienced the success of their Founder Dominick's Invectives to the utter
destruction of above a hundred thousand Murdered Albigenses, thought it a
piece of their Ecclesiastical prudence to cherish and propagate such dexterous
Instruments of their Cruelty.

Upon the same Foundations were reared the great Privileges of Franciscans,
and Minorites, whose crimes, iniquities, impostures, lewdness, and Vices of all
sorts and sizes, have been the Themes that have employed the Pens of sundry
Learned men, that could not forbear to detect their Enormities. Nor could any
thing be more infamous in History, than that Hellish piece of Villainy which was
acted at Bern in Switzerland, upon occasion of the difference between the
Minorites and Franciscans, about the Conception of the Virgin Mary. In which
Story the Reader may find the very Person of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and two
of their own Saints, St. Barbara, and St. Katherine, most audaciously rather
nefariously counterfeited to support their own Assertion. The Relation is to be
read in Stumpsius's Annals of Switzerland. Of these Mendicants, Nicolaus
Clemangis, Archdeacon of Bayeux, raises a very severe and general Question:
Quid commendabile de ipsis dicere possumus? Petrus de Aliaco, a Cardinal,
styles them, Hominibus onerosos. Polydore Virgil calls them, Fraudulentorum
hominum Sectam.

As for the Jesuits, how they have behaved themselves in the World, you may
easily see by their Expulsions out of so many Kingdoms and Commonwealths:
Particularly after that Villainous Attempt upon the Sacred Person of Henry the
fourth by Iean Chastel, by a particular Act of the Parliament of Paris, it was
Enacted, That the Priests and Scholars of the College of Clermont, and all
others of the Society of Jesus, as being corrupters of Youth, disturbers of the
public Tranquillity, and Enemies of the King and Kingdom, should depart the
Kingdom in fifteen days, and that their Goods and Revenues should be employed
in Charitable works, as the Parliament should think fit.

Father Guignard, in whose Chamber several Scandalous Libels were found against
Henry the 3d. and Henry the 4th. was condemned to be Hanged; and Father Guerit,
who had been Chastel's Tutor, sentenced to a perpetual Exilement.

Of this same mysterious Tribe are all those pretended imitators of Jesus, who
having made all England ring with their amazing Villainies and Parricides, have
made all Europe stare at the Impudence of their Defenses and Denials: For what
they cannot Deny, they Vindicate; what they cannot Vindicate, they Deny; as if
there were no truth in History, and that all were falsehood but what they coin
in their Mints of Lying and Equivocation, to support their unsanctified
endeavors to maintain and propagate the power of Antichrist. I say what they
cannot Deny, they try to Vindicate. And thus because they could not deny the
Murder of Henry the third, Sixtus the first then Pope, had the impudence to
applaud the Fact, with the Epethites of Insigne and Memorabile, and long Majus
quam illud Sanctae Judith. Which when once that Lamb of God, who pretends to
forgive all the crimes in the world, had done, no wonder Mariana and Verona
followed his steps, the one in Vindication of Jacob Clements, the other of John
Chastel; no wonder there should be a Book published at Doway, in which the
Jesuits impeached the Act of the Parliament of Paris of Absurdity and
Injustice; or that the Jesuits should excite, exhort and encourage Ravaillac to
complete that unhallowed murder which others had so unsuccessfully attempted.
This may suffice to give you a short prospect of the Credit of the whole Roman
Catholic Clergy, of which I may say in brief, as Callimacus says of the
Cretans, (...): -- Or, As Hesiod, in his Theogonie of the Lying Priests of his
time, (...) Or rather according to the Character given to the unruly vain
Bablers and Deceivers of his time, by St. Paul, out of Epimenides: (...).

How then comes it to pass, that men who for so many Ages together have been
persons of a profligate credit, however they may blind the World with an
outward Sobriety, they that have long ago forfeited all their Reputation for
common Honesty and Morality; for what signifies the Morality of discharging the
Expenses of daily necessities between Neighbor and Neighbor? what imports an
outward civil conversation in obedience to the Law, when at the same time they
are clandestinely designing against those very Neighbors to deprive them of
their Political Tranquillity, and hazarding their Estates by Invading the
Sovereign Protection of Both. I say then how comes it to pass that such persons
of profligate credit, the professors of a profligate Religion; a vicious and
misshapen Mixture of Ceremony and Superstition, that will not pass the Muster of
common Reason; should be such Sisters and Winnowers of Truth? What have they to
do to be so strictly Inquisitive after the Motes in other men's eyes, that have
such massy Beams in their own? Why should it be such an improbability to
believe, that people that were so active in their Contrivances against Q.
Elizabeth, King James, and Charles the first, should be so unlikely to Plot
against Charles the Second. As if the Roman Catholics had but newly
entertained the Charm of Sacred into their Breasts, and that it was no
protection against their Violences, when as truly worn by his Predecessors.
With what Impudence can they presume to be the Judges of the pretended
perjuries of other Man, who themselves trample under foot the solemnity of
Swearing; have invaded and corrupted all the Laws of Testimony, and with the
Canker and Aqua fortis of their Diabolical Equivocations have endeavored to
corrode and dissolve the very Ligaments and Bands of Humane Societies? Because
they deny, we must not be believed; because they assert, there is no
Contradiction to be made against them. A most ignenious project indeed, to
propagate the grand Mystery of Iniquity. What a golden Age it would be among
Thieves and Robbers, Ruffians and Murderers, and all sorts of Malefactors,
were they but once allowed to defend their Villainies by their own bare denial
of the facts, or the Recrimitation of their Accusers. But this Vindicator and
his Crew, because they are no better than such, would fain have it so to be,
that it might be at their own pleasure to Govern the belief of the World.
Because they have rendered all their sayings, their writings and their
Attestations of as little Credit as the Alchoran; therefore it is a thing
impossible for any other men to speak Truth. And yet while they are Sweating,
Toyling, Moyling, Panting and Laboring to Stop and Undermine the Truth of
Evidence, encouraging and employing the debauched Pens of Criminals and
Protestants in Masquerade, setting their mercenary Emissaries for pitiful
Rewards and Tavern expenses, to fill the Town and Country with their Stories,
Lies and Fables, to delude Belief and trouble the Stream of succeeding History,
they do but act the same things of which they accuse others, rather disclosing
and evincing than concealing their own shame, and manifesting the Verity of
their foul deeds.

(...). The Truth is always better detected by a Patient silence and contempt
of Political Malice, than by so many boistrous, laborious and forced
Vindications, which make it Evident that so much Bustle, so much stir is not
for nothing.

They confess there was a Plot, but they say it was contrived by others, and
not by them. And to that purpose, they endeavored to throw their
Meal-Tub-shams upon the Innocent; But the success of the Proof on both sides
was far different; for many of theirs have suffered, none of ours were so much
as questioned. And yet such was their Diligence, such the discouragement of
ours, such the strength of their Party, that perhaps it might have gone hard
with some persons, had there been the least appearance of Truth in what was
designed by those Knights of the Meal-tub, and crafty Secretaries of Colonel
Mansel's pretended Letters. But all those Elaborate Engines of deceit being
Providentially overturned and rendered unsuccessefull, what can men of Reason
Judge but that all their Windings and Shiftings, all their Forgeries and
Reproaches, all their Rolling Sisyphus's Stone, are but the Effects of their
disappointed Fury to see their tottering Religion more weakened and Expugned by
their own Diabolical practices, that have thrown upon their Nonsensical
Superstition the additional stains and defilements of Treason and Murder, and
awakened the Jealousies of all the Princes of Europe to put in Execution the
Motto of Lewis the XII. Perdam Baylylonis Nomen, more than all the Opposition
either of Germany or Geneva.

Seeing then all the several Orders of the Roman Clergy, and this Vindicator of
the Inglish Catholics, being of the same Gang, are so far from being Persons
of Credit, that they are not only the Subject of every Satirical Pen, but the
Religious Scorn and Indignation of so many good and grave Men of their own
Profession; we may presume that those Thunderbolts of Perjury and concocted
Lies which they toss with so much Rage at others, will not prove so Fatal as
vain Malice suggests to men of their own lewd Principles.

Now then to the Particular difference between the Vindicator and Dr. Oats. And
first let us see whence comes this dismal Shower of broad Arrows, and barbed
Defiances. It seems, Non omne malum ab Aquilone; a little brush of Misfortune
from the South, St. Omers and Doway must Club to vindicate the Inglish
Catholics. Two Reverend Seminaries of Mischief, where are the best Forges and
the best Artists, as Famous for Forming Lies and Reproaches against the
Protestants, as the Workmen of Montpellier for making of Tweezers. What
Instructors of Youth they are, is yet fresh in Memory, upon their sending such
a Knot of young Striplings, furnished and fortified with all the Sleights of
Equivocation, to lie and forswear themselves for Convenience; a Virtue which
the Jesuits thought both Rationable and Justifiable, as being Applauded by
Lucians Philospeudes, the Vindicators particular Author. So that I am afraid
there is but little hopes of Truth to come from either of these places, where
the Masters are so ready, and the Scholars so apt to learn the Mystery of
Lying. His Address to the Reader, he calls to the Courteous Reader (for indeed
the Reader must be very courteous that takes notice what he says) and tells
him, he is to examine a Pamphlet, which is singular in its kind. He means
something else, whatever it is; help him Mrs. Cellier. For certainly this was
not the first detection that ever was made of Popish Conspiracy and Treason in
England, and therefore not singular in its kind. But he endeavors to explain
himself, saying, It is an Original; for its Author found none to copy: and he
hopes none will ever copy him. In truth, I don't understand him yet; 'twas very
discourteously done to chop Nonsense upon a courteous Reader at the first dash.
It was a violent strain to usher in a Quibble. But whatever the Vindicator
meant, the Author of the Original never meant it should be other. He does well
to confess it an Original; for then you may be sure it was the Authors own.

No work, he says, so like the True Narrative, as Lucians True History. What
did this Fool mean to bring the True Narrative and Lucian's True History
together, between which there is no more Parallel or Similitude than between an
Oyster and a Pippin. If he did it to show his Learning, he is cursedly mistaken
to conclude the falsehood of the true Narrative from the truth of Lucians true
History. For to tell him the truth, Lucian 's true History is no true History;
so that by the force of his Antithesis, Lucians true History being feigned, the
True Narracive must be true. However like one that never read Lucians true
History, he essays to make out his Comparison, and says, Lucians true History
is witty, the True Narrative stupid. Go on -- That delights, this grieves; That
laughs, this bites. A very pretty description of a true History. However in so
doing, it did the Office it was intended for; it did both grieve and bite, but
none but those that deserved it, which was a greater Argument of its being
true, than any the Vindicator has brought out of Lucian to prove it false. So
that I am apt to believe, this Conceit of the Vindicators was conceived in his
Heel; as Lucian, in his True History tells ye, the Men in the Moon conceived,
and not in his Head. However he has placed it in the Forefront of his Battle,
to show ye the strength of his Imagination.

He says, He never saw the man. Non imperte -- and so knows nothing of him but
by hearsay, and his works, which discover his better part, his soul: I find
the shallow Vindicators Prospective-glass was too short to discover his Soul;
but as to his Body, it being allowable among the Jesuits to abuse those they
never saw in their lives, he adds, That his Physiognomy in a Pamphlet is said
to be an Index to all Villainy, and that any lettered man may read Rogue in his
face. This denotes in the Vindicator two Jesuitical perfections, Malice and
Rascality, from the single authority of a Pamphlet to call a man Rogue, that he
never saw in his life. And who wrote this Pamphlet? A certain Fortune Tellers of
their own Gang. A very easy way of defamation, to borrow Reproaches from one
another. However there be that say, if they had had his face, they would not
have changed it with any of the five Jesuits that were hanged. Certain it is,
that being presented to the Bishop of St. Omers for Confirmation, he stopped when
he came to Oats, because he doubted whether his heart was prepared to receive
the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Love, in whose face He perceived signs of great
Malice. It seems then, the Vindicator Berogu'd the man he never saw, by his own
Confession, upon trust; the more Knave he for his pains; for he was not certain
of the first, but he is certain of This. And what does this signify? As if the
Bishop of St. Omers spoke nothing but Gospel. Men must be scandalized by such
Enemies to Truth as the Vindicator, because such disciples of Artemidorus, as
the Bishop of St. Omers, shoot their fools bolts at Random against a Young
Scholars face. An excellent Reward for a Proselite that came to be admitted
into their foppish Religion. But to return your Bishop Physiognomie for his
Physiognomie; St. Francis, one of his great Saints, was such a contemptible,
ill-look't, beetle-brow'd fellow, that when he came to Innocent the Third for
the Confirmation of his Rule, the Pope bid him go wallow with the Hogs, (for
whom he was fitter company than for men) and not trouble him with his Rules. So
much may the Pope, much more the Bishop of St. Omers, be deceived in Humane
Physiognomie.

The Vindicator goes on; He styles himself (quoth he) Doctor of Divinity, and
says he commenced Doctor at Salamanca. Which cannot be; First, for he never
was at Salamanca.

To which the Doctor answers, That it may be, for First, he was at Salamanca.
Now whether the Doctors Argument be not as good as the Vindicators, I leave to
any ordinary Logician: Nay it is more probable that the Doctor should know
whether he was at Salamanca or no, than a man that never saw him in his life.

Secondly, None but Priests, says He, are admitted to that Degree in Catholic
Universities, and he never was a Priest.

To this the Doctor makes answer, that the Vindicator is in a very great
error: For that Father Landayada, when he was only a Clericus Minor was made a
Doctor, and that he was not made a Priest till some time afterward. But the
Doctor could not stay for his Priesthood, because of his urgent occasions in
England.

Then the Vindicator tells ye a story of the Archbishop of Tuam, how the Doctor
wrote to him for Holy Orders, which the Bishop denied him, because of the ill
Charracter he heard of his Life and Manners.

Who does this Vindicator write to? certainly not to the Protestants; and then
what does his Vindication signify? Here is an Irish Priest, that pretends to
an Archbishopric in the King of Englands Dominions, to which he has no more
right than Tom Thumb, one that lives under the ill Character of an Exile, a
Renegado, one that has renounced his Allegiance to his Sovereign, and as a
Foreigner gives Him only the Title of Most Serene King of Great Britain; and
because this Hedge Archbishop would not give the Doctor what he had no Power or
authority to confer, and to excuse himself pretends an ill Character of the
Doctor, therefore this must pass for current. It Is easily believed, that they
who usurp all the good Characters to themselves, have none to spare for the
Doctor, the Capital Enemy of their Treasons and Impieties. It argues nothing
but mere spite and malice to lay general Accusations against a man's
Physiognomy, and reproach him with the general Term of an ill Character, when
they lay nothing in particular to his charge. And so good night to this silly
Objection.

Thirdly, He had not Learning sufficient for any Degree in a Catholic
University. That Is strange! How then come so many Dunces, Blockheads,
Ignoramus's and stupid Theologists, to obtain their Degrees in Catholic
Universities. A thing so common, that there is nothing more frequently
complained of than the doltish Ignorance of the Romish Clergy. But the Doctor
tells the Vindicator, that he is still resolved to assume the Title in spite of
his teeth; and still asserts it to be his Right; and that he had once a fair
Diploma to have justified the Truth of it, (if any truth may be justified to
such opinionated and headstrong Mules as the Vindicator and his Gang) but that
Fenwick, White, and Wilmot rifl'd his Study, and took it from him, as the Monks
of Doway served a reformed Brother of Theirs, by robbing him of his Letters of
Orders, to the end he might not be able to justify his Ordination.
Nevertheless the Doctor is not so bare of Testimony, but that Fenwicks Papers
sufficiently witnessed before the Lords, that the Charges of his Proceeding at
Salamanca were paid by the Society here in London: A fair Argument, that the
Dr. had as much Learning as the Quoter of Lucians True History, and as well
deserved his Degree for it, as He will do for his Vindication. And thus the
Vindicator, against his will, happens to speak an unlucky piece of Truth, That
the Doctors Doctorship and Papists Treason were both hammered on the same
Anvil. For no question but Salamanca was as deeply concerned in the Plot as St.
Omers.

Now, quo he, I appeal to all who know any thing of the Jesuits, whether it be
credible that Oats a Scholar, should be employed in Negotiations of State, of
most dangerous nature and highest consequence?

Oh! are ye come to your Appeals? Then we shall deal well enough with ye.

Who would think it credible that the Jesuits, those Doctors of Policy, those
Engrossers and Forestallers of Learning, should employ such a pitiful poor
Scholar, as Iean Chastell the Son of a Draper, in such a Negotiation of State,
of such a most dangerous Nature and highest consequence, as the Murder of a
Sacred King? Who would think that that same Pythagoras of a Jesuit, should run
the Risco of being his Tutor and Instructor to prepare him for the fact? And
yet so it was without any Equivocation, and there was a fair Attempt made, for
which the Jesuits were expelled France, Father Guignard was hanged, and the
Philosopher Gueret condemned to perpetual Banishment.

Now after all this, who would think the Jesuits and other Papists should be so
impudent, as to come with their Ifs and Ands, and How is it probables, to
Vindicate themselves from the Guilt of the Assassination? Who would think they
should go about to lay their Crimes upon the Huguenots, as the Vindicator and
his Gang lately endeavored to father their Treasons upon the Presbyterians?
and yet they were so Impudent, and did so. For with your good leave, Mr.
Vindicator, Litera Scripta manet, there is no fence against the Record of
allowed History.

The Author of the Libel Printed at Doway, against the Decree of the Parliament
of Paris, was so confident as to averr, that it was Framed and composed on
purpose to render the Jesuits Odious. How is it probable, cries the same
Author, that Chastel, such a Proficient in Philosophy, should suffer himself to
be persuaded, that Kings might be Murdered? How is it likely, that Chastel
should so positively affirm, that such approved Doctors should write and teach
the same?

So that the courteous Reader may plainly see, this way of Iffing and Anding,
and Appealing, is no more than their old way of Shamming and Shifting, revived
by the Compendium, and imitated again by this same Learned Reader of Lucian.
Certain it is, they could not be without some body to do the Drudgery of
Transaction: And why their Pupil Oats, a Scholar, as they themselves call him,
might not be as fit a person to go of their Messages, carry their Letters and
open 'em by the way, as any of their learned Priests; why he might not be
thought to have behaved himself so well among them, as to be trusted, and
entrusted, and trusted again, there has nothing happened in the sequel of his
conduct that could make any man think the contrary. Neither indeed was there
that vast difference between the Doctors despised parts, and the Elevated
Capacities of them that were hanged, but that he might be an Associate with
better men than they at any time. And there is no greater Argument of his being
one of their Chief Instruments, than the Mistaken Judgment that they made of
his Physiognomy. For the Vindicator confesses they intended him much good, if
his nature had been susceptible of good Advice. Otherwise 'twas very ill done
of the Jesuits, so lovingly to entertain a person in whose face they read
Rogue, and was so obnoxious for the Ill Characters of his Life and Manners, but
that through those very Errors of their silly skill in Phisiognomy, they looked
upon him as a fit Engine to carry on their designs. So that from his own
conclusion reversed, since there was nothing of Strangeness or Improbability in
the Plot, as being a common piece of Papistical practice, it is as little
strange or Improbable, that Oats a Scholar should be employed in it.

He would persuade us in the next place, that the Doctor was never employed by
Jesuits, because he says, he knew the Generals Hand and Seal, and had several
times seen his Name; Yet in the first place, never hit his name right. It might
be very true that the Doctor had seen his name, and yet never see it truly
written. It Is a frequent thing in England for strangers to misspell one
another names, and it is as frequent to prosecute and sue persons by names
mis-spelt, and yet such a Misnomer invalidates neither the Prosecution nor the
Action. He was right in the bulk of the name Oliva; whether it were De Oliva,
or Di Oliva, or D' Oliva, it was not a straw matter, neither were the Letters
taken in White's Chamber produced to prove the wrong or right spelling of the
General's name, but that he was guilty of the Plot; which doing so effectually
as they did, 'twas not material to examine whether D' Oliva's name were spelt
right or no.

He says the Doctor mistakes the Inscription of the Seal, and that there never
was a (...) in any Jesuits Seal. A General and therefore very bold assertion.
And yet he confesses the Seal varies, and sometimes contains one thing, then
another. But what is this to the purpose? for throughout all the true Narrative
the Doctor does not undertake to tell the Inscription of the Jesuits Seal. He
says indeed in his true Narrative, that I. H. S. signified the Jesuits: He
also says that the Commissions to the chief Conspirators were stamped by the
General of Jesuits, but concerning the form or fashion of the Seal, there is
not one single Syllable. The Vindicators business is to answer the true
Narrative; if he do not that, he does nothing. Alas poor silly Woodpecker! He
come to strike at the root of a discovery with such dull Tools as these! I had
thought he would have brought such dismal Instruments of Ruin, that would have
displayed the very Foundations of the Tower of Babel, that he would have put
off his Doublet, fallen to work, and outdone Hercules's twelve Laborers:
Instead of this, he comes in sneaking like some superannuated Pigmy, with a
couple of formal sentences, which his Grandmother taught him, or else collected
out of Gregory's Morals, or some such musty Author; as if he had quitted the
force of Reason, and intended to proceed by the more lazy way of Miracle. Alas!
we knew that the speaking of material contradictions weaken the Credit of a
Witness; we knew what Truth, and Falsehood were, without the aid of his
Nonsensical Information. Then he rambles into the Trials of Ireland, Coleman
and Langhorn, which no way belong to his Province, and for Reply to which we
shall referr the Reader to Dr. Oats's Vindication in Answer to the Compendium,
from whence this feeble Vindicator has rifl'd both his matter and his
Observations.

Then he proceeds and says, The Doctor declared in Parliament, He had no body
considerable to accuse besides those he had named, but after he accused some of
the very Prime, whom before he had not named.

From this Suggestion, though absolutely false, the Vindicator would have the
Dr. Evidently perjured. To which purpose he sets up a Court of Judicature
consisting of himself, and by the help of a Scrap of Latin, and a versicle of
Scripture nothing to the purpose (as being far more applicable to himself and
his party) condemns the Doctor, and declares himself satisfied.

And thus you see, Gentlemen, the Vindicator has got a great Victory; he has
convinced himself; and so there is one of his great Labors over. One would have
thought he would have stopped here, as believing the World would have been fully
satisfied in his Judgment. But he proceeds and says, the manner of the
Accusation is such, as any Knave by his Oath might bring any person in
Question. He means, the Accusation was an Accusation; for all the World knows,
an Accusation justified upon Oath, will bring the Parties accused into
Question. But Accusations of that Importance as are contained in the True
Narrative, are too high attempts to be carried on by ordinary Knaves, but only
such extraordinary Knaves as themselves; such as they that had so lately
contrived to put their Shamms upon the Innocent, to cover their own shame. But
there was this difference between the Doctors Accusation and theirs, that his
was providentially upheld, theirs by Providence confounded.

We have a long story, quoth the Vindicator, of Treasonable Words spoken, and
Treasonable Letters written by several, who all protest they never heard of any
such thing, till Oats 's Narrative appeared. Assuredly this Fop of a Vindicator
wrote his Vindication to be laughed at; for men were not such Fools to betray
themselves. And yet in some measure by the help of their dear Minion,
Equivocation, they protested the Truth. They did not believe they had spoken
Treasonable Words, or written Treasonable Letters, till the Doctors Narrative
appearing, both their Words and Letters were so adjudged: but then it seems
their Ears were opened; and you do not hear the Vindicator urge their
Protestation any farther than the appearing of the Narrative. The Story of
Bedingfield, as he by his own Confession relates it out of a Pamphlet, scribl'd
by one of his confederates (by which you may see from what Muck-hills of
Treason he rakes his scoundrel Observations) to speak his own Language, is a
wicked Lie. For Bedingfield knew there was a Packet lay for him at the
Post House; but not daring to fetch it himself, sent a Friend for it, and when
he had it, showed it another Cordial Friend, besought him to carry the Letters
to Court, and to improve them to the best advantage (which the Vindicator calls
doing his Duty:) Thereupon the Letters were shown in Council as disowned by
Bedingfield, and an Argument drawn from thence of the Improbability of the
Plot, that men should of themselves produce Letters of that consequence; but
Bedingfield being sent for to be examined about them, could not be found high
nor low; he had prudently withdrawn himself out of harms way. The Story of
Atalanta had taught Bedingfield that piece of cunning; who not daring to trust
himself to an Escape with such papers about him, like those that scatter Gold
to prevent the swiftness of pursuit, sent his troublesome Packet to employ the
debates of the Council, when the business was new and scarcely believed, while
he shifted for himself. Otherwise Father Bedingfield might as well have carried
his Innocent Packet to Court himself, as have troubled his Friend. And it had
been a noble piece of service for such a Grave Father to have appeared, and by
the Discovery of the Doctors Knavery, as they call it, to have diverted the
Tempest so blackly threatening the heads of his dear friends. But to give the
Vindicator Scripture for Scripture, out of the very next words to his
Quotation, in the first Epistle to Timothy; (...).

The rest of the Paragraph is mere Canting and Mockery of God and Men; the more
ridiculous for his quotation of Whitebread. As if he had no other supports for
his Vindication than the Hypocritical Ejaculations of Executed Traitors.

But now he will follow the Deponent step by step. There Is something in that,
for all this while he has done nothing. And what he says, shall be confirmed by
the undoubtedly true Attestation of Archbishop of Tuam, the perjured Frye of
St. Omers and Doway, the Jesuits of the Confederacy, and the rest of his bloody
Canaille; Murderers shall give it ye under their hands they are no Murderers,
and Traitors attest they are no Traitors. Drive on Coachman. For though in
Equity our bare Denial ought to be preferred before his Asseverations, when the
Vindicator is Chancellor, not otherwise; for, in dubio favendum est reo, prius
quam Actori, which is utterly denied him, when hitherto neither Justice nor
Reason have made any doubt of the Guilt of his Party; Yet he will prove
irrefragably what he advances; that is, if he can. However his heart is good,
and he promises fair; so that if the old Proverbs of Cursed Cows and Threatened
Folks do not help us, we are all at a loss. In the two following Paragraphs you
shall find him Accoutring Himself to make his public Entry, putting on the
Vizor of a starched Humility, dressing himself in all Habiliments of
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, Flattering the King whom he abhorrs in his heart,
Colloguing with the Parliament which he abominates, and acting all the tricks
of Jesuitical Mountebankry that St. Omers Magazine could furnish him withal.

He says, he will not repeat the Seditious and Traitorous words of his
Majesty's Sacred Person; that is to say, he owns 'em all to be true, and
therefore he will not put himself upon impossibilities, to Vindicate the
English Catholics in this particular. As for his complement to His Majesty,
it is only to be looked upon as the forced Effect of Papistical Dispensation,
necessary at this conjuncture. There Is never a time that he calls the King
Sacred, but he receives Absolution. Else he would endure a long demorage and a
severe chastisement in Purgatory, to call that person Sacred whom he knows to
be Excommunicated by his Lord God the Pope, and deprived of his Dominions by
his Ecclesiastical Censures. Certainly, says he, the words were never spoken
by any Papist, Priest or Jesuit. Certainly they were; and some of them were
hanged for their pains; nor is it the first time they have done so. The
Papists, and among them the Monks and Jesuits, were they that unking'd Henry
the 3d. of France, and left him nothing but the bare Title of Henry Valois.

The Monks and Jesuits were they that made the Pulpits of Paris ring with their
Rebellious Declamations against their Sovereign. And the whole Faculty of
Theology then among the Papists esteemed the chiefest of Christendom, gave it
for their Opinions, that the French were Absolved from their Allegiance to
Henry of Valois. And does the Vindicator believe there were neither Papists,
Monks nor Jesuits of that Facalty?

-- Credat Iudaeus Apella. What Priest, Monk or Jesuit durst give the Title of
Sacred to Henry of Navarr, whom Sixtus the V. their Head and Lord, by whom they
all subsist, had condemned for a Heretic, deprived of his Dominions, and
declared incapable of Succeeding to the Crown. The Pope, the Sorbonne, the
Jesuits, and almost all the New Orders of Religion, (among which we are to
believe there were neither Papists nor Monks) were they that contrived and
fomented the League of the French Papists against their two Sovereigns, Henry
the 3d, and Henry the 4th. Father Claude Matthieu, a Jesuit, was called Le
Courier de la ligne, because of his continual Posting to Rome for the
advancement of that Rebellion. And can any man be so stupid as to imagine, that
all this while those Friars, Monks and Jesuits, never spoke treasonable words,
when they uttered nothing but Treason in their Pulpits; never wrote Treasonable
Letters, without which such a Rebellion could never be carried on; or believed
the Title of Sacred belonged to Pope-condemn'd and Anathema'd Princes?

-- Credat Iudaeus Apella. I fetch not these Instances out of Protestant
Records, but from their own Historians. From whence I argue the Falsehood and
Arrogance of this quacking Vindicator, and by which all men of Sense and Story
may see what credit there is to be given to the rest that follows.

Did he see his Observations would be Offensive to any in Authority, he would
suppress them. No, no -- it is well enough; For though this sentence of the
Vindicators be an Impudent Reflection upon the Supreme Authority of England,
and those who at present Govern the Helm of State, yet some compassion may be
showed to his saucy Supposition, and pretended Blindness, in regard that by
divulging his inconsiderate Malice, he has rather justified the proceedings of
those in Authority, than Vindicated those Miscreants whom they punished. The
Lords Spiritual and Temporal are mightily beholding to him for his
Acknowledgments, though it is verily supposed, They will hardly return him their
Thanks, unless he will vouchsafe to come over and fetch it himself. He did ill,
when he was in such a Courteous vein, not to thank 'em too for Voting what was
discovered in the Narrative to be Truth: Then the disproof of the true
Narrative would render him an Illustrious Vindicator indeed. Nothing could be
sufficient for his recompense, but the Pontificate it self. But the lewd
progress he makes presages so ill of his side, that if he ever come to
preferment in the Church, it must be by his Duncery, and not by his Ingenuity.

But now he returns to the King, and hopes His Majesty will not be displeased
with harmless Endeavors to Vindicate persons wrongfully accused. He forgets
his Title of Sacred already; and Blaspheming that Sacred Majesty which he
pretends to reverence, presumes to tell the King, that those persons whose
Crimes and Treasons he himself had so patiently and with so much consideration
examined, were wrongfully accused. Yet not content with this, under the
disguise of humble Admonition, from his Castle of St. Omers, more daringly
assails his Sacred Honor, and Taxes him of shedding Innocent Blood. Who would
not now believe this Miscreant Vindicator Himself, to be one of those that
contrived the Assassination of his Sacred Person, that so irreligiously Attacks
and Undermines his Sacred Reputation? And what is all this clamor for? Only
for putting to deserved Death a company of Varlets and Vagabonds, who ought to
have been hanged, if for nothing else, for only Scaperloytring within the
forbidden Limits of his Dominions. He is now got into a Preaching humor, and
says, Defense of Life and Honor is commanded by the Law of Nature. It Is so,
and therefore his most Sacred Majesty is resolved to take the best care he can
to preserve his own, and the Life and Honor of his Subjects, from the
Villainous Attempts of the Vindicator and his Confederates. For, pursues he,
should we admit the Reproaches of Traitors, Conspirators, Plotters,
King-killers, etc. we were not fit to live in any State. It Is very true; and
therefore because they could not avoid those Reproaches, that is the very reason
they have been expelled out of so many States and Kingdoms, and particularly
out of This. And so to his

Observations on the Epistle Dedicatory.

He begins, Mr. Oats --

Well -- here Friend -- what is your business?

Why, -- If all you say in your Narrative be true, if the Conspiracy be real --
etc. -- then so.

But if the Plot be feigned, if the whole Information be a heap of Lies, if the
persons accused be innocent, etc. -- then so --

A very worshipful Speech in good sooth -- for the which,

-- Dii te, Damasippe, deaeque
-- donent Tonsore --
It is a very irrefragable Argument indeed, and I suppose such a one as they
call at St. Omers, Argumentum ad Hominem; that is, the Vindicator calls to Mr.
Oats, being a Man, and tells him, If it be so -- it is so -- If it be otherwise
-- it is otherwise -- From whence I argue, that if the Logic of St. Omers be no
profounder, it may be easily fathomed.

Well then for once we will grant, that if the Doctors Narrative be true, he
merits Reward; if false, he deserves Punishment. Now what is the Consequence?
Why the Consequence is this. If the Narrative be false, no Crime can be greater
than His. If true, no reward can be too great. I appeal to both the
Universities, whether this be not acutely argued? But, Heaven be praised, the
Logical fit is over, and the Vindicator betakes himself to his former method of
rambling Discourse, which better agrees with his humor, if I may not say
Capacity.

You boast, says the Vindicator, of your inbred Loyalty, which neither your
Education nor your Discourse confirm. Suppose a man be bred a Turk or a Jew,
what is that to the purpose how he was educated in his Youth? He left his
Fathers Education, and came to you to St. Omers for Breeding; why did not you
teach him better? We had thought you had intended your Vindication against the
Doctor, not his Eather. Now for his Discourse, you say, the Doctor calls
concealing Treasons and concurring with Treasons (the subject of his Majesty's
Pardon) Human frailties, as if he esteemed them little Peccadillo's, and Venial
sins. Pray, Mr. Vindicator, where were your Brains? or how long did you scratch
before you hit upon this learned Exposition of yours. For he says no such
words, and the sense of what he writes you most falaciously misinterpret. The
Doctor says only this, that the Narrative had its rise from his inbred
Loyalty, and credits support under God to his Majesty's gracious Pardon for
several humane frailties in the Management: As much as to say, His Majesty's
Gracious Pardon of several Humane frailties in the conduct of his discovery,
were the support of it against the Machinations of such subverters of Truth as
the Vindicator. His Pardon for concealing your Treasons, and concurring with
your Crew, was a Pardon of another nature, which there was no occasion here to
mention: By the way, good Mr. Screw-sence, in your Reply, be sure to tell us
what you mean by Little Peccadillo's.

To what the Doctor says, That the many encroachments of the Papists upon
Princes for these thousand Years, prove their Inclinations for the future. You
answer, What will the Encroachments of the Presbyterians prove? What Is that to
you, or what is it to the purpose? The Encroachments of the Presbyterians are
no Excuses of the Encroachments of the Papists. The Presbyterians stick
strangely in your Stomach. I find you want Employment. You would fain animate
the Protestant Princes against the Presbyterians. It Is true, we know you could
help 'em to a Massacre or two at a short Warning. But at present there is no
such occasion. In the mean time, what say you to the Encroachments of the
Papists? That Is your Charge. With much ado at length you say, That the
Rebellions, which you mincingly call the Disorders of the Catholics, were like
Agues in the Spring, neither painful nor dangerous, and leave the Body more
healthy than before. So you conclude that the Papists may be Rebels, massacre,
murder, play the Devils with two Sticks, it is all for the health of a Kingdom.
So you murdered Henry the third, and Henry the fourth, for the Health of the
Kingdom? God preserve England from your Papistical Agues. Here Is a Vindicator
of the Inglish Catholics indeed, to support and encourage Treason, while he
endeavors to vindicate 'em from it! The Catholics have great hopes of your
destroying the True Narrative.

He is offended that the Dr. Charges the late unnatural War upon the Papists.
But it is very true, for all his Ale and History; for had not the Papists
perpetrated that Inhumane Massacre in Ireland, those other heats of a few
violent Spirits had soon been overmaster'd. But when the Papists by that bloody
means had conjured up the fears and jealousies of the Nation for the common
safety, 'twas high time to disarm Papists, and put Priests and Jesuits to
death. Afterward, when the Kingdom was all in a Combustion, the Papists
flocked to the King not so much out of Loyalty, as to protect themselves from
the Revenge that threatened the Crimson Fact they had committed. Then for the
service they did the King, it was none at all, but rather an injury; for they
did but weaken and pull down his, as the Huguenots by adhering to Henry the
third, advanced and Strengthened the Duke of Guises party, to the destruction
of both those unfortunate Monarchs. We could give the Vindicator a cluster of
Evidences of the Disloyalty of the Inglish Catholics to their Native
Sovereigns. Particularly, how unlikely a thing it is, that they who would have
murdered King James in his Cradle, should prove Loyal to his Father? that they
should fight out of Loyalty for the preservation of his Majesty's Crown, and
the Protestant Cause? No, no, they hoped by that Disunion, which they appeared
in only to advance and render more desperate, that there would be no need of
Catholic Arms to reduce them to the Romish Church, but that in time they would
pave the way to it themselves. But being defeated of their hopes, then they
fell to their old way of Plotting, according to the method of the Doctors
Narrative. Had the Dr. added, that the Papists were the first Contrivers of the
late Wars for the health of the Nation, the Vindicator would have been pleased;
but because he did not, therefore he was displeased: And because he cannot be
revenged upon the Doctor, therefore he falls pell mell again upon the
Presbyterian, asking questions with one side of his Mouth, and answering them
with the other. Who did this? The Presbyterians; Who did that? The
Presbyterians. Who did the the other thing? The Presbyterians. But to retaliate
his Kindness, the Vindicator must give us leave to ask a few questions in the
same manner. Who massacred the poor innocent Albigenses? The Papists. Who
committed that bloody Butchery in Paris? The Papists. Who massacred the poor
harmless Piedmontors? The Papists. Who were the Actors of that impious Tragedy
in Ireland? The Papists. Who were the Contrivers of this last horrid Plot? The
Papists. So that the Vindicator does but sharpen his own weapons against his
own and the breasts of his own party; and the dirt of Rebellion still remains
as foul as ever upon their own Hypocritical Habits. I will ask the Vindicator
but one Question more; Who they were that brought a Petition to Oliver Cromrel,
wherein they promised that if He would Tolerate the Popish Religion in England,
they would assist him to extirprate the Family of the Stewards? And whether
they were not as like to proffer a thousand Pounds for the discovery of his
Majesty's Escape after Worcester Fight? As long as it was the Act of the
Papists, it is no matter for the Mistake of a Name or two.

Upon his next Repetition of the following Expression in the Epistle, What
Arguments can persuade them to be true to their natural, who profess
Allegiance, out of Conscience to a Foreign contrary Sovereign? He Answers
readily, no English Papist does so. He may well say readily; for such Answers,
indeed, are very readily coined. But I say, Bellarmine, thou lie: For if the
English Papist do not do so, he is no Papist, but a Mungrel. To prove this, he
renounces his Religion, and says, That the Pope, out of his temporal Dominions,
is no more regarded than the D. of Parma, or the Prince of Monaco. This is
another manifest untruth; For it is the positive Doctrine of the Papists, that
by mere Divine Right, the Pope is supreme and sole Monarch of the World; and
that all Monarchs and Princes are his Vassals (which includes his authority in
temporals as well as spirituals): Insomuch, that the Legate of Pope Adrian told
Frederick Barbarossa to his face, That he held his Empire at the pleasure of
the Holy Father; which if they did not believe for Gospel, and that they were
not tied in greater Bonds of allegiance to the Pope, than to their native
Princes, they would never so often have revolted and renounced their fidelity
to their Sovereigns, as they have done upon every trifling Excommunication from
the Sea of Rome. And it would be a ridiculous vanity for the Pope to assume to
himself a power of depriving Princes of their Kingdoms, which is a supreme
authority in temporals, if he thought the people did not believe themselves
bound to obey him in temporals as well as spirituals. It Is the fear of temporal
accidents, not the spiritual Fulminations, that has scared so many Princes, and
brought the Empire of Germany almost to a morsel of Bread. But this same
Vindicator and his crew, are such a parcel of obstinate, willful Vermin, that
they will believe nothing in the World, either of History or Reason, that makes
against them, be it never so certain, never so plain.

All the rest of this Chapter is nothing but ribble-rabble, as wide from the
purpose, as Dan from Bersheba. Now we are come to the Contradictions and Lies.

CHAP. II.
A Discovery in the Address to the Reader.
IT IS very true, here is a prodigious yelping and bawling, a hideous Black
Sanctus of Lies and Contradictions, Contradictions and Lies, beyond all the
yells and dins of Green-Hastings and Mackarel. But now I think on it, I can tell
what is the matter; the Jesuits are ringing all their Bells backward to raise
the Country upon Dr. Oats: And yet after all this confounded noise, enough to
startle all the wild Beasts in a Lybian Forest, the Vindicator tells us not a
word what a Lie or a Contradiction is; as if that men of sense were such silly
Partridges to Cowre under the Lowbells of Jesuitical clamor. These Jesuits are
a pack of Knaves that must be looked after. It Is a Thousand pound to a
Nutshell, but that this deceitful Vindicator may have arraigned and condemned
for Lies and Contradictions, those things which are not so; and that for
Perjury, which deserves no such sentence. And therefore, for the better
discovery of the Vindicator's fraud, it will not be amiss to produce the
several definitions of Contradictio, Mendacium, and Perjurium, that so the
Vindicator's pretended accusations being brought to their several Tests, the
juggles of this St. Omers Pamphleteer, may more easily be made apparent.

A Lie, then, is that by which a false thing is signified either in word or
deed, with an intent to deceive.

A Liar is one that delights to speak a Falsity which he knows to be so; or a
Truth which he believes to be false.

On the other side, he is no Liar who tells a thing that is false, which he
verily believes to be true; he may be said to err, not to tell a Lie.

Now in this first Chapter he tells us, the Deponent says,

The Narrative was presented to His Majesty the 13th of August last, and sworn
upon the Sixth of September.

These, like a great Knave (for it is fit he should have as good as he brings)
he calls Two Great Lies; for as to the first, he says, the Narrative contains
things averred to have happened upon the 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8 of September
following. And what of all this? The Narrative was presented privately in
August, at what time, and till the Eighth or Ninth of September following, the
Deponent remained undiscovered.

To the next he answers, That the Dr. and Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey assure it was
sworn the Twenty-seventh of September. That is false; for the date of the
Certificate which he carps at, is only the date of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's
Certificate, that it was sworn before him, not when it was sworn.

But suppose these passages had been both false, where is the intent of
deceiving, that made them Lies? The intent of deceiving must have lain in the
falsity of the Narratives being actually presented, or actually sworn to; which
being really true, the error of a trivial circumstance, is but one of your
Little Piccadillo's as you call them.

And now Mr. Vindicator, are not you a pitiful, idle, inconsiderate, both Fool
and Knave, in a vindication of the English Catholics from so horrid a crime as
they lie under, which should have been weighty and great, so unworthily and
Porter-like to give a Gentleman the Lie to posterity, upon such silly,
illiterate, pitiful and low-conceited inadvertencies as these? Give me leave to
tell you, Sir, you have hitherto showed us nothing but the symptoms of your
future folly and duncery; and whereas you are pleased to bespatter the Deponent
with such Lackey-like and slovenly Language, Dispeream si tu Pyladi prestare
matellam
Dignus es, aut porcos pascere Perithoi.


CHAP. III.
Containing his Informations from Spain.
IN this Chapter the Vindicator pretends to tell us of abundance of Lies: For
as yet, I meet with neither Contradictions, nor Perjury. Observe now how he
makes them out.

He denies that Strange the Provincial, Keines, Langworth, Harcourt and Fenwick
did write a Treasonable Letter to Suiman at Madrid, concerning the contriving
and plotting a Rebellion in Scotland; And yet you see there was a Rebellion in
Scotland soon after, which makes it shrewdly suspicious, or in plain English
altogether credible. But what is his Reason? Because there was never any such
Letter. How does he prove it? By the Attestation of Strange himself, the very
first person accused of the Plot in the Doctors Narrative. And then again, he
says, It never was the practice of the Jesuits, that many should sign their
Names with the Provincial. Neither does the Doctor say any such thing; He says,
they wrote the Letter, that is, they were present at the Writing of it, which
is the same thing: So that the Attestation of M. K. R. S. C. B. and the rest of
his several confederate Jesuits was only a trifle of supererogation.

He denies that Morgan, Wright and Ireland were employed to preach as
Presbyterians to the disaffected Scots, etc. How does he know all this? Because
no English Jesuit was ever sent into Scotland. Wright was infirm, and went into
England for his health. As if England had not been in his way to Scotland. But
he was recalled shortly after. How long that might be, God knows, considering
how the Jesuits are able to stretch such a Whitleather word as shortly. And as
for Morgan and Ireland, they never were out of England. Just as he denied his
being in London, because he was in the liberties of Westminster.

He denies that the Dr. broke up those Letters at Burgos, and read the
Contents. His Reason? -- Because he has told ye, there were no such Letters,
therefore he could not read the Contents. This is just like their silly
pleading at Newgate.

In the Third Article he has found a nest of Lies, no less than Four at a time,
denying, That Ashly, Blondel, and the Two Peters' s sent Twelve Scholars into
Spain, Eight to Valladolid, and Four to Madrid, as appeared by their several
Patents, who were obliged by the Jesuits to renounce their Allegiance to His
Majesty of Great Britan in the hearing of the Deponent. 1. Because the Students
are never sent away by any but the Rector, or Vice-Rector. With the
Vindicator's favor, the Jesuits have no such Laws of the Medes and Persians,
but which the Rector or the Provincial may dispense with upon occasion: Besides
the Rector has his Consultores or Assistants, whom he may employ to act for him.

2. Never any Patent among Jesuits had more than one name. There Is nobody says
to the contrary; If Twelve Scholars have Twelve Patents, what need of more than
one Name in a Patent?

3. Because there is not one word of renunciation in the Oath of those
Colleges. Who said there is? They might renounce their Allegiance to the King,
and yet not take the Colledge-Oath.

4. He could not hear a thing done in a place where he never was: but he never
was at Madrid; therefore. But he was at Madrid in spite of your Teeth, Ergo.
Nor could the Dr. hear it done at Valladolid; for the Oath is never tendered to
the Novices, till they have past a whole year in that place. You mistake the
point, Sir, the Dr. talks not of the Oath, he speaks of the Renunciation,
without which, their very admittance would have defiled the College.

He denies, as being Two more Lies, That Dr. Armstrong brought Letters
subscribed by Five Jesuits, in which was expressed that the Jesuits in London
intended to dispose of the King.

1. Because those Letters were signed by more than the Rector: For which, he
brings his former Attestation of John an Oaks and John a Styles. What a strange
thing this is! He will not allow Five men to subscribe their own Letters.

2. Because there never was any such thing contained in those Letter, as they
protest who wrote them; As by their Attestations appears.

He denies, that Suiman wrote, that the King of England was poisoned. Upon what
ground? Why, because neither Suiman nor any other person ever heard such news.

He denies that Strange, Gray, and Keines wrote in a Letter to Suiman, that
they were using all diligence to get the King dispatched.

1. Because it is false that ever Strange writ any such Letter; as appears by
his own Attestation.

2. Because it is false that the Dr. was ever at Madrid; which they prove by
Three Attestations of their own drawing.

He denies that at the same time, at Madrid, the Deponent ever saw a Letter
from Strange, Gray, Keines, Langworth, Fenwick, Ireland and Harcourt, wherein
they expressed their sorrow the business was not done, through the
faint-heartedness of their man William.

1. Because he was never there.

2. Because it was against the custom of Jesuits, already repeated. But this
was upon an extraordinary occasion; and besides, they were then in a place
where they were not tied to observe Customs.

3. Because there never was any such Letter; as by their own attestations
appears.

I marry, Sir, here is the Sparring Argument at last.

He denies, That Pedro Hieronymo de Corduba Provincial of New-Castile, sent a
Letter by the Deponent to Strange, wherein he promised Ten thousand pound for
their pains, if they could get the business dispatched.

1. Because P. H. de Corduba was never Provincial of New-Castile. It Is not a
straw matter whither he were or no.

2. Because he left Valladolid upon the 30th of October, and not the Third of
November. The Vindicator was hard put to it to cavil so strictly for a day.

3. Here Is their old friend in a corner, that never fails 'em; because there
was no such Letter, as their own Knight of the post avers.

But besides this, there are Three improbabilities in the case, That the
Provincial of Castile should go about to allure the English Jesuits with such a
reward, who needed rather a Bridle than Spurs. You are still upon mistakes; the
Money was not to reward the Jesuits, Ten thousand pound was a Fleabite to what
they expected; but to show there should be no want of Money, should their
Chapmen ask too dear.

2. That he who could not dispose of any money out of his Province, should
promise them such a sum. By your favor, Sir, but he might, when it was money
entrusted in his hands, and left to his disposal upon such and such an account.

3. That he should trust the Dr. with such a Letter, whom he had newly cast out
of the College. That very thing argues all you have said about the Doctors
Expulsion, to be a St. Omers Lie; which exceed our English Lies Ten times as
much in bigness, as one of your Onions surpasses ours.

Thus Gentlemen you have seen what this Nickapoop of scurrilous Vindicator has
hitherto called Lies, and how he has proved them. 'Twas not so, because it was
not so -- 'twas not so, because it could not be so -- and it could not be so,
because they themselves say so -- Ergo. -- Now I would fain know of you, good
Mr. Vindicator, whither if you, and another as bad as your self, should both
steal a Horse, and your friend escaping, you should be taken, arraigned, and
the matter of fact proved, I say, I would fain know, whether if you, being
asked what you had to say for your self, should pretend the Presbyterians stole
the Horse; or if that would not serve, you should protest you knew nothing of
the Horses being stolen, till you were Indicted; and that your confederate,
that was with you, should attest it under his hand, that you did not steal the
Horse; Do you believe that these evasions should save you from being hanged?
It Is an experiment, I assure you, well worth your coming into England to make
trial of, in regard, that if you escaped upon those excuses, it would very much
conduce to strengthen the Arguments of your Vindication; and therefore take
notice, I have made you a fair Invitation; we have a College ready furnished
for your entertainment.

CHAP. IV.
From the Ninth, to the Tenth Article: Containing what the Doctor Heard and
Read at St. Omers.
THis is a long Chapter, an Oglio dressed by the same Cook without any variety,
wherein as he proceeds according to his former method, the Answers will be the
more ready at hand. It is averred by no meaner a person than Casaubon, a man of
great Learning and unspotted reputation, that a Jesuit in France, with his own
mouth, asserted to him, That if Jesus Christ were again upon earth, liable to
death, as he was, and any one should reveal to him as his Confessor, that he
had a design to kill him; before he would reveal that Confession, he would
suffer Christ to be murdered. In the same manner, we may as well believe, that
the Vindicator and his traiterous Brood, bred up in the same blasphemous
principles, so positive in the denial and evading such apparent Truths, and so
notoriously proved in so many public Courts of National Judicature, would deny
the very being and coming into the world of that eternal Deity whose Name and
Order they profess, were it for their disadvantage to allow it.

The Vindicator's conceit of his strength, and his fond belief that men of
reason will believe his Contradictions, because he asserts 'em, and confirms
'em by the attestations of men involved in the same guilt, does but help to
ruin his Papal Chimera; and those swarms of Clamours, Contumelies and
Calumnies, which he calls Lies, Contradictions and Perjuries, will in the end
sting his Vindication to death. For Vindicators losing their end, like bad
Surgeons, by their ill-applied Plasters, rather inflame and fester, then
assuage and heal. And indeed I might well enough conclude, as having shown the
Reader, plainly enough, the proportion of this Hercules, by what his puny
Arguments have hitherto been; but we are forced to follow him step by step, as
he does the Narrative, and to humor the Fool in his folly, to prevent the
Coxcombs crowing upon his own Dunghill of St. Omers.

Observe then how this Infidel of Truth proceeds.

He denies that Strange, and Nine other Jesuits wrote a Letter to Ashby* that
they had an intent to stab the King, etc.

1. Because Strange avers it to be false in Attestation G.

2. Because Nine Jesuits never subscribed with their Provincial. You must have
it over and over again. I tell ye, the Customs of Jesuits in Conspiracies and
Colleges are different things. Besides, the Doctor himself has sworn, that he
both saw and read the Letter, which is much more convincing then your
Attestation C.

Now for your observation upon the Text; for I find you are at a loss how to
remove this Block out of your way. You say to hear the Dr. speak, a man would
think nothing more ordinary in Jesuits Letters, then to write of poisoning,
shooting, stabbing and dispatching Kings. Nothing more frequent in their
Sermons and Writings, and therefore not so much to be wondered at in their
Letters. But you hear, that several of their Letters were perused, and no such
thing found in them. You heard with your harvest ears. For though you so easily
believe your own Brethren, we are not bound to believe you.

He denies That the same Fathers wrote other Letters to de la Chaize, with
thanks for his charity, and care of propagating the Catholic Religion; and
that the Deponent carried it to St. Omers, and thence to Paris. And his Reason
is, because the Deponents whole journey from St. Omers to Paris was a Lie. As
if any man would be such a Fool to tell a Lie which all the World could
convince him of. The Vindicator's neater way, would have been to have denied
there were any such Towns in the World as St. Omers or Paris, and then he had
hit it.

He denies That Ashby showed the Deponent, at his return from Paris, a Letter
to Strange and others in London, showing, that they had stirred up the Scots to
Rebellion, and that Twenty thousand would be in Arms, if France broke with
England.

He denies that a way was made for the French to Land in Ireland, that the
Irish Catholics were to rise, or that Forty thousand Black Bills were ready
for them.

1. Because the Deponent never returned from Paris, as having never beeen
there; which is verified by Attestation D.

2. Because such a Letter was never written, by the averment of Attestation G.

3. Because no English Jesuit ever dealt with Scotch Presbyterians.

4. Because they never dealt with Irish Papists disposed to Rebel.

5. Because there were no Black Bills prepared.

6. Because there was no way made for French landing.

How is this proved? Because here are no less then Six Becauses. And Six
Becauses, with an Attestation D. and an Attestation G. make an Argument
sufficient to confound all the Reason in Europe, were there Ten times more then
there is.

He denies that by Letters of the 18th of December it was specified that White
was made Provincial.

Because he was not declared so, till the 14th of January 1678. This is an
evasion. He might not be declared till the 14th of January, and yet notice
given of his Election before, without any violence done to Madam Probability.

He denies that White ordered a Sermon against Otes in the Sodality Church.
Why? Because he had no power before he was declared. But what if he took upon
him a little more then he needed? they durst not contradict him. And for the
Rectors, they have no such power as he talks of by the public Rules of the
Order.

And he denies there was any thing mentioned of Oaths; because Coniers protests
to the contrary, and the Copy shows it; as if they that Copy, could not leave
out what they please.

He denies Coniers was ordered to exhort all to stand by their new Provincial,
because it was never practiced, and then telling us the Sodalitie Church was
not a convenient place for such a Sermon, concludes the Deponent to be no such
Confident of the Jesuits as he pretends. It Is not to be questioned but that
they wish he had not been. But it seems he was more their Confident then the
Vindicator. For he goes only the old Pack-horse-rode; the Deponent was
acquainted with all their new methods, which the conjuncture of new affairs
required. Your great men, Friend Vindicator, were moving out of their Sphere,
and therefore no wonder if they acted eccentrically.

And this answer may serve for your fopperies and strained Evasions of the 13
th. Article. Only take notice that Evasions are as bad as lies at any time; for
they do not only include a lie, but endeavor to cloak the lie which the Evader
labors to smother.

He denies that Blundel was made Ordinary of Newgate.

It seems the word Ordinary offends his Worship. Let him choose what title he
pleases, 'twas an employment of the same nature, which for once he confesses,
yet calls it a lie. For he hopes if the Provincial did employ any one in works
of charity, ordered him to visit prisoners, to relieve or prepare them for a
good end, he was not to be blamed for it. Very true, but he was to blame to
send his agents upon Messages forbidden by the Law, only to debauch the
Consciences of men in misery, and out of a covetous interest, to prevent the
slipping of any grise by their Mill.

He denies it was done by Patent; call it what you please, Patent or Order, or
Commission, it seems it was done; and that is sufficient.

He denies that the said Blundell ever instructed any Youth in London, or
taught them Treasonable Doctrine. Upon what ground? because it is false and
improbable. How then came the Act of the Parliament of Paris to call 'em
Seducers and Corrupters of Youth? To evade which common practice of theirs, he
says the Jesuits might be begged for fools, to teach such Doctrine; he means
rank downright Treason, for then they may be hanged like Knaves for their
Labors. But for all his tricks, and shifts, and doubtings, let me tell this
Pumpkin of a Vindicator, that the seed and the fruit are very different in
shape, and yet the seed sends forth the fruit.

From this discourse of so many Letters, he takes an occasion to aim full at
the Deponents face, and thinks to give him a mauling rub: You seem (says he)
quite through your Fabulous Narrative to represent St. Omers as the center of
Jesuits Transactions, when they that know. St Omers, know it is the worst served
with Letters, of any considerable Town in the Low Countries. Well Gaffer
Fabulous, what would you infer from all this? You infer more than you can
answer from what the Deponent has sworn; but not believing that enough, you
would be inferring to the same purpose from what he never said. He does not
accuse St. Omers for being the center of all the Jesuits Transactions, nor the
Center of the World, nor the Center of Europe, or any Center. But indeed since
you put us in mind of it, it seems to have been the Nursery of the Conspiracy.
But what is the meaning of this impertinet Insinuation? To prove that there were
no Treasonable Letters sent to St. Omers, because they are so ill served by the
Post. Silly Mortals! what need had they of the Post, who had such a trusty
Messenger as the Deponent.

He denies that upon receipt of the abovementioned Letters, the Treasonable
words were spoken by Nevil and Fermor in the Jesuits Library at St. Omers, or
that the Deponent heard them.

For, says he, the words were never spoken when the Letters were received,
because there were no such Letters.

This, with the Vindicators leave, I take to be direct Nonsense, When the
Letters were received, there were no such Letters. But let it be what it will,
he has three Attestations, E. K. Q. to make it out. And lest they should fail,
he puts his hand in his Pouch, and pulls out a Contradiction. Here I had
thought to have produced the definition of a contradiction. But because this is
only a contradiction of the Vindicators own framing, I shall defer that trouble
till a better opportunity. He says, the Letters must be written upon Ian. 1, 2,
but takes the longest time, and then appeals to the Postmaster, whether a
Letter could come in 24 hours from England to St. Omers. I know not what
necessity there was that the Letters should be written upon the first of
January. The Deponent swears no such thing; but he swears he heard the words
spoken upon the third of January, and tells ye where; it is no matter when the
Letters were written. And now what think you, Sir? are not these pretty Fables
to trouble the world with? You might have very well spared your Calculation,
and your Appeal, unless they had been more to the purpose.

But he says the Deponent went on the third of January in the morning to
Watten, and dined there, as appears by the Day-book of the Seminary, and
therefore could not be at St. Omers that Afternoon. A worthy Record indeed! and
much for the Honor of St. Omers, when they are at such a pinch to bring their
waste-paper in Evidence! What low and ridiculous thoughts has this Vindicator
of mankind, to think that sense and reason would suffer themselves to be swayed
by the Day-book of the Seminary of St. Omers? Had the dispute been for no more
than half an hours absence, they would have brought the record of the Seminary
Day-book to prove the Deponent was gone to the House-of-Office.

To the 21, 22, 23, and 24 Articles, he says so very little, that it is just
nothing; so that we are to believe he grants them for truth. And if they be
true why not all the rest? Nay since he has given us an Inch, we will take an Ell,
and tell the Vindicator to his Teeth they are all true, for this very reason
because they are confirmed by that worthless Oath of the Doctor (as he most
Jesuitically calls it) which his railing and reviling language has only barkt
at, no where been able to penetrate.

It is a sentence of the Wise, Calumnia semper opprimit meliora.

But on the other side we have this to relieve us: Iustos mores mala non
attingit Oration.

And so let us go seek out our Vindicator again. As good fortune will have it,
see where he comes, all-to-be-new-recruited with the zealous inspirations of
Brandy and Satan, to gratify his Papistical, blind, and superstitious fury.

He denies, That White and other Jesuits writ a Letter on the tenth of March,
declaring that the Clergy were a sort of Rascally fellows, that had neither wit
nor courage to manage such a great design, meaning the Plot.

Here, says he, the Deponent throws an apple of discord to sow dissension
between the Clergy and the Society.

To pass by his polite Metaphor, which shows him to be either a great Dunce, or
a mere Novitiate, I would fain know cui bono? What should move the Deponent to
do a thing already done to his hands? It Is well known what opinion the rest of
the Clergy have of the unlimited pride of the Jesuits in general, and their
haughty advancement of themselves above their brethren; so that it was not the
Deponents work either to unite or set them together by the ears; for any man
with half an eye may see the Deponents intention, which was only to introduce
their contemptible reflections upon the Clergy, as a circumstance to prove how
curious they were in their Traiterous Instruments. But this is only a surmise
of the Vindicators, and therefore for fear it should not turn to account, he
brings his two never failing friends to nick it, that is, his own Averment and
Attestation E. Very proper Don Quixot's, and Sancta Pancha's to encounter the
Wind-mills of his own erecting.

He denies, That the Deponent saw a Letter from White, mentioning that attempts
had been made to assassinate the King at several times, by William and
Pickering, had opportunity offered it self. For missing whereeof, he denies
also, that William was chid, and the latter had twenty strokes with a
discipline.

His reason is, because he says, that no body ever heard of it but by the
Deponents Narrative. And then he desires the Deponent to give a reason why
White should only chide William that was his Man, and whip Pickering, over whom
he had no jurisdiction.

By the way William, was not Whites man, but a servant to the whole Society in
London, and so was Pickering, being under their Hire, and consequently both
equally under the Jurisdiction of White their Provincial Now I appeal to common
sense, and the judgment of those who have read or understand the extent of
Papistical authority in Penances, whether these lame and miserable shifts be
excuses sufficient to vindicate the Conspirators from the intended
Assassination of a Monarch? One would think that Mistress Cellier had been
Midwife to the Vindicators Invention, his Vindication is so like the Fables in
her Malice defeated.

He denies, That there were any Letters from White and others of the fifth of
April, that Morgan and Lovel were returned from Ireland; who said, 40000 Irish
Horse and Foot were ready to rise at ten days warning.

He denies also, That the Provincial summoned a General Consult to be held at
London, and that the Deponent was summoned to assist at it as a Messenger from
Father to Father.

Now what is his proof that all this was not so? Why because he says, there is
not one word of truth in all the Article, except the calling of the
Congregation. And then for the 40000 men, they were never any where but in the
Deponents Addlehead, and Lying Narrative.

Here Is a Vindicator for ye now! tell me where ever was such another in the
world! One that carries Gunpowder in his mouth, sets fire to his tongue, and
with one puff of a denial blows ye an accusation, be it as ponderous as all
Stonehenge, into a perfect annihilation. Caitiffs of Newgate, be of good
comfort, from henceforth defy Justice and the Gallows, bid the men of St.
Pulchers melt down their useless humming Passing Bell, and put the money in
their Pockets. For now let your crimes be what they will, never so plainly
proved by Oaths and Testimony, it is but saying the Deponents are Addle-heads,
and their Testimonies, Lying Narratives, and you shall be forthwith set at
liberty without fees.

This wonder-working Operator lives at the Seminary of English Jesuits in St.
Omers. He instructs the rich at moderate rates, the poor for nothing; he is to
be spoken with from eight in the morning till twelve at noon; and from two in
the afternoon till six at night. Vivat Diabolus.

CHAP. V.
Of the Congregation.
THE Business of the Congregation takes up a whole Chapter; 'twas an ugly
Business, my Lord, and begat a world of hanging-evidence, and therefore must be
denied stoutly.

But before he begins, he premises, That the truth of the particular concerning
the Congregation, shall be attested by all that were there, who are still
alive. No, they are not, there are some of 'em hanged. But what need of this
advertisement? we question not the readiness of them that are living, and of
hundreds more in the place of them that are wanting, to swear all that, and ten
times more, upon such an unavoidable occasion as this. There is nothing safe
either in this or the two other worlds from the denials of the Jesuits. They
deny there is a God by their actions and Doctrine; and should ye affirm there
is a Devil, because he is the father of Lies, they would deny that easily, as
being the fathers of Lies themselves. Upon Earth you see what the Vindicator
has denied already, and you shall see what he still denies. He denies that upon
the 24 th of April 1678, still, nov. Warren, Sir Tho. Preston, Marsh, Williams,
Sir John Warner, Sir Robert Brett, Pool, Nevil, in all with the Deponent about
nine, went from St. Omers toward London. For, 1. The Rector of Liege was not
of the number. 2. Sir Tho. Preston never stirred all the while from Liege. 3.
Sir John Warren remained at Watten. 4. Sir Robert Brett, Pool, Nevil, and the
Deponent remained at St. Omers. And to prove this, he bids you see
Attestations, I, H, F, D, and E. It Is very well, -- briskly done, -- well go on
--

He denies, That these met in a consult in London with Fenwick, Blondel and
Gray, and others, to the number of fifty Jesuits, at the White-horse- Tavern in
the Strand.

For why? neither Fenwick, Blundel, nor Gray were there. 2. There were only
fifty. 3. They never met at the White-horse-Tavern, as they are ready to swear,
and protested to the Vindicator, they did not know of any such Tavern in the
Strand, till the Deponent informed them of it. It may be not, because he was to
give them notice of the Place. He should have done well to have told us where
they did meet; and then the truth might have been easily found out. The
Deponent swears he was at the Consult held in May, to attend the Consulters,
and delivered their concerns from company to company. To this the Vindicator
says nothing but what was said by the Jesuits at their Trials, where their
Defenses made 'em ridiculous.

He denies, That after they left the White-horse- Tavern, they divided into
several Companies, as being against the nature of a Congregation.

You still forget, Mr. Vindicator, that this was no Congregation according to
the Statutes of the Society, but such a Consultation as Catiline held at Rome
for the subversion of his Country. And it is the nature of such Consults to be
kept on foot by private Committees, for the better carrying on the design.

Lastly, whereas the Deponent swears, That within 3 or 4 days after, he
returned to St. Omers with the Fathers that came from the other side of the
Water.

He absolutely denies there was any such thing. And these are the Lies which he
pretends to be sworn to in the Narrative in reference to the Consult at the
White-horse-Tavern.

And now Mr. Vindicator, give me leave to tell ye, you may be Canonized for a
Fool, but never for a Saint; for you have spoiled your Cause in this very
Chapter. I expected that here you should have shown all your Wit and Rhetoric,
the cream of your Eloquence, that you should have strewed the whole Chapter
with your Flowers, your Metaphors, and your Sorites; that you would have gored
us with your forked Dilemma's; that you would have displayed all your Hocus
Pocus tricks, all your doublings and shiftings; that you would have showed us
your Wards and Traverses, and all your Fencing dexterity; but never was
Tiptoe-expectation so deceived: here is not so much as one gentile piece of
Sophistry; nay, he must be a good Chemist that can extract so much as one poor
dram of common sense out of all his elaborate undertaking, but you lie, and
it is false: terms of Art which I find in no sort of Logic, but that of St.
Omers. He that pretends to such good Intelligence, could not choose but know,
how these very objections had been canvassed, how the defenses of his Martyrs
were exploded, how the testimonies of his St. Omers striplings, sent of Fools
errands, to swear in verba Magistri, were baffled; and therefore in his topping
Vindication to raise nothing new, but to say less then they then said for
themselves, less then what had already been promulgated by others, was but only
a lazy Epitome of the Compendium, and showed the Vindicators Brains were dryer
then Bricks; for they will yield a useful Oil; his Brains will afford nothing
but a putrid matter, which might have been as well blown out of his Nose, as
seaton'd out upon the Muckinder of a nonsensical Vindication.

CHAP. VI.
What happened after his return to St. Omers, till he left that place.
GEntlemen, you may be sure of Romances in this Chapter by the form of the
Contents.

Says he, the Deponent swears that Tho. White came to St. Omers upon the Tenth
of June 1678, and on the Eleventh spoke treasonable words against the King and
Duke in the presence of Richard Ashby.

And further, That White told Ashby, a Minister had endeavored to render
Jesuits odious, by Englishing their Morals, and the Provincial sent the
Deponent into England to kill the Translator, which the Deponent undertakes to
do, having 50 l. reward promised him by the said Provincial, and then that the
Provincial and the Society in London would procure the death of Dr.
Stilling-fleet. What says the Vindicator to all this? Why, he says the Deponent
Lies; and the White's dying Speech, and his Attestation before his death,
justify that the Depositions are false. He forgot to quote the Martyrs
Kinsman, Mr. Iennison's Attestations too, and then like Iael, he had Nailed the
Drs. Depositions to the Ground.

The Deponent swears, That Ashby told him that the Rector of Liege, when he was
Procurator at Paris, did reconcile the Lord Chancellor Hyde upon his deathbed.

This the Vindicator says is false; For the Rector of Liege has declared the
contrary, and that he never saw the Lord Chancellor in his life. Then it seems
it was Ashby the Jesuit that ly'd, and not the Doctor.

He denies That on the 23d of June the Deponent was sent for England to attend
the motions of the Fathers in London, with 4 l. for his charge, and a promise
of 80 l. for his services in Spain and elsewhere.

These things the Vindicator denies stiffly, as being circumstances of great
moment; Nay, if you will let him hold stakes himself, he will lay ye a wager of a
Hundred to One upon his own side. And the reason of this confidence is this,
that there is a Papistical necessity in the case, that the thing must be so. In
the foregoing Fourth Chapter there was a necessity that the Deponent should be
under Lock and Key at St. Omers, from the 10th of December stilo novo, till the
23d of June; and therefore they swear, and attest, and damn themselves it was
so. Now it is not convenient for the Deponent to be at St. Omers; now they
swear he was never admitted, and only a while there upon ance.

He would infer, the Deponent could not be sent the 23d of June to attend the
motions of the Fathers, because, he says, he was ordered Ten days before to go
for England to kill the Translator of the Jesuits Morals. As if a man might not
be sent into England upon Two Errands; or that the Fathers would have been so
rigid to have checked the Deponent for non-attendance, when they knew how well
he was employing his time. The killing of the Translator of the Morals, and the
attending the motion of the Fathers, were no such distinct employments, but
that they might be both conferred upon the Deponent together. Neither is there
any such desperate flaw in the depositions, but a very great probability that
the Deponent might be promised 50 l. for the Murder, and 80 l. for his services
in Spain. But here the Vindicator has ye again, and denies the Deponent ever
did any services to the Jesuits in Spain, unless it were in exercising their
patience by his unsufferable manners. What those were, the Lord knows, for he
gives us no account of them. And yet if the Vindicator could have spared us any
Instances, we cannot believe but he would have been very ample in his
Relations. We cannot imagine this concealment of an Enemy so outrageously
embittered, Orco implacabilior, as the effect of his favor. And therefore for
want of other Argument, he is dropped into such a nonsensical story of a Roasted
Horse, much like the Tale of St. Francis's Wife of Snow, that you would think
him sitting in some old Chimney-Corner, canopied with a Bacon-flitch, and
lulling the credulous ears of the old woman of the House for the benevolence of
a Rasher. Never did the Island of Dreams produce a more empty piece of vanity;
by means whereof, this Nug^poly-loquides would endeavor to prove that the
Deponent was never admitted, but contemptible, rejected, and did what he did
out of revenge.

He says, That when that good man, White, as he calls him, but as we with an
alias character him, that Traytorly Jesuit, was made Provincial, then the
Deponent made his Addresses, etc.

Let him say what he pleases, they have confessed the Dr. to have been received
into the College a Month before they will allow White for Provincial; and one
of their attestations confirm it: They swear and vow he stayed there above half
a year afterward, and stirred not out but twice all that while. No sign of his
being so extremely notorious for his bad life and conversation. And yet when
this bears too hard upon the Vindicator, here must be a Fable formed, how his
admission was denied above a month after he was admitted, and how he was
dismissed, and yet kept close in the House. The Vindicator should have told us
the date of his dismission, and for what particular crime; but that he
carefully conceals. Where are his Attestations A. B. C. and I know not what
flim-flams for that? But he was admitted and not admitted, dismissed and kept;
and then he swore, he would be revenged. A very probable Tale, that he should
be so plain with such a sort of people, when fast in their clutches, whose ways
of preventing his fury, he so well understood. And then he said, he must be a
Jesuit or a Judas; if he were not a Jesuit he should be damned. Truly 'twas ill
done of the Provincial, not to use his charitable endeavors to prevent a young
man from Two such dangerous precipices.

But that the Reader may be no longer in the dark, we will tell him when the
Doctor was dismissed; He was dismissed when upon some glimmering of the
Discovery, that Good Man the Provincial struck him with his Cane, and gave him
a Box of the Ear in his Chamber at London. A very rude way of dismission indeed,
and a very great affront, as the Vindicator called it. So that we agree about
the manner, but not as to the Time. After that, the Doctor dismissed himself,
by running down Stairs out of the Provincials Lodgings, having over heard what
a severe chastisement they were preparing for him, if they could but Trapan him
again to St. Omers.

Truly, if the rest of the Jesuits of St. Omers were no better then those that
were Hanged, or the Vindicator, hardly worth that, I see no prevailing reason
any man had to be so greedily covetous of their Society. Nor do I believe the
Doctor cared a Straw for their Company, but only for the advantage of watching
their contrivances, and disclosing the Conspiracies they were then brewing for
the destruction of his Prince and Country.

CHAP. VII.
What he Relates since his return to London, concerning Jesuits, from the 33 to
the 53 Article.
THe Narrative declares, That in July Ashby came to Town to dispose of the
10000 l. procured by La Chaise, and that he should Treat with Sir Geo. Wakeman
to Poison the King, as also to procure the Assassination of the Bishop of
Hereford. To this the Vindicator replies, That Ashby before his Death declared
all this to be false, as the Jesuits of St. Omers themselves attest. And all
this he clinches too with a How is it probable, that had there been any such
thing, Ashby should communicate it to one who had by him been so disgracefully
dismissed by the Provincials Order, etc. This is another Dismission which we
never heard of before; so that he may sheath his How is it probable again, as
being a very blunt piece of business.

The 34 Article, the Vindicator says, Is all false, and that there is not one
word of Truth in it, upon the credit of Attestation G.

To the 35 he says, Ashby and Blundel both protested it was false.

To the 36 he says the same upon Ashbys* single Protestation.

Thus you see what an Esteem one Traitor has for another, and how warily they
credit each other. Like the Story of the Caldron and the Cabbage. As if the
Vindicator and the rest of his Bloody Gang, had made a Compact together, to
this purpose, Do you make a Vindication, Deny, Lie, Defy, Decry, and what ever
you assert, we will all Swear to.

Now Gentlemen, that you are to Believe what they attest, I prove thus.

The Legend of St. Germain says, That that Saint raised up a dead Ass to life
again. The Legend of that Saint is to be believed, Ergo, You must believe the
Vindicator and his Attestators.

In the 38 Article the Doctor deposes, That White wrote to London to Fenwick,
that he had ordered twelve Jesuits to go for Holland, to inform the Dutch, that
the Prince of Orange intended to make himself King, but they got no farther
then Watten, by reason of some mischance, which Letter the Deponent saw.

This the Vindicator says, with more then ordinary Choler, is a Lie malicious
and ridiculous; malicious, in charging such an odious business upon the
Jesuits. Not so malicious neither, History has charged the Jesuits with far
greater Crimes committed in Holland then this. No less then the Murder of
William of Orange, and the same as fairly intended Maurice Nassau, both
perpetrated by persons instigated, encouraged, emboldened, hired, paid and
Missionated by the Provincial and Rector of Doway, and other Jesuits, as
Thuanus, whom the Vindicator, if he dares, may deny for a good Testimony, more
at large relates.

A Ridiculous, in supposing that the English Jesuits have either credit or
acquaintance with the States of Holland. The Fool will turn Changling before
the end of his Vindication. As if we thought the Jesuits had no more wit than
to appear in Holland in all their formalities. No, no, they have their shapes
and their disguises, and if they want credit or acquaintance, they want neither
Money nor Insinuation to procure both, unless they be all such Dunces as the
Vindicator. He I confess is no great man of Language, he will tell ye ye Lie, and
it is False, -- And fearing that neither his Malicious, nor his Ridiculous would
serve his turn, in his own natural Delivery, he affirms, The Jesuits never had
any such design, and that no Jesuit or Jesuits were sent about it. All which we
find him endeavoring to prove thus, for it is sometimes requisite to let you
see the quint Essence of his Arguments.

Six Jesuits could not be spared out of the Seminary of St. Omers upon such a
Design.

Ergo. Not Twelve out of the whole Province.

Again. They that stopped at Watten, could not be sent to Holland; for had they
been sent, they had gone.

Ergo. They were not sent, because they did not go.

To the 39 Article he answers, That Blundel protested he never heard of any
such Letter, and so refers ye to Attestation E.

In the 41 Article the Doctor deposes, That Fenwick told him that the Jesuits
had 60000 l. per Annum, and 100000 l. in Bank, and that he lent out money at 50
per Cent. This he denies, and wonders how it should be true. But it is a
Proverh fixed upon the Jesuits, Quod Vultur est Milvo, id Iesuita est Monacho.

So that it is no wonder that the most Covetous, Proling, Scraping, Racking,
Cozening, Cheating, purloyning Order in the World, should have 60000 l. per
Annum, and a hundred Thousand pound in Banck. The Vindicator little understood
what belongs to sums beyond his own Seminary Exhibition; and Fenwick was a
^illy Jesuit-Broaker. There be those who have better calculated the Jesuits
Incomes, that could have informed the Vindicator that their Revenues above 20
years ago, amounted to two Millions of Crowns in Gold yearly, which is above
500000 l, per Annum, a sum far greater then what the Vindicator admires at. And
there is no question to be made, but that they who were contriving the ruin of
Princes and whole Nations, had some of their bulky Banck disposed of near the
Scene of their Expenses requisite for such a design. And for the Jesuits
Consciences, we leave them to their Brethren the Jews to take measure of them
by their own.

The 42 Article deposes, that Harcourt, Fennick, Keynes, and another of the
Society, declared their intentions to raise a commotion in the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, which appeared also by several Letters showed
the Deponent.

This the Vindicator calls a Lie without any sign of Truth, and would have any
one of these Letters produced. What would it have signified? For the Vindicator
would have brought somebody to protest there were no such Letters written,
Produce their Letters, and either they make their Equivocating Comments upon
them, or else deny their own hands, which has not saved their Necks for all
that. That Is such a Flim Flam Story, for a Sancha Pancha of a Vindicator, to
bid us produce Letters, when he himself has undertaken to venture his Soul, and
all the pains of Hell and Purgatory to confound what ever can be produced,
which bare denials and attestations out of the Clouds, and that with such a
daring and audacious Impudence, as if Truth were only confined to that foul
skulking hole of Iniquity and Treason at St. Omers. And then with a plausible
Insinuation, They that all our modern Histories have Charactered for the grand
Incendaries of the World, They that are Chronicl'd for their Murders and
Massacres, and their inflaming all the Kingdoms of Europe, and disturbing the
repose of Church and State over all Christendom. They shall come to a pitiful,
idle, nonsensical Vindicator, and bid him cry to the Deponent for deposing the
Truth, and detecting their hateful Conspiracies, What a Commotion you have
raised in England, all the World may see. Yes, and all the World (no question)
by the vanity of this Vindicators attempt, by the sordidness of his Defense, do
plainly see who were the Original cause of all this Commotion; not the
Deponent; for the Enterprise, had it not been Truth, would have sunk such a
mean and despicable Slanderer as he. But those aspiring, topping Sons of
Perdition, whose wicked Principles oblige them to lay, (if they can bring it to
pass) all the Princes and States of Europe at the feet of a Lewd and Profane
Antichrist.

To the 43 Article, That no Messengers were sent by the Names of Moor and
Sanders, with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist Scots, etc.

He says little, but seems to be in an Ecstasy, and wonders whom the Deponent
means, for he never could hear of any Jesuit of those Names. A very likely
thing indeed, that never any English Jesuit (at any time) bore the common Names
of Moor, Sanders, and Brown, so vulgar almost in every Society of Ten. But what
needs all this Amazement? No body says they were Jesuits, nor sent as Jesuits,
but as Messengers or Emissaries, any thing but Jesuits. And thus you see what
is the main thing imposed upon the Vindicator to do; he is to deny right or
wrong; at which his fidelity is so nimble, that rather then not deny, he will
deny what was never averred. You shall see, when he finds that his Vindication
has done more harm than good, He will deny there was ever any such thing
written, or ever seen in the World.

To the 44. That the Jesuits communicate the secret Counsels of the King,
which they purchase with their money, to La Chaise the French Kings Confessor,
etc.

He says positively, all this is false, and to make it out, tells ye, There
was no need of purchasing Intelligences while the Coffee-houses stood. He would
make us believe the Jesuits were the arrantest Idiots in Nature, as if we
thought that Coffee-house Intelligence were the purchase which they Fished for
with their Silver-hooks. No, no, 'twas they themselves, who then, and still do,
make those Coffee-houses he prates of, the Nurseries of Rebellion, by their own
Emisaries, daily employed, to divulge their Lies and Forgeries, Et ambiguas in
vulgum spargere voces, on purpose to cast a mist before the Eyes of the people,
and gather strength to renew their disappointed Villainies: So that his
Coffee-house Inference is nothing but a mere Smoke.

The 46 Article deposes, That the Letters from St. Omers expressed great joy,
that Sir G. W. had undertaken the business.

To which he Replies, it is false, that ever Sir G. W. undertook the business;
for why? it appears so by the public Verdict of the Jury at his Trial.

An Argument of the Vindicators own Framing against himself; for by the same
inference it is apparent, that all that was Sworn against the rest that were
Hanged, was true, because the Public Verdict of the Jury found 'em Guilty. See
how these fellows glory in one Acquittal, and yet it is a thing frequently
observed, That many times the greatest Fellons escape, when lesser Criminals
are Condemned. By which the whole Nation may see of what a dangerous
consequence it is to show the least grain of Mercy to the Unmerciful. And yet
the Argument is not so potent neither, when we consider how much men of Reason
are dissatisfied with that Acquittal, and how the Papists laugh in their
Sleeves, and sing Jubilate, not so much for the escape of the Person, as the
success of their underhand dealing.

The rest of the Chapter is so Ridiculous, that I pass it over, as being
unwilling to tire the Reader with Impertinencies that may be avoided.

CHAP. VIII.
What he Relates of the Jesuits and others inclusively from the 54 to the 81
Article.
ART. 55. Mr. Jennison said, That if the King did not become R. C. he should
not be long C. R.

This the Vindicator calls a groundless Lie; but says withal, if any such thing
were said, It was because of the Presbyterians, and not of the Papists. So
then, the Question is not so much, Whether Mr. Ienison spoke the words, but
whither he spoke them of the Presbyterians or the Papists? If he spoke them of
the Presbyterians, they were true: If of the Papists, they were false. What an
open piece of Impudence this is, to Arraign a whole Deposition for a groundless
Lie; and yet with the same Breath to confess they might be spoke? If he has not
been soundly Pickering'd already for this mistake, he notoriously deserves it.

Article 57. Fenwick told the Deponent, that he had Writ that the King was gone
to Windsor, and that honest William and the Fathers were ready to attend the
Court.

To this he says, the first part might probably be true, but the latter part is
false; as also, that Fenwick told him of the Contents of the Letter. How then
came the Deponent to know of the Information given of the Kings going to
Windsor? It Is plain he knew it, and he Swears Fenwick told him, and you Mr.
Vindicator must produce some other Intelligencer, or else your Vindication will
hang of the Hedge.

Article 58. Keines Preached a Treasonable Sermon to Twelve persons of Quality,
That Protestant Princes were ipso facto Deposed.

Nothing more confirms the Truth of the thing, then the Subject of the Sermon.
But this he calls a Train to blow up any man that the Deponent should mark out
for Destruction. How common a thing it is among the Jesuits, to lay Trains
against, not only the Reputations, but the Lives of Great Men, they themselves
sufficiently know; and to requite that knowledge of theirs, we know as well how
hard a Task it is here for the Deponent to pick and choose the Subjects of his
Accusation considering before what Judges he must appear. The Vindicator should
have done well to have come into England, and lived half a year or so at
Newgate before he began his great work, they would have taught him far better
pleading then this: And yet he has the Effronterie to pretend from hence great
inconveniences, if Perjury continue Paramount, and Knaves be rewarded. Never
did Mortal speak more like a Knave then this Vindicator; for the Deposition
only supposes they were men of Quality, and yet he grounds a Perjury upon it.
See how cursedly this great Atlas of the Catholic cause crickles at the hamms.
A voice I hear, but nothing do I see, speak who thou art, that we may return
thee thanks for thy Learned Paraphrases.

Article 59. Keines advised a Gentleman in or about Westminster, to remove
thence, least God should destroy him with the Sinners of that City.

Well! what does the Vindicator say to this? why -- That Keines protested he
never said any such thing; and any man that knows both, will take his word,
before the Deponents Oath.

And I would advise Keines rather to crowd among the Dominicans, under the
Virgin Mary's Petticoat, then come hither to try the Experiment.

Article 60. Keines said it was endeavored to dispatch 48 at Wiudsor; that
Corker and the Benedictines had promised 6000 l. that two of them owned it, and
that their business was to remove the Stuarts out of the way: and that Coniers
laid a wager, that the King should not live to eat any more Chrismas Pies, etc.
This the Vindicator calls Poetry, as being one of the Tragical Order himself.
But whatever is the matter, here is neither ye Lie, nor Attestation G: surely
the man forgot himself, or else these two great Cronies of his were tired and
gone to sleep. Only he throws himself upon Corkers acquittal: a very slight
Bladder to Swim with in such an intended Sea of Blood. For though Corker were
acquitted, it was for want of double Evidence which the Law required: Not that
the Court believed him Innocent; and therefore they gave new orders to Detain
him, which was but sour Sauce to the sweet Morsels of his acquittal. Truly this
Article, great Man of might, required a more Garagantua like Vindication. You
should have roused all your ye lies, and it is falses, and now he lies under
Conviction and embodied all your Attestations to have given Battle to this
Article: and if you could have got all St. Malo's Dogs to have helped ye, all
had been little enough.

Article 61. Keines took the Deponent to an Assembly of the Dominicans, where
six were met in the name of the rest, with their Provincial, to comply with the
fathers of the Society. There also met five Jesuits. Keines demanded of the
Dominicans money to carry on the business of Killing the King: The Dominicans
answered, They were poor, but would give their assistance and Counsel. Hence
the Deponent was sent with the Proposals to the Carmelites, who answered, Their
prayers to God and the Blessed Lady should not be wanting, and that was all
they could give.

What says the Vindicator to all this? why, since you needs must have it, He
says, All those that know the Emulations that have been, and still are, between
the Dominicans and the Jesuits, will scarce believe those would meet to comply
with these.

Oh! Mr. Vindicator, you are ill read in History: Herod and Pilate could well
agree to remove the King of the Jews. Though the Dominicans and Jesuits jangle
about the Conception of the Virgin, they may agree for all that, about the
Conception of a Plot. Nay, the Pope himself could reconcile himself to the
Turk, and call him into the bowels of Italy to help him at a dead lift. You are
a whole Dutch League too short of a Vindication yet.

Art. 62. Blundel said his Workmen wanted Oil, which the Deponent supposed to
be Sheeps Fat. Coniers said, the Hill people were fools to set upon 48 at
Windsor, but he would speak to his Worship in other Language then in
Tormentillo, but that if his Shirt on his back should know how, he would burn
it.

All this the Vindicator denies, and sends ye to Attestation S, as the Dice in
the Dutch Fortune-book send ye to the Philosopher Pythagoras.

Art. 64. That Fogarthy is a main Agent in this Hellish plot. That he told the
Deponent he was present when Sir G. W. was contracted with; and that he had
hired four Ruffians to mind the Kings Postures at Windsor.

To this he says, the first is a Lie, the second is a Lie, and the third is a
Lie. Most Serene and Polite Vindicator, we greet thee Well. Cicero himself
could have said no more. From whence I argue thus.

He that tells another man he Lies three times, has the better of the Dispute.

The Vindicator tells the Deponent he Lies three times,

Ergo, The Vindicator has the better of the Dispute.

Now to turn the Argument,

The Vindicator tells me, the Pope is not Antichrist.

I tell the Vindicator he Lies three times.

Ergo. The Pope must be Antichrist.

And so there is a Rowland for his Oliver.

Having thus done with the Quintescence of his Ingenuity, we shall come to the
drossy part of his Wit, which lies in his Reflections. By which, if he knew
how, he would fain insinuate strange Chimera's into the peoples Heads, as
Bufalmacco in Boccace frighted his Master with Dor-flies, and bits of lighted
Wax-candles.

And to this purpose he terrifies ye with the Inconvenience of Blank
Accusations. For, says he, the Deposition concerning four Ruffians, was filled
up by Jenisons naming four Innocent persons to get a false Witnesses Reward to
pay his Debts, and supply his want of money. There Is now for Mr. Ienison, I
think he had better have held his Tongue. The Vindicator finds another
substantial Evidence come in to confirm the Narrative, and therefore he must be
bespaul'd with his Jesuitical drivel. But those Innocent persons never came in
to justify themselves, and in regard the Law of the Land supposes them guilty
that fly for it, it is not for his Pie-Powder-Court at St. Omers, to determine
who are guilty, and who are Innocent in England; or to dive into the reasons of
other men's Loyalty; as if none but the necessitous could be Loyal, and none but
Fugitives Innocent: Or as if the Justice of England accused or condemned any
man to please the Kings Evidence; or that the Kings Evidence were so dear to
him, that he would sacrifice his Justice to their private Interest. Brain of a
Tailor you are too saucy.

He goes on, No man can be secure in the way of a Mad-Dog, or an Impudent lying
Witness, such as your Mungrel Attestators, as long as the Clamours of the
Rabble are so loud, that neither Justice or Reason can be heard. He Is mistaken,
Reason and Justice have both in a good measure been so well satisfied, that I
dare say, they will never appeal to St. Omers for the redress of their
Grievances. By the way, Gentlemen, you are to consider whom this Brain of a
Tailor calls the Rabble: none but the Lords and Commons of England, you your
selves, and the whole Body of the Nation.

Those, says he, were wisest that embraced a voluntary Exile. He is mistaken
again, they are no voluntary Exiles, they were Banished by the Law of the Land,
and were but intruders into the Kings Dominions. They were the Pest of the
Nation, that escaped the provision of diverse wholesome Statutes, like old
cunning Vermin, Let them that stay behind, look to themselves as well as they
can. You speak like an Oracle; let 'em Fee their Counselor, and take his
advice.

Article 65. That the Deponent at Madrid, had seen the Lord Ambassador, Sir
William Godolphin at Mass, and was perfectly informed by the Archbishop of
Tuam, that the Ambassador held great correspondence with the Archbishop, and
that a Jesuit had read to him Philosophy and Divinity. That Suiman a Jesuit,
in a Letter to the Deponent the 30th of July Newstile, did specify, that Sir
William was as industrious as any man could be, to answer the expectation of
the Society.

Here, says the Vindicator, are as many Lies as Periods. For, 1 st, It Is False.
2 ly, It Is False. 3 ly, It Is False. 4 ly, It Is False. 5 ly, It Is False. 6 ly,
It Is False.


This puts me in mind of a Scene in Ben. Iohnson's Alchymist, where Face and
Subtle undertake to teach Kastril to Quarrel. The Jesuits I liken to Face and
Subtle, the Vindicator to Kastril. Face and Subtle teach Kastril their Art,
Kastril well instructed, takes a peek at the Doctor. Now Kastril, come -- show
your parts, -- It Is False, -- ye Lie, quo he -- How! Child of Wrath and Anger,
the loud Lie! why so sudden, say we. Nay, look you to that, I am aforehand, quo
Kastril. Talk to him of the Archbishop of Tuam, you Lie quo Kastril; talk to
him of a Letter from Suiman, you Lie cries Kastril. Nay, say Face and Subtle,
if you don't quarrel him out of the world, you do nothing. Presently Kastril,
you Deponent, if you wont get ye out of the world, ye Lie.

This is just the Vindicators chollerick method of Proceeding, the Battoons of
his Rhetoric, with which he thinks to Cudgel us out of our Senses, and the
Doctor out of his Reputation. But what said the Curtesan Thais of that same
Swash-Buckler Thraso in Terences Eunuchi? -- ne metuas,
Sane, quod tibi nunc vir videatur esse, hic
Nebula magna est.
A mere Fizzle-Sucker, that thinks to blow up Solemn Oaths and Depositions with
the windly Eructations of Scurrility and foul Language. Language that issues
from his Mouth with a steam as putrid as the Exhalations of the Tyrant Gelo's
Breath. Language so undecent, so unbecomming any person that pretends to so
much Learning as to put Pen to Paper, that it cannot be imagined that any man
but of common Education, of indifferent Breeding, or but ordinary Generosity,
which abominate scurrility and rudeness in conversation, will harbor the least
belief of such a nasty and slovenly Writer. For as there are some certain
Ragamuffins that deserve to be Kicked out of all Society; so there are some
books to be Kicked out of all Credit, and among the rest, none more deservedly
then this same fardel of impertinent Ruffianisme.

He challenges the Deponent, to produce the Letter of the 30th of July from
Suiman, which he might have done, because directed to himself. What a delusion
would he here put upon the People? He knows that Letters of this Nature being
once read by those to whom they are directed, to their Superithey are by them
taken away, and laid up among their Archiva, and yet he ors, challenges the
Deponent to produce what he knows to be out of his reach. It seems it was not
so convenient for him to be now so punctual in declaring the Customs of the
Jesuits, as upon other occasious, which made him omit this. If, says he, the
Archbishop of Tuam, or the Jesuit, being Subjects of the King, waited on his
Majesty's Ambassador, they did but their Duty. They were under no such
obligation, being no Subjects of the King, in regard they deny him that
Allegiance and Supremacy which the Law of the Land requires to make them so.
King and Subject are the Termini Relativi, Duty and Protection are the
Relations between those Terms: No Duty, no Subject: no King, no Protection.
And thus it may be said, that no English Roman Catholic is a Subject to the
King. They live under his Moral Protection, as Travelers and Foreign Traders,
not under his Relative Protection, as Subjects. But the Jesuits are so far
from being no Subjects, that they are Traitors proscribed by the Law; and
therefore for an Ambassador to correspond with such, I suppose is a Privilege
which no Prince or State in Christendom allows their Foreign Ministers. Now
you shall see how the Vindicator strives to dis-intangle himself. He says,
It Is absolutely false, that their past any intimate correspondence, chiefly in
Public concerns: That is to say, it is absolutely false, and it is not
absolutely false. The Affirmative was singular, and therefore the Negative
should have been Universal. In the Name of St. Dominic, what did you mean to
meddle with that word Chiefly for? Oh, cry ye Mercy, 'twas to show your parts,
and to let us see, that you could tell a Man he ly'd, and yet confess 'twas
true what he said, both at the same time.

To the 67 Article he only gives six Lies, sends ye to three or four of his
Paltry Attestations, and says no more. So that six being twice three, by virtue
of an Argument already drawn from his own Topics, if we tell him he Lies six
times, the Article is true, and we are even with him.

To the 69 Article, he answers, that Blundel the Traitor protested he knew
nothing of the business.

And then, says he, It seems the 22. of August was well employed, for though
the Deponent had neither eat nor drank, nor stopped all the day, He went to
such a place, and such a place, and such a place; met with such a one, and such
a one, and such a one; heard this Discourse, and that Discourse; saw these
Letters and the other Letters, and what then? why it could not be, unless the day
had bin as long as that in which Joshua fought against the Philistines; or that
himself had been as busy as Menechmus seeking his Brother. Who says there is no
Wit stiring at St. Omers? Here are a brace of Similes, the one out of the
Bible, the other out of Plautus's Menaechmei; excellently well-match'd, like a
black and white Coach-Horse both at one Pole, and as much to the purpose as his
comparison of Lucians True History. However, you see by this he had read three
Books, Lucian, Joshua, and Plautus. Now, what is the use of these two
Biblio-Plautinian Hyperboles? To prove that a man must be Perjured, because he
went Twelve hours without eating or drinking. What a Perjured fellow was St.
Marin of R^mini to fast six whole days together; and Batthaeus the Hermit to
macerate himself so long without eating or drinking, till the Worms bred in his
Teeth? What a Perjured Knave was St. Dominie, to dispatch as many Penances in
six days, as served for a hundred years? I think he was much more busy for the
time, then the Deponent or Menaechmus either. What a Perjured Villain was St.
Francis to fast 40 days together in honor of St. Michael* There Is never a poor
Soldier in a Campaigne that marches Twelve hours without sustenance, but must
be Perjured. Not a man in the world that dispatches more business in a day,
then the Vindicator would have him, but must be perjured. Certainly this is
some Stylite newly crept out of a hollow Pillar, that talks so ridiculously of
the affairs of the world. Mr. Asinego, if you want Fables, go and Read your own
Legends, the Narrative I find is above your fathoming.

Article 70. On the 24 ^h of August, Blundel told the Deponent, That the
Catholics would shorten the Kings days; and that the Protestant Religion stood
on its last Legs. Here we have gained one point at length: For says he, Had
this been produced at the beginning, it might have been tolerable, but to
bring it where it stands, was senceless.

If it were true at the beginning, it is true where it is. Truth is confined to
no place, and therefore we shall take no care to remove it, if you have no
better Reason. Oh! but he has a Reason: For that after the Deponent had
produced the Dominicans and Carmelites dissenting from the Business, he now
says All Catholics. He does not say the Dominicans and Carmelites dissented;
he Swears that both pleaded Poverty, but the Dominicans offered them their
personal Assistance and Money: The Carmelites promised to assist them with
their Prayers to God, and our Blessed Lady. Hoping that if God would not hear
their Prayers, our Blessed Lady would. So that Heaven's be Praised, this
Article as if it were the Laurel Tree of the Narrative, stands not so much as
blasted by all his Thunder. And then -- dato hoc uno absurdo,
Sequuntur all the Rest.


To the next Article, he says, Blundel protests he knows nothing of the
Business.

Article 72. Blundel showed the Deponent the Bull, by which the two
Arch-Bishopprioks, 21 Bishoppricks, two Abbey's and six Deaneries are disposed
of. Nor are there any Prebendaries or other places undisposed of. To this he
answers only with Periods, Heaven's! quo he, setting him upon his Tail, and
lifting up his two Paws like a Bear in Astonishment. Such Benefices to be
bestowed without the Kings consent! As if it were likely his Holiness would ask
the King of England leave to dispose of the Popes Benefices. All in one Bull!
That so carelessly sent! so carelessly produced! Not one Protestant to be
continued! No, if it were to save his Soul. All the promoted Persons ignorant
of their Advancement! who can swallow such Mountains of Incredibility? Rub his
nostrills with a little Spirit of Bezoar, the man has been in a desperate
Agony. What a contraction there is upon the Vindicators Windpipe on a sudden.
He will make you believe by and by, that his Gullet is no wider then the
passage from Purgatory to Heaven. He can swallow the Incredibility that his
Holiness should ask leave of the King to dispose of the Popes Benefices: The
incredibility that any one Protestant should be continued in his Living; which
I can hardly swallow m^self; and yet he cannot swallow the probability of the
Popes trusting the Bull with his own Creatures, that one Bull should pass for
all, at a Conjuncture when too many Bulls would make too much Roaring; nor the
probability that the parties concerned and promoted knew of it; because he
says, they did not. I warrant ye, were it an Attestation G. or D. he would
swallow it, though it were as big as the Globe of the Earth, But I am informed
by several Physicians, that the Jesuits Stomachs have a particular Antipathy
against Narrative Pills; show a Jesuit a Narrative Pill, and it puts him into a
fit of the Quinsie immediately. His Vvola will close and shut up like a Misers
Buttery hatch upon the sight of one. He cannot swallow a Narrative Pill, though
it were no bigger then a Tobacco seed. And therefore no wonder these
incredibilities seem so montainous to one that has drank some sort of Styptic
water, and purs'd up his Windpipe, as the Gentleman purs'd up his Mouth in the
Ladies Chamber.

Art. 52. That the Deponent saw a Packet from the Fathers met at Edinburgh, to
the Fathers here, acquainting them, that 8000 Papists were ready to rise, to
assist the disaffected Scots, when required by the Scotch Jesuits there. That
one Westby was destroyed by a Servant of Lovel the Jesuit, for endeavoring to
detect the Rebellion, etc.

To all this Vindicator cries, Not one word True. What are his Reasons.

1. Because there never was any meeting of English Jesuits in Edinburgh. 2. No
English Jesuits in Scotland. 3. Never Lovel. 4. Nor any Servant of his were
^ver there. 5. No correspondence of English Jesuits in Scotland. 6. No
knowledge of Affairs of that Kingdom but by the Gazetts.

He would make us believe that Scotland was one of the happiest Kingdoms in
Europe, as if the Air of that Country would no more admit of the Vermin of
Popery, then Ireland endure the Venom of Toads and Spiders. But how does he
come to know all this? Nay, that is a secret, -- Some body, it may be supposed,
has told him, and he tells you, and his Ipse dixit you must take for Gospel.
However, suppose they were Scotch Jesuits that met at Edenborough (for the
Article says nothing of English Jesuits) what is to be said then? Why then he will
Swear there never was a Scotch Jesuit upon the Face of the Earth. So that the
Vindicator is ready prepared for ye, come at him which way ye will. Now, can
any body believe this Vindicator cares what he says, that will assert so
positively, that never any English Jesuits met at Edenborough since the
Creation of the world? That the Jesuits hold no correspondence with Scotland.
That they who correspond with China and the Indies, should forbear to
correspond with Scotland, where there is such advantageous Brewing, to the
disturbance and molestation of England.

Art. 75. Tho. White writ to Blundel, that he was informed of some Discovery,
yet he should not desist the business in hand. That he should thank Fogarthy
for his Care of the business of 48, meaning the King; and for his forwardness
to assist those in Ireland, for whose good success he would pray.

This he confutes by the strength of his Politics: For, says he had there bin
so horrid a Plot, Some burnt at Wild-house.
and White had heard it was discovered, he should have ordered the Conspirators
to have desisted, secured their Persons, and made away their Papers. It Is very
true, but there are many Foolhardy persons that are often washed to the Skin
for ventring into the Shower, believing 'twill presently blow over. The
Conspirators design was so well laid, and their Party so Strong, thought
nothing would have been heard, much less believed against them. And therefore
none but such shallow Pates, and of as little Sense as the Inventer of these
Suppositions, but will believe that White had all the reason in the world to
command them to go on. For it is not to be thought, that Men of such High
undertakings, and that knew upon what Foundations they Trod, were to be
Bug-Beard out at the whispring of an uncertain Report. Nay, it behooved them to
go on with more vigor, when they knew how easily the sudden Expedition of one
single Assassination would have prevented the consequences of that Rumor. Had
the Deponent, says the Vindicator, said that White had desired their Prayers
for the Preservation of himself, his Province, and all the Catholics, his
Narrative might have been Believed. To what purpose so much Praying for
persons, that had secured their persons and their papers? But it is much to the
same Effect; for had he gone the Vindicators way, and accused White for
desiring the Prayers of his fellow Traitors upon such an account, he had but
made a Discovery, and so he did, by taking his own Courses, So that the
Vindicator seems now to be angry at the Deponent, not for discovering the Plot,
but for not doing it that way he would have had him. But to make him amends, if
he will be pleased to come and make any farther and real Discoveries himself,
he shall have his Liberty to use his own Method.

The 77 Article, contains the Deponents Entertainment at the Provincials
Lodging.

This he calls coherene Nonsense. For none, says he, who knew White in his
Vigor, will believe he could beat so stout a man as the Deponent, considering
the weak condition he was in when he came to London. What made him venture his
weak Carcass at London. It must be no ordinary occasion certainly that made him
hazard the Inconveniences of Sea and Land in that weak condition. This
Vindicator can believe that St. Denis when he was in a weaker condition, when
he had his Head cut off, could run with it in his Hand above a League, and yet
now he thinks it such a Miracle for the Provincial of the Jesuits, to give an
Inferior that durst not resist him, and yet had so highly incensed him, a blow
or two of Correction with his Cane. And yet his condition was not so weak
neither, but that he could stand well enough at the Bar long after that, to
tell a company of flim flam Lies and Falsities, without the assistance of Aqua
Mirabiles.

The rest is only a Repetition of the words of the Narrative, with some few
Comments, and a Story of his own framing, so little to the purpose, as if he
had made it his business to play the Fool. But at last he concludes, that for
all their fears of the Deponent, White kept his ordinary Lodgings, removed no
Papers, left those under his Conduct in their ordinary Stations, etc. Which
alone to Posterity will be a convincing proof of his Innocence. That is to say,
White believed that the Deponent was a Person, whose Information would be
easily crushed by the ponderous weight of the Popish Interest, and so he
resolved to go with the Plot. It was not his Innocence, but the blindness of
his Zeal, and the great encouragements and probability of success that hardened
him to merited Destruction. Quos Deus vult perdere, was the Fate that hung over
his Head. His stay at his Lodgings could be no convincing proof to Posterity of
his Innocence, in regard that that very act of his, rendered him a Criminal, by
which he had at that very time forfeited his Innocence to the Law of the Land.
And therefore he could not stay to justify what he had forfeited by his stay:
but he had a longing desire to see the utmost of what He had bin so long a
Spinning, and was snapt in the midst of an insensible Vexation, to see the
Labor of many Months and Years lost.

As for his Chapter upon the Commissions given to the Nobility, I pass it by,
in regard the Persons themselves are yet to make their Desences; which if they
prove no better then what their officious Vindicator present us with, is a very
Ominous Prospect of their success. However to give them an Essay of his
Rhetoric, He tells them what a wise man said, a very bad beginning my Lords,
for it seems it is not your Advocate that is the Wiseman, but another Man, and
that is apparent by his thus spoiling his own Market. For the Lords will
certainly go to the Wiseman, and not to the Fool, I mean the Vindicator. But
what says the Wiseman? Why, this Wiseman concluded, That either what Homer and
Ovid writ of the Lies, and Aesop of Beasts, were no Fables or the English
Conspiracy is a Fable -- Truly the Wiseman did not speak very good sense,
whoer'e he were. He meant, that if what Homer, Ovid, and Aesop wrote, were no
Fables, then the English Conspiracy was no Fable. But those were, therefore
this is -- This I suppose is the Wisemans Conclusion: but with the Wisemans
leave, all the World allows there was a great deal of truth couched under those
Fables, and that very considerable truth two, experienced and attested to be so
by the Testimony of several Ages. So that if the Narrative be so like those
Fables, it follows that there is a great deal of Truth couched in the
Narrative. Had not the Vindicator bin a Fool, he might have bin as Civil to the
Lords as the Wiseman, and not have stood outfacing and denying like a Sott in
so many Pages what a Wiseman has granted in two Lines. And now being in the
Company of Lords, he is not ashamed to tell ye what he is, as good a Traitor,
and as worshipful a Conspirator, as any of the rest; Never the less, quoth he,
we suffer for the Truth; that is, as his Brethren Faux and Ravillac did, for
the Truth of their Crimes. And the Truth shall set us free, that is, when they
have the grace to believe in Christ, as the Truth in that place spoken of, and
not the Popish Plot. However, had he bin so ingenuous as to have quoted the
Scripture right, and put in You instead of Us, it had come rightly from him, as
thus -- We, that is, the Vindicator and the Lords, suffer for the Truth, And
the Truth shall set You, the Deponent free. I would wish the Vindicator to let
Scripture alone, unless he understood it better. And so to his Word of Advice
to the Deponent.

CHAP. X.
Word of Advice to the Deponent.
BUT here you shall find, that before he comes to play the Fool, he plays the
Knave; and assumes to himself very arrogantly and audaciously to have convinced
the Deponent of Evident Untruths, Infamous Perjuries, and Shameful Perjuries,
when he has no more done it, than he has removed the Southern Tropic into
Lapland. He has not assigned one Perjury in all his ribble rabble discourse,
but only like the lying Products of Smithfield Wit, swells his Title to put off
his Book. Nay he talks so ridiculously, so idly of Perjury, that he does not
seem to know what it means. He uses the word to fright Fools, as Nurses make
use of Raw-head and Bloody-bones to fright Children with, yet neither know what
they say.

His Party have been told that Perjurus is one qui male Jurat ex animi sui
Sententia. That there is this difference between Pejerare and falsum jurare.
For qui Pejerat is sciens and ex animi sententia falsum Jurat. Qui falsum
jurat, non decipiendi animo hoc facit, sed quia rem ita se habere putat. Let
him prove that the Deponent has Sworn any thing through the whole Narrative
Scienter and ex animo Sententia -- Nay, let him prove that the slips of memory
as to names or time, were ever accounted Perjury, then the Pope shall give him
the great Motto of Eris mihi magnus Apollo: and we will grant him the Cause.
The Deponent has Sworn Scienter there was a Popish Plot. The Circumstances he
swear only as believing, ita rem se habere.

Caitiff of a Vindicator upon the False and Knavish Assertions of his own Brain
to call a man Perjured; and to think merely with Din and Noise to stop the
Inquisition and pursuit of Truth after Treason and Murder! No, he must not
imagine England yet so easily scared and deluded by such a Priapus of a
Vindicator as He. So that I may say to Him, as the Ocean said to Prometheus --
(...).

His slanderous Tongue will never do the Deponent Harm --

But what sort of Counsel is it that this same (...), half Fox, half Goose,
pretends so freely to bestow upon the Deponent? He believes that he has
disabl'd the Deponent to follow the Trade of a Witness, and therefore advises
Him to take to some more honest, though less gainful way of living. A very
specious piece of advice indeed -- But when we consider from whence it comes,
and the aim at which our Adviser drives, it appears to be only a drowsy piece
of Exhortation, glazed and sweetened over for the Palate of the Common People.
Good Counsel ought to be without respect of Interest for the sole benefit of
the Person to whom it is given. The Vindicators Advice to the Deponent is quite
contrary. He and his Party have been acting one of the foulest Conspiracies
that History can Parallel; and he advises the Deponent to be quiet for the
future, and to forbear his farther Prosecution. Very good advice truly. Now I
would fain know of our Subtle Vindicator, what way the Deponent shall take to
follow his advice? The Parliament of England are satisfied in the Truth of his
Discovery; they are satisfied that the Vindicator and his Accomplices are
guilty of the Villainies and Treasons of which the Deponent accuses them; and
they require and expect from the Deponent that he should do his duty, and go on
as he has begun. Which way now shall the Deponent proceed to take his advice,
and smother those crimes which he has so impertinently attempted to vindicate?
The Deponent therefore, good Mr. Vindicator, not believing either your pitiful
Rhetoric; and more pitiful arguments sufficient to persuade him to do a thing
so unjust and detestable, gives you this answer out of Tacitus, Se neque
Proditoris, neque hostium consiliis uti. He is resolved to make use neither of
the Counsels of a Traitor, nor his Enemies.

But what is this for? For the good of the Deponents Soul. How does he prove
it? from a mis-quoted place of Scripture of the Psalms, Fill their Faces with
shame, and they will seek thy name, O Lord, Psalm 83. not 82. Now this was a
complaint of David himself, upon a Conspiracy against his Life and Government,
as the Deponent had complained of a Conspiracy against the Life of His Majesty
and the English Government. The other is another mis-quoted Text, from
Ecclesiasticus in the Apocrypha. For, There is a shame that brings Glory and
Grace. And therefore he would have the Deponent ashamed of the good he has done
for the safety of his Prince and Country. As to the first of these Texts, I
cannot well understand how the Faces of men could be well filled with more
shame than to be publicly condemned for Treason, and as publicly Hanged for
the Crime, and yet the Vindicator is so far from seeking the name of God, that
he still persists in the Devils name, lying and justifying those detestable
Enormities for which they suffered. And for the latter Text he speaks too late,
for the Deponent had appropriated that shame long before to himself, when out
of an abhorrency of their lewd Impieties, he forsook, their Cercopum Coetus,
their Dens of Treachery and Forgery, and betook himself to make his Discovery,
of which perhaps e're now he might have reaped the Consequences, that is to
say, Glory and Grace, but for your busy Machinations to undermine and prevent
him. However the Deponent understands the Bible as well as your Worship, and
finds a little farther in the same Author, Strive for the Truth unto Death, and
the Lord shall fight for thee; which he believes to be far better Counsel than
you have given him. And indeed it had been impossible for him to have Swum
against such a stream, or rather Torrent of Opposition, had he not had the
strength of Verity to support and Buoy him up. He has got the hatred of you and
your Party most certainly; and the ill will of those whom your sedulity has
perverted: He contends daily with the reproaches of some* the envy of others,
the dissimulation of others: Only the Truth of his Narrative begets him some
Friends among the better sort of the Nation, and never more hopes than now,
that others will change their Opinions upon the sight of your lying and
scandalous Vindication.

You say again, you have advanced nothing material but what is certainly true.
Which is one of the greatest Lies that ever one single man durst advance in the
face of the whole World: There being nothing that is either Material or True.
For says he, the chiefest points are attested by Witnesses of umblemish'd
Reputation. --

Here Is another Swinger. For as to their Reputation it is so far from being
unblemished, that it is the fowlest under the Sun. The Reputation of Fugitives,
Traitors and Conspirators with himself in as Bloody a design as ever Popery
hatched; and consequently Homines Triobolares, Propertius's Damae, Tressis
Agasones. In the Second place they are no Witnesses, but vain Attestors in
their own wicked cause, of whom more anon.

Upon these rotten Surmises of his own unparalled Confidence, this Etnean
Beetle, the Vindicator, this Monsieur Homme de Rien, this Pomarius Hercules
presumes to judge of the Deponents Conscience, and dispose of his Salvation. A
Sawciness in the Pope himself, much more in such a Popelin as He. He has been
talking Folly and Nonsense all this while, and now conceited of his misshapen
Foppery, would needs set himself up for a Deus Ollaris, and sit Judge of
another man's Conscience and Salvation. But I must tell you, Sir, (...),
(...).
Thou have Philosophiz'd, speaking to Earth and Heaven;
By whom there is no heed given to thy Speeches.


So that you would have done well to have forborne this impertinent piece of
Trouble; the Deponent having now quite done with Jesuitical Confessors, and
besides he does not know that ever he required the Vindicators solicitude for
him in this particular, nor believes that his Episcopal jurisdiction reaches
into England. He makes an idle Story of the Deponents fainting at the Jesuits
Trial. If he did, the Crowd and Season of the year might well excuse him. But
Homer tells us the reason of such a small accident as that, far more discreetly
than the Vindicators Malicious Inference. The Deponent had a great deal to
remember, and a great deal of business to do. (...) --

He took breath a while -- Rediitque in pectora Sensus.

The next thing he troubles the World with, is a Sentence of the Lord Chief
Justices in Sir G. W's Trial. Which in regard it makes nothing to his purpose,
we shall leave to the better construction of those, who no doubt will make a
more favorable interpretation of the words. Lord, what would these Fellows do
with this Vile Heretical Deponents Body, if they had him at Rome, that have
with so much inveteracy erected an Inquisition of his own Conscience, and a
Chief Justices Sentence to deprive him of his Salvation. Usurping a vain
Authority over both, as well knowing that neither the Deponents Conscience, nor
the Chief Justices words are at their command. From the Lord Chief Justice he
repaires to K. Solomon, and tells us, He that is inconsiderate in his Language
shall feel mischief. From whence he undertakes to be a Fortune Tellers, and
bodes the Deponent bad Luck.

In the first place he has confessed that the Narrative was Writ with a great
deal of Consideration, and then why may not the preceding words be as true as
these, A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth. Then for his Prophetic
Spirit we value it not of a Nut-shell, for the Proverb tells us, it is the Wise
man that Governs the Stars, and not such a Fool as He.

He talks of Eternal Damnation due to False Witnesses and Murderers. What Is
that to the Deponent? Let him and his Attestators look to that. Oh but, quo He,
I have proved him to be both by the Foregoing Discourse, as he calls it. You
have said so several times, but you must come and tell us who you are, and make
it out, before any man of reason will believe a word you say. You will find it
a hard task to make the World believe you are able to write Common Sense, much
less with your Feeble Arms to expugn the Truth of the Narrative. If the
English Catholics had such a mind to a Vindication, they should have done well
to have made choice of some Person of more Wit and more Learning, considering
the Importance of the Charge with which they entrusted him, than your empty
Skull affords.

Having thus tossed your little Squibs of Advice at the Deponent, you throw your
Fireballs at the Citizens of London, whom you call the Giddy Rabble of London.
An Expression you might have forborne, had you had the least grain of prudence
in your hollow Pericranium; considering how much you have already exasperated
'em, by your late Devastation of their City, and laying their pretended
Habitations in Ashes. You may be sure they have not yet forgot it, nor who were
the Authors and Contrivers of their Calamity. They find it in the Narrative,
which because you have so slenderly attacked, they must still and do believe.
And therefore you must not blame the Rabble of London, for being kind to the
Person that discovered your Villainy. I know not what farther Designs you and
your Confederates may have against the Rabble of London, that you threaten 'em
so hard, but I believe for all your Vindication, they will have a narrow eye
upon your future Actions, and continue as severely diligent as ever in the
preservation of themselves from your Clandestine Machinations.

You say that Whitebread and his Fellow Sufferers prayed for the Deponent at
their Executions. They had broken the Gallows Custom else. It Is usual, and
therefore no wonder. All your Thieves, Murderers, and Malefactors are mighty
tender hearted, and Pardon all the World like so many Popes, before they turn
off. But you may assure your self, 'twas more than the Deponent ever cared for,
or desired at their hands, and so you may tell the rest of the Surviving
Jesuits, that you say Pray for him still: For he is fully satisfied, how far
the Prayers of the wicked will reach Heaven. So that you may go Whistle with
your Friendly Admonitions, pack up your Awls, and conclude that you have lost
both your Labor, and your hearts desire; for that you are never like to have
him in your Clutches at St. Omers again.

Now for the Attestators and Attestations themselves, they are such as one
would think he had intended a Vindication of the Spanish and Flemish
Catholics, not of the English.

As for the Persons themselves, certainly never was such a parcel of Vermin
Mustered together out of the Temple Walks, or the Black-pot Houses in
White-Frayars, particularly Jesuits and Mule-men; generally Fugitives, Traitors
of the same Gang with himself, Conspirators in the same Plot, and impeached for
the same Crimes for which some of their Fellows have already been Hanged and
Quartered by the Law of the Land, and all after a fair Trial, a deliberate
Verdict, and the Sentence of their Judges. To tell you more of them, they are
(...), Testes Domestici, such as the Vindicator has at home, that is, within
the Verge of Papistical Jurisdiction, ready for his and their own advantage.
And so to bring Evidence of this nature, is no more than what Cicero, in his
Third Book de Oratore, cites, as the saying of Catulus, of a certain vain
declaimer of that time, Stultitiae suae quamplurimos testes domestico praeconio
colligere, to bring a Rabble of Knights of the Post, or People of his own Stamp
to attest his own folly. In a word, they are most of them of St. Omers Breed,
and what Ropes of Testimony have been sent from thence, we have had experience
sufficient and public enough. As for that same Dr. Linch that pretends to be
Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland, What does he at Madrid? If he claim his Dignity
from the sole head of the Church in that Kingdom, who is the King of Great
Britain, why does he absent himself from his Diocese, an Exile from his Duty
and his Prince's favor? If he claim under any other Authority, he is a Rebel;
and then, what have we to do with him or his Attestation either? And the same
may be said of Strange, Warren, Warner, Blundel, and the rest of his English
Crew. Then for the Attestations themselves, being only the Subscriptions of
such unblemished Gentlemen, could ever any man but a Vindicator of the English
Catholics imagine, they should be of any value here? Suppose that an English
Jesuit should commit a Felony in England, and fly to St. Omers, and being
afterward Out-lawd for the Crime, should send an Attestation under his own
Hand, that he was Innocent and knew nothing of the matter; is it possible for
any man to believe that such a piece of wast Paper would be sufficient to
acquit the Fellon, and Perjure the Witnesses that accused him? They that
informed this Attestation-monger so precisely concerning the Deponents
Physiognomy, might as well have informed him that our Law admits of no such
Rubbish in Criminal Causes, as the Scrawls of Foreign public Notaries: Viva
voce Testimony carries all in such Cases. Our Law is so far from admitting a
Criminal to attest, that it will not allow him to swear in his own Cause.
'Twere a fine thing indeed, that they who dare not show their faces in England,
should be believed upon the credit of a Foreign scrip of Paper. And it is no
less a wonder that such Sir Politico's as the Jesuits, should be such
Cuckow-brains, as to send their Billets into England for the Vindication of the
English Catholics, where they knew the Law so little valued them -- So that
being no more than Caeca Testimonia, blind Certificates, and as the Poet ca'ls
them, (...) cunning artifices of deceit, it follows then, that all their
Protestations to Heaven contained therein, were framed and modeled animo
decipiendi, only to delude the ignorant and unwary People, and surprise their
belief with the gaudy luster of most worthy and unblemished Witnesses. Whereas
coming to the touch, they prove to be only a Company of Exiles, Traitors and
Rebels, their Attestations for that reason mere trifles, and that for their
Protestations, they might as well have protested by their Skeanes and the
Winds, like the Ancient Scythians. Now then if the English Catholics be not
Vindicated by their own Laws, the Vindicator has done nothing, his Mountain
has not brought forth at all, the Mouse is there still. And then what becomes
of his confident Assertion, that he had advanced nothing but what was material
and true? What will become of all these Forgeries, Lies, Contradictions, and
Perjuries, with which he has so impudently and confidently defamed and
Scandalized an approved Narrative? Tibullus tells him, -- Venti
Irrita per terras and summa freta ferunt.


In the mean while the Plot is still Popish, the English Catholics are never
the better, and the Vindicator loses his hearts desire. Three mischievous
accidents to one that pretends to have spent so much labor for those very ends
and purposes. The Vindicator therefore should have done well to have remembered
the Story of that famous Lawyer, Papinian, who being flattered by Caracalla, to
Vindicate him for the Murder of his Brother Geta, made answer that Crimes of
that nature were sooner committed than excused. 'Twas easier for his Brethren
the Jesuits to act as they did, than for him to excuse their Villainy when
perpetrated. There is that Guard of Providence over Truth, which is not to be
forced from her defense by the threatening aspect, or reproachful Scandals of a
more terrible Gorgons Head than his. -- Though Power and Policy assail her both
at once, it is but a (...), from which all the fury and State Policy in the
World will be forced to retire at length with shame and loss. So that
considering the difficulty of the task, and the imbecility of the Undertaker,
there is no necessity that he should go presently and dispose of his body by
way of despair, for the loss either of his Labor, or his hearts desire. For to
say truth, it was a very confident thing for him to think that the People of
England should be Hectored out of their Senses by a single Gladiator of St.
Omers. However if it be impossible for him to Survive his Misfortunes, he may
do as he pleases.

Thus we see upon what Supporters the Vindication of the English Catholics is
founded. Upon the ipse dixit of the Vindicator himself, and the Attestations of
the Criminals accused. The crime from which the Vindicator goes about to clear
his Friends, is the Popish Plot. The way he assumes to accomplish his ends, is
to render the Discoverer infamous and contemptible, thereby to make their
Credit Superior to his. To this end, the Vindicator talks big of the Deponents
Life and Conversation. But neither he nor any of the Attestators, with all
their Aspick Venom and inveterate Malice, tax him with any of the common Vices
incident to Youth. You heart not a tittle of those, but only of his ill
Manners. What these were they do not particularize. But at length we may pick
'em out, and they appear to be Passion and Aspiring. Nay they crowd in another
Peccadillo too, which they call Poverty. To all which how many of the Greatest
among the Great, the Learned among the Learned, the most Pious among the
Pious have been Subject, I leave to all the World to judge who have read any
thing of Story. This is still but the misconduct and miscarriage of Humane
Frailty, which it is at our Liberty, and which indeed we ought to forgive in
one another. But Treason, Murder, Assassination of Princes, Firing of Cities
are Crimes, Crimes of the highest Nature, Crimes which none can forgive but God
and his Vicegerent the King. This Person then, who while he lived among them,
was no more than Passionate and Lofty, comes and Discovers a Popish Plot
carried on by a Gang of Conspirators against the King and Kingdom, makes out a
Narrative of their Proceeding, and Swears to the Truth of it. To acquit
themselves, they do not presently come fairly to the Test, but as soon as they
think that by their Magic Policies and Industrious Contrivances they have
lulled the Prosecution of their Villainies asleep, they give Order to the
Vindicator to deny the whole matter of Fact, from the Alpha to the Omega of it,
and to call the Discoverer Rogue, Liar, Perjured, to load him with Obloquy, and
upon his own Dung-hil to crow up their own Credit: while their Spies on the one
side, watch him as the Ichneuman does the Crocodiles Eggs, and supply the
Penman with Matter for his Scribblement, and they on the other side furnish
him with their own Attestations of their own Innocence, and by that means
believe they shall discharge themselves of a Passionate man. And why? because
they say the Credit of Traitors and Rebels is beyond the Oath of a man of ill
Manners among them. Come, come, Beloved, this will never do; this is not the
way to Vindicate your Friends nor your selves neither, by calling your accuser,
who has been smart enough with ye hitherto, Perjured and Liar a the other side
the Sea, like the Carrier that defied the Lord Mayor upon High gate-Hill. Your
clearest and most effective course will be to crave Passes, come over, enter
the Lists with him, beard him, face him, outface him, disprove him, turn him
and wind him, and convince him into a Niobean silence. Then write your
Vindication, you will need no Bilbo Merchants then to help you out at a dead lift.
Till you have done all this, your Attestations indeed may serve to make Pellets
for Pot-guns, but though you should hit your great Enemy full in the Breast with
a hundred of 'em, they will never do him a Pins worth of Harm.

But now to speak a little more of their Credit, since they stand so much upon
it, I do find in the Edict of Queen Elizabeth for their Expulsion out of
England, that their Credit is highly there advanced for their lewd and
desperate Arrogance; for their prying into the Counsels of Princes; for their
Exciting Foreign Potentates to invade the Queens Dominions; for their Libels
against Her Government, and Traitorous attempts upon her Person. Virtues so
proper for the carrying on such a Plot as these men of credit are accused of,
and out-facing and out-brazening it at a distance, when they have done, that I
find no reason why men that are accused of the same Crimes, men of the same
clay, Pot-sherds of the same tincture with those that have been Branded for so
many Ages, should have that ill opinion of themselves, as to think themselves
so unlikely to be Guilty; and so good an opinion of their musty Attestations,
as to put them in Competition with the solemn Oath of a Person never Criminal
but in their Society.

This and what has been already said at the beginning, may suffice to show the
value of this same so much exalted Credit of the Vindicators Order of Jesus,
which if they dare be so confident as to gainsay, I dare be so hold as to
produce Twenty times as much more. So that with so little credit as they have
to call the Discoverers Oath Worthless, was but like the boast of a Bankrupt
far from Neighbors.

To say the truth their Religion it self is a Religion of no Credit. A Religion
founded upon Forgery. A sort of Devotion that no man of reason can admit into
his Belief or Conscience. A Religion in the Practice of its Professors so
Diametrically contrary to all the Precepts of the Founder of Christianity that
nothing can be more. Their Muster Roll of Saints to be sported with, as Lucian
Laughs at the numerous Train of the Heathen Deities in his Council of the Gods.
Their Transubstantiation to be contemned rather than disputed against; Their
Miracles as Fabulous as Mandevil's Travels. Their excessive Pomp, their
inordinate Pride, their Luxury, their Sodomy so infamous, as if they placed all
their felicity in the enjoyment of the pleasures of this World. Their
Superstitions and Ceremonies Foppish and Ridiculous. In short, a Religion which
their Popes themselves have vilify'd with their own mouths, while one
deridingly retorted to his zealous Friend.

Non si chiava in questa Religione, non durera.
Never make such a bustle about this Religion, 'twill not last.
And another exulting in his Riches, cried out.

O quantum nobis profuit haec fabula de Christo? Certainly then for the
Professors of a Religion of so little Credit, to advance their worthless
Attestations above the Oath of a Person professing a Religion so sincere and
Orthodox, as that of the Protestants, and for them to be believed, would be the
greatest Paradox in Nature. But it seems that having lost its Religious Credit,
it must be now supported by Bloody Maxims of State; by the Murder of Princes,
and the Massacre of their Subjects. The first Religion in the World, that ever
subsisted by its own Ecclesiastical Politics. The Jews lost all by revolting
from the Ordinances of God; they lose all if they revolt from the Maxims of the
Devil. The Maxims of the Papal Government are easy enough to be seen: by which
it appears that the Popes of Rome have taken little notice of the Oracles of
God, but altogether consulted the most inward Recesses and Penetralia of Humane
Wit. Insomuch as the Author of the Life of Sixtus Quintus tells ye, the reason
of the Diuturnity of the Papal Government is not to be taken from the Verity of
the Religion, but from this benefit peculiar to the Government, that it always
falls into the hands of Old men, and consequently men Grave, Prudent and
Considerative. Which is the cause that the Papal Government still gets ground,
or at least never loses. Whereas other Monarchs being successive, and subject
to the misconducts and miscarriages of Minors, Protectors and Favorites, lose
more in a few years, than the Wisdom of many that succeed is able to make good.
So then, what Trust or Credit there is to be given to the words, actions or
Protestations of the Professors of the refined Politics of Humane Wit, I leave
to all the World to judge.

Yet certainly this exquisite Politeness, this studied exactness of Humane
Policy, is not always the most successful, not does it always obtain it is end.
Sometimes those men of Parts peg up their Invention too high; or else while
they Weave their designs so thin and subtle, they become transparent, and being
discovered, degenerate into Folly.

Assuredly such a piece of refined cunning, was that of the Jesuits, to think
to clear themselves, by throwing their Crimes upon the Presbyterians. One of
the greatest Arguments, no doubt, of their Guilt. For never in this World did
Innocence go about to acquit it self the Recrimination of other. Reason and
Justice requires, that the Guilty should clear themselves, before they accuse
other people.

What the Papists, what the Jesuits, what the Popes themselves have been, what
their Maxims and their Tenants are, we have already shown, and shall do more if
they require it, viz. That they have trampled upon the Heads and Crowns of
Princes, been the Authors and Fomenters of most of the Rebellions of the
Subjects of Europe. That their Political Tenants are the Extirpation of
Heretics, otherwise called the Destruction of Kingdoms, the Deposition and
Murder of Princes, and to cover all, mental Reservations, and Equivocations
with God and Man.

These men being now accused of no more than what has been their practice for
so many years; These men, because they are Detected to have done no more than
what is as natural to 'em as their Mothers Milk; to have acted only according
to those Principles which they learned with their first Rudiments of Spelling,
to clear themselves, would fain throw their Crimes upon the Presbyterians;
under that Notion aiming at the whole Body of the Protestants in general.

But the Presbyterians must bear the Burden of their Calumnies, by reason of
the miscarriages in the years forty two, before and after.

As for the Protestants in General, the Vindicator should have done well to
have produced his Histories where they have been such Recorded Mutineers and
Rebels against their Princes.

In France how lately were they the chiefest support of their Natural Sovereign
against their Rebellious Papistical Subjects, whom the Pope and the Jesuits had
Leagued together to their utter Extirpation.

The Protestants of the Netherlands could not be called Rebels, for that they
made no opposition upon the account of Religion, but for the maintenance of
their Ancient Franchizes and privileges, from the Oppression of the Spaniard,
who was not their Lawful Sovereign neither. Nor did they do what they did, in a
Tumultary way, but under the Conduct of a Prince, who had as much right to the
Sovereignty among them* as Philip the Second. Nor did they during the contest,
send any one to Murder the King of Spain, as the Jesuits, his great Creatures
did to Assassinate two great Princes of the House of Nassau.

As for the Protestants of Germany, their Wars were carried on by their own
Princes, who were as free as the Emperor himself.

The Protestants of England never got the Power of the Government into their
hands by Rebellion, but by the act of their own Monarchs themselves. By the
assistance of the Protestants Queen Mary obtained the Crown. And the
Protestants were they whom she Martyred for their kindness, who yet
nevertheless made no other resistance against her, but by their patient
submission to her Cruelty. But the papists were they that were so restless in
their Conspiracies against Her Successor.

But the Chief pretense of their Malicious cunning, is the late Rebellion in
England, of which Presbyterians are by them charged to be the chief Designers,
Authors and Instruments.

I must confess, there can be no Pen but that of a Jesuits, that dares
adventure to justify that Rebellion. But since it was His Majesty's most
Gracious Pleasure that all the public transgressions of those years, should be
Buried in the Tomb of a General Oblivion, it was an unpardonable injury to His
Majesty's Act of Pardon, to revive forgiven offenses, to improve Scandals, and
raise surmizes of Facts committed, for which there is not the least appearance
of Proof.

The Vindicator had a greater business then this to do, before he had opened
such a Villainous absurdity; that is, he should have proved that the Papists
and Jesuits, were not the Abettors and Seducers of those Presbyterians at that
time, in regard they acted nothing but by their Doctrine and Principles, and
that so truly, as if Bellarmine, Lessius, Suarez, Mariana, and the rest of that
Crew had been their only Masters.

Salmonet also in his Troubles of England tells us, that after the battle of
Edgehill, several Priests were found among the Slain of the Parliaments Army.
So Courageous were Popish Emissaries to accompany the Presbyterian Soldiers,
for fear they should falter in their Rebellious Fortitude. And it is the
opinion of Wise and Learned men, that that Rebellion was raised and fostered by
the contrivances of the Court of Rome.

When those Presbyterians saw their errors, and had voted to restore the King
with Honor and Safety, they were no longer for the Turn of the Jesuitical
Party, who presently therefore forsook them, and joined with the Army Party,
that was not only the Stronger, but driving on the Design which they aimed at
themselves, which was the Destruction of His Majesty, to which intent and
purpose they insinuated themselves into the Chief Committees of the Independent
and Fift-Monarchy Faction.

For proof of which Dr. De Moulin tells ye of a Select Number of Jesuits, that
were sent from the whole Number of Jesuits in England to the Sorbonne at Paris,
to consult for the advancing and securing the Catholic Cause in England; which
they found no better way to bring to pass, then by making away the King, who
had then yielded to the making several Acts for Extirpation of Popery. He tells
ye of one Sarabras that was present, and Triumphing at the Murder of the King;
and of a certain Priest and Confessor, who when he saw the Fatal Stroke given,
flourished his Sword and cried out, Now the Greatest Enemy we have in the World
is gone. And the Author of Fair Warning affirms, that one Father Sibthorp, in a
Letter to Father Medcalfe, acknowledged that the Jesuits were the Contrivers of
the Kings Murder. And it was the Opinion of Secretary M. that the Irreligion
of the Papists was chiefly guilty of the Murder of the late King, the Odium
whereof, they were then about, to file to the account of the Protestants. Now
that men of such lewd Principles as these, men so strongly accused, and so
likely to be Guilty, and of whose Number some have already Suffered upon the
same Accusations, I say that such men should go about to invalidate the
Testimony that appears against them, by recriminating upon another Party before
they have acquitted themselves, and that so unseasonably and with so little
probability of proof, was one of the most Sottish pieces of Jesuitical cunning
that ever History Recorded.

It seems then, that if the Jesuits Plot had not been Discovered, the
Presbyterians never had been heard of. But the Jesuits Plot being once brought
to Light, they began to look about 'em, and so they found the Presbyterian Plot
in a Midwives meal-Tub. Here was strange good luck, and strange bad luck;
strange good luck, to find a Plot so Miraculously; Strange bad luck, to make so
little of it. And what was the Reason? Because it was a Jesuitical not a
Presbyterian Plot. And indeed it was a wonderful symptom of despair, and that
they were come to the last push, to hope for success from a Plot carried on in
a hurrey, that had failed so unhappily in the Confultations and premeditations
of so many years. But there is yet a greater Argument of the pretended
Presbyterian Plot, for that it was not placed right, as being fixed upon Men
that were become those Foelices Agricolae, that now well understood their own
happiness. persons that have a fairer prospect of their own Interest and
Safety, as deeply understanding both to be so entirely wrapped up in the Safety
of His Majesty, as absolutely to oblige them to venture their Lives and
Fortunes for the Preservation of His Sacred Person, His Crown and Monarchical
Dignity. Therefore it was that they were so Cordially Zealous, and zealously
assisting in his Restoration; since which they have enjoyed those Blessed
Fruits of Freedom, Rest and Peace, of which Men of their prudence would never
go about to deprive themselves by the Folly of a Meal-Tub Plot, or to sully
that Reputation for their Loyalty, wherein they have ever since continued, with
designs and Counsels, the most Ridiculous and vain that ever Vanity it self
produced. They cannot be ignorant of that Immortal hatred which the Court of
Rome and the Jesuits bear them. Campian the Jesuit has told 'em roundly the
Intention of his Associates. As for our Society, says he, I would have you to
know, writing to the Counselors of the Queen of England, That all we who are
of the Order of Jesus, wherever dispersed over the face of the whole World,
have made a Holy League, to extirpate the Heretics by all means and ways
whatever, whereby we shall easily surmount all your Contrivances against Us,
nor shall we ever despair as long as one of Us remains alive. So then it would
be the most inconsiderate piece of Rage, the most besotted piece of Fury in the
World, for Protestants to lend their helping hand to assist the Malice of such
an Inveterate Enemy for the Destruction of each other. And consequently so
little to be suspected from the Wisdom and Piety of the Presbyterians, that it
would be almost a Crime to mention it farther.

And now to Conclude, let the World take this Character of the Scandalizer of
the Presbyterians, and the Vindicator of the English Catholics, that he is a
man of the most passion, and the least Reason that ever put Pen to Paper, and
so I leave him against next time, to learn more Wit and more Manners.

THE END.

