New News FROM TORY-LAND, etc.
GReat News from Whitehall -- Great News from Samm's Coffee-House -- Great News
from the Pall Mall -- Run ye Rogues -- Run ye Whores -- The Rat-Catcher's just
going off -- Cancaro -- What an Age do we live in? What! will ye never ha done,
Gentlemen? Here Is -- Noise and Din, Clamor and Fury, Raging and Storming,
Hoyday! -- Here Is Thou Fool, and Thou Knave Thou Rogue, and Thou Rascal Thou
lie, and Thou lie Hei-go-mad! -- Tantivishire is all in a flame with
Thunder and Lightning -- Anathema's and Excommunications; -- Tory-land is so
dismally harrass'd with Tempests and Hurricanes, that a Dissenter can hardly
keep his Hat upon his Head, or his Cloak upon his Shoulders. -- Here are Your
Thompsons, Your Prologue-makers, and Ballad-makers, Your Heraclitus's, and
Roger's, and the Devil and all -- Nay, here is Conjuring too, downright
Conjuring in the Language of Trithemius, Tory, Whigg, Fanatic, Tantivyman --
Come up here in the name of Sando^phon, and Adarniel, Hautzeviv, and Tzautzeviv
-- And what is the meaning of all this? For a Company of Poltrons, and
Paper-wasters, to get money, and disorder the Kingdom. Who would not be the
Danae of an Observator to be courted in Golden Showers, and all to please the
wanton Fancies, or Politic. Ends of some sort of People with the Harlotry of
his prostituted Pen.

Imprimis Received l. s. By a Note into Lumbardstreet, Guineys 100 00 00 Item,
For burlesquing the Popish plot, and the King's Evidence from the Lords in the
Tower 050 00 00 Item, For defending the Protestant Faith better than the Sons
of the Church can do, from Cambridge 250 00 00 Item, More from Oxford 200 00 00
Item, More from Norwich 170 00 00 Item, More from Salisbury 090 00 00 Item,
More from Bristol 100 00 00 Item, More by Madam Johannas yearly Tribute 150 00
00 Summa totalis 960 00 00

Now mingle all this Money well together, and tell me whether any Vintner or
Coffee-man, Mercer, Tailor, or Haberdasher, be so quick-sighted in this Town,
as to pick out the Popish from the Protestant Money? or if he should, whether
any would be so scrupulous, as to refuse it for the sake of the two Cross
Scepters? But what is the pretense all this while? The fairest in the World,
even Loyalty it self; which by virtue of a certain Crimson Charm, these
State-Pharisees would so engross to themselves, as if all true Loyalty were
confined within the Circle of a Scarlet Stayband. Had it not been for an
Observator and an Heraclitus, Heaven knows what had become of the Kingdom ere
this. Had not they stood in the Gap, and raised monstrous Plots, horrid
Contrivances, desperate Inventions, and providentially discovered them, when
they had done; had not they Erected vast Bulky Piles of Surmises, Leviathan
Fears and Jealousies all over the Nation, and then pulled 'em down again, the
Land had been overwhelmed with Fanaticism, and deluged with Liberty and
Property. God forbid Gentlemen, but Faction and Disloyalty should be punished
with the utmost Rigor of the Law; But for the Loyalty of the greatest part of
the Nation, and most considerable for Wealth and Trade, to be blasted and
tainted with the venomous breath of Mercenary Scandal and Reproach, what is
this but the greatest Disloyalty in the World, to unrivet the Affections of the
People, and Eloin their Allegiance from their Sovereign? Certainly, were
Disloyalty such a General Crime, it could not be the bleating of a Feeble
Observator, or a Shatter-brain'd Heraclitus, that could stem the Torrent of
Universal Resolution. But to come to the point; if Disobedience to the King's
Law be an Act of Disloyalty, as no man will presume to deny, I find none more
guilty then these Primroses of Loyalty themselves. For the King's Positive Law
enjoins, That no person or persons shall presume maliciously to call or allege
of, or object against any other person or persons, any Name or Names, or other
words of Reproach any way tending to revive the Memory of the late Differences,
or the Occasions thereof.

But contrary to this Law, now, put but your Nose into any Company, What Is such
a one? A Whigg, G -- dam him. What Is such a one? A Fan. G -- rot him. What Is
such a one? A Tantivy-man. That Is well, He Is one of Us. What Is such a one? A
Tory. The Devil take me, if I did not think him an honest Fellow by his looks.
Sbud, these Whigs, and these Fans, they have different Faces from other men.
Then cries one, Would they were all at the bottom of the Sea. Another wishes
for a Discreet Plague, to separate the Sheep from the Goats. Now what is this,
but to embroile common Friendship and humane Society? which once unhinged,
farewell Law; and farewell all Allegiance. Yet upon this Foundation the
Observator rears the Fabric of all his weekly Ribble-rabble. Whiggs he will
have, and Whiggs he must have, and who can blame him? For, quo he, no Whigg, no
Guiney.

This King in his Proclamation against vicious, debauched and profane Persons,
dared in the 12th Year of his Reign, is pleased to declare his Royal Will and
Pleasure to this effect

There are likewise another sort of men, of whom we, have heard much, and are
sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in Taverns, Tippling houses and
Debauches, giving no other Evidence of their affection to Us, BUT IN DRINKING
OUR HEALTH, and inveighing against all others, who are not of their own
dissolute Temper; and who in truth have more DISCREDITED OUR CAUSE, by the
License of their Manners and Lives, than they could ever advance it by their
Affection or Courage. We hope that they will hereafter become Examples of
Sobriety and Virtue. For the more effectual reforming these men who are a
Discredit to the Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor and wish
well to, We require all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices, to be vigilant in their
Prosecution, etc.

But in contempt of all this, it is now, Dam me will not ye drink the Kings Health?
Dam me drink it, or I Will throw the Glass in your Face* Now it being certain
that Loyalty does not consist in drinking Tavern Healths, it follows then, that
the Peek is not between Loyalty and Disloyalty, but between Huzzah-Loyalty,
ranting, roaring, damming, swearing Loyalty, and sober, serious, solid, and
temperate Loyalty. And that is the Loyalty that (...) the King and Kingdom,
though there were (...) drop of Claret in the Nation.

His Majesty himself was pleased to declare in His Gracious Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, p. 5* (and the sayings of Princes are not without a
coercive Awe among prudent Persons) That while he was in Holland, he was
attended by many grave and learned Ministers from England, who were looked upon
as the most able and principal Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinions, and to
Our great satisfaction and comfort found them persons full of affection to Us,
of Zeal for the Church and State, and neither Enemies to Episcopacy or Liturgy,
but modestly to desire such alterations in either, as without shaking the
Foundations might best allay the present Distempers,

Sir Matthew Hales left them this Encomium, Many of the Presbyterians had
merited highly in the business of the Kings Restoration, and at least
deserved, that the terms of Conformity should not be made stricter than they
were before the War.

One would think now that the King might be believed. No: if the King don't
understand his own business, the Observator and Heraclitus do: For Mr,
L'Estrange confidently avers in one of his late Observators, that the Sea the
King's Speech to the Lords July, 27. 1660. for hastening the Act of Oblivion.
Presbyterians had no hand in bringing in the King, ('it is a wonder he did not
deny his own name, and shift off Tongue that way, and so have spared his silly
Shammer shamm'd.)

Therefore the Presbyterians are Traitors, and Fanatic* and the Kingdom is to
be dispeopl'd with their utter Extirpation. What a loyal Orlando Furioso is
this, thus to tilt against the public Declaration and Judgment of the King
himself, and the Oracle of his Laws. As if he were a Guide to the supreme
Magistrates of the Kingdom, as well as the inferior Clergy.

After all this Gentlemen, pray consider Whether they that will not be confined
to any Laws, Proclamations or Declarations themselves, are proper Persons to
vent their Buffonry against the pretended Disloyalty of others.

But what is become of the Popish Plot all this while? Oh! The Triumvirate of
Whigg-hunters are better employed, than to mouth against that Cerberus has had
a Sopp, and is engaged to be quiet; Nay he does as good as confess, he believes
nothing of it. For in his Observator, N. 92. says Whigg, You always take the
pains as much as in you lies to hide the Plot, To which Tory replies, Not the
tenth part upon my faith, as I have done to find it out. Truly 'twas pity a man
should be so be Be-Gadbury'd in his old Age. Surely never did so wonderful a
Cataract befilm the Eyes of Mortal Man before* He could find out a blind Plot
in a Meal-Tub, but could not see a Plot that was visible to the whole Nation.
However since His Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament had found it out, he
might have had so much manners, as to have believed his Prince, and his Acts of
public Justice, as well as the Lords in the Tower. The to'ther's a professed
Papist, and he swears there is no Popish Plot, upon the Credit of Madam Baud,
and her Condemn'd-Fellow-Jayl-Birds in Newgate. An ill requital of delayed
Justice, For such Tenants at Will, to feed the Press of a hungry Varlet with
weekly Lies, and Forgeries. The third a Pusillanimous Mortal, that lies
snarling at present only against the Evidence, hoping to come in for a snack in
the next Tower Guinnies, when they shall think him to have credit, or wit
enough to serve their turn.

And these are the Loyal Persons, that one would have thought might have chosen
a Nobler Theme, to have decry'd the reiterated Periuries, Forgeries, and
Subornations of the Papists; to have turned their fury against the Scandalous
and public Vindications of their Treasons and Conspiracies, to have maintained
their Sovereigns Honor, and the Justice of his Supreme Courts of Judicature,
and not to leave both him and them exposed to the malevolent inferences and
impudent insinuations of his Capital Enemies.

Now what says that Backbiter in Ordinary to the Devil, Heraclits? E'ne what
you please, it is such a pitiful Wight, that he is scarce worth taking notice
of. He may serve for some Zany to a Mountebank, to jest off Medicines for the
Toothache to the Rabble in Southwark. Or else couple him with some blind
Fiddler, and send 'em together about the Country to go snips at Wakes and
Hobnayle Weddings. For, Faith, Wine's ill bestowed upon him here in London,
that does not deserve the weekly Wages of a Peny-post-man, for a Months
Brain-Work; were he only mere Fool he might deserve Commiseration, and the
reversion of a Changelings Place in some Country Almshouse; but the Serpenting
Mixture being more predominant, he cannot expect it. However some good Friend
of his would do well to advise him to give off in time, before his snuff quite
stink.

As for Mr. All-Conceit. alias Mr. Steers man of the Henpeckt Fregate, most men
are of opinion, he had better have stock't his Shop with the Saints Everlasting
Rest, then thus to the shame of his Trade, and the public disturbance, to run
every day Scaperloytering after a Penniworth of Lowsy Farce, and the restless,
and Pragmatical Employment of being a Silly Libeller, and Common Accuser; an
Employment more fit for a Rascally Informer, or some such Retainer to the
Gallows. An Employment from which, such Revolters from their Substantial
Livelyhoods, can in the end expect no other kindness, then a Recommendation to
the Under-Beadles Place in the Company, or to be Tip-Staff'd over the water to
keep a Coffee-House in the ^^les.

And now what may the world think of these People, that so tamely, and so
easily surrender their belief, and admiration to the Charms of Quirk and
Quibble; or that can be so blind, as not to perceive with what different aims
from their Pretensions they drive on their designs, and that so apparently,
that there need no more then the Flashes of their own fury to discover 'em.

In the first place there is that Wizard, Gadburies Astrological Jargonrie,
Printed for the Loyal Company of Stationers themselves, stufft from the
beginning to the end with nothing but lies, and Popish Vindication; and yet
neither the Loyal Observator, nor the Loyal Heraclitus take any notice of it.

Here are Castle mains Memento's, and Staffords Memoires, publicly Printed,
and Sold by Protestant Booksellers, to the dishonor, and scandal of the King
and Parliament, and yet neither the Loyal Observator, nor the Loyal Heraclitus
take any cognizance of it.

The Journeymen Prologue and Epilogue-makers openly deride the Discoveries of
Heaven in the Play Houses, and yet neither the Loyal Observator, nor the Loyal
Heraclitus have one word to say.

There is hardly any public Meeting or Assembly of the People, wherein the
bold Emissaries of Pope and Devil do not barefaced act their parts, and make
the Grand Plot* and intended Parricide of Gods anointed, the subject of their
merry Sarcasms, and the Theams of their Philistine Paeans. Popery struts along
the Streets openly by Noonday Sun, and Treason sneers ye in The Face, and
twits ye with the effusion of Holy Martyrs Blood.

Can the Sons of the Church of England so Passively hear the Reformed Religion
abroad, and all its pious Professors derided, and their Reputation blasted by a
Vermin of a Figure-Caster, and not give one gentle admonition to their Great
Guide, to bestow one cast of his Office upon so infamous an Enormity?

These considerations should cause a Recoil of over hasty and passionate
thoughts; which, were they seriously fixed upon the present Confusions of the
Nation, it is impossible that the Libels, the Rimes, the Ballads, the
Pamphlets, that at such an unfortunate Conjuncture overflow the Nation, and
spit their quotidian Venom against the Dissenters, so numerous a Body of the
Kings Liege People, and so deeply engaged by all the ties of common Interest,
to oppose, and with all their might withstand the Enemies of their Prince and
Sovereign, Defender of their Faith, as their own and the Capital Enemies of the
Kingdoms Quiet, should ever be imagined to be the inventions of Loyalty, or
that the Owners and Contrivers should be guilty but of so much Allegiance, as
will outweigh a Mustard Seed, let their pretenses be never so zealous or
high-flown. The Romish Policy keeps to no Maxim of Christ so close, as to that
of a Divided House cannot stand; Nor have the Roman Pontiffs studied the Arts
of National disturbance so long, but that they well know, that the Protestant
Interest in England is not to be destroyed but by Self-destruction, which they
who under pretense of Loyalty make it their business to farther advance, it
were to be wished they would keep their Loyalty to themselves, or practice it
in some other Country, under some more undeserving Prince.

FINIS.

