A VINDICATION OF THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor: IN A REPLY TO Two
Pretended ANSWERS to it.

By the Author of the CHARACTER.

LONDON: Printed for R. Dew. 1681.

A VINDICATION OF THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor: In a REPLY to two
pretended ANSWERS, etc.
A Reply to the first Answer printed by N. Thompson.
THERE has lately, as the Author has most truly expressed, a very slight. Reply
been made to a Pamphlet called, A Character of a Popish Successor; in which he
arraigns the Pamphleteer (as he calls him) of contradictory discourse and
reasoning, but says his principles are not so: To prove which he allows you to
fancy a picture of the late Rebellion; for like that it begins with fears and
jealousies of Religion, Liberty and Property, and continues in murmur and
revile at the Imperial Root, and to stiffen the knees that would bow to a
crowned head. The last two parts of this Indictment has been so far from being
justified by the Author, that where he found them, they were owned, as the evil
effects of a worse cause: but by advising us not to be subdued like less than
English men; not to submit our necks like slaves to the Roman yoke, he does
infer, we must repel a King under the name of an Invader. Truly when though by
the permission or aid of any English King, Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, and
Cruelty, are entering our Gates, and are ready to butcher our Protestant
Ministers at their Divine Worship, make Human Smithfield Sacrifice of us, our
Wives and Children; we justly may resist the Invading Tyrannick Power of Rome.

In the next place our Answering Pamphleteer would have you believe,
notwithstanding your own sense and reason to the contrary, there is no just
fear of Popery, nor any danger in any of their Plots; but from his own wise
suppositions drawn from 41, and 48. has found or made a Plot, and as prudently
laid it at the Presbyterians door; a Plot so subtle, that they have outdone the
very Jesuits themselves in the contrivance; and laid it with so much art and
cunning, that no heart could have imagined it, nor no eye discerned it but his.
And now let us take notice who this honest Gentleman under the sinily of his
Leviathans, means, that sport and take their pastimes in our troubled deep;
whose restless and uneasy rolling does not foretell, but is it self the storm.
But I think, with our wise Authors leave, this had been better proved, before
so positively asserted, considering it is no less than three whole successive
Parliaments (his Leviathans) that have been restless to find out a Plot, and
vigorous to prevent our ruin; all which he has drawn in as the greatest, nay
only principals of our destruction, and as his Text goes, are themselves the
storm or Plot; he musters up a thundering accusation against them, that they
foment the people into rebellion, distract them with dreadful apprehensions,
casting them into a raving frenzy; and as the greatest plague of the wicked,
makes them afraid where no fear is. And this honest well principled man is all
this while a man of the Church of England. And to prove the correspondence of
this truth with that of his Pamphlet, we may easily remember, that all the
Parliaments were not all Presbyters; the first Parliament were all men chose at
His Majesty's blessed Restoration, when there was not the least favor for that
Party; and those Loyal, Wise, and Honest Patriots of their Country, gave the
first blow to the Plot, first Allarmed the people, made Tests, and removed the
DUKE out of his places and seat in Parliament; yet these are the men, and this
the storm which is ready to shatter our Royal Vessel, the British Kingdom,
into pieces. But since he is a zealous Protestant, they have no reason to be
angry at his making bold with his own Party.

But why should we stand in fear of Popery? Ay, why indeed, says he? He has no
fear at all; they will not hurt him for his Religion, then why should we fear?
But alas! all are not such Protestants as he, Heaven knows, such Champions for
their Cause and Interest; and therefore we may have reason to fear,
notwithstanding all his brotherly advice to the contrary.

In the next place let us see what small difference he makes between the
principles of the Church of Rome, and those of the Church of England; only a
few disputable matters of faith, and not very material Ceremonies of Divine
Worship; as what harm is it to pray to Saints, to worship Images? or what great
matter to believe the Infallibility of the Pope, or the Transubstantiation in
the Sacrament, or to allow the Doctrine of the Roman Church without error, when
it shall depose and murder Kings, command Massacres, make Plots, Fire Cities,
Canonize the principal Actors of their Revenge and barbarous Cruelties, and
consecrate the Instruments of death? Is it not hard, says our honest
Protestant, that these frivolous divisions on a sudden should ruin and efface
all those good characters of Magnanimity and Justice, of Generosity and
Goodness in this our Popish Prince, which even his greatest enemies, nay the
most detestable Character it self allows him? Indeed Mr. Scribler, I remember
no such allowance; but as your self remarkt, suppose, and suppose: But if the
encouraging of Plots and Popery, holding correspondence with his Holiness and
other Foreign Princes, contrary to the Laws of this Nation, be Virtues, those
and more perhaps of such a nature, may be allowed him. In the next place he
takes a great deal of pains to let you know what the Virtues are; which though
the Characterizer does not understand, he does especially when Cardinal; and to
show you he is a man of truth, and can keep his word sometimes, he has there
made so slight a Reply, as I have not thought it worth the answering, but will
refer the ingenious Reader to compare that part of the Character with his
Answer; and now I will skip over this page, as he has done several which he
could not with all his stock of Impudence defend.

Well now, says he, since we have Laws to suppress Popery, what remains then
for a Popish King, but to put those Laws in execution; and for us, but to sit
down under the shadow of this Fence? Yes, I think a greater assurance that he
will execute them, than our Answerer can give.

His next Argument, or rather Opinion, is so far from thinking that the Reign
of a Popish King can be any ways advantageous to the Iesuitical Instruments,
that he rather believes it will be their destruction; and why? because there is
Laws of foree against them, and the power of executing those Laws he himself
has already given to the people; and which he has concluded they will more
vigorously do under such a King. But hold! this Sham wont pass; we know the
people may convict them; but none can punish them but their Prince. But if the
people by the authority of our Scribler do, what will he have this King to be
the mean time asleep? or with all his Cardinal Virtues an Atheist? for if he is
not a Papist, he has no pretense to any Religion, having himself renounced all
Churches else. Certainly he must be the first of these two, if this power be
assumed in his Reign, without his permission; and the last, if with it. For no
man can be, or pretend to be a Son of the Church of Rome, that will not be
obedient to all her principles and commands, and will not maintain on all
occasions to their utmost power, her Cause and Interest: He shall no sooner
refuse or neglect to do this, but he shall be exploded as the basest Coward,
and excommunicated as the vilest Heretic. Besides, there will be more danger
for him to permit their punishments, than any other Prince whatever; for as
their hopes in him has given them almost assurances of their utmost wishes; so
will their hatred and malice be greater to him, when they shall find themselves
more than frustrate of all their ambitious expectations. And if an Atheist, (a
man that believes no God, no punishment for Vice, nor no reward for Virtue) to
pretend to be of a Religion by which he has banished himself his native
Country, lost the hearts of three Kingdoms, and thrust himself for ever from a
Throne, he must be the greatest mad man, or the most a Fool in the Creation;
and I think it not fit for either of these to wear a Crown, or a Papist our
English Diadem. And prudently considering all this, that exclusive Bill in
Parliament, was like the wise Fathers advice to rash Phaeton, as much for his
own good as the Kingdoms safety; for no doubt but if ever he should ascend this
Throne, and hurried on by the furious conduct of his Romish Counselors till he
had set his Nation in a flame, he himself at last will most certainly perish in
his own fires.

Now our Answerer bids us consider the weight of a Coronation Oath with a
Prince of any sense of Honor or Religion, and he has promised upon this
account (pray Heaven he keeps his word!) a very smart argument, which he makes
out thus; He has a double tie, of Nature and Religion. Those ties indeed ought
to be very strong; but how strong the ties of Nature and Gratitude to the best
of Kings and Brothers, are in him, has been sufficiently experienced, and
largely treated of in the Popish Character; but for Religion, that has no tie
at all upon him that loosens all other ties contrary to the pride and interest
of the Romish Church. And though our Answerer has to a miracle confessed, that
there is such a Doctrine in the Church of Rome, as dispencing with, and
absolving Papists from all Oaths to Heretics; yet says he, it is a Doctrine
never universally received, and that even they that do believe it, do not
preach it to all; and therefore these, with him, are poor shifts and evasions.
Why should we fear it should be made use of against us? for says he, that
Prince that would lose all his Honorable preferments rather than tell a lie
against his conscience, ought certainly, to be believed when he shall make so
solemn a protestation as his Coronation Oath. But that Oath we have by sad
experience found to be such a Juglers knot, and has so often played fast and
loose, that if he were a Mahumetan, and should swear by Alha, we should have
much more reason to believe him as Turk or Infidel, than as a Roman Catholic;
for we know the bands of Nature, Morality, and Honor, have been sacred to
Heathens, but never to Papists. And besides, I must tell my smart Gentleman,
Though we very well know that Dispensations are frequent things from Rome, yet it
would have been no less than a mortal sin, and never to have been forgiven, to
have presumed in that case to have told a lie without the Popes permission;
though truly as some Papists have declared, his Holiness was to blame not to
dispense both with the Dukes receiving the Sacrament in the Protestant Church,
and their taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance for some time, since
they would have been no less sons of his Church, nor no less true to his power,
and considering he might so easily have done it, which would have prevented all
their misfortunes, and for ever have secured their Interests.

And next says our Scribler, What if the King of France, contrary to his Oath
upon the Sacrament, has invaded Flanders, he is but one president; and must all
Princes of that Religion violate their Oaths because he has done so? But for Q.
Mary of Eng. violation of her Oaths, Covenants, and her Honor, with all her
barbarous recorded Cruelties, let her pass, it is not at all pertinent to his
purpose to take the least notice of her. Besides, for his Coronation Oath, it is
an Oath upon compulsion; and he has greater and more ambitious motives to make
him take it, though against his conscience, than the French King had to take his
Oath upon the Sacrament, and break it; for that was only a little to enlarge
his Empire: but this of our Popish Successors is to mount him on a Throne. And
since it is a like ambitious cause in both, we very well know, that ambitio
multus mortales falsos fieri coegit.

He tells us now his first design was only to be of the defensive part. But if
comparisons of these times with those of the late Rebellion; if railing at, and
accusing three Parliaments of a horrid Plot, a Plot to ruin Monarchy, ferment
us into Civil Wars, and make us cut our own throats, be more than defensive,
the second page of his Pamphlet must tell him to his face he lies. But now he
is at the same thing again; he must say something.

Well though he denies the possibility of introducing Popery, because a great
many as good Protestants as the Characterizer do both say so, and believe it
too; yet certainly he thinks the Party very powerful, to protect his notorious
impudence against the King, the Parliament, and all the Judiciary power of the
Nation, who has with great wisdom, and by strong proofs, found out a most
Hellish and Dangerous Plot; a Plot against the Life of his Sacred Majesty, the
Protestant Religion and Government; and with reason and thankfulness have
acknowledged 'twas only the especial Providence of God that has delivered us.
But he says, it is not only impossible to introduce Popery, but it is impossible
for the Papists themselves to believe it could be done; that is to say, there
has been no Plot on that side. But what has he made all the Three Estates of
England to be, but a pack of Rascals and Villains, to pretend a Plot where
there was none; and to set their hands to the confirmation of such a Falsehood,
and to the delusion of the undiscerning multitude? Nay, he has a further charge
against that great and honorable Council of Parliament, who (though a Papist
King cannot influence the Judiciary Officers of his own creation) have already
depraved the Bench, and obstructed Justice, as in the last line of his 8 th
page, where he says, Justice has been denied, where it might give distaste to
the Representatives of the Nation.

Well, but after much senseless quibling upon the Characterizer's being a
Papist, because he was of their minds so far as to believe their design of
establishing Popery in England might have took effect; he at last has not only
granted the possibility of their belief, but the introducing of Popery
feasible. Yet (says he) does it follow, that because they thought so then, that
they think so still? sure they have little reason to believe that that design
which was in so hopeful a forwardness as never since Queen Maryes days could be
boasted of, carried on with all the art and contrivance, all the secrecy and
cunning of a diligent and active party, favored by several the greatest
persons in the kingdom, and those most eminent for their Riches and Interest to
support the Cause, and the universal security of the Nation conspiring with all
these, and after all this brought to naught; should ever at all, or at least in
this age, be effected, when all their measures are broken, and all their wicked
contrivances laid open, and the whole scene of that Religious Villainy displayed
to public view; when the whole Nation is still awake with continual fears, and
fresh Alarms against them. Yes, Mr. Scribler, 'twas and might still be
possible, if the people of England be yet more senseless than in that security
you spoke of, and does yet leave them the hopes of a pernicious Popish King;
there will be then no need of Plots, his Power will undoubtedly perform much
more than all their Hellborn stratagems could ere design. It was indeed an
overhasty Roman zeal to mount him on the Throne before his time; they were
impatient of delays thought long till they arrived at their dear promised Land,
and would have took delight to have waded through that Sea of blood that would
have brought them thither; 'twas that and Providence that it seemed had not
designed we all should perish in our dreams, made them so unhappy to
themselves, and fortunate to us. Their fear* that death might interpose betwixt
them and all their hopes, and snatch their darling Prince before his Brother's
or their work was done; their dread of this, and eager thirst of blood, made
them plot on for what they might have had without, and ruin all. But to prove
it is possible, in case of a Popish King, it is in the power of any English
Prince to remit the punishments due to that party when convicted, as has been
experienced; and I think none will doubt but a Popish King, and an obedient Son
of Holy Mother Church, will extend his Negotiation a little further for them
than an Heretic, so far no doubt as to encourage his own Religion, and
suppress its enemies, and give them leave to revenge their long sufferings.
Well, admit this King, and more certainly the impowering his party to all they
can desire, what will the cackling of all our Protestant Geese do then, to the
preserving our Capitol? even as much good as our Scriblers Vindication has done
his Master.

Next, if it were possible that we shall ever suffer a Papist King in England,
and put the reins of Government into his hands, whose Arbitrary Principles we
so abhor; when we do this, we shall no doubt not only be content to let him
have a standing Army, but shall every man voluntarily contribute to the setting
up and maintaining that Army we know beforehand is designed to enslave us, or
cut our throats. But I will hope, and believe it impossible for the whole
Nation to be mad at once; and on that presumption agree with my Pamphleteer in
that point, That we shall have no standing Army, no Arbitrary Government; and
indeed I fancy the Jesuits have just cause to say now, Perditur haec inter
miseros Lux.

Well but he says again, It were folly for a Papist King to attempt the
bringing in of Popery: for, says he, young as the Reformation was in Queen
Maryes days, it might indeed with some ease have been plucked up, ere it had
taken root; the Papist in those days equal, at least, if not exceeding the
Protestants, all longing for the restoration of their Religion: but now when
this Idolatrous Superstition has been so long worn off the minds of the people,
and the Reformation so deeply and so strongly rooted, the Roman Church so
detested both for the dangerous Innovations of its Doctrine, and the Idolatry
of its Ceremonies; and so odious in the eyes of the people for its pernicious
principles expressed in the Villainous practices of its professors, in Massacres,
and Plots all detected. All this indeed is very true; and I confess he is so
far much in the right. But soft and fair! how came this to pass? how has the
Papists disobliged you, now that you are so briskly treating of their
pernicious Principles, the dangerous Innovations of their Doctrines, Idolatry
of their Ceremonies, and their Villainous practices in Plots and Massacres? How
came the wind to be thus turned now? Or has my good friend forgot himself since
he writ the second page of his wise Answer, where he was showing that the
principles of a Papist and a Protestant so little differ; it is contrary to
reason or common sense a Papist should be less an honest man for them, as only
differing in a few disputable matters of faith, and not very material
ceremonies of divine worship. And is it possible that he who has so exclaimed
against contradictory discourse and arguing, and has so much endeavored to
find it out where it never was, by leaving out, or adding words of his own,
should at last be found so grossly guilty of the same fault? Well, but perhaps
he may as justly as his Master say the case was altered, so he could not help
it; for indeed his first business was to persuade us to believe what a happy
condition we should be in under the reign of so virtuous and heroic a Popish
King, and to take off our dreadful apprehensions of his Religion; therefore he
tells us the small difference betwixt us and them, as only a few disputable
matters of faith, etc. but fearing that work with all his painful arguments may
not be perfectly finished, therefore he now says we have no reason to think it
can do us any harm, because it can never be established in England; for the
dangerous Innovations of its Doctrines, and the Idolatry of its Ceremonies, and
villainous practices of its professors in Plots and Massacres, have rendered it
so odious. But this contradiction was a little unlucky in this place, just
where he is accusing the false Satyr of blowing hot and cold with the same
breath; but in that we may suppose he did forget himself, which may be forgiven
him too, since by his handling both these Arguments with so much convincing art
and cunning, he has proved good Wits are incident to ill memories.

But now he says, It Is plain, though the Triple Mitre be struck at, the three
Crowns is their aim; nor would they be so violent against Popery, which they
have no reason to fear, but that they know it is the charm to bring in the
people to the ruin of Monarchy; knowing the multitude to be not unlike Beasts
or Cattle in a Ship, which in any storm that is raised, if they are made
apprehensive of the Vessels sinking on the one side, run immediately with such
a violent panick fear to the other, that they overset the Ship, and quite
overwhelm themselves and it in ruin. And all this lies again at the Parliaments
door, because they have endeavored for the good of the Kingdom to disinherit a
Popish Successor, and have not supplied the King with moneys, though at the same
time they have declared, if his Majesty will be graciously pleased to join with
them, and bar all the pretense of Papists to this English Diadem, secure their
fears by passing that one Bill against that Prince, whose succession is the
terror and distraction of this Nation; an Act in which consists the peace, the
safety, and the glory of three Kingdoms; let him but be removed from all
pretensions to this Crown, which justly may be done by King and Parliament, and
they will open their purses so wide to Him, give Him that Mass of Wealth, as
will make Him both feared abroad, and beloved at home. So vast a Treasure will
they make Him, as none of all His Royal Ancestors, nor He Himself was ever
Master of. But should they have done't without, it would have betrayed the
Nation, ruined their own Privileges, and left all Grievances as unredressable
as unredrest, and then they might thank themselves for what would follow.

And next our Scribler thinks it very unreasonable that the Prince alone should
not have the benefit of Liberty of Conscience, which every subject in his
dominions takes very ill to have denied to himself. Truly it is hard indeed; but
the circumstances of this Nation considered, not at all to be wondered at: for I
believe all men of sense, as well as Sir Poll, as he calls him, will take it
for granted, that if this Popish Heir comes to the Crown, he will by the
dictates of that Religion, in spite of Vows and Covenants, promote the Romish
Interest with all the severity, injustice, and tyranny, that most religious
Cruelty can invent. But whether or no he will condescend to make the least
excuse for it, as the Characterizer has supposed he might, I cannot tell; but
our Answerer that laughs at the supposition, it is probable knows more of his
mind, than to think he will be guilty of so much curtesy, as to make us an
excuse for any thing he does against us.

If (says a Critic in the Character) these be the dangers of a Popish King,
why have we not such strong, such potent Laws made before this Popish Heir
comes to the Crown, that it shall be impossible for him ever to set up Popery,
though he should never so much endeavor it? The Character answers, To endeavor
to do it by Law, even with those Laws we have already against it, is
impossible. But it is likewise as impossible for any man of sense to believe,
that he being a Papist, and Vassal to the Pope, either will or can put those
Laws in execution. But then a little after it is confessed he may be totally
restrained from all power of introducing Popery by the force of such Laws as
may be made to tie up his hands; and put the execution of those Laws into the
hands of the People, and consequently those Laws must be such as must ruin his
prerogative. Well, but granting thus much, says our Answerer, what you infer
from this is doubly ridiculous; first, that no Monarch would thus intail such
an effeminacy on a Crown as shall render the Imperial Majesty of England but a
pageant, a mere puppet upon a wire. And what can you make more of a King that
has no power, no not so much as the meanest subject in his Dominions can have
after these Laws are made to tie up his hands? he cannot put an Officer in any
place throughout his Kingdoms, for fear he should be a Papist, nor take one
servant of that persuasion into his Court, they being all liable then to the
conviction and persecution of the people; and when it is so far from him to
defend them, that it is not in his power to favor, in any case, the dearest of
his own party: for may not his subjects, or rather his Masters, inspect into
his actions, and call him to account for every thing they think a misdemeanor,
having the Law in their own hands? and when his prerogative is thus ruined, is
not this Prince more like a Pageant born upon men's shoulders, than a King?
which when they are weary of, they may throw him down, and dash him all to
pieces.

But these Laws, says he, that bind up a King so strictly, suppose him to be a
Popish King, such only to be restrained, this is not therefore an intailed
effeminacy, but a short eclipsing of the full splendour of a Crown, which in the
next Protestant Successor is to shine forth with greater luster. But how will
you assure us that the people, after they have been once possessed of such a
glorious Power, will ever give it back again? Indeed I doubt it: for we have
not seen the English men so willing to part with any of their Magna Charta, or
the least of their Privileges: No, I am rather afraid it will rather give them
the itch of taking the Name as well as Power upon them; and I believe it is the
only expedient to subvert this glorious Monarchy into a Commonwealth.

But to give us hopes that we may have a very good and merciful Popish King,
that will neither remember Petitions, Protestings, nor Association Votes, he
refers us to the consideration of his Royal Brothers Clemency, which indeed has
been so great, that ingratitude it self cannot but acknowledge it; but all this
while he was a Protestant Prince, and therefore that can be no Argument to make
us think a Papist King will be as gracious: for were his Nature an Original of
Mercy, he could not be the man he would be, without the forfeiture both of his
Conscience, Religion, and his Kingdoms: for if an Emperor or a King (says
Parsons) shows any favor to an Heretic, for that he loses his Kingdom,
Philopat. p. 109. Becanus, another of their Authors, says, If that Kings and
Princes are negligent in rooting out of Heretics, they are to be
excommunicated and deposed by the Pope, Controv. Anglican. p. 131. 132. And
when the Papists tell us how many Virtues he is Master of, and amongst the rest
how noble and how strong his friendship is, then granting the truth of this,
his opposers has more reason to dread his Power: for it is a known Maxim, The
greatest and truest friend, the most implacable and revengeful Enemy.

But for those Acts of Parliament which we find ordering and disposing of the
Succession, they make (says he) very little for the purpose for which they were
produced. Yes, they prove that the Succession has been given by Act of
Parliament, where the King and the Parliament thought fit; and upon those
reasons they afterward thought more weighty, the Gift has been recalled, and
they have placed a Right elsewhere; and who shall dare to say these Acts, or
any made by King and Parliament, are unjust? Indeed the King without his
People, or the People without their King, cannot alter the Succession, but with
a joint consent: Those Acts of Parliament declare it has and may be done again;
and certainly there never was a Cause that did require the changing of the
Succession half so much as we have now.

But he is drawn to an end; and I thought nothing could have been more
audacious than his Answer is throughout, in notorious Accusations of all our
Great and Honorable Parliaments; but the dedicating his Libel to those very
men with the same hand he writ it of them, is a boldness that certainly has no
president, but is an Original of Impudence.

A REPLY TO Roger L' Estranges PAMPHLET.
WELL, but now for our Second Masquerade, who Begins just like his Brother, and
carries on the Argument of Forty one throughout every Paragraph of his whole
Pamphlet, to answer all that can be said against Popery with that. He tells us:

The Character of a Popish Successor were an excellent piece in the kind, if it
had not too much Sublimate in it. The truth of it is, says he, the Author has
made the figure of his Successor too frightful, and too enormous; and then he
finishes his Masterpiece with a paradox, by the supposal of a most excellent
Prince, and yet making him the greater Devil for his Virtues.

I cannot suppose it any Paradox, to say the intoxication of Romish Principles,
and that Religious frenzy in the brains of Majesty, will pervert all his
Natural Virtues, and make him imagine he does his God and his people good
service, and think he improves his Talent sevenfold, when he puts the severest
Roman Laws in force against us, which is no less than the forfeiture of our
Estates, next the loss of our Liberties, and our Lives in a very short time
after. Nor are we to suffer any death more merciful than burning alive, which
is the Popes own Law, in these words, Decerminus ut viva in conspectu hominum
Comberatum (De Hereticis. 7 Decretat. sect. in consutilem). Nay, his obeying
his Superior Ecclesiastic Power in executing these Laws, shall be so far from
making him or any other Papist else, think him the greater Devil, as he says,
that on the other side the Pope, and all of that Church, will tell him he has
improved all his Virtues to that height, that he deserves to be a Saint; has
merited that Heaven which they will give him.

But before I go any further, says he, let me recommend to the Reader one
Remark, as a thing worthy his attention, That he cuts all the way upon the
Successor, as presupposing him to be a Papist, and consequently dangerous and
insufferable by reason of that persuasion; and very magisterially gives his own
bare word for the dangers of that persuasion: why does he not rather tell us in
particular terms, These and these are the principles, and then make his
inference from those principles, to the dangers that attend them.

I thought both the Principles of the Roman Church, and the dangers that attend
them, had been too well experienced in England, as well as other places, not to
be known to the most Vulgar person in it: for what was Q. Mary's Tyranny, but
an impulse of Conscience derived from those Popish Principles that told her
that all Heretics are all notorious Traitors, Traitors against God himself,
and therefore guilty of the highest High Treason, which they call Crimen Laesae
Majestatis Divina, and therefore they deserve that worse penalties should be
inflicted for that, than other High Treason? And it is besides enacted by a
General Decree, That whatsoever King, Bishop, or Nobleman, shall believe that
the Decrees of the Roman Bishops may be, or shall suffer them to be violated in
any thing, be accursed, and shall remain for ever guilty before God, as a
betrayer of the Catholic Faith, Cause. 25. 91. cap. 11. and therefore
considering all this, we cannot with reason think that such barbarous Cruelty
could be the delight of naturally soft and tender hearted woman, or that
Majesty could be so perjured, so ungrateful, and so dishonorable for little or
no advantage; but she was a servant of the Church and Pope, and durst not incur
his curse, that was to open her the Gates of Paradise; and it is impossible for
any Papist to have such a Sovereign Power as hers, and not to be the same
Tyrant that she was.

Now in Answer to a paragraph which his Brother, the wiser of the two, skipt
over, concerning the barbarity of the known Doctrine of the Roman Church, that
pronounces damnation to all that differ from it in any one matter of faith, and
to justify his Masters and his Religion from such a terrible Accusation, as
tearing up his Fathers Sacred Monument, branding his blessed memory with the
name of Heretic; and the completing the horrid Anathema, of most impiously
execrating the very Majesty that gave him being. He says the Characterizer lays
down a false supposition, and then raises out of it a most uncharitahle
consequence; for the very position, That there is no salvation out of that
Church, is yet qualified with an exception, In case of an invinsible
persuasion. I think that case was plain in that Royal Martyr, who sealed the
invinsible persuasion of the Protestant Faith with his blood.

And next he says, If this be so lewd a principle in one Religion, why is it
not so in another? Which being admitted, involves every individual member of
the Church of Rome in the same condemnation. So that he says, in asserting this
Doctrine the Characterizer himself damns all the Papists, as well as he makes
them damn all the Protestants.

Now as I never thought the Protestants in a more likely state of damnation for
the Papists saying or believing so; so I always thought it was the proof of
Crimes, and not the accusation; that must condemn all men before so just a Judge
as God Almighty; and there are such proofs of that Hellish Doctrine, that it
bears witness against it self: for it is not the Protestants knowing and judging
their principles, but their believing and following them, damns the Papists;
but he is a Protestant that holds the Romish Tenants as good as those of the
Church of England, and is of whether for a penny: so that it is possible he may
believe a man deserves to be hanged as much for being accused of burning a
House, or killing a man, and think him as guilty, as if he were taken in the
fact: nay, with him a Protestant shall as justly deserve to be damned for
saying this is a Popish Tenent which they themselves declare to be so, as those
Papists that believe it; and we must have a special care of saying they do any
thing ill, lest we contribute more to their damning than they themselves.

And now let us see what this pretended Protestant Champion Mr. Le Strange says
to an Oath of a Roman Catholic Prince. Take that for granted once, that there
is no trusting to their Oaths, and you cut all the ligaments of Society and
Commerce; there is an end of all Treaties and Alliunces, amicable and mutual
Offices betwixt Christian Princes and States; nay (says he) (...) but that
Maxim, and you turn all Europe into a Shambles, and put Christendom into a
state of War; for where there is no trust, there is no security.

Well I allow all this, that these Politic Reasons of State may oblige Papist
Princes to keep their Oaths with Foreign Princes, nay with Heathens, when they
shall break them with their own subjects, to usurp an Arbitrary Power in their
own Kingdoms, and to establish their own Religion amongst their own people,
where they can never be called to an account.

And as the Character says, He has Religion to drive the Royal Jehu on;
Religion that from the beginning of the world, through all ages, has set all
Nations in a flame, yet never confessed it self in the wrong. Mr. Le Strange
says these are strange words to come from the mouth of a pretender to scruples,
and a Protestant Advocate; his quarrel is not now so much to a Popish as a
Religious Successor. If he had said only the pretext of Religion, he might have
appealed to the clamours of his Brethren, or his own papers.

Hold there, honest Mr. Towzer* follow not the scent so close; it is his
Religion will drive the Royal Iehu on to our destruction; and I am sure blind
zeal as well as pretext, has at some time or another set almost all Nations in
a flame.

He has told us, 'Twas the pretended fear of Popery that brought a pious and a
Protestant Prince to the block. And though we all know this to be a sad truth;
yet that can be no Argument to us now, who have the demonstration of evident
Plots, and an Heir, an apparent Roman Catholic to bring in Popery, and to
establish Tyranny, if it shall ever be in his power; when that was but a
pretense against his Royal Father, which they made use of, like those Rogues
that went and pretended a Commission to search for Priests and Jesuits in
Hatton-Garden, and under that color robbed a House; and because they were
Villains, and had none, must there be no further search made after those
Traitors. Must the Authority of all Constables be denied in that case, because
they came with a villainous cheat? And must there be no Plot, no danger in a
Popish Successor, nor no just fear of Popery now, because for the late
Rebellion they had only that pretense? But his design is to divert our eyes
from approaching Tyranny, by bidding us look another way.

And though I am no Papist in Masquerade, yet I must say this for that party he
calls so, notwithstanding all the Crimes he alleges against them, which indeed
though never so much deluded into, or set on by the Papists, will bear no excuse;
yet there is but that one president of horror against that party; and we have
no reason to suspect they would be at the same game again, for being against a
Popish Successor's coming to the Crown; a Cause so much concerns the Nation.

To prove that Government was purely Divine, he tells us, It needs no other
support than the authority of the Holy Scriptures, By me Kings reign, etc.

That which we call Kingly Government, he says was at first Paternal, and after
that Patriarchal; but to prove still that Kings were made for the people by the
consent of God himself upon the request of the children of Israel, the Chain of
Kingly Succession has been broken, and the same Divine Right invested in
another, as we may see in 1 Samuel 8. 1. where Samuels sons, as Judges of Israel,
no doubt had as great a right of Kingly power, as either Paternal or
Patriarchal Government; but they not walking in the ways of their Father (c. 8.
v. 3.) God Almighty to satisfy his troubled complaining people, did grant the
dispossessing these men of their lawful Birthrights, and command the crowning
of Saul, 1 Samuel 8 22. a man so remote from any pretense to that power, that he
was of another Tribe; and after Saul, David was anointed King, though Saul had
many Sons living at the same time; yet who dares to say, that Readiness or David's
was an Usurpation, or an unjust Power? Now we see by this, that the succession
of Kingly Government has not been so sacred, but upon some occasions it has
been changed by Divine as well as lawful Authority; and from his own Text of
Scripture, I have made the man; the earth, and the beast that are upon the
ground, and by my outstretched arm have given it to whom it seemed meet into
me, Jer. 27. 5. there is as much a Divine Right for the unmolested enjoyment of
five shillings per Annum by a subject, as for the inheritance of three Kingdoms.

And for the Expedient offered at Oxford in Parliament, in lieu of the
Exclusive Bill, where it is proposed that his Children shall wear his Crown;
shows plainly it is not malice against his person, nor Forty one, they aim at;
but the preservation of peace and safety in these Three Kingdoms.

And we have great reason to thank God, and pray for a blessing on those men
that struggle most against a Religion which from the effects of its Bloody
Principles we can produce so many Records of Tyranny and Persecution.

I have been told, That a Reply to the first Pamphlet would have sufficiently
Answered both that, and the Papist in Masquerade; there being so little
difference in the substance of their Arguments: However I think I have
particularly answered every material part of that, and Mr. Le Strange's too.

FINIS.

