SAM. Ld. Bp. of OXON, His Celebrated REASONS FOR ABROGATING THE TEST, And
NOTIONS of IDOLATRY, ANSWERED BY SAMUEL, Archdeacon of Canterbury.

The Third Edition.

It Is better to Indulge Men's Vices and Debaucheries, than their Consciences.
Sam. Park. Eccles. Pol. Page 54. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1688.

THere is nothing hereby intended to impugn the Abrogation of the TEST: May His
Majesty's Sacred Will and Pleasure be fulfilled; and may the Rights of the
English Peerage remain Inviolable. But there seems to have been an absolute
Necessity, for the AUTHOR of the Reasons for Abrogating the TEST, to have
Repealed his most bitter Invectives against the Nonconformists, and his
Tempestuous Indignation against Dissenters in general; so diametrically
opposite to the Serene and Pious Desires and Resolutions of His Majesty, to
make His Subjects happy, and unite them to Him as well by Inclination, as Duty;
and to have showed his Compliance to His Majesty in all His most Laudable and
Generous Designs, before he had singl'd out that particular Point of the TEST,
merely to hook in a Plea for Transubstantiation, and his own New modeled
Notions of Idolatry. But let Others, whom it may concern, dispute those
Controversies: The present Question is, Whether his Lordship of Oxon, have
Retracted his Discouses of Ecclesiastical Polity, or at least, those Passages
in them, which run so apparently counter to His Majesty's Gracious Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience? Otherwise he may seem to have calculated his
Writings for the various Meridians of State; and his Arguments will not bear
that Weight, which (though the same, yet) coming from Another Person, they would
have done.

NOW, there cannot be a more certain Touchstone of Truth of the Bishop's, or
Arch-Deacon's (which you please, for they are both the same Person's)
Ecclesiastical Polity, than the Declaration it self: Only, out of his Christian
Charity, the Archdeacon has Peopled the Kingdom with such a dreadful Canaille,
(all but those of the Church of England) that Astonishment it self might wonder
well, were his unconscionable Epithetes to be allowed, that so Gracious, so
Indulgent, so Soft and Calm a Declaration, should come forth in Kindness to
such a Rabble: For Those whom His Majesty calls His Good Subjects, the
Archdeacon continually strigmatizes with the foul Epithetes of Iugglers,
Dissemblers, Wicked Rebellious, Hypocrites, Ecclesiast. Polit, page 241, 242,
273, 319, 187.
Sons of Strife and Singularity, and most notorious Heretics. And, upon this
Supposition, as the Foundation of his Pile, that the Generality of the People
of England are such, (for he excepts none but Those of the Church of England)
he rears the Fabric of his Ecclesiastical Polity; wherein he had only this
Misfortune, to be of a quite contrary Opinion to His Prince; and that his
Draconicks were not Repealed, before the Declaration came forth.

The Declaration expresses His Majesty's Earnest Desire to Establish His
Government on such a Foundation, as to make His Subjects happy, and unite Them
to Him as well by Inclination, as Duty; which He thinks can be done by no means
so effectually, as by Granting Them the Free Exercise of their Religion.

But the Arch-Deacon's Politics are of another Strain: For, in his Preface to
his Ecclesiastical Polity, p. 12. he say; That the Aim of his Discourse is, by
representing the Palpable Inconsistency of Phanatick Tempers and Principles,
with the Welfare and Security of Government, to awaken Authority to beware of
its worst, and most dangerous Enemies, and force them to Modesty and Obedience
by Severity of Laws.

Page 52. of the same Preface: If Princes (says he) would but consider, how
liable Mankind are to abuse themselves with serious and conscientious
Villainies, they would quickly see it to be absolutely necessary to the Peace
and Happiness of their Kingdoms, that there be set up a more severe Government
over Men 's Consciences, than over their Vices and Immoralities.

Page 54. of the same, He boasts his having proved, That Indulgence and
Toleration is the most Absolute sort of Anarchy; and that Princes may with less
Hazard give Liberty to Men 's Vices and Debaucheries, than to their
Consciences.

But the Declaration is quite of another Temper: We humhly thank Almighty God,
it is, and has of a long Time been, Our constant Sense and Opinion, which upon
diverse Occasions We have declared, That Conscience ought not to be
constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere Religion.

But this will not be admitted by the Archdeacon: For, ( says he, Ecclesiast.
Pol. page 321.) when Men's Consciences are so squemish, that they will rise
against the Customs and Injunctions of the Church, She must scourge them into
Order and chastize them for their troublesome Peevishness,

Page 324. (Eccles. Polit.) He pretnnds to have proved the Unavoidable danger
of Toleration, and keeping Religious Differances, that Religion must be
governed by the same Rules, as all other Transactions of Human Life; and that
nothing can do it but severe Laws; nor they neither, unless severely Executed.

Ecclesiast. Pol: Page 311. if Princes (says he) will suffer themselves to be
checked in their Laws Spiritual by every Systematical Theologue, they may as
well bare to see themselves affronted in their Laws Civil by every
Viliage-Attorney.

Page 284. But to indulge Idiots in their folly because they threaten Authority
to be peevish and, Scrupulous, and to Infest the Government with a sullen, and
cross-grained Godliness, (an Artifice not much unlike the Tricks of forward
Children) is to suffer Ignorance to ride in Triumph; and therefore such
Humorsom Saints must be lashed out of their Sullenness, into Compliance, and
better Manners. This ( as the Archdeacon calls it, Preface to Brambal 's
Vindication) was one his Rhapsodies of hasty and huddled Thoughts. Most Divine
Words, and most Seraphick Charity! but the Archdeacon will have Tenderness of
Conscience to be Pride; Vanity, and Insolence, though all the Seven Champions
should contradict him.

Page 273. He that pretends Conscience to vouch his Humor, and his Insolence,
is a Villian, and an Hypocrite; and so far from deserving Pity, especially from
Authority, than no Offenders can more need or provoke their Severity. This may
be True: But, Eccles. Pol. p. 27, 28, 36, etc.
where the Supreme Government, which must of necessity be Absolute,
Uncontrollable, and Unlimited, as well in matters of Religion, etc. more
Sagaciously discerns beyond the Archdeacon 's, that same Conscience to be
neither Humouor nor Insolence- nor will comprehend it under that Notion; there,
it is to be hoped, the Man is not a Villian, nor an Hypocrite, and so not
liable to the Fury of Correction.

Page 271. And therefore, if Princes will be Resolute, they may easily make the
most Stubborn Consciences bend to their Commands; But, if they will not, they
must subbmit Themselves, and their Power, to all the Follies and Passions of
their Subjects. Probatum est. S. P.

Page 270. Governors must look to the Public, and let Tender Consciences look
to Themselves. Laws must be of an unyielding, and unflexible Temper, and not
soft and easy Things. Princes must not be diffident in their Maxims of Policy;
but, as they must set up some to Themselves; so they must Act roundly up to
them Dii te donent Tonsore. -- Quaere, Why this Counsel was not taken, since
the Counsel was given so long before the Declaration came forth? Answ. Because
it was ever contrary to His Majesty's Inclination, Declar. P. 2.


Page 269. It Is all one to the Concernments of Government, whether Tenderness
of Conscience be Serious or Counterfeit: for whether so or so, it is directly
contrary to the Ends and Interest of Government. Better unsaid, than not
Believed.

Page 263. And what can be more destructive to all manner of Government, than
to make all the Rules of Order and Discipline less Sacred, than the Whimsies of
every Phanatick Zealot? Pray be patient, Sir, there is no such thing done.

Ibid. When to pick Quarrels with the Laws, and make Scruple of Obeying them,
shall be made the Specific Character of the Godly: When giddy and humorous
Zeal shall not only excuse, but hallow Disobedience; when every one that has
Fancy enough to fancy himself a Child of God, shall have License to despise
Authority. Who would have been at the trouble of all this Rhetoric, had he
known what would have followed?

Page 253. In brief The only Cause of all our Troubles and Disturbances, is,
the Inflexible Perverseness of about an hundred Proud Ignorant, and Seditious
Preachers; against whom, if the Severity of the Laws were particularly
levelled, how easy would it be to reduce the People to a Peacable Temper?
There were just Three more than his Number, and that spoild the Project.

Page 187. What can be more apparently vain, than to talk of Accommodations, or
to hope for any Possibility of Quiet or Settlement, till Authority shall see it
necessary to scourge them into better Manners, and wiser Opinions?

Page 219. It Is easy possible for well-meaning People, through Ignorance or
Inadvertency, to be betrayed into such unhappy Errors, as may tend to the
Public Desturbance; which, though it be not so much their Crime ^as
Infelecity; yet is there no Remedy, but it must expose them to the Correction
of the Public Rods and Axes. Surely, Rhadamanthus 's own Chaplain could not
have preached more severe Divinity?

Page 271. In brief, There is nothing so ungovernable, as a Tender Conscience;
or so restiff and inflexible, as Folly or Wickedness, when hardened with
Religion: And therefore, instead of being Complied with, they must be
Restrained with a more peremtory and unyielding Rigor, than naked and
unsanctify'd Villainy.

Page 223. Nay, so easy it is for Men to deserve to be Punished for their
Consciences, that there is no Nation in the World, (were Government rightly
understood, and duly managed) wherein Mistakes and Abuses in Religion, would
not supply the Galleys with vastly greater Numbers, than Villainy. It Is a
comfort, cursed Cows have now short Horns.

However, to this the Tender Declaration makes a Reply, declaring one of the
Reasons of His Majesty's Indulgence to be, Because He finds, That Force in
Matters of mere Religion, tends to the Depopulating of Countries.

On the other side, the Archdeacon in Opposition to the KING 's Reason, is for
Depopulating the Land, and Peopling the Galleys; and arraigns that Government
for want of Understanding, and due Management, that does not observe his Method
of Cruelty. He is for Pillories, Whipping-Posts, Rods, Axes, Scourges, etc. as
if no Government pleased him, but that described by Virgil in Hell: Hinc
exaudiri gemitus, and saeva sonare
Verbera; tum stridor Ferri, tractaeque catenae.
-- Accincta flagella
Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque sinistra
Intentans Angues vocat Agmina saeva sororum.


This, in the Archdeacon 's Ecclesaistical Polity; and to show, that no other
Government will content him but this, Page 18. I leave it, (says he) to
Governors themselves to judge, whether it does not concern them, with as much
Vigilance and Severity, either to prevent the Rise, or suppress the Growth, (
of Phanaticks he means, that find themselves aggrieved by the Penal Laws) as to
punish any the foulest Crimes of Immortality? And if they would but seriously
consider into what Exorbitances peevish and nntoward Principles about Religion
improve themselves, they could not but perceive it to be as much their
Concernment to punish them with the severest Inflictions, as any whatsoever
Principles and Rebellions in the State -- Well! The Business is considered, and
his Ecclesiastical Polity is found to be Deficient.

Nay, he goes farther, and arraigns all Kings and Princes for their Folly,
under the Title of Governors: For, says he, in the following Page 19. This
certainly has ever been one of the Fatal Miscarriages of all Governors, in that
they have not been aware of this Fierce and Implacable Enemy, ( meaning the
Phanaticks, who care no more for Whips and Scourges, than the Devil does for
Holy Water) but have gone about to govern unruly Consciences by more easy and
remiss Laws than those that are only able to suppress scandalous and confessed
Villainies; and have thought them sufficiently restrained, by threatening
Punishments, without inflicting them. And indeed, in most Kingdoms, so little
have Princes understood their own Interests in Matters of Religion, etc.
Hearken, O ye Princes of Europe, and go to School again to the Author of the
Discourses of Ecclesiastical ^^lity.

But, here is another bold Touch: Prohibition disobliges Dissenters, and that
is one Evil; Impunity allows them Toleration, but that is a Greater; and where
Governors permit what their Laws permit, (This is not the present Case) there
the Commonwealth must at once feel all the Evils both of Restraint and Liberty.
So that, as they would expect Peace and Settlement, they must be sure, at
first, to bind on their Ecclesiastical Laws with the streightest Knot; and
afterward keep them in Force and Countenance, by the Severity of the Law.
Their Restraint must be proportioned to their Unruliness of the Conscience; and
they must be managed with so much the greater Strictness, than all other
Principles of Disturbance, by how much they are the more dangerous. Gratias
Domine, now Princes understand what they have to do.

Yet a little more of the Archdeacon 's Ecclesiastical Polity. Beloved, in his
Preface to Bishop Bra^hal 's Vindication, (for it is not Pag'd) you shall find
it thus written: They ( meaning the Phanaticks, or Complainants against the
Penal Statutes) have been so long accustomed to undutiful Demeanor, that it is
to be feared, they are grown too Headstrong and Incorrigible, to be awed into
a more modest Behavior by Threatenings of Severity. Therefore, it will be
thought necessary to bridle their ungoverned Tongues and Spirits with Pillories
and Whipping-Posts.

And at the Bottom of the same Page: To this Peevishness of their Humors, I
might add the Restlesness of their Minds, that is always displeased with the
settled Frame of Things, (innuendo, the settled Penal Laws;) and that no
Alterations can satisfy. If you condescend to their First Demands, you only
encourage them to be making New Remonstrances: Appease all their Old
Complaints, and they are immediately picking New Faults to be Redressed. They
that at first only request Indulgence, will, when strong enough, demand it. In
short, Give the Non-conformists an Inch, and they will take an Ell.

But, ( in the same Preface) should it ever so happen hereafter, that any King
of England should be prevailed with to deliver up the Church, (That is to say,
to dispense with the Penal Laws and TEST; for the TEST, notwithstanding the
Reasons against it, must be included in this long Parenthesis, because the
Church framed it) he had as good, at the same Time, resign up his Crown. And
thus you see the Danger of the Present Government, through the Nonconformity
to the Archdeacon 's Ecclesiastical Polity.

There is another Reason, why His Majesty was graciously pleased to Think,
Force in Matters of mere Religion directly contrary to the Interest of
Government; and that is, Spoiling of TRADE.

Trade! cries the Archdeacon: Trade! No. Let Grass grow about the
Custom-House, rather than abate one Tittle of my Ecclesiastical Polity: For, (
in his Preface to his Ecclesiast. Pol. Page 49.) It Is notorious, (says he) that
there is not any sort of People so inclinable to Seditious Practices, as the
Trading Part of a Nation; and their Pride and Arrogance naturally increases
with the Improvement of their Stock. And if we reflect upon our late Miserable
Distractions, it is easy to observe, how the Quarrel was hatched in Trade, Men's
Shops, and cherisht by the Zeal of Prentices: (By the way, this is plausible
Nonsense all over.) But he goes on, Page 50. It Is a very odd, and preposterous
Piece of Policy, to design the enriching this sort of People, while their Heads
are distempered with Religious Lunacies. And, Page 51. He is a very silly Man,
and understands nothing of the Follies, Passions, and Inclinations of Human
Nature, who sees not there is no Creature so ungovernable, as a Wealthy
Phanatick. And therefore, (Page 48.) I confess, I cannot but smile, when I
observe how some, that would be thought wonderful grave and solemn Statesmen,
labor with mighty Projects of setting up this and that Manufacture, in their
several respective Towns and Corporations; and how eagerly they pursue these
Petty Attempts, beyond the Great Affairs of a more Public Concernment, (
Meaning the dreadful and terrible Execution of the Penal Laws;) and how wisely
they neglect the Settlement of a whole Nation, for the Benefit of a Village or
Borough? Very pleasant Ecclesiastical Polity! No Man must eat or drink, or
maintain his Family: The grand Relation of Human Necessities, depending one
upon another, must stand still, to oblige the Archdeacon 's Ecclesiastical
Polity. Here Is a Quietus est for above the Third Part of the Nation. None but
those that can swallow a Surplice, and adore the Parochial Levite, must weave
Camlets at Norwich, make Bays at Colchester, Spurrs at Rippon, Nayls at
Brommigeham, or Saddles at Burford. For why? There is not any sort of People so
Seditious, as the Trading Part of the Nation. So that, supposing the Greater
Part of the Trading Part of the Nation be, as the Archdeacon calls them,
Phanaticks, and Nonconformists, ( that is, Men Conscientiously scrupuling the
Ceremonies of the Church of England) they must either be Scourged into better
Manners with Briars and Thorns; Preface to Bramhal 's Vindication.
or else the Nation must be laid waste and desolate. For, to tell you true, as
good have no People, as those that will not pay Tithes; it is no matter for the
KING's Duties, nor how the Nation may be otherwise weakn'd and exposed.

There is yet behind one more Reason urged in the Declaration, and that is
this; That Force in Matters of mere Religion, never obtained the End for which
it was employed; wherein His Majesty declares Himself the more Confirmed, by
the Reflections He had made upon the Conduct of the Four last Reigns.

Now, here is the utter Subversion of the Archdeacon 's Ecclesiastical Policy;
All mere Labor in vain, abundance of Ranting, Raving, Reviling expressions,
insomuch, that the Archangel was more civil to the Devil, than the Archdeacon
to the Dissenters; and yet all to no purpose. He has been at a great deal of
pains in setting up Pillories and Whipping-Posts in all Parts and Corners of
the Kingdom; and now he may e'ne go, and pull 'em down again. What are now
become of all his Politic Let but's? In his Preface to Bishop Bramhall 's
Vindication; Let but the Government think it seasonable at any time to Reprieve
them ( meaning the Dissenters) from the Severity of the Laws, and they
immediately start up into that Confidence, as to imagine themselves the only
Darlings of State. Let but the Public Rods be removed from their Backs, and
they are presently full of Expectations to have them put into their own hands.
If they are not always Scourged and Chastis'd, they will grow Saucy, and must
by all means become Cronies to Kings and Princes.

Many other Passages might have been Collected out of his several Bitter (if
they may not be said to be Scurrilous) Invectives against the Dissenters; but
here are sufficient to make it apparently Manifest, that the Author of the
Ecclesiastical Polity, was as great a Dissenter from the mild and tender Maxims
of his Majesty's Government, and his constant Sense and Opinion, of a long time
professed and declared upon several Occasions in Matters of Religion, as the
Dissenters were dissatisfied with the Rigid Severity of the Church of England;
or, at least, with the Principles of his Ecclesiastical Polity.

Which makes it seem questionable, whether a Person, who has brandished his Pen
with that Virulency, against the Dissenters in general, and His Majesty's Royal
Opinion, and the Mature Results of his most serious Deliberations, may be a
proper Champion against the Test? For most certainly, there has been much more
said already, and much more to the purpose, than he has produced.

On the other side, he has most Dogmatically avouch'd, Preface to Bishop
Bramhall's Vindicat.
That if ever the Boisterous and unreasonable Opposition (as he calls it) of
the Nonconformists to the Church of England, be Re-erected it must be upon its
Ruins: And that if ever the Roman Catholics get any Ground, or Advantage of
the Church of England, they will be bound to make their Acknowledgments to the
Puritans, and the Strength of their Assistance. Whence he draws his Conclusion,
That it would be a pleasant Spectacle, (that is to say, A ridiculous oversight
in Government) to see either the Classical or Congregational Discipline
established by Authority.

Moreover, in the 721. Page of the Vindication of his Eccles. Pol. He appeals
to all Men, whether Liberty of Conscience be any better, than a License for
Anarchy and Confusion? Page 238. He says, That to grant Subjects a lawless and
uncontrolled Liberty of Conscience, in all Matters and Pretenses of Religion,
is to dissolve one half of the Government into perfect Anarchy, and yield up
the Constitution of all Public Affairs, to the Humor of every wild Enthusiast.
And Page 553. you find it thus written; So that, seeing an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction (of Pillories and Whipping-Posts, Thorns and Briars) is absolutely
necessary to prevent all Confusions, arising from unrestrained Liberty, it is
better that Mankind should be sometimes exposed to the Miseries of Tyranny and
Persecution, than always Groan under the Intolerable Disorders of Anarchy, or
Reluctance to Penal Statutes.

If then the Church of England be Established upon such a firm Foundation, that
nothing can endanger it, but Indulgence to the Dissenters, it is to be admired,
that a Man, so knowing in Ecclesiastical Policy, and so great a Friend to the
Church of England, would open such a Gap as to plead for the Abrogation of the
Test, which the Churchmen of England framed and setup, as the only Bulwark to
prevent her Dissolution. So that, to use his own Words, It Is very hardly
Credible, That a Person, who has lately appeared so Vigorously in her Cause,
should, notwithstanding all his seeming Zeal and Earnestness, be really i^ good
Earnest, in his Pretenses, against the Test. For what signifies the Abrogating
the Test, if there be no way to shake the otherwise immovable Church of
England, but by making two Bridge^ of Dissenters, one between Callice and
Dover, the other between Diepe and Rye, for Popery to return into England: For,
when he comes to tha^ part of his Preface to Bishop Bramhall 's Vindication,
where he considers what likelihood, o^ how much danger there is of the Return
o^ Popery into this Nation: For my own part, says he^ I know none, but the
Nonconformist's boisterous an unreasonable Opposition to the Church of England*
If he think, that the Abrogation of the T^^^ may be a means to unite the
Papist, and the Di^senter, which he seems to intimate, by saying That the
Faction of the Dissenters may be made use of, ^^ instruments (Iourney-men
Tools) to dissolve and unravel the established Frame of things, and destroy the
Church of England; and so make an unobstructed Passage for the Return of Popery
in Glory and Triumph; then he has left his Cause in the Lurch, and relinquished
all his Ecclesiastical Polity at once.

As for the Papists, he deals with them after such a rate, that no Man living
knows where to have him. In his Preface to Bishop Bramhall 's Vindication, he
seems neither to Love nor Fear 'em: For that, as long as the Church of England
stands in Power and Reputation, it will easily beat back and baffle all the
Attempts of Rome, and its Adherents; Their Plausible Reasons being evidently no
more, than little Tricks and Sophisms, and seem intended by themselves, rather
to abuse the Simple, than satisfy the Wise, Their Innovations are so
undeniable, and the Design of the Church of England's Reformation, so
apparently Apostolical, that those People must needs argue at a strange wild
rate, that will be demonstrating against Experience, and Ocular Inspection. So
then, the Reformation made by the Church of England, in the Points of
Transubstantiation, Worship of Images, Adoration of the Host, and Invocation of
Saints, being Apostolical; What must be thought of his Reasons against the
Test? Nay, there is Nothing could preserve the Papists from being hissed out of
the Pit, but that they are extremely Confident, and most Readers sufficiently
ignorant: So that the Church of England may safely defy all their Opposition.
She does not stand upon such Trembling Foundations, as to be thrust down with
Bull-rush Spears, and Oral Traditions, with Labyrinths, and Castles in the Air.

But then his Heart misgives him again, and he begins to fear the Return of
Popery into the Nation, should the Nonconformists join with the Papists: And
therefore, at the End of his Preface, he begs the Hearty Prayers of his Friend,
for the Peace and Prosperity of the Church of England; for when That is gone,
(farewell Frost) 'twill he hard to find out Another, with which any, that are
either Honest or Wise, will be over forward to join in Communion.

Notwithstanding all this, upon better Consideration, as it were in Compassion
of the despised Weakness of the Church of Rome, and her Adherents, he
undertakes to furnish Them with better Arguments of his own, than any they have
Themselves, to vindicate Transubstantiation, and clear them from Idolatry: For
which he strains an Argument deduced from the Cherubims, that covered the Ark.
And yet, in his Defense of his Ecclesiastical Polity, Page 285, 286. he
condemns both Turk and Pope together in a Breath; the One for giving Divine
Worship to a lewd Impostor; the Other, to a Senseless Piece of Matter. And
thus, what, by Virtue of Apparent, Apostolical Reformation, he called (Before)
a Senseless Piece of Matter, he has (Now) covered with the Cherubim 's Golden
Wings, and rendered Adorable by Scripture- Warrant: But, Been scribit, qui been
intelligitur; What he has Written, he has Written.

FINIS.

