THE SPIRITVAL YEAR or Devout Contemplations for every week etc
Blessed Souls! that winged by sweet devotion love
To converse often with the great God above
Our time so spent is well employed, and we
By such Weeks, Months, and Years secure Eternity.
Printed for S Smith at ye Prince's Arms in St Paul's Church yard



THE Spiritual YEAR: OR, Devout Contemplations, Digested into Distinct
ARGUMENTS FOR Every Month in the Year, AND FOR Every Week in that Month.

IMPRIMATUR.

August 4. 1692. Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.



LONDON: Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Daughters of the Latin Tongue are not ill distinguished in their
Proprieties by an Ingenious Fiction, of their having been all three spoken in
Paradise: That, first, when the eating of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge
was forbidden, God himself delivered that Command in Spanish, as the most
Majestic Language, which seems to carry Authority in the very sound: That
next, when the Serpent enticed Eve to taste it, he made use of the Italian, as
most Persuasive, charming the Ear with the Musical sweetness of its Accents.
And that lastly, when Adam was called to Account for his Disobedience, he
confidently excused himself in French, as having the smoothest Phrases, and
fittest to disguise Criminal Actions with fair Pretenses.

Nor does this only express the Nature of those Languages, but also of those
several Nations, and of the Subjects, wherein their Writings do more
particularly excel all others. Thus the Amorous French, brisk and adventurous
in Enterprises, quick in variety of Invention to frame surprising Projects, and
of a Ple^sant Courtly Conversation, have surpassed all others in well-contrived
and pleasantly-diverting Romances. The Politic Italians, of a subtle
penetrating Wit, to discern and observe the Intrigues of State; Jealous, and
thereby Inquisitive to search into the grounds upon which they move, and
Judicious in giving the Reasons of them, have been remarakably Excellent in
Writing History. And the Grave Spaniards, who are of a serious thoughtful
Temper, fit for Contemplation, Zealous in Religion, and extremely Devout, are
preferred before the others, for Books of Piety. Not that any of the three want
Eminent Authors in all sorts of Learning; but that the Genius of each being
different, does help to the attaining of greater Perfection in those particular
Subjects.

Our Youth, Manhood, and Old Age suit with the several Humors of those three
Nations; Men commonly in those Seasons of their Life being inclined to read
Pieces of such kinds, as are most agreeable to each. Now one of the first sort
having been translated out of French, and one of the second out of Italian, by
the same Person; the former (at the desire of a great Lord) in his younger
days; the other (at the Command of a great King) in his riper Years; He was
afterward moved by a far greater Sovereign, to employ some of his declining
time in Translating one of the third and best sort out of Spanish, that he
might not give a worse Account of the reremainder of that Precious Talent, but
endeavor to make it some way useful to himself and others.

When he first had that Design, this Book was given him by the Conde de Molina
(then Spanish Ambassador here) with great Commendation, as a late Piece highly
esteemed amongst them, and he had the more hope it might prove worthy of his
Pains, because he had seen some other things of the same Author, ( viz. John de
Palafox and Mendoza, Bishop of Osma) and particularly a Letter, wherein he
relates the hard Persecution he had suffered by the Jesuits, while he was
Bishop of Angelopolis in the Indies.

By having read several of their Works, he found that the best of them are not
free from many Monkish Stories, and Legendary Miracles, and could not but
wonder at such a mixture of Truths and Forgeries from the same Pens, comparing
them to the Prophet Jeremiah's Figgs, whereof the good were very good, but the
bad so bad, as not fit to be eaten; at least not by us in this Northern
Climate, whither, it is hoped, such unwholesome Fruits shall never be
transplanted any more. Yet having seen several of those Books so well purged,
as to be safely read by the strictest Protestant; He thought it would be no
hard matter to do the like with this. And being pleased with the Subject, as
agreeing with his Intentions; and the three parts of this Spiritual Year
suiting also with the different Ages of our Life, he resolved to follow the
Apostle's Advice, To try all things, and to hold fast only that which is good.

In the First Part he met with little but what might well enough be made fit
for one of our Religion to read; but in the second Part he found it necessary
to make such wide Gaps in several of the Discourses, that he feared it would
pass his Skill to make them up so, as to keep the Author's Order in his several
Months and Weeks; yet he attempted by borrowing from other Authors of that
Nation, and from some of our own, to fill up those Breaches, and to keep to the
Author's Method, with the same good intention and desire to bring sinners to
Repentance, and to save their Souls. And yet after he had done all, he had not
so good an Opinion of his own performance, (being but a Layman) as to think he
had made the Work Correct enough to be published with hope of effecting amongst
us the same Pious Design, which the Original aimed at.

However, having reaped much benefit himself by spending so many Hours in such
a serious matter, (which had the greater Power upon him by forcing him to a
very attentive Consideration of the business he was about, to the end he might
rightly understand, and render it into English) he pursued the Work till he had
quite gone through it, which he did some Years ago, but has kept it privately
by him ever since for his own Use; till by chance a Pious Divine of our Church
found him looking over some pieces of it, which, when he had been allowed the
liberty to peruse, he judged it might be made capable of doing good in the
World, and thereupon it was freely given up into his hands to be altered, as he
should think most expedient to that end, and to be supplied in whatsoever part
he should still find it defective.

By his Care and labor it comes forth at length, in such a manner, he hopes,
as may be available to promote the Spiritual good of Men, to persuade them to
the serious Practice of Religion and Piety, and to get them possessed with a
Spirit of true Devotion; which is the sole end of his endeavors, and indeed is
a thing which cannot be prosecuted with too much earnestness in this lukewarm
Age, when there appears almost in every place a most dismal face of Indevotion,
and a general decay of Christian Piety, universally extending it self through
all places and orders of Men; which sad and lamentable Evil, as it is the
desire of all good Men, as far as in them lies, to remedy; so he believes an
impartial and diligent perusal of this and suchlike Spiritual Treatises, will,
by the assistance of God's Grace, be Instrumental to the producing of that
blessed effect. He found by reading this Book, that in it were laid down the
most profitable and useful Instructions, the most affecting and forcible
Arguments to allure to the Service of God, and the most solid and substantial
Nourishment, that can be administered to Souls: And this gave him Encouragment
to undergo the pleasing Trouble of preparing it for a Public Reading. Which
being effected, his hearty Prayers to Almighty God are, that his Endeavors may
have their desired influence upon the Hearts and Minds of all that shall
vouchsafe to peruse them; and that that Devout and Heavenly Spirit may in some
measure be communicated to them, whereby the Spiritual Author of this Spiritual
Year was acted, in Designing and Perfecting so Divine and Profitable a Work.

THE Author's PREFACE.
THE Design of this Piece is to draw Souls to the serious Consideration of
Eternity, to move their Affections to the Love of Heavenly things, and to bring
them to a Contempt of those that are Temporal and transitory. In it they will
see much of what is treated at large in diverse Spiritual Books, and the
substance of what lies dispersed in them, summed up in this one; not with that
Spirit and Learning, wherewith those Authors wrote, but with equal desire for
the good of Souls.

Indeed that, which we are able to do, is nothing, in respect of what God does
by that Grace, which he has tied to the Ministry; for without all doubt, it is
He that does all; He that moves all, He that directs all, He that amends all,
and brings all to Perfection. Though St. Paul was a Vessel of Election, full of
the Spirit, and might have had as great confidence in himself, as any other
Apostle, yet this made him say, That his Planting was nothing, and his Watering
nothing, but that it was God that gave the Increase.

However, it much animates the Laborers of the Gospel in the Spiritual Work,
to find that it often happens to them, as it does to Husbandmen, who scatter
their Seed on their Land with perfect heedlesness, part of it falling beside,
and part being thrown from them with an uncertain direction, only with a
purpose to fill the Field with Seed; and yet returning home afterward to take
their rest, God while they are asleep sends Rain upon the Inheritance, moistens
the Earth, disposes the Seed, tempers the Heat, seasons the Elements, makes it
rot, revive, and rise again, so that even in Corruption it takes Root, grows
up, and brings forth the full Ear. What did the Sower more, than cast away the
Seed from him, as if he regarded it not? And yet it springs up, and gives an
abundant increase. All that he did was to prepare the Matter, that God might
work the Miracle, which (as St. Austin says) is only little in Man's
Consideration, because he sees God work it so often.

This hope encourages me to scatter the Seeds of the Divine Word into the
Hearts of the Faithful; trusting that God (who is the Worker of all that we do)
will give his Blessing, his Grace, and Power, to the end that the Fruit may be
multiplied; which Effect in the Parable of the Sower his Divine Majesty
intimates, he uses to produce in those Souls, who receive it with Attention,
and with a pious holy Affection; it taking Root in them, as in a fertile Soil.

But it may be some will say, there be already so many Books of Devout
Meditations, that this might well have been spared; they being so Holy and
Spiritual, and this not so, being written by so wretched a sinner as I am. To
this I answer, that though all other Persons might be questioned, why they make
Spiritual Treatises, since there are so many; yet that account ought not to be
demanded from Bishops, since it is a thing as proper to their Ministry, to
Write, to Teach, and Instruct, as the very Name of a Pastor. And in that Work,
it is lawful for a Prelate to Teach not only Opportunely, but in a manner
Importunely; as St. Paul teaches his Disciple Timothy, who was Bishop of
Ephesus. Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine; that is, by Sermons, by
Writing, by Conversing, and by Example.

And therefore We Bishops ought ever to fear the contrary Censure and Question;
Why do ye not write Spiritual Books? And this being the more dreadful Censure,
we ought to embrace that which we have least need to fear, and to avoid that,
which can most condemn us. Moreover it is a very affected and unreasonable
Complaint of the Politic Censurer, who is troubled, that so many Spiritual
Treatises come forth into the World; for God can never be too much praised
thereby, nor can Evangelical Counsels be too often repeated, nor Discourses
that aim at the Salvation of Souls be too frequent, though consisting of one
same Matter. To say the truth, we have seen nothing else in the Church of God,
from the time that His Divine Majesty settled it with his Blood, but this
Succession of Doctrine, which has accompanied that of those same Ministers,
whom by their Vocation, and excellent Abilities, he called and appointed for
Masters of Christian Instruction.

The Four Evangelists wrote those four Books, which contain all the Treasures
of Grace, in the Life and Death of our Savior; yet St. John did not forbear to
write his three Epistles, and the Revelation; St. Luke the Acts of the
Apostles, St. Peter two Epistles, and St. Paul fourteen; St. James one, St.
Jude another; and their Disciples, Ignatius, Polycarp, and others, did also
write, though they might have contented themselves with what the Apostles had
done, who were the General Ministers and Teachers of the Faith.

After these succeed the Doctors of the Greek and Latin Churches, who filled
the World with Writings, without any prejudice to those; or rather proceeding
upon the same Doctrine, and using it according to their purpose, have
enlightened and enriched the Church, to the great profit and comfort of Souls.
That Book of the Imitation of Christ, made by Thomas a Kempis, which some call
the Contempt of the World, and others, The Christian Pattern; though it be a
very little one, is yet so full of weight, that those other Spiritual
Treatises, which have been written since, might seem superfluous; yet for all
that the Venerable Lewis de Granada having translated and incorporated it into
his Meditations, with those of another excellent Author, which are very
Heavenly both in their Spirit, Style, and Matter; did not only make others
after them, but wrote also the Guide of Sinners, which has reduced, converted,
and guided so many; as likewise the Symbol of the Faith, and several other most
Profitable Treatises; besides numberless other Spiritual Men, who have written
since, and are still Writing without any harm to the World, by the repetition
of the Churches Doctrine in so many several manners. For the Pens of Writers
accommodate themselves to our Humane condition, which in length of Time and
variety of Ages seems to alter its taste; and even that, which is good, had need
to be seasoned after such a manner, that Men may be spoken to in their own
Language. Thus there is no fault to be found, that there are so many Spiritual
Books in the World; the pity would be, if they should be wanting: As no body
complains of the Government, if there be much pure Silver Coin current in a
Kingdom; that, which might be censured, is, if there were great scarcity of
that, and great abundance of Copper Money. If it should be said, Why are there
so many smutty Plays, loose Romances, profane Poesies, abusive Satyrs, and
Atheistical Pamphlets, with others of that kind, which do unspeakable Mischief,
and at the best serve only for a vain and unnecessary Divertisement? This
indeed were too just a Complaint, too reasonable an occasion of Censure, and it
is much to be wished, that effectual care were taken to prevent the Publishing
of such, and to suppress many of those that are already abroad.

It is probable many will dislike the shortness of my Style, and say, that it
had been better, if I had dilated my Discourse into larger Arguments, as many
very Learned and Spiritual Men have done in other Treatises. To this I Answer,
that though I be short and concise, I have endeavored to make it clear,
substantial, and comprehensive, and not to let the Brevity of it take away the
force of Persuasion. The Endeavor of this has been mine, but the attaining
and effecting it must be from God.

For this reason, I have also divided it by Months, Weeks, and other shorter
Paragraphs, to the end that those, that read it, may receive their Nourishment
cut into smaller Morsels; especially in the beginning, where I have been
briefer, because the Points there treated of are harsh and unpleasing, like a
Purgative Medicine, which being very bitter, is hard to be gotten down in a
great Potion; but is more easily swallowed, when it is made up into little
Pills. My Prayer is they may work to the driving out of sin, and to the
preparing of their hearts for those comfortable Cordials, that are administered
more seasonably afterward.

I Advise therefore all those, that shall vouchsafe to read this Book, that
they would do it with great leisure and consideration, that thereby they may
obtain that Spiritual Profit I wish them; and that they would by little and
little drink the Spiritual Water of this Doctrine, Meditating and Contemplating
upon it, and often making pauses, after the manner of Birds, who lift up their
head at every drop they drink, as if it were to give thanks for that Benefit;
and lastly, that they would lift up their Hearts and Thoughts to God in an
attentive Consideration of every one of those Sentences I propose unto them.

For this reason, I have sometimes permitted my Style to have a certain Chyme
or Cadence, to imprint them the deeper in their Memory, that from thence they
may sink into their hearts; to the end, that enlightening and warming them in
the love of Heavenly things, they may remain fixed in them for ever. For as our
Common Proverbs stick more easily in the Imagination, when Custom has brought
them into it; so those short Maxims, and inward Instructions of Souls do by
that means produce more benefit: And I have chosen rather to suffer that
Imperfection in my Style, than to venture losing the fruit of my desire.

The Fathers, especially those of the African Church, were much accustomed to
this way of Writing; as St. Austin, Fulgentius, Valerius Maximus, and others;
nay, even Leo the Great, and Petrus Chrysologus, though Latins by Nation, have
something of it. For as all of them busied themselves to persuade Souls to
Goodness, so, it being needful for that end to leave that imprinted in the
outward, which they would have to be fixed in the inward Powers and Faculties,
they sought the most Effectual means, though it was not the most Elegant and
perfect way of speaking.

St. Austin (whom he that follows in the Church of God, and imitates both in
his matter and manner of expressing it, may be sure not to do amiss) uses this
very frequently, as may be seen in his fourteenth Sermon de Sanctis, where
speaking of St. Paul and his Conversion, he says, Portabat Christus
Persecutorem, ut faceret Ecclesiae Doctorem; occisus agnus a lupis, and faciens
agnos de lupis; mane rapientem, and ad vesperam praedam dividentem. And in his
thirteenth Sermon, de Tempore, speaking of our Savior, he has these words. O
omnipotentia nascentis! O magnificentia de Coelo descendentis! adhuc in utero
portabatur, and ex utero Matris a Joanne Baptista salutabatur, and a Simeone
seen famoso, annoso, probato, coronato, agnoscebatur; differebatur exire de
seculo, ut videret natum, per quem conditum est seculum; Innovatus in aetate,
qui plenus erat pietate. And the like in many other places.

Possibly this Book may also be disliked by some, for not having any of those
points in it, that relate to Visions and Revelations; which are Favors God's
Divine Majesty does sometimes communicate to Devout Souls: But my Intention is
to give Men a clear, plain, and substantial Nourishment, which may be certain,
constant, and secure; to put them upon the Exercise of Virtues, and to give
them an Aversion to the Vices that are contrary unto them; and at the same time
both to persuade and enlighten them in the Principal Mysteries of Faith, and
not to enter into more abstruse and extatick Discourses; for since things are
chiefly governed by Rules, and the Infallible Rules are, to fly from evil, and
to do good, to seek Peace, and ensue it, (as the Kingly Prophet says) and
since this depends wholly upon the Exercise of a Christian Life, in believing
and doing according to God's Will revealed in his Word; my desire has been to
feed Men only with common Food, and to give them the plain Rules and Foundation
of the inward Life* leaving those particular and extraordinary things, which
may sometimes be felt by Devout Souls, to other Treatises and Spiritual
Masters, who Discourse upon those Subjects with great light and exactness. I
content my self, that they should stir up themselves by the Reading of this
Book, to endeavor to serve, to love, and to please God in the Exercise of
Christian Virtues, by frequent and Devout Prayer; that they should often
consider these Instructions, and frame their Lives and Manners according to
them, making that their whole Employment: And though they obtain no higher
favor of God, than to keep his Commandments, and to follow his sweet and
delightful Counsels, as far as their Frailty can permit; they need neither
desire, nor trouble themselves for more; and if God shall please to give them
any thing beyond that, let them decline it with Humility, or receive it with
Reverence, and preserve it with Fear, working in all things with resignation,
and the Counsel of their Spiritual Guide; for the Revelations whereby we are to
be saved, are already revealed to the Church, and for the rest, though they may
be profitable, yet they are not necessary to my Design.

To conclude, I offer this Work, such as it is, (full, I confess, of
Imperfections) to all that are desirous to improve, and go forward in the
Spiritual Life, with a most affectionate desire of their good; earnestly
exhorting them to the principal end, which the whole aims at; namely, to know,
how much earthly transitory things ought to be despised, and therefore to fly
from Vices, to avoid Worldly Delights, and to embrace those which are Heavenly
and Eternal; to practice the Virtues, to frequent the Sacrament, to Pray
earnestly, and often; and finally, to labor, and take pains in the Kingdom of
Grace, that they may come to enjoy God eternally in the Kingdom of Glory.

AN INDEX OF THE Several Subjects treated of in each Month and Week of this
Spiritual Year.
JANUARY.
Week I. OF the Frailty of Humane Nature. Week II. Of the Weakness of Man, and
the Miseries of his Body. Week III. Of the Miseries of the Soul, and its
Passions. Week IV. Of the Miseries and Sins of each Man in particular.
FEBRUARY.
Week I. Of the Remembrance of Death. Week II. How much it concerns the Soul to
remember Death in the time of Life. Week III. The dreadful Call of God to the
sinner, that defers Repentance till his Death. Week IV. The Answer of a
Repenting sinner, and that we ought to prepare our selves for Death.
MARCH.
Week I. Of the particular Account that each man is to give immediately after
his Death. Week II. Of the Rectitude and Severity of the Judgment. Week III. Of
the means there are in this Life to prevent the Account and Judgment of the
other. Week IV. Of the Universal Judgment at the end of the World.
APRIL.
Week I. Of the Torments of Hell. Week II. Of the Place of Hell. Week III. Of
the Company of the Damned, and of their pain of Sense. Week IV. Of the duration
of the pain abovementioned; of the pain of Loss, and of the Worm of Conscience.
MAY.
Week I. Of the Divine Benefits. Of the Benefit of Creation. Week II. Of the
Institution of Matrimony. Of Civil Society and Government. Week III. Of the
Benefit of Preservation; first; of our Bodies. Of Preservation from
particucular dangers. Of the Preservation of our Souls. Of the Guard of Angels.
Week IV. Of the Benefit of Redemption.
JUNE.
Week I. Of Baptism and Confirmation. Week II. Of Repentance and Absolution. Of
the Holy Eucharist. A Prayer. Week III. Of Frequenting the Sacrament. Week IV.
Of the Kingdom of Grace. Of the Purity of Intentions. Of Purity of Conscience.
JULY.
Week I. Of Temptations, and the Grace of God in them. That it is no easy
matter to be saved, but that it is necessary to fight. Of the Grace of God.
Week II. Of the Glory of the Blessed. Week III. Of the Imitation of the Life of
our Blessed Savior, and of his Mysteries. Of the Mystery of the Incarnation.
Of the Birth of our Lord. Week IV. Of the other Mysteries of our Lord till his
Preaching; and first, of his Circumcision. The Adoration of the Kings. Of his
Presentation in the Temple. Of his Flight into Egypt. Of the other Mysteries.
AUGUST.
Week I. Of the Baptism and Preaching of our Lord, with his Doctrine, Miracles,
and Parables. Week II. The Eve of the Passion. Of the last Supper, and of the
washing of his Disciples Feet. Of the Institution of the Holy Sacrament. Of the
Consecration of the Apostles. Week III. Of his Agony in the Garden, his Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension. Week IV. Of the Exercise of the three Theological
Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, upon Contemplation of the Life and Death of
our Savior.
SEPTEMBER.
Week I. Of the Virtue of Religion, and of the manner of governing the Cardinal
and Moral Virtues by that of Religion. Of the Application of Christian Works.
Week II. Of the three first of the Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude; and first, of Prudence. Of Justice, and of good and evil Judges. Of
Fortitude. Week III. Of Temperance, the Fourth of the Cardinal Virtues. Of the
manner of governing the Moral Virtues by the Cardinal. Of Judging falsely. Week
IV. Of Humility, and its contrary, Pride.
OCTOBER.
Week I. Of Liberality, and its contrary, Covetousness. Of Chastity and
Abstinence. The Mischiefs of Sensuality. Of Remedies against Sensuality. Of
Gluttony. Week II. Of Patience. Of Anger. Of Moderation in speaking, and the
mischiefs of the Tongue. Of Silence. Week III. Of Envy. Remedies against Envy
Of Charity to our Neighbors. Of Courtesy. Week IV. Of Diligence and Fervency,
and of the mischiefs of Omission and Sloth.
NOVEMBER.
Week I. Of the Twelve Fruits of the Holy Spirit in general. Of Charity, the
First Fruit of the Holy Spirit. Week II. Of Peace, the Second Fruit of the Holy
Spirit. Week III. Of Longanimity and Benignity, the Third and Fourth Fruits of
the Holy Spirit. Week IV. Of Faith, the Fifth Fruit of the Holy Spirit. Of
Continence, the Sixth Fruit.
DECEMBER.
Week I. Of Joy, the Seventh Fruit of the Holy Spirit. Of Patience, the Eighth
Fruit. Week II. Of Goodness, the Ninth Fruit of the Holy Spirit. Of Meekness,
the Tenth Fruit. Week III. Of Modesty, the Eleventh Fruit of the Holy Spirit.
Of Chastity, the Twelfth and last Fruit. Week IV. Of Perseverance, and Prayer
to God.
THE Spiritual Year.
JANVARY.
The First WEEK.
Of the Weakness of Humane Nature.
HEAR, Son, the Instruction of thy Father, and learn to fear God, who is thy
true Father. Consider thy beginning, if thou desire to have a good ending.
Look what thou art, and thou will see what thou shall be. Know thy self, and
thou shall know God. Behold thy self, that thou may behold him; thou art
blind from thy birth like the man in the Gospel, and may recover thy sight
as he did by putting Clay upon thine eyes. That is the matter thou art made of,
and it had remained Clay for ever, if the Spirit of God had not breathed life
into it. Thus thou see what Humane Nature is, and that it speaks nothing but
weakness and frailty.

2. Would thou see how strong it is? Look how long it stood. Man being
created in Innocence, scarce continued so for a few days; some say, hardly a
few hours. His Nature was so perfect, and so strong that it was able to destroy
it self, and without any inward weakness, it yielded (in Adam and Eve) to an
outward Enemy. What is it like to be, now that it is sick and mortally wounded,
since it ruined it self, when it was sound and healthful? Man fell in Paradise
in the midst of Light; and now, unless he get assistance of the light of Grace
by Prayer, what will become of him? And how shall he keep himself standing in
the midst of so much darkness, and so many confusions, as he has been subject
to ever since he was banished thence?

3. What is our Nature, but a Vessel of Passions and Miseries; a seed-plot of
Sins, and of Misfortunes? Consider Man in his Generation, and thou shall find
him to be nothing but Corruption. Behold him in the darkness of his Mother's
womb, and thou shall find him a little lump of living filth. Behold him taken
Captive before ever he was at liberty; and a Prisoner before he has committed
any Crime. His Body scarcely formed, and yet already shut up in a most obscure
Dungeon. Thus was he acquainted with darkness, before he saw any light; and
came headlong crying into the World, as an Omen of his precipitate Passions and
future Miseries. Yet alas, that Captivity which his Body suffers in his
Mother's Womb, is less to be lamented, than the other which his Soul suffers in
his Body.

4. Behold, that is a Captive, not only to corruption and filth, as the Body,
for that were tolerable; but also to the loathsomness of sin; created to an
Original Servitude, and condemned to Troubles without number or measure. To
begin to be, and to begin to be in Servitude, is in Man one and the same thing.
We are all born Slaves of the common Enemy, what have we then to be proud of?
Only one Man exempted himself from this hard Servitude, for he was God: All the
rest fell; all the rest are Tributaries without remedy.

5. Man is born to suffer and to weep; he forces out his way by the strait
passages of Afflictions, Pangs, and Throws; causing them to his Mother, and
sometimes even her very Death. What kind of Creature is this, that cannot come
to life, without hazarding to give, or to receive death? And who at the same
time begins to live and to lament; being accustomed to Tears, before he comes
acquainted with Laughter. But it is no wonder he should weep at his Mother's
feet for being born, seeing the miseries that expect him in the World. The Body
has cause enough to bewail its innumerable pains, and the Soul its innumerable
sins. Finally, Man is born the most feeble and helpless of all Creatures; being
destitute of every thing, and needing the succor of every body. He is kept
alive by the Alms, Care, and Compassion of his Parents; being utterly unable to
help himself, and utterly useless to all others.

6. In this sad condition, God's mercy steps in, and makes him His, by the
Water of Baptism. He takes from him the ^gs of the Old Adam, and clothes him
with the Robe of Grace, making him the Adopted Son of God, by the blood of the
Eternal Son of God. O! happy he, if his Fortune ended here; and if in this
Holiness and Innocence of Childhood, he might pass from Grace to Glory! But no;
alas, he is not so happy; for he grows up, either to a greater Reward, or to
harder Sufferings. The light of Reason no sooner begins to glimmer in him, but
presently his Appetite rushes forth to oppose it; and that being commonly
strong and powerful, drags the other after it, (because it is weakened by the
first fall) unless it be assisted by God's Grace. His Affections take birth
with his Understanding, and with them his Passions gather strength; these grow,
and daily darken his Reason; he lives a painful and vexatious life, in a
continual conflict, sometimes falling, sometimes getting up again, and very
often totally overcome, and willingly yielding up the Victory. His Life, whilst
an Infant, is mere impotence; whilst a Child, ignorance; whilst a Youth,
danger; whilst a Man, care; when Old, weakness, pain, and sorrow; and his
passage through all these Ages, is frailty, sin, and folly. In short, he lives
such a life, that Death uses sometimes to be his Wish, often his Refuge, and
always the great Remedy of his Miseries. This is the external Man, therefore do
thou use thy endeavors to become an internal Man. Conquer Nature, by the help
of Grace; thy Appetite, by that of Reason; the Delights of the Flesh, by
Mortification; the Deceits of the World, by Prayer; and even Death it self, by
a Religious Life.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Frailty of Man, and of the Miseries of his Body.
THis is the Nature of Man in general; Look now in particular upon the Body,
that gross and visible part of our frailty. Job says not, that man's Body has
some miseries and troubles, but that he is of few days, and full of troubles.
Would thou see it? They are so many, that they commonly break forth, because
they cannot be contained within him; and ever and anon that which afflicts him
inwardly, discovers it self outwardly in boyls and blisters, in swellings and
discolorings of the skin. The Year has fewer days, than there be ways of
dying suddenly; and can any body live in so stupid a Lethargy, as not so much
as to dream of an Eternal Life? The Year, and even our Life, has fewer hours
than there be Mortal Diseases in the Body, (as Naturalists affirm) and can any
one live forgetful of his Soul? We may wonder how life can continue in the
Body, having so many Gates and Windows to get out at? How is it possible that
the four Humors, which are Enemies to one another, should agree and last
together in so strait, so narrow, and so obscure a place as is man's Body? Yet
they do not agree, but with a most obstinate strife and contest, they do
disorder and discompose our life. What is the Body, but a false and seeming
Friend to the Soul, yet in truth, its certain and deadly Enemy? What is the
Body, but a Vessel of Poison, which to day is not perceived, yet kills to
morrow? What is the Body, but a heap of loathsomness and corruption? What is it
but a living deceit, which yet continually undeceives us, if we would be
undeceived; and a security in appearance, but a constant infelicity? Whilst it
is in Health, it cheats us, and never speaks truth but in Sickness; so long as
it lives, it is a lie; and never tells truth, till it be dead.

2. Our life is nothing but death in a disguise, and when it has made an end of
acting its part, the Mask is pulled off. The most beautiful Body carries that
within it, which were sufficient to make it eternally fly from it self, if it
were possible so to do. It is full of filth and corruption, so loathsome, and
so nauseous, that it is a scandal but to name them. It is a source of
Uncleanness, and the wretched dwelling of Impurities, which are so numerous,
that it was necessary to make many Common Sewers for them to run out at,
because there was not room enough for them within. The Body is so frail, that
every thing has a powerful Jurisdiction over it; a little dust choaks it, a
little fire consumes it, a little water drowns it, and even a blast of air
destroys it. Some have been seen to dye with Laughter, others have been killed
with Joy; one is drowned with a draught of Milk, and another choked with a
Hair; nay, even a man's own breath, meeting with his own breath, has made an
end of him with a Heicough. In conclusion, man's Body is the death of his very
life; can any thing be more frail and weak? Can any thing be more death? Or can
any thing less deserve the name of life?

3. O the deceit of Mortals, that can be cheated with this Dunghill! This
gross, corruptible, and miserable part of us, drags all the World Captive after
it. Shall we serve and pamper so vile, and so base an Enemy? Shall we sweat and
take such pains for its Delights and Pleasures?

4. No, let us not do so. Use thy Body as a Subject, and let the Soul live as
the Prince Ruling in it. Let the better part of thee Command, and the meaner
Obey: Let Reason take the Empire, and let thy Appetite serve as a subdued
Vassal. Let Grace rule thy Reason, and then let Reason be the Counselor of thy
Soul, that it may Govern thy internal Monarchy; in Holiness toward God, and in
Righteousness toward Man.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Miseries and Passions of the Soul.
1. BUT take heed how thou suffer thy Soul to Command, unless it be obedient
to the Command of God; for alas, neither is the Soul without its hazards. The
miseries thereof are not less, but greater, except it be governed by the
Creator of both Body and Soul. The Rational Soul was in its first beginnings
sound and strong; it became wounded by Adam's sin, and though cured by Grace in
Baptism, yet the seed and inciter of sin still remains. The Scar of that Wound
is not yet worn out; and there still remains a hard Exercise and Conflict of
our Nature, which is always rebellious till Grace bring it to subjection. Our
fleshly Appetite commonly governs and draws our Reason after it; the Passions
live triumphing in our Souls, and keep the Virtues in Captivity.

2. What mischiefs have been acted by Mankind, that owe not their Original to
the Passions of the Soul? What does not the Devil owe to those fomenters of
Crimes, and to those Parents of so many miseries? What Vanity, or what Folly is
there in the World, that is not derived from the same source? Behold the Cities
and Kingdoms which man's Passions have set on fire, and destroyed: Behold the
Cruelties, Murders, Adulteries, Robberies, and other Abominations. Behold
Mortals concurring to hasten their mortality, and thinking themselves ruined,
if they cannot ruin one another. All these, and innumerable other mischiefs,
are due to the Passions of the Soul.

3. The Wars, the Sieges, the Battails, and the Victories, by which men so
carefully seek the ways to destroy one another, proceed from them. Man's Nature
being so blind, as to call that Victory, Happiness, and Triumph, which is the
undoing, the consuming, and the extirpation of it self. Consider those
necessary Harms, those unavoidable Misfortunes, those bloody Cruelties, the
Killings, Robbings, Burnings, and all those things which so many cannot live
without; and by this thou see what Humane Nature is.

4. He that poisoned the Waters on purpose that whole Nations and Kingdoms
might perish by them; He that envenomed the Dust, whereby numberless Persons
died infected; He that fed his Horses with the flesh of his Guests; He that
wished the whole Empire had but one Neck, that he might cut it off at one
stroke; He that in a rage cut the Throats of thousands of his Neighbors; The
Enemies of the Faith, that by wild Beasts, and by their own Cruelty, fiercer
than that of wild Beasts, tore in pieces and destroyed so many just and holy
men; so many innocent Martyrs and Confessors: All these were hurryed to those
Villainies by their Passions. In conclusion, whatever horrid Wickedness,
whatever heinous Crime man has or shall commit, proceed all from the Passions
of the Soul.

5. O how much greater are the ruins of Souls than those of Bodies! The Body
is brutish, it obeys and does not discourse; but the Soul has the light of
Understanding, which should direct, govern, and preserve the Body; and yet it
kindles, enflames, and destroys the Body, dragging it along with it self to
utter Perdition.

6. What do we see in this World, but enormities of the Soul, which the Body
often pays for upon the Gibbet or the Scaffold? The Whip, the Rope, the
Hatcher, the Galleys, Banishment, Imprisonment, and many more Penalties of the
Body are not sufficient for that multitude of wickednesses which are committed
by the Soul. It is for the Soul's Offenses such multitude of Bodies are
punished; and yet the number of those Persons whose Crimes are pardoned, or not
known, does far exceed that of those that suffer.

7. Would thou know how great the miseries of the Soul and of its Passions
are? Measure it by the effects. They extinguish the Light of Natural Reason in
it, and make it to become brutish and unnatural; nay, bruit Beasts have the
advantage in very many things over passionate Men. See how temperate they are
in comparison of Men; When did the sincerity of Men equal that of the Dove?
When their Prudence reach that of the Serpent? It is manifest, never; since the
Eternal Son of God bids us to be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. When
did the Providence of Man equal that of the Ant? It is manifest, never; since
the Holy Spirit sends the improvident Person to learn of the Ant. When did his
Meekness equal that of the Lamb? It is manifest, never; since the Baptist gives
that sweet Title of the Lamb, to the Redeemer of the World.

8. When was there ever seen so many Battles and Slaughters amongst Beasts, as
we see daily amongst Men? Who ever saw Troops of Lions making War against other
Lions? Of Wolves against other Wolves? Or of any other wild Beasts against
those of their own kind? Have our Fields ever had Armies formed of irrational
Creatures? Only Man is a Beast to his own kind; Man is a Wolf to Man; nay,
which is worse, Man is a Man to Man; for by what more reproachful name can he
be called? since men make such Wars as the fiercest of Beasts never do.

9. When do Beasts practice that Sensuality and Uncleanness which Men are
guilty of? They content themselves at certain times to pay that debt to Nature,
which conserves their Kind. When did irrational Nature seek to satisfy the
Appetites of Gluttony? How simple is their Diet! how frugal! how healthful, and
how natural! This is the life of Beasts, while we set our wits on work to
procure our destruction by our Food; and our death by vicious excesses in the
nourishment of our life.

10. Free our Souls, O Lord, from Passions, which make them veryer Beasts than
the Beasts themselves. And what are we, Lord, if thou leavest us without the
support of thy powerful hand! O how we abuse those admirable Gifts which thou
so graciously bestowest upon us! We extinguish the light of Reason within us,
we banish truth and goodness from us, and transform our selves into wild
Beasts, or worse, if we forsake thy Law, and give our selves up to the
obedience of our own Appetite.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Miseries and Sins of each Man in particular.
1. THese are, the Miseries of our Nature lightly and briefly expressed; but
what kind of ones, and how many are they in each one of us individuals, seeing
they are so great, and so considerable in their Root? If the Tree be so bitter,
what bitterness must be in the Fruit? How blind are we, O God, if we do not see
that which is so near us! How blind are we, if we do not see what we are our
selves! How wretched, if such innumerable Miseries do not enlighten us to seek
for Mercy! How unworthy, if we do not bewail the Sins we daily commit.

2. Let every one well consider himself, and he shall see what is in himself.
Let each of us turn the Eye of his Mind to behold himself within; Let each of
us put our hand in our bosom; and he will draw it out full of Leprosy. If the
just Man falls seven times a day (or rather seventy times seven) what shall I
do that am unjust and wicked? Do not judge of this, or measure it by others,
but judge of it and measure it by thy self and me.

3. Scarce did the Light of natural Discourse begin to shine in my Childhood,
when I embraced Evil, it being my Duty to have embraced Good. My Reason
increased with my Age, but my Passion increased much faster than it. What a
grief, what a pity, to see Reason banished from a Man's Soul by Passion! That
being set between Evil and Good, my Soul should fly from Good to Evil! Woe is
me, how soon I lost the Robe of Grace! How soon I made my self an infamous
Slave of Sin! How soon its snares and nets entangled me! How soon its darkness
obscured all my light! How early I began to grow worse, and to hasten that
approaching Night! How early I forsook the Banner of the Redeemer of Souls, and
flying from the City of God to that of my beastly Appetite, I quitted the Holy
Jerusalem, to take up my dwelling in Babylon! How late I recovered thee, O
sweet Jesus of my Life! How late I know the way to serve thee, having so early
known the way to offend thee! Slow have I been to follow thee, O my Jesus; but
very hasty to persecute thee. Who can suffer this? This slowness, and that
haste. Crucify my Soul, O Lord, and I will bewail them both eternally in my
Life, till I see thee in the Life eternal by my death.

4. How long did I go as a lost and prodigal Son, flying from my heavenly
Father that sought me! How long like a wandering Sheep, flying from my Shepherd
that ran after me! How long did I go astray in the venomous Pasture of worldly
Vices, taking Poison and Death to be my nourishment! I embraced my Deceits and
my Undoings, being fond of that which killed me, Blindly stumbling, I followed
after Vanity, and in a bold folly, I hunted after my own destruction. Who
called me and brought me back when I was lost, laying me gently upon his
Shoulders? Who was that divine Samaritan, that took care of me, the Man full of
Wounds, and that lay half dead as I was going from Jerusalem? Who but thou, O
my Jesus, who were more wounded by thy Love for Man, then I by the Love of my
Sins? Who but thou sweet Jesus that were more ready to lay down thy Life for
me, then I was to have my Life saved by thee?

5. For me to be lost and wicked and wretched, (O eternal Glory) is natural to
me and to my Vices; that being properly of my own Stock: but for thee, who art
infinitely good, to seek after him that was lost, and wicked, and wretched (thy
infinite Justice requiring rather that thou should destroy then save such a
Person) is a Work that belongs only to thy unspeakable Mercy, and to the Bowels
of thy Compassion. Thine infinite Goodness, O my Jesus, does still exceed my
horrible wickedness; and look how vast the distance is between thee and me,
between finite, and infinite: So vast is that between my ruin, and my remedy.
Blessed be thou my God, for though the one be great, the other is unmeasurable
in greatness.

6. But, Oh, that being once found and cured by thy hand, I had never lost and
forsaken thee again! Oh, that I had but once cost thee the Pains, the Sweat,
the Blood, the Torments and the Death which thou paid'st for me! But Lord, I
have often, nay numberless times crucified thee again.

7. Look not Lord upon my wickedness, but upon thine own goodness. To offend
thee, though but once was a great Evil; but to do it so many thousand times, is
an Evil of the highest Magnitude. To offend by forgetfulness of thee, before I
was pardoned, was very ill; since to forget thee is a very great Evil; but to
offend thee after being pardoned, is an ill beyond all ills, because it is to
be ungrateful, and an Enemy to my greatest Benefactor. To offend thee before I
knew thee, was very ill; but to offend thee knowing thee, and acknowledging
thee still to offend thee, is a much greater aggravation. To offend thee as an
open Enemy is a great Crime; but to offend thee as a false Friend, and a
treacherous Disciple, is the highest of Treasons. To contrive and commit Sins
in thine absence without remembering that thou stand looking on, is very bad,
since there is no absence from thee who art in all places; but to offend thee
in sight of thy Divine Countenance, and even while born upon thy Shoulders, to
betray thee in thy very House and at thy very Table, is a degree of Wickedness
above all comparison. I am utterly lost, O Lord, unless thy kindness pardon and
direct me; My Sins deserve a thousand Hells, unless thy divine Goodness and
Mercy free and defend me.

8. How often good God after having been cleansed have I returned to wallow in
the Mire! How often after having been cured, have I renewed my wounds; and like
a perjured Soldier, forsaken the Banners of thy Grace and entered my self in
pay under thine Enemies Colors! How often like thy treacherous Disciple, have
I sold thee for the vile price of some beastly Pleasure! Many a time to
satisfy my anger or revenge, have I offended thy Meekness; Many a time have I
by despising and trampling upon others, offended thy great Humility; Many a
time have I by known and wilful Sins, fearlesly ventured to provoke thy
Justice. O dear Jesus, tie me now fast to thy Cross, let not my Lips, nor my
Soul be parted from thy divine Feet; fasten me with thy Nails; pierce me with
the Lance that wounded thee; and by that wound receive me into, and hide me in
thy Heart; free me from my self; free me from all my Vices, by thy holy
Virtues; and by thy sacred Wounds, O heavenly Physician, heal those many,
whereby, though I have made my self the most unworthy, and the most wretched of
thy Creatures, yet am I thereby the fitter Object of thy Mercies.

FEBRVARY.
The First WEEK.
Of the Remembrance of Death.
1. Would thou amend thy loose, irregular Life? Remember Death; and do while
thou live, as thou would wish to have done, when thou shall come to die.
This Life which thou think so lasting, is but vanity. This Life which thou
live as if thou thought it would never have an end, is ending every
moment, and is making an end of thee. Death comes flying speedily to us, and we
are running as fast to it; they quickly meet that seek one another with so much
haste. Would thou take off thy value and esteem from that which is
corruptible? Look upon all things as subject to Death, and full of Corruption.

2. All that is in this World breaths Death in the midst of Life; and all that
seems Life, is a secret Death. Kingdoms and Empires die; some destroyed by the
Hands of others; some even by their own. The Assyrian Monarchy was slain by the
Medes; that of the Medes by the Persians; that of the Persians by the
Graecians; that of the Graecians by the Romans; and that of the Romans by many
several Nations; and then they all made an end of one another. If the whole,
which is strong and potent, die; can any part live, which is weak and divided
within it self? The stateliest and strongest Buildings die. Look, and thou
shall no where find the Colosse's, the Mausoleum's, the Palaces, and highest
Edifices of the Ancients. Those Towers, which seemed to touch the Stars, ruined
themselves by their own weight, and greatness. If Houses of the most lasting
Marble die; shall this petty Inhabitant of them live, whose Body is but a
little dust, that vanishes at a blast of wind?

3. Might, and Power also dies conquered sometimes by it self; sometimes by a
greater Power. What is become of those Giants of Vanity, who with so much Pride
did trample upon all the World? What is become of those, who made whole
Monarchies to tremble at their lightest Motions or Disgusts? They are now a
heap of Bones, lying upon the Earth; and they who struck so great a Terror
through all the Earth, are themselves reduced to Earth already. Yesterday they
trampled all under their feet; to day they are trampled under feet by all, and
thrown out to be the Food of Worms. There is no need of Thunder-boks from
Heaven, to strike down this Power so full of weakness; Earthquakes are
superfluous on this occasion. There needs neither Conflagration, nor Deluge;
nor all, no not so much as one of the Elements; it is enough if there be but
one Humor distempered within a Man's own Body; a malignant Fever will serve
the turn; nay, a fatal Sneeze, upon a violent occasion is sufficient. This is
the hard necessity, to which all humane Power is tied and subject; and to which
it must be forced to yield. Who then would fear any other Power, but that of
God, which is the true Power indeed?

4. What is become of the Honor, the Riches, and the Authority of those
Grandees, whom once the World adored? It ended with their Power, Imperial and
Royal Crowns and Scepters, Pontifical Miters, Palls and Crosiers, with all such
Ensigns of Dignity roll up and down on the Wheel of Uncertainty, following the
course of Days, Hours and Moments. Scarce do they appear, when they are already
vanished; scarce have they begirt the Brows of one, when they instantly forsake
him, to seek the Brows of another; Yesterday a Throne, to day a Coffin;
Yesterday Rich, and clothed with stately Robes; to day reduced to Rags, and
Beggary. And are Wealth and Honors subject to these sudden Changes? Who then
would seek any other Honor, but that of God, and of an humble virtuous Life?
Who would seek other Riches, than those of his Gifts and Graces?

5. What, and does Beauty, Gallantry, Sprightliness and good Humor die too?
One may rather doubt whether they live at all: So great is the Vanity, and
Shortness of them. Where are now those Narcissus's, and Adonis's, those
Venus's, and Cleopatras's; those Livias's, and other Flowers of Beauty which in
each Age show themselves, and vanish almost at the same hour? Death cuts them
all down, and that which is less, even Life it self destroys them. Riches,
Power, and Temporal Greatness, do sometimes last as long as Life; and nothing
but Death alone does conquer them; but Beauty is so frail a thing, that it is
subject to be cut off, not only by Death, but even by Life also; That which was
yesterday, the Envy and Admiration of the World, to day is Ugliness and
Deformity. A slight accidental swelling of a Cheek, or a discoloring of the
Complexion, a small Addition or Abatement in the Plumpness of the Face; an
outward Alteration, or Change of the Countenance, whether natural or violent,
takes away the former Air, and presently farewell handsomness. Let but a little
Rheum fall into the Eyes, a few Wrinkles shrivel the Skin; a small Convulsion
pull the Mouth awry, a few Pimples break out in the Nose; or any internal
Humor discompose that outward Symmetry; and instantly there is an end of
Beauty. There is no need of Death, nor Smallpox, Wounds, nor Burnings: A
little Wind, a little Nothing will serve to wither that delicate Flower. Did I
say nothing? That was too much, for it decays and withers of it self, and
is it self its own destroyer.

6. Beauty ('it is strange) dies with living, ends with lasting, and is ruined by
its Conservation. Is it not a wonderful thing, that living, and continuing,
should make it become horrible and loathsome? That the handsomest Person should
only by living, become abominable and deformed? And that merely the Duration of
Life, should make the most beautiful Lady to be abhorred? According to this, it
plainly appears, that that which we have thought to be Life, is Death; that
which we have thought a Being, is not a Being, but a ceasing to be; that which
we take to be Truth, is Falsehood; that which seems to be Riches, and Authority,
is Impotence and Vanity; and that which looks like Life, is Death, or at least
a Shadow of Death.

7. Let us therefore lift up our Eyes, and Hearts to that Life which is
Eternal, and knows no Death. Of what Importance, of what value can that be,
which either leaves me while I live, or must be left by me when I die? Nothing
is lasting, or of any worth, but Virtue, Truth and Piety. To serve God, and to
please him, is the only Riches and Power; and that the only Beauty which
lasts to Eternity.

The Second WEEK.
How much it concerns the Soul, to remember Death in the Time of Life.
1. COnsider, that Life passes away, that Death hastens; and that thou thy
self art the Theater of thine own Tragedy. I will not tell thee that Death is
coming, it is already come; with it thou live, with it thou eatest, with it
thou walk, and labourest; and with it thou sleep; Now since thou sleep
with it; Why do not thou awake with it also? An indisposition of thy
Stomach; the aching of thy Head; a pain in any part of thy Body; briefly, all
such like accidents, are so many knocks that Death gives at thy Door, to rouse
thee to the Remembrance of it: Lend but thine Ear to hearken, and thou shall
hear it call upon thee; in the beginning of thy sickness, it begins to finish
what it has been about ever since thou were born; and Death makes an end of
thee, even in the time of thy very Life. It is a powerful Enemy, that allows no
means to fly, to make resistance, or to capitulate! A terrible Enemy, that will
neither pardon, nor be persuaded, nor suffer it self to be entreated, nor
conquered, nor convinced.

2. Ah, yield thy self to Death, before it force thee to yield, and to wait
upon its triumph. Receive it by Meditation, before it come to execution;
accustom thy self to the Thought of Death, and that will take away the Fear of
Death. It is a great Morsel, and will not be got down the Throat at once; thou
had need to divide it into parts, by frequent consideration, that thou
may be able to swallow it the more easily. The Saints by often thinking of
it, made their Death more tolerable, and their Life more religious. Their end
was always present to them, and by that means they made both the beginning, and
the middle of all their Actions holy. To forget Death is a great Mischief, and
an evident Destruction. The unwary and unprovided Soldier, is already foiled
and conquered.

3. Why are so many ruined in their Life? Because they bear not in mind the
Remembrance of Death? Why are so many condemned after Death? Because it was
never present to their thoughts, in the time of their Life. They live, as if
they never were to die; they die, as if they were never to be judged; and yet
in one instant, they are dead, judged, and condemned.

4. Do all the Actions of thy Life, as having still an eye to thy Death; this
will lessen the Fear of thy Account, and of the Sentence which condemns to
eternal death. Woe be to thee, if thou stayest till death, to begin to live!
Woe be to thee, if thou stayest till thy end, to begin to work! Woe be to thee,
if thou deceivest thy self with to Morrow, to Morrow, to Morrow; and art so
foolish, as to think thy self sure of to Morrow. No, let thy delays be applied
to sin; and the present time to repentance; to day, to day, to day; nay
instantly, this very moment bewail thy offenses, and resolve upon amendment:
and say to morrow, to morrow, (or rather never, never) when thou art tempted to
commit a wilful Sin.

5. Oh how many are now burning in Hell, for being such fools, as to believe
that they should find a to Morrow to repent in; and who neither found
Repentance, nor to Morrow! Oh how many are now burning in Hell, because they
would not repent when they might, and afterward could not when they would! Oh
how many are there now burning in Hell, who delayed to work out their
Salvation, while the Light of their Day lasted; and afterward had neither
light, nor time, being seized upon suddenly by the dark Night of Death! Fools,
ridiculous Fools, that left the Matter of greatest Importance, to be done in
the time of greatest Confusion! Fools, ridiculous Fools, to give the worst of
their time, to the saving of their Souls, which is the only Matter of
Concernment; and the present, which is the best and the most acceptable, to the
damning of them! To employ their Health, their Youth, and their Strength, in
sinful Pleasures; and to put off their Contrition, and Amendment, till they are
sick, and old, and feeble! In offending the Just, the Holy and Omnipotent God,
they spend all the Years of their Life; and to obtain Pardon, can afford
nothing, but the Moment of their death! To offend him, they give all their
Senses, Powers, and Faculties, while they are quick and lively; and think them
good enough for repentance, when they are dull, sleepy and stupefied! They lay
the heavy load of Repentance upon decrepid old Age, which is not able to bear
it self; and waste their most active and vigorous Days, in vain delights and
trifles! Finally, they lie dead in Sins, all the Years of their Life; and
presume they shall be able to rise to Repentance (that is to lead a godly Life)
in the Hour of their Death!

6. Suppose a tender hearted Father, pitying the Ruin of a Son justly
disinherited and brought to slavery by his many Rebellions, should send
Messengers on purpose to fetch him home from Captivity to his Favor, and to
his Fortune; provided he return before a certain Day prefixed; Suppose they
inform him, the Road is very dangerous, especially near his Journey's end, and
that the Evening will probably be very dark and tempestuous. What would thou
think of him, if instead of hastening to his Father's embraces, and the plenty
of his House, he should be so ungrateful to his Father's kindness, so forgetful
of his past misery, and so regardless of his future happiness as to turn into
the first pleasant Meadow he spies by the way, and if notwithstanding the many
earnest Calls of those that were sent to bring him, (who tell him how the day
wastes, and that they cannot stay for him) he should lie down and loiter out the
time, picking up Flowers, and catching Butterflies, till Night force him in the
midst of stormy Winds, Rains, and Thunderclaps, to grope for his way alone in
the Dark, through Briars, Bogs and Precipices, where it is in a manner
impossible to escape Destruction?

It is hard to think that any Man can possibly be so stupid, and wretched or so
wilfully foolish; yet thou thy self, art much more stupid, wretched, and
foolish than He; if deluded by the Pleasure of Sin, thou delayest thy
Repentance till the Night of Death; for He knew the certain number of Hours in
his Day, but thou know not how few there may be in thine, nor how suddenly
thy Sun may set, and leave thee (perhaps before thy Noon) exposed to a darker
and a more tempestuous Passage. Again, He lies in the cool Shade of a pleasant
Meadow, but thou probably lie wallowing like a Swine in the Mire of
Sensuality, or basking in the Heat of Lust, in spite of the Persuasions of thy
Spiritual Guides, that would bring thee into the Ways that are truly pleasant,
and into the Paths of Peace. In short, He by the delay of his Journey, ventures
but the loss of an earthly Inheritance, or at the worst of a temporal Life; but
thou by that of thy repentance wilt loose an inheritance eternal in the
Heavens, which fades not away; and not only a temporal Life (as well as he)
but also an eternal one, receiving instead of it, an everlasting Death, as the
just Reward of thy more wilful Folly.

7. Again, Suppose a Husbandman, instead of manuring, plowing, and sowing his
Land in the right Season, should waste the Year in carelessness, and think it
time enough to fall to those businesses, when his Neighbors who have done them
all in due order, are reaping their Corn and filling their Barns with a
plentiful increase. What would thou judge of him, for having not only
slighted their good Example, but despised their frequent Advices to be more
provident and industrious?

Though thou may have learnt by the former Simile, to apply this to thy self;
I cannot but condemn thee as more ignorant than the very Birds and Beasts, for
they infallibly know and exactly observe their several Seasons. But all they
that delay their Repentance, are beyond comparison more ignorant and more
slothful then that Husbandman; considering the infinite disproportion there is,
between those hopes that should have moved his Industry, and those assurances
which should encourage theirs; as likewise between those fears, that should
have quickened his sloth; and those terrors, that should rouse up theirs. That
Husbandman might possibly make a shift, though a hard one, to rub out that
fruitless Year by the help of charitable Persons, and having dearly bought more
wit, by the sad Experience of his Poverty, might buckle close to his work, and
by future diligence against the following Harvest, be Master of as rich a Crop
as any in the Field; but if thou defer thy Repentance till the Harvest of
Death, there is no possibility for thee to have another Year. No in that
Harvest thou shall be reaped thy self, and bound up with the Tares to be cast
into the Fire. Nor do thou adventure to trust to the Charity of others. But
remember, that although the wise Virgins, had Oil in their Lamps, yet were they
so far from having any to spare; that they had hardly enough for themselves;
and when the foolish ones, that wanted, came to them for a supply, they were
sent away with a flat denial, and it being then too late, to get any for their
Money, they were shut out from the Feast of the Bridegroom for ever.

8. Oh what sad stories might be related to thee upon the Subject of delayed
Repentance! How many Examples be there of Persons that after long sleeping
securely in Sin, have been rouzed of a sudden by the sharp Stings of Conscience
at the Approach of Death, and frighted from the vain Confidence they had of
their Salvation, into the other Extreme of Despair, by the dreadful Terrors of
Hellfire, which then seemed to flash in their very faces! Some of them have
started into such dismal Apprehensions of God's severe Justice, which they
never regarded before; that they quite forgot the abundance of his Mercy,
whereof till then they had groundlesly made themselves too sure; nor could they
in that condition, be persuaded there was any pardon to be got for them, though
they should repent never so much; they could not believe the Goodness of God,
though infinite, was large enough to afford them any share in that Redemption,
which he sent his Son into the World expressly to purchase for all Mankind, at
the price of his most precious Blood. Though He be so gracious as to call all
Sinners, and to say he came to seek and to save them that were lost, professing
with an Oath, that he delights not in their death, but rather that they should
turn from their wickedness and live; Nay, that he would have all to be saved,
and none to perish; yet the Devil, taking advantage upon their having so long
delayed to repent makes them now to believe that it is too late, as he did
before that it was too soon. They can entertain no thoughts of God, but what
are dismal, looking upon him as their greatest Enemy, and some of them, even
hating him out of a prodigious Belief that he created them on purpose for
Damnation. This Crime is so heinous, and of so deep a dye, that the Stains of
it can hardly be fetched out even with that Blood, which makes Sins though red
as Scarlet, to become as white as Snow; yet not for want of Virtue in the
Remedy, but because that Sin, is so hardly repented of; nor is it strange, if
upon so high a provocation, God in his Justice, suffer their wretched Bark, to
be tossed and weather-beaten, upon the unquiet Billows of a wounded Spirit; and
to be dashed in pieces against the Rock of Despair, by the violent Gust of his
Displeasure. Methinks I hear their loud Complaints, and lamentable Cries, and
though I dare not so much as imagine the horrible Blasphemies which some of
them utter in that woeful anguish of their Souls, yet I cannot but learn how
amazing their condition is, and how insupportable; since it makes diverse of
them hang, drown, poison, or stab themselves, and blindly to fly from temporal
into eternal Torments. Oh take warning by such dismal Examples, which the
divine Providence sometimes permits (as humane Justice does notorious
Malefactors to be exposed in Chains) for the greater Terror of all, that
behold, or but hear the Narrative of their Execution.

9. And yet there is another State, which though quite contrary, is no less
dangerous then theirs; and numberless is the Multitude of those that are in it,
which makes me the more earnestly beg of thee, to be careful thou be not one of
them. These flatter themselves vainly with the false Notion of God's infinite
Mercy, and quite forget the strict severity of his Justice: they think it
enough to avoid gross, and scandalous Sins, and count those they commit so
inconsiderable, that they are safe though they neither repent of them, nor
regard the Performance of Religious Duties. Thus do they pass their days in a
Lethargy of Security, till their dead sleep be changed into the Sleep of Death;
and they swallowed up in the Gulf of Presumption, without any noise; few
reflecting upon their end, and fewer being warned by their Example. Some of
them indeed seem to be more awakened; to rise out of this Spiritual Lethargy;
and to walk in the Course of Religious Duties; but resting in the outward
Performance of them, without the Sincerity of Repentance, or fervency of
Devotion, they are but like Men that walk in their sleep; and while they dream
they are going in the right way to Heaven, drop into Hell with more presumption
in themselves, and less warning to others, than the former; most thinking them
in a safe Condition, and being therefore encouraged to follow them in the same
Road. But oh! take heed of that Security, and of resting upon the broken Reed
of formal Religion, for even some of those Despairers that strike so much
terror into those that see them may sooner escape, provided their Despondency
proceed from in excessive apprehension of their own unworthiness; which has
been the Case of some very devout Souls, whose Faith has failed, more out of
the Timerousness of their own Nature, than through any distrust of God's Mercy,
or of their Savior's Merits.

10. Would thou than escape from both these dangers? Consider seriously the
Shortness of Life, and the Certainty of Death; that the time of it when come
can by no means be prolonged; that the Place, Manner and Time is utterly
unknown to thee; that it will come like a Thief in the Night; that we can die
but once; and if we do it ill, there is no second time to do it better; that as
the Tree falls so it lies. Examine which way it would fall with thee, if it
should now be cut down; Let these thoughts fill thee with the holy Fear of
God's Justice, which will keep thee from the Gulf of Presumption. Bring forth
Fruits of Repentance, and entertain an humble Hope of God's Mercy, whereby thou
shall avoid the Rock of Despair; and looking up to Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of thy Faith, with the Arms of that Faith lay fast hold upon the Merit
of his Cross, and so shall thou pass safely into the Haven of everlasting
Happiness. Let not Life deceive thee, but let Death undeceive thee. See what
St. Austin says, The Sinner that would not when he might, is not able when he
would; and being asked the Reason, he answers, Because by his affection to what
was evil, he lost the power of doing what was good. A Man that has spent a
whole Life in sinning, will not find it easy to die repenting; he whose Life
is departing and Death seizing on him, is but in an ill condition to grieve for
his Sins; he is not like to lament, and bewail his offenses, which are
hastening on his Death; it being more probable his Sorrow will then be for the
Loss of his Life. In that terrible moment, the Sinner will want Time, he will
want Disposition, he will want Understanding, and all things fitting for that
weighty Business; and will abound in nothing but Pain, Terror, Anguish and
Confusion.

The Third WEEK.
The dreadful Call of God, to the Sinner that defers Repentance till his Death.
MEN want time to repent, because God justly takes it from those, that have so
long abused his Mercy, and gone on delaying their Repentance, to such a time as
is rather to be called a Moment than a Time. Thou have provoked my Anger, (says
God to the Sinner) thou have forsaken and cast me off during thy whole Life.
How can thou expect to find me kind and loving to thee at thy Death? I gave
thee the best time, and thou give me the worst. Do thou think it is so
easy, to regain that best time which thou did despise, with the worst, and
in the worst, till which thou have delayed to use it? When I gave thee Light
and Strength, thou imployedst it to persecute me; and will it be easy for
thee, without Strength and without Light, to seek me, and to find me? Is it all
one thing, O presumptuous Sinner, whether thou offendest, or please me? I
have called upon thee, and wooed thee with many gracious Invitations, and with
innumerable Benefits, ever since thou came into the World: Is it enough for
thee, having despised them all, and wounded me with thy Ingratitude, to come to
me when thou art just going out of it? And can thou expect, that I will then
receive thee? If thou art rejected then, O sinful Man, the Fault will not be
mine, but thine own. If the business of thy whole Life, has been nothing but a
wilful provocation of my Anger; Can there be any thing more unreasonable, than
at thy Death to expect my Favor? Is the Grace of Contrition in thy own Power,
whenever it pleases thee? Will thou be able to do that in the instant of
Death, which thou could not do in so many Years of thy Life? Will thou be
able to do that with a disturbed Judgment, and a confused Understanding, which
thou never did attempt, nor would ever learn while thy Understanding and
Judgment were clear and found? If the whole Custom of thy long Life has been
nothing else but sinning, can thou, O Man be so senseless, as to look that the
end of such a wretched Life, should be merit and reward? How can thou hope to
die a Saint, having ever lived a scandalous Sinner? If so many repeated acts of
Sin, have begot in thee a powerful Habit and an inveterate Custom of despising
me; Which way will thou begin to overcome that Custom, when thy Life is at an
end? If thou have spoken but one Language all thy Life; would thou go about
the learning of another quite contrary to it, in the Moment of thy Death?

2. So long as thou did live in health, thou never were acquainted with
sorrow for sin, nor knew what it was to be contrite and penitent; will it be
easy for thee to learn and practice these things, when thou art going out of
the World, to which thou were so averse all the time of thy being in it? If
thou have spent it all in the deceits and entanglements of sensual Delights,
How will thou be able to get loose from them, and free thy self in that short
instant, when thy Soul is to be separated from thy Body? If then thou would
leave them, they will not leave thee; thou hold them fast, and they stick as
fast to thee: How will you then get loose from one another? Can thou be
willing to leave that at thy death, which thou never would forsake, nay,
which thou did ever run after, and hug with so much fondess all thy life? I
shall be willing to pardon thee, O Man, but thou will not be able to ask me
pardon; the fault will not be in me, O Sinner, but in thy self.

3. Thou would never think of Death, much less think how to dye; and then
thou will not know which way to beg for Pardon, because thou would never
endeavor to learn; and that time must then be spent in dying, which ought to
be spent in bagging forgiveness. Thou will not be able, because thy Will,
disturbed with fears, will fail thee; thy Understanding will be darkened with
Anguish, thy Memory afflicted with Sins, thy Senses dulled and decayed with a
mortal Sickness; and finally, all thy abilities will be mere disabilities. Thou
have wasted all thy life, as if there were never to be a death; and therefore
thou will not have power to repent thee, at thy death, which is the death of
Eternal Life. Thou never in all thy life did remember that there is a Hell;
and therefore at thy death thou will either forget it, or else be so pressed with
the fear of going thither, that thou will not be able to pour down Tears, nor
send up Prayers to escape it. Thou have lived without Judgment, as if there
were to be no Judgment; without calling thy self to Account, as if thou were
never to be called to Account; therefore, O sinner, thou will find at thy
death, that it is more easy to tremble at thy Account than to give it.

4. Thou have spent all thy life in sin and wickedness, without any remembrance
of the Glory to come; what Idea therefore can thy Memory have of that Glory,
when thou come to dye? If it be tedious and wearisome to thee to confess a
few daily sins, how do thou think thou shall find Diligence and Patience
enough when thou come to dye, to confess that infinite number thou have
committed from the time of thy birth? Thou can not (or wilt not) now in thy
health lift a hundred weight, and do thou think thou shall be able in thy
sickness to lift a hundred thousand? Do thou reserve that weight to be laid
upon thee in thy weakness, which thou dare not venture to lift at in thy full
strength? What profit or advantage can thy Death bring thee, when all thy care
and trouble will be employed about the losing of thy Life? Thy Heart being
glued to the Wealth and to the World, which thou must leave; How will thou be
able to loosen it from thence, and to join it to what thou have never cared
for? The Chains of thy Passions, tie thee fast to this transitory World; How
will thou be able to break them in an instant, and to give thy self to that
which is eternal?

5. It cost me Tears, and Groans; Prayers, and loud Cries to raise up Lazarus
to Life again, who had been dead but four days, of a natural Death; What will
it cost to raise up thee, from the spiritual Death, in which thou have lain
dead (perhaps) these forty Years? I raised up Lazarus, without his doing any
thing to help toward his own Resurrection; but I will not revive thee, unless
thou do something on thy part, and how will thou be able, O wretched Man, to
perform that under a double Death; thy Soul in that of Sin, and thy Body so
near to that of Corruption? Thy Spirit being conquered, and having yielded it
self a Slave to thine Appetite, which has domineered powerfully all thy Life,
and forced thy Soul to the Drudgery of Sin: Do thou believe, that in
breathing out thy last Gasp, thou shall be able to recover its liberty? No,
thou will find, that though it be freed from thy Body, for a time, it is going
to suffer a much greater slavery in Hell, and to be tormented by the Devil in
Chains of Darkness, till the Day of Judgment; when thy Body indeed shall rise
from the Grave, as did that of Lazarus to be joined again with thy Soul; yet
not, as his, to Life, but to die eternally, and to be for ever banished from my
sight.

6. Thou have used thy self, all thy Life, to follow thine own will, and never
to deny thy self in any thing; and do thou think, thou shall have power, to
do that in the end of it, which has always been so contrary to thy
Inclinations? Or if thou have endeavored to get Victories over thy self, and
have fought without success, that spiritual Combat; is it probable thou shall
overcome thy self, better in thy utmost weakness, and when thou lie gasping
for Breath? If thou could not conquer that Enemy, when thou had all thy
strength, if with the force of Reason, quickened by frequent Admonitions,
called upon by many Exhortations, and excited by several good Examples, thou
could not subdue thy sensual Appetite, in so many Years; how will thou
conquer it, when thy Reason, and Understanding shall have forsaken thee, and
when the Ear of thy Body, shall be as deaf to all other Motives as that of thy
Soul has been till then? Think thou, when thou lie fainting in thy
Deathbed, without strength to move a Hand, rattling in the Throat, and gasping
for Breath; to overcome that Enemy, that potent Enemy insulting over thee, in
the Pride of so many repeated Victories? That Enemy, which the Apostles
themselves, and their Successors, with so many other excellent Saints, fought
against all their Lives; will thou conquer, with the dregs of thine; being
without Memory, without Understanding, and even without Sense, in that great
disorder, and confusion which Death uses to bring especially to those, who have
always suffered their Appetite to triumph over them?

7. How long, O Sinner, will thou go on in this foolish Presumption? I do not
bid thee despair when thou die; but I bid thee work out thy Salvation with
fear and trembling while thou live; I deny not, but that I saved the good
Thief; He believed on me, when my Disciples forsook me, and fled; and prayed to
me, even when I was nailed to the Cross; to such an extraordinary Faith, I
showed an extraordinary Favor; and though I promised he should be with me that
day in Paradise; thou may remember, I suffered him that was crucified with
me on the other hand, to be condemned. If he, who died so near my side, and
looking upon that Blood, which I shed for him, was damned; Will thou delay
still, and hope to escape, at that last Hour? I do not forbid thee to hope,
when thou come to die; but I bid thee to do good works in the mean while; and
serve me during thy Life, without deferring it till Death; for if thou
despisest the warning I give thee now, the time will come, when thou shall
call, and I will not hear; and when thou shall cry, Lord, Lord, I will answer,
I know thee not thou worker of Iniquity. Depart from me, into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

The Fourth WEEK.
The Answer of a repenting Sinner, and that we ought to prepare our selves for
Death.
1. AH, let us all quake, and tremble; what shall we answer to these terrible
Words of the Lord? What shall we answer to these Arguments, which are rather
evident Conclusions? What shall we answer to that eternal Wisdom, to that
eternal Light, and Truth, whose Sayings are undeniable, and whose Accusings are
clear Convictions? Here is nothing to be done, but to acknowledge our guilt, to
humble our selves, and amend our Lives. Here is nothing to be done, but with
Repentance, Humility and Contrition, to weep and sigh and earnestly beg for
Mercy.

2. Here is nothing to be done, but with a most intimate Desire and Sorrow of
the Soul, to say; Lord I have sinned against thee all my Life, and I will
bewail my offenses during my Life, that I may likewise bewail them at my Death.
If I be not willing to lament them now, perhaps then, I shall neither be
willing nor able. I sinned in the best of my time, and so made it the worst;
and I desire to forsake my Sins, in the best that remains; before the last
comes, which is the worst indeed. I desire, O God, to employ the remainder of
my days in thy Service; since thou yet affordest me time to bewail that time,
which I so sinfully have lost. I desire to lament my Sins, with all my Senses
Powers, and Faculties; since I have abused them all in offending against thee
my God; nor will I defer my Tears, till my Death, since I did not defer my Sins
till my Death.

3. I desire, O Lord, that I may not be to seek for Oil in my Lamp, when the
Bridegroom calls, but to have it ready prepared and lighted, against his
coming. To get Oil after death, is impossible; grant that I may buy it, and
furnish my self before I fall asleep. Life, without thy Grace, is not only
Sleep but Death; grant therefore, O Lord, that I may prepare for Death, during
Life, by living well. Grant, O Lord my God, that the Bridegroom at his coming
may find me watching; grant, O Lord, that when the Thief shall come to break
into this House of my Body, and rob me of my Soul, I may not be found asleep,
in any customary Sin, but awake upon my Guard, and with my Lamp ready lighted;
and let me never hear from thee the Light eternal, that terrible saying, I know
thee not.

4. Grant that at thy second coming, thou may find me with my Loins girt,
and my Light burning, and able to give such an account of the Talents which
thou have given me, that the Benefits of thy former coming, may by thy Mercy be
made effectual to my Soul. What shall become of me, O my God if I loose thee?
If once I loose thee, O Light eternal, when shall I be able ever to recover
thee? Deliver my Soul from the roaring Lion; free my darling from the Power of
the infernal Dragon; if once I loose my self and thee; Is it possible I should
ever find thee again, my Savior? Is there any passage from Hell, to Glory? Is
there any Redemption in that place of Torment, where all Mercies are utterly
cut off? Shall I expose my Soul to that hazard, to that danger, and to that
loss at my Death, for not repenting while I live? Shall I trust that which is
most precious, and most important, to the most unfit and the most uncertain
time? Shall I put off, the loosing or enjoying thee eternally, O my Jesus, to a
Conjuncture so full of anguish and confusion, as scarce affords a possibility
of knowing thee? No, Lord, suffer me not I beseech thee to fall into so
miserable a Condition; rather let me die now, instantly, at this present
moment, in thy Grace; than so foolishly to adventure the loss of both thy Grace
and Glory.

5. This is the Answer we should make to God; these are the Thoughts we ought
to feel; these are the Requests we ought to make, before the Agony of Death,
for then the Pains of the Body, the Anguish of the Soul, the Grief for leaving
the Pleasures of this World, and the Fear of going into the Torments of the
next; the Distraction of thy Thoughts, and the Decay of thy Understanding, will
neither suffer thee to attend thy Prayers, nor allow thee time to consider what
to pray for; O how ignorant, how mad a Folly it is, to delay our amendment till
the Hour of Death! What a mistake it is to believe, that our damage does not
increase with that deceit, and our deceit with that damage! What an Error, to
think I shall be better; when I see, and feel my self daily growing worse! And
that the end of my Life shall be good, when the whole course of it from the
beginning, has been evil! What a Cheat the Devil puts upon a Man, to persuade
him, that when his Soul is torn out of his Body, he shall be able to employ
himself in any thing else, than to feel that strong Division between the Body
and the Soul!

6. This puts an end to the Sinner's Life; this puts an end to his Delights,
this puts an end to his Acquaintance. His Friends, his Riches, his Honor, his
Power; all these must be left; this is the thing that disquiets and afflicts
him; thither his Mind runs then where he had placed his contentment; thither
his sorrow, his torture and confusion where he had rivetted his Heart. His
thought, his care and his attention being taken up with what he loses, and
which is worse, with what he fears; he is in too great a Distraction, to
discourse of that which he should, and which imports him most.

7. And therefore, if thou will live eternally; die before thou die. Think of
that now, which thou meanest to think of hereafter: Let not Death go out of thy
Memory, and so thou shall amend thy Life. Live, and do all things, as a Person
that must die, and thou shall die to live for ever. Thy Death shall be but a
Passage, not a Death; and a passage to eternal Life; not a dying to eternal
Death.

MARCH.
The First WEEK.
Of the particular Account that each Man is to give immediately after his Death.
1. NOW give ear, and I will tell another thing, more dreadful and terrible;
more quick and speedy; and of more hazard and danger, Anger, than Death it
self. And that is the account thou art instantly to give; with the Judgment and
Sentence that shall be passed upon thee in particular, at the Moment of thy
Death. What, so soon? Yes, so soon; scarce dead, when already judged; and
Sentence past, either to absolve, or to condemn thee! The Body is not yet quite
cold upon its Bed; And is the Soul judged already? They are yet holding a
Looking-glass to my Mouth, to try whether I have any Breath left in me; and is
my Cause already dispatched, concluded, and sentenced? The Body is not yet put
into a Winding Sheet; and is the Soul already judged, and which is more the
Sentence executed upon it! Shall there not be a little delay? Will they not
allow me a little space, to think how I may satisfy by some excuse, the Charge
that is brought against me? Will they pluck me away, and precipitate me so
suddenly, without having any thing to lay hold on, when I am driven out of the
Body; without any thing to lay hold on, when I am snatched to Judgment; without
any thing to lay hold on, when I am hurried to execution; without finding one
moment of delay, ere I receive the Sentence? Is it possible, that there is no
place of refuge? No retreat, where I may stop a little, though it were but at
the foot of that very Judgment Seat, where I am to be sentenced, or at the
Threshold of that Dungeon, where I am to he imprisoned? May not the Execution
be suspended for a little while? Is there no Chapel, as I pass where a
condemned Person may linger a while, and pray between the Judgment Seat and the
dismal place of Torment? Is it possible that there is no other way, either on
the Righthand or on the Left, from Death to this account, to this Judgment and
to this Sentence, whereby I may escape and hide my self? Can I not turn back
again? Is it absolutely necessary I must be thrown headlong? Must I needs
swallow that bitter draught, and be forced to make that irrevocable leap from
the Delights of this World to the Miseries of the other?

3. No, no, there is no remedy; that most bitter Potion, is forced, not
voluntary; and it must of necessity be drunk, for they will not let thee spill
it. To die, to be judged, to have Sentence executed; and to conclude all, and
make an end for ever, is but one instant. See how thou go out of this Life,
for so thou shall enter into Judgment; see in what condition thou art to make
thy account, for in the same thou shall come from thy account; see well, how
thy Case stands, for according to the Proof, so shall the Sentence be. There is
no mending of Answers, no Wrestings, nor Perjuries, nor Briberies in that high
Court of Justice; all is dispatched in a moment; the Charge, the Answer, the
Judgment, the Sentence and the Execution. The Sentence is but to look upon the
Criminal; to come into the Presence of God is to be condemned, and even but to
come into the Presence of God, is a casting off the Wicked from his sight for
ever, and a receiving of the Good into eternal Joys.

4. What, and is there then no remedy for a Sinner before God's Tribunal? Is
there no way to come off from that Judgment, and from that account? Yes, there
is a remedy; But what, I beseech you? To judge thy self in this Life, and to
call thy self daily to strict account. Let the Sinner pass Judgment upon
himself, during his Life, and then his Death shall be a Comfort; his Account a
Blessing; that great Day, a Day of Mercy; then the Sentence shall be Joy; and
the Execution Glory. The Sentence is published there; but the Trial is made
here; and according as the Case is found, the Sentence is fitted to the Trial.
God pronounces the Sentence, in his Tribunal, according to the Trial; but thou
and I are here forming and giving Matter to that Trial, by our Thoughts, by our
Words, and by our Actions. Take heed what thou do, for there thou shall find
it; and take heed what thou say, for there thou shall hear it; the Trial, I
say, is of our own making; by it that most righteous Judge shall judge us; take
heed then what thou think, for there thou shall see it; and take heed what
thou sowest, for there thou shall reap it.

5. As thy Life shall be here, such shall be thy Death, thy Account, and thy
Sentence at that Tribunal, and afterward the Execution. The Judgment is God's
Truth; the Sentence is his Righteousness, and the Execution his Justice. It is
neither the Judgment, nor the Sentence principally, which condemns a Person,
but the wickedness of his Life. The Sentence of God's eternal Judgment, is
rather a Declaration, then a Condemnation. Thou did sentence and condemn thy
self, when thou did Sin; and being already condemned, thou go to be judged
by dying in thy sins. All that is done there, is but to declare, that thy
Wickedness, deserves Hell; and thy Life, eternal Death.

6. And according to this, at the last Judgment in the Gospel, our Lord says
nothing else in pronouncing it; but Go ye cursed, or Come ye blessed of my
Father. He does not say, My will condemns the Wicked, nor my will absolves the
Good; as he finds them, so he judges; he finds those cursed; and as cursed he
casts them from him; he finds these blessed, and as blessed he calls them, he
embraces them, and takes them to himself. The reason of this is because that as
God is the eternal Truth, he judges according as he finds the Trial, and if
that be deadly, the Sentence of necessity must be so likewise.

7. He that will escape Judgment, at the Day of Judgment, must begin from this
present time to judge himself. He that will clear his account at that day of
Account, must begin in this Life to call himself to an account. Let a Man take
good heed on what hand he lives in this mortal Life, on that hand he shall be
placed in the immortal Life: if on the Left hand, then on the Left; if on the
Right Hand, on the Right: In this World which is full of Deceits and
Equivocations in Suits and Causes; all the danger of the Person condemned, is
in the Judgment past upon him; for his Innocence will little avail to save him,
if the Sentence condemn him; nor if that absolve him, will the greatest Crime
and the most evidently proved do him any harm: but at God's Tribunal, the
Danger is not in the Sentence, but in the Case of the Criminal. Hereby, amongst
many other Reasons, God is justified in condemning the Wicked, although he be
Mercy it self; for it is not his Mercy, Goodness, and Pity; but the Sins, the
Guilt and the Malice of the Wicked that condemns them. It Is they that choose
their own Sentence, for they make their own process in this Life. It Is they
that make Hell their own choice, because they wilfully choose those Sins that
carry them thither; and will not choose Repentance, that would free them from
it. They are the makers of their own Misfortunes, and themselves are the Causes
of their Death, their Hell and their Damnation; by not applying Tears and
Contrition to their Sins.

8. O, what a strange Doctrine is this! According to it, there is nothing to be
feared at the Day of Judgment, but our Lives; nothing to be feared in the
Sentence, but our Sins.

Nay all is to be feared; for terrible and dreadful are the Judgments of the
Lord; yet are they just, righteous, and holy; therefore, fear Sin, which brings
thee to be sentenced; fear Guilt, which brings thee for ever to be condemned;
fear that Sentence, which throws thee into eternal Damnation; and fear that
Judgment, which casts thee headlong to everlasting Torments.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Rectitude and Severity of the Judgment.
1. BUT admit all this be so, yet may not some of our faults be forgotten, or
some of our Sins excused at that Day? Tho I go out of this Life in the Judge's
disfavour, may I not in the other Appeal, or reply, or beg, and obtain his
Favor before he pass the Sentence? May I not by Gift, or Craft, or Industry,
or subtilty of Discourse, evade, or extenuate, or hide, or at least disguise
the Sins I have committed?

2. O how foolishly do thou argue, if thou can have such a Thought! Thou
art more blind in thy reasoning, than thou art in sinning: for that is but
weakness; but this the highest Ignorance. What excuse can thou possibly have,
for offending thy God, and thy Redeemer, who died upon the Cross only to free
thee from Death, and Sin. What excuse for not being willing to take the Benefit
of his Sacraments? What excuse for rejecting his Helps, and holy Inspirations?
What excuse for the frequent rebelling against his holy Commandments? What
excuse for refusing his divine Counsels? What excuse for stopping thine ears to
the Masters of Christian Instruction; and to those loud Cries with which his
Preachers daily call upon thee from their Pulpits?

3. What can thou say, for having neglected the Directions of thy Spiritual
Guides, those internal Physicians of Souls, and Consciences? What can thou
say, for having so often turned away from God, who by them called upon thee,
daily entreating thee, and offering thee eternal Life? What for following his
and thine own Enemy that offered thee nothing but eternal Death? What can
thou say to quit thy self from so many Accusations? What Evasion can thou
find to so full an Evidence? Or how will thou get off from so weighty a Charge,
wherein thou will not be able to answer so much as one of Ten thousand? If the
Charge be true, how will it be possible for thee to oppose the Truth; thy Judge
being also the Truth it self? What deceit will be able to prevail before so
great a Light, and such a manifest Conviction? Do thou think, O simple
Creature, to overreach that infinite Wisdom? Does thy Ignorance think to
circumvent him, who sees the time present, the time past, and the time to come,
all at one instant? Or does thy foolish proud Presumption, hope to escape his
all-seeing Eye? Thou deceivest thy self, and not him, in so silly a conceit;
his Judgments are Evidences; his Sentences Truths, and his Execution Justice;
and do thou think there can be forgetfulness of thy faults in that eternal
Comprehension that beholds all things? There is not the lightest Thought, the
suddenest Motion, the inconsiderablest Word, nor the smallest Action, which is
not punctually registered there. That eternal Justice has all Sins counted,
weighed, and measured in his presence, from the first bitter Fruit of Adam's
Apple, to the last and slightest Sin of all Mankind, till the end of the World.
That which was only known to thy Chamber, to the secretest; Corner of thy
House, or of thy Heart; that which is unknown to thy most favored Servant, or
most intimate Friend, is all public, and manifest before the Face of thy
Creator. The Leaves of all the Trees in the World; the Sand of all the Seas,
all the Stars of the Sky, and the Atoms of the Sun, with whatsoever is created,
are all numbered and present to him; and can thou believe he will forget thy
Sins?

4. Would thou know what the Judgment is, that thou may live with
Judgment, before thou come to Judgment?

5. It is an exact, and particular Register, of thy loose and wretched Life;
all that thou have said, seen, done, and thought, in seventy Years of thine
age, is perfectly seen to God, in that instant, as if thou were but then in
doing of it.

6. O Jesus, my Lord and my God; is it then all one thing with thee to behold,
and to judge? And is thy Judgment, the perfect and particular Sight of all the
Sins and Transgressions of our whole Life? Alas! Alas! What then shall become
of me, at that Day? Is it possible, O my great God, that thou should then see
all my Crimes and soul Misdeeds? That thou should then see all my
Subtilties, Deceits, and Falsehoods? Must all my beastly Vices, and filthy
Sensualities, be seen by thee at that Judgment; with the Pride, and Presumption
wherewith I have despised, and trampled upon others; with my unjust censurings,
and rash judgings of my Neighbors, and my Vanity and Folly in thinking better
of my self then of them? Shall thou then see the Sins, not only of my Person,
but likewise of my Office, and Dignity? My Sins of Omission, as well as those
of Commission? The Evils I have done, the good Actions I have left undone, and
my suffering others to act those Crimes, which I might have hindered? Must thy
pure Eyes, which cannot behold Inquity, see and behold, and judge all mine
Iniquities in that one instant? How can I but tremble, to think that thy holy,
and heavenly Eye should see such filthy Impurities, and such horrible
Abominations? What can I hope for in that Sentence? What can my Wickedness
expect from thy eternal Justice, but everlasting Torments? All my Bones quake
for fear, O God, and I am ready to wish the Rocks might hide me, and the Hills
might cover me from thy Presence; but I know how vain that is, and that even in
the Center of the Earth, thy Righthand will find me out, I am therefore plainly
convinced that there is no refuge for me, but from the Bar of thy Justice, to
the Bowels of thy Mercy. Yet how shall I dare take Sanctuary there, having so
much abused it? Now, I discover the necessity I stand in of a Mediator, to
plead there for me; yet dare not beg his Intercession, having so long neglected
it. Thou of thy infinite Mercy, and Goodness, have given thine own dear Son,
even the Man Christ Jesus to be that Mediator for all Mankind, and in him some
beams of Hope begin to comfort me, remembering his excessive Love that willingly
died upon the Cross, to make Satisfaction to thy Justice for the Sins of all.
But with what confidence can I hope in him whom I have so often crucified
afresh by my redoubled Offenses! This is my sad Condition, and when I look only
upon my Guilt, I am almost ready to despair. But Lord, I know that that is a
greater Sin than any I have yet committed; therefore I will hope even against
hope; and carnestly beg of thee, O my dearest Savior, that since thou have
hitherto given me time, and now so loudly call me to Repentance, by this
terrible Meditation of God's vigorous Judgment; I may not delay a Moment
longer, to lament and bewail the Multitude of my Transgressions. Grant I may go
to that great Day, with Tears of Contrition, and that I may depart from it,
with Songs of Praise. Grant I may go to it, weeping for having offended thee,
and that I may come from it with joy for thy having pardoned me. And since thou
see my sins which provoked thy Wrath, grant thou may also see my
Repentance, to obtain thy Mercy. Grant, O dear Jesus, that since thou see my
Ingratitude, thou may also see my Heart deeply grieved, and afflicted for
having been so ungrateful: And lastly grant I most earnestly beseech thee, that
I may see thy infinite Pity, interposing the Merit of thy Death, thy Blood, thy
Cross and Passion, between thy Father's Justice and my sinful Soul, now and
ever; and most especially in that great and terrible Day; and that in the mean
while, I by thy Grace may so spend the rest of my days in Sorrow and Amendment
of Life, that at my Death I may be received into thy Glory. Amen.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Means there are in this Life, to prevent the Account and Judgment of
the other.
1. I Am stricken with amazement, stand trembling at the thought of the
Judgments of the Lord. I know not what to do, nor can find any way how to
escape them. I am ashamed and confounded to appear in his presence full of so
many Miseries and Sins. Is it not possible to delay it? Is there no remedy
against this Evil, nor defense against this Danger?

2. The Evil is not in being judged, but in going unprepared to Judgment. This
imminent danger, has an easy, plain, and safe remedy, by the Grace of God.

And that is for a Man to judge himself often times, before God judge him once
for all. Would thou not be afraid of the Judgment, nor of that dreadful
Sentence? Judge thy self before hand; examine thy self, before thou come to
be examined; call thy self frequently to a strict account; humble thy self,
amend thy Life; and at the sight of thy Sins, pray, and weep, and thou shall go
willingly to Judgment, and come off safe with thy account. Serve thy Judge,
love thy Judge, and obey him in all things, before he come to judge thee; and
thou shall go contentedly to his Judgment, and find thy Judge to be thy Friend.

3. Consider that many Saints have desired, that their Life might be shortened,
that their Death might be hastened, and that they might come to Judgment
thereby to enjoy God. They desired to be dissolved, and to leave this mortal
Tabernacle. They desired this knot of Life might be untied, and to be free from
the Prison of this miserable and corruptible Body, to see their God, their
Creator and Redeemer; whom they loved, served and adored while they lived in
this World. They esteemed Death, as Life, because it freed them from a dying
Life, which delayed their enjoyment of an eternal Life.

4. They could not pass to the beatifical Vision of their God, without going by
the way of the Judgment and Sentence. They did as it were die, with an eager
desire of dying; and joyfully embraced that Death, which brought them to behold
the kind, the cheerful, and beautiful Countenance of their loving Judge. They
knew they were to be judged by their Father, their God, their Creator, and
Redeemer, their faithful Friend and their most gracious Lord. They loved him in
their Life, they sought him by their Death; they adored him in the Judgment,
and with an humble confidence in his infinite Pity, they hoped for Mercy in the
Sentence. They knew their offenses were many, but they had bewailed them; they
knew though they were Sinners, they had lived desirous to please him, diligent
to serve him, and with care not to offend him. They knew they could not put
their cause into better hands, and that the same Person was to judge them, who
had shed his Blood for them, and given his Life upon the Cross for their
Redemption. They went to offer their Works, their Tears, and their Repentance
unto God; yet without trusting any thing in their Works, they relied wholly
upon the Goodness of God and the Merits of their Savior.

5. For though it be just, that the Judgments of the Lord should be feared; yet
it is as just that they should be loved. My Father (says the holy Soul) is to
judge me; what am I then afraid of? My Lord and my God is my Judge; How can I
choose but hope, and trust in my Lord and my God, though he be my Judge? If he
have a kindness for me, and I have a reverence for him; What can I look for in
the Sentence, but Mercy and Compassion? What Son is afraid to be judged by his
own Father, if he has not lived and acted as an Enemy to his Father, or if he
has bewailed the time that he was his Enemy? What Wife, is afraid to be judged
by her tenderly affectionate Husband, if she has not been an Adulteress, or
has heartily lamented that Injury, and penitently begged pardon of her dearly
loving Husband? What Friend is afraid to be judged by his Friend, if he has
been faithful to him, or has showed a real grief for the breach of his
Fidelity? Though I be afraid and wretched, says a sick Soul, I have been
desirous to serve thee, O my God, thy Precepts have been my Direction, and thy
Counsels have been my Rule, if not in the execution, yet at least in my
intention and earnest desire. I hope for mercy from that eternal goodness of
God my Creator and Redeemer, who dyed upon a Cross for my Salvation. He that
was so gracious, and so loving in Redeeming me, cannot but be a sweet and
tender Father in Judging me.

6. These are the breathings of a Holy Soul; Thus said St. Paul and many others
when they desired to be dissolved, that they might come to the presence of God;
and for the obtaining of that, did not fear to put their Cause and Sentence
into his hand. They feared his Power, and they adored his Power: They were
afraid by reason of their sins; and yet they hoped, knowing his mercy and
loving kindness. Their love conquered their fear, because their hearts were
inflamed with that perfect Charity which casts out fear. And thus, if thou
do desire to have a holy and assured hope, humbly resigned and yet cheerful
in the Judgment, and in the Sentence; do that which the Saints have done, and
thou shall hope, as they have hoped.

7. Make account in thy lifetime of that Account thou art to give hereafter; I
repeat it to thee once again, keep a Judgment Seat within thy self every day,
till thou come to thy last. Judge thy self ten thousand times, and consider
in what steps thou treadest, for according to what thou do in this World,
thou shall be judged in the other. Strictly observe thy very thoughts, and mend
what thou shall find amiss: For by this means, thou shall increase that love
which casts out fear. Do thou judge thine own Actions, before God judges them;
beg light of him to see and know them, and tears to bewail them; and so with a
holy resignation, and with an humble confidence thou may appear in the
presence of God. Take good heed to thy Words, Thoughts, and Actions, and square
them by the Rule of the Divine Law, and of the Will of that Lord, who is to
Judge thee; and strive in this Life to obtain Mercy and Pardon for thy Sins and
Miseries.

8. Be careful to purify thy Understanding, and to purge it from evil; fill it
with honest and spiritual Considerations; cleanse thy will from corrupt
Desires, and fill it with the love of thy Creator. Let thy Memory be the
Storehouse of Holy Meditations, and then, hope and trust; love and adore the
Judgment of the Lord. His goodness does more desire to Pardon thee, than thou
do to be pardoned; He is more desirous of thy Salvation, than thou art to be
saved. He is more desirous to deliver thee from that Infernal Dragon, than thou
art to be delivered. Be careful (I warn thee once again) on what hand thou
live in this life, for on that hand thou shall find thy self when Death
carries thee from hence.

9. Fear the Judgment of the Lord, for it is very just so to do; fear, humble
thy self, and tremble; but yet hope, and be more afraid of the sins wherewith
thou offendest him, than thou art of his righteous Judgment. Thy fear of his
Judgment is so great, because that of thy Sins is so little. Thou live in a
course of wickedness, and committest thy wickedness with boldness, and even
with greediness, and then thou art afraid to be judged; and that is because
thou art to be justly condemned. But thy chief and principal fear ought to be
that of offending so severe a Judge; and thy chief and principal hope ought to
be that of being judged by so indulgent, and so loving a Father. It is the part
of an unfaithful Servant, not to dare appear before his Master's face; and
though he fears him, yet he does not love him: But a good Servant is glad to
come to the Presence of his Master. Every Call of his is a joy to him, every
Command a comfort, and he runs cheerfully to wait upon him, at every knock; but
an evil Servant is afraid to see him, because he was not afraid to offend him.

10. Every sin thou committest, unless thou repent of it, is a rigorous
Sentence against thy self; every guilty action, and every wilful transgression
is a Criminal Article, whereof thou accusest thy self at that Tribunal. How is
it possible for thee not to tremble and dread the Judgment and thy Account in
the other Life, if thou live without Judgment, and without Account in this?
Repent therefore, pray and weep; love and serve thy Judge here, that thou
may find him kind, gentle, and gracious hereafter. He is a Judge that
suffers himself to be gained in this life; therefore use means to win his
favor before he comes to Judge thee in his anger, for thy having slighted and
neglected to get his favor when thou might have done it. Tremble with
apprehension to see him in his wrath, who may yet be appeased by the means I
have showed thee, and who being reconciled, first fills the Penitent's Soul
with transports of his Love, and after with those Joys and Pleasures which are
at his right hand for evermore.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Universal Judgment at the end of the World.
1. I AM something comforted with your Discourse, (says the Penitent) but I
have heard dreadful things of that great Day, when all Mankind must rise to
Judgment; that horrible Trumpet, which makes even the Dead to hear, (how much
more the deaf) does also make the heart to tremble, and confounds the senses
with amazement.

It is no wonder indeed, that thou should be dismayed at that which
affrighted St. Hierome, and very many other holy Men; thou may very well
tremble at that which they were afraid of.

2. Who can choose but fear and tremble, to see the whole Creation destroyed by
the Creator of it; and all the World consumed by his powerful hand? Who can
choose but fear the Signs which fore-run that Judgment, those terrible
Earthquakes, and horrible roarings of the Sea? Who would not fear to see the
Elements, those preservers of Life, to become its furious Enemies; and fighting
with one another, to become the Ministers of Death? Who can choose but fear, to
see the confusion of Mankind; some calling on the Rocks to hide them, others
upon the Darkness to cover them, all being full of terror and astonishment, to
see all sorts of miseries come together, to bring our Nature to an end? Who can
choose but fear, to see the Sun covered with a deadly Vail, his light obscured,
that of the Moon extinguished, the Stars also falling from their places, and
overwhelming the Generations of Men. Nothing to be heard but public Complaints
and Lamentations, Cries, Sighs, and Groans; nothing to be seen but Fears,
Dangers, Losses, Miseries, and Confusions.

3. Can any one choose but be affrighted to see the dead rise again by God's
Command, at the sound of that horrible Trumpet, to take up the consumed and
scattered pieces of their Body, to cloth themselves therewith, and each one
unite it to his Soul, that he may appear at the dreadful Judgment Seat of God,
waiting for the Sentence, either of Eternal Life, or of Eternal Death? Who can
choose but be amazed with fear, to see the Almighty clothed in Majesty, to
come down with the Court of Heaven, armed with Justice, to be exercised against
sin and wickedness? Who would not be dismayed, to see the Creator hurl flames
of fire against all he has created; to see Houses and Cities, Palaces and
Kingdoms burnt together; and finally, to see the whole World destroyed in that
cruel and dreadful Conflagration? Who would not even dye with fear, to see so
many Angels, and so many Devils together divided from one another, on the right
hand, and on the left; expecting the word of Sentence to be put in execution?
The Angels carrying the good to Eternal Joys, and the Devils dragging the
wicked to Eternal Torments.

4. How is it possible not to fear a Tribunal so dreadful, a Judgment so
terrible, and a Sentence so formidable; from whence there is no Appeal, and the
Execution whereof is either Life Eternal, or Death Eternal, for ever, for ever,
for ever; so that they shall know no end of that ever, ever, ever? My Soul is
astonished, and amazed in the consideration of the Universal Judgment: It is
dismayed to think, and to imagine all this which is but as a Dream, thus
represented to us in writing, in comparison of what it will be, and of what we
shall see it in effect.

5. Grant, O Lord, that I may tremble, bewail, lament, and sigh deeply for my
sins and wickednesses, before I hear that killing Sentence pronounced against
them by thy Divine lips. Grant that my Tears and Repentance, my Sorrow and
Contrition, may make my polluted Soul fit to be washed and purified by thy most
precious Blood; to the end I may never hear that confounding word, Go ye cursed
into eternal fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

6. O give me grace to imitate the Martyrs in Faith, the Confessors in Hope,
and the Blessed Virgin thy most holy Mother, and all the rest of the Saints in
Charity; to the end I may hear that most sweet, and most welcome call of, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.

7. Oh that I had never offended thee my dearest Lord, that I might not see
thee offended! Oh that I had ever served thee, that I might see thee appeased!
Mercy, sweet Savior, mercy in this Life, that I may find it in the Judgment,
and in the Sentence of the Life to come! Prepare me, O Lord Jesus, for my
particular Judgment, that I may be able to stand in thy Universal Judgment.
Have mercy upon me, when thou shall Judge me alone, to the end thou may have
mercy upon me, when thou shall Judge me and all the World together. O grant I
may live with such care to judge and call my self to an Account in this Life,
that the remembrance of that other which I must one day give to thee, and my
earnest endeavor to make my self ready for it, may never depart out of my
mind. Amen.

APRIL.
The First WEEK.
Of the Torments of Hell.
1. OH, what terrible things are these; Death, Judgment, Account, and Sentence,
without any Remedy.

Yet there are things more terrible than all these, and they are, viz.

To be damned, and to suffer the Torments of Hell to all Eternity. Death is
Life, Judgment is Joy; the Account is Pleasure, and the Sentence is Delight, in
comparison of what it is, to depart from thence condemned to be thrown
eternally into Hell and Damnation; and to suffer there, those intolerable
pains, which a sinner has deserved here. This is that which makes Death
terrible, Judgment formidable, the Account insupportable, and the Sentence
dreadful. Actions are measured by their Successes, and Causes by their Effects.

2. If they had condemned me to lie for many years in some strait place, and
some narrow Dungeon, and always in obscure darkness, where mine eyes should
never see the Light, that were a great Evil; but in Hell, the darkness is far
more horrible, without the least hope of light.

3. If they had condemned me for ever, to suffer extremity of Torment, though
but in one Hand, in one Foot, or in any one particular Member; that were a
great Evil: But in Hell, the whole Body and Soul suffer together, without
having one part or Member free to comfort another, and all of them suffering
for ever! and ever!

4. If they had condemned me to some moderate pain of sense, and such as might
have been endured, leaving my Thought and Understanding free; yet that pain
being for ever, would be a very great Evil; but that in Hell is far greater,
for the pains that are suffered there, are unmeasurably sharper, both in their
intension and extension.

5. If they had condemned me to lie among Gally-Slaves, Traitors, and
Murderers, the vilest and basest of Wretches; men of abominable Life, and worse
Manners; this were a great Evil, to be tied to such ill Company. But they
condemn me to be amongst utter Enemies, who not only abhor, but would fain
destroy one another, and themselves too; to hear nothing else but Yellings and
Blasphemies, to see none but Tormentors executing their Rage, and their Revenge
upon the damned, by a death that knows no death, and an end that is still
beginning; and which keeps it duration even in the midst of Torment.

6. If they had condemned me to some limited time, though it were for a hundred
years, to suffer such sharp and terrible pains; that were a great Evil, since
we see that one year of acute pain is insufferable; how much more then for
millions of millions of years? But for ever! for ever! for ever! to suffer
innumerable and remediless Miseries and Torments, which have no end nor
limitation, but must last eternally; who can be able to suffer and undergo them?

7. If they had condemned me to all these Sufferings in my Body alone, leaving
my Soul free, that I might feel no more Affliction than what is caused by the
Punishment of my Body, that were an intolerable Evil; but the torment which is
felt within, is greater than that without; and more insufferable is that excess
of grief and anguish, which the never dying Worm of Conscience gives unto the
Soul, than all the pains and torments which are laid upon the Body. These are,
as it were, the body of Hell; but the soul of it, is the torment of the Soul;
far more intolerable and disconsolate. Yet this is but a slightdraught, a very
remote and faint description of Hell in general; consider it now in particular.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Place of Hell.
1. COnsider now the Place of Hell; the Habitation of Devils, the horrible
dwelling of the Damned; A dwelling, that is no dwelling; a habitation, that is
no habitation; a place, that is no place, but horror, darkness, fire, torment,
and confusion. There is nothing in those unhappy Prisons that speaks order;
there is nothing that speaks distinction; all is disorder, all is contrariety;
all flame, and yet all obscurity. All that is seen there is fire and flame,
which do torment, but not enlighten. The Place where those miserable wretches
are condemned, is Sorrow; their Rest, is Affliction; their Food is burning; and
their walk, a passing from one terrible pain, to another more intolerable.

2. The Lodgings of that horrible Palace, are Racks and Tortures; the Halls and
Galleries are fire and its continuance; the Chambers and Closets, are vexation
and anguish; the Windows are darkness, and the Light, is to see nothing but
miseries and woes. Think what they shall do and suffer there; who here employ
all their care, and spend all that Money which they owe to the Poor, in
sumptuous Buildings, in stately Appartments, in costly Furniture, in curious
Pieces, and in rich Accomodations.

3. Nature does require ease, comfort, joy, light and cheerfulness, but the
Damned shall there find pain, affliction, grief, sadness and obscurity. How
much does a Man suffer lying in a dark Dungeon! Nay, how tedious it is to
suffer an easy Bed, if a Man be kept there but two or three Years, nay but two
or three Days, by any sharp infirmity; his weariness makes it a severe and a
heavy Punishment! How much does a Man suffer being fastened to the Bank of a
Gally, a Chain at his Foot, an Oar in both his Hands, and his Shoulders exposed
to cruel Lashes! But alas, how spacious and lightsome are Dungeons! How
pleasant is a sick Bed! and how delightful are Galleys, and the sharpest Pains
of this mortal Life, in comparison of those unutterable Sufferings of the
Damned in Hell!

4. Man's Nature desires fair Houses, large and cheerful Appartments; but that
is a place strait, close and narrow, for the pain of it; and only great, wide
and spacious, in the lasting of that pain. Nature requires room and liberty to
walk; to dilate the Heart and cheer the Senses; but that is a place where the
Limbs have no Motion, the Heart no Enlargement, and where the Senses on all
sides, meet howlings, tortures, griefs, stenches, fire, and confusion. Nature
requires a place to delight and recreate it self: But that place is all misery,
and discomfort, torments, and more torments; Losses, Sorrows, and Sufferings,
without end, without measure, and without remedy.

5. Finally, the place of Hell, is a place of calamities, even beyond all
imagination, and of extremity of tortures for an eternal Duration. Its limit,
is to repeat eternity; it ceasing to be, is a new beginning; and a continual
repetition of torment.

6. Now all this being so; is there any one that believes it, who would not
suffer here, to the end he may not suffer hereafter? Woe be to thee, and me, if
we do not consider here, and endeavor to prevent what is prepared, and what
expects us there! Woe be to thee and me, if we do not examine, weigh, and
bewail the times, wherein we have offended that eternal Judge, who condemns the
most part of Mankind to that infernal abode, for not considering these things
here while he gives them time to do it, and for neglecting his many calls, both
of mercy, and chastisement; and thereby making Hell to become their own choice.

7. Is it possible, O my Jesus, that I have chosen that horrible place, by
choosing Sin, and continuing in it! Yes; for God set before thee Life, and
Death; Blessing and Cursing; and left the Election to thy self. Why then, Lord,
if I have hitherto chosen Death, and that accursed place by sinning; grant I
may get out of it, before I go into it; and that by repenting, by forsaking my
sins, and by relieving thy poor Members, I may gain thee to be my Savior; and
at the last day be called to thee with those comfortable words, Come ye Blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the
World.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Company of the Damned, and of their pain of Sense.
1. IF that terrible Abode, were only a wide empty space, though sad, obscure
and afflictive to the Wicked; yet without such ill Company, it might be more
tolerable: But the fierce and cruel Inhabitants, and their hateful Company, is
worse and more intolerable than the place it self. None but Devils, and damned
Persons are the Neighbors of that infernal City. The Devils that are busily
inflicting Tortures, and the damned most impatient in suffering them; raging
and blaspheming with incredible Fury. Nothing is heard there, but the noise of
the Lash, and the cry of those that feel it; a sighing without comsort, a
groaning without ease, an eternal Woe, and alas, an endless weeping, wailing
and gnashing of Teeth.

2. Their Lamentations, are Oaths, Curses and Blasphemies; they rage, despair;
and they belch out Vengeance, without Revenge, and Wrath without Satisfaction.
O good Jesus! The hearing of one Curse, the hearing of one Blasphemy, is
sufficient to pierce a Heart and afflict a Soul; What will it then be, to hear
so many horrid Curses and Blasphemies? This may be reckoned the very Hell of
Hell it self. But alas! Lord, the Damned do not only hear and suffer them, but
also utter them, and that is yet much worse, and more to be abhorred. Rather, O
Lord, let me suffer a Hell without pains; but without Sins and Blasphemies;
than a Hell of Sins and Blasphemies, without any other pain.

3. In that unhappy and calamitous City, and among those wretched Citizens, all
their Peace is Discord; all their Quiet, War; all their Comfort, Anger, all
their Order, is Division, Disagreement, and Confusion. Imagine thou did
behold a City where the Inhabitants went up and down killing and burning one
another, with Swords and Firebrarnds in their Hands; here loud Complaints;
there louder Cries; here Rage, there Death, and Desperation. Such a place, were
peaceable, and quiet in comparison of the Hatreds, Fightings and Discords that
are in Hell: For those at last come to an end, when the Inhabitants have made
an end of one another: But these instead of ending, are always beginning a new.
The Sufferings of those have some measure and limitation, but these have no
degree below infinite, nor any limit short of Eternity; and finally, the
Companions, Friends and Neighbors of that dismal Abode, are only the Devils,
and the Damned, most inveterately hating and abhorring themselves and one
another.

4. Think how the nice and delicate Person will be able to endure this surly
boisterous Company, who by being used to suffer nothing that can cross his
tender Inclination, is become too haughty, and insolent to bear the Company of
his own Family, or so much as bear with patience the attendance of his
Servants. How will the proud, scornful and dissolute Woman, endure to see her
self encompassed with Devils, and with Souls as proud and imperious as her
self; who cannot endure the Company of that Husband, which God has given her?
How will the tyrannical Governor, be able to suffer so many Devils to be his
Superiors, and to tyrannize over him, who cannot suffer his Inferiors, though
Loyal and Obedient, to live quietly under him? And how will the rebellious
Subject, be able to suffer so many infernal Princes, to exercise over him the
Empire of their cruel Wills, who never can suffer one good just and moderate
Sovereign, ruling him according to the Laws?

5. Oh, if thou did turn the Eyes of thy Consideration another way, and did
see loose and sensual Persons, instead of the delightful Embraces of their
lustful Lovers, embraced and inflamed by Vipers and fiery Basilikes, and
suffering unexpressible Torments, without any remedy or comfort; If thou did
see the Scornful, the Proud, the Haughty, trampled upon by Devils, dragged and
despised by them, and burning in unquenchible Fire; If thou did see the
ambitious Grasping at the top of Flames and Smoke, and for ever suffering the
Thirst, which that of their ambition kindled here in so short a Life; If thou
did see the rich covetous Miser, in eternal beggary and nakedness, without
any other plenty but of Fire, Torment, Anguish, and Affliction; If thou did
see the beautiful and lascivious Woman, whose Sins and Vanities carry her to
Hell; there become ugly, loathsome, and abominable; her Body parched with
flames and her Soul racked with vexation and despair; If thou did see the
debauched Clergyman, who instead of guiding Souls to Heaven, by his Doctrine,
brings many to Hell by his evil Example, tormented there in living Flames; his
holy Orders much increasing his punishment, and what was here his Honor, and
his Ornament, becoming there the greatest Aggravation of his Crimes; If thou
did see the Glutton, and the Drunkard, the Epicure and the Libertine, there
hungry and thirsty, lean and pale, all their Delights reduced to Fire and
Brimstone, without one drop of Water to cool or quench their thirst; and
instead of their delicate meats to be now devoured themselves, and gnawed for
ever by the Worm of their own Consciences; If thou did see all this, and
heard'st so many sad Cries and woeful Lamentations; so many Curses, Blasphemies
and Confusions; If (I say) thou did see, hear and well consider all this; Ah!
how much more careful would thou be, to see, to hear and to live otherwise
than thou have done hitherto. Therefore, go down into Hell by consideration,
while thou live; that thou may not go down into it by condemnation, when
thou die. Look well upon it thus; and behold it now, to the end thou may
not be thrown into it; now by Meditation, to the end thou may never see it
any other way; nor be there compelled to feel the weight of God's wrathful
Indignation.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Duration and the Pain of Loss; and of the Worm of Conscience.
1. IS there any Evil in Hell, greater than this? Can there be any other
greater?

Yes, there is yet another, greater, and more cruel than all these; and that is
the Eternity of them.

2. If these horrible Misfortunes, Torments, and Miseries, were to last for a
Hundred thousand Years, or for a hundred Millions of Years, and that then at
last they might have an end; and that there did shine some glimpse of hope
(though so remote) of their being ended, it were not absolutely Hell. It is no
infernal Evil that has a conclusion, nor can that be called the Pain of the
Damned, which can be seen (as it were behind) going away from them. That ever!
ever! ever! eternity! eternity! eternity! is the Torment of all the Torments of
Hell. To shut the door against all Mercy, for ever! To bolt and lock the Gates
of Hell, and to throw the Key into the bottomless Pit, so that it shall never
be taken out of it again! For the Damned to turn their Eyes on every side, and
find all passages utterly barred up; to see the Dungeon not inhabitable, and
yet closed up on every side, and to lie burning, and suffering in it to
eternity; this, this is the Evil, of all the Evils of Hell!

3. Never! never! never to see the Face of God! That the Damned shall never be
admitted, to the Light of his heavenly Countenance! That they shall never have
any benefit by the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which he came to offer for them,
as well as for the rest of Mankind, if they would have made themselves capable
of it! That the Devils shall never stir from their sides, nor cease one moment
to torment them! That they shall never be able to think one honest thought, to
speak one virtuous Word, nor to do any one Action, but what shall be abominably
wicked! That they shall always go wishing, and seeking for Death, and yet never
find it! That neither the Tormentor, nor the Tormented; nor the Torments
themselves, nor the place of those Torments, shall ever come to an end! What is
this, good Lord, what is this, but Horror, and Astonishment?

4. Ah, how my Thoughts are disturbed, and even distracted; and Nature it self
is in amazement, and in a manner lost, in the Meditation of these Things! How
well was it spoken of him that said, there were but two sorts of Punishments to
be ordained in this World for all those that are the Followers of it, and that
are deceived by it. One for the Heretic, if he does not believe; and another
for the Fool, if he believes and does not do accordingly. Is there a Hell for
ever? And yet we do we sin! Is there a Hell for ever? And yet do we not fear!
Is there a Hell for ever? And yet do we not repent!

Oh! what a Terror is stricken into my Soul, by contemplating the Eternity of
those Torments; But is it not hard that God should inflict eternal Punishments
for temporal Offenses?

Oh; take heed of judging thy Judge, who has forbidden thee to judge so much as
thy Neighbor; how much more then thy Creator! If thou will needs be judging,
judge thy self, for that thou lawfully may do; but presume not to question
his ways, for they are unsearchable, and his Judgments past finding out. Thou
may as well empty the vastness of the Ocean, and pour all the Water of it
into an Egg-shell, as fathom the Depths of his Proceedings, with thy shallow
capacity. Yet there want not Reasons to convince thee of God's Justice, and to
vindicate it from Incongruity. God sets before thee Blessing, and Cursing; Life
eternal, and Death eternal, he shows thee the way to obtain the one, and to
escape the other. He calls upon thee often in his Word, and by his Ministers to
walk in the narrow way that leads to Life; but if still thou will go in that
great Road, which thou know must of necessity bring thee to eternal Death,
thou make it thine own choice, and ought rather to blame thine own choice,
and ought rather to blame thine own Folly, than God's Justice. He has set
before thee Heaven, and Hell, and out of his exceeding love, sent his own Son,
to take Man's Nature upon him, on purpose that he might suffer Death, to redeem
thee from the one; and purchase the other for thee. He swears, As I live, I
will not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would turn from his
wickedness and live. He invites thee earnestly, saying, Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways, and kindly expostulates? Why will ye die? But if after all this
method of Mercy, Men will not be wrought upon, but will run on to their own
destruction, which they are forewarned must be eternal, it is their own will,
not God's severity, that is to be blamed: Besides if a Man sin as long as he
can, even to his Death, and would continue to do so for ever, if he lived so
long, which is not unknown to God, who searches the secretest corners of his
Heart, and foresees his most hidden thoughts long before; that they are only
evil, and that continually; can it be unjust that he should be condemned to
suffer continually? He does what he can against God, by his Sin; and may not
God justly correspond with him in punishment? He never ceased from Sins while
he had power to commit them, and God ceases not from punishing while he has
power to inflict it, which is for ever. Add to this, that an offense which may
seem very small against an equal, becomes an heinous Crime, if committed
against the Majesty of a King, by one of the basest of his Subjects. And if
David, who was a great King calls himself a Worm, and no Man, humbling himself
in the Presence of God; how vast must the disproportion be between God's
infinite Majesty, and such a Worm as thou art, being so much inferior to David!
Therefore even the smallest of thy Sins, committed against that infinite
Majesty, must needs have an infinite guilt; and so may justly suffer an
infinite punishment. More Arguments might be brought to this purpose, but to
dispute those Points is not the business of this Design.

This is enough, to show their Error; and teach them to beg pardon for it;
beseeching God to forgive the lightest Thought, that can entrench upon his
Justice, and to give them Grace to make such use of this Representation of
those eternal Pains, as may make them careful instantly to forsake, and lament
their Sins, and totally to apply themselves to obtain his Mercies.

5. If I have struck a Terror by representing the bodily Pains of Hell, and the
Duration of them, how will it move thee seriously to consider, how far they are
exceeded by the Torments of that Worm of Conscience, which gnaws the Souls of
the Damned; which kills them without suffering them to die; and which devours
and consumes them, without any diminution, or bringing them one moment nearer
to their end. This is Hell in the Abstract. The Pains, and Torments of the
Body, show only the outside of those Vessels of Wrath, and of that Hell where
they are tortured; but the inside of it, is that Worm of a Man's own
Conscience, and his rage against himself, for his Sins and Follies. This is the
bitterness of that Cup of Gall and Wormwood, wherewith those Vessels are
filled, they being compelled to drink and suck out the very dregs of it.

6. Oh what a sad thing it is, to hear the Damned howling out their woeful
Lamentations, grinding their own Hearts with doleful Complaints, and crying
out. Ah! woe is me, that had it in my power to be saved, and so foolishly chose
those wicked ways that has brought me to this endless Misery! Ah! woe is me,
how great a happiness have I lost! I had time, and means sufficient, and for
not making use of them, I am come to suffer for ever in this hellish Dungeon. I
was born, and bred a Christian, I had the Sacraments, and other outward Helps
of the Church; and because I regarded not those advantages, I am now here
suffering these most cruel Torments.

7. I despised the gracious, and gentle Commandments of my Lord God, and now I
am forced to undergo much harder Laws, and must submit to the most fierce and
cruel Commands of Devils, suffering what they impose, eternally without remedy!
I might have followed the Examples of the Godly, but I scorned, and mocked at
those that gave me them. I might have forsaken, and wept for my Sins; but I
delighted in them, and would not part from them, and now I neither can, nor
would repent, neither would it profit me though I could; for should I weep
never so much for them, tears here in Hell will avail me nothing.

8. I refused God's holy Inspirations, I hardened my self against the Checks of
my own Conscience. I rejected the Calls and Reproofs of many excellent
Preachers, I stopped my ears against the Advices and Counsels of Spiritual
Guides, following in spite of all these, the Pleasures of my sensual Appetites;
and now I suffer, and must suffer eternally those torments which by well
employing a little time while it was in my power, I might easily have prevented
and avoided.

9. Oh miserable wretch that I am, What have the Death and Passion of Jesus
Christ served me for, but to aggravate my Pains for having despised them! What
have the Sacraments and other holy Mysteries of Religion served me for, but to
increase my Torments! Oh! how it tears my Soul, to think that for a short and
beastly delight, I am now thus grievously tormented, and must lie here raging
and suffering so long as God shall be God, without any ease or remedy! That my
Pains, Miseries and Torments, must never, never have any end! That I must for
ever, for ever lie howling, despairing and devouring my own Heart, with malice
and envy against those that enjoy the Happiness, from which I must
everlastingly be excluded.

10. Cursed be the Moment, in which my Mother conceived me, cursed be the Hour
in which I was born; cursed be the Parents that begot me; cursed be all the
Days of my wicked Life; cursed be all those that afflicted me to sin, and
accompanied me in sinning; and cursed be I my self, who by my own fault, and
folly have been the procurer of my eternal Damnation. Ah wretched and miserable
Creature that I am, how much better were it for me, if I had never been born!

11. These and such other woeful Complaints, are the Damned continually
uttering, and they are heard by God's Justice: But the Ear of his Pity and
Compassion is always stopped against them. His Justice hears them, because it
rejoices in making it self satisfaction, by the punishment of those Sinners
that have offended it: But his Mercy hears them not, because they abused it,
and because the time is past, wherein they might and would not receive it.

12. Oh; but is there no remedy, dear God, no means to avoid so great a
Mischief? Yes; and that is to prevent suffering, before thou come to suffer,
and to repent and lament thy sins before they come to be punished; To weep
here, that thou may not weep there; to take pains in this Life, that thou
may not endure pains eternally in the other; to give and receive Blessings
here, that thou may neither give, nor receive Curses hereafter. To forsake
and amend thy Sins and Offenses for a short time, that thou may not be
tormented for them to eternity when time shall be no more.

THE SECOND PART OF THE Spiritual Year, IN May, June, July, August.
MAY.
The First WEEK.
Of the Divine Benefits.
1. WHAT dismal Discourses have these been! How sad and dreadful!

2. It must be confessed they have been so indeed, but by this sadness which is
short, we must pass to that Joy, which is eternal. The darkness of the Night is
followed by the Light of the Day; the Reward is gotten by labor; and the
Battle must be fought, before the Conquest and Crown can be obtained. Choose
which thou will, either to begin with Pains in this Life, and end with Joy,
which never shall have end; or to begin with momentary Pleasures, and by
following them end in the everlasting Pains of Hell. Thou can not avoid one
of these two Extremes; If thou will have the Victory, there is a necessity of
fighting; and if thou will fight it is as necessary to take pains, and suffer.
If thou do neither fight nor conquer, the Enemy will conquer and captivate
thee; and having made thee his Captive, will carry thee to eternal
Condemnation. To him that overcomes, says God, I will give the hidden Manna.
This Manna is hidden, and therefore it is necessary to seek it, and to labor
and sweat to find and to obtain it. And so, before thou come to enjoy that
high Kingdom of Glory, where that true Manna is to be found, thou see it will
be absolutely needful for thee to strive, and use thy utmost endeavors in the
Kingdom of Grace. If thou do not fight, if thou do not conquer here, it
will be impossible for thee to triumph there.

But thou will say, who is sufficient for these things? You have given me so
deep a Sense of the Miseries and Frailties of Man's Nature, that I am quite
discouraged at my own Disabilities; for how can such a weak and wretched
Creature hope to get the Victory over such powerful Enemies?

If thou were to stand upon thine one strength only, thou would have reason
indeed utterly to despair of Victory; but our strength is in the Lord, that
made Heaven and Earth, and thou art to enter the Combat against the Spiritual
Goliath, as David did against him of Gath, in the Name of the living God. Man is
apt to think too well of his own Abilities, and to be too ventrous upon his own
Strength, and therefore it was necessary to abase that self-conceit; but if
thou have really attained to that high Point of Knowledge, which makes Men low
in their own Eyes, thou art thereby in a safer Condition, and much more able to
withstand all danger. St. Paul says, When I am weak then I am strong, and in
another place, I can do all things through him that strengthens me, for our
sufficiency is of God. Thy own weakness will make thee rely only upon thy God,
an from this knowledge of thy self, thou may come to some knowledge of him.
Excuse not thy Sloth and Cowardice, by laying the fault upon the Frailty of thy
Nature; for that is but to accuse God as an hard Master that expects much,
where he gives but little. No he expects no more from any Man, than what he
enables him to perform. Raise therefore thy Courage by Contemplation of those
divine Benefits he has bestowed upon thee; Make clear the Glass of thy Soul,
and in it thou shall see God, and shall hear and find him; for although God be
in all places by his Essence, Power, and Presence; yet is he no where better
seen and known, than where he is present through Grace. What a number of things
will thou find within thee by beholding God within thy self! What Treasury!
What Cheerfulness! What Joy! What Wisdom!

St. Augustine seeks God over all the World, and says of himself, That he
sought, but could not find that without him, which he already had within him.
He entered into himself, and there found what he had sought, though he could not
find it by wandering abroad. If thou have God within thy self, in vain will thou
seek him elsewhere. It Is within thy Soul, it is within thy Heart that this
Precious Treasure is to be found. If not there, then no where else. As soon as
thou find him within thee, thou shall see ineffable Lights, and meet with
Directions that shall guide thee to keep him fast within thy self, and yet to
find him every where without thee also. Thou shall learn to trust him, and by
that to fear him. There shall thou see the Divine Benefits, what he has done in
thy favor, without thee, above thee, and on every side of thee; thou shall
find it all there. There shall thou see and meditate, what thou owe him, and
by thy internal and superior knowledge, thou shall be able to see, to ponder,
and to penetrate, what before thou neither did see, nor know, nor love, nor
consider.

Of the Benefit of Creation.
Thou shall see the good he did thee in Creating thee, in making thee a
reasonable Creature, in giving thee a Soul, and forming in thee an admirable
Image of his Heavenly Countenance. Thou shall see what he did for thee, in
drawing thee out of the Abyss and Confusion of nothing, to be capable of all
things. Thou shrit see what he did, in that when it was in his power to make
thee a Stone, a Tree, or a brute Beast, he made thee a Reasonable Creature, and
capable of God himself. Tell me, what had thou done, that could oblige him to
it? Upon what merits did this high Benefit fall? Did thou perhaps win him to
it by thy sins, which were then present to him at thy Creation?

Oh how unspeakable is that Benefit, bestowed even in the sight of Ingratitude
itself! That God should have all my sins present before him at my Creation, and
should yet Create me; that in Creating me he should fix his eyes upon his own
Mercy, and cast my sins behind his back; this was a goodness more wonderful
than can well be conceived. The anger of a liberal Person grows enraged by the
presence of an ungrateful one, whom he has relieved; and yet here my Creator
not only was not angry, but in the sight of all my Offenses bestowed a Benefit
upon me, which it had been much to have granted upon the highest Services.

Behold, how greatly we are indebted to God for Creating us reasonable Men, at
the same time he beheld our sins, making us capable to bewail them, and
flexible, docil, and disposed (through his Grace) to wash them with our Tears.
By this first and principal Benefit he filled us with infinite other Benefits;
for in giving us that chief Jewel the Soul, all the rest, though greater, are
less; because they all depend upon that.

It is more to be a Man, than to be a Great Man. It is more to be a Man, than
all that can be contained in the Being of Man. It is much to be Wise, but it is
more to be Man, than to be Wise, because he could not be Wise unless he were a
Man. It is much to be Rich, Powerful, and Noble, but more to be a Man, because
he has all those by being Man. It is much to be a King, but more to be a Man,
because without being a Man, he could not be a King. It is much to be Good,
Holy, and Virtuous, but it is more to be a Man, because he could be none of
these without a Rational Soul, which makes him to be a Man.

Know thy Dignity, O Man, and use it with respect, and do not abase that part
of thee, which is Man, to the level of that other, which is but Animal. Let not
sin defile that Sovereign, and that Celestial Majesty, which thou have in thy
Soul; for to spot, blemish, and deface it, is great sin and ingratitude. To
make thee a Man, was to give thee all that is visible, and to make thee capable
of all that is invisible. What Thanks, what Services do these Benefits require?
To make thee a Man, was to make thee Head, King, and Sovereign of this
inferior Nature. He chose thee for Prince of the Planets, of the Sun, of the
Moon, and of the Stars. Finally, he gave thee the Elements, all things mixed,
and all the several Individuals, for thy Contemplation, and for thine
Inheritance.

Thus God's Creating Man, and giving him a Rational Soul, is the chiefest and
greatest of all the Gifts he has bestowed upon Men; for although afterward he
enriched them with others of his Grace, which are more excellent, yet they all
depend on that of Nature. They are Benefits, which fall upon this first
Benefit, and without which they could be of no Efficacy or Advantage.

But let me not pass over in silence, or forget to mention in particular those
other admirable and illustrious Endowments, which in Creating thee a Man, and
giving thee a Soul, God has furnished thee with, so vastly surpassing those of
the inferior, and irrational Tribe; I mean the glorious and sublime powers of
thy Soul, by which it operates; for how do they transcend the low Capacities of
sensitive Beings? How noble and excellent are thy Faculties, and how wonderful
their Operations, in respect of the grosness and inactivity of theirs?

Thou have an Understanding capable of knowing all things, able to draw
Inferences from precedent Propositions, and to frame Conceptions of universal
and immaterial Objects. God has given thee ability (if thou would improve
it) to penetrate into the profoundest depths of Humane Knowledge, and in some
measure into his Divine Essence; thou art able to make some discovery of those
infinite Perfections, which concentre in him the Original of all Perfections,
and to soar up by Contemplation into the highest Heavens, where this infinite
and incomprehensible Nature most eminently resides. Thou art able from things
made and visible to collect the absolute necessity of the existence of some
first Being, which is the Author of them, and invisible. Thou see the frame
of Nature contrived in a wonderful manner, and beholdest innumerable Creatures
of all kinds, some having but Being; others, Being and Life; a third sort,
Being, Life, and Motion; a fourth, Being, Life, Motion, and Sense; a fifth,
Being, Life, Motion, Sense, and Reason; and from hence thou art able to infer,
that there must be a Creator of them, since nothing can make itself, and so
proceeding through the whole Chain of Causes, thou come at last to one first
Cause of all things, which is eternal, self-existent, and independent; and to
him thy understanding bids thee ascribe infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
all which Attributes were most illustriously displayed in the Creation of the
Universe. And further, as by the light of this Principle thou art able to
discover the Being of God, so by the same thou art enabled to comprehend thy
Duty to Adore, Reverence, Worship, Serve, and Obey him. Thou know, thou
could be made for nothing but for his Service, and that his having made thee
gives him a most indisputable Right to thy Obedience and Homage; thou know
the difference between Good and Evil, and apprehendest not only what is
pleasant or unpleasant to the Senses, (which is the utmost degree of Knowledge
that the brute Creatures arrive at) but also what is honest or dishonest, just
or unjust, morally good, or morally evil, and art sensible of thy Obligations
to prosecute the one, and avoid the other; and from hence it is, that thy
Conscience, that internal Witness and Judge, seldom fails to excuse and comfort
thee, when thou do thy Duty, or to accuse and torment thee with uneasy
thoughts, when thou committest Sin. Further, this unvaluable Benefit qualifies
thee for Society and Government, (Blessings not known or enjoyed by the lower
rank of Creatures, which are unsociable and incapable of Discipline or Order)
and capacitates thee for that, which we deservedly account a most desirable
happiness, the Conversation of thy Friends, and of those of thine own kind,
without which thou would be disconsolate and miserable.

O inexpressible Benefit of thy bountiful Maker! deserving thy most intense
meditation, and the service of thy whole life. What return can thou make to
God for this singular Gift? What requital worthy of so vast a Favor? Has God
made thee an Understanding Creature, and given thee a Capacity to comprehend
not only Natural Objects contained in this low Sphere of matter, but also
things supernatural above the reach of sense? Let it then be thy principal care
to endeavor after an improvement of this Noble Faculty, to employ it about
things that are suitable to its Dignity, but above all to know God and his Son
Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life. Consider how it imports thee to acquire a
due knowledge of those Holy and Divine Truths, which God has been pleased to
manifest concerning himself; and whatever escapes thee, suffer not thy self to
be ignorant or unskilled in those Sacred Oracles, which contain the will of God
to be performed by thee, if thou desire to partake of his Glorious Promises,
or ever to enter into his beatifick Presence. It Is the Gift of God, that thy
Nature is enriched with this high Ornament and Perfection, and therefore use it
to his Glory, and have a constant regard to his Honor in the employment of it.
Let thy whole aim bet to magnify God thereby, and have a care of dishonouring
him by his own Gift, which he gave thee for thy benefit, but to be used in his
Service. In a word, seek all occasions to show thy thankfulness for it, to
celebrate the goodness of thy Divine Benefactor, and to show forth his Praise
by applying it constantly to the glorification of his great and venerable Name.

But besides this Faculty of Understanding, thou have yet others, which are no
less excellent and sublime, for which thou art equally obliged and indebted to
thy liberal Creator. He has given thee Memory, that Storehouse of Science, and
common Receptacle of all things that are apprehended by the Understanding, an
Endowment most eminently useful and beneficial to thee. To this thou
committest, as to a Guardian or Register, whatever thy Judgment or Imagination
presents, drawing it forth again, and remanding it back, when occasion
requires. In this thou treasurest up the Images of things, and lodgest
innumerable Idea's vastly different from each other, the most disagreeable
Objects being therein reconciled, and joined together without the least jarring
or discord, confusion, or disorder; and which is most wonderful, by how much
the greater the multitude of the Objects is, that are fastened there, by so
much the more space there remains for others; and by how much the more thou
endeavourest to crowd and to fill it, so much the more it will still hold, it
being capable of an infinite extension. From the assistance of this Faculty
thou derivest many great and considerable Advantages. Thou art enabled thereby
to reflect upon thy past Actions and Follies, in order to amend them for the
future; to represent things absent and gone, as present before thee; to descant
upon the Mercies of God, which have been formerly extended to thee, and upon
thine own Ingratitude in making him no other return for them, but disobedience
and sin; and remembering how vile thy Practices have been, by this means thou
may conceive an hatred and detestation of them, and be brought to
Repentance. Finally, by the help of this Gift, thou may recollect the
principal passages of thy Life, and recall to mind, what thou have done amiss,
which is the first step to Contrition and Amendment.

Since therefore God has vouchsafed to endue thee with so admirable a
Perfection, and to plant in thy Soul so useful and excellent a Faculty; strive
to embellish and adorn it with suitable Objects, and consider how thou art
obliged above all things to remember thy Creator, and to lay up his Word within
thy heart. Remember him who gave thee Memory, and bear in mind thy great
Engagement to him for this Benefit. Be careful to treasure up his precious and
saving Truths, nor let his Goodness and Bounty to thee be ever forgotten. It Is
a most unnatural Ingratitude, not to remember him, whose Gift it is, that thou
remembrest any thing else, and to let him slip out of thy memory, who took care
to furnish thee with that Noble Treasury, for the Entertainment of himself, and
of things that are agreeable to thy Nature.

Nor are these all the Advantages which thou enjoyest, from God's having given
thee a reasonable Soul; thou have still something of equal Worth and Excellency
with the former Endowments, deserving thy Thankfulness and Acknowledgment. Thou
have a Will incapable of constraint or force, which above all other Possessions
is most properly thine own, in thine own power, and not subject to any external
violence. Thy Understanding may be taken from thee by several Accidents and
Diseases, and thou may be deprived of thy Memory by sundry Mischances, but
nothing can despoil thee of thy Will, or hinder the freedom of its Operations.
Thou can choose, or refuse, act or not act, and art exempt from that
fatality, whereby inanimate Beings are moved: Thou have no necessity upon thee
to determine thy Actions this or that way, nor art thou led by Natural Instinct
with the Brutes to pursue those things, which make for thy good, but by
Election and Choice, having an absolute liberty, either to follow or reject,
what is outwardly represented to thee. Thou can not be compelled to do such
things, as are evil and prejudicial to thee, but it is purely thine own act. The
Devil himself, that great Tempter, can only solicit and allure, persuade and
entice thee, he cannot force thee to do any immoral Action, nor all the Powers
of Darkness; much less have men any Authority over thy Will. They must obtain
thy consent, before they can draw thee into sin, and thou must will the evil,
before thou can act it. It Is in thy power, whether thou shall follow the
Counsels and Suggestions of wicked men, or whether thou shall refuse to be led
by them, nor is it possible that thy Will should be driven by compulsion or
violence to the prosecution of Objects, which it does not first seek and desire.

Consider then the greatness of this Gift, and study how to express thy
gratitude to God for it. Since he has made thee Agent, and given thee Election,
take heed, that thou direct thy Choice to such things, as tend to his Honor,
and thine own Benefit. Be sure to govern thy Will by the Rule of Reason, and
let no Passions or Temptations prevail to vitiate or corrupt it, for otherwise
that which is in itself a great Blessing, will prove to thee a Curse, and an
Instrument of Misery. Remember thou art under a Moral, though not a Natural
Restraint; that it is thy Duty to will only such things as are good and honest,
though thou have power to embrace the contrary. God leaves thee to thy freedom,
whether thou will obey him by practicing such Duties as he has commanded in
his Word, and be saved; or whether thou will disobey him by pursuing those
Vices, which he has forbidden, and be damned. He leaves it to thy choice,
whether thou will use the means that lead to Eternal Life, or to Eternal Death.
Be not therefore so regardless of thy Happiness, as to choose Misery, and so
utterly unthinking, as to make Damnation thine own choice. O consider how much
depends upon the due regulation of thy Will, and labor to restrain its
unbounded freedom within the limits of thy Duty. Apply it only to Virtue and
Goodness, and thy Reward shall be a Crown of Glory, and everlasting Peace.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Institution of Matrimony.
GOD having Created Man, and perfectly furnished him with suitable Faculties,
did next provide him a meet Help, and a comfortable Companion, blessing them
for the propagation of Mankind by the Institution of Matrimony; and though it
was abused by Polygamy, yet Christ afterward reduced it to its Primitive
state, telling the Jews, that from the beginning it was not so, for Male and
Female created he them. He himself honored that State by being born of a
Virgin betrothed to an Husband, with whom she lived, as in Wedlock. He honored
it also by being present at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, working there a
wonderful Miracle, which was his first. He communicates particular Graces and
Gifts to it: First, that of Fidelity to Husbands, to the end, that a Man, who
ought to give Example to his Wife, may not run into that which is forbidden, by
forsaking that which is allowed him; and to the Woman, that she may not be
false and treacherous to her Husband. And as it is a Bond, which cannot be
untyed; so nothing should untye the Affections of their hearts. To this Grace
of Fidelity and reciprocal Chastity, he gives that of Patience, to enable them
to bear the burdens of Marriage, which are great; That the Wife should bear the
condition of her Husband, and that the Husband should provide Maintenance for
the Wife, and that both carrying that holy Yoke upon their shoulders, may go on
with equal steps in the ways of Virtue and Religion, taking care of their
Children and Family with Humility and Prudence. This Patience is the seasoning
of that Holy State, without which the married Pair must be undone. Where there
are Troubles, Patience is necessary; as Remedies are, where there are Wounds.
The Soul and Body, how close soever united, yet are not always at agreement
with themselves, but ever and anon there are Quarrels between them. How then
shall the Husband and Wife agree always, who, though they be two in one flesh,
as the Soul and the Body, yet they are two several Persons, and each in itself
remains one. One of the great wonders of the Grace of this Holy Institution,
is, to preserve two Persons of several Sexes, and often of contrary Conditions
and Humors, united together, which is done by Patience. A great Miracle! To
live tied to one another with that strict Bond, and yet to act with quietness
and tranquillity, each seeking the good of the other, as much as their own.
Who, but God, could bring Peace out of Diversity, and Concord out of
Contrariety? And though married Persons do frequently live in Discord, that is
not the fault of the Institution, but our misery and frailty, which throws away
the Grace and Benefit which might be received from it. If a rich man should
offer me his Riches, and I turn away from him; Is he ever the less rich,
because I refuse them? If the Sun enlightens me, and I shut my Windows, and do
choose darkness; does it cease to give light, because I will not see it? This
Institution is light, is holy, is pure. If the married Couple do not dispose
themselves to receive it; If they choose Discord, rather than Agreement; to
persecute, rather than to bear with one another, and to hate, rather than to
love one another; this they may do without being married, for there be many
that live in Dissension, besides Men and Wives; but to live, to agree, to be
united in affection, and to have a mutual compliance for so long a time as the
whole Life, nothing but the Grace of God giving a Blessing to them, can effect;
as he does in those, who dispose themselves for such Seize. Thus if there
be disagreeing Couples, it is because they do not conform themselves to serve
and to please God, who is the Author of those Blessings; and if they would but
reconcile themselves to God, they would soon be reconciled in Peace to each
other. The Holy Ghost tells us, that Zachary and Elizabeth were righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments, and Ordinances of God blameless;
and thence it was, that they lived peaceably together. If the chief Wheels in a
Clock be in disorder, the less cannot move regularly. A Bone out of Joint gives
great torment, till it be put into its right place again; and so the Man and
Wife, being at variance with God, till they be set right there, there will be
nothing but disorder and quarrelling between them; but that difference being
composed, their Conjugal state will be a state of Comfort and Happiness, and in
every respect a great and High Blessing.

Of Civil Society, and Government.
Mankind being propagated and multiplied by the means of that Divine
Institution; from hence arise in the first place Families, which, as Aristotle
observes in his Politics, are the first Societies in Nature, the Ground and
Original, the Nurseries and Seminaries of all the rest; and from them larger
Societies, and Bodies Politic. And from this mutual Combination and
Fellowship, who does not see the great good and benefit accruing to Mankind in
general? What inestimable Advantages spring from such an Union and Association?
It Is certain, by Nature we are all dependent, and cannot live without the
mutual Assistance of our fellow creatures; we must be beholding to others for
things necessary, without which our very Being cannot be preserved; and
therefore to supply those defects and imperfections which are in us living
singly and solely by our selves, we are even naturally induced to seek
communion and fellowship with others.

And the Benefit of a Sociable Life sufficiently appears, in that Nature has
implanted in all Men a strong desire of it, which shows it to be in all
respects advantageous and profitable; for otherwise such a desire had never
been so universally engrafted in the Constitutions of Men. Civil Society does
more content the Nature of Man, than any kind of private solitary living;
because in Society the good of mutual participation is so much larger, than
otherwise. Nor indeed are we satisfied with a Society bounded within the narrow
limits of our Native Country, but we covet to have a kind of Fellowship (if
possible) with all Mankind. Which thing Socrates intending to signify,
professed himself a Citizen, not of this or that Commonwealth, but of the
World. And an effect of that desire in us (to have universal Fellowship with
all Men) appears by the wonderful delight men have, some to visit Foreign
Countries, some to discover Nations not heard of in former Ages; and all of us
to know the Affairs and Dealings of other People, yea, to be in League and
Amity with them. And does not Reason tell us, that by this means Traffic is
promoted, and when many are confederated, each may make other the more strong?
Is it not evident, that by such Confederations and Compacts the general Good is
advanced, and the public Tranquillity secured? How is it possible for the
Interest and Welfare of Mankind to be provided for, without men's being linked
and united in such settled Societies, where each Individual is obliged to study
and to consult the Common Advantage, and every Member to be serviceable to the
good of the whole Body? And therefore the confounding of Languages was rightly
accounted a Curse to the Old World, because thereby men were rendered incapable
of mutual Commerce, and debarred the great Privileges resulting from thence.
They became Barbarians to each other, and lost the sweet Benefit of Society and
Converse, without which all Delights are insipid, all Order is disturbed, and
all Safety banished.

And as the Benefit and Necessity of such Communions, and Politic Societies is
great, so consequently Laws for the maintenance of them must be equally
necessary and beneficial, the just power of making which Laws belongs properly
to the same entire Societies; which having gained a Public Approbation, do
afterward obtain an obliging force, and become binding to every particular
Member. And without this Government and Discipline, it is not conceivable, how
any Societies can consist; for if, when there was but one Family in the World,
no means of Instruction, either Humane or Divine, without positive Laws, could
prevent the effusion of Blood; how is it possible now, when Families are so
multiplied and increased on the Earth, but that without Laws, Envy, Strife,
Contention, and Violence must grow amongst them?

There is no impossibility indeed in Nature, (Man retaining his original
Integrity) but that Men might have lived without any public Government; but
presupposing the Corruption and Sinfulness of Man and of his Offspring, it
cannot be denied, but that the Law of Nature does now require of necessity some
kind of Government; so that to bring things to the first course they were in,
and utterly to take away all kind of public Government in the World, were
apparently to overturn the whole World. It must be acknowledged that Government
is the effect of Sin; but yet that does not in the least detract from its
necessity or usefulness to Men. Those Laws of right Reason, which in a State of
Innocence had been sufficient to direct each particular Person in all his
Affairs and Duties, are not now sufficient nor able to serve, since the
Corruption of our Nature, when Men's iniquity is so difficultly restrained
within any tolerable bounds; but do require the Addition of other Laws, to
which it has always been found needful to annex Rewards, to allure unto Good;
and Punishments to deter from Evil. These are the Instruments, which uphold the
World in Order, and keep it from running into a State of Confusion, and
Violence. These are the Bridles, which restrain the Exorbitant Passions of Men,
and contain them within due bounds; and these alone secure us in the Possession
of our just Rights, which otherwise we might be deprived of by an unjust force
without a possibility of Redress. In a word, without this Bulwark and Defense,
there would be nothing but grievances and wrongs, injuries and endless discord.
The World would not be able to subsist, nor we to live in it without daily
Fears and Jealousies; for whither would not the impetuous and turbulent
Passions of Men drive them, if they were at liberty to take their full career,
without control or restraint? What would not the Wickedness of Men attempt, if
all things might be committed with impunity? It Is therefore to Government, that
we owe the Possession of whatever is dear to us, and for that reason we may
deservedly account it a most unvaluable Blessing, deriving it self from God,
the Author of all good Gifts; without which we can have no secure enjoyment of
any thing that is valuable, but must be in continual fears of being
dispossessed of it by violent Aggressors, who being more powerful will not
dispute the Right or Equity of the Matter. If the Irregularities and Vices of
Men can hardly be curbed by the most severe Sanctions and Penalties; what would
they not dare to enterprise, if they were exempted from those Penalties, and
were wholly left to themselves, to act as they please, without fear of
punishment? What dismal consequences would this produce! And therefore we can
never sufficiently extol the inexpressible Benefits of public Government and
Laws, nor yet that God, who has graciously enabled us to find out and enact
such Laws, as are most fit, and expedient, for our mutual Preservation and
Welfare.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Benefit of Preservation; and first of our Bodies.
TO the Benefit of Creation with all those advantages already spoken of must be
added that of our Preservation; for if to make thee a Man was so great a thing,
and to give thee reason to understand, and means to make advantage of Blessing,
shall it be accounted less to preserve thee from returning again to nothing? It
is a great Matter to conquer, but it is no less to keep what has been gotten by
Conquest; That Benefit was effected in a short time; God dispatched thy Cretion
in an instant, but how many Years does he preserve that Life, he then bestowed
upon thee, and all that while nourish, protect, and defend thee? Is this to be
less accounted of than that? Life and Health are common Blessings, (nor yet are
they the less to be valued for being common) but those personal Mercies, which
he has showed to thee and me, how great, and how many are they?

His care in preserving thee began from the very first moment of thy
Conception, he quickened thee, when thou were but an Embryo; He nourished thee
in thy Mother's Womb, and preserved thee in preserving her, that thou might
not be the untimely Fruit of a Woman, which never sees the Sun. He kept thee
alive in that close Imprisonment, where it was impossible for thee to breath,
and at the just time of Birth brought thee forth into the open Air of this
World, where it was impossible for thee to live one minute without breathing.
Here thou found'st ready prepared for thee (the most proper Aliment for the
Weakness of Infancy) two Fountains of Milk in thy Mother's Breasts, and when
thou know nothing else, he made thee know the use of them, and taught thee
to suck, as soon as they were presented to thee, He filled the Heart of thy
Mother with such a natural Love and Tenderness toward thee, that when thou
could do nothing else, but disturb the Repose so needful for her at that
time, she forgot the thoughts of her own present weakness, to take care of all
things that were requisite for thee, and thou that were born more helpless than
any other Creature, had by his Goodness more helps provided for thee, than
all the rest of the Creatures put together. Thy Flesh was washed from its
pollution, thy Nakedness covered, thy feeble Limbs swathed to prevent their
being crooked and deformed, and when thy Mother broke her sleep by night, and
disquieted her rest by day, to rock and tend thee, it was he that gave her
Ability and Courage to go through with that difficult Task, to support the
weakness of thy Legs; and made her tire her self with stooping, that thou
might learn to go upright, and to speak with a faultring Tongue, that thine
might be able to speak plain. What but the Power of God for thy Preservation,
could have made her find a pleasure in so much real pain and trouble? He made
her Eye continually watchful over thee, when a small neglect might have been
the loss of thy Life, by any of those accidents, which we frequently see happen
to other Children. The carelessness of a Servant lets one fall out of a Window,
another into the Fire, or the Water; how many are maimed or cripled by a
thousand several Mischances, but God has not only preserved thy Life, and the
use of thy Limbs, but that of thy Senses also, the great Value and Benefit
whereof ought to be considered, though we never sufficiently esteem it, till we
come to feel the want of them; yet their loss is greatest to those, that never
had them to loose.

For if thou had been born deaf, thou likewise must of necessity have been
dumb, and since nothing can come into the Understanding but by the gate of some
one of the Senses, whereof the Ear is the chiefest for receiving the Notions of
Truth and Wisdom, in what a tedious stupid Life had thou lingered thy time
out? being by the want of hearing deprived of the most comfortable part of
Life, the Conversation of Friends unable to discourse with them, or with thine
own thoughts, which would have been empty through the Ignorance of those
things, that should afford Matter for that pleasing and profitable
Entertainment. And if thou had been born blind, thou would not only have
wanted the Comfort of all those delightful Objects the World affords, but also
the easiest and speediest way or means of Knowledge. The Eye teaches us many
things in an instant, which a blind Man can never come to conceive by all the
Descriptions that can possibly be made of them, and the want of Eyes does also
in a great measure take away the use of Legs, Sight giving both the occasion
and means of going from one place to another. Thus the loss of any Sense is
more than a single loss; and even the want of Smelling, which is the Sense
might best be spared, is commonly accompanied with a great defect in the Taste,
so needful for the distinguishing of wholesome from tainted Meats, and the
Pleasure whereof God has added to our hunger, that both of them may daily call
upon us to eat for the preserving of our Lives. For were it not for those two
Incitements, can we think Men would take all that pains, and be at so much cost
and trouble, as they are about their Tables, only out of a care for the
maintaining of Life, when we daily see them by that very means destroy their
Health and shorten their Lives? more perishing by Gluttony and Drunkenness than
by the Sword. Nor has God only given us an Appetite to eat, and a Pleasure in
eating, but for the same end has also given a nutritive Quality to each
several sort of meat and drink, without which our Bodies could receive no more
nourishment by those we account the most substantial Meats, nor by the choicest
Wines, than by pouring Water into our Hats, or by putting Stones into our
Pockets.

I should not have been so particular in this Discourse, but to bring thee to
consider and admire, from how small, how weak, how wretched beginnings, by what
strange means, and by what wonderful Protections, the Providence of God
conducts Men through those many difficulties and dangers, which every Year, nay
every day, and hour of their Childhood, of their early Youth, and growth to
Man's Estate, they are subject to, till in the midst of these they (under his
support) attain to that strength of Body, to that sagacity of Mind, and that
undauntedness of Heart, which makes them capable of the most desperate, and
seemingly impossible undertakings.

Behold one, whom a while ago thou saw lying in his Cradle, unable to stir
either Hand or Foot, now venturing to encounter the most fierce and savage
Beasts, and not only taming the unruly Horse, but bringing even Lions and
Elephants under his Subjection. Here Men dig Mines the depth of many Fathoms
under ground, and there they build Towers and Pyramids of as many above it.
Here a mighty Emperor joins Land to Land, by making a Bridge over a Bay of the
Sea; there a most potent King attempts to join Sea to Sea, by cutting a Passage
of many Miles from the Mediterranean to the Ocean. Behold them leading huge
Armies, and cutting through Mountains that oppose their passage, to rush upon
Pikes and Swords, as if they were resolved to be killed in spite of God's
Protection.

Thus when Men are grown up to their greatest Strength instead of being more
able to defend themselves against those manifold Dangers and Diseases we are
naturally subject to; they on the contrary have gotten but the more Power, and
the more Liberty to run into them by the Prosecution of their violent Passions.
The aspiring Ambition of one Man, the greedy Covetousness of another, their
unruly Lust, or enraged Jealousy, their insolent Pride, or their furious
Anger, exposing them continually to the Revenge of some implacable Enemy.

But if God has given some the Grace to govern their Passions with more
moderation; yet the necessary occasions of their Business or Calling, may
several ways make them also liable to numberless dangers, as of Tempest and
Shipwracks, of Piracy and Slavery in Voyages by Sea; of Falls, and Precipices,
of Robberies and Murders in journeys by Land, and of loss of Life in the Wars,
either by Sea or Land. But if neither their Profession, nor any other accident
have engaged them in these, there are Plagues and Famines, Lightnings and
Thunders, Conflagrations and Earthquakes, Sea-breaches, and Inundations with
diverse other public Calamities, which even Persons of the most quiet and
retired Condition are subject to. Besides the particular Mischances of
drowning, burning, and many more such like, than possibly can be imagined, from
which no sort of Persons can be exempted; so that it is no wonder that Men die,
but the great wonder is, when any one lives to be very old, and were it not for
the Power of an Almighty Protection, the sight of a very aged Man would be
counted little less than a Prodigy. How many thousands perish before or in
their Birth? How many have Mothers more hard-hearted than the Estrich, which is
said to leave her Eggs exposed upon the bare Rocks, and to regard them no
further? Nay, and some Monsters much more barbarous, do most cruelly destroy
their innocent Babes to conceal their own Infamy. How many in their Childhood,
how many in their Youth are snatched out of this World by one or other of the
forementioned Accidents? Not one of an hundred living to forty Years, nor one
of a thousand to double that Age; and for those few that do, their Strength
then is but Labor and Sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we are gone. Those
that dwell in populous Cities, are every hour put in mind of this truth by the
continual tolling of Bells, and by their frequent meeting those, that are
carrying dead Bodies to be buried, every one of which thou art to look upon, as
a preservation of thy self, who had dropped into the Grave before them, if
his hand had not upheld the weight of thy Mortality, which naturally tends
thither. The Mischiefs which some do suffer, are the Benefits of those that
escape: Blindness, Lameness, Crookedness, Dumbness, Deafness, and all Diseases
whatsoever another suffers, are so many Obligations thou have to God, that
frees thee from them. Their harms are thy Blessings, since thou ought to
have suffered, if thou had not been pardoned, all that they suffer, who are
so punished; and if thou have not suffered these Mischances, how many more,
which thou know not of, would have happened to thee, if God had not
preserved thee from those dangers? His Preservation of thy Safety is manifested
to thee in those many miserable Objects thou see about the Streets, since
without his particular Favor thou might have been in the same, or in a
worse Estate.

Whenever therefore thou beholdest any of those wretched Creatures, ghastly
pale, and lean with sickness, or almost starved with hunger, loathsome with
Sores and Ulcers, or naked with Poverty and Beggary; Whenever thou see the
Members of one consumed and shrivel'd up by Fire, or of another blasted and
withered by Lightning, or finally any of those lamentable Spectacles, from
which thou turn'st away thine Eyes through horror, let their Misery at the
same time move thy Heart with Compassion to thine own Image, and with
thankfulness to thy God, that thou thy self art not in that woeful Condition.
Consider him as a Man of the same Nature with thy self, as one whose manner of
Birth was just like to that of the greatest Monarch; though in this World God
has set the one upon a Throne, and laid the other on the Dunghill. Say then, O
Lord, this is my Picture, and just such an one might I now have been, if thy
preserving Mercy had not put so vast a difference between us. As I have daily
new occasions to remember this Mercy; so let me daily praise thee for it with
joyful Lips, and with a thankful Heart, Lord, that I may make a right use of
it, and then it will move me not only to pity, but also to relieve his Misery;
so shall we make an exchange advantageous to both, my Soul feeling the
Affliction of his Distress, and his the Comfort of my Alms, and of my
Compassion. Let me still remember, that I am liable to the like Disasters, and
be prepared with an humble Resignation to undergo, whatsoever thy fatherly Hand
shall at any time lay upon me, hoping that if I share with Lazarus in his
Sufferings here, I shall also share with him hereafter in the Joys of Abraham's
Bosom.

But the Diseases and Miseries of the Soul, when they break out to shameful and
scandalous Actions, are much more loathsome and abominable than those of the
Body; therefore when thou shall likewise see any notorious Sinner, glorying in
his wickedness, as too many do now adays; when thou shall hear any one abusing
the Name of God, and the Ears of good Men, with horrid Oaths and Blasphemies,
or with profane Atheistical Discourses; When the disfigured Face of one shows
thee the Marks of his brutish Lust, or the reeling steps of another discover
his swinish Drunkenness; in short, when any come in thy way that are manifestly
guilty of those heinous Sins, which yet thou art free from, take heed of
thinking thy self good, because they are so much worse, and if thou stand
take heed least thou fall, and be not high minded but fear, for there was a
time when those profligate. Wretches, were as far from such Practices, as now
thou think thy self to be; Ascribe it then to God's Mercy only, that thou
art not such an one, and say, Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, not unto me,
but unto thy restraining Grace be the Praise, for without that I should have
been (nay, and yet may be, if that should forsake me) as great a scandal to
others, as this wretched Person is to me. Grant, that I may detest the Vice,
but not the Man. Convert him, I beseech thee, from the evil of his ways, and so
strengthen me in the Paths of thy Commandments, that I may never fall away, but
persevere in them constantly unto my Live's end.

Of the Benefit of Preservation, whereby we our selves have been delivered from
particular Dangers.
Now if the Calamities of others, when but looked upon, are a just Motive to us
of Thankfulness; how much more those we our selves have been freed from by
particular Escapes: God permitting us sometimes to fall into dangers that his
Goodness and fatherly Care may be the more visibly manifested in our
deliverance; and that we may acknowledge our selves more obliged to remember
them with Gratitude, and to make him returns of Duty and Obedience. Thou may
be able to relate and express those he has showed to thee, I will relate those
done to my self, though it be more easy to have a Sense of them, than to
express it. I shall not need to insist upon his Benefits of doing one good,
since thou will know them by those of delivering me from evil. (Here the Author
reckons up his particular deliverances, which I omit to insert.) Do thou
likewise, Reader, following his Example recount to thy self the chief of those
dangers God has preserved thee in, which it concerns thee carefully to
remember, and gratefully to lay them to heart. And when thou have recollected
as many as thou can, say with the Psalmist, Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul,
and all that is within me praise his holy Name, Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and
forget not all his Benefits, Who forgiveth all thy Sins, and heals all thine
Infirmities, Who saves thy Life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy
and loving kindness. I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall
ever be in my mouth. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name
together.)

Of the Preservation of our Souls.
But is not the Preservation of the Body from corporal Death much less
considerable, than that of the Soul from spiritual Death? Yes certainly. There
is no comparison between them, for the former is only in order to the latter,
and when he saves us from any such dangers, as those I have beforementioned,
they are to mind us of our Mortality, and to make us think in what condition we
should have been, if he had then snatched us suddenly out of this World. His
sparing us longer, was only to give us a longer time to repent, and to urge us
to make use of it, to the end, that when he shall come again to take us away in
good earnest, he may find us prepared for Death, in being reconciled to him by
Repentance and newness of Life. Thus in all the occasions, wherein he delivered
me from a Temporal, he delivered me also from eternal Death, affording me a
longer time to break off, and to forsake my Sins by a Repentance not to be
repented of, quickening my Faith to lay faster hold on my Savior, least I
should be plucked away from him, as I had like to have been, while I was in so
great an Error, as to presume he would be held by me, whilst I was loath to let
go my sins, as if it had been possible to embrace Christ, and the World both at
the same time. How often, when his Divine Majesty was ready to throw me justly
into Hell with one hand, has he detained me with the other? And when I was
already condemned by his Divine Justice, how often has he saved me by his
Compassion and Mercy? How often, when I was going, nay running, to throw my
self into the infernal Flames, has this compassionate Lord stopped me in my
Career, and freed me from Temptations, which were hurrying me to eternal
Miseries? How often has he driven back the Devil, who had seized me, and was
dragging me away, when his Divine Majesty laid hold upon me, rescued,
sustained, and receivcd me, pardoning my wickedness, and embracing me in the
Arms of his boundless Charity? How often, when being blind and foolish I went
astray, has he sought me, and brought me home? How has he called, advertised,
reproved, and counseled me, by which means I was recovered and restored? How
often, sometimes sleeping, sometimes waking, while I was dead to Grace, but
quick to Sin, has he rouzed me up, called me, and led me by the hand to make
me forsake Sin, and return to Grace? Who then bound the Hands of his Justice,
who entreated for me, when I was lulled asleep in that sinful security? What
was there in me, that I should find more favor, than those, that are taken
away from amongst us in the midst of their days, and in the heat of their
youthful Lusts? My Sins cried out against me, but the Lord stopped his Ears. My
offenses daily increased against him, and his Mercies abounded as daily toward
me. I sinned and he did expect me, I fled from him, and he followed me, and
when I was even weary in offending him, yet his long sufferance was not weary
in expecting me; for in the midst of all my Sins I received many good
Inspirations and Reproofs from his Holy Spirit, which checked me in my
inconsiderate course of Life. How often did he call me with the Voice of Love?
How often did he terrify me with threats and fears, laying before me the Peril
of Death, and the Rigor of his Divine Justice? How often has he followed me
with his Word preached? How often invited me with Blessings, and chastened me
with Crosses, compassing me about, and hedging my way with Thorns, that I might
not be able to break from him? By all these holy Methods he made me at last to
see the Vanity, the Folly, the Deceitfulness, and even the Painfulness of Sin.
l found that it was dangerous and costly, as well as slavish to be hurried up
and down by the Tyranny of my unruly and vicious Passions. I found I had no
fruit of those things, whereof I was afterward ashamed, and was at last
convinced, that the end of them was Death, nay, and death eternal. Then did I
fully resolve (being assisted by thy Grace) with an unchangeable purpose, to
alter my course of Life, and to run the way of thy Commandments, since thou
had set my Heart at liberty. My Soul escaped even as a Bird out of the Hand
of the Fowler, the Snare was broken, and I was delivered. O let me never again
be entangled with the Birdlime of sinful Delights, from which it is so hard to
get disengaged, but grant I may now soar up to those Pleasures, which are at
thy Right Hand for evermore, taking my flight freely to thee, and to the Ark of
thy rest, for the Deluge of Wickedness, that has covered the Face of the Earth
affords no safe place for the sole of my Foot, O put forth thine hand to take
me in to thee, as Noah did the Dove. I come with the Olive Branch of Peace in
my mouth, the Merits and Intercession of the Prince of Peace. I have nothing
else to plead, but by them and by them only I hope to be received, and kept
from ever departing from thee any more.

If thou have not been so great a Sinner as I, art thou less bound to God for
preserving thee from it, than I, for being pardoned and reclaimed? Shall the
Benefit by thee be accounted less, because it is really much greater? Does the
Hand, that saved me from a Wound, do me a smaller kindness, than that, which
cures me, when I am wounded? Or rather is not the benefit of Preserving much
the greater, by saving the Blood I should have lost by the Wound, and the Pain
I should have suffered in the Cure? For though it require a greater Power to
lift me up, when I am down, than, when I am up, to keep me from falling; yet to
me the Benefit is more worth, which prevents me from a Mischief, than that
which gives me remedy, when I am in it.

Thus have I seen, O God, for how many Benefits I am indebted to thee
notwithstanding my many Sins, O let not an horrible Ingratitude be the last,
and greatest of them all. Man's Laws have ordained no Punishment for that
infamous Crime, either because they did not believe, that any thing in the
World could be so bad, as an ungrateful Person, or that they could find no
Punishment proportionable to so great a Crime. The wildest and the most savage
Breasts are grateful to their Benefactors, and good turns have tamed the
fiercest Lions; but we, more savage than the furious Beasts, are so far from
Gratitude, that on the contrary we each moment offend our most gracious
Benefactor. But suffer us not, O Lord, to do so any longer; and let the
greatest of all thy Benefits be to make us thankful for them, and with the
humblest Devotion of our Souls to acknowledge, that the Number of them is
infinite, and their Nature most transcendent.

Of the Guard of Angels.
We have seen how watchful the All-seeing Eye of God's Providence is for the
Preservation of our Souls and Bodies. The Holy Jesus tells us, that without it,
not so much as a Sparrow falls to the Ground; how much less a Man, who is more
worth than many Sparrows? And to express his great Care of our smallest
concerns, he says, that even the very Hairs of our Head are numbered. Thus
dwelling under the Defense of the most High, and abiding under the Shadow of
the Almighty, any other Protection might be thought wholly needless; yet God
(as subordinate to that) has out of his super-abundant Love to Mankind been
pleased from the Beginning of the World, to protect them particularly by the
Guard of Angels; for having created those Blessed Spirits in distinct
Hierarchies and Choirs, the chiefest of them he applied principally to the
Worship and Veneration of himself, and appointed others to serve him in the
Succor and Assistance of Humane Nature. We are told in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister to those,
that shall be Heirs of Salvation. And their forwardness to obey God in all
things that relate to the good of Man, is seen in many places of the Scripture.

HEre the Author having cited many places, where Angels have been employed for
the Service, or for the Punishment of Mankind, makes a long Discourse, whereby
he endeavors to establish their Doctrine of adoring and praying to Angels, and
proceeds with great Devotion therein; but here our Church forbids us to go
along with him, allowing us to search the Scriptures, where we find express
Texts and Examples flatly to the contrary; thus we read in the Revelation,
that, when St. John was going to fall down, and to adore the Angel, he was
strictly forbidden by him, saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy
Fellow Servants, Worship thou God. And we have a plain Text, fore-warning us to
take heed, that no Man deceive us by a voluntary Humility, and the Worshipping
of Angels. St. Paul was wrapped up into the Third Heaven, and yet he makes no
relation of those blessed Inhabitants, but says, he saw, what it was not lawful
for Man to utter, and the Scripture tells us, that things secret belong unto
the Lord, but the things that are revealed belong to us; We ought therefore to
content our selves with them, and not to be wise beyond Sobriety, but while
they pretend not only to know particularly the Names and Ranks of the several
Choirs in each Hierarchy, but also the particular Business and Employment of
every one of them; Our part should be to acknowledge how infinitely we are
indebted to God for his Goodness toward us, and to raise our Minds to the
highest Admiration and Reverence of God's unspeakable Power in Creating them,
and to the most ardent Love of his Goodness in employing their Ministry for our
Benefit, but most especially for that happy Message brought by the Angel
Gabriel to the Blessed Virgin Mary of the Incarnation of the Eternal Word,
which was the beginning of our Redemption, and for the joyful News of his
Nativity delivered to the poor Shepherds by an Angel, when suddenly a Multitude
of the heavenly Host sung, Glory to God on high, etc. How can we forbear to cry
out with the Psalmist, Lord, what is Man, that thou art mindful of him, or the
Son of Man that thou regardest him? Thou made him lower than the Angels, to
crown him with Glory and Honor. Instead of praying to them, let us lift up our
Minds and Prayers to the Creator of them, and in Thankfulness for all Mercies
join with that blessed Choir, to magnify him. Let us beseech him, that has
ordained and constituted the Services of Angles and Men in a wonderful Order,
mercifully to grant, that as his holy Angels always do him service in Heaven,
so by his appointment they may succor and defend us on Earth, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.)

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Benefit of Redemption.
WE are come now to the utmost top of all the Divine Benefits, which requires a
most attentive Consideration. Our great Creator in the making of Man designed a
most wonderful Union between his Soul, his Body, and his God; Three things so
vastly distant, and so strangely different, that nothing but Omnipotency could
have joined them together; for what can be more different than a dead Clod of
Earth, and a living immaterial Soul? What can be more distant, than a Soul
dwelling here below in the narrow Limits of an Earthly Body, and the Divinity
of an infinite and an eternal God, who dwells in the highest Heavens, and
whom even the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain?

In this blessed State he was placed in the Garden of Paradise, where nothing
was forbidden him, but the Tree of Knowledge; and with this Covenant, that if
he continued in obedience, he should never die, but be translated from that
Earthly to an Heavenly Paradise; but Lucifer, who from a glorious Angel was
become a Devil, having been thrown out of Heaven for aspiring to be equal to
God, envied, that Man should enjoy the Happiness which he had lost, and knowing
by woeful Experience that Heaven could not contain a proud Person, he thought
himself sure to prevent Man's being admitted there, if he could but make him
guilty of the same Sin, Pride. Hereupon he subtly first began to tempt the
weaker Vessel, Eve, by showing her the beautiful Fruit of the forbidden Tree,
telling her that by tasting it she might become like unto God himself, and when
by his persuasion he had deceived the Woman, he made use of her (as he still
does) to deceive the Man. Thus Sin, like a cunning Thief crept in at the Window
of his Eye, which he unwarily had set open to behold the Beauty of that Fruit,
and soon opened also the Doors of his Ears to admit the Enticement of his Wife,
conspiring with his treacherous Appetite to let in Death at the Gate of his
Mouth, by his disobedience in eating the Apple, which was presented to him by
her. Then that blessed Union was broken, and a Separation made not only between
his Body and his Soul, by a temporal Death, the Sentence whereof instantly
passed upon him, though the Execution was deferred; but also between his Soul
and his God by an eternal Death, to which he also became thereby liable; and as
a Forerunner of both, he and his Wife were driven out of Paradise from the
Presence of their gracious Creator. Now as the Departure of the Soul from the
Body is Death, so the Departure of God from the Soul can be no less than Hell;
for as in his presence there is fullness of Joy, so in his absence there must be
extremity of Sorrow, and as at his Right Hand there be Pleasures for evermore:
so on his Left there must needs be everlasting Pains, and what can the feeling
of them be but Hell? To this miserable Condition Sin brought our first Parents,
and from them all we their wretched Posterity became tainted with an original
Corruption, the Seeds whereof growing up into innumerable actual Transgressions
afford no other Fruit but Death in this World, and eternal Damnation in that
which is to come; but God being infinitely merciful would not abandon them to
perish for ever in this sad Estate, but out of the Bowels of his tender
Compassion, did with incomprehensible Wisdom find out a way for the
Satisfaction of his own Justice, and for the Salvation of Mankind. It had been
utterly impossible for all of them together to have done any thing in the least
degree toward the Salvation of so much as one Man, for it cost more to redeem
a Soul, so that they must have let that alone for ever. But God contrived it by
an Union much more admirable than that already mentioned, and that was between
the Divine and Humane Natures; And Adam had no sooner broken the first Covenant
of unsinning Obedience, which God made with him in Paradise, but he graciously
made a Second with him and his Posterity in the second Adam the promised
Messiah. This he afterward performed, by sending his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ, equal to his Father, as touching his Godhead, into the World for the
Redemption of Mankind, who being conceived by the Holy Ghost in the chaste Womb
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, became also perfect Man, of a reasonable Soul and
humane Flesh subsisting; to the end that as Man he might be capable to suffer,
and as God, to satifie for the sins of the whole World.

This was a Benefit so high, and so transcendent, that neither the
Understanding of Man, no, nor that of Angels is able to comprehend it. Here all
consideration is confounded, and humbles itself with astonishment, to see, that
the Son of God, to the end that he might cloth thee with his Grace, clothed
himself with our Nature, which is a poor, torn, wretched Garment, full of
beggary and misery; and yet that Sovereign, Eternal, and Divine Majesty put it
on for our sake; and though this was exceeding much, yet he did a great deal
more for us; since besides this Humanity which Christ the Divine Word took upon
him, he underwent so many Sufferings for Mankind, and wove this seamless Coat
of Grace, (which he gives us in Baptism) with such unmeasurable griefs and
torments, as never have been suffered in all the World, but by himself, nor
ever shall be. Nay, he did yet more, for he not only wove this Coat of Grace
with these unspeakable pains, but even with his holy death, and would end his
Life in that very employment of weaving and finishing it, to the end he might
give that seamless Robe its utmost Beauty and Perfection.

Here all our thoughts ought to be Silence, Amazement, Terror, Reverence, and
Admiration, with Tears of Love and Contrition. That the Eternal Son of God, to
cloth me with his Grace, should cloth himself with my humble Nature, and
presently load himself with the burden of my sins, and then take upon him their
Punishment upon the Cross, and die upon it for them! That the cleansing of me
should make him be defiled with the spittings of blasphemous mouths! That the
giving me the Life of Grace, should make him die the Death of Nature, and that
in such cruel Torments! That for the washing of my Soul, he should shed all his
Precious Blood! And that he should divest himself of all Humane Comfort, only
to give me Comfort, Remedy, and even Heaven itself! This is a business more
proper for our Love, than our Meditation, more to make us active in his
Service, than contemplative in our Thoughts, and to be expressed more by our
Wonder than our Words. Yet it is good to meditate upon it, that we may love
him; to consider it, that we may serve him; and to speak of it, that by finding
we cannot speak enough, we may admire and adore him.

A Man, that does me a kindness, has my Thanks; and if by his pains and danger,
he draw me out of any Trouble, I show my Gratitude by acknowledging it. There
be Laws, that order Recompenses for a Subject, that saves the Life of his King,
in War, or in Peace, appointing him to be rewarded with Wealth, and crowned
with Ensigns of Honor. Mordecai, only for giving Notice to Ahasuerus, that
some of his Treacherous Servants meant to kill him, was by the Command of that
Heathen King, clothed with his own Royal Robe, and his most beloved Favorite
was made to lead the Horse, upon which that Loyal Subject rode about the
Streets of the City. This was an high Honor easily attained; so notable a
demonstration of Favor, so Royal and Majestic a Recompense but for a bare
Advertisment.

Consider now, if so much were due to a Vassal, who by the discovery of a
Traitor, had saved the Life of a King; what shall a Vassal owe to his King, who
not only has saved him from Death, but, which is more, has given him Eternal
Life, freeing him from everlasting Damnation, and not at so cheap a rate as
words, but by sweating Blood, suffering Torments, and giving up himself to
Death, even the death of the Cross? Can this Benefit, this Love, this excess of
Kindness, find any in the World, that can be compared to it? And if we should
be ungrateful for it, or forgetful of it, (which in some sort is worse than to
be ungrateful) could there possibly be a greater wickedness? O Lord, suffer not
me, I beseech thee, to be guilty of so great an Error, of so great a Folly, and
of so great a Wickedness; for such a strange want of Love, and such an
abominable Ingratitude, cannot be thought of by any good Person without horror.

JUNE.
The First WEEK.
Of Baptism and Confirmation.
COnsider now what God has done for thee in particular, toward making thee a
partaker of this high Benefit of Redemption, for though Christ by his death
paid a sufficient Price for the Souls of all Mankind, yet thou (no more than
many others) could have had no share in it, had thou not been made a Member
of his Body; and how high soever the Benefit of Creation be, it had been much
better for thee never to have been born, than not to have been made a
Christian. But what could thou, a poor helpless Infant do toward the
attaining so great a Benefit, when thou did not so much as know thy want of
it? Yet the Mercy of thy most Gracious God prevented thy desires, and in his
eternal purpose he determined thee to be one of that happy number, that should
be born of Christian Parents, in that part of the World, where the Gospel is
most purely professed, and where thou were early consecrated to him in Baptism.
Thou were brought to that Laver of Regeneration, where the stains of thy
Original Corruption were washed away in the Blood of Christ, represented by the
outward and visible sign of Water, wherewith thou were sprinkled, to signify
thy death unto Sin, and thy new birth unto Righteousness: Thou were baptized in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, according to thy
Savior's Appointment. By the Gate of that Holy Sacrament thou were admitted
into the Church, and made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Heir of
the Kingdom of Heaven; being by Nature born in sin, thou were thereby made a
Child of Grace. Thus the second Covenant made with Mankind in Christ Jesus was
sealed between God and thee, which cannot fail on his part to be faithfully
performed, if thou be but careful on thine, to do the best thou can, and to
serve him with sincere, if not with perfect Obedience.

Men use to envy those that are born of Noble Parents, whose Care, Power, and
Greatness, may support and succor the naked, weak, and innocent Infants; but
O! what a Noble Birth is that of Faith? What rich Mantles and Swadling-cloaths
are the Celestial Virtues? That this little Creature shall no sooner be born,
but that at the same instant he comes into the care, not of a weak frail
Mother, who lies unable to help her self, by reason of the Pangs and Throws she
suffered for the bringing of a Child into the World, but of an Holy, Perfect,
and Spiritual Mother, which is the Catholic Church, that clothes him with the
Robe of Grace, an admirable Pledge of a safe and an eternal Inheritance in
Glory! That the Child should scarcely be born, when already the Son of God, as
an invisible Minister does by the visible hand of his Minister baptize, and at
the same time wash away sin from that Soul, and fill it with Graces, Gifts, and
Virtues! This is an Honor, which is indeed deservedly to be valued, and a
Benefit, which can never be sufficiently admired. From the time that the Water
of Baptism washed off the filthy rags of Adam, and clothed thee with Grace in
the Blood of the Lamb; sin, which had wounded thee before, became wounded it
self; and whereas before it gave death, from that time it suffered death. In
Natural Sicknesses, the Remedies seldom reach to the Diseases, and the Body,
when it is recovered, hardly gets so great strength, as what it lost by
Sickness; but in the Spiritual Sickness, and in the Hurts and Diseases of the
Soul it uses to be much otherwise; for the wounded party recovers more strength
and vigor, when he is gotten up again, than what he lost by falling into them.
The Devil ruined us, but God is more powerful in good, than he is in evil. Sin
destroyed us, and Grace renewed us, but Grace is more effectual to renew us,
than Sin to destroy us. Our weak and ruined Nature was indebted Ten Thousand
Talents, but the Eternal Son of God has satisfied the Debt, not with Ten
Thousand, nor with an Hundred Thousand, but with his Blood, a Price of
inestimable value.

Do thou think that any thing can be more powerful than God? Has he not
received thee into his Church by Baptism? And has not he on his part promised
to protect, to free, and to assist thee? Have thou not passed through those
Waters, flying from the Enemy, that pursued thee? Did not that Red Sea of thy
Savior's blood open to give thee passage? And did it not shut again to drown
the Egyptian, I mean Original Sin? Then what have thou to be afraid of? Sing
the Victory with Miriam and the Daughters of Israel, which the Son of a better
and a more glorious Myriam has obtained for thee. Is not God thy succor and
thy hope? Whom have thou to fear? Is not he thy defense and thy protection?
What do thou dread? When a man is once clothed with the Grace of God in
Baptism, all his Enemies are but few. By the Infusions of Grace thou ought
to count Sin and Nature to be already conquered. What signifies the Signing
thee with the Sign of the Cross in thy Forehead, but the marking thee out for a
Soldier of Jesus Christ? Be not therefore ashamed to confess the Faith of
Christ crucified. Thou art not only his Soldier, but art furnished with Arms
of his Magazine. The Old Man is put away, and thou art clothed with the New,
and that New Man is Jesus Christ, who enters into thy Soul, to cloth it with
himself, and with his Graces, for he enters to arm, to defend, to favor, to
protect, and to assist thee. The Field, in which thou fightest, is thine own,
for he strengthens and encourages thee in all encounters. Thou fightest in the
Militant Church, whereof thou art a Member, against which that Enemy with whom
thou fightest can never prevail. Great part of the Victory consists in the
Advantage of Ground, but all is favorable to thee from the time thou art
entered into the Church. That Entry by Baptism was the first Victory, for the
entrance it self was a Victory, and that Victory a Triumph. From that day Hell
trembles at thee, only because thou art a Christian, and now no body can
destroy thee, but thou thy self, and thou art told by the Word of Truth, that
the greatest outward Enemy, the Devil, will fly from thee, if thou do but
resist him.

Thou can not but be greatly cheered with these Encouragements, and much
comforted by seriously considering what thou have received in Baptism. We
Christians certainly ought never to lose the sight of that Benefit, but still
to reflect upon the greatness of it with thankful hearts. Yet we ought not only
to look upon what God has done for us, but also to think upon our part of this
Covenant, and to weigh the Duties we are obliged to by it. Remember that thy
God fathers and Godmothers, when thou were baptized, did promise and vow in
thy Name, that thou should forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; as
likewise that thou should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith,
(contained in the Apostles Creed) and finally, that thou should keep God's
Holy Will and Commandments, (contained in the Decalogue) and walk in the same
all the days of thy life. The Church appointed them to do this for thee, as thy
Sureties, because at that time by reason of thy tender Age, thou were not able
to make, much less to perform, these Promises; but being come to Understanding
thou art bound to take that Vow upon thy self; and they may properly be called
Godfathers and Godmothers, because in the mean while it is their Duty to take
care, that their God-Children, as they grow up, may be taught, what a Solemn
Vow, Promise, and Profession they have made for them, and to cause them to be
instructed both in the Articles of the Creed, and in the Ten Commandments.
Moreover, if at any time they shall hear them speak, or see them do any thing
contrary to that Divine Law, they ought to put them in mind, that they promised
and vowed the contrary in their Baptism. But O! how little of this care is
there in the World! there is nothing more neglected or forgotten than this Duty
of Godfathers, yet I hope not generally. I cannot have such hard thoughts, for
though I must needs confess it is too much slighted, yet certainly there be
many, that have a due regard of it. But since Children, when they grow to Age,
are themselves bound to perform what was promised in their Names by their
Godfathers and Godmothers. They may in great part discharge themselves, when
they take care, that their God-children be so well Instructed in the Christian
Religion, as to know the Duties that Vow engages them to; and when being of
years able to renew that Covenant, and to take the charge of their Souls upon
themselves, they shall have persuaded them upon serious consideration so to do,
and have brought them to the Bishop to be Confirmed, according to that Order,
which the Wisdom of the Church has established, appointing all the Members
thereof to be so, or at least to be ready and desirous to be so, before they be
admitted to the Holy Communion. The Bishop, by whose Ministry this Office is
performed, first causes the Parties, who are to be Confirmed, to make an open
Confession in the Public Congregation, that they do renew the Promise and Vow,
that was made in their Name at their Baptism, ratifying and confirming the same
in their own Persons, and acknowledging themselves bound to believe and to do
all those things, which their Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for
them. He also prays to God to strengthen them by the Holy Ghost the Comforter,
and daily to increase in them his manifold Gifts and Graces; the Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding; the Spirit of Counsel and Ghostly Strength; the
Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness; and to fill them with the Spirit of his
holy Fear for ever. Lastly, he lays his hand upon each Child, and blesses him,
as our Savior did upon those Children that were brought to him, and concludes,
beseeching God to direct, sanctify, and govern both their Hearts and Bodies in
the ways of his Laws, and in the works of his Commandments, that through his
mighty Protection both here and ever they may be preserved in Body and Soul,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Much are those Parents and Sureties to be blamed, that omit to bring them to
this Order of Confirmation, it being a great benefit, both to the Sureties in
the discharge of their Obligation; and to the Children, who are duly fitted and
prepared for it, for they are thereby awakened to an early sense of Religion,
and to a future endeavor of performing their Duty in it.

When Young Plants are removed out of their Nurseries, and set in the open
Field, it is necessary to fence them about with Stakes, to hinder their being
crop'd or trodden down by Beasts; and it is no less necessary thus to confirm
and strengthen new beginners in Christianity, that they may be the better
guarded at their coming into the open World against the dangerous approach of
brutish Men. Such Branches as are so engrafted into the true Vine, God
doubtless vouchsafes to water with his Grace, and though in weak measure at
first, yet if they continue to take firm Root, he will not fail to make them
thrive, and bring forth good Fruit. Those gifts of the Spirit prayed for on
their behalf, will likewise through his Mercy increase, till they become so
many strong Bulwarks to defend their Souls against the Common Enemy, within
which they may stand safe to fight according to their Vow, against the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil.

Remember therefore always the Obligation that lies upon thee by that Vow. We
are engaged in our Childhood to that, which we neglect, when we are grown up;
whereas, being grown up, we should be careful to perform that, which our
Sureties promised for us, when we were Children. Keep then still in mind that
thou art a listed Soldier, forget not in what Army thou art enrolled, what
Captain thou art to follow, what Fidelity thou have sworn to him; and fight
valiantly even to the death, rather than suffer thy self to be overcome by the
subtle Persuasions and Devices of his and thine own Enemies.

The Soldiers of this World for a very small hire keep Fidelity to their
General; they fight and die for him without any other bond or tie, than that of
some little piece of Money, ill paid, and yet they give their blood, and daily
venture their life for that Pay; whereas we Christians, the Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, listed under the Ensign of his Cross, assisted by so many Benefits of
Grace, being Heirs, and Coheirs of Glory, and having Heaven for our Pay, do
frequently desert our Colors, like vile infamous Cowards, and by sin
treacherously fly over into the Enemies Camp. The Soldiers of the World fight
to defend their King, or their General, but here our General fights, and gives
his Blood and his Life for the defense of his Soldiers. They hazard their
lives for a pitiful Pay, which oftentimes they never get; but our King and
Captain secures us a certain Pay, rewarding us with Life and Glory. If they fly
over to their Enemy, it is out of hope to preserve their lives; but if we do so,
we run to eternal death, and fly from eternal life. The War of the World is
made by wounding, hurting, and killing others, but the War of God against the
World is made by receiving Injuries, Affronts, Wounds, and even Death it self,
if it be necessary. The War of the World is to Conquer, by destroying others,
but the War against the World is to Conquer by undergoing Difficulties, and
Suffering for God's sake. In that War, it is Force that overcomes, in this it is
Patience. The Victories of that War are gotten by pulling down, and trampling
upon others, but in this by debasing and humbling our selves. The Triumphs of
that War are here upon Earth, and of a short continuance; but those of this War
are to be in Heaven above, and to endure for ever and ever. Fight therefore
courageously, have patience, and persevere; the Battle lasts but for a while;
thou art already near the Crown, that is to be thy Reward. Arm us, O thou great
Captain of our Salvation, for this Warfare with the Shield of Faith, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Helmet of Salvation, and with the Sword of
the Spirit; and grant that having our Feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace, we may cheerfully withstand all Assaults of our Ghostly
Enemies, keeping still present in our thoughts, the Vow we made to thee in our
Baptism, to fight manfully under thy Banner, against the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, and to continue thy Faithful Soldiers and Servants unto our lives
end.

The Second WEEK.
Of Repentance and Absolution.
OUR blessed Redeemer and Savior of Souls did not stop here; He thought it not
enough to Arm us for the Spiritual Warfare, but has also provided a Remedy to
cure our Wounds. His Divine Majesty knew our weakness, he knew our proneness to
Vice, he knew that like Cowards we should sometimes throw down our Weapons at
the feet of our Enemies, and basely fly from his Banner, for the sake of some
filthy Appetite. He would not leave our Souls without help, but his Compassion
seeing our Frailty and Misery, was pleased in the very sight of so great
Ingratitude, to prepare a Medicine for the cure of our Wounds, and an Antidote
for the Poison of our Sins, by establishing the Doctrine of Repentance, and by
giving Power and Commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce unto
such as are truly Penitent, the Absolution and Remission of their sins. Great
was the Love of our Lord in dying for us upon the Cross, nor was it less in
giving us this means to make his Sufferings effectual to us. To pardon past
Offenses has been seen, and sometimes one man to suffer for another, but not at
so dear a Price as his own Blood. For a Person offended to suffer the sight of
his Enemies, is much, when it is to do them good; but it is much more, when he
knows that they are not only Enemies, but that they are ungrateful, and despise
his Benefits, to shed his very blood to make a Medicine for their Wounds: This
is a pity exceeding all Humane Understanding.

That there should be care taken in Armies to cure the Wounded, and Hospitals
for the Sick, it is not strange, because they are Faithful Soldiers, and
venture their Lives in Fighting for their King: But in the War of the Spirit,
that the Savior of Souls should prepare Remedies, not for his Friends that
fight on his side, but for Enemies and Soldiers that desert him; that he
should admit them again to be new listed under his Banner, is a Mercy beyond
comparison. To pardon Mutineers has been seen in Armies, but yet the Heads are
commonly punished, and the Companies disbanded; but not only to pardon such
Enemies and Traitors, but to call them back, to Love, to Cure, to Reward, to
Honor, and Sustain them with his own Flesh and Blood, can be the effect of
nothing but an Infinite Charity and Compassion. So great is the Benefit of
Repentance, which giving us a Title to the blood of Christ, not only Cures
those that are wounded, but also raises those that are dead in sins; nor is
there any thing above the Cure of that Sovereign Medicine, unless the Party
affected resists the power of it, which is so great, that it not only cures the
Wound, but takes away the very Scars, and makes those, that are recovered, more
sound and healthful than they were before.

Behold a Man fallen from a Ship into the Sea, and ready to be drowned amidst
the Waves! see with what eagerness he calls for a Cable, with what greediness
he catches at the Plank, nay, the poor wretch would even lay hold on a naked
Sword to save his Life, though with the loss of his Blood; so the Christian,
who by the Grace of Baptism sails in the Ship of the Church, being carried by
his Passions throws himself into the World, and is sinking in the Tempest of
his sins, and if he be drowned, he perishes to Eternity; but as he is sinking,
he finds this second Plank of Repentance to save him from Shipwreck, and by it
is drawn up into the Ship again, and preserved to arrive in safety at his
desired Port. Apply thy self therefore to the use of this Remedy, with
Humility, with an holy Disposition, and great sorrow for thy sins, and by Faith
in the Merits of Christ's Blood, and then thou shall rise up not only cured,
but crowned. Call to remembrance thy sins, and make a firm Resolution never to
offend thy Lord again. Be affected with a sorrow, that is pure in its
sincerity, pious in its intention, great in its degree, perpetual in its
lasting, and particular in the enumeration of thy several sins, with all the
aggravating Circumstances thereof. Finally, let thy Confession be clear and
undissembled, with confusion of Face for thy often relapses, giving Glory to
God, and taking Shame to thy self,. Make use of a Spiritual Guide in all
difficulties of Conscience for thy Instruction and Consolation. Forgive all
Injuries thou have at any time received, which are but a few Pence in
comparison of the many Talents, which thou have to be forgiven, and remember
that Christ says, Except ye forgive men their trespasses, neither will your
Heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. And not only forgive thine
Enemies, but embrace them with unfeigned Affection, for his sake, and by his
Example, who loved thee, when thou wast his Enemy.

Of the Holy Eucharist.
In this Preparation of Soul wounded both with Love and Grief, and thirsting,
as the Heart for the Waterbrooks, approach reverently to the Sacrament of thy
Savior's Body and Blood, which that gracious Lord instituted at his last
Supper, for a continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross,
purchasing our Redemption by his Death, the Merits and Benefits whereof shall
therein be assured and conveyed to thee, as a Pledge and Seal of thy Pardon.
Apply it to thy self with an humble Confidence in his Promises, with a firm
Faith, that his Blood was shed for thee, since thou art admitted to be a
partaker thereof. That Divine Antidote is not only to be thy Medicine, but thy
Nourishment; and receiving it with lowliness and Devotion, thou shall not only
find Grace, but the Author of Grace; thou shall not only find the Guide, but
the Way, the Comfort, and Support of the Spirtual Life. If he be God Eternal,
the Son of the Eternal Father whom thou receivest into thy Breast, art not thou
certain, that all his Virtues and Attributes enter with him? If in receiving
him I make him not only my Guest, but also my Lord and Ruler, I become one with
him, as the fire which heats the Iron, is united with it. If his Goodness be in
me when I receive him, how is it, that it does not abolish my Wickedness? If
his Omnipotency, why does it not take away my Weakness? If his Love be in me,
why does it not expel my Luke-warmness? If his Purity and Chastity, why don't
they chase away all my Defilements?

A PRAYER.
O Eternal and Celestial Light, O my Redeemer, and Sovereign Master, and
Physician, O sweet Spouse of my Soul; What is it that hinders the Operation of
so great a Light in me, but that my Soul is in so thick a Mist of Darkness?
What is it, that can hinder the admirable Effects of thy Grace in me, but the
wickedness of my ungrateful heart? What keeps the Divine Strength and Power
from waking, but my great coldness and hardness of heart? What hinders thee, O
Heavenly Physician, from curing the Diseases of my Soul, but that it loves
them, and abhors the Remedy? What hinders thy Sheep, O Heavenly Shepherd, from
receiving the Celestial Food thou offerest them, but their being lost and
running astray after sensual Delights, the Poison of their Vices? What hinders
the amorous Embraces and Favors of this loving Bridegroom, but the ungrateful
forgetfulness of his Spouse? My heart gives it self up to worldly Loves, and so
does not perceive these glorious Pleasures. What keeps my Soul from receiving
the Graces and Favors, which my King entering into it would bestow, but the
Passions and Rebellions wherewith it is filled? What hinders me from hearing
the wholesome Counsels of my most wise Instructor, or, if I hear them, from
following them, but that my Passions make me deaf to his Inspirations, or weak
and unable to follow those which I have heard? O Lord my God, and my Redeemer,
All my Sickness is in my self, all my Cure is in thee. O my God, since thou
do vouchsafe to enter into me, stay there and deliver me from my self: I am
mine own Enemy, no body can hurt me, if I hurt not my self. Free me from that
inward Enemy, O dear and potent Friend; Thou art the strength of Heaven, Thou
art the succor of the Weak, and I am weak; Thou art the light of the Blind,
and I am blind; Thou art the comfort of the Afflicted, and I am afflicted; Thou
art the Shepherd of lost Sheep, and I am one of them; Thou art the pardoner of
the Ungrateful, and I am even Ingratitude itself. What can Cure so great an
Ignorance, but thy Heavenly Wisdom? What can take away or destroy so great a
wickedness, but thine Infinite Charity? What can cleanse so many Defilements,
but thine ineffable Purity? What can give strength to my feeble Soul,
overwhelmed with Vices, but the Infinite Power of thy Glorious Virtues? Have I
thee here within me, and will thou not Cure me? I will not believe it, Lord.
Art thou one of those, that see their Friends in the Sea of their Troubles, and
suffer them to be drowned? Art not thou He, who alone art able, if thou will,
to appease a Tempest? Art not thou He, who stretched forth his hand to Peter,
when he was sinking in the waves? Art not thou He, who sleeping in the Ship,
did awake and calm the Sea, when it was ready to be swallowed up? Art not
thou He, who walked'st upon the Waters of the Sea only to help those that were
in them? Art not thou He, who both by Sea and Land, in Mountains, Towns, and
Cities, were the Universal Remedy both of Souls and Bodies? For to whom thou
gave Grace in the one, thou also gave Health in the other. Art thou less
able in my Soul, than thou were in Judaea and Palestine? Is not thy Power as
great to Cure Souls now, as it was to Cure Bodies then, since thou did
therefore Cure their Bodies, that thou might the better Cure their Souls? Is
thy skill less now adays, O Omnipotent Physician, than it was in those times?
Does not thy Immense Charity rather increase, if it be possible for it to
receive any augmentation? Does not every one of thy Benefits call a great many
more after it? Can thou do any thing else, than give more, and more, and
more? Art not thou All-powerful, O my Jesus? Art not thou all Love and
Goodness? And art not thou infinitely Wise? If then thou art both able,
knowing, and willing; How is it, that I feel not the effects of thy Power,
Goodness, and Wisdom? It is true, I have very often resisted them all, but now
I penitently yield my self up to them; now I humbly prostrate my self, I call,
I seek, and adore the Author of my Remedy. Enter into me, O Lord, my Glory.
Cast out of me all Humane Resistance, and though (wretch that I am) I did
resist thy Virtues, I will no longer resist thy Remedies. I desire, O my God,
to desire. Lend thy helping hand, and banish all that can separate me from
thee. Drive out of me all that Will, which opposes thy Blessed Will. O Lord
God, I believe, (as another incredulous Person said) help thou my unbelief, and
my obdurate Nature, which is the Original of all my harm. I believe, I will, I
desire, I love, I seek, I weep. O merciful Lord, O Eternal and Heavenly Light,
pardon and banish my want of Love, my Coldness, my Ingratitude, and my
Forgetfulness. I would fain desire, but I know not how to desire; I would fain
work, but I know not how to work; but since thou entrest into me, O my Jesus,
work thou in me. Separate from me, and destroy in me all that hinders and
detains me from serving, from loving, from following, and adoring thee. Let
that Love of thine, which was enflamed with the love of me, conquer and expel
this ungrateful want of love. Let thy Light drive away my Darkness, and thy
Goodness my Wickedness. Finally, O Lord, make thy self Master of me, of my
heart, of my will, and of all my Faculties, and carry my Soul thy Captive in
the Triumph of thine Infinite Love.



These are the breathings thou ought to send forth from the bottom of thy
Soul, when thou have received thy Lord, for that is the time for thee to beg
and pray, since he is not deaf, but will hear thee; not dumb, but will speak
unto thee; not blind, but will look upon thee; and being most loving, he will
not reject thy love. God works in the hearts of the Faithful according to what
he himself is, and according to what he finds in them, and even though he find
not in them such a convenient disposition as is due to so high a Majesty; yet
if they be in any measure disposed, his goodness improves it, and even that
first disposition is a gift of his Goodness and Virtue. Since therefore he
gives thee all things, and thou owe him whatsoever thou have, give thy self
wholly to him, who gives thee all things. Come with cleanness to receive that
Divine Purity, and beg of him more Purity, and more cleanness, knowing thine
own defilement and unworthiness. Keep him fast with love, whom thou receivest
with an holy reverential fear, and be not guilty of so gross a folly, as to
forsake him, when thou have but newly received him. For thee to receive God,
and presently to turn thy back upon him, and give thy self up to Worldly
Affairs, is the gross stupidity of the Traitor Judas, who had scarce received
him, when he presently went away to sell him. No, be not so base and unworthy,
remain with him, and suffer thy self to be enflamed with that Celestial fire.
To him reduce all thy love and consideration, raise up thy mind to him in
Heaven, and where thy Treasure is, there let thine Heart be also.

The Third WEEK.
Of frequenting the Sacrament.
THE time shall come (says our Savior to the Woman of Samaria) that God shall
be adored in all places, and not only in Jerusalem; as who should say, the time
shall come when Heaven shall come upon Earth. Would thou attain eternal
Blessings? Ask them of the Lord in the blessed Sacrament. Would thou be freed
of thy Passions, and have all Virtues planted in thee? Would thou have
increase of Grace, and high Gifts of the Spirit? Beg them of the Lord in his
Sacrament, receive it with frequency, and purify thy self to approach that Lord
of all Purity. Receive with profound Humility that admirable Example of
Humility; and with ardent Charity him, that is not only the Pattern of perfect
Charity, but even Charity it self. That which thou receivest, he gives thee,
and that which thou seek desire, and labourest for, thou may find in
that foundation of all our Good, and that remedy of all our Evils.

But thou will say, Alas! I cannot easily, no nor with all the Pains I take,
find that Humility, Purity and Charity you speak of, and which, you say, will
make me fit to receive him; for if I could, I would seek them, and strive to
get them, and would offer them up to that Divine Lord; but because I cannot
attain them, I fear to partake of that celestial Food.

It concerns our Necessity to seek them, but the finding of them belongs to his
Grace. If thou seek them heartily in Spirit and Truth, thou already have
them; for God in his Goodness never obliges thee to find, but only to seek. The
finding is much more certain than the seeking, for this depends upon thy
weakness, but that upon his infinite Love and Charity.

Do thou confess thy Sins with an unfeigned Sorrow, and with true purpose and
desire of Amendment? Do thou avoid the occasions of Sin, and do thou fly
from Evil, striving to exercise thy self in that which is good? Do thou feel
Contrition for having offended so good a God? Art thou truly desirous to please
him for the future? Would thou in good earnest have thy Soul and Conscience
ordered by him, and that he should frame it according to his good pleasure?
Then what art thou afraid of? Draw near to thy Lord with Love, but yet still
preserve his filial and holy Fear. That good fear does not separate a Man from
God, but calls him and draws him nearer, and increases in the Saints in the
same Proportion that their Love does. A perfect Fear, which springs from the
high Knowledge of so high a Majesty, and brings forth a deep Humility and
Reverence of God, does not drive Souls from, but unites them more nearly to
God. This is the difference between a base servile Fear, and a filial Fear;
that the servile grows greater by doing ill; but filial Fear increases, and
becomes more perfect by doing well. Would thou see it? An imperfect Man fears
by reason of the Pains of Hell. How much the more he sins, so much the more he
fears; and how much greater is the number of his Offenses, so much greater is
his fear of Damnation, nor does he make one step in wickedness, which (if he
set himself to think of it) does not augment that terror. This is the greatest
Anguish of Mind ill Men have when they come to die, and their fear is sometimes
so excessive, that they utterly despair of Mercy, unless God by his especial
Grace detain them. On the other side the good Man fears God, because he is his
Father, his Lord, and Creator, and is therefore afraid to displease him; by how
much the more he loves him, by so much the more he fears to provoke and anger
him; and by how much the more his knowledge of that high Majesty does increase,
by so much the more that holy Fear of God increases also, and with it the
desire of pleasing him, and the care not to offend him, whereby he comes with
greater confidence to rely upon his Mercy and Favor; and therefore Thomas
Aquinas says, That the holy Fear of God may consist with the Blessedness of
those in Heaven, who, though they be already freed from the Fears of the World,
and from losing that unspeakable Happiness, do yet fear the Lord, as well as
love him, and do therefore fear him, because they love him; for this holy fear
takes Birth from Love, is clothed with Love, and is indeed rather respect and
reverence, than fear.

And thus thou ought to receive the Lord in the Sacrament with Love and with
Fear, since this fear is Humility, is Reverence, is Love. For because thou
know so great a Majesty, thou fear it; and fearing, loving, and
reverencing the Greatness of that Majesty thou art to approach, thou humblest
thy self in the depth of thine own unworthiness; and this Knowledge, Fear,
Reverence, and Humility, inclines God to come unto thee, to dwell with thee, to
inflame thee, and preserve thee in his Love. Woe be to that Man, that comes to
receive Christ without fearing him! Woe be to that Man that receives, without
considering that it is God, whom he receives, and that he that receives him is
but a weak, wretched, and sinful Man! Woe be to him, that receives God rashly
and inconsiderately without weighing the infinite Difference that there is
between the high ^od, and so vile a Creature!

Those holy Men, who did most frequently receive and consecrate the Sacrament,
were they, that feared him most, and within that Humility, Reverence, and Fear
they found the Treasures of Love. O what tears of Fear did they shed at the
receiving of it! What fire of Love did they find in their Breasts by being so
united to their Savior? What high knowledge sprang up from the depth of their
Humility and Fear? What Faith in believing and adoring him? What Hope in
seeking him, and what Charity in finding and possessing him? They did, as St.
Peter did, at the first knowledge of his Master's Divinity in the Miracle of
the draught of Fishes, when throwing himself prostrate at his feet, he said,
Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful Man. The Apostle runs to his Master's
feet, and at the same time prays him to depart from him. His high fear makes
him beg that he would depart, and his ardent Love makes him at the same instant
to draw near; that approach was caused by Love, and the bidding him depart
proceeded from fear. Thus at the Communion be thou all Humility, Fear, and
Acknowledgment, that thou art unworthy to receive so great a Lord, but yet
knowing thy unworthiness, thou ought so much the rather to approach so high
a Majesty with Love as well as with Fear and Humility. That Fear, which
separates us from God, is never a good Fear; for where but in God can we find
the Perfection both of Love and Fear?

O eternal God, is not thy Goodness communicable? Art not thou a God, who
give thy self, and make all Creatures to participate of thy Goodness? Then
why shall not we come to this Communion, and receive this communicable Good?
Art not thou Goodness and Liberality it self, who bestowest thy Treasures upon
all? Did thou institute this Sacrament in Bread and Wine, to the end that Men
should only see it, and not receive and eat it? Why did thou leave thy self
in this manner amongst Men, but to be their Support and Nourishment? When thou
did consecrate this Celestial Bread, did thou not receive it first of all
thy self, and then give it unto thy Holy Disciples? Thou knew, O Lord, their
Imperfections, and that they would forsake thee and deny thee that very night;
yet thou gave them remedy in thy blessed Body, for without that their fall
and their loss had been much greater.

O eternal Glory, do thou seek me, and shall not I receive thee? Do thou
come from Heaven to seek me, and shall I fly out of the Church that I may not
receive thee? Thou come, O eternal Shepherd, to be both my Shepherd and my
Food, and shall I poor, lost, and wandering Sheep refuse this Food, and refuse
to be born upon those blessed Shoulders? Did thou shed thy Blood, to give it
me for drink, and was thy Body broken, that I might feed upon it; and shall I
shut my Lips, and my Heart, and Soul, against this meat and against this drink?
If I reject thee, who art the Remedy of all my Griefs, whom shall I ever
receive? If I drink not of thee, thou Fountain of all Goodness, when shall my
thirst be satisfied? If I bath not in this Fountain, which thou have set open
for Sin and for Uncleanness, who shall wash this Soul full of so many
abominable Pollutions? And if I be not to receive thee, my God, my Lord, and my
Creator, but when I am indeed worthily disposed for it, when shall I ever dare
to approach thy Table? Is any the highest Cherubim or Seraphin worthy to
receive thee? Can the greatest Purity deserve to partake of that unspeakable
Greatness? Is there any Goodness worthy or capable of that infinite Majesty?
The Blessed Virgin thy Mother confesses she is not worthy to receive thee, and
what am I then polluted Wretch, and sinful Man, unworthy beyond all
unworthiness? Did thou not know, O eternal God, when thou did institute
this Sacrament, that it was to be received by weak Men, and m^erable Sinners?
Thou did consecrate it with this Condition, O infinite Mercy, that thou were
to suffer the Misery of our Nature, and to bear with the Neglects and
Imperfections of our Frailty. Before thou made thy self the Nourishment of
Men, thou knew the Weakness and Sinfulness of Men, and did leave this
Institution not only for our nourishment, but also for the remedy of our
Diseases. Who can cure them, O God, but thou? Who else can guide and strengthen
and encourage me to encounter all the Difficulties, to avoid all the Deceits,
and to overcome all the Temptations, that I meet with in this Spiritual
Warfare? Who can be my Antidote against the Poison of Sin, but the Author of
Grace? Who can enable me in this Banishment to travel through the most rugged
Passages into my heavenly Country, but thou, who art the Way, the Truth, and
the Life, that do sustain, lead, cheer, and refresh me? Do not suffer me, O
Lord, to have that kind of fear, which shall hinder me from serving and adoring
thee, from seeking and finding thee, from possessing and enjoying thee; but
give me a filial and reverential Fear, and such an one, as even in the midst of
fear may inflame me with thy Love.

Thus may we comfort and encourage our selves against the thought, that Fear
cannot well consist with Love, by which mistake some are kept from daring to
receive the Sacrament. And because St. John says, That perfect Love casts out
Fear, they believe that Love and Fear are not compatible, and that not having
this Love, it would be a great Presumption in them to receive the Communion of
the Body and Blood of the Holy Jesus. But they do not well understand St. John,
for he does not speak of reverential Fear, which is very consistent with Love,
and grows up with it; but of servile Fear, for that is it, which is thrown out
by holy and perfect Love. The holy Fear of God keeps no Man from doing any
thing that is good; and much less from the chiefest good, which is the
receiving this blessed Sacrament: but rather by how much more perfect fear is,
so much the more does it burn in Love, and so much the nearer does it draw us
to God. And thou must not only take heed that filial fear hinder thee not from
receiving it with that frequency, which thy Spiritual Guide shall advise; but
thou ought also not to forbear the receiving it, though with but a servile
Fear. If thou have thy Conscience burdened with no heinous Sin, and have
confessed and lamented all those thou know thy self guilty of, resolving to
forsake them for the future; Go with Humility, and an holy Confidence to
receive that Sacrament, for God may turn thy Attrition into Contrition, and his
Love will better thy fear; though in the beginning it be Servile, yet if thou
frequent the Table of the Lord, his Grace will amend it, and make it to become
Filial. It often happens, and very often, that beginning by the fear of Hell
and Punishment, a Man comes at last to the fear of offending so great a
Goodness; the Lord being so gracious and so good, that he increases our
Charity, only through the excess of his. We begin with that which is imperfect,
before we can attain to that, which is perfect. We begin with Self-love, and
end with the hatred of our selves, and with the perfect Love of God. Believe
me, the receiving of this Sacrament draws vast Advantages along with it, and
those the Lord only by his infinite Goodness works wonderfully in us, beyond
what we see, know, or understand. Let every one draw near with such
Examination, Confession, and Preparation, as he is able to make, be it more or
less, (if he have used his utmost diligence) and let him hope that God will
give him an hundredfold increase of what he brings. How many Saints has
servile Fear made, and brought to filial Fear, who afterward with Faith and
Hope, burning in Charity, have cast away the former Fear, and been enflamed
with love of the second? How many Saints have begun their Spiritual course with
fear of being tormented in Hell, who afterward only for God, and his Love's
sake, have repented and bewailed their Sins, and are now reigning in the Joys
of Heaven? How many Saints have by the means of Love cast out that imperfect
Fear, which was the Instrument to bring them to Love, and to perfect filial
Fear? Our good Lord cures and remedies all things; if we seek him, and receive
him by Grace, trusting and relying upon his Goodness, and Love to us.

Therefore those acts of Religion, which are due as to their last end, unto the
three divine Persons in one Essence, thou ought frequently to direct to the
Reverence and the Worship of God in this divine and mysterious Sacrament. In
this Point all the Lines of thy Affection and Devotion ought to meet, as in
their Center. Though it was the Son alone, by whom it was instituted, yet the
Father is with him, and with the Father is the Holy Ghost. That Divine Lord,
that he might become our Savior, took our Nature upon him, being conceived in
the Womb of the blessed Virgin; and if thou do adore him, the Saints and
Angels are at the same time Adoring and Worshipping him, whom thou do adore
and worship; and for thy doing so with them, He will both help and bless thee.
Thus the Devotion to our Savior Jesus Christ in the Sacrament is the greatest
of all Devotions. This Worship and Reverence is the highest, and comprehends
all the rest.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Kingdom of Grace.
THE Kingdom of God, says the Savior of Souls, is within you, and it is that
Kingdom of Grace, which brings to the eternal Kingdom of Glory, nor is it a
small benefit and comfort that it is within us, that we need not go far to seek
it, and to find it. Happy is that necessitous Person, who has his relief within
himself, he cannot be poor, unless through perverse idleness he embraces his
own Misery, neither desiring, nor knowing how to make use of that relief. O the
great Unhappiness, that we should have this holy Kingdom within us, and yet go
out of it? O the high Misfortune, that this Kingdom of Grace being an
infallible Pledge of that eternal one of Glory, I by my Sins should banish my
self from both the Kingdom of Grace, and that of Glory that I my self, of my
own accord should forsake the eternal Joys, and choose the Torments of Hell, by
embracing Passions and despising Virtue!

The Kingdom of Grace, is to be in the Grace of God, and God in us by his
Mercy; to subdue our Passions, and by that means to make the inside suitable to
the outside; It is, that my Reason should govern my Passions, and the Spirit my
Reason, and to keep the Flesh mortified under that Dominion. The Kingdom of
Grace is that mine own Will and Appetites should be destroyed, as much as may
be, and that the Divine Will should rule Instead of it. O true Kingdom! O just
Empire, without the least show of Tyranny, where the Creator governs the
Creature, and where Reason keeps the Passions, and inferior. Faculties of the
Soul in subjection to it! O Kingdom of true and holy Peace, which knows nothing
but Quietness and inward Joy above all other Contentments!

The Kingdom of Grace is for God to be in the Soul, and the Soul in God; for
the Son to be in the Favor of his Father; for the Creature to find himself
beloved by the Creator; for the Servant to yield himself humble, obedient, and
resigned to the Will of his loving Lord, which is not only Grace, but Glory and
great Glory. In how great liberty is that happy Soul, that lives and acts thus
in the Grace of God! how much above all the Troubles and Miseries of this Life!
No torment, no pain, no disgust comes into this Kingdom, for there can be no
torment, pain or disgust but in the loss of it; nor can any one lose it, but he
that will, by forsaking Grace, to commit Sin. So long as a Man is in the Grace
of God, and does not lose his Grace and Mercy, all things else do neither add
to him, nor take from him, neither hurt him, nor concern him. Let the World
burn in Wars, abound in Misfortunes or shine in Felicity; Let this Man rise,
and the other fall; Let humane Affairs go as they will, and these temporal
transitory Kingdoms be in Peace or in Confusion. He from the height of his
Spiritual Kingdom looks down upon all with a quiet Resignation. Let all the
World join against it, and with the World, the Flesh and the Devil. Let
Affronts, Calumnies, and Persecutions arise; if he lose not God, and his Grace,
all the rest is but a greater increase of Grace, and a nearer approach to
Glory. Strive therefore to enter into this Kingdom, for only those that live in
it here, shall see the Face of God hereafter. Rather live tormented in it, than
be drawn out of it by deceitful Pleasures. Rather suffer thy self to be torn in
pieces, than to be brought under the Slavery and Miseries of Sin. Rather suffer
a thousand Torments in this holy militant Jerusalem, than make thy self a
wretched Slave in the infamous City Babylon. Forsake not those Squadrons that
are at the Gates of Heaven, to fly over to those, that are entering into the
Jaws of Hell. Each of these must go to their own place, either to Glory, or
eternal Torment. That they might not forsake this Kingdom of Grace, the Holy
Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors forsook their Lives; not to lose that, the
Baptist lost his Head, St. Peter chose his Cross, and the Apostle of the
Gentiles gave up his Neck to the Sword, St. Bartholomew gave his very Skin, and
finally all the Saints in Heaven chose Tribulations and Torments here upon
Earth, rather than to leave that sweet Kingdom of Grace. And what great matter
was it, that they lost here, since they recovered it an hundred fold in the
Kingdom of Glory? O happy Torments! O joyful Death, that is rewarded with
eternal Bliss! This Knowledge, and these Lights will God increase in thee, if
thou live humbly mortified and resigned, disposing thy self daily to receive
more Grace.

Of the Purity of Intentions.
O that I could see my self so secure in this Kingdom of Grace, as never to
enter into that sad and dismal Kingdom of Sin! But how can I be secure, so long
as I live in this miserable Life so full of Snares and Dangers? There can be no
security, where Man's Will is to act, which is so weak and frail, and so
unsteady. The World is full of Snares, there are more Stumbling Blocks, than
Steps. We carry within us the Nourishment of our own Miseries, and the Source
of our Passions is the cause of our Sins and Imperfections. But for all that,
Would thou persevere in this Kingdom of Grace, and go with full sail into the
Kingdom of Glory? Watch then, and pray, hope and fear, trust and persist. Let
thine Intentions be pure, and thy Conscience clean, and do all things as in the
Presence of God, and believe that the end of this short Voyage will be the
Haven of the Celestial Country, and of eternal Salvation.

Let thine Intentions be pure, (I repeat it again to thee) let thine Intentions
be pure, for thereby thy Passage shall be safe from Rocks and Tempests. If thy
Intention really be to serve God, and to please him in all things; thy
Practice, thy Words, thy Actions will also be to please him in all things. As
Matters go with thee internally, so will they also externally. If the Tree be
good, it gives good Fruit, and if evil, evil Fruit. An evil Tree cannot bring
forth that which is good, nor the good that which is evil. The Quality of the
Spiritual Tree is taken from that of the Intentions, and the Quality of Fruits
and Works from that of the Tree. O happy he, who has a clean and pure Heart,
that is, a clean and pure Intention! O happy he, who desires and loves nothing
but God, and his Service! for all the Exercises of such a Man will be to serve
and adore him.

Thus then if thou desire to persevere and to increase in the Spiritual Life,
let thy first rule be to purify thy Intention, for that gives Life to thy
Works, and Cleanness to thy Heart. If thine Eye be single, says God, all thy
Body will be full of Light, as if he had said, if the Intention be right, the
Body of all the Actions will be right, and shining in good Example. The Light,
that lightens thy Body, is thine Intention; if it be pure, it enlightens thee;
if otherwise, thou will walk in darkness. See! how a Lanthorn shines that has a
little Candle in it, it not only is clear it self, but gives light to all that
are round about it: So the Soul, that has a pure holy Intention within it, has
thereby all its Actions made holy, clear, and perfect. God is to be thy
Intention in all thou do, in all thou speak, in all thou think, and
whatsoever thou do, must be for God, with God, and through God.

Of Purity of Conscience.
If this be thy Intention, and thou have attained its Purity, thou shall easily
by the Grace of God attain Purity of Conscience also, or rather it may be said,
if thou have the one, thou already have the other also, for what is Purity of
Conscience, but Purity of Heart and Intention? If that be pure, thy Thoughts,
Words, and Actions, will be so likewise; and if they be pure, thy Heart and
Conscience are so too; yet Purity of Conscience signifies, not to consent to
any blemish or defect in thee, and when thou find any to throw it away
presently, and to wash it with tears; It signifies an attentive Care and
Vigilance to purify the Soul from all Sins and Imperfections, small as well as
great, and not to allow them entrance, or let them remain there, but to
confess, bewail, and forsake them; It signifies an implacable Enmity between
Innocence, Truth, and Sincerity of Heart, and Sins of all kinds, and a dissent
and contradiction to them without permitting them to make any stay in it. It
signifies an exact care to see and observe what passes in thy Soul, and not to
tolerate any thing in it, not only that is contrary, but that tends but to the
lessening thy desires to please God; It signifies a great disquiet and
uneasiness at any thing that offends God, and an open War against Sins without
having any Contentment or Satisfaction, till thou have thrown them out by
Penitence and Contrition.

Those that live and walk with this hatefulness, and with this desire are they,
which the Savior of Souls meant, when he said, Blessed are the pure, for they
shall see God, as if he had said, it is impossible to see God without purity of
Heart. Let a Man do works that are never so perfect and holy, let him be
liberal in Alms, visit Hospitals, pray, and suffer as much as he will, or do
any thing else; If his Heart and Conscience be not pure, it is impossible for
him to see or enjoy God, till he have cleansed and purified them. Into Heaven
no defect can enter, nothing but what is clear, shall be received into that
bright City, for a Man must enter there, as he is to live there. No Man can see
God in Glory, even though he were in Glory, unless his sight be made so clear
by purity of Life, as to be able by the Divine goodness to be raised to behold
God. Employ therefore all thy care to cleanse thy Heart and Conscience; not to
consent, that any Sins, Passions, or Imperfections should lodge there, but to
throw them out, and wash them off with tears. I do not say that thou should
have none, (though I wish it) but that thou should not entertain them, for it
is impossible in this sinful Life, that a Man should not fall into small, and
sometimes even into great Sins; but whether they be great or small, he ought to
detest them, as soon as they are perceived, and not to keep but to cast them
out instantly with humble Sorrow. Do not go to sleep with Sin in thine Heart,
before thou have washed it out with tears. Think how unsafe it would be for a
Man to sleep with a Viper in his Bosom, but it is far more dangerous to sleep
with Sin in the Soul. As the Sea casts out dead Bodies, so do thou cast Sins
out of thy Soul. See how long thou can keep a burning Coal in the Palm of
thine Hand, and even a less time suffer Sin to continue in thy Soul. As in the
other Life no Man can see God without a pure Heart; so in this Spiritual Life
seldom does a Man hearken to God, till he has cleansed his Conscience by
casting out his Sins. Sins and Passions are troublesome Companions, and make so
great a noise, that they disquiet and deafen the inward Senses. In the loud
noise of a Mill. I could not well hear the gentle voice of a Friend, who comes
to succor me in imminent danger; It is necessary the noise should cease, that
I may apply my attention to hear the voice of my Friend: If my Soul be diverted
with Passions and other Thoughts, how can it hear the amorous Invitations of
the eternal Word? How can his holy Inspirations enter, or work upon me, if I be
taken up and carried away with worldly Cares? If the Light of my Reason, and of
the Spirit be extinguished by my Passions, how shall I see God, or hear him,
when he speaks in my Heart? Thy Life is within thee, and therefore the
Government of it ought to be Internal and Spiritual. Thou ought to observe
thy inward Motions, and to hearken to the secret Voice of thy Master and
Redeemer, who comes to direct thee. His Precepts and divine Counsels are not
only to guide thee outwardly, but by them thou art to square all thy Thoughts,
Words and Actions. It is not only from our Spiritual Fathers and Teachers, that
we ought to receive direction, but we have also another Master, an inward and
secret Master, which is the Spirit of God, who is Superior to them and
enlightens them. That shall speak to thee, admonish, and reprehend, and guide
thee, and thou art to hearken to, and obey it, which thou will neither be
willing nor able to do, if thy Conscience be not pure, and if thou do not
listen attentively to it. That holy Master will govern thee with internal Light
and Knowledge, to which it is a great hindrance, if the Heart be drawn away by
Sin, whether great or small, but especially by Self-love, and a Fondness of the
Vanities of the World.

Pray therefore to God, that he would cleanse thy Heart, awaken, enlighten,
guide, and teach thee, and not suffer Sins or Passions to enter into thy Soul,
or if at any time through infirmity thou fallest into any, that he would give
thee Grace to bewail them, and to return to purity of Heart.

JVLY.
The First WEEK.
Of Temptations, and the Grace of God in them.
BUT methinks I hear thee complaining, and saying, Lord, I desire to please
thee, and would fain keep fast in this Kingdom of Grace, that I may not loose
that high Kingdom of Glory, nor be ungrateful for so great benefits; but my
weakness is very frail, and temptations are many, which cross and hinder my
works and my desires. In me every step is a danger, or, to speak more properly
a loss. The Flesh disturbs me, the Devil afrights me, and the World deceives
me. I feel a Law within me, which drags me away, and carries me after it, and
when I have a mind to that which is good, I find my self a Captive to that
which is evil; and though I know what is best, yet I am drawn to follow that
which is worst. I would fly even from my self, and yet I still find self
within me. O wretched Man! Who shall deliver me from that self, which has more
power over me, than I my self have.

Do not disturb thy self, thou have one within thee, who will defend thee from
thy self; great is the Labor, but greater the Assistance. If the Devil
persecutes thee, God helps thee. If the Flesh tempts thee, the Spirit
encourages thee; and if the World entices thee, the divine Light guides thee.
Suffer with resignation, and be not weary of suffering, for from thence will
come thy remedy and thy reward. Fear not Temptations when they come to thee,
but fear them, when thou go to them. If God permits them to come, he will
strengthen thee to resist them, and assist thee to conquer them; But take heed
of being in Temptation by thine own will and choice, for then thou will fall in
it. By how many steps thou go toward danger, by so many thou drawest nearer
to Sin. Believe me I give thee Caution. Thou art not so strong as David, nor so
wise as his Son Solomon, and yet both of them fell by going to Temptation. If
thou live with wariness, heed, and fear, be not afraid of those Temptations,
wherewith the Lord proves thee, for he does it to see the Bottom of thy Virtue.
If with the Left Hand he tempts, with the Right he helps thee; If with the one
he assails thee, with the other he supports thee. Would thou triumph without
getting the Victory? No Man is crowned in Peace, but he that with Valor,
Constancy and Perseverance endures the Hardships of War. Would thou live in
the Spiritual Life without Temptations and Tribulations? That is not to be
truly Spiritual. Take it therefore for a Temptation to be without temptation.
The stillest Peace uses to be the highest danger, and what seems to be safety,
is many times but deceit and vanity. The Devil lets thee alone to make thee
trust in thine own self, that he may the sooner, and the more certainly destroy
thee. That troublesome Enemy has his Stratagems, he withdraws to deceive thee,
and retires to come back with a fresh Assault. Sometimes he recreates thy
Senses, disposes thee to Tenderness, and outward Devotion, only to beget a
secret Pride in thee, and a foolish Confidence, that may carry thee to eternal
ruin. But do not thou consent to that, which is bad, but ask Strength of God,
and so thou will make the Bad to become Good. The Saints suffered Tribulation,
and the Savior of the World suffered Temptation, and do thou refuse to
suffer them? By going the same way thou shall come to the same end, and by
following thou shall attain. Do not believe, that without steering the same
course, thou shall arrive at the same Port, where they are entered. Do thou
think to find a particular way for thy self? That will be no way, but a
Precipice. Sufferings, Pains, Difficulties, and the Cross are the way to
Heaven, but in those Pains and Difficulties there is exceeding great
Consolation. Who art thou, that thou would not suffer, weak, wretched, and
faint-hearted Sinner? Who art thou? or what Man is there in the World, that can
be exempt from Troubles and Temptations? Man is born to Labor, and is full of
Misery, within him and without him, he is encompassed round therewith; but fear
not Tribulations or Hardships, be afraid of nothing but Sin. Believe me, there
is no other way to save thee, but the royal, holy, and perfect way of the
Cross. The Redeemer of Souls saves us by the Cross, He died upon the Cross, and
we must live under the Cross, to enjoy the Triumphs of the Cross. He from his
Passion came to his Resurrection, and by his Resurrection to his glorious
Ascension. Thou shall never be raised to the Life eternal, if thou do not
suffer for God in this temporal Life. Thou shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Glory, without striving here in the Kingdom of Grace. Do thou think, that by
avoiding to suffer for God, thou shall escape suffering? Thou deceivest thy
self, for they suffer most, that run furthest from God. O how much greater are
the Sufferings of those, that are so deceivd! how much more painful and
afflicting! The Sinner passes his whole Life in pains by reason of his Vices;
and so much the greater are his Torments, by how much the greater are those
Passions, which disquiet and molest his troubled Mind. Behold the loathsome
Diseases of the sensual Man, both of his Body and Soul! Behold the unclean
Surfeits of the Glutton! Behold the fiery Rage of the Angry and Revengeful! The
racking Cares of the Covetous! and the uneasy Emulations of the Proud! Behold
the frettings of the Envious Man! All of them live, or rather all of them die,
for how can they be said to live, that undergo such Anguish and Vexation? Then
behold the difference between him that suffers for God outwardly, and feels joy
and comfort inwardly. And how will thou grow in the Spiritual life without
Temptations and Tribulations? Thou can not only not grow, nor thrive, but not
so much as live in it. Would thou drive Sin out of thy Heart? It must be by
Mortification, or else it will still remain there. Would thou drive away thy
Passions? It must be by conquering Temptations. Would thou be fitted for the
Celestial Building? It must be by the Chisel and Mallet of Temptation and
Mortification. Would thou throw out Vicious Habits? It must be by exercising
contrary Virtues. Would thou live humbled? It is necessary that thou should
be afflicted. Would thou know what thou art? By suffering Temptations thou
shall perceive thine own Frailty and Misery. Would thou cast Self-love out of
thine unquiet Heart? Deliver thy self up to an holy Self-denial. Would thou
give thy self wholly to God, thy Savior and Redeemer? Deny thy self, and
refuse to satisfy thine own desires. Finally, would thou have Glory? Take up
the Cross, embrace Sufferings, love Tribulations, do not defend thy self from
the Cross, but under the Cross, and by the Cross; do not defend thy self from
Sufferings, but under them by the power of Grace; do not defend thy self from
the Temptations which God sends thee, but from the evil of those he sends thee.

That it is no easy matter to be saved, but that it is necessary to fight.
Believe it, he does but deceive thee, who tells thee, that thou may enjoy
God in another Life, without Suffering for him in this Life. He does but cheat
thee, who says, there are two Glories for the Soul, one of Temporal Delights,
the other of Celestial. He deludes thee, who says, without any Tribulations
thou shall enjoy that Glory, which our Lord entered into by suffering them. He
deceives thee, who makes thee believe, there is another way for thee, than that
which all the Saints passed through. He cheats thee, that says, It is an easy
matter for thee to live ill, and to die well; to take thy fill of Pleasures
here, and to partake in Eternal Joys hereafter. He abuses thee, that says, it is
an easy thing to be saved, and that the Gate of Heaven stands open for him at
his death, who has lived wickedly all his life. No, the Savior of Souls does
not tell thee so, but he says, That narrow is the way, that leads to Salvation.
He says, We must strive to enter, because the gate is strait. He says, The
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and that the violent take it by force. He
tells thee, His Flock is a little Flock; that many are called, but few chosen.
All this speaks no easiness, nor temporal and sensual Sweetness, but Rigor,
Courage, Constancy, Repentance, Sorrow, and a Life of Crosses and Tribulations.
Believe it, the strictest Livers are at no small labor to obtain Salvation.
Strive therefore, since it was not without cause, that so many Holy Persons
before thee have undergone the most terrible Difficulties and Afflictions in
their way to Heaven.

Of the Grace of God.
This indeed is a sharp unpleasing Doctrine, and very unwelcome to our Nature;
but if it be an Enemy to our Nature, it is a Friend to our Spirit, and to that
Grace, which brings Glory to our Nature. It is a safe Doctrine, because it is
taught by our Redeemer. It presses Men to take care of their Souls, that they
may seek God, and not forsake him; that they may serve him, and not offend him.
But all this which is so difficult, and even impossible to our frailty, is
sweet and easy by the Grace of God. It is that Grace, which fills and
supports, assists and conquers, convinces and disposes, does and perfects all.
The most powerful Grace of God, is that, which sweetens all Labors, and
renders them not only tolerable, but delightful. This Grace makes the good
desire Sufferings, as the bad do Pleasures, and causes them to find Joys in
their Austerities, when the wicked find Trouble in the midst of their Delights.
Grace encourages, sustains, comforts, and gives an inward sweetness to
Sufferings, which makes them more savoury and pleasant, than the most pretended
Enjoyments of this World. Grace in the Spiritual Life strengthens the weak,
enlightens the blind, eases the afflicted, comforts the sorrowful, and gives
joy to the disconsolate. Grace supports the Soul, animates, guides,
accompanies, raises it when it is sinking, leads it in the way, and crowns it
in the end. O most powerful Grace of God! thou admirable effect of his
Goodness. All is owing to thee; How many steps are taken in the Spiritual Life,
how many affections and desires are stirred up, how many good actions are done,
how much perseverance is exercised, how many tears are shed, and how much love
is enkindled, all is owing to God's Holy Grace. Fear not therefore Tribulations
if Grace be with thee, for by it Temptations and Tribulations will be rendered
of no force, and thou shall conquer all by its Effectual and Omnipotent Power.
I can do all things, says the Apostle of the Gentiles, through him that
strengthens me, for then he was strengthened by Grace; Not I, says he, but
the Grace of God, which is in me; as if he had said, I work, but I am carried,
guided, and assisted by Grace, for without it I neither know, nor can do any
thing, being of my self unable so much as to think one good thought.

Behold with what facility David lamented his fall, by the help of Grace!
Behold how quickly St. Peter washed away his sin with tears by the help of
Grace! Behold with what Resolution Mary Magdalene broke off the dissoluteness
of her sinful Life, by the help of Grace! Behold how suddenly St. Paul from a
Persecutor, became a joyful sufferer of Persecution, and the Prodigy of the
World, by the help of Grace! See the World converted and reformed, and Heaven
peopled in a short time by the Apostles, through the help of Grace! Now that
same Grace, which made them Saints, may make thee one also, though now thou art
a sinner. It Is the same Grace that favors and assists thee, and is not less
powerful now, but is as kind, as sweet, as strong, and effectual, as it was
then. Grace does not grow old, but continues the same, or rather increases.
Strive then, fight, and persevere, for he that without Grace is but mere
weakness, may by it become a powerful Conqueror.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Glory of the Blessed.
THough the former Doctrine was sad and disconsolate, I hope this last has
cheered and comforted thee. We must still walk between hope and fear; for the
doubt of fear restrains us, and the light of hope sets us forward. To
facilitate the way of the Spirit is good and sound Counsel, and of possible
performance, for it is made easy by Grace, and therefore a Christian ought not
to be afraid of it; but to facilitate Salvation, and to make it consistent with
a loose and licentious Life; to make it attainable without seeking Heaven in
good earnest, without Repentance and Contrition through Grace, and without
conquering the Passions, and banishing them from the Soul; to make it easy, I
say, to be saved that way, is a most plain Fallacy, and dangerous Deceit. St.
Paul tells us, That through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and therefore the steps that lead to Glory are Tribulations. And
believe me, even so it is purchased at a very cheap rate, for all we can suffer
in this Life full of Miseries, is not worthy of the Glory that shall be
revealed, which he obtains, who suffers willingly for God. What can our
Sufferings be in comparison of those Enjoyments? How light are they all in
respect of the eternal weight of Glory? What an inexpressible Happiness must it
be, to see ones self admitted to be one of the Citizens of the Celestial
Jerusalem; to see ones self in the ravishing Company of Saints and Angels; to
see ones self with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and
Virgins; to see all those Just and Holy Spirits singing Hymns and Praises to
the Glory of God? And yet all this is less (though unspeakably great) than to
see the holy Humanity of our Lord, that gracious Countenance, those Divine
Eyes, whose brightness darkeneth the Sun, and enlightens all the Creatures;
those Hands and Feet, and that pierced Side, from whence, as Blood heretofore,
there now comes forth the Splendor of Glory, the Stream of Grace, the Joy and
Comfort of all the Saints. And still this is less, than to see God the Father,
God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons in One Essence, the
beginning and the end of all Creatures, (that ineffable Mystery, which exceeds
all created Understandings) before whom all the Angels and Saints prostrate
themselves in Adoration. This is that, which amazes the Pen, and humbles the
highest Meditations, in contemplation whereof the most lofty Cherubims and
Seraphims lose themselves, not being able fully to comprehend it.

From this Fountain and Original of Divinity and Goodness proceed all the
Felicities of those holy Citizens in that Triumphant Jerusalem; from that
Source of Joy and Delights flow all their Delights and Pleasures; from that
Infinite, Omnipotent, and Supreme Essence, which is Incomprehensible in all
it is Attributes, springs the Original Glory of the Blessed. All their Power and
Being arises from his Power and Being. The sight of that Goodness, that Wisdom,
and Charity is the cause of theirs. From that Light proceeds their Light. Only
to see one of his Attributes, whether his Goodness, Justice, or Mercy, (though
it is impossible to see any one of them without seeing the rest) is enough to
give inexpressible Glory to all the Creatures.

What a blessedness also is it to turn the Eyes upon the Order and Beauty of
that whole Celestial Court? To see the Martyrs crowned with Ensigns of their
own Valor; to see the Holy Confessors adorned with their Virtues; to see the
Virgins with their Palms and Crowns; only to see the Order wherein they are
ranked, and wherewith they Adore and Praise the Lord; to see the Nine Quires of
Angels with the Three admirable Hierarchies; only to see the great number of
beatified Souls and Spirits, every one in his Place and Employment serving
their Creator, and the Author of all their Happiness with unspeakable
Contentment. What a wonderful and high Felicity is this? Then what Peace, what
Contentment, what Joy, what Quiet, what Sweetness, what Union, what Conformity,
what Ardent love of God, and of his Creatures, is there in that blessed City?

Finally, would thou see what Heaven is? Look what all the Delights of this
World are, freed from any mixture of Disgust, and thou shall find, that in
respect of them, they are but Pains and Torments. Think what it is to hear the
sweetest Voices, to smell the sweetest Perfumes, and to enjoy whatever can
delight the rest of the Senses; think of an Heart full of Joy and Contentment,
an Understanding with all the Powers of the Soul filled with all the Delights
and Pleasures, that this World can afford, it is all but Sadness and
Affliction, Pain and Anguish in the highest degree in comparison of those
Eternal Joys.

Would thou know what Glory is? Then consider, who it is, that gives it to
the Saints. Think how Infinite the Power of God is, it is his Power that gives
that Glory. Think how Infinite is his Wisdom, it is that Wisdom, which gives
that Glory. Think how Infinite is his Goodness, it is that Goodness, which gives
that Glory. If then an Infinite Power, an Infinite Wisdom, and an Infinite
Goodness join together to give Glory, what must that Glory be, which is the
effect of such a Power, of such a Wisdom, and of such a Goodness? If God gives
to every one of his Saints in his just proportion according to his Love, his
Power, and his Wisdom, what Riches shall he give, who is infinitely Rich? What
Wisdom and Light shall he give, who is Infinitely Wise? And what Joy shall he
give, who is Infinitely Good and Happy? If the necessitous Person measures his
hopes by the Power and Hand of the Liberal; what shall the Joy be, that is
given by an Infinite Power, which is willing to give that which is Infinite?

Would thou see what Joys those are, which God will give to the Blessed in
Heaven? Think how great the Punishments are, that are inflicted upon the Damned
in Hell. If those are so sharp and intolerable for the pain of them to the
wicked, how sweet and superabundant will be the Enjoyments of the good? Though
his Justice and his Mercy are Essentially equal, yet in the effects his Mercy
is greater than his Justice; for he punishes in Hell less than Sinners deserve,
and rewards in Heaven more than the Saints deserve. What Glory shall he give in
Heaven, who punishes so terribly in Hell with everlasting Fire?

Would thou see the Joys which he confers upon the Elect, who serve him in
this Life? Think what he suffered for them, and what he did to save them. If he
gave his Blood and Life upon the Cross for the bad, as well as for the good;
What will he give in Heaven to the good alone? And if he underwent so many
pains and torments in this Life, only to purchase Eternal Happiness for them;
what Contents, what Delights will he give them, when they come to enjoy it? The
difficulty, the greatness, and the incomprehensibleness of that infinite Ransom
was, that God gave his Life upon the Cross for Man; but it is an easy thing
for him to bestow those Joys, after he has paid the Purchase. How great is that
Glory, which he bought for the Just, when the Price of it was Infinite, and
that Infinite Price was the Blood of the Eternal Son of God? But after all in
my judgment, the most proportionable measure to judge of it by, is St. Paul's
Rule, The eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

See then how light and trivial are the pains and torments of this Life,
whereby we arrive at those high Contentments. But to the greatness and
immensity of this Joy, Delight, Sweetness, Happiness, and Glory, is to be added
the Eternal duration thereof. To enjoy God for ever, to be freed from
Sufferings, and to live possessed of Joys for ever, for ever, for ever! an
Happiness that has no end; a Glory that shall never cease; Delights that time
cannot consume, having no power either upon them, or those that enjoy them. In
this uncertain Mortal Life our Delights (if there be any) either end of
themselves, or put an end to the Life of him that enjoys them. They end by
their duration, and perish even whilst they are lasting, and destroy him that
takes pleasure in them, and are pain and death in the Image of Delights. But O
the Eternal and Celestial Joys of Heaven, which live and last, and grow in
their duration! They change Time to Eternity; their Being is Continuance; they
last without ending, and are always beginning anew; they are impossible to be
lost, and as impossible to be expressed. For who is able to declare what it is
to be Eternal? Since Eternity is an immense Ocean, whose bottom cannot be
found; a most obscure Abyss, wherein are sunk all the Faculties of Humane
Understanding; an intricate Labyrinth, out of which there is no issue; a
perpetual, invariable, and indeficient Present, without what was, or what shall
be; a great Year, which ever begins, and is never to end; Finally, that which
never can be comprehended or conceived. Dionysius the Areopagite, speaking of
God, confesses that it cannot be said, what he is, but only what he is not, and
besides what he is. In like manner, Eternity cannot better be declared, than by
what it is not, and besides what it is. Eternity is not Time, it is not Space,
it is not an Age, it is not a Million of Ages; but it is more than Time, Space,
or Millions of Ages. The Life, wherein thou now art, and which must shortly
have an end, is not Eternity; the Health which thou at present enjoyest, is not
eternal; thy Pleasures and Entertainments are not eternal; thy Possessions and
Treasures are not eternal; that wherein thou trustest is not eternal; the Goods
of this World, in which thou so much delightest, are not eternal. Thou must
leave them all. A far greater thing is Eternity, above Kingdoms, above Empires,
and above all Felicities. It Is this that makes the Joys of Heaven so
inestimably valuable, and so infinitely excellent. Had they not an eternal
durance, they would be incomparably less desirable, but Eternity being annexed
to the fruition of them, enhances their worth above all possible comparison. If
we were to enjoy all the pleasures of the Senses for a thousand Myriads of
Years, but were to pass no further, we ought to change them all for one only
Pleasure, that would last for ever. Why then exchange we not one perishing
Pleasure of the Earth, which is to last but for a moment, for all those immense
Joys, which we are to possess in Heaven for a World without end? All the
Temporal Goods of the World might well be quitted for the securing of only one,
that were eternal; how is it then that we secure not all the eternal, by
forbearing now and then one, which is Temporal? It would infinitely exceed the
Dominion of the whole World, so long as the World shall last, to be Lord, but
of one little Cottage for Eternity. Time holds no comparison with it; all that
is Temporal, how great soever, being to be esteemed vile and base; and all that
is Eternal, how small soever, high and precious. And that we may enlarge this
Consideration as much as possible, the very Being of God himself, if it were
but for a time, might be quitted for some other infinitely less excellent,
which were Eternal. And shall then the Covetous Man satisfy himself with those
poor Treasures, which Death may rob him of to morrow, despising for them the
Eternal Treasure of Heaven? For certain if God should promise us to enjoy the
pleasure of one only Sense for ever in the next Life, we ought for it to part
with all the pleasures we have in this: How huge a folly is it then, that
promising all those immense Joys of Heaven, we will not for all them together
part with some of those poor ones on Earth? That having a sure Prospect of an
everlasting Recompense, we will not for the sake and attainment of it despise
temporal and uncertain Possessions? In Eternal Blessings, besides their
perpetual continuance, there is likewise this Advantage, that they are free
from change, so as they can neither end nor diminish; and that whilst Temporal
Goods change and consume themselves, they remain in the same firm, stable, and
immutable condition for all Eternity. Compare therefore the brevity and
inconstancy of the things of this Life, with the unchangeableness and eternal
duration of those of the other. Do but seriously observe the difference betwixt
those two words, Now and Ever. The Fools of this World say, Let us now rejoice;
The Wise and Virtuous say, It is better that we forbear our Pleasures now, that
we may hereafter enjoy Eternal Happiness. The Worldlings say, Let us now live
daintily, and fare deliciously; The Servants of Christ say, Let us dye in the
Flesh, that we may live ever without change. The Sinners say, Let us now enjoy
the World; They who fear God, say, Let us fly from this unstable World, that
we may for ever enjoy the Celestial. Compare these two, and see who are the
wiser; those who aim only at what endures but this momentary Instant Now; or
those which look after Eternity, which lasts for Ever; those who shall suffer
eternally without any Profit at all, or those who are content to suffer a
little in this World, for so great a gain, as is the Kingdom of Heaven.

In all respects therefore the eternal Goods are incomparably the most
excellent, and most transcendently superior to all perishing Delights. Aspire
therefore unto them, and strive to Purchase them, even at the loss of all which
is Temporal, and in this Life as much as may be to imitate the same Eternity,
which is to be done by the Practice of those three Virtues, which St. Bernard
recommends to us in these words: With Poverty of Spirit, with Meekness, and
Contrition of Heart is renewed in the Soul a Similitude and Image of that
Eternity, which embraces all times. For with Poverty of Spirit we merit the
future; with Meekness we possess the present; and with the Tears of Repentance
we recover what is past. Let all thine Actions be accompanied with this
Thought, For Ever; that for ever shall be rewarded what thou do well, and
with this consideration thou will not only animate thy self to do good works,
but to do them well. If in all thy deeds thou would but propose to thy self
Eternity, and wholly respect it, thou would find little difficulty in any
good works thou go about. Fix therefore thine Eyes and Thoughts upon that,
which is to be given us, for that which may be done in a moment. Blessed be
God, who bestows upon us a Reward without end, for Troubles so short, that they
scarcely have a beginning. The Benefit which David reaped by this
consideration, was a firm Resolution to mend his Life, and change into a new
Man, animating himself to a greater Observance, and a more high Perfection. And
so in that Psalm, wherein he says, That he thought upon the days of Old, and
the years of Eternity, he adds immediately the effect of his Meditation,
saying, That he was to begin anew. Considering that Eternity never ends, but
still begins, and that it is wholly a beginning, he determined with such new
fervor to give a beginning to a more perfect Life, that he would never flag or
be dismayed in the prosecution of it; willing in this to imitate Eternity,
which as it is ever beginning, so he would ever begin to deserve it. And what
great matter is it, if that which we are to enjoy for ever be ever in
beginning, that we should likewise be ever beginning to deserve it? Our Reward
is not to fail us, and therefore there is no reason, why we should fail, and
grow weary in our Service and Endeavors. Our Joy is ever to begin, why should
not then our Endeavors be ever beginning? The Repose we hope for, shall never
have an end; why should then our Deservings ever cease? We ought never to look
back upon our Labors past, but still to animate our selves to labor anew for
God and his Service, as did the Apostle St. Paul, who says of himself, That he
did forget what was past, that he did enlarge his heart and mind, extending it
for that which is to come; which the Apostle spoke in a time when he had
suffered much, and done such Services to God in the good of Souls, that he had
already labored more than all the Apostles. After that he had entered into the
Synagogues of Damascus, and publicly preached Jesus Christ with the most
evident danger of his Life; After that he had converted many People in Arabia,
Tarsus, and Antioch; After he had distributed great Alms, gathering them with
much labor, made long Journeys, and brought them unto the Poor in Jerusalem;
After the suffering of innumerable Persecutions, and after infinite more
Services performed for the Church; After all these it seemed unto him, that he
had suffered nothing, done nothing for Christ, and he forgot it all, as if it
had been the first day of his Conversion, determining still to do more, to
suffer more, to labor more, to begin anew, esteeming himself after so many
Labors and Services an useless, unprofitable Servant, and to be far short of
deserving that Eternal Blessedness, which is reserved for the Faithful in
Glory. And indeed what proportion does a whole Life of Labors and Sufferings
bear to an everlasting Reward, and never-ending Joys? What Conditions can
thou think too rigid to be performed, or what Calamities too hard to be
undergone, for the attainment of an Immortal and Incorruptible Crown? If we
would but allow this Point it is due consideration, how slight should we think
all the Evils and Troubles of this World? How inconsiderable are all Pains and
Difficulties to them that have a Prospect of those future Beatitudes?

Let me see thee, O God, in thy Glory, and let me suffer a thousand Torments in
this Life. till I come to see thee. Let me see you, O Blessed Angels, in
Heaven, and let me suffer upon Earth, till I come to see you. Let me be
admitted into your blessed Company, O happy Saints, hereafter, and let me
suffer, whatever ye suffered, here. Come Pains and Punishments, so I may but
see those Eternal Joys and Contentments. Let me endure any thing in this Vale
of Miseries, so I may at last come to the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
abounding in all manner of Joys and Comforts. Finally, O my Jesus, do
whatsoever thou will with me here, so that I may but at last see, adore,
praise, and enjoy thee for ever there.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Imitation of the Life of our Blessed Savior; and of his Mysteries.
IF the Examples of Men, nay, even of the worst, may help very much toward the
making us good, being incited thereby to take care to avoid their evil Action;
and if those of good Men are so prevalent to draw us unto Virtue, what
excellent Virtues may be acquired by imitating those which are to be seen
through the whole course of the Life of our Blessed Savior, who has commanded
us to learn of him? And whither should we go but to the Life and Passion of our
Blessed Redeemer, for the attaining of that Glory, which he has purchased for
us with his most precious Blood? Where shall we find those Virtues, which we
ought to practice in the Kingdom of Grace, which is the way to it, but in his
holy Imitation? Where those Merits, which must give Life and Value to all the
best Actions we can possibly perform, but in the Merits and Sufferings of his
Cross? And where the Grace, that must Animate, Quicken, and Fortify our
Nature, but in that which he obtained for us by those Sufferings, and by that
Cross?

And thus, would thou have Glory? Then go strait to the Passion of our Lord.
Would thou improve thy self in good and holy Customs? Fix the Eyes of thy
Consideration upon the passages of his most Holy Life. Would thou know how to
Fight and Conquer? Behold his Battles and his Victories. Would thou walk in
the way of Eternal Life? Follow him in those holy steps which he has trod
before thee. Would thou overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, those
Enemies of the Cross? Take up the Cross and follow him, who goes before thee
carrying it upon his own shoulders. Do thou desire Light and Knowledge, the
Fire of Charity, the Fervor of Devotion, and to banish all Wickedness and
Imperfection from thy Soul? Then contemplate the Mysteries of the Blessed
Jesus; for in them thou shall find Light, Joy, and Company; Fervency, Grace,
and Devotion. Go on, and continue this Holy Meditation, and it shall fill thy
Soul with Treasures of Spiritual Comfort.

Of the Mystery of the Incarnation.
And first, behold and consider the Eternal Son of God, Coeternal,
Co-omnipotent, and Infinitely Wise with the Father, coming forth from the
Father (yet without leaving him) to be made Man; the Holy Ghost in this high
Mystery cooperating with the Father and the Son, for the Three Divine Persons,
who concurred in the Creation of Man, concurred also in his Reparation and
Redemption. Consider how he sets forth accompanied with the whole Court of
Heaven, and takes Flesh in the chaste Womb of the most pure and perfect Virgin
that Nature ever saw, the most Blessed Virgin Mary, the Honor of Nazareth, the
Glory of Jerusalem, and the Joy of all Israel.

Behold that unspeakable Union between the Divinity and the Humanity; behold
the Eternal Word clothing himself with our Nature, and espousing himself to it
in that Virgin Bride-bed. Here thou may know what thou owe to thy Creator
and Savior, who for the love of thee, and for thy Remedy, made himself Man,
took on him the form of a Servant, and subjected himself to all the Labors and
Miseries, to which Mankind is liable; and together with our Nature loaded
himself likewise with all their Pains and Punishments; and which is more, being
Innocence itself, he took upon him all their Sins also, to suffer for them.
Consider thus, what God did for thee, and then consider likewise what thou
owe to God for having done all this for thee. That the Immense, the
Omnipotent, and the Infinitely Wise should become Man for the Redemption of
Man! That those two Extremes so distant and distinct should be conjoined; that
the Nature of Man, which is Frailty and Misery, should be united to the Divine
Person of the Eternal Son of God, which is the Supreme and Sovereign Deity!
What greater cause can there be of Astonishment and Admiration? Men use to say,
when they would express any thing impossible, Heaven and Earth shall meet,
before this can come to pass. Consider how much greater a thing is God's
joining the Humanity with the Divinity for my sake, than the meeting of Heaven
and Earth. Can there be a greater Favor, than that God to show his love to us,
should do impossibilities? Could Omnipotency want other means to Save and
Redeem Mankind? Could not his Infinite Wisdom have contrived other ways for the
Salvation of the Sons of Adam, without engaging himself in this
incomprehensible expression of Love? Yes, most probably. For to him that is
Allpowerful, the most difficult things were very easy, and to him that is
Infinitely Wise, they were also most clear and manifest; but his excessive Love
would for the Salvation of Man, give that which was not precisely necessary,
and having it in his power to do less, for their sakes he would needs do more.

O more than Infinite Goodness! O Love that exceedest all Consideration! That
thou the Immense, the Omnipotent, and Infinite God should be made Man, for
Man! That thou should so have limited thy self, being the unbounded Creator
of all things both in Heaven and Earth! That thou should be reduced to so
short and narrow a space; Thou, who comprehendest the whole Creation within thy
self, and yet have infinite room within that unmeasurable comprehension! That
thou should become passible, being by thy Divine Nature incapable of Labor,
Pains, and Sufferings! And not only passible, but already beginning actually to
suffer, being Innocence and Goodness itself, and the very Original of all
Goodness and Innocence! This does not only amaze Man's Understanding, but even
that of the highest Cherubims; and only that same God can comprehend it, who
celebrated and performed this high and Sovereign Mystery.

Now let us come back to our selves, and consider, what is it for Man, sinful
Man, to suffer, that drags so many Chains of Passions and Wickednesses, (it
being just that he should suffer for them) since this Divine Lord suffers a
close Restraint and Imprisonment in the Virgin's Womb? What is it for Man to
humble himself for God's sake, seeing God for Man's sake humbled himself so
far, as even to become Man? What a small thing is it for Man to shut himself up
in a Cell, or to hide himself in a strait Enclosure in hope that he shall come
forth to the enjoyment of Eternal Liberty, since God the Son imprisons himself
so closely for nine Months to come forth to suffer so many ways for Thirty and
three years, that he might purchase and obtain that very Liberty for Man? What
is it for the low, the mean, the vile, and the unworthy to humble himself;
since the Divine, the Immense, the Omnipotent, the Infinite, and the most High
has abased himself to so great a degree? Draw from hence that Humility, which
after a certain manner thou ought to be proud of, as an Honor; since thou
do that which God himself did, for it must needs be always a great Honor to
do that which has been done by that Eternal Majesty. Behold what thankfulness
thou owe to that unspeakable Goodness, for that wonderful expression of his
Love, in the Incarnation of the Son of the Eternal God, and how it can be
possible for Man with sufficient gratitude to acknowledge, that God should make
himself Man for the Redemption of Man, that he should come down from Heaven to
Earth, to make Earth an Inheritor of Heaven?

This in my Opinion was the greatest of all the expressions of God's Love and
Kindness; in this was the greatest Conquest of his Charity; in this it was that
he measured the most unmeasurable distance. When once he was made Man, to
suffer for Man was but an Humane distance, although a very vast one, because
that Man was God; but that being God, he should make himself Man, was a Divine
distance, and that so beyond all excess, that for the measuring of it, it was
necessary that Omnipotency itself should yield to the greater power of Love.
When once he had made himself passible by becoming Man, it was so natural for
him to suffer, that if he would have freed his Humanity from it, it must have
been by the help of his Divinity; but for him, being God, to make himself Man,
that he might become passible; this was a Prodigy more than Divine, and which
does almost seem incredible. Those that are of High and Noble Birth avoid to
come near the Plebeians and Vulgar sort; those that are Rich, scorn to have any
thing to do with the Poor; and those that are Wise, despise to talk with the
Ignorant. But thou, O Eternal Wisdom, Riches, and Nobility, not only came
near to our Poverty, our Baseness, and our Frailty, but cloathed'st thy self
therewith, to instruct, to enrich, and to enoble our Nature. From henceforth,
Lord, we ought to learn from thy Divinity, to humble and abase our selves, and
to become Poor, that we may imitate thee in thy Humanity.

Of the Birth of our Lord.
Behold now, when the appointed time for the Birth of the Messiah was come, how
the Eternal Son of God, the Author of our Nature, to Honor and Redeem it,
after having so long suffered that close Imprisonment in the pure Womb of an
humble Virgin, was humbly born in the Stable of an Inn, and laid in a Manger.
He was born in a Stable amongst Beasts, coming to live amongst brutish Men; and
he was laid in a Manger, that was to be the Food of Souls; and in an Inn, the
common receptacle of all Comers, that all might have access to him, who was the
common Savior of all Mankind. Behold that poor Cottage of Bethlehem, already
transformed into a Heaven, and his supposed Father the chaste Joseph, with the
Blessed Virgin his Mother, kneeling to adore the Child of her Bowels, who also
was her Maker, being the Creator of the whole World. Behold all the Evangelical
Spirits, busy in worshipping the Lord God, and in calling the Shepherds, to
acknowledge their true and eternal Shepherd. The Angels sing, Glory to God on
high, on Earth Peace, and good will toward men, exalting that Humility, which
had laid itself so low, and manifesting his Divinity at the same time that his
Humanity appeared. Enter thou also with them, O my Soul, to adore the Divine
Son of God, who had now clothed himself with the Nature of Man, and filled it
with greater Humanity and Love, than ever till that time it was capable of:
Come thou therefore with love, and lay aside thy fears; if thou art a Shepherd
to others, thou art one of his Sheep. This chief Eternal Shepherd comes to call
and to seed, not only the Sheep, but their Shepherds also. Draw near, O my
Soul, to that Manger, for his Deity and his Humility would have no greater
Throne, to the end that thou might the better approach it. Seeing thy
baseness, his Divine Nature abased itself to the uttermost, to the end that the
baseness of thine might attain to so high a Greatness and Sovereignty. Draw
near, my Soul, be not afraid, for his tender Mother holds him out to thee in
her Arms, and calls thee to his Humanity, lest his Divinity should affright
thee.

O Infant God, the Joy and Consolation of Mankind! O Infant God, the Light of
Eternity, and Comfort of the Universe! O Infant God, the unspeakable Delight of
all Creatures, and the sweetest Gladness of Souls! Why should not I suffer for
thee, since thou came purposely into the World to suffer for me? O Immortal,
and yet Mortal, Child, wherefore art thou in this Stable, wherefore weeping and
suffering in this Manger, since thou art the Author of Grace, and of all that
is Graceful, the Author of Delight, of Joy, and Gladness? Were it not better, O
beautiful Infant, were it not fitter that Sin (that is I) should suffer, than
thou, who art Innocence itself? Were it not fitter that the wicked should be in
pain, than that thy Goodness should endure it? What have thou done, O tender
Infant, that thou bewailest the faults of others, and make the punishments of
them thine own? Will thou, O sweetest Goodness, wash my defiled Soul with thy
Tears? Will thou, O lovely Child, by suffering Cold, inflame the coldness of my
Heart; or do thou feel that cold, to reproach the coldness of my Devotion? O
Glory and Comfort of my Soul! Would God it were so clean and pure, that I might
offer it instead of Swathes to enfold and to embrace thy tender Body. Would God
it were full of Spiritual Flowers, and sweet smelling Virtues, that I might lay
them in that Manger instead of that straw, which was honored with bearing upon
it that Divine Eternal Grain, which is the Food and Nourishment of all that is
created. But, O Holy and Eternal Infant, I have nothing in me to offer thee but
Thorns; nothing but Sins and Miseries in my Soul, and it is not just to
anticipate those Thorns, which must one day Crown thy sacred Head; nor to begin
so early to hurt that tender Body with them. O thou that art my Happiness and
my Glory, how soon do my Sins begin thy Punishment! How soon does thy Love lie
suffering between two Beasts, dying for the love of Man, who within few years
art to suffer Death between two Men? How soon, O my Jesus, after thy Birth, art
thou in the company of Beasts, who art to live amongst Beasts, and to dye
amongst Beasts of a more cruel kind? These at thy Birth are much more innocent,
for how brutish soever they be, yet the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Master's Crib; but they would neither know nor receive their Savior, but first
they scourge and buffet, and then nail their Redeemer to the Cross. Why do
thou weep, O Heavenly Child? Yet since it is natural to thee to weep, because
thou have taken our Nature; weep, because I do not weep, to the end that I may
weep with thee; since thou sighest, let it be because I do not sigh; since thou
feel pains, let it be, because I am insensible of thy pains, and let them
beget in me a deep sense of my unworthiness, that thou should suffer them for
my sake. Let those Tears of thine become my Remedy and my Rejoicing; transfer
them from thine eyes to mine, and as they wash thy beautiful Cheeks, let them
also wash my polluted Soul. Transfer the love of thy tender heart to this
obdurate heart of mine, and grant as it offends thee, so it may infinitely
grieve for having offended thee, and desire with passionate longing to adore
and to embrace thee. Let the thought of that frosty Season, wherein thou were
born, thaw this frozen heart of mine into a love of thee, that sufferedst that
frost for me, who am benumbed with one more hard and lasting; for that
continued some few weeks perhaps, but this of my heart has continued many
years. O that I had suffered it for thee, dear Child! for the most rigorous
frost that is felt for thy sake, is Warmth, is Love, and is not Ice, but Fire
to kindle and inflame my heart. Thou were born for my Happiness, and for my
Remedy, Grant, O dear Lord, that such a Repentance; such a Sorrow, and such a
Contrition may be born in my Soul, as may prepare and fit me for my Remedy, and
grant that the light and power of those Beams of Love, which dart from the
beautiful Countenance of thy Humanity, may drive away the darkness of Sin and
Infidelity from my Soul, which thou came to banish from thence, and may
kindle in me such a fire of love toward thee, as nothing may ever be able to
extinguish it.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the other Mysteries of our Lord till his Preaching; and first, of
Circumcision.
IT is hard to get out of this Cottage, that was honored with the Birth of our
Lord, which is the sweetest Mystery, and filled with the softest Expressions of
his Love; but there is a necessity of waiting upon him through the other
demonstrations of it; and because he came to Redeem us, it is very fit we
should follow him, that we may attain that Redemption. It seemed a small thing
to his Love, to shed tears for us in the cold he was exposed to, by the
openness of that inconvenient place; but he also shed his blood already for us,
by being wounded with the Legal Knife. O tender Infant, how soon do thou pour
out the blood of thy most precious Veins for my sake? O, who would not wish to
be so happy, to spend the last drop of his for thine? My sins gave sharpness to
that Knife, which was the Instrument of thy pain in this Mystery, and that
blood was spilt by my Offenses, and by thy Loving Kindness. As they Circumcise
thy Flesh, O Eternal Good of Souls, do thou Circumcise my wickedness. Lord, cut
away my Vices and Deformities; Take away the Old Man, O Lord, form and reform
the New-Grant that I may cease to do evil, and begin to do good, that by so
doing, I may live for evermore.

The Adoration of the Kings.
They bring back our Savior wounded with Love and Grief, as well as with that
knife, unto the Stable and the Manger; unless it was perhaps in that very
place, that he poured forth his blood, as well as his tears. There they stay,
till three Kings come to Adore him, in requital of that one, who sought to
destroy him. O how much greater a Kingdom did they find at the feet of this
Celestial Infant in the Manger, than in their own Royal Thrones. How much
higher were they advanced by laying themselves prostrate before him, and to
what an height were they exalted by having so humbled themselves? By throwing
down their Crowns at his feet, they encompassed their Heads with brighter
Crowns, and those not earthly, but Crowns of Grace and Glory.

They presented unto that Divine Child things Temporal; and he gave them things
Heavenly and Eternal. The Gifts they presented to him, were but transitory, but
those he filled them with, were permanent and everlasting. They Offer to him
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, and he in exchange gives them the Golden Virtue
of Charity, the Incense of pure and fervent Devotion, and for Myrrh, the Grace
of Mortification, whereby dying to this World, they began to live to that
other, which never shall have end. O how much greater were those Gifts, which
were bestowed on them by that little Child, than those that were offered to him
by those great Kings! They presented to him Gold, as to the Creator of all the
Riches of Heaven and of Earth, and he in exchange gave them the Riches of the
Earth and Heaven. They gave him Incense, the perfume whereof ascending from
Earth toward Heaven, acknowledged him God as well as Man; and he gave them
Grace, as an Earnest, that they themselves also should ascend into Heaven. They
gave him Myrrh, as to a Mortal Man, and he in being Mortal, did by his death
quicken them to live with him for ever in his Glory.

Let us offer to him, with those Kings, that which those Kings did offer; let
us offer Devotion, Charity, Mortification, and Adoration; let us offer to him a
Life, that from this day may aspire to an Eternal Life; let us offer unto him
Ardent Love, Fervent Prayers, and Humble Penitence; let us offer to him all the
Actions of our Life, and let us take care, that all our Actions be such, as may
be fit to be offered to him. We may well draw near with an humble confidence to
adore this Child, who suffered himself to be approached by Children, and to be
adored by the poorest Men, as well as by the richest Kings. He was born poor
himself, to the end, that he may be found by those that are poor; and a Child,
that he may be adored by little ones, for even out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings he has ordained strength, and perfected praise. Come with Humility
and Assurance to make him an Offering of thy self, and thou shall find him
tender, and wounded with Love, readily to accept thy Offering.

But what can I offer to thee, O Glorious Infant; I, who am mere Poverty? What
Gold of Charity, being with thee at Enmity? What Works of Repentance, being
full of Obstinacy, Rebellion, and Impenitency? What Devotion, my Prayers being
full of wandering Thoughts and Distractions? O my God, I come not only to adore
thee, but also to beg of thee. Lord, I believe that I please thee more in
asking of thee, than in giving to thee. Such is thy Charity, thy Goodness, thy
Mercy, and Liberality, that to exercise it, and to be giving, is thy Glory; and
thou rejoycest much more in that thou bestowest, than in all thou can receive
from us poor necessitous Beggars. And what can we bestow on thee, O Infant God,
we that are nothing but Misery? What can we give but trifles unworthy of a God,
and only tolerable for a mere Humane Child, but far unfit for thee, who art
also God? Thou alone can give us what we ought to give thee; and if the Gift,
which we ought to offer thee, come not first from thine hand, the worth of it
can be no ways suitable to such an Hand, to such a Child, and to such a God.

Finally, it is from hence thou must endeavor to draw those Gifts that thou
ought to Present him; It is from himself thou must obtain the Gold, the
Frankincense, and the Myrrh, in Prayer, Charity, and Mortification. From hence
thou must procure a Charity burning with the love of that Lord, a Mortification
constant in suffering for him, that suffered for thee; that suffered cold, and
shed his blood in that mean place for thy sake. In short, from hence thou must
draw an earnest and fervent Devotion to contemplate and adore so many, and so
great Benefits, without suffering them to slip out of thy Memory; and him, whom
those Kings sought in that particular place, thou must love, seek, follow, and
adore, in all places, wheresoever thou shall happen to be.

Of His Presentation in the Temple.
His Holy Mother, when the days of her Purification were accomplished,
according to the Law of Moses, carries her Son, the Eternal Son of God, and
with his supposed Father, Joseph, Presents him in the Temple with a pair of
Turtle Doves, the Offering appointed for the Poor, they not being able to make
a richer. There he was received by the hands of Simeon the Priest, who having
been assured by the Holy Ghost, that he should not die, till he had seen the
Lord's Christ, knew by the same Spirit, that that Promise was then fulfilled,
which he openly declared, when taking him in his Arms he blessed God, and
desired to depart in peace, for that his eyes had seen his Salvation, which God
had prepared before the face of all People, to be a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, and to be the Glory of his People Israel. It is said, that Joseph and
his Mother marvelled at those things that were spoken of him, and no doubt
rejoiced greatly to hear them, but that Joy was quickly checked, for though he
blessed them, he said to Mary his Mother, Behold, this Child is set for the
fall as well as the rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign, which shall
be spoken against, yea, and a sword shall pierce through thine own Soul also.
There the Virgin Mother saw the future Passion of her Son Prophesied of unto
her, and her heart was wounded with a Mortal stroke of Grief, and of
Compassion. From that moment she never wanted Sufferings, nor did that Sword,
foretold by Simeon, ever depart from her Soul.

Thus he subjected himself to the Law, who was exempt from all Law, and who
came to give us Laws; and shall thou and I be so vain, and proud, and foolish,
as to shake off from us the necessary Yoke of Laws? Does he obey, to whom all
ought to be obedient; and shall thou and I, who are born only to obey, resist
Humility and Obedience? No, let us submit to our Superiors, and obey not only
for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake; and let us pray unto God, that as his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ submitted himself to be presented in the Temple in
the substance of our Flesh, so we may be presented unto him with pure and clean
hearts, by the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

Of his Flight into Egypt.
With this sweet Lord and his blessed Mother, and Joseph his reputed Father,
thou art next to leave Judea, and accompany them flying into Egypt, to avoid
the Cruelty of that Tyrant, who slew so many Innocents, that he might slay
Innocence itself. Go along with those Fugitives through those Sandy Deserts,
with a desire to serve them in the way, and if thou could, to lessen the
weariness of so tedious a Journey. Make have to get before, to prepare them a
Lodging, and that not in any material House, but in thy heart; and that it may
be the fitter to receive him, fill thy Soul with affectionate desires to please
him; with fear to offend him, and with unwillingness ever to be separated from
him.

Of the other Mysteries.
Being returned from Egypt, go along with thy Blessed Savior to the House of
his Mother. Behold him there growing up in Age, and in Grace, and Beauty, who
is the Fountain and Original of all Grace and Beauty. There beg of him, that
thou may daily grow in Grace and Charity, which is the greatest beauty of
the Soul. Lose thy self also with him in his way to the Temple, since thou art
utterly lost without him. Seek him there with the Virgin, and thou may find
him at Twelve Years old disputing with the Doctors, and teaching the Law and
Precepts of his Father; for first, he accomplished them, and then he taught
them. Follow the Blessed Virgin, and imitate the trouble and the care she was
in for having lost him, and her great joy and gladness in finding him again, to
serve him. Do thou lament like her, when thou losest God by sin, and rejoice no
less to find him again by Grace, and by Repentance. Seek God in the Temple, and
thou shall find him there; but then thou must be sure to seek him with Fervor
and Devotion. Seek God there by Prayer, and by Prayer thou shall be sure to
find him. Seek him in the Divine Precepts, and in Obedience to them thou may
be certain he will be found by thee.

He afterward retires and dwells in privacy with his humble Mother, and his
supposed Father from the Age of Twelve to Thirty; living obscurely those
Eighteen Years, whereof the Scripture gives us no particular Account, saying
only, that he was obedient to his Parents; and we may reasonably believe, that
he, who was the Example of all Virtues, would not spend so much time in
Idleness, which is the nourisher of all Vices; but rather that he assisted
honest Joseph in the business of his Occupation, and that probably he used even
that painful means to help to support that Poverty, who came to relieve the
Poverty of all Mankind. For though the Jews in one of the Evangelists call him
but a Carpenter's Son; in another they asked, Is not this the Carpenter? Some
of them probably having seen him employed in that Profession. Behold the
Creator of all things subjecting himself to his own mean Creatures; and thou
rebellious and wretched Creature, wilt not thou submit thy self to thy great
Creator? Behold that Majesty, nay, that Divinity, obedient to the Humanity of
his Father and Mother; and will thou be disobedient and refractory to his
Commands, who is thy Eternal Father; and who gave thee a Being in this World to
no other end, but that thou might obey and serve him? Behold him helping to
build Houses for others, who never had one of his own to rest his head in.
Imitate him in his laborious Industry, and give not up thy self to sloth and
laziness. Though God has given thee Riches, so that thou art not forced to
work for Necessity, remember that a slothful hand tends to Poverty; and if
thou exercisest thy self in some manual Business, thou will be the better able
to bear a low Condition, if thy uncertain Riches should make themselves wings,
and fly away. Learn also to be contented in the poorest Estate, by his
Example, who in this World was worse provided for than the Foxes, for they have
Holes; or the Birds of the Air, for they have Nests. And Pray to that builder
of the Celestial Jerusalem, that, since in his Father's House there be many
Mansions, he would bestow the meanest corner in one of them upon thee; and that
in his good time he would remove thee from this Earthly Habitation, to an House
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Here let us stay and dwell a while longer upon the thoughts of our Savior's
strange condescension in that poor, painful, and obscure manner of Life; for
here it is thy Folly and mine, thy Pride and mine must find their Cure. To see
the Creator of Heaven and Earth live Eighteen Years in silence, obedience, and
humility, may well be a Cure for the highest Vanity, and for the most
rebellious Obstinacy; since the Maker and Creator of all things humbled himself
to serve and obey two of his own Creatures for the space of Eighteen Years, who
would not humble himself below all Creatures for Eighteen Thousand, nay, for an
Eternity of Years? O my God, O God-man, that were so humble, so resigned, and
so obedient for Man, give me that Obedience and Humility, cure my Pride and
Vanity, and grant that forsaking the noise and hurry of this tumultuous World,
I may retire with delight, not absolutely to a soli^ary unactive life, but
frequently into the privacy of my Closet, there to admire thy Divine
Excellencies, and to contemplate thy Humane Virtues; and that by Imitation of
the one, I may through thy Mercy obtain a participation of the other.

AUGUST.
The First WEEK.
Of the Baptism and Preaching of our Lord, with his Doctrine, Miracles, and
Parables.
NOW I will show thee the Original, of which thou ought to be a Copy, and
the Looking-glass, wherein thou ought to dress thy self; I mean the Actions
of our Lord, which hitherto have been unspeakable Mysteries; but now besides
being Mysteries, they begin to be Advertisements, Instructions, Lights,
Counsels, and Informations of the Spiritual Life.

Behold how after Eighteen Years of Silence and Obedience, our Savior at the
Age of Thirty begins to teach and direct Souls. A rare and admirable Example,
teaching us, that we ought to restrain our selves, and not be too hasty in
getting up into Offices and Preferments, but to fear them, and to learn first,
that we may be afterward able to teach; since he did so, who had no need of
learning, and who was Wisdom itself, that came to teach us. Do thou love
Obedience, Patience, and Silence, and if thou would learn to Teach and
Govern, learn first to Obey, and to hold thy peace:

Behold how that Lamb of God goes to the River Jordan, to seek his Holy
Forerunner, John the Baptist, who pointed out the Savior of Souls with his
finger, bearing Witness that it was He, who came to take away the sins of the
World. See how presently going into the Water to be baptized, he was not so
much washed himself, as he purified and cleansed the Waters with his Innocence
and Holiness, and by them our sins; leaving us the Universal Remedy of Baptism,
the Gate of the Church, the ineffable Seal, and mysterious Character of Humane
Redemption, and of Christian Vocation. Behold, how the Father acknowledges his
beloved Son, in whom he declares himself well pleased. Behold the Holy Ghost
also appears upon him in the visible form of a Dove, the whole Trinity
cooperating in the Institution of that Holy Sacrament. Pray to him, to restore
unto thee that Robe of Grace, which he gave thee in thy Baptism, and which thou
have lost by thy many sins. Beg of him to renew it by his Virtues, and amongst
the rest, by the chiefest, which is final Perseverance. Consider what Thanks
thou owe unto this Lord, for having caused thee to be born where thou had
the benefit of this blessed Sacrament, and were made capable of those Heavenly
Blessings, which by it are brought into thy Soul.

Behold in the next place, how our Lord goes to the Desert to Fast forty days,
that he might consecrate Fasting to us by his Abstinence; and the labors and
difficulties of a Spiritual Life, by being tempted. If the Eternal Son of God,
who is Goodness and Innocence itself, did Fast, have not I need to do so, being
mere Wickedness, Excess, and Incontinency? If the Eternal Son of God, being the
Creator of all things, suffered himself to be tempted by our common Enemy the
Devil, why should thou and I, who are vile Worms of the Earth, think it much to
suffer Temptations and Tribulations; since our Misery and Wickedness for the
most part give nourishment to those very Temptations, and that we very often
run into them by tempting our selves? See how he conquers both the Tempter and
the Temptation, the one by his Abstinence, and the other by his Humility and
Patience, choosing those two Virtues for an Universal Remedy of all the
Diseases of the Soul. Humble thy self therefore, and be confounded in the
knowledge of thy Misery, and when thou art tempted, (since Christ himself was
so) do thou imitate him in a firm and resolute Resistance, patiently relying
upon his strength, who with the Temptation will make a way for thee to escape,
and will deliver thee when thou call upon him.

Behold now, how he chooses his Apostles, the first Pillars of the Christian
Religion, and the chief Masters of the Spiritual Life, beginning with two poor
Fishermen, who having spent all the Night toyling in vain, and caught nothing,
taught us Obedience by their readily letting down the Nets again at his
Command; which was well rewarded by the Miraculous draught of Fish, with which
they themselves were caught, and were from that time made fishers of Men. These
he increased to the number of Twelve, most of them being of that mean
Profession; whose Poverty and Ignorance he chose to confound Humane Wisdom and
Greatness, that to neither of them, but to his Grace alone might be
acknowledged the conquering and confounding of the most presumptuous Power,
Knowledge, and Vanity of this World. Therefore love Poverty, and believe that
the Kingdom of God cannot consist with Riches and Greatness, unless they be
mingled with Humility.

Mark how he begins his holy Preaching with that Divine Sermon in the Mount,
the Matter whereof has been the Subject of all Sermons ever since. Read it
often, till thou have fixed it in thy Memory, and have it always before the
eyes of thy Mind, to follow it in thy Practice. Let the Prayer he teaches
there, be the Pattern of all thy Prayers; In the three first Petitions whereof
thou may learn thy Duty toward God; to Sanctify his Name, to resign thy
self to his Will in all things, and to love him above thy Life in longing for
his Kingdom, which thou can not enter into, but by Death. Learn in the other
three thy Duty toward thy Neighbor, in loving him as thy self; since by using
the Plural Number, thou beggest all those Blessings for others, which thou
desire for thy self; and ask to be forgiven thy Offenses toward God no
otherwise, than as thou thy self forgivest those that are done unto thee by
Men: And since the doing good to all, and the forgiving all Injuries, is the
greatest perfection of Christianity, and the thing wherein we most resemble our
Blessed Savior; be sure amongst all those excellent Lessons of that Divine
Sermon, to make that one of doing to others, whatsoever thou would have them
do to thee, the continual Rule of all thy Actions; for that will make thee to
love and to do good unto all, because thou would have all to love, and to do
good unto thee; and it will make thee forgive the greatest Injuries that any
Enemy can do unto thee, because thou would have no body to take Revenge for
those they receive from thee.

When the Holy Jesus had ended his Sermon on the Mount, that Divine Repository
of the most excellent Truths, containing a Breviary of all those Precepts,
which make up and perfect the Morality of the Christian Religion; he descended
into the Valleys to consign his Doctrine by the power of Miracles, which were
next to Infinite, and which, it is remarkable, he chose to instance in actions
of Mercy, that all his Powers might especially determine upon Bounty and
Charity, and at the same time be invincible Arguments of the Divinity of his
Person and Doctrine. Almost all the Miraculous Works he did during his Natural
Life were actions of Relief and Mercy, that he might at once, both do good to
Men, and also demonstrate his Mission from God; which indeed was the principal
design of all his Miracles, which being so infinitely and apparently above the
power of Nature, could not but create great confidence in his Disciples, that
himself would verify those great Promises upon which he established his Law,
nor fail to make a very deep impression upon all Persons whose interest and
love of the World did not destroy the Piety of their Wills, and put their
Understandings into Fetters. So mavelous was the force of Conviction by these
supernatural Operations, that to minds unbiased and honestly disposed to
receive the truth, it was hardly resistible. Who could choose but be wrought
upon to confess his Divinity, from the sight of that first Miracle, which he
wrought after his descent from the Mount, upon the poor leprous Person, which
came to him worshipping him, and begging to be healed. He did but barely put
forth his hand and touch him, and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. What
so great Virtue could possibly proceed from Natural Agents; or from whence
could so sudden and effectual a Remedy come, but from that Great and Heavenly
Physician, who is Lord of Nature, and consequently has no need to use Physical
means, but by a word of his mouth can accomplish whatever he pleases, both in
Heaven and Earth? He bad the Man go to the Priest to offer an Oblation
according to the Rites of Moses his Law, hereby teaching what Respect and
Obedience we owe to the Laws of that Religion which is duly established. For in
all the wonderful Works which he wrought for the healing Men's Bodies, he had
this further design to heal their Minds too, by insinuating good Instructions.
He was a Physician of Souls as well as of Bodies, and always had an eye to the
Spiritual benefit of Men, by contributing to their bodily ease. This
Observation holds in all those Corporal Cures, which he wrought for the outward
good of Men by that Divine Power, which God had anointed him with. As his
Miracles were intended for Mercy, so also for Doctrine. The Impotent and
Diseased Persons were not more cured, than we instructed; which will appear, if
we cast an eye upon some of his Miraculous Cures.

Behold him then in the next place giving sight to the Blind; to one, who
besides his blindness was also possessed with a dumb Devil, which being cast
out, he presently spoke and saw; to another, by anointing his Eyes with Clay
and Spittle, which one would think were more likely to have blinded him, if he
could have seen; and even to one that was born blind, without any natural
capacity of receiving sight; which more increased the Wonder of the Multitude,
all confessing, That since the beginning of the World it was never known, that
any one had received sight, who was born blind. And do not these Examples teach
us to admire his Goodness and his Power, which working both with means, and
without means, nay, and against means too, may convince us of his being God as
well as Man? How should we be excited by this excessive Bounty of our Lord, to
beg of him to enlighten the blindness of our Understandings, which is far
greater and worse than the blindness of those Men; and to give us such a clear
sight of Heavenly things, as may make us look upon all the Greatness, the
Riches, and the Pleasures of this World only with Contempt and Pity; that we
may plainly perceive the Path that leads to eternal Happiness, and avoid all
those stumbling blocks which are laid in the way? O thou that openedst the Eyes
of the Blind, suffer not the thick Mists of Ignorance to obscure and darken my
mind, and so hinder it from seeing and knowing in my day, the things which
belong to my Peace, that they may never be hid from me.

See in another place a Noble Personage coming to Jesus with much Reverence,
and desiring him with great importunity to come to his House, and cure his Son,
being now ready to dye. Jesus, who did not do his Miracles by Natural
Operations, cured the Child at a distance and dismissed the Prince telling him
his Son lived; which he found to be true, and that he recovered at that time,
when Jesus spoke those salutary and healing words. Whereupon he and all his
House became Disciples, and were thoroughly convinced of his being the true
Messiah, and that Salvation was only through him; which effect the Miracle did
naturally tend to produce.

Behold at another time, how soundly he sleeps in the midst of a most violent
Tempest, which so affrighted his Disciples, that they hastily awoke him,
saying, Lord save us, we perish. Thus quietly do they rest in the midst of
dangers, which trust in God; and so are they dismayed with fears, who dare not
repose an entire confidence in him. Imitate thou his Disciples in having
recourse to Prayer in all thy distresses, but rely upon God with assurance of
his help. Observe how their distrust was checked with a, Why are ye fearful, O
ye of little Faith! Yet his Mercy granted their Request, for he presently
rebuked the Winds and the Seas, and their was a great Calm. In like manner, O
Lord, compose the storms of my troubled Breast, appease the boisterous Winds of
my unruly Passions, and the rolling Billows of my exorbitant and unsteady
Desires. Say unto them as thou did unto the Sea, Peace and be still; so shall
I safely pass through the Tempestuous Waves of this miserable World with a calm
and contented mind, till I arrive at the Haven of endless Rest and Comfort in
thy Kingdom.

Nor does he only quiet the Sea, but walks upon the Waters of it, which seemed
so strange to his Disciples, that they took him for a Spirit. St. Peter having
his Master still in his thoughts, that he might be certain, calls out, If it be
Thou, command me to come to thee. Observe the strength of his Love, which makes
him desirous to be with Jesus in any place, how dangerous soever; and yet the
weakness of his Fear, which presently causes his Faith to fail, though he had
an Omnipotent hand ready to help him. His heart first sinks in his Body, and
then his Body sinks in the Water. Learn then to follow Christ, by imitating the
Virtues which he practiced as Man; his Patience, Meekness, Humility, and
Charity; and do not affect to do those things which he performed as God. It is
enough for us to undergo Dangers, when Providence shall bring them upon us, and
too much to run our selves into them unnecessarily; for that is to tempt God by
a vain Presumption, the Punishment whereof is to be left to our selves, and
most probably to perish in our own rashness.

Let us next accompany our Savior to the Marriage in Cana, (and indeed there
it was that he wrought his first Miracle) where to rescue the married Pair, who
were poor, and wanted Wine, from Affront and Trouble, he commanded the
Water-pots to be filled with Water, which by his Divine Power he changed into
Wine; where the different proceeding of God and the World is highly observable.
Every man sets forth good Wine at first, and then the worst; but God not only
turns the Water into Wine, but into such Wine, that still the last draught is
most pleasant. The World presents us with fair Language, promising Hopes,
convenient Fortunes, pompous Honors, and these are the outsides of the Bole;
but when it is swallowed, these dissolve in the instant, and there remains
nothing but bitterness and corruption. Every sin smiles in the first Address,
but when we have well drunk, then comes that which is worse, Fears and Terrors
of Conscience, and Shame and Displeasure, and diffidence in the day of Death.
But when after the manner of the purifying of the Christians, we fill our
Water-pots with Water, watering our Couch with our Tears, and moistening our
Cheeks with the perpetual distillations of Repentance; then Christ turns our
Water into Wine; first Penitents, and then Communicants; first Waters of
Sorrow, and then the Wine of the Chalice; first the Justifications of
Correction, and then the Sanctifications of the Sacrament, and the Effects of
the Divine Power, Joy, and Peace, and Serenity, hopes full of Confidence, and
Confidence without Shame, and Boldness without Presumption; for Jesus keeps the
best Wine till the last; not only because of the reservations of the highest
Joys till the nearer approaches of Glory, but also because our relishes are
higher after a long enjoyment, than at the first Essays; such being the Nature
of Grace, that it increases in Relish, as it does in Enjoyment; every part of
Grace being a new Duty, and new Reward.

Next, let us contemplate those most apparent and indubitable effects of a
Power truly Divine and All-sufficient, that our Savior wrought in raising the
Dead, and recalling Life and Breath into them; which is a Work that baffles all
the Powers of Nature, and is too difficult to be compassed by a limited Virtue.
See how he comforts Jairus, one of the Rulers of the Synagogue, when certain
Messengers came and declared to him the departure of his Daughter, (whom having
left at home at the point of Death, he came to Jesus to beg a Cure for her,)
and desired him to trouble the Master no further. Be not afraid, says he, only
believe; As if he had said, Trouble not thy self at this doleful Message,
neither be grieved for thy Daughter, for I am as able to restore her to Life
now she is Dead, as I was to heal her when she was Sick, had I had a timely
notice of her illness. Only have Faith in me, and believe that I am able to
accomplish this great Action, and it shall presently be accomplished: And
according as he believed, so was the event, for entering in, where the Damsel
was lying, he took her by the Hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi, that is,
Damsel arise, and immediately she arose and walked, to the great Astonishment
and Joy of those that were mourning and weeping for her Decease. In like manner
our Lord beholding another Object of Pity, namely, the Widow of Nain, bewailing
and lamenting the Death of her only Son, who was now carrying to be Buried, had
compassion on her, and bad her forbear weeping, for that her Son should be
restored to her again; and by the Voice of his Mouth, which commands the whole
Creation, and awakens the Dead, recover Sense and Motion, which was soon
effected; for he did but call, Young man, I say unto thee arise, and forthwith
he that was dead, sat up and began to speak; whereupon, there came a fear on
all: And being struck with amazement at the sight of so mavelous an Action,
they glorified God, saying, A great Prophet is risen up among us, and God has
visited his People. At another time, he exercised this Supernatural and Divine
Virtue, in raising up his beloved Friend Lazarus from the Grave, who had been
buried four Days, and had seen Corruption. His Sisters Martha and Mary in his
Sickness, sent to Jesus, saying, Behold he, whom thou love is sick. Jesus
permitted him to taste of Death, that the Glory of God might be manifested in
his return to Life. He determined to get him Glory by his Resurrection; and
therefore when he knew of his Death, he said to his Disciples, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep. As he went, he
was met by Martha, who received him with this mournful Lamentation; Lord, if
thou had been here, my brother had not died; (the same words wherewith Mary
received him afterward, when she came to him) but however (taking comfort by
Faith) I know, said she, That even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God
will give it thee. Jesus answered her, Thy brother shall rise again, and that
not only at the last day, (as she understood him) but instantly: Wherefore he
demanded where they had laid him; and coming to the place, he bad them take
away the stone from the cave, which being done, He cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus come forth; at the sound of which words, the slumbring Carcass was
awakened, all its parts revived, and his Soul reunited to his Body. So readily
do all Creatures obey when God commands. These Instances our Lord designed as
Types of our rising again at the final Consummation of the World to an immortal
State, When our corruptible shall put on incorruption, and our mortal
immortality. As they were raised again to a Temporal Being, so shall we to an
Eternal, in Joy or Misery. How greatly then does it import us so to frame our
lives in this World, that we may be counted worthy to rise again to eternal
Life, and not to Eternal Death. Can we truly and heartily believe, that our
Souls and Bodies shall be reunited at the last Day, and be called before
Christ's Tribunal to be judged and sentenced according to their Deeds here, and
yet live in a careless security, without ever regarding to set right our
Accounts, before we appear at that Judgment Seat? Can any thing be more absurd,
than to entertain this Faith, and yet to live as if we utterly disowned it? If
we were really persuaded and convinced of this grand Truth and Article of
Christianity, and would often meditate upon it, we should not fail to guard
ourselves against the assaults of Sin, and enchantments of Pleasure, to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, and to apply our whole Endeavors to prepare
our Souls and Bodies, for a glorious and ^appy Reunion.

Finally, (to name no more of our Lord's Miracles) let us come to that Sign,
which was given to the Jews and Pharisees, to cure (if possible) their
obstinate Incredulity; that greatest of Miracles, which could have no suspicion
of Imposture, no Instance, or Precedent, or Imitation; and that is, Jesus, his
own lying in the Grave three Days and three Nights, and then his raising up
himself again, and appearing unto many, and conversing for forty Days together;
giving probation of his rising, and of the verity of his Body; and making a
glorious promise, which at Pentecost was verified. He by his Omnipotency raised
his Body from the Dead, and enlivened it, according to that Prediction of his,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will build it up again. What more
pregnant evidence could possibly be afforded, of his being the Son of God, than
this sublime Miracle? This one would think, were enough to conquer the most
inveterate Infidelity, and to banish the least doubt or suspicion of our
Savior's Divinity. O my Soul, do thou endeavor herein to resemble Christ: As
he died and rose again for thee, so do thou die from Sin, and rise again unto
Righteousness and Newness of Life, seeking those things that are above, where
Christ is ascended, and praying to him to quicken thy sinful and earthly Heart
with holy Desires, and heavenly Affections. That Infinite Power, which did so
solemnly triumph over Death and the Grave, can much more easily roll away the
Stone of a customary Sin, and subdue and mortify the most powerful Lust,
though of never so long continuance, and enable thee to live henceforward to
God, in a careful observance of all Christian Duties, which will at length
bring thee to the end of thy Hopes; to those Glories, which being the Portion
of Angels and Saints, and the nearest Communications with God, are infinitely
above what we see, for hear, or understand.

After the Miracles of our Savior, succeed his Parables; which way of
Expression was abundantly useful, and recommended it self chiefly upon this
account. That whatsoever was represented in this Figurative manner, was apt to
insinuate more closely, and to work more powerfully upon the Affections.
Forasmuch as in this case the mind was not only addressed to, by the mere dint
of Reason; but Truth was in a manner made Visible, and set off in such lively
Colors, that the Imagination being Impregnated, the Passions were easily
carried along too. Hereby also the memory was exceedingly fortified; for such
things as we feel and see, or which our Imaginations have an express Image of,
and our Affections relish; those things always stick by us. And further, this
way of Parables, which our Savior made so frequent use of, in many cases came
more home to Men's Consciences, and carried more Conviction, than any other more
express and direct way of speaking: And had it not been, that the Jews were
filled with Intolerable Prejudices against him, they must of necessity have
had his Wisdom in great Veneration. For though under his Parables were hid
mysterious Senses; yet they were not so mysterious, but that they were easily
intelligible to Minds unprejudiced, honest, and desirous of Instruction. The
Truth shines through the Veil, and the Shadow does itself guide to the Body and
Substance.

How excellently did our Lord represent the great Efficacy of Repentance under
the Gospel-state, and its acceptableness with God from the vilest Sinners,
under the Parable of the Prodigal Son? The Pharisees who were hardened in
Infidelity, for the sake of this Doctrine, accounted him a Friend of Vicious
and Lewd Persons. They knew that the Law gave hopes of Pardon only to some
smaller Offenses, excluding all great and notorious Offenders, and shutting
them up under Wrath; and they not being elevated above this literal
Dispensation, would not believe that God would exercise Mercy upon any other
Terms, than what he therein proclaimed; and therefore our Savior Preaching
Repentance, and giving hopes of Pardon to the greatest Sinners, upon condition
of an hearty and thorough Reformation; these demure Hypocrites were offended,
and insinuated a suspicion of our Savior, That he was a favourer of wicked
Persons. In answer to this unjust Imputation, and to silence the murmuring of
these hard-hearted Jews, our Savior makes use of this Parable, with two others
of the like nature, wherein he plainly sets forth this great Doctrine; and
shows, that as it is the common course of Men to express most Joy upon the
recovery of any thing lost; so God, to whom the Souls of Men are infinitely
valuable, is highly pleased with the recovery of lost Sinners, and upon their
returning to him, will mercifully accept them, as the Indulgent Father here
embraced his returning Son, who had been so long engaged in the most wild
Extravagancies, and in the greatest Disobedience to his Paternal Authority. O
the merciful Compassion of God to Mankind! O Love, that surpassest all
Understanding! That the worst of Sinners should be received into favor, and be
made capable of Pardon, only by repenting of their Wickedness, and being sorry
for their Sins.

In another Parable, to wit, that of the Talents, how forcibly does our Lord
instruct us in the Duties of Industry, Diligence, and Spiritual Husbandry? How
plainly does he teach us the necessity of improving those Gifts and Graces,
which God communicates to us for that purpose, and to increase those Talents
which he entrusts us with, and which he will call us to an account for, how we
have used them, and what we have gained by them? He sets before us the Reward
of a careful employing of them to the Uses designed, and the Punishment of a
neglectful management of them. Those that had gained by their Talents, were
pronounced good and faithful Servants, and commanded to enter into their
Masters Joy; but he that had hid his Talent in the Earth, and made no advantage
of it, was branded with the infamous name of wicked and slothful Servant, and
commanded to be cast into outer Darkness. In like manner God will require an
account of us, how we have used all those Gifts and Endowments, which he has
bestowed upon us, whether they be Goods of Fortune, or of Grace. We are
mistaken, if we think them given merely for our sakes. Have we the Blessing of
a plentiful Fortune? God entrusts us therewith, to make us capable to do good,
and to relieve the necessities of our poor Brethren; and unless we thus use it,
it will prove a Curse to us. Are we favored with extraordinary Endowments of
Mind? It is, that we may instruct the Ignorant, and employ them to the Glory of
God, and to the good of others, which are destitute of so great a benefit. Is
God pleased to infuse his Grace into our Hearts? it must then be our daily
endeavor to grow therein, and to add one Virtue to another. We must faithfully
employ and husband the first beginnings, to the end, that we may obtain still
greater degrees. God will Reward or Punish us according to the good or ill
Employment of his Goods, which he makes us Stewards of; If we give diligence to
add to those Talents, of whatsoever nature they be, which he deposits with us;
then no doubt God will honor us with the Title of faithful Servants, and
abundantly recompense our Industry; but if through Idleness and Sloth, we so
employ our Talents, as to bring in no gain to our Lord; we must expect nothing,
but that dismal Sentence denounced against the slothful Servant; Cast ye the
unprofitable Servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.

Another most useful and profitable Doctrine is taught us in the Parable of the
Ten Virgins going forth to meet the Bridegroom; which is that of Vigilance or
Watchfulness, and a timely preparation for Death and Judgment. As the exact
time of the Bridegrooms coming was unknown to them, so is our latter end to us.
And as the Door was shut against the foolish Virgins, and they excluded from
the Marriage, for their unpreparedness at the Bridegrooms coming; so the Door
of Mercy will for ever be shut upon us, if we suffer ourselves to be surpised
by Death, without making a due preparation for it. The coming of the Lord to
Judgment, will be as a Snare on all them that dwell on the Face of the whole
Earth. Let us Watch therefore and Pray always, that we may be found worthy to
stand before the Son of Man.

We are likewise taught to pray instantly and perseveringly, by the Parable of
the Importunate Widow, whom the unjust Judge, that feared not God, nor regarded
Man, did yet condescend to avenge of her Adversaries, merely because of her
Importunity and constant Entreaties, that he might not be wearied by her
continual coming. If this unjust Judge could by this means be moved to do
right, and to hearken to the Petition of the oppressed Widow; How much more
will God hear thy Prayers, if thou continuest instant in soliciting his Divine
Majesty? If at the first thy requests be not granted, yet cease not thy
Addresses, nor give over praying, but contend and wrestle, as it were with God,
till thou gainest a hearing. God loves such an holy Violence. First see, that
the matter of thy Petitions be just, lawful and convenient; and then thou
may be sure to obtain them, or something better, if thou perseverest with
Faith and Patience.

Another most necessary Duty is very strongly enforced in the Parable of the
King, which would take Account of his Servants, I mean the Duty of forgiving
Offenses and Injuries. When he began to reckon with them, one was brought to
him, which owed him ten thousand Talents; but being utterly incapable of ever
discharging so vast a Debt, he fell down before his Lord, and with great
Humility and Earnestness entreated him to have patience with him, whereupon he
freely forgave him the whole Sum. But this same Servant afterward severely
exacting a far less considerable Debt of an hundred Pence of one of his
fellow servants, and notwithstanding all entreaties casting him into Prison,
till Payment should be made, his Lord thus expostulates with him; O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on
thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due to him. This is our case; as the Servant's Debt to
his Master was great and important, and that of his fellow servants to him but
trivial and inconsiderable: So our Offenses against God are infinite, and of a
provoking Nature; and the Injuries of our Fellow Creatures to us are but few,
and of small importance; if therefore we desire God to pardon our heinous and
often-repeated sins against him, how can we refuse to pardon the petty and
small Affronts of our Brethren? With what Modesty can thou, who denyest to
forgive thy Brother one single Trespass, expect that God should forgive thee
ten thousand? Or how can thou hope for the Mercy of God, who art most cruel
and unmerciful to others? Revenge, as it is an unchristian Principle, so it
tends directly to unqualifie us for forgiveness, and is incapable of the least
rational defense; for no man ever did or can forgive his Neighbor so many
Provocations and Offenses, as he himself has need to be forgiven by God; which
is an eternal Reason and Motive to incite us to the exercise of Charity and
Mercy, and cannot fail to work upon ingenuous and considering Minds. Can there
be a greater Argument devised to make us easy and willing to pardon Offenses,
than the consideration of that absolute necessity we our selves stand in of
God's Pardon, without which we must eternally perish? Especially since our
Savior has plainly revealed to us, that unless we from our hearts forgive
every one his Brother their Trespasses, our Heavenly Father will not forgive us
our Trespasses. Consider this attentively, and thou can not but perceive the
great unreasonableness and sinfulness of Revenge. Think seriously how much thou
dependest upon the Mercy of God for thy Salvation, and then thou will not fail
to be merciful to thy Brethren. Finally, see what an infinite multitude of sins
must be forgiven thee by God, if thou escapest Damnation; and thou will find
great cause to pass by without the least thoughts of Revenge, all the Injuries
and Wrongs, that can possibly be done thee by thy Fellow Creatures.

And many more useful Doctrines may we find couched under these Figurative
Speeches and Parables which our Savior delivered. Thus by the Parable of the
Tares permitted to grow amongst the Wheat, he intimated the Toleration of
Dissenting Opinions, not destructive of Piety, or Civil Societies. By the three
Parables, Of the Seed growing insensibly, of the grain of Mustard Seed growing
up to a Tree, and of a little Leven qualifying the whole Lump; he signified the
increase of the Gospel, and the Blessing of God upon the Apostolical Sermons.
By the Parable of the Sower scattering his Seed by the way-side, some on stony,
some on thorny, and some on good Ground, he intimated the several Capacities
and Indispositions of men's hearts, the carelessness of some, the frowardness and
levity of others, the easiness and softness of a third; and how they are
spoiled with Worldliness and Cares, and how many ways there are to miscarry,
and that but one sort of Men receive the Word, and bring forth the Fruits of an
Holy Life. Thus plentifully did the Savior of Souls provide for the winning of
men's hearts, or else (if they were Stubborn and Contumacious, and would not be
wrought upon) for the hardening of them, by such pleasing Discourses; which to
pursue in particular, were endless; for, Without a Parable spoke he not unto
them.

The Second WEEK.
The Eve of the Passion.
NOW it will be needful for thee to prepare thy Mind for great Tribulations,
because thou drawest near the Passion of our Lord, whose Holy Imitation is the
Joy and the Glory of Suffering. How well does a Soldier fight seeing the
Courage of his General! How well the Subject in the sight of his King, that is
ready to lose his Life for him! The Disciple is not to be above his Master, nor
the Servant above his Lord. The Son is not to fare better than his Father, nor
the Creature better than his Creator. Embarque thy self in the vast Gulf of thy
Savior's Passion. In that Stormy Sea of his Sufferings thou will sail more
safely, than in the Haven of thine own Will; for this is hazard, and that
Security. I had rather endure Torments with my dear Lord, than enjoy the
Delights and Greatness of the World; I had rather follow him and serve him on
Mount Calvary in this Life, than to rejoice in the Glories of Mount Tabor. Deny
thy self not only in Temporal and Sensual Pleasures, but also even in those
that are Spiritual. Love the Cross, not only in flying from evil, but in
following that which is best. Pains and Sufferings, Lord, are the Portions of
this Life, for Joys we may well wait till the eternal. O what were thy
Sufferings, my sweetest Jesus! If once thou gave liberty to thy Divinity to
swallow up thy holy Humanity in Glory at thy Transfiguration, how often did
thou hide it under thy Sufferings; nay, rather thou made use of it, that the
Sufferings of thy holy Humanity might be the greater, the stronger, and the
more durable? Thou with the Power of thy Godhead did support the frailty of
thy Manhood, and thy Divine Nature gave strength to thy Humane, to the end,
that it might thereby be enabled to undergo that, which otherwise it could not
possibly have endured. Consider then and lament, and follow him in this first
part of his holy and dolorous Passion. When the Eternal Word being prepared to
Suffer, asked leave of his Eternal Father to enter into that Sea of Torments,
to complete the excess of his love to Man, and to crown that Obedience
wherewith he disposed himself for the Redemption of Mankind, Behold, from Six a
Clock in the Evening of that Thursday (which also may well be called Holy) the
many painful steps, which our Savior took, in going to shed his Blood, and how
that most gentle Lamb was carried, and offered up by Love for a Sacrifice upon
the Cross.

There the Prophecy of Venerable Simeon had its perfect completion; there the
sharp Sword of Sorrow pierced through the heart of his Virgin Mother. Learn of
him, as she did, to resign thy self in all kinds of Sufferings for him, as he
resigned himself to the Will of his Father, in his Sufferings for thee. Yield
an humble resignation to the Judgments of the Lord, and cheerfully bear
whatsoever he shall ordain concerning thee, since thou see the Son of God and
his Mother; the one giving up his Blood to obey it, and the other her Heart.
Refuse not Labors, repay not Slanders, resist not Persecutions and Affronts,
but whatsoever thou shall suffer, suffer it humbly and patiently for the sake
of that dearest Lord. God the Father sends them, God the Son in bearing teaches
thee to bear them, and God the Holy Ghost will give thee Comfort in them.

Do thou feel how much the Enemy persecutes thee? Do thou feel how much thy
evil-willers afflict thee? Do thou feel the Injustice and Oppression of the
Powerful? Do thou feel Losses, Trouble, Sickness, Anguish, Poverty, or
whatsoever else lies heavy on thy heart? Ease it, by considering that all comes
to thee from Heaven. That which is God's permission in him that sins, is his
dispensation to him that suffers; and those very Afflictions and Persecutions
which God permits by a Tyrant, he makes use of as the Chisel and Mallet, with
which he is cutting out and forming of a Martyr. He commands the one to suffer,
and suffers the other to torment; to the one he sends a Crown of Martyrdom from
Heaven, and leaves the other upon Earth to commit Sins, which will be his
everlasting Torment in Hell; therefore whatsoever thou shall suffer, bear it
patiently in God, with God, and for God.

Of the Last Supper, and of the washing of his Disciples Feet.
Now behold the Lord Jesus with all his Apostles entering into the Chamber
prepared for them to celebrate the Legal, Natural, and Eucharistical Suppers
in, where the Eternal Shepherd made himself Food, for the Nourishment of his
Sheep. Behold, how with his Disciples he celebrates the Ancient Legal Passover,
with Staves in their hands standing, with Shoes on his holy feet, eating those
bitter Herbs which he abolished, and leaving them for the sweet Aliment and
Sustenance, he after gave us in his most Holy Body and Blood. With that he gave
a full accomplishment to the Ancient Written Law of Moses, and gave it a
Farewell with his most holy Hand, shutting the Door for ever against those
Ceremonies, which till then were enjoined, but are since sealed up and
prohibited.

Having ended that first Supper of the Paschal Lamb, (which was much more a
Figure, and a Mystery, than a Nourishment) his Apostles celebrated the natural
and common Supper, giving refreshment to their weary Limbs, that their Nature
might be enabled to support those Injuries, Pains, and Torments, which Sin was
like to bring upon them. In that second Supper our Savior gives Judas an hint
of his intended Treason, and of his own Mercy; and as if he had meant to awaken
him from his wicked Lethargy, offers him the Sop he had dipped, to the end that
the Liquor changing the color of the Bread, might check the Traitor with the
thought of his most precious Blood, and that he was going to shed it, even for
him, by being nailed upon the Cross. Our Lord strikes a trouble into all his
Disciples, by affirming that one amongst them would betray him. Peter loving
him fervently, and being stout, desires to be informed by the means of John,
who that Traitorous Disciple was, that (as it is credible) he might chastise so
horrid a wickedness; but our Lord, who that Night had made, as it were, an
Embargo upon all Pains and Punishments, and seized them only for himself, would
not plainly manifest the Traitor, lest by discovering so horrible a Treachery,
the Salvation and Redemption of Mankind should have been hindered.

Those two Suppers being ended, our Savior, to establish Humility in the
hearts of his Disciples, to the end that by increasing and multiplying, it
might be derived to the whole Church of God, enriching and improving it with
that Holy Virtue; The Creator rises to wash the feet of his Creatures, and who
could cleanse them better, than he that Created them? Who could better repair
what was fallen down, than he that made the Building? Who could better restore
us to our former Innocence, than he that was like us in all things, Sin only
excepted? Who could wash and purify our Sins, but the Author and Fountain of
Grace? which flowing in the Heart of our Lord most full of Mercy, that Source
of eternal goodness pours it forth with his most Holy Hand; for, From what
other Hand could so great pity and compassion have proceeded?

What other Water, O Jesus my Redeemer, could cleanse the foulness of my Sins?
What other but thy Divine Hands could purify the Defilements of my inordinate
Passions? What but Innocence itself could whiten the stains of my polluted
Soul? What could take away my Wickedness, but thy Infinite and Unspeakable
Goodness?

He begins to wash the Feet of his Apostles, of which some think the first were
the foulest and the most disloyal, that ever trod upon the Ground; beginning as
the Divine Physician with Judas, who had the most deadly Disease, and hastening
the Remedy to him first, that was in the greatest danger. Others, who would
have St. Peter to be Head of the Church, say, He began with him; That
Reformation being the best grounded, and the most powerful, which begins from
the highest, descending from the Head unto the rest of the Body. That holy
Apostle seeing his Redeemer at his Feet, was humbled and confounded before he
touched them. He that had walked upon the Waters, and Trampled upon the Waves,
sinks deeper in this Basin, through Love, than he had done in the depth of the
Sea through Fear. Seeing an Humility so beyond all measure, and that his God
was down upon his Knees at his Feet, he was in such an amazement, that he
denied them him, saying, Lord, thou shall not wash my feet. O what an high
acknowledgment was this of St. Peter, when he said, Lord, will thou wash my
feet? It was in its kind, an higher one than when he confessed him near
Cesarea. He then knew him, and confessed him to be God, but he did not know
himself; but now Peter acknowledges him to be God, Infinite and Omnipotent, and
himself to be a wretched weak Man, and a most miserable Sinner. Many pretend to
know God, and are ignorant of themselves; but they know him indeed, who by his
Divine Light, come to discover their own Darkness. Lord, will thou wash my
feet? Thou, the God of Heaven, and I a little Dust of the Earth? Thou the
Creator, and I the vilest of all Creatures? Thou, the Eternal Greatness of the
Creation, the Soul of all that lives; and I the frailest, the meanest of all
that Die? Thou my Master, and I thy Disciple? Thou, the King and Crown of
Angels, and I a poor simple Fisherman; nay, which is worse, a sinful Worm, and
therefore more base, than any of those that crawl upon the Ground? Thou, that
art Innocence adn Goodness itself, upon thy Knees at the Feet of my Sins, and
of my Wickedness? Finally, O my Jesus, Thou, who art greater than the greatest,
do thou kneel at my Feet, who am less than the least of thy Mercies?

Thus the Humility of that loving Disciple opposed that of his Master with a
Holy Contention, while all stood looking and admiring, to behold which would
get the Victory, whether the Human nature knowing the infinite height of the
Divine, or the Divine knowing the infinite Misery of the Humane. It seems more
just, that here Peter should have overcome God, than God Peter, as it is more
reasonable that Man should serve God, than that God should serve Man. It is the
part of Man to obey, and of God to command; to Man it belongs to Serve, and to
God, to suffer himself to be Served, Loved, and Adored.

This indeed was a Mystery of Love and Divine Charity, and he showed this
excessive kindness, to oblige and to inflame theirs to him, and to one another
by his example; saying, If I being your Master and your Lord, have washed your
Feet, ye ought also to wash one another Feet. That Love, which made him being
God to become Man, made him being Man, to humble himself before Man. And that
Sovereign Lord never took a righter course for that high intent, than by
humbling and prostrating himself, to wash, to cleanse, and to purify Man. He
made himself Man, that he might redeem him; and did it seem much for God being
become Man, to kneel down to wash him?

Yes, dear Jesus, it is much, much beyond expression, for nothing of all this
could be deserved by Man. He does not deserve any remedy, because he has been
the Author of his own Misery, but thy unbounded, thy unspeakable compassion
looks upon his Necessity, and not upon his Demerits. Whither, dear Savior,
shall the high expressions of thy Love extend? Where shall this Infinite
Charity of thine be limited? Behold Lord, we are Men, that is to say, mere
Misery and Wickedness. Behold, Lord, thou art God, that is to say, the most
Sovereign Power, and Supreme Majesty. Do thou so far abase thy Divinity, as
to drag it upon the Earth within thy Humanity? Is it not enough for thee to
make thy self Man, unless thou humblest and prostratest thy self before Man?
Who can see God at his feet without falling into an Ecstasy of Astonishment, and
without giving up his life, through an excessive Humility? Who can choose but
die with shame and confusion, to see so unfitting an in-equality? I do not
wonder, that St. Peter resisted it, for besides that, he knew that his Master
was God, and he a vile Creature, he loved his God, and he loved his Master
extremely much, and in the same proportion that he loved him, was the trouble
he felt to see him kneeling at his feet; since he knew that it was the duty of
all earthly Creatures to serve and adore him. But yet for all that, Peter at
last yielded to Christ, it being most just that man should yield to God, since
the greatest Humility lies in the greatest Obedience; the Disciple therefore
must obey his Master, and the Servant his Lord. Our Savior told him, that if
he would not be washed and purified, he could have no share in his Redemption;
at the hearing of which terrible Sentence, Peter offered him not only his feet
to be washed, but his Hands and his Head also. To this Christ replied. He that
is washed, needs not save only to wash his Feet but is clean all over: That
is, he that has been already washed in the Laver of Baptism, needs only to
wash the Feet of his Affections, which from the Earth and misery of our
Inclinations and Passions rise up to the Heart. Hereby the Redeemer of Souls
signifies that Purity, wherewith we ought to prepare our selves for the
receiving of the Blessed Sacrament; for before he Consecrates that, he in the
washing his Disciples feet, gives them an example of Humility and Resignation,
and in the Water expresses the virtue of those penitent Tears, wherewith they
were to wash their Sins, and bewail their Miseries. And by not suffering the
Dust of the Earth to remain upon their Feet, teaches them that they should much
less suffer inordinate Affections to remain in their Hearts.

In short our Blessed Lord washed the feet of all the Holy Apostles, and
amongst the rest, those of the Traitor Judas, whose cruel Obstinacy was so
great, that neither the touching them with those Divine Hands, nor the bringing
them so near to the Compassionate Breast of the Redeemer of Souls could
mollify the hardness of his Heart, nor change the cruelty of his Intention. O
how hard-hearted a thing is Covetousness! What an insensible Rock! How well
does St. Paul call it the Source of all evil? O what a difficult thing it is to
bring those with sincerity home to God, who once have lost their respect to him
so far, as to dare to offend him to his Face. Let so many Publicans and
Sinners, so many Harlots, and other wicked Livers speak this, who repenting
were pardoned, and the Traitorous Apostle Judas, who persisting in Impenitency
was Damned.

Of the Institution of the Holy Sacrament.
This Gracious Action being finished, he holds a most loving Discourse to his
Disciples, preparing them to see their Master suffer, and to bear all those
sufferings they were to undergo themselves. O how does he forewarn and advise
them! How does he encourage and instruct them! How does he enlighten and
comfort them! There he rebukes Peter, thereby giving a Lesson to the rest, and
shows them Beams of Mercy even in those Prophecies of Tribulations and
Afflictions, that were to befall them. If he foretell their Frailties and their
Failings, he also assures them of Victories and Triumphs, and that they shall
subdue and trample upon the World through the Virtue and Power of his Grace.

That most tender Discourse being likewise ended, he Celebrated the third and
last Supper, or more properly, the admirable and unspeakable Mystery of the
Sacrament, in which he expressed and Epitomized the Intimacies of his
unmeasurable Goodness and Charity. To make himself Man, and to suffer for Man,
seemed but a small thing to his Love, unless he still remained with Man to be
the food of Man. O Infinite Charity, which contentest not thy self with being
our Redemption, unless thou also becomest our Nourishment! O Infinite Charity,
who not only offerest thy self to Death to save my Life, but who also wilt
enter into my Breast to give me a better Life, and to defend and free me from a
more lasting Death! O Infinite Charity, who having our Ingratitude in thy
thoughts, and that thou were to be condemned by Men to die upon the Cross, yet
leavest us a benefit, which we could not have received, but by thy passing
first through so great an Ingratitude of Men! O Infinite Charity, which knowing
that my Offenses would nail thee to the Cross, were yet providing that remedy
for those very Offenses! O Infinite Charity, which knowing that a thousand
Injuries and Torments were contriving in the Hearts of Men against thy
unspeakable Goodness and Mercy, did yet leave thy self for Food to those
Infamous Mouths, and having it in thy Power to inflict a severe punishment upon
them for so great a Wickedness, were offering them means and expedients of
Mercy, Goodness, and Charity! What was Man doing, when thou did institute
this blessed Sacrament for him? What, but preparing the Scourges, the Crown of
Thorns, the Nails, and the Cross for thee? He was designing thy cruel Death,
and thou his eternal Life. He was contriving Torments for thee, and thou Glory
for him. He was platting a Crown of sharp Thorns for thy sacred Head, and thou
a Crown of Joys and Eternities for his. Lord, is it thy Custom to repay
Benefits for Injuries, and to give Crowns for the Reward of Ingratitude? Come
hither, O devout Souls, come and bewail with me so great a Sin; Come, love with
me so great a Love. Come with a Spiritual Hunger, and offer up your hearts to
receive that Divine Nourishment, and let whatsoever is in you of your selves,
go forth of you to make room for this most deservedly beloved Lord to enter.

Of the Consecration of the Apostles.
After that our Sovereign Lord and Master had Consecrated the Elements of Bread
and Wine, breaking the one and giving it them to Eat, and pouring out the
other, and commanding all to Drink, calling the one his Body, and the other his
Blood, and thereby changing not their nature, but their use, that they might
become a Sacrament, which should remain in his Church, not only for a
Remembrance of his precious Death and Passion, but also for a Conveyance of the
Merits thereof, for the Remission of Sins. He Consecrated also the Apostles
themselves, and gave them the Power and Virtue to Consecrate and Ordain others,
and to send them forth, as he did them for the Propagation of his Gospel, and
for the Administration and Government of Souls. This was another admirable
expression of the Love of our Lord Jesus to Mankind, since whereas he could
have taken upon him the nature of Angels, and left them Heirs of that rich
Possession of Receiving, Consecrating, and Administering those precious Symbols,
he was pleased to bestow that Benefit and Privilege upon Mankind, which
thereby received Honor and Favor, as well as Remedy. But, Lord, I wonder not
at that, since from the time thou made thy self Man, all advantages were
brought to Man, by joining thy Divinity to his Humanity.

O that, as thou have given to us Bishops and Priests this Dignity, we had also
the Spirit, the Devotion, and the Piety of the Apostles! And, Lord, as the
Power thou have conferred upon us, is what thou have not granted to Angels and
to Seraphins, O that the Perfection of our Manners, and the Purity and Charity
of our Souls were in some degree suitable to that of Angels, and of Seraphins!
But, O God, we have a Dignity of great weight upon very weak shoulders; the
Dignity is fit for Angels, the Weakness is of miserable Sinners; And thou only,
O Eternal Goodness; thy Mercy, and thy Strength alone can help and encourage,
and support our Weakness and Misery. Since then, O sweet Lord, thou give us
this Dignity, give us also those parts and qualifications which are expedient
for it. Since thou have given us the Obligations, help us also with the
Abilities; since thou give us the Ministry, give us also the Spirit. As thou
have made us to represent thee, make us also to imitate thee. As thou have
given us the Power, give us also the Virtue with the Power. Suffer us not, O
Divine Goodness, to serve in that High Dignity with Uncharitableness and
Indignity. If thou will not help the Bishops, the Fathers of the Faith, and the
Shepherds of Souls, O thou Eternal lover of Souls, whom will thou help? If our
Light must enlighten the Souls of others, what shall become both of us and
others, if we want thy Light? Thou call the Apostles and Ministers the Salt
of the Earth, and if the Salt lose its savor, how shall their Doctrine be
seasoned? If the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into the ditch?
Grant, O Lord, that thy Goodness and thy Love may dwell in us, that thy Mercy
and thy Charity may burn in our hearts, and that the fire of thy Divine Love
may break forth from thence to kindle and inflame the hearts of our Christian
Brethren.

Our Blessed Savior having Consecrated his Holy Apostles to be Teachers of the
Faith, and Pillars of his Church; and having made himself their Minister and
their Priest, enters into the breasts of those that were to be his Ministers
and Priests, to become an unbloody Sacrifice in the Altar of those living
Temples, before he was a bloody one upon the Altar of the Cross. They with
profound Reverence receive the Lord, whom they adore and behold in receiving
him, and at the same time feel within themselves him that ministers unto them;
and two fires becoming but one inflame them, that without by their Eyes, and
that within by their Hearts. That happy Night the Lord took possession of the
breast and heart of Men, and they in exchange took a Proof of the excessive
Love of God; but our Savior likewise had a Proof of Man's Ingratitude, since
the Traitor Judas received him; his infinite Charity being resolved to try, if
he could possibly be washed clean within, who was not purified at all by his
having been washed without: But he, that had kept his foul Intention
notwithstanding the washing of his Feet, and would not make use of that Water
to wash his evil Eye, was as little the better for the inward washing, for he
shut his Eyes against that Beam, which would have enlightened him, and the fire
of his Covetousness was more powerful than the fire of so great a Charity. He
suffered his Redeemer to come into his breast, not that he might receive him,
but that he might the better sell him, and so he carried him along with him,
that he might not get away, when he was to deliver him up in the Garden. At the
same instant that he received the Savior of Souls into his covetous Breast, he
presently went out to sell him to the Jews, whereby it appears that he received
him, to the end that he might betray him more securely that way, than by
leaving him behind. And this was the first and most grievous step of his
Passion, to be received by that Treacherous Disciple. O let us, that are
Priests, tremble in Receiving and Administering the Sacrament of him, who in
loving us enters as a meek and a gentle Lamb into our breast, and who, when he
comes to Judge us, will be a fierce Lion, if we receive him here unworthily.

The Third WEEK.
Of his Agony in the Garden, his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension.
THese three unspeakable Mysteries being ended, the Savior of Souls goes forth
into the Garden of Gethsemane, to give beginning to his dolorous Passion, that
the place where the second Adam raised us up, might be like that, where the
first Adam cast us down. It was in a Garden we were ruined by the first of Men,
and in another Garden we were repaired by the best of Men. There our Redeemer
sweats drops of Blood for the purging of thy sins and mine; so laborious was it
to bear the weight of our sins, that his holy Pores were thereby opened, and
even Innocence itself was put into an Agony by that intolerable burden. There
to see the Ingratitude of Mankind, and how much they would despise the
un-utterable Treasures of Man's Redemption, made blood break forth from the
Body of the King of Heaven, and run trickling down to the very Earth. There he
thrice made earnest Prayer unto his Father for himself, and for us; asking
strength of Body for himself, and strength of Soul for us. There he repeated
his Prayer so often, to teach us, that our Prayer ought to be earnest and
persevering. The Humane Nature begged assistance from the Divine; and he
weighed the heaviness, and shrunk from the bitterness of that Cup, that his
Divinity might help his Humanity in the drinking of it. There our dear Master
by suffering taught us to suffer; that our Patience and Courage in Suffering
depends wholly upon God, and that there is nothing in us but Miseries; as if he
should have said, If I, who am God as well as Man, do as Man need the succor
and favor of God, and ask it with a threefold repetition; Why do not ye, weak,
wretched, and miserable Men ask it a thousand times, and why are ye not
instant, devout, and fervent in your Prayers?

He there also granted, that the Cup of his grievous Passion should pass on to
his Disciples, and that they, and from them the rest of his Church, should
inherit that Patrimony of Pains, and that effectual Medicine of Sins. Let this
Cup pass from me, says he to his Father; as if his meaning had been, Grant, O
my God and Father, that these my Apostles, and all those that by the Preaching
of them and their Successors shall heartily receive and embrace my Religion,
may drink of this Cup with me, that they may also Reign with me. There he was
comforted by an Angel, who was himself the Comfort of Angels; and being God,
would show himself, as Man, to stand in need of Divine Consolation, giving us
assurance that we likewise in our needs shall be succored and protected by
Angels. There all his Disciples are dismayed, or fallen asleep, and none
wa^ches but the Traitor Judas. O Lord, how lukewarm and indifferent is our
Love! how strong, how vigilant is our Ingratitude! In serving thee, dear Jesus,
we are dull and sleepy; in offending thee we are lively and watchful. Who could
bear with such Wickedness, but only thy infinite Goodness? Who but thou, O most
Gracious Savior, could endure such sleepiness, and such watchfulness; such
watchfulness in Sin, and such sleepiness in Love?

Judas being Treacherous and Covetous, for a little Money sells the Eternal Son
of God, and makes them pay for him, to whom he freely offers himself in Gift.
Those infamous Ministers of Covetousness and Envy come with great force of Arms
to lay hold of a gentle Lamb; and Humane Weakness attempts with Cords to bind
the Divine Omnipotence. But what great matter was it, that he should suffer
himself to be bound by their wickedness, when he had already bound himself with
his own Charity? That Treacherous Disciple with infamous lips kisses his Face,
and turns the Signal of Peace into a Signal of the greatest Treachery. The Lord
calls him Friend, although he was so cruel an Enemy, and still bore with him,
and loved him, because he suffered himself to be sold for Love. His design was
to try, if it were possible, to soften the heart that was so hardened in
mischief; but his heart being in his Purse, he neither would, nor could let it
be wrought upon by the meekness of his Master. St. Peter being both fervent and
valiant, at the taking of our Redeemer cuts off an Ear of one of the Servants,
(and it is probable he would have done the like to Judas, if he had been near
him) but the most sweet and merciful Jesus restores it, reproving that loving
Disciple; and being able with his Divinity to have defended his Humanity, he
makes use of the one to manifest the other, by a clearer demonstration
discovering his Divinity in the Miracle, and his Humanity in the Advice and
Remedy. O more than infinite Goodness! O thy merciful forwardness to Pardon and
to Suffer! Thou reprovest him that defends thee, and curest him that offends,
and comes to take thee. Yet in that hurry and disorder of wickedness the
Miracle was not taken notice of, and it being a Night of so much darkness, to
what could it prompt the minds of Men, but to what was black and cruel?

Now they bring the Blessed Jesus thus tied and bound at Midnight to the House
of Annas, who was the Father-in-law of Caiaphas the High Priest, and there
without Right or Reason, without Justice or Mercy, the Universal Judge of Souls
is examined, as a guilty Person. He gives them a modest holy Answer, for which
they give him a box on the Ear, the whole Heaven weeping at that time to see so
horrid a Crime committed upon Earth. From that day Affronts became honorable,
Ignominy glorious, and that began to be Renown, which before had been Contempt.
The Cross had been accounted shameful, till the unspeakable Mysteries of Man's
Redemption were celebrated upon it; but from the time that God blessed and
consecrated Pains and Punishments with his Pains and Punishments, to be Merry
began to be a great Danger, and to Suffer was made to be a great Honor.

While our Lord suffered these things in the House of Annas, the Officers and
People gathered themselves together in the House of Caiaphas, and they led the
most meek and holy Jesus before him, because he was the High Priest for that
Year, and so the Lamb was brought before a Council of Lions, and ravening
Wolves. There Envy Examines him, Injustice Condemns him, and the Blasphemers of
God pronounce God himself to be a Blasphemer. O Folly, that exceeds all Folly!
O Wickedness, that surpasses all Wickedness! Man condemns God for a Blasphemer,
when the greatest Blasphemy, that Man's Nature could commit, was to declare so
foolish a Condemnation, and so Blasphemous a Sentence.

But while they are condemning our Blessed Lord, his Divine Majesty suffers no
less by the Denial of his Loving Disciple, than by the Persecution of his
bitter Enemies; but his merciful Eyes raise him up again, since it was the fall
of a Lover, who came to seek for his Beloved. St. Peter fell, where no body
else durst come; His fall was by the frailty of our Nature, but his coming
thither, when all the rest forsook their Master and fled, was by the Valor of
Grace. It was not so with the Impenitent Judas, who, besides his being a
Covetous Traitor, was also distrustful of Mercy, for he having made Restitution
of his illgotten Money, did with a worse kind of Repentance, seek his Remedy in
Despair.

Behold Jesus being condemned to Death by the Jew, they deliver him up to the
Gentile; and having loaded him with Injuries, Affronts, Buffetings, and a
thousand other sorts of Punishment, they present him to Pilate. By him he is
examined again, and the Idolater less partial acknowledges the Malice of the
Sons of Israel, and the Virtue and Holiness of the Son of God. Yet what does
that help, if Envy and Cruelty be more powerful in Persecuting, than Truth and
Innocence in Defending? But to the end that the pains of our Redeemer might be
the greater, he finds him very slack and remiss in his Defense, and them very
fierce, vigorous, and constant in his Prosecution; but at last the violent and
importunate Accuser always gets the better of a weak and unconcerned Judge; so
Pilate, not to give himself the trouble of defending Innocence, delivers it up
bound into the hands of Malice; yet having some little scruple to commit so
great a wickedness, he would fain have shuffled it off to another, and remits
him to Herod, to see if he could ease himself of so troublesome a Cause, and
avoid so foul a Crime as that which those fierce Tigers would have had him to
commit.

They bring the Savior of Souls to the House of Herod, and that sensual
Incestuous King would have had him to work some Miracle for his Diversion, not
having been willing to believe those he had wrought for his Salvation. Our
Blessed Lord gives him no Answer, for he that had beheaded John Baptist, and
silenced the voice of his Holy Forerunner, did not deserve to hear the voice of
the Eternal Word. In the end, the Eternal Wisdom being despised as a Fool,
Herod disdains to be the Judge of his Cause, and so being clothed in a Robe of
Scorn, they bring him back again to Pilate. Thither the cruel Multitude follow
him with their Clamours, and being impatient to see Injustice so backward to
Condemn Innocence, they with loud cries entreat the Gentile, that he might be
Crucified, because the Superstitious Jew would not defile himself by his death
in the time of the Passover, thinking that provided he kept but an outward
Purity, it was no matter though he had a thousand Impurities and bloody stains
in his Soul. How well did our Savior tell them, that they were Cups washed
clean on the outside, but that within they were full of Riot and Excess; and
whited Sepulchers, whose inside was full of Rottenness and Corruption! The
President makes still some resistance, and for an expedient of Pity Condemns
the Holy Jesus to be scourged, believing that at the sight of his Scourging and
Crowning with Thorns, his fierce Accusers would be softened and satisfied. O
Pity, more cruel than Cruelty itself! Are five thousand lashes a merciful means
to save the Innocent? Behold, O my Soul, what sort of Compassion was used in
the dolorous Passion of the Redeemer of Souls, since they took it for a kind of
Pity to tear his Flesh with so great a number of Stripes, and how justly it is
said, That the mercies of the wicked are cruel! Thus shedding Rivers of Blood,
crowned with Thorns, having put a Reed in his hand, and an infamous Robe of
Purple on his back, he brings forth the Lord Jesus to be seen by that
ungrat^ful People, bidding them behold the man; but they still fierce and
barbarous, cry out to have him crucified. How soft are Rocks, how gentle are
Lions and Tigers in comparison of such Monsters! Behold our Savage hardness,
since God suffers in this manner for Man, and Man still continues cruel and
obdurate toward God! Is it possible that so many wounds and sufferings should
not work upon them? nor at all abate their fury? Is it possible so doleful, so
miserable a Spectacle should not soften Humane hearts? There is no Anger, no
Rage, nor Fury so violent against a Criminal, which does not relent to some
tenderness at the sight of his Punishment; but here at the sight of Innocence
itself tormented, abused, and affronted with all kinds of Mockery and Derision,
they become more hardened, more furious, and more enraged. Sure they were
Statues of Brass, since all this could not move them; or if they had the flesh,
at least it was impossible they should have the hearts of Men. But, O Lord, how
much more reason have we to condemn our selves! For if our sinful and obdurate
Souls are not changed and softened by thy Pains and Sufferings, believing and
confessing thee; what wonder is it, if those cruel Murderers persisted in
their bloody purpose, since they denied and rejected thee? The President seeing
that his Expedient had been fruitless, and that the People were grown but the
more furious by it, condemns him to Death, (though dissuaded by his Wife upon
her Dream from having any thing to do with that Just Person) and delivers him
to them to be crucified; since all that was easier for such a mean complying
Judge to consent to, than to trouble and hazard himself in the further Defense
of Innocence. Yet that he might remain clear and spotless, and honored in the
Opinion of the World, in Condemning our Savior he declares himself not guilty
of his Blood, and so he washes his hands, and satisfies himself with laying the
Crime upon others. But what greater Infamy can a Judge be guilty of, than to
suffer the Accusers themselves to write and to sign the Sentence?

This being done, our Blessed Savior carries his Cross alone for a great part
of the way to Mount Calvary, and because they thought the time long of his
getting thither, they make Simon the Cyrenian help him to bear it, that he
might be there so much the sooner; for it was not out of pity that they gave
him that Assistance, but it was an effect of their Cruelty; nor did they intend
it for any ease to his Life, but for the hastening of his Death. In his way to
Calvary he is bewailed by the Daughters of Jerusalem, leaving this Glory to the
Women, that they alone wept at the Passion of their Lord, their Master, and
their Redeemer. They strip his Body for the clothing of our Souls, and at the
same time both Heaven and Earth were clothed with Grief and Darkness to mourn
for the Sufferings of their Creator. They with rough hard Nails fasten the
Eternal Son of God unto the Cross, the Ingratitude of the Jews making him that
requital for all his Divine Benefits. Those blessed Feet, that traveled up and
down so many weary steps, to seek Sinners, that he might save and pardon them;
Those liberal Hands, full of Charity and Beneficence, are bored through, and
nailed by those very Persons whom he came to succor. Not to acknowledge a good
turn, is Ingratitude and Wickedness; what shall it then be to pierce both the
Hands and Feet of ones Benefactor?

Then they raise up the Blessed Jesus upon the Cross, and allow him the
Superiority over two Thieves, as fit Subjects for the King of that Royal
Throne; and by the same action they raise and exalt Man's Nature, and advance
it in a manner to be Divine. When the Son of Man shall be raised up (said his
Divine Majesty) he will draw all along with him. It is clear he did so, since
by his most precious Blood he washed and redeemed them, and with his most
ardent Love he called and enflamed them. O my dearest Lord God, who were
wounded and despised, crucified and crowned with Thorns, and for my sins did
suffer so many torments upon the Cross; I beseech thee by the Merits of them
all, O sweetest Jesus, to pardon all my grievous Offenses. Since thou have
drawn up all, draw me up also, O most Gracious Savior. Do not suffer that most
precious Blood to leave unwashed this Soul, which confesses thee, and
acknowledges thee to be God. Thy ardent Charity interceded to thy Father for
those very Enemies that crucified thee; How much rather then will thou be the
Mediator and Redeemer of a poor Christian, who confesses and adores thy
Sovereign Majesty?

Behold, admire, and adore thy Suffering Savior, and bewail thy sins the cause
of all his Sufferings. Behold all Creatures in amazement to see their Creator
in so woeful a condition! Behold the Heavens obscured at that Eclipse of his
Heavenly Beauties! Behold the Earth and all the Elements confounded at the
awfulness of his Pains and Torments! Behold how the Sun withdraws its Light,
not to see so horrid a Wickedness, and so terrible an Ingratitude! Behold even
the very Rocks so softened, as to cleave asunder in compassion! What kind of
hearts then are those that remain unsensible? Lord, suffer not mine to be one
of them, but let it melt with Love and Contrition, to think of thy heavy
Torments, and of my heinous Offenses. The Vail of the Temple was rent in twain,
and shall my Heart be whole? Shall not my Breast and all my Bowels open
themselves to receive the Blood which thou sheddest for my Redemption?

Behold the Holy Virgin at the Foot of her Son's Cross, who recommends her to
the care of his beloved Disciple. Behold, how one drop of his Blood falling
upon the good Thief, was to him the Baptism of Life; and eternal Condemnation
to the Bad, who knew not how to make his advantage of it. He there made the
Divine Nature propitious to the Human, that it might be pardoned, and by the
last of those seven Words which he spoke upon the Cross, declared that by his
Blood and Death he had finished the Work of our Redemption. Then after having
hung three Hours alive upon the Cross, He that was the Life of Souls, gave them
Life by his Death, and a Life eternal, which Triumphs over Death for ever. When
he was dead, the Soldier with a Spear pierced his most holy Side, out of which
came Water and Blood, representing the two Sacraments, and making a wide Door
for holy Souls to enter; and after other three Hours, the Piety of his Friends
takes him down from the Cross, laying his precious Body in a new Sepulcher,
which was bestowed on him by the Charity of Joseph of Arimathea: So he, who
during his Life had not a House to rest his Head in, was so poor likewise at
his Death, that he had not so much as a Grave of his own, to put his Body in.
There they sadly lament his loss, and burying him in their Hearts, as they had
done in that Tomb, they leave him there embalmed with Spices, that, as it was
Prophesied of him, he might be as the Rich in his Death; and though there they
leave him, yet they carry him away with them in their remembrance, that we by
their example never may forget him.

After his sad and bloody Passion, succeeded his Powerful Resurrection, when he
had conquered Hell, as well as Death, and then the Glorious Triumph of his
Ascension, to the end, that Human Nature might not only be Redeemed, but also
Honored and Crowned; yet before he went up into Heaven, he comforted his
Mother and the Apostles, to whom he several times appeared after his
Resurrection, to the end that their Joy for it might recompense the Sadness
they had felt at his dolorous Passion. He examined St. Peter thrice concerning
his Love, that by three Confessions he might purge away the Shame of his three
Denials, bidding him as often to feed his Lambs. He signified to him by what
death he should Glorify God, commanding them all to Preach the Gospel, and
assuring them, that he would be with them to the end of the World.

Within few days after he made good his promise in sending them another
Comforter, for at Pentecost the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in fiery
Tongues, to the end, that the third Person in the Holy Trinity might Govern the
Church, which the second had founded in his Blood, and which the first still
supports with abundance of Celestial Blessings. This is a Week, which is
sufficient to employ all our Days, and Weeks, and Years, even to Eternity; in
imitating those Virtues, in adoring those Mysteries, and in for ever praising
that Savior and Redeemer of Souls, who performed them for our sakes.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Exercise of the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
upon Contemplation of the Life and Death of our Savior.
WE have been furnished with large matter of Consideration, which not only is
sweet and holy, but also most profitable to our Souls. For the Life of Jesus
Christ must be the Looking-glass of our Lives: His Passion must banish the Sins
and Passions of our Hearts. His Sufferings must moderate and reform our
Pleasures. His Wounds must be the Cure of our Wounds and Maladies. His Cross
must be our Banner, and his Death our Life. From hence, as from a most clear
and beautiful Original, thou art to Copy out those Virtues, which are to
resist, assault, and conquer thy Vices. Upon these high and Heavenly Mysteries,
thou art to fix thy Faith, thy Hope, and thy Love at all times. So far as thou
shall think and meditate upon the Life and Passion of our Lord, so far will thy
Faith quicken and enliven thee; and that Faith, which being Dead and without
Works, will be but the cause of thy greater Condemnation, by being made a
living and a working Faith will obtain for thee a high Reward. If you have
Faith, says our Savior, you shall remove Mountains. O how great is the power
of Faith? If you have Faith, ask of me and you shall receive, seek me, and you
shall find me; and if you knock, it shall be opened unto you.

That lively Faith, which is offered and given us in the Life and Death of the
Savior of Souls, is not only to believe what Faith teaches us, but also to do
in the same measure as we believe. To believe so many Heavenly Mysteries, and
not to act in conformity to them, is a very imperfect Faith. To believe a God
will not serve the turn alone; The Devils, says St. James, believe and tremble
too, and yet are now burning in Hell. The Devil knows very well, that God is
God, and abhors him, though he believes. Do thou believe in God, art thou a
Christian? It Is well. But tell me how many are Condemned for ever, who believed
but did not do accordingly. Do thou believe in Christ, and yet wilt not
follow Christ, and which is worse, do thou Persecute him, and Crucify him
again by thy wicked Life? Woe be to thee! and woe be to me! if we thus believe
in Christ. This People (says he) honor me with their Lips, but their Heart is
far from me. Woe be to thee and me, if we honor Christ on that manner!

Not all those (says the Holy Jesus) that cry unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father. That is to
say, there are two sorts of Persons, that cry Lord, Lord, which are two sorts
of Believers: The one say, and do not do; believe, but do not work: The other
both say and do, believe, and likewise work. He that believes and does shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that believes a God, and yet works
against him, and Offends and Crucifies him, shall never be admitted into those
Heavenly Mansions. It Is not enough to do, without believing, nor to believe
without doing; both are necessary, and we must work without giving over. Let
every one look and consider what his works are, for thither he shall go,
whither his Thoughts, Words, and Actions direct their Course. Are they sinful?
Then to Hell. Are they full of Tears, Repentance, and Contrition? Then to
Heaven.

Look what thou sowest, for that shall thou reap. If Corruption, thou shall
reap Corruption; if Perfection, thou shall reap Perfection. Do thou sow
Virtues in this Life? Thou shall reap Celestial Crowns in the other. Do thou
sow Vices? Thou shall reap Eternal Torments. A lively Faith, I say, a lively
Faith is that which will save us; a lively, active, a pure, holy Faith; not one
defiled with Sins, deformed with Passions, and full of Misery, and Presumption.
Do thou live as if thou were an Heathen, and yet believe thy self a
Christian? Unless thou amendest thy Life, the Heathen shall carry the Christian
along with him to Hell, but the Christian shall never carry the Heathen along
with him to Heaven. Do thou believe an Eternity, and yet live without any
memory of that Eternity, having all thy thoughts fastened on that which is
merely Temporal? These Transitory and Temporal things will pass away, and then
thou shall come to suffer Torments in Eternity.

Do not deceive thy self, nor think it is enough to believe without working,
nor that Christ's having suffered for thee will be enough to save thee, whilst
thou ungratefully offendest him, that suffered for thee. Alas! that will not
serve the turn, but rather it will be enough and too much to damn thee. Do
thou think Christ came to suffer, to the end that thou might the more freely
sin against him? Do thou think he came into the World, that thou might
heap up thy wickednesses upon his holy shoulders? Do thou think he came to
facilitate thy Crimes? to the end that obstinate sinners might compound their
Vices with his Merits? Do thou think that Heavenly Master of Purity and
Holiness came to open a Gate unto all Vice, whereby his Sufferings might serve
to save those, that only believed and wrought nothing but Sins and
Transgressions? The Eternal Son of God came into the World, not only to Redeem
us, but also to Teach us; In his Blood he left Redemption, and in his Life,
Instruction. He underwent his Passion to redeem Souls; but his Actions were so
high and holy, to amend, inform, direct, and purify them. The effect of his
Pains, his Cross, his Death, is to give Merit to our Works, and Grace and Force
to a Christian to suffer with him; but the effect of his Virtues, Perfections,
and whole Life, is to teach us, and to set us a Pattern to imitate, as far as
we are able. I have given you an Example, says he, that ye should do as I have
done. And in another place he says, Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come
after me, cannot be my Disciple. He is no perfect Christian, nor is it possible
he should be, that flies from the Cross, even though he might escape it. Every
Christian is to follow, and embrace the Cross of his Redeemer. Can any Man be a
perfect Christian without keeping the Commandments? No, certainly. Why then the
keeping of them is to follow Christ in taking up his Cross.

Consider, that when thou came into the Gate of the Church, by being Baptized
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, thou were
signed with the Sign of the Cross, in token that thou should not be ashamed
to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, but manfully fight under his Banner
against Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and continue Christ's
faithful Soldier and Servant unto thy life's end. Consider, that being come to
Understanding, thou art brought to take thy Baptismal Vow upon thy self in
Confirmation, whereby the Soul is fortified to fight the inward Battles of this
Life, and to bear the Cross. Consider, that at the receiving the Sacrament, if
thou do it worthily, thou renewest the same Vow, and that the Benefits of
Christ's Death cannot be conveyed to thee therein, but by believing, and
working according to thy belief. What is all this, but to teach us, that our
Faith ought to be lively, and that believing and doing must go together in a
Christian? For if thou want a hand to work, thou will also want a hand to
lay hold of Christ's Merits, and to apply them to thy Soul. Beg therefore of
God, that he would give thee a true, a vital, and an active Faith, for by that
means thou may have a sure, and a certain Hope, and an ardent Charity; since
they that believe well, hope well; and they that hope well, love well.

He that works as he believes, and believes as Christ commands him, hopes in
the same proportion that he believes. If thou hopest as thou believe, and
believe as thou ought, and love in the same manner as thou hopest,
Heaven and Glory are surely thine, thou have already conquered Hell: The Devils
fly already from thee; The Angels are already with thee; The Saints already
bear thee Company; Thou art already under the Protection of thy Blessed
Savior, and art already sealed by him for an Heir predestined to his Glory.
Pray therefore earnestly to God for a lively Faith, and then thou shall have
certain Hope, and fervent Charity. The Root of that most beautiful Tree, is
Faith; the green Leaves and fair Flowers of it are Hope; and the sweet savoury
Fruit is Charity. This Tree of true Wisdom is the Tree of Eternal Life, which
cures the Wounds of the Tree of Death and of Knowledge. Pant and gasp after the
Fruit of this Spiritual Tree, which is Divine Charity. If thou feel that, if
thou possessest that, thou art already grown up, and have profited considerably
in the Spiritual Life. If thou feel the love of God in thee, and that thy
heart be warmed with one spark thereof, rejoice and be of good courage, for
thou art already near the top of Calvary, which is the Mount of Christian
Perfection. The day that God gives a Soul the feeling of his Love, and an eager
hearty desire to serve and to please him, he draws it near to him, and unites
it to himself; nay, he already gives it a Pledge, that living always so, he may
safely hope never to be parted from him. Have thou Divine Charity, and do
thou feel the love of God within thee? Thou will cast away Humane Passions and
Imperfections; and having banished that which is imperfect, that which is
perfect will continue and increase in thee. Have thou Divine Charity, and do
thou feel the love of God? Darkness will speedily fly away, and an holy
perfect Light will enlighten thee.

O Divine Charity! how great is thy Power! how great is thy Worth! What is it
that thou can not do? Thou art more Omnipotent in a manner, than Omnipotency
itself. Thou made the Son of God to leave the Bosom of his Omnipotent Father,
to seek a Mother, to become Man, and to die on the Cross for Man; In the doing
all which acts of excessive Kindness, Omnipotency was as it were the Servant of
Divine Charity; since those things could not have been done, if Omnipotency had
not obeyed the infinite Love of God, in performing what his Charity ordained.

If thou love God then, I reckon thee safe on shore. Persevere, go on with
joy and cheerfulness, and all will be easy, sweet, and pleasant to thee. The
Love of God facilitates the Exercises of a Spiritual Life, and makes them
sweet, though in themselves they be bitter. The Love of God chears the Soul,
and resists great Storms of Temptations, Afflictions, and Tribulations, and
keeps a Conscience pure, holy, prompt, and lively. The Love of God gives more
pleasure in Suffering, than Pleasure itself does in the enjoying. The Love of
God gives Light, and drives away Darkness from the heart; and as Night and Day
cannot consist together, so neither can Divine Charity and Sin. The Love of God
gives Strength and Perseverance in what is good, and Valor and Constancy to
oppose what is evil. The Love of God roots out Passions, Hatred, and Revenge
from the heart, and introduces Pity, Goodness, and Mercy, with the other
excellent Virtues. Finally, the Love of God quickens, defends, comforts,
strengthens, enlightens, and perfects the Heart and Soul; and so long as thou
keep it there, it brings all under Subjection and Obedience to Reason. It is
strong, sweet, and powerful; loving, constant, courageous, and cheerful; it
contains in it all that is good, and casts out whatsoever is evil.

Exercise thy self then in Love, if thou desire the Lord should Crown thee.
If thou have a mind to profit, employ thy heart in loving Day and Night. Love
the Lord, who in his Eternal purpose loved thee, before there was Day or Night.
Let every return of thy breath breathe out the Love of this Lord, so that thy
respiration and thy love to him may he equally constant in thee.

THE THIRD PART OF THE Spiritual Year, IN September, October, November,
December.
SEPTEMBER.
The First WEEK.
Of the Virtue of Religion; and of the manner of Governing the Cardinal and
Moral Virtues, by that of Religion.
AN ardent Love, a lively Faith, and a constant Hope will bring thee to another
most sweet and noble Virtue, called Religion, or the inward and outward Worship
of God; which is that that creates and promotes all the other Virtues, and goes
always intermingled with Prayer. In this thou ought to Exercise thy self with
very great Humility. All thy Conversation should be with God, of God, and for
God. Enter thy self into his Service by Faith, adore him with Reverence, and
love all that appertains to him. There is no need for thee to go up into Heaven
to seek this Lord; since for that purpose even Earth is Heaven, and all Heaven
is to be found in this narrow place of our Banishment. Thou ought also to
bear great Reverence to the Houses of God, and to Sacred Persons; for these are
the Ministers of God, and do represent God; and those are Holy places,
consecrated and appointed for his outward Worship. If thou do live thus with
Reverence and Fear, and do exercise the Virtue of Religion with Love, which
is the height of all Perfection; thou shall walk on in Spirit, in Truth, and in
Prayer, and shall in the end infallibly attain the Crown of Eternity.

It Is Religion that sanctifies and gives worth to the four Cardinal, and to the
Moral Virtues; for without it they are only Natural; though they have an
outward Beauty, yet inwardly they are empty of Grace and Value. The Gentiles,
Barbarians, Idolaters, and Heretics also have Virtues; but they are only
Natural ones, they want that Soul, that Spirit, and that Efficacy, which they
get by the direction and intention of serving God by them. Without Religion and
love to God, thou shall find no Virtue in thy heart, that can deserve to be so
called, but the worth of it will increase, by how much the more it is performed
with Purity, Fervor, Attention, and Devotion. Endeavor to keep thy Conscience
clean, and to do all things through God, and for God; for that is all thy
Virtue, all thy Remedy, and the value of all thy Actions. The same pains taken,
only by changing the Intention, may either prove an Advantage, or a Ruin to thy
Soul. O how good and holy might the Vicious Man be, if he would but suffer so
much for God in Virtue, as he does to satisfy his Lusts in Vice! The Covetous
man plows up the Seas, and runs up and down through several Countries, to get
Wealth; but think what Treasures, what Crowns he might acquire, if he would
undergo the same hazards, as St. Paul and the Holy Apostles did, for Zeal of
propagating the Faith! See the ardent Passion, wherewith the Sensual Man rushes
upon an Object full of Misery and Corruption, which, though to him a seeming
Good, is indeed but Loathsomness and Folly! If thou gave thy heart and soul
with as much eagerness to God, that true, first, and chiefest Good, to whom it
is due; O how happy might thou be! Only by changing thy Labors for another
Object, they would become holy, which else are perverse and imperfect. Only by
changing the Intent and the Action; nay, sometimes by only changing the Intent,
and not the Action, the Heart is made clean and pure, which would else be
sinful and defiled. Only by giving that to the Invisible, which is given to
what is Visible, Men might with the same, nay, with less pains, lay up Rewards
in this Life, which will be delivered to them again in that to come; whereas by
employing Diligence to attain sinful Pleasures, they also procure Eternal
Damnation.

O what Labors, what Difficulties, what Misfortunes and Afflictions do Mortals
undergo here upon Earth! and at last either they perish in the search, or else
they obtain but perishing Advantages, which when they have found, and
conquered, and possessed, are all no better than a little Earth! They spend
their time, which wastes and comes to an end, in seeking, finding, and
acquiring that which they long to enjoy; and they always find the Pains, but
seldom the Enjoyments. Vain Labors! Unprofitable Travels! Ill-employed Pains!
and Unhappy Vexations! To spend their Time, their Life, their Honor, and their
Estate, in seeking and acquiring that, which it is not a pin matter whether
they get or lose! That, which I no sooner have deceived my self into the
delight of possessing all my life, but I am undeceived with the sadness of
having it taken from me by Death! This is that, which the Damned bewail
themselves for; saying, We wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness and
destruction, yea, we have gone through Deserts, where there lay no way; but as
for the way of the Lord, we have not known it. What has Pride profited us? Or
what good have Riches with our vaunting brought us? All those things are passed
away like a shadow, and like a Post, that passes by. And seeing the Righteous
stand with great boldness before such as afflicted them in this World, they
complain, saying, This is he, whom we had sometimes in Derision, and a Prove^
^f Reproach; We Fools counted his Life Madness, and his end without Honor: How
is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot among the Saints? O Happy
Labors! O Heavenly Repentance, which workest, enrichest, and obtainest the
Crown of Everlasting Life!

Of the Application of Christian Works.
And thus Holy Men say, that one ought not so much to consider, what pains a
Man takes, or what sufferings he undergoes in this Life; but for whom, and for
what end he either does or suffers. Non quantum (says St. Austin) sed ex
quanto. A Criminal is extremely sorry that he has killed an Innocent Person,
because he is going to be hanged for the Fact. He is much troubled for the
Murder, by reason that his Life must satisfy for the others Death. But this
Sorrow, how great soever it be, will not procure him the least degree of
Reward. Why? Is he not sorry, and extremely sorry for having killed him? Yes;
but his grief is not for his sin, nor for having offended God; but he bewails
his own Death, and is afflicted for the loss of his Life; yet let him change
his Intention, and he may save his Soul with much less sorrow.

We squander away Treasures by not applying our Intention to a good Object, in
what we do. All our Actions may be holy, and profitable to our Salvation,
whether they be good or indifferent, if we do them for God, and offer them to
God. The same thing ^at is either naturally good, and yet for want of
application remains without either Sin or Merit, (in the Opinion of some) or
that is sinful and imperfect (in the Opinion of others) may be made holy, good,
and effectual to our Souls, only by being done out of love to God. Nay, there
are some that say, there is nothing Indifferent, and that whatsoever is not
directed to God, is guilty and inordinate; and even to walk and discourse,
without applying it to God, is in a degree sinful, though in itself it have no
other ill, than the not being directed to God. Finally, they say, that if what
we do be not good, it must of necessity be bad; if not in a high, yet at least
in some measure.

O how hard this Judgment seems! yet in my Opinion it discovers very excellent
Reason in the Root of it. For we are in such manner Debtors to God, (all our
Senses, Powers, and Faculties being his) and we are so much indebted to him for
those Talents, which he gave to our management, to the end we might increase
them in his Service; that not to do so, whether it be in a great matter, or in
a small, must needs be either a small or a great Offense. Work for me, says God
to his Creatures; Traffic till I come, since to that end it was I gave thee
all thou have. All that thou do not restore unto me, thou take away from
me. Consider that thou robbest me of all that which thou do deny me. To work
for any other, or for thy self, as thy ultimate end, is to work against me. If
thou placest thy End in the Creature, thou take it away from the Creator. If
thou do not place it in me, but either in thy self, or others, thou give
that to the Creatures, which thou owe to me. He that is not with me, is
against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. If thou do
not work for me, because thou will not, thou deniest me thy Will; and if it be,
because thou do not remember it, thou deniest me the Memory, which thou owe
me. He cannot be freed from the blame of Ingratitude to his Benefactor, that
forgets the Benefit; but the greater Forgetfulness seems the greater
Ingratitude.

Upon this it is they ground themselves, who say, that every indifferent
Action, which is not applied to God, is evil and imperfect; that there is
nothing indifferent; that in the sight of God's Justice, whatsoever is not
good, is bad; that every action of Man must be in the Service either of God, or
of Belial; and that there are no more than two hands, the Right and the Left,
whether the sin be great or small.

Let Doctors discourse of this in Universities, and let them decide it in the
Schools; but let us go the safe way. Every Morning Offer to God all thy Works
and Thoughts. Endeavor to preserve the Actions of thy Life innocent; Offer
them to God, every Year, every Month, every Week, every Day, and if it be
possible, every Moment. All thou do, all thou think, all thou willest and
desire, let it be applied to his Service, and in the mean while give the
Doctors leave to Dispute in the Schools. This inward Offering alone makes that
which is Indifferent to become good, and that which is good, to be perfect. If
(with the Opinion of some) there be Indifferent Actions, by this application of
them to God, they become good; and if there be none, it will give an Efficacy
to that, which else would be unprofitable; and Sanctify that, which else would
be evil and imperfect.

Observe what Advantages the Virtue of Religion brings along with it; and the
benefit of a Christian's taking care to apply all his Thoughts, Words, and
Actions to God, looking upon God in all he does, and working for God in all he
undertakes. Thou ought to exercise all thy Virtues, both Cardinal and Moral,
with this consideration, and with this aim; and if thou can not with an
actual, yet do it at least with an habitual Intention; for by this means thou will make those Virtues to be true and solid, which without this holy Attention
and Intention will be no more than seeming ones.

The Second WEEK.
Of the three first of the Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude; and
first of Prudence.
PRudence is that Verture, which directs the manner of Humane Society; if it be
through God, and for God, it is truly Prudence, for by him it finds fit and
convenient Means, and holily Guides by a good Way, unto a good End.

The Prudence that is of God, and through God, is Divine Prudence, which
designs all for God, and never fails of its aim, because it is guided by the
Rules and Directions of God. This holy Prudence leads the Intention and the
Heart, and adorns every Action with excellent Circumstances. Avoid and cast off
from thee the false and crafty Prudence of the World, which is full of its
deceits and subtilties. Banish from thy sincere Heart, that falsly-call'd
Prudence, made up of Lies and Jugglings, which gounding its designs upon
falsehood, most commonly perishes, when it comes to contest with that, which is
true and certain. I have always found, that Truth gets Victory over Lies. I
have always seen Sincerity fool the Tricks and Cheats of Craftiness. I have
always seen the Prudence of God, triumph over that of the World, and if it
happen otherwise sometimes, that lasts but for a while, for in the end Truth
and Honesty are Victorious.

Would thou be prudent? Work sincerely, speak always the Truth, take care in
whatsoever thou do for God, not to offend his holy Laws, keep the Rules, to
which thy State and Profession oblige thee. Let thy Intentions be single, and
thy Actions ordered according to Reason; and believe me, thou shall be God's
prudent Man, without so many turnings and windings, as ill Men entangle
themselves in; without so much Pains and Anxiety as it costeth them, and
without so many Tricks, Dissimulations, Plots, and Policies, as the Imprudent
prudent Men of this World beat their Brains in contriving.

Would thou be Wise and Prudent, so that no body may deceive thee; but that
rather, if they attempt it, they shall be deceived themselves, and ruined thee
without thy Fault? Then be careful to keep Gods Commandments, live with an holy
Plainness and Sincerity, and ever speak the Truth. Art thou a Christian? Obey
the Laws of Christ. Art thou a Clergyman? Keep the Canonical Rules. Art thou a
Bishop? Be careful of thy Diocese. Art thou a Layman? Keep the honest Laws of
the Laity. Art thou a Subject? Be Loyal to thy Prince. Art thou a Magistrate?
Put the Laws in Execution; for who does thus, is Prudent, Wise, and Discreet,
and can neither be deceived, nor deceive others.

Deceit lasts not long; Truth and Sincerity defend themselves, but Doubleness
and Fashood have need of Friends to defend them. A right Intention makes an
Action to be Right and Prudent. And if at any time it be requisite for the good
Prudence, to dissemble and be silent, it knows how to dissemble and be silent,
yet without feigning, lying, or deceiving. The good Prudence has so heedful a
Discretion in all Actions, that what the false one does with great Labor, it
performs with Facility. It examines and disposes the means sweetly and orderly
unto their End, and having chosen an holy End, makes use of good and discreet
means for the attaining of it. On the contrary, as the Ends of the World's Wise
Men are foul, so likewise their means are foul and vain. The Prudent Men of the
World use to be more subtle in their ways (says our Savior) but not more
constant, nor more effectual. These ill Politicians may perhaps stand for a
while, and maintain themselves in their crooked Designs, but at the last they
must fall at the feet of Prudence, and of Christian Policy.

Of Justice, and of Good and Evil Judges.
Justice also has need of the Virtue of Religion, that is, to have an Eye to
God in all things, and without that it can hardly be able to take one right
step, nor can it well be said, that there is such a thing as Justice. For that
being the Director of all Humane Actions to what is fit and honest, and the
Reducer of all that is created unto those Rules, how can there be any Justice,
where there is no regard had to the true, holy, and just Law of the Eternal
Creator? What Justice can there be where Humane Understanding does not square
its Discourse and Judgment according to that true and eternal Justice? All the
Wrath, all the Injuries, all the Wickedness, and all the Injustice of the
Creatures proceeds from their departing from that right Justice of the Creator.
Consider how many Mischiefs are caused by a slackness in Legal, Vindictive,
Commutative, or Distributive Justice. Consider the inequality of the World, in
disposing of Rewards, Offices, and Dignities. Consider the wrong done in Suits,
by giving that Sentence for the Rich and Powerful, which is due to the Poor and
Necessitous Person. Consider the false Clemency and Pity, whereby ill Men are
Pardoned, and the secure Tyranny, whereby the good are Oppressed. Consider the
Disturbances that arise from the ill management of Laws, and of Public
Resolutions. All this disorder, all this excess or defect, omission and
commission, and all this perverting of Judgment proceeds from our swerving from
that Eternal Rule of Internal and Superior Justice, which God imprinted in
Natural Reason, and which his Grace afterward did more illustrate by his Holy
Laws, Counsels, and Directions.

Tell me, what Justice there can be in the heart of him who is unjust in
himself, and who is possessed with filthy Appetites, and inordinate Passions?
That Justice which begins with so terrible an Injustice; as to throw God out of
the Possession of his heart, how can it deserve the name of Justice? Or how can
that be so called, which does not oblige a Man to do within himself, as he
desires that others should do without himself? The first thing, that a wicked
and partial Judge does, is to rob God, by taking away his own Heart,
Understanding, and Discourse from him, and giving it to the common Enemy. Now
where is this Judge like to end, that begins thus with playing the Thief? He
that robs God of that which is his, what Robberies will he not commit upon Man?
It Is manifest, that his Justice will be but a tolerated and applauded Tyranny;
since he is to Judge and pass Sentence openly, who is himself already Judged
and Condemned secretly. Partiality and Arbitrariness will sway his Sentence, to
free a Delinquent, if he be his Friend, and to condemn an Innocent, if his
Enemy. He will prefer one that bribes and flatters him, and reject another,
that neither presents nor honors him. He will prefer his own Commodity,
Pleasure, Profit, or Will, before the Public Peace, Quiet, and Security. In
all his Actions he will measure the Public Convenience with his own, and leave
his neglect and carelessness to the Public. All his Diligence and Watchfulness
shall be for himself, but not the least part of either for God, or the due
performance of his Public Employment.

Now would thou do Justice, and be Excellent in that Virtue? Then first be
just within thy self, and then thou will not fail of doing Justice to others.
Settle and govern thy inward Commonwealth with Holiness. Let God and Reason,
and the Rules thereof, order that little World which thou have within thee, and
then thou may come forth holy and just to govern the World without thee. Is
it not certain, that if thy little World be disturbed, confused, and in
disorder, the great World will be so likewise, as far as thou have the
Government of it? If the Governor himself be naught, how shall it go with the
thing governed? If a furious Storm have broken and carried away the Rudder,
what shall become of the poor Ship? If thou and I, when we are Superiors, be
the Rudder and Government of the People; and if we will be ungoverned and
destroyed by Vice, how shall they be governed and preserved in Virtue? Let us
govern our selves first, and then we may be fit to govern others. Let us do
Justice in our own Houses, and then having given credit to it by that means, it
will enter powerfully and effectually into the Houses of others.

With what color of Modesty can the Judge, that is inwardly unjust, act
outwardly against a Criminal, or a guilty Person, finding himself more guilty
than that Criminal? Will not his Heart and his Conscience in every Action be
condemning and lashing him for his own Injustice? Will it not call out unto him
with clear and loud cries, and speak truth to his Soul in the midst of his
falsehood and deceit? Saying, Why do thou condemn another, O thou wicked
Judge, being thy self the most worthy of Condemnation? Thou Hypocrite, thou
see the smallest Mote in the Eye of another, and do thou not see the Beam
in thine own? Will thou guide, and restrain, and govern others, being blind,
and loose, and disorderly thy self? Take away thine own Beam, and then thou
may see to take away the other's Mote. Govern thy self, and then thou may
govern the People. Amend thy self, and then thou may amend them; Corect thy
self, and then correct them. First do Justice within thy self, and then thou will likewise do it abroad. Would thou be just toward others? Then rectify
thy self. Cleanse the Affections of thy Soul, and thou shall see clearly.
Passions are as the Eyelids of the Soul, they close themselves upon it, and
take away all its light. Lift up those Lids, set aside those Passions, and look
up to God, and thou shall see, and shine, and burn, and give light to others.

Of Fortitude
The same thing thou find concerning Justice, thou will also find concerning
Fortitude, whose exterior practice depends totally upon the interior. This
excellent Virtue is the Crown of the rest; since it conserves, strengthens, and
defends them all. Fortitude in its Original, is Valor; in its Behavior, is
Prudence; in its Cause, is Justice; and in its Execution, Temperance. Since
then that Fortitude is Valor, Prudence, Justice, Temperance, nay, and
Perseverance too, how can it consist with the Vice, Weakness, and Inconstancy
of a Man, that governs not himself by Reason, but is subjected and enslaved by
Passion? He that is not strong in himself, must needs be weak against others;
for he is wholly governed by his inordinate Passion, which in itself is mere
weakness and debility.

What do thou think that Fortitude is? Do thou believe it is to conquer
Provinces, and to trample under foot Kingdoms, and to tyrannize over the World?
This rather is a crowned Weakness, a respected Violence, and a public Pest.
What matter is it for the Valiant Tyrant to present his Face to the Enemy, if
at the same time he turn his back to Virtue? What matter is it though he defeat
and conquer the Army he fights against, if at the same time he be conquered and
dragged in Triumph by his Passions? That cannot be Virtue, which is the cause
of innumerable Crimes, and is a Crime itself in its very root. Alexander the
Great subdued all the World, but was the great and public Thief of the World.
His Commanders punish one that steals a Thousand Ducats, whilst he in one Year
Robs and Usurps Thirty Kingdoms, and that was a Crowned, a Reverenced, and an
Adored Crime. Julius Caesar, who, if he had possessed himself of his
Neighbor's Inheritance, would have been banished from Rome, Usurps and takes
Possession of the whole Roman Empire, destroying and cutting the Throats of
innumerable Neighbors and Citizens; and is adored by Rome, and by the Roman
Empire. Shall we ascribe the Virtue of Fortitude to those Royal and Imperial
Crowned Serpents of the Earth, who laid waste, and dispeopled the Earth? Shall
we allow that Atila, or Totila, with such like Monsters of Cruelty were endowed
with the Virtue of Fortitude? These and their Fellows, who by their weak and
powerless Ambition over-turn'd the World, destroyed, pillaged, burned, and
razed innumerable Cities, Kingdoms, Nations, and Provinces, at the same time
while they were captivating the World, were themselves captivated by their
Passions.

No, these were not truly strong and valiant, but Men powerfully weak, who
turned the World upside down. They had been valiant, if their Valor had
overcome their Passion, and if they had known how to confine their hearts
within the limits of Reason. Julius Caesar had been truly Valiant, if he had
defended his Country, and Citizens, and had been able to defend himself from
himself, without passing from the Name of Citizen to that of Tyrant. We might
have ascribed Fortitude to Alexander, if he had governed his own Kingdom in
Peace, defending his Crown in just War, within the Bounds of Macedonia; but to
make an Inundation upon Asia, to take away so many Crowns, and make them the
Trophies of his Ambition, was a powerful Weakness, but neither Valor nor
Fortitude. The Virtue of Fortitude preserves the Mind in that which is right,
just, and holy, without consenting to let Passion enter to disorder and triumph
over Reason. He that is first conquered by the Virtue of Fortitude, will have
force to conquer himself, subduing his Appetite, making it yield to Reason, and
setting that up to Reign and Govern in his heart.

Shall he that disquiets a City, and makes hurly-burlies in it, becoming the
scandal of the People, be said to have the Virtue of Fortitude, though he kill,
and burn, and make himself the Terror of a Country? He has only a strong
Frailty, so mad and frantic, that he can neither order nor contain himself
within those Honest and Lawful terms, which are allowed in our Commerce with
others. He lives and acts, as being dragged and trampled on by his Fancy and
Humor, and would he then have us think him to be truly Valiant? The Powerful
Prince, the King that defends his Crown justly and orderly; the General that
Governs his Army rightly, keeping Military Discipline; the Judge, who
constantly repelling Passions and Partialities, gives to every one that which
is his own, working in subjection to the Laws of God, and those of his Country;
the Honest Man, that walks fixing his Eyes only upon God and Reason; the Modest
Woman, that firmly and constantly defends her Chastity; these may indeed be
said to have the Virtue of Fortitude. The good Prelate, that with just
Discipline governs the Souls under his Charge; the Glorious Martyr, who in the
midst of Persecution, encompassed, or rather crowned with Torments and Tyrants,
yet breaths Valor, Constancy, and Perseverance. Finally, all those who give
their Body, their Fame, their Fortune, or their Life for the saving of their
Soul, and keep that strong, constant, and persevering in goodness, only for
God's sake, whether they suffer, or suffer not; whether they are esteemed or
despised in the World; These are they that are truly Valiant, and are eminently
possessed of that honorable, glorious, and courageous Virtue of Holy Fortitude.

The Third WEEK.
Of Temperance, the Fourth of the Cardinal Virtues.
TEmperance, which moderates our Passions, and governs our Souls with
rectitude, has its Root also in Religion, and must direct itself to God, if it
will be a perfect Virtue. Its Duty is to reduce the Appetite, both irascible
and concupiscible, to moderate bounds, in order to God and his Holy Laws. Anger
is the Sword of Reason, which sometimes she is necessitated to draw, to defend
her self, but yet acts in such a manner, that by Temperance she cuts out only
what is sufficient, without passing on to what is superfluous. There have been
Natural Philosophers that condemned Anger, and would have Reason to be
sufficient of itself; they thought to divest Humane Nature of Passions, was
enough to make it to act prudently, without any other means, pretending to
bring men's minds to an insensibility, and to banish from them all manner of
Natural Affections; but they deceived themselves, for it is neither possible
nor convenient, that Reason should quite lay aside the use of Passions and
Affections, because they move our hearts to act. That which is convenient and
possible, is by the help of Grace to govern our Affections well, and to
regulate our Passions.

Let the Prince be angry, as much as Justice and Occasion requires, and let him
moderate his Anger by the right Rule of Reason. A General, that sees an unjust
and cruel Enemy coming to destroy his Army, may and ought to defend himself
with Anger, and stir up his Fury to obtain the Victory. Let the Superior use
his Anger to chastise the wicked, and yet at the same time have compassion upon
the wicked. Let Reason Command, let Anger Serve and Obey; and let them join
together to go as far as is convenient. Be angry (says the Lord) but sin not;
as who should say, Let Reason temper Anger, and let Anger be subservient to
Reason. The Zeal of Moses, when he was angry, flew those that rebelled against
the Law; that of Elias brought Fire from Heaven upon the Soldiers of Ahab.
Heaven did administer Fire to his Zeal, because his Zeal was moved with a just
and heavenly Anger. Our Savior also sanctified Anger, when seeing the Temple
of his Eternal Father profaned by the Jews, he twice took up the Whip to drive
out the Buyers and Sellers, and when he threw down the Tables of the
Money Changers. Thou must not therefore think that an easy clemency and
slackness, which suffers the bad to run to ruin, deserves the name of
Temperance; for to tolerate the bad, and leave the good undefended, is not
Temperance, but a base Remisness, and detestable Negligence. For Superiors to
be sluggish, whilst Subjects are insolent, is so far from Temperance, that it
is an egregious Intemperance.

Temperance is that, which neither comes short in what is right, nor goes so
far as what is prohibited. Temperance is that which does not punish, when it is
urged by Grief or Importunity; but when Reason appoints, and the Nature of the
thing requires. Temperance is that, which does what God commands, and neither
swerves from it by excess, in going too far; nor by defect, in doing too
little. It is not Temperance for a Man utterly to forbear eating, but to eat
temperately. It does not forbid a Man to sustain his Body, but to give it as
much as the inordinate Appetite requires. It gives that which is sufficient,
but allows not that which is excessive. When the Appetite asks what is
necessary, it grants it; but if it demand what is hurtful, it denies it. Thus
Temperance is the Bridle of the Appetite, whether it be concupiscible, or
irascible.

Temperance has two Reins in her hand, sometimes she stops, sometimes she puts
forward; now she turns on the one hand, now on the other. Whithersoever the
Law, Reason, and the Divine Will directs, thither she guides. How should all be
governed without Error, if the Mind be not moderated, enlightened with Reason,
and subdued with Mortification? How is it possible, that Temperance without God
should be able to contain and moderate man's unbridled Appetite, either
irascible or concupiscible? Or how can it without the power of Grace, subdue
our corrupt, rebellious, and unruly Nature? How can this outward part be
governed, unless God illuminate and guide it from within? And what can show us
the way of Virtue here below, but the light that comes in to us from above?

The Gentiles did practice some Moral Virtues with Temperance, yet even in
them, and in others, they themselves acted with Intemperance. Diogenes an
humorous, overweaning, and wilfully-poor Philosopher, tramples with his bare
Feet all dirty upon the stately Train of Plato, a wealthy Philosopher richly
apparelled: Plato asked Diogenes, What do thou? He answers, I trample upon
Plato's Pride. Yes, replied Plato, but with a greater Pride. Here the very
Light of Nature judged among the Gentiles, and enlightened them to see their
Errors; and one Pride reformed another, for there was Pride in both. Plato will
be an Heavenly Man, full of Vanity and Pride, and fast giued to the Commodities
of Life, playing the Philosopher about Eternity only in Speculation, but giving
up his Will and Passion wholly to Temporal things. Diogenes on the contrary
despising outward things, was neither contented in himself, nor could live
quiet among others, being full of an inward Pride, that contemned, abused, and
offended all. Both of them were acted by Intemperance, and were Philosophers of
this World and of Nature, but not true Philosophers of God, nor of the Spirit
of Grace.

If one of the Saints, or ancient Fathers of the Church, had come into the
richly-furnished Room of Plato, he would have despised, but not trampled upon
his costly Furniture. He would have despised his Riches with the same holy
Humility, wherewith he despised himself. He would have despised the brave
Hangings and Carpets of Plato, but not the Person of Plato. O the Celestial
Knowledge of God, and of his holy Law! O incomprehensible Wisdom! How pure and
clear, how bright thou shinest in the heart of a Christian, who suffers himself
to be governed by thy Light, and directed by thy Means! It is a ridiculous
thing to think there is any perfect Virtue without God; neither Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude, nor Temperance can be so without him: for without God
Prudence is Imprudence, Justice is Injustice; Fortitude is Weakness, and
Temperance Intemperance. If God does not govern, order, temper, and enlighten
it; if he does not guide and direct it, natural Virtue will be so weak, and
full of imperfections, that it will stumble at every step: If it go right now,
it goes wrong within a moment, and if here it punishes the Guilty, there it
condemns the Innocent: But the Government of God, and that Sovereign Light
which enlightens a Righteous Man, that heavenly Grace which assists and
counsels him, that is it which thou art to pray for, and endeavor to obtain;
that is it that must temper thee, if thou would attain to the true practice
of the Moral Virtues.

Of the Manner of Governing the Moral Virtues by the Cardinal.
By these four principal Virtues thou art to govern and direct the seven Moral
ones, (I mean those which are opposite to the seven deadly Sins) which in the
Spiritual Life do order our Manners, and make the Soul acceptable to the Lord
of Virtues. The former do command, dispose, guide, encourage and direct us in
the way; but the latter to practice and put in execution what the others
ordain. Prudence gives the Manner, Justice the Rectitude, Fortitude the
Courage, and Temperance the Measure in all thy Actions. Of all the Moral
Virtues, there is not one perfect, which in its Exercise, Duration, and
Perfection, does not contain all the four Cardinal ones within it self.

Humility, the Glory, Peace, and Foundation of the Spiritual Life, the most
fruitful Seminary of Gifts and Excellencies, stands in need of Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, and so do all the rest. First ^t has need of
Prudence: for without a prudent management Humility might pass on so far, as to
become Scandal or Vanity. Secondly, It has need of Justice; for a Man ought to
keep it in such manner, as likewise to keep up his Office, Ministry, or
Dignity. Thirdly, It has need of Fortitude, to preserve the Man between two
vicious and contrary Extremes, which the Moral Virtues are always in danger of,
unless they be corrected and assisted by the four Cardinal ones. And lastly, It
has need of Temperance, to keep a well-ordered proportion in every business.

Of Judging falsely.
But observe, that there is a worldly judgment of persons and things, that has
nothing of the Spirit, and another that is Spiritual and Internal; therefore in
thy Actions avoid the former, and give thy self wholly to the latter.
Whatsoever a Soul does for God, is accounted foolishness by those of the World,
because they take their own Rule, and measure the Action with a natural
Measure; whereas the end for which it is done, is Supernatural, and so he who
does that good thing, does not suit nor proportion himself to the Judgment,
Rule, and Censure of evil Men. They hold that for imprudent, unjust, weak, and
intemperate, which is heavenly Temperance, Justice, Fortitude, and great
Prudence.

G^ calls the Soul with an effectual Vocation, and presently the gallant
Young Man, and the beautiful young Lady, quit their Vanities and Follies, and
despise the Pleasures, Honors and Riches of this World, to secure an
Inheritance in that to come; by entering into a strict course of performing the
Duties of Religion. God calls the ancient Person, who being undeceived by
Experience, presently forsakes the World, and retires from Business, to spend
his Age in a severe and penitent Life, that he may give an holy end to those
beginnings and middle parts of it, that were wicked and scandalous. This the
World esteems to be imprudence, injustice, lightness of affection, and takes it
for the distemper and disorder of Reason.

The Spiritual person fasts, and uses other Austeries, he flies from those
Companies that formerly were the occasion of his sins; he seeks God in
Solitude, or else in Business and Employments, and lives in his Service, having
an eye to him in all his Actions. The World instantly gives him the Character
of a strange, singular, extravagant and distempered Man; whereas he is truly
just, temperate, valiant, wise, and one that gives life unto the World. For
this reason it is, that our Savior says, that the Prudence of this World is an
Enemy to the Prudence of God; for these two sorts of Prudence being very
opposite and contrary, do always look upon each other with an eye of dislike
and enmity. Our frail miserable Nature being inclined to evil, is subtle and
discursive in any thing that is bad; but is dull, blind, and careless in all
good, and if a Divine Ray from above does not help and clarify our Natural
Light, it will presently be obscured, if not extinguished by our Passion.

It is therefore very useful and convenient in the Spiritual Life to walk in
the Divine Presence, with the light of Prayer in our hands, to the end, that by
the brightness thereof, we may with God's Grace and Spirit choose the fittest
means for so high an end, despising vain and worldly Wisdom, and making use of
one, that is Divine, Spiritual, and Celestial. O let thy Prudence and
Discretion consist in following the ways of thy Salvation! All the means thou
employest to this end, are Christian, good, holy, just, powerful, and prudent.
And all those Motives, which would put thee out of those ways, though they seem
to come shining with Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, are really
unjust, weak, intemperate, and very imprudent.

The end of any thing ought to govern the means. Thy end ought to be to save
thy Soul, to serve, please, and not to offend God; to live an internal and
spiritual life, to make thy life a preparation for death; to fit thy self by
death for Judgment, by Judgment for thy Account, and by thy Account for that
Sentence, which may deliver thee from Eternal Condemnation, and give thee the
Crown of Glory in Life Eternal. Oh! What an heavenly Prudence is this. Oh what
Justice! What Fortitude! What Temperance! How well are they all tempered with
one another! and and how imprudent, and unjust, how foolish, how mad, how
distempered, and how ruinous is the contrary!

Thus these four, which were wont to be Natural, Politic, and Heathen Virtues,
thou may by a right intention and direction, transform into Christian and
Spiritual ones; taking from Prudence not what the Flesh, but what the Spirit
requires; from Justice, not what the Inferior but the Superior directs; from
Fortitude, not what Passion, but what Reason commands; and from Temperance,
what is allowed by God, not by the World and the Devil.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of Humility, and its contrary Pride.
WIth these Rules (which are not worldly and natural, but holy and spiritual)
concerning the four Cardinal Virtues, the first thing that thou art to practice
continually in the life of the Soul, is Humility. This is an unspeakable Virtue
indeed, and the Mother of all the rest; for they are all bred and produced in
her Bowels. Humility is that which the Eternal Word chose among all the rest,
when being God he became Flesh, to dwell amongst us clothed in our Humane
Nature; for the Immense and Omnipotent Lord of Heaven showed himself in this
World so naked, so poor, as to be born in a Stable; so little and so limited,
as to be contained in a Manger: He consecrated Humility, and dedicated himself
to it, through the whole Course of his most holy Life, from the Virginal
enclosure of his Mother's Womb, and taught it upon the Cross by his most holy
Death. This is that which he has left for an Inheritance to his faithful
Followers, when he said, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and
when afterward having humbled himself at his Disciples feet, he bad them do as
he had done.

We have seen already how great a number of Virtues, our blessed Savior, the
Example of Christian Perfection, did practice, whilst he lived in this World,
leaving us to imitate that Divine Original; and yet for all that he calls upon
us, sollicits, and persuades us in particular to Copy none, but his Humility.
Why did he not call upon us to practice his Patience? Why did he not bid us
learn his Charity? Why not his Zeal and Diligence? Why not his Fortitude,
Justice, and Temperance, but only his Humility? By reason that the greatest
fall and wound of both the Natures, Angelical and Humane, was Pride; and so
that Nature of the two, that remains in a possibility of being cured, which is
the Humane, and which our Lord came to remedy, finds its principal Medicine in
Humility.

Will thou see how contrary Pride is to Humility, that thou may the better
know, how contrary Humility is to Pride? Why, Pride is the Natural Mother of
all the Devils? she engendered them in her Bowels, and an Infernal Pride made
them Devils of so many Angels; they would needs be like God, and equal
themselves to him in Power; and that Pride threw them in an instant from Heaven
into the bottomless Pit.

Would thou now see what Humility is? It is that which made Angels to be
more Angels than they were before; for when taking warning by the Fall of their
Companions, they humbled themselves before God, he confirmed them in his Grace,
and fixed them for Angels eternally in his Glory, above the danger of ever
becoming Devils.

And would thou see what Pride is? Look upon our first Parents Adam and Eve
in their highest Felicity of Paradise, and thou shall see, that because they
would be as Gods, and pass from Humane Limits to Divine; they were instantly
cast out, banished, naked, and undone, sowing Tribulations and Sorrows, and
reaping Thorns, Afflictions, and Misfortunes.

Would thou see what is Humility? Behold those same first Parents weeping,
grieving, and bewailing their Fault with an humble Penitence, and thou will
also behold them pardoned by the Divine Goodness, and both themselves and their
Posterity restored to Grace and Glory, with a remedy more noble, and much
superior to the Felicity they had lost.

Will thou see what Pride is? Look upon Cain, who despises God by denying the
best of his Fruits, which were due to him, as the Author and Lord of the
Inheritance; and being proud and covetous forgets the Banishment, the Example,
and the Tears of his Parents, and would exempt himself from that just and holy
Tribute. This Sin carries him to another, which is worse, I mean that of Envy;
and Envy thrusts him on to a higher, that of Murder, even the murder of a
Brother; and this drives him to the greatest of all, which is final Obstinacy
and Impenitence. He lives in Despair, flying from himself, and dying wounded
with a deadly Arrow, becomes the Head of the Reprobates, and the Damned.

And will thou see on the other side, what Humility is? Look upon holy and
blessed Abel, who humbly acknowledges his Eternal Creator, by offering him his
Fruits. He gives him the best of them, and the best of his Soul, which is
Humility; whereupon God blesses, favors, and crowns him, as being the first
Martyr of Heaven, and the First Fruits of those that were called, appointed,
and predestined by the Will of Christ to an immortal Glory. Finally, these
first successes and contrary effects of these two Contraries, have been
followed by innumerable others, and there is nothing seen, nor has been seen,
nor ever shall be seen, but the ruins of Pride, and the triumphs of Humility.

Therefore of all those Virtues thou ought to follow and exercise in this
Spiritual Life, there is none thou should so deeply meditate upon, nor so
earnestly beg that God would give thee, as that of holy Humility. Though
Humility be a Virtue, as it is exercised, yet it is a Gift as it is bestowed;
and therefore it is needful to beg it of God, with earnestness, constancy, and
humbleness. So great is our Pride, and so great is our Vanity, that without a
particular succor and favor of our good Master Jesus, we are not capable of
true, holy, and perfect Humility. Pride is so natural to us, and so rooted in
us, that even when we exercise our selves in Employments of Humility, we are
wont (unless God by Grace prevent it) to make them the matter of our Vanity:
How mischievous must that needs be, which turns our Remedy into a Mischief? How
great is my Pride, if when I prostrate my self meekly and humbly, I often rise
up again proud, insolent, and disdainful?

Even in the midst of Humility, there may spring up a Vanity of being Humble,
and an inward Pride may grow out of a Conceit of my Humility, which is worse
than an outward Pride, clothed with Vanity, for that, when it hurts, does
undeceive; but this both hurts and deceives together. O Lord of Mercy and Pity,
that my Vanity should be so excessive, as to make me (unless thou prevent it)
grow vain and proud in the very Temple of Humility! That I should profane those
holy Walls, and upon the Altar of the Lord, set up the Idol of Dagon, and that
I should adore my self in that place, where I ought to adore none, but God
alone!

Therefore beg Humility of God without ceasing, and whatsoever thou shall do,
that is orderly, right, honest, good, holy, or perfect, still beg of God
Humility. If thou were able to give sight to the Blind, strength to the Lame,
Ears to the Deaf, nay even to raise the Dead, yet tremble, and pray to God for
Humility. If thou could speak as an Angel, and do Works that might become a
Seraphim; If thou drawest all the World after thee, and that for God; if thou
convertest Souls; if thou art a Master in Spirit and Perfection, and that all
thou go about succeeds to thy desires; yet tremble, and pray to God for
Humility. Believe me, between Hell and those Successes, Miracles, and
Perfections, there is not the breadth of a finger; I say, not so much; since
all the distance between them is but thine own Will, which is weaker and of
less power than thy finger.

Do thou work Miracles? Why so did Judas. Do thou know much? Lucifer knew
more. Art thou good? Adam was much better. Are thy Writings heavenly? Those of
David were much more so. Have thou Divine Revelations? So had Solomon. Yet some
of these fell, and others of them were lost for ever. Humility! I say Humility!
Stick close to that, for thereby all things shall redound to thy profit, and
without it any thing may be thy ruin and destruction.

Go with humble confidence into the presence of the Lord; with humbleness,
because thou art wicked; and with confidence, because he is infinitely good. Go
with contrition, because he sees thy wickedness; and go with cheerfulness,
because thou fixest thy eyes upon his goodness. Never place the end of thy
remedy in thy self, nor believe in thy Works alone, that thou shall go to
Heaven for them, or that thine own hands and feet shall carry thee thither.
Thou shall not enter there without them, but neither shall thou enter for them.
It is God that carries us to Heaven, and his Grace, his Goodness, his Pity, his
Merits, his Death, Passion, and Mercy; for without these, let us do what we
can, and take never so much pains, we shall never be able to get thither. It is
a better Phrase to say, God has taken him up to Heaven, than to say, He is gone
to Heaven. God carries us, guides us, helps us. God calls, pardons, and crowns
us, and all this because he loves us.

Lazarus, that holy Beggar, was carried by Angels to Abraham's bosom; but the
rich Glutton went to Hell of himself. God carries us to Heaven, if we be saved,
and we condemn our selves, if we be damned. Do thou look upon thy good works?
Thou owe them all to God. Do thou see the Repentance that reformes thee,
the Chastity that adorns thee, and the Charity that enflames thee? Thou art
endebted for them all to God. The Pot dressed up with Flowers is not proud of
them, for it is but a little Earth and Dung honored by the hand of the
Gardener. What have thou, that thou have not received? And if thou have
received it, why do thou foolishly boast, as if thou had not received it?
They are the words of the Apostle of the Gentiles. He that has wrought best in
the Spiritual Life; he that has been a Martyr of Perfection; he that has lived
so, as to strike all the World with admiration of his Spirit and Fervor; he
that has most exercised himself in all Verrtues; the most generous Martyr, the
glorious Apostles, St. John the Baptist, the most holy Virgin, and all the
Saints and just Persons at their entering and being crowned in Glory, do not
give thanks to their own Excellencies, nor ascribe their Salvation to
themselves, but unto God, and to his Mercy, Goodness, Blood, and precious
Merits, which gave them those Excellencies and Virtues. They lived humbly, they
entered with humbleness into Heaven, and they are crowned for their Humility.
Therefore be thou humble, and do not think thy self the Author of thy Fortune,
when it is good; but when it is bad acknowledge that thou art so.

Depend for all thy Fortune upon God. Those hands that made, and fashioned
thee, will preserve, inform, and reform thee. Believe that of thy self, thou
art nothing but a source of misery, and that thou have no goodness, nor any
stability in thee, but what is given thee by his Goodness, Grace and Mercy.
Attribute all that is good and holy in thee to God, to whom it all belongs; but
all that is evil, wretched, and imperfect, to thy self, for that only is thine
own. Labor, sweat, persevere, exercise thy self in what is good, and with care
and diligence avoid all that is evil: But in doing all this, rely nothing upon
thy self without God, but trust all to him, who is thy Helper within thee,
above thee, and round about thee.

Then let the Humility, which thou embracest inwardly, shoot forth also
outwardly in all thy Actions; for it is not easy to believe that internal
Humility can dwell with external Vanity. Let thy words and actions suit with an
humble heart; for to praise and applaud ones self openly, and pretend to be
esteemed and respected, does not make it very probable that Humility is lodged
within. The Humility of that Mind comes very short, that cannot reach from the
inside to the outside, the distance being so little between one and the other.
The Tree is known by its fruit, as our Savior says, and the Root is known by
the Tree; and for a Man to be proud in his outward behavior, and to be very
humble in his heart, are two things very hardly compatible.

Do not excuse thy self with thy Office or Dignity, thereby to be dispensed
from an external Humility, and from conforming it to the internal. There is no
Dignity so high, wherein Humility may not apparently shine forth. Our Kings,
who in public represent the Majesty of God, do often exercise their Humility
in touching the poorest Cripples, and sometimes even in washing the feet of
their Maundy-men after Christ's Example. Why cannot the Bishop represent his
Dignity in his Cathedral, and afterward exercise his Charity and Humility with
the Poor at home? He is no less honorable at their naked feet, washing and
kissing them, than in the Grandeur of the Church, and of his Dignity: If in the
one he represents Mount Tabor, in the other he represents the Humility our
Savior practice at his last Supper.

Believe me, when the Virtues do not break forth from the internal, and show
themselves in the external, they are much to be suspected; and those Affections
are seldom powerful, that can be stifled, and concealed within. Can thou
think that thou art humble, when seeing thy self despised, thou breakest out
like Lightning in thy Defense? Thou may be humble in thine own conceit, but
art far from being so in good earnest. They that are both outwardly and
inwardly humble, do not despise others, but yet they despise themselves, and
are so far from being sensible when they are despised, that they rejoice and
delight in being despised, which are the four degrees of perfect Humility.

Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not. Be not eager to get
Offices and Places of Honor, but set thy self down in the lowest room, as the
Holy Jesus advises, lest a more honorable than thou come, and thou be fain
with shame to leave it, and remove lower. There may be reason sometimes perhaps
to show thy reason to make thy self esteemed, yet I fear very much, that in
those matters they are but thine own reasonings, and not right reason.

It has happened heretofore to me poor, weak, vain, and wretched Man, to set
forth such reasons my self, and (as one who then had but small light) sometimes
to enforce them also, thinking that therein I did very good service; but
looking afterward upon those occasions in a clearer light, I saw that was but
deceit, and vanity, and no perfect Humility. True Humility is, when a Man
humbles himself to the Will of God, and suffers himself to be governed thereby;
when he thinks, that there is no Employment so mean, as his desert, and that
every Dignity is too high for his unworthiness. The reasons that are contrary
to this, are reasons sought for, but not found. They are Reasons of Nature, but
seldom of the Spirit, or of Grace.

This which seems to thee to be Humility, is convenience and safety; for the
humble Man is quiet in his Humility, whilst the proud Man labors, and
endangers himself by his Pride. I have read of an holy Man, that upon occasion
of seeing one fall from an high Dignity to a Scaffold, threw himself flat on
the ground, taking fast hold of it with his hands, and being asked, why he did
so? He answered crying out, That I may not fall. Besides, in natural reason, a
Man of an humble heart cannot fall. Whither can he fall, that through Humility
lies prostrate upon the Earth? He may well get up higher, but can go no lower.
He may well rise, and be crowned, but who can humble him that has thoroughly
mortified himself? Therefore it is that our Lord has said, They that exalt
themselves in this Life shall be humbled in the other; and in the same
proportion that a Man humbles himself here, he shall be exalted hereafter. The
Eternal Word abased himself in coming down to the Earth, and laying himself
prostrate upon it; but he quickly after ascended into Heaven to be crowned
there. On the other side, Lucifer would needs be crowned in Heaven, but for his
punishment was thrown down headlong into Hell. Thus thou see Humility not
only is honor and profit, but also (as I told thee before) safety,
convenience, peace, joy, and comfort. How courteous is the humble Man! What a
many quarrels and vexations is he freed from! All seek for the humble Person to
honor him; and he by having Humility, appeases, quiets, and pacifies them all.
If they despise me (says the true humble Man) it is that I desire. If they
esteem me, it is a thing I have found, which belongs not to me, and therefore I
offer it up to God, who is the right owner of it; for what am I but Earth, and
Dung, Dust, Ashes, and Corruption? This is my own, this is what I deserve;
which is to be humbled, persecuted, and despised.

OCTOBER.
The First WEEK.
Of Liberality, and its contrary, Covetousness.
IF thou be humble, thou will be also liberal, for the humble Man desires
nothing for himself. Every thing is too much for his Poverty, for true Poverty
is true Humility. He that is of an humble heart, flies from his own honor and
excellency; but he that is proud loves his riches, and heaps them up, that he
may be esteemed, respected, reverenced, and adored; for he seeks his own
excellency, and delights in it. Covetousness is the Daughter of Pride, which is
the fruitful Mother of Vices; for she nourishes, supports, and increases them.
There go many Vices to the forming of Covetousness, many to the practice, and
many to the preserving of it; and therefore St. Paul calls it, The Root of all
Evil. Covetousness made Cain the first of the Damned; because that he might
keep the best Fruits for himself, he gave the worst to God. Covetousness put
the Whip twice in the hand of Christ to drive it out of the Temple, because it
made his Father's House a Den of Thieves. Consider the Savior of Souls made
angry. Consider that infinite Meekness and Gentleness made fierce, and thou
may judge how terrible that Vice is, which could bring his infinite Pity to
be so severe. Covetousness, of a Disciple made Judas a Traitor, and wrought
upon him to sell his Master, transforming him from a chosen Apostle, into the
worst Man that ever was born.

On the Contrary, Humility and Liberality, the Enemies of Covetousness, are the
Mothers of Poverty of Spirit, of unconcernedness for the Goods of this World,
and of dis-engagement from all things created. They love most their Creator,
who delight most to humble, divest, and set themselves at liberty in his
Presence, nor would draw after them those Impediments, Snares, and Miseries of
this Life, which they call Riches. The Poor Man, that is not humble, may be as
insolent as the Rich; and many times more than the Rich; but he that is poor
and humble too, can neither be Insolent, nor does pretend, or desire to be
Wealthy.

From hence it comes to pass, that the humble Man is very free and liberal; for
he that desires nothing for himself, does easily give away all; and he that
thinks that all he has is too much for him, does neither covet nor desire any
thing he has not. Thus the humble and meek of heart are not only liberal and
forward to give Alms, but prodigal after an holy manner; and when they want
wherewithal to give, they readily give their very selves. Serapion the
Sindonite gave his upper-Coat to a poor Man he met, and passing on further, he
gave his under one to another, remaining in a manner naked, with only the New
Testament in his hand, which he also gave away to a third; and being asked, Who
stripped him so? He answered, that Charity had stripped him of his upper-Coat,
the Gospel of his under one, and of the Book of the Gospel, Christ himself, the
Author of the Gospel. This same Man sold himself twice to Slavery, that he
might convert his Masters. And another Bishop, after he had given all he had to
the poor, hired himself out by the Day, that he might have wherewithal to give;
therefore fly from Covetousness more than from the Fire. Love Holy Poverty,
Charity, and Liberality, and if thou must exceed in any kind, rather err on the
right hand of giving, than on the left hand of refusing.

Our Savior (as an Ancient Father of the Church says) is always between two
Thieves, and this is most verified in the Moral Virtues; because the excess or
defect destroys the Virtue; which consists in the middle. He that does not give
that which is sufficient, is covetous. He that gives too much, is prodigal; but
he that gives that which is useful, fitting, and necessary, is liberal, and so
with him Jesus Christ is to be found. Therefore when through Humane frailty
thou art like to err on the one hand, or the other, and do not know how to
walk straight in the middle way; keep on the right hand, for the Prodigal Man
is the good Thief, and the evil Thief is the Covetous, and God more easily
pardons him that gives.

I always observe in the Holy Gospel Prodigal Persons pardoned, and Covetous
ones condemned. Mary Magdalene was taxed of Prodigality, for breaking the Box
of precious Ointment to serve our Redeemer, which was great wast according to
appearance. O Heavenly Prodigal, all seems little to her for the anointing of
her Lord! She breaks the Box, and with it all her vain desires; she casts her
self down a prodigal Sinner, and presently rose up a pardoned Saint; she was
Prodigal in good, and so what she did, was to be accounted rather love than
wast; but the Prodigal Son was Prodigal in Evil, and spent his Portion
foolishly amongst Harlots, wandering, and distressed about the World; yet in the
midst of all those squandrings, God gave him a good and holy Consideration of
remembering his Father, and a Resolution to return penitently to seek him. This
wretch went astray, it is true, but yet he gave; he ruined himself, but he
relieved others. If he sinned in giving ill, yet there was something good
wrought in that giving ill; namely, to give, to succor, and to sustain those
that wanted. If he offended God in sinning, yet he imitated God in giving at
least; for God gives not only to the good, but also to the evil; and to give,
though with squandring to the bad, was an evil not totally void of good.

The unjust Steward, that lessened the Debts to his Master's cost, to pass them
so afterward in his Accounts, did very ill; but yet he gave, and the Lord
commended him, as having done wisely, and puts him for an Example, that we
should make Friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that is, of Money ill-gotten,
and that we should get out of that wickedness, by giving, when we cannot find
the Person to whom it should be restored; but the Covetous Man, that had so
many Barns, and yet in his thought was foolishly contriving to build more and
greater ones, to hoard up the great abundance of his Corn, was himself cast
into Hell, as a bundle of Tares: And the other Rich Glutton, who would not give
so much as the broken scraps of his Gluttony to feed the holy Beggar, that lay
at his Door, was also for ever condemned; there being amongst the evil they
did, nothing that was good, for Pity to lay hold on.

And thus it is ill to be Prodigal, and it is also ill to be Covetous. The good
thing is to be Liberal, and a giver of Alms; yet of the two extremes, he is the
less evil (with equal imperfection) that gives, than he that refuses; He that
throws away, than he that takes away; and he that wastes, than he that spares.

Of Chastity and Abstinence.
With Humility and Liberality thou ought to love Chastity, the inward and
the outward Clothing, which cleanses and beautifies the Conscience, and adorns
the Soul with a white Garment, sweetly perfumed, and very pleasing in the
Lord's Eyes. A Virtue beloved of our Savior and his Mother, and one of those
he showed most kindness to; Jesus being a Virgin himself, would have a
Virgin Mother, and a Virgin-Father, in her Husband Joseph, a Virgin-Fore-runner
in the Baptist, a Virgin-Disciple in St. John the Evangelist, and even in
Heaven Virginity had its first birth in the Angelical Nature.

O Heavenly Virginity! O Sovereign Purity! O un-utterable Chastity, which
dwell in Heaven, and were a Virtue there before thou were known upon Earth!
O Heavenly Virginity, which waitest upon the Virgin-Lamb, who is accompanied by
Virgins, that follow him whithersoever he goes! O Heavenly Virginity, which
art the fruit of the Blood of the Lamb, since it is that Wine which engenders
Virgins.

Virginity and Chastity purify the Soul, and which is more admirable, preserve
the Body also pure, white, and spotless. Chastity makes the Spirit pure, clean,
and fervent. Chastity disposes the Will to give itself wholly up to God, and
not to love the Creatures, nor to forsake the Creator for them. Chastity keeps
the Powers, Faculties, and Senses clean, to the end that being pure, chaste, and
dis-engaged, we may forsake all Creatures, freely seeking after the Creator.
Chastity betroths itself to Virtue, protects and defends it, and obliges the
Eternal Son of God, and his Holy Mother, with all the Saints and Angels to be
our Friends. Finally, would thou see the excellency of Chastity? Look upon
its contraries, Lust and Sensuality. Would thou know the beauty of Light?
Consider the ugly and loathsome horror of Darkness. These defile, embase, and
make deformed; whereas the other clears, adorns, and beautifies.

The Mischiefs of Sensuality.
Sensuality depraves the Senses, defiles the powers of the Soul, disorders all
our Faculties, destroys all our Rational part, and reduces us to be merely
Animal. Sensuality obscures Reason, and makes Passion tyrannize over it. Other
Vices do bespot the Soul, this the Soul and Body too. The rest are Vices and
Passions of Discourse, this is a beastly Passion, common to Bruits, that are
not able to Discourse. The Proud, the Ambitious, and the Covetous have
something of Reason in them. In those Vices something of Discourse is
requisite; and that Natural elation and vanity of the Mind speaks Superiority;
but the Base, Lascivious, and Sensual Person, is very short and sottish in his
Discoursing, being totally sensual and bestial; and agrees so much the more
with Beasts, by how much the more he is Brutish and Animal in his unbridled
Passions.

Who is able to number the Ruins this Vice has caused? It is easier to lament,
than to reckon them. See what it brought upon David. It made that Heavenly Man
become an Adulterer, a Murderer, Treacherous, Faithless, and Cruel to a worthy
and valiant Subject. From the ill Example of the Father, it passed on to the
Incestuous Son, and made Amnon to force his Sister Thamar: Next it disposed
Absalom to take Revenge by killing his Brother Amnon: Thence proceeded the
contempt of David's Reign, when his Subjects saw themselves commanded by an
Adulterous, Murdering, and Treacherous King. Thence came a general Scandal,
and thence the Kingdom rebelled, and the poor despised and persecuted King was
fain to fly from his own Son, bewailing the Sin he had committed, the lives of
an innumerable company of his Subjects being paid for one Sensual Delight. Now
if we have often imitated David in sinning, let us imitate him also in
repenting. Let our Tears remedy that Mischief, and let our Grief and Contrition
help to make amends for our follies of Lasciviousness, and let our Eyes bewail
the Offense, which by lustful looking upon Beauty they have committed. Let
Sorrow cure the heart that is wounded by that Passion, and let the warning of
such Examples make him Wise, Chaste, and Wary, who has been made Foolish,
Sensual, and inconsiderate by the pleasure of a moment.

What Ruins and Misfortunes, what Miseries and Desolations does not the
Kingdom of Spain owe to this Sensual Vice? It was above nine hundred Years
under the Chain of an hard Captivity, purging away the guilt of one sin hastily
committed, but long and sharply punished. Look upon the Sensuality of the last
King of the Goths, how it made an end of his Empire, threw down his Power to
the ground, drew Barbarians into Spain, banished the Faith out of it, filled it
with Infidelity, and quite rooted out the Valor and Goodness of the Gothish
Nation. Finally, one momentany Delight cost the loss of an innumerable company
of Lives and Souls. This Example is of a Neighbour-Nation, but the like Causes
will probably produce the like Effects in other places; many Instances whereof
may be found in the Histories of all Countries, to the end that great Persons
chiefly may take warning, because their evil deeds are of more dangerous
consequence, in the influence they have upon the Guilt and Punishment of others
in this World; but as to the other World, even the meanest are as nearly
concerned to fly this Vice, for the consequence of it to them will be the
rottenness of their Bodies, and the damnation of their Souls, (which is bad
enough) unless God give them the Grace to Repent, and forsake so ruinous a Vice.

Consider what the mischiefs of this sin must be in its Roots, which produces
such innumerable mischiefs in its Fruit; What it must needs be in its
beginning, that has so dismal and lamentable an end; what it must be in its
original, which gives birth to so many miseries and misfortunes. O who could
have believed that this Vice had been so heinous, and so terrible! One might
have thought it indeed to be weak, foul, and ugly, but not that it had power to
produce such unspeakable mischiefs. O! yes, it works great ones, and such as
are truly unspeakable, not only to each individual Person, but also to the
Public. Sensuality enervates the strength of Nations, embases the Majesty of
Princes, blinds the Understanding, weakens the Courage of their Soldiers,
besots the knowledge of their Wise men, and fills the most Prudent with
Ignorance and Folly. Sensuality makes young men base and feeble; old men blind
and doting; it dulls the reason of the wise, darkens their knowledge in
counsel, and makes their Government rash, heedless, and inconsiderate. It
banishes Providence, and casts out care and watchfulness from Kings and
Kingdoms.

Of Remedies against Sensuality.
But what Remedy is there against such terrible Mischiefs? God and the serious
thought of him is the principal Remedy; Prayer and begging earnestly of God to
cleanse us, and give us Chastity. This is the only remedy, since it is certain,
that no man can be chaste without the gift of God; Nemo enim continens esse
poterit, nisi Deus dederit; Pray therefore continually that God would defend
thy Soul from this Vice, and give thee an hatred of it. But together with this,
which is the principal Remedy, there are others which God applies to free us
from that inbred and Domestic Evil. And the first is the Protection and
Intercession of Christ, with his holy Example, and thy endeavor to imitate the
Purity of his Life; for if thou prayest, and actest contrary to thy Prayers,
thou provokest him to anger, that should grant thy request; and if thou will
have the chaste and holy Jesus to be thy Master, thou must show thy self to be
his Disciple, by striving to follow him in holiness and chastity.

Next this Remedy, (and even in this Remedy) avoid the occasions of loosing thy
Chastity. Trust not in thy self, nor presume upon thine own strength, but
believe thou shall no longer be saved from falling, than thou keep thy self
from the occasion of falling. Think how is it possible to have live Coals upon
thy Breast and not be burnt? Think, how is it possible that fire and tow should
touch one another without being enflamed. Think how is it possible to dawb thy
self with Pitch, and not be defiled. Consider, I say, that there is as little
possibility to escape safe from a voluntary and very near occasion. If thou
have escaped to day, it is in a manner a Miracle, and it is ten thousand to
one, that thou shall fall miserably to morrow, if thou presume to venture upon
it again, and shall fall so much more foully and irrecoverably, by how much the
more thou art confident, that thou shall not. Let not thy Passion, nor thy
foolish Presumption deceive thee; thou art not holier than David, nor wiser
than Solomon, nor stronger than Sampson; and yet all these fell by not avoiding
the occasions, and these were public warnings, which God has left to the
World, to the end we may open our Eyes, and be more wary.

Art thou a Spiritual Person, and do not avoid the occasions of sin? Why
then, thou art not a Spiritual Person. Think thou, because thou live upon
thy guard, thou shall not fall? If thou trustest to that, thou art fallen
already, unless thou also live retired. Sometimes, nay often, a Spiritual
Person, that exposes himself to voluntary occasions, (if he may be called
Spiritual that does so) is in greater danger of falling than a loose and
debauched man; for the loose man incurs less danger, because he incurs more;
and the cautious person probably incurs more, because he incurs less. How is
this? you will say, I do not understand it. Then I will explain it to thee. The
Lascivious man by custom in that Vice, sometimes looses his Appetite, or at
least abates it, and with that the Temptation; but it increases with the
cautious man, and becomes more ardent by his forbearance, and therefore the
Tempter is more sollicitous, vigilant, and vehement to overcome him. The
Delights wherewith the Devil entices a Spiritual Man, are in the imagination,
and have nothing of act, whereby he may become undeceived; but those of the
Vicious Man are filthy in his practice of them, and that very filthiness and
foulness tires him, enlightens him, and undeceives him; for this reason
Spiritual Persons ought to be more watchful and wary than those, that are
Sensual; and if not, they will do as the Galatians, who ended in the Flesh,
having begun in the Spirit.

In Conclusion, would thou be chaste, careful and wary? Would thou conquer
this Vice? Then fly from it. Other sins are conquered by fighting, this by
flying. This flight is both the Combat, the Victory, and the Triumph; but
withal use Abstinence, and other acts of Mortification, to overcome and subdue
so powerful a Passion. There is a sort of Devils, says our Savior, that
cannot be cast out without Fasting and Prayer. To eat much, and to drink much,
and neither to think of God, nor call upon him in Prayer, is not the way to
conquer that strong, contagious, and dangerous Passion. It is frail, and needs
strong Remedies. It is incontinent, and needs continent Remedies. It is unruly
and unbridled, and therefore needs Remedies that may restrain and tame it. By
Abstinence thou may also conquer Gluttony, the foul ugly Mother of many
sins. The ancient Philosophers, though they had but the Light of their Candle,
which is Natural Reason, yet said very excellently, That a Virtuous Life
consisted wholly in two words, Sustine and Abstine, Bear and Forbear, or be
patient and abstemious. If a Heathen could say so by the Light of his Candle,
What shall a Spiritual Man say, being enlightened by the Sun of Christian
Verities, and by the Rays of Eternal and Celestial Light? Abstinence is an
Universal Virtue, which comprehends innumerable Virtues; and so this Virtue
alone is a general Antidote against the Maladies of a Spiritual Life.

Would thou not sin? Why then abstain from offending God by the breach of
his holy Commandments. Would thou grow in the Internal Life? Why then,
abstain from rejecting his holy Counsels. Would thou have the Virtues come
and lodge within thee? Why then, abstain from running into Vice. Would thou
be perfect in all things? Why then fast inwardly, as well as outwardly.
Would thou subdue thy Vices? Encompass thy self with the Virtues, for that
is the Girdle, which our Savior tells us is the Scourge of Vice. What good
does it to begirt the Body with a Cord, and make it lean with fasting; if in
the mean while the Soul grow big, and swell up with Self-will. What good does
the yellow meager Countenance, which speaks abstinence from Meat and Drink; if
in the mean while wrath and hatred give a worse Complexion to the Soul, because
they feed it with a worse Nourishment? In the midst of your Fast, says God,
your own Will reigns, whereas the resigning it up to my Will ought to be the
Crown and Honor of your Fast. This is another kind of Abstinence than that
which is contrary to Gluttony; but I will now say something of that.

Of Gluttony.
Gluttony is an infamous Vice, that pollutes and destroys both Body and Soul no
less, than Sensuality, dulling and abasing the Senses of the one, and the
Powers of the other. It is a loathsome Vice, and filthy, both in its Cause, and
in its Effects; for in its cause it fills a man with foul Humors and Diseases,
with Painfulness and Misery; and in its Effects, because by wakening and
feeding the Appetite, it breeds as many Mortal Distempers in the Soul, as
Diseases in the Body.

The Scripture tells us, The People sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play. As if it had said, They sat long at Meat, whereas they should have
eaten, but as it were in passing. They did eat as if their utmost end had been
eating, and that they had been born for nothing else; and not considering that
they were born to live after another manner, as soon as they had done eating,
they played away their Life, their Fortune, and their Honor. God commanded
that the Paschal Lamb should be eaten standing, with their Loins Girt, and
their Staves in their hands: What is this, but to teach us, that as our Lives
pass quick away, our Meals should do so too?

Let us eat and drink (said some deluded men) for to morrow we shall die. See
what a madness! Observe what a foolish Consequence these Epicures draw, when
Gluttony is the Antecedent! Because they are to die to morrow, they eat
excessively to day: But Wretches, if you must die to morrow, and vomit up your
Meat, giving a strict account of what ye shall eat and drink; Why do you cram
your selves like Beasts to day? Death uses to terrify, and undeceive every
Body else, but it hardens these and deceives them more; and that which
affrights others from sin, invites these stupid men to sin. See how Gluttony
dulls and stupifies the Understanding, since it fills it with such ignorant and
senseless Discourses and Arguments.

O heavenly Abstinence and Moderation, which give a pure, a long, and a
righteous Life! Long, because thou correctest those foul gross humors that
choke and drown it; Pure, because thou do quite banish them; and Righteous,
because thou cuttest off Passions by taking away the nourishment of Vices,
whereof Gluttony is a fruitful Mother. O heavenly Abstinence, thou art the
Forerunner of great Blessings! By having prepared themselves with Abstinence
and Fasting, Moses received from God the Tables of the Law; Elias received
Nourishment from an Angel; and the Savior of Souls obtained innumerable
Victories. O holy Abstinence, which do sweeten, adorn, and sanctify
Repentance! For by thee Virtue is cherished, Vice is put to flight, and holy
Desires and Perfections become active, vigorous and permanent.

The Second WEEK.
Of Patience.
Thou will think perhaps, that by being humble, liberal, abstinent and chaste,
thou have perfected the Spiritual Life; but thou have not done all yet, thou
must have Patience also; for without that, thou can scarce be said to have
begun. Those other Virtues look to what thou ought to do within thy self,
and to what thou ought to do to others. This teaches thee how thou ought
to suffer from others, when they oppress and injure thee.

The Virtue of Patience is an inward fortitude of the Mind; to bear for God's
sake what is laid upon us by men, and is as necessary for the Spiritual Life,
as Breath is for the Natural. Think how impossible it is for one that is
continually shot at with Bows and Guns, to escape; unless he have some defense
against the Bullets and Arrows: As impossible it is for thee to live in the
Spiritual Life, without being defended with the shield of Patience.

All things assault and shoot at him that loves God. The Devil persecutes him,
the World slanders him, the Flesh tempts him; he is afflicted from without, he
is drawn and allured from without, his Superiors trample upon him, his Equals
despise him, his Inferiors presume to affront him, and even the Lord himself,
whom he adores, does seem also sometimes to be his Enemy, because he has a mind
to make trial how far his Courage and Constancy will reach. Thus it is said in
the Book of Wisdom, That God proves the Good, to the end he may find them
worthy of himself. And Job complained of this, and said, Wherefore hidest thou
thy face, and hold me for thine Enemy? Will thou break a Leaf driven to and
fro? and will thou pursue the dry Stubble? Thou writest bitter things against
me, etc. Consider what Patience he had need to have, who is persecuted by God,
by the World, by the Flesh, by the Devil, and by his own self.

In short, the Spiritual Life is a fruitful Seedplot of Thorns, and the way of
Afflictions; and therefore it is necessary at every step to have the Staff of
Patience in thy hand to support thee. Is it not the way of the Cross? Why then
have Patience. Is it not the way of Difficulties? Why then have Patience. Is it
not a way of Tribulations? Why then have Patience. By this one Virtue alone
many Vices are destroyed. Without Patience thou would throw the Cross from
thy shoulders, and run over to the Party of thy Enemies, which are thy Delights
and the Devils; for this reason the Lord recommended Patience to his Disciples
above all other Virtues, saying, In patience possess your Souls. He sent them
out as Lambs into the midst of Wolves; he sent them to preach, teach, and to
give light to a foolish, perverse, and a wicked World; what could they look
for, but Pains, Crosses, Death, and Torments? And how should they be able to
make any advantage of them, without Patience and Suffering? In another place he
tells us, That the good bring forth fruit in patience; as inferring, That
without Patience there is no Fruit at all of Virtue.

This is most certain, That the Virtues, how many soever they be, can neither
consist with one another, nor have any Life, Subsistence, or Perseverance in
themselves, without Patience. And reason shows it, for all of them make it
their business to subdue the Appetite, and to give Reason her Scepter and
Empire. The Appetite resists, and desires Superiority: Reason on the other side
sights and makes opposition, so that to hold out such a cruel, obstinate,
continual, and internal War, there is a necessity of having a great deal of
Patience. Affronts, Calumnies, and Persecutions assault the Spiritual Man; What
other Remedy has he but Patience? He walks with Temptations round about him;
What Remedy is there but Patience? He falls into Imperfections and Miseries,
and the Enemy tempts him to Desperation, What other Remedy but Patience?
Patience, Humility, Constancy, and Perseverance, which are all Sisters, do
crown the Soul, and make it triumphant in the Spiritual Life.

What else was the Life of Christ, our blessed Example, but a long, constant,
repeated, and enlarged Patience? Behold him suffering cold in the Manger, the
smart of a Knife in Circumcision, heat and weariness in his flying to Egypt,
slanders, revilings, and insolences from some Ministers of the Law in his
Manifestation, Scourging, Thorns, Wounds, Death, and the Cross in his Passion.
In all this he consecrated Patience, and the same Virtue was practiced by his
Mother in the Torments of her Son, suffering in her tender heart what our Lord
suffered in his Divine Person.

What Complaints were heard from our sweet Master Jesus? O the innumerable
Injuries that were done him! But what resentments did he show? Why, to teach,
to give light, to guide, to suffer, to entreat, and to pray for his Enemies.
Patience is not only a Merit, and a Merit of very great excellency; but it is
Comfort, Peace, and Joy, and very great Wisdom. Who is the Wise man? says one
of the Fathers of the Church, and answers that doubt, The Patient man. And who
is more wise? He that is more Patient. And who is the wisest of all? He that is
most Patient of all.

Of Anger.
Believe me, Anger is an ugly, fierce, ignorant, and unruly Vice; for it vexes,
afflicts, disquiets, precipitates, and works nothing but confusion, coming very
short in Means and in Remedies. Patience will free thee from all this; for it
enlarges the Heart, increases the Understanding, and gives strength and depth
to our Discourse. What do thou think that Anger is but a short madness? for
the angry man and the mad man differ only in time, not in action. The furious
mad man is angry for a long time, and the furious angry man is mad for a short
time. Would thou see the Picture of Anger? Look in a Glass when thou art
angry, and thou shall see a terrible ugliness in thy Face; thine Eyes sparkle
with rage, thy Brows wrinkled with Frowns, thy Complexion discomposed and
enflamed with redness, and all thy actions sudden and disordered. What a kind
of thing is Anger in the Soul, which thus transforms the Countenance, and
deformes the whole Person?

The Lord in that holy Precept of loving Enemies, had an Eye not only to the
good of the Enemy, and the Person hated; but also to that of the Friend, by
whom he would have him to be loved. His aim was not only, that the one should
not die, but also that the other might live; and which is more, he desired not
only to prevent a Christian from defiling his Soul with hatred; but also to
preserve him from the vexation and torment of so unquiet a Passion. His intent
in this most sweet and gentle Precept, was to give the Christian a Temporal, as
well as an Eternal Life. Eternal by his obedience, and Temporal by his quiet.
To hate is rage, disquiet, anguish, and death, and so he banished Anger from
the Soul, to free it from death, anguish, and disquiet.

Do thou think that by thy hatred thou take revenge upon thine Enemy? Thou
art deceived; it is he that is revenged on thee. What greater punishment can
thy Enemy inflict upon thee, than that to which thou condemnest thy self merely
by thy hatred? Thou frettest, thou stormest, thou vexest, and tormentest thy
self; thou abhorrest on the one side, and longest eagerly on the other, and
live in a continual Affliction, between the earnestness of thy Desires and
Aversions; tossing and turning to and fro, biting thy Lips, grinding thy Teeth,
and contriving Scorpions for another; but all this within thine own heart. What
Torture can the Enemy give thee, that is greater, nay equal to this that thou
bring upon thy self? On the contrary, he very often laughs when thou
lamentest; and he is at rest when thou art upon the rack. By this it is
manifest, that it is more easy, more cheerful, more pleasant and delightful for
thee to love, than to hate thine Enemy. According to this, it is not only
pleasing to God, but happy and comfortable to our selves to love our enemies.
According to this patience, the medicine of Anger is not bitter, but sweet; and
the heavenly Physician cures thee of a Calenture in the Dog Days, by
prescribing thee a draught of Cold water; for he cures the Infernal fire of
Anger, and washes it away with the gentle Stream of Love and Charity. For this
reason we may justly call Patience the Celestial Art of Peace. Would thou
have Peace, and Joy, and Comfort in thy Soul? Get Patience, and thou shall have
Peace, and by having Peace and Patience, thou shall not only have Joy, and
Comfort, but the Author of Patience and Peace, of Joy and Comfort, shall dwell
continually in thy Soul.

Of Moderation in speaking, and the mischiefs of the Tongue.
There is yet another kind of Abstinence, besides that excellent Virtue of
forbearing the Excess of Meat and Drink, which we have already spoken of; which
is that of forbearing, superfluous and hurtful Talk; for that is also a very
admirable and profitable kind of Abstinence. I do not know, whether I should
not say; Thou shall do a better and a greater thing, to abstain from speaking
much, than eating much; for speaking causes more mischiefs than eating, and men
grow tired and weary with eating, but never with talking. Our Savior does
advertise us well of this, when he says, Not that which enters into the Mouth
defiles the Soul, but that which comes out of the Mouth. Now they be words
which come out of the Mouth, and it is meat that goes into the Mouth; What
then, Is not excessive eating very hurtful? Yes to the Body; but the Soul
receives no hurt from the meat, but from the excessive delight in it; whereas
that, whereby the Soul is so frequently defiled, comes out of the mouth, in
filthy, loose, smutty, and sinful words, as also in those that slander, and
detract, and destroy the Honors, Lives, and Fortunes of their Neighbors.
These are they commonly that do the mischief to our Souls.

The Tongue is the Source of Vice, and the Ruiner of Virtue. This little
Instrument is a sharp and cruel Razour, that cuts, and burns, and kills, and
sets the whole World on fire, and is set on fire of Hell. St. James calls it an
unruly Member, full of deadly poison, the matter of infinite vexations,
quarrels, and contentions; it disturbs, disquiets, and overturns all. In short,
this little Engine is the universal Conveyance, through which all the mischiefs
of the World come out of the heart, in counselling, persuading, disposing, and
quickening its destruction. It Is not without great reason, that God has shut up
this dangerous and powerful Instrument, the Tongue, within a double wall of the
Teeth, and of the Lips, to the end that it might be kept close and restrained;
and no words suffered to pass out of that Fortress, till they be well examined.
One Bridle is enough for the fiercest Horse, but for this little Worm two are
not sufficient. Think what a suspected House that is, which needs two Porters;
either it is in a very unsafe Condition, or else the keeping of it is of great
importance.

Be very wary of thy Speech, and keep thy self, as much as thou can toward
silence, for that is very secure; but speaking, very hazardous to thy Soul.
Think, ruminate, examine, and file over thy words oftentimes, before thou utter
them with thy Tongue; and consider that when once they come there, and are shot
from thence, they become Arrows, which cannot be recalled, and which kill
without remedy. The Tongue (says St. Austin) being in a dark moist place, is
very apt to slip, and it is very dangerous to go in slippery places without
either light or care.

Of Silence.
Silence is the Furnace of Charity, and as when the mouth of a Furnace is open,
the fire comes easily out of it; so out of ours sometimes does the fervor of
Spiritual Charity, for the good of our Neighbor. The ancient Philosophers,
that they might learn to know, were taught to be silent, for Silence is the
Parent of inward peace, rest, and quietness. If this be requisite in the
Meditation and Contemplation of Natural Things; how much more then, in Eternal,
and Celestial?

Do thou love Peace? live in silence. Would thou do much? Take heed what
thou say before thou speak. Let thy words pass twice through thy
thoughts, before they pass once through thy Tongue. Hear, see, and say nothing,
if thou will be disturbed at nothing. Audi, vide, and tace, si vis vivere in
pace. I have often repented me of having spoken, but never of having held my
Tongue. He that speaks, makes himself subject to the Censure of all that hear
him; but he that keeps silence is the secret Censurer of all that speak. See
the difference there is between being a Subject and a Superior, between being
a Judge and being Judged; the same there is between speaking and hearing. To
speak much shows Confidence, Lightness, Imprudence, and Vanity; to speak little
shows Modesty, Goodness, and Discretion.

The Third WEEK.
Of Envy.
ABstinence, Patience, and Silence are naturally followed by the Love of our
Neighbor, whereof the contrary is Envy, an infamous Vice, which took birth,
growth, and gathered strength with our very Nature; but I come short, Envy is
more ancient than our Nature; for Lucifer and his Fellows stumbled in Heaven by
Envy, and fell headlong from thence into the bottomless Pit. It being proposed
to that high Cherubim, (according to the Opinion of grave Authors) that he
should adore the Eternal Son of God, when in future time he should be united to
our Nature, he disdained to do it through Envy, that an Union should be made
with the Humane, when he might have taken the Angelical.

It was Pride in Lucifer not to adore the Son of God; but it was a Pride
(according to this Opinion) that had its Root in Envy. It was Envy also that
moved him afterward in Paradise to lay that Trap, into which our innocent
Parents fell, alluring their holy sincerity and goodness with offers of being
like unto Gods. It was his Envy to see them in the favor of their Eternal
Creator, while himself was Condemned into Everlasting Fire. It was Envy that in
the first steps of the Banishment of our first Parents, made angry Cain an
Enemy to God, and to his Brother Abel, and which made him first commit Murder,
then to Despair, and at last to be quite cut off; that Envy proceeding from
God's favorable accepting of the Sacrifice of the Liberal, and turning away
his Eyes from that of the Covetous. This wild Beast within his heart, broke out
into open Fury, and was the first that shed Humane Blood, and the first that
put the Life and Death of the Innocent into the power of the Guilty. This was
the first wickedness, that after their own Disobedience, afflicted our first
Parents, and the Tears, Grief, and Repentance for their own Offense, were much
increased in seeing the Murder of their good and holy Son, commitmitted by the
hand of the other, that was a wretched Villain and a Castaway.

It was Envy that sowed innumerable Discords between those first Patriarchs and
Heads of the several Tribes; Joseph's Brethren not being able to endure his
Virtues, nor the kindness of his Father to him, they resolved rather to sell
him, than to imitate him. It was Envy that brought in the Dissentions and
Discords between Jacob and Esau, the elder not being able to suffer the
Blessing of the younger. It was Envy that took away the Virtue, the Kingdom,
and the Life of Saul, who, because he could not bear the Valor and the Spirit
of David, chose rather utterly to destroy him than frame himself to follow his
Example. It was Envy also that durst attempt to bite even the Apostles
themselves, when seeing the favor of their Master to St. John, they began to
strive which of them should be the greatest. It was Envy that was the chief
Incentive, that kindled the fire of Rage and Passion in the hearts of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and of the Priests and Masters of the Law against Jesus,
when seeing his Virtues and Miracles, they chose rather to put him to Death,
than to enjoy Eternal Life.

Behold the Victories and Trophies of Envy, and entertain a great abhorrence of
this cruel Enemy; for it is a powerful one, though in it self it be vile, base,
and infamous; choosing rather to hate Virtue, than to emulate it, and affecting
priority, rather by destroying that which is good, than by making that good
which is evil.

It is an infamous, a desperate, and an ungrateful Vice; for the first, that it
kills, is the Person who entertains it, and the Envious man dies with Envy
himself, but cannot thereby kill the Person envied. It is an infamous Vice, for
that being able to ease it self (in a great measure) of vexation, by imitating
Virtue; it frees it self rather by the destruction and death of the innocent
and virtuous Person, making Poison of the Antidote, and corrupting it self by
the virtue of another. It is an infamous Vice, because it draws the nourishment
of hatred and abhorrence out of the same ground, from whence it ought to draw
that of Love to Virtue; and it defames and dishonours that which right Reason
extols and magnifies. It is an infamous Vice, because it destroys the love of
our Nature; for whereas one man ought to love another as man, and much more if
he be virtuous, Envy abhors him so much for being virtuous, that it would not
suffer him to continue man. It is an infamous Vice, because it prosecutes the
damage of another, without bringing any profit to it self, and loads it self
with more Crimes, without lessening another Virtues. It is an infamous Vice,
because it makes an Enemy of that Person, whom it ought to imitate and esteem
as a Friend, choosing rather to abhor that which is good, than to make use of
it in forsaking that which is evil. Finally, Envy is the Vice of base wretched
People; for whereas the envious man might by a noble emulation and sincere
endeavor, make himself both virtuous and generous, he chooses rather to
torment himself, and become more base, more wretched, and more miserable.

Remedies against Envy.
This Vice must be cured by means contrary to those we directed against
Sensuality, for that (as we said) must be cured by flight, but Envy must be
conquered by fighting. Thus when thou feel in thy heart the first motions
toward Envy, raise up thy self to encounter it with a stout Opposition, and
force thy self to love and praise that Person, whom it would tempt thee to
abhor and to calumniate. Let both thy words and thy thoughts commend that
Person, whom thou art troubled to see preferred before thee. Exalt his fame,
and copy his virtues with thy utmost endeavor.

There are two sorts of men in the World, which are very great in my esteem;
those that acknowledge the ill which is in themselves; and those that
acknowledge the good which is in their Enemies. It is a generous sense, and a
noble action for a man to conquer Envy, and to own Virtue wheresoever he finds
it. That is a powerful and a generous light which illuminates the Soul, and
drives away the darkness of Envy; and a Man will not be far from imitating the
virtue of a person whom he rightly understands to be virtuous.

What do thou gain by Envy, but rage, anguish, and the gnawing of thy own
bowels? He enjoys all his happiness, and thou choosest torments and vexations.
If Envy could take away the good things of the person envied; if it could bring
home his Riches and Honors to the House of the envious man, though with the
adding of Theft to his Envy, yet at least he would get some profit by it, and
have wherewithal to comfort himself in the midst of his tortures. But it is not
so; for the envied person remains healthful, happy, rich, and powerful, and the
envious man poor, afflicted, wretched, and miserable; getting nothing of the
Wealth he envies, but of the color of that Gold in his Complexion.

Better thy Fortune by thy Virtues, but never attempt to advance it by Vices.
Do that which is in thy power, which is to imitate whatsoever is good, and fly
from whatsoever is evil; and strive not in vain to do what is above thy power,
namely, to take away the goodness from him that is good by making thy self
wicked, and by torturing thy Soul with continual disquiets.

Of Charity to our Neighbors.
Charity toward our Neighbors is the bridle of Envy, the total destruction of
it. With this thou must banish that out of thy heart. Love to our Neighbors is
a Ray of the Divine Love; for Man imitates God in loving that which he loved,
that is to say, Man, for whom he died. If we love not our Neighours, whom will
we love? Will we perhaps love the wild brute Beast? We are Humane by Nature,
let us be Humane also in our Love. Who is there that abhors himself? or who is
there that abhors his own Natural Condition?

Our Nature has produced so Savage a Beast, so pitiless a Man, and so great an
Enemy to Mankind, that kissing a Child, and being asked why? He answered, That
he foresaw by his Art, that Child would be a Soldier, and a great Captain, who
would kill an infinite number of men, and for that reason he began to love him.
This Man, or rather this Monster of Cruelty, would for the same cause have
kissed the Plague, if he had met it in the Street. There was another like this,
that was also a great Enemy to Mankind, and they two visiting one another, the
first said, I am very glad to be in the Company of one that abhors Men; To
which the other replied, So should I also to be in thine, but that thou art a
Man. Were these Men? No certainly, but Beasts, and fiercer than Beasts.

Our blessed Redeemer did not thus, but was always pleased to be called Man;
and being God, the Eternal Son of God, God of God, seldom or never called
himself the Son of God, but often the Son of Man, honoring that Nature which
he came to Redeem, and making himself Man, by taking his Name from it.

Love thy Nature, says the Holy Ghost, hate not thine own Flesh. If Men abhor
Men, and which is more, Men that are virtuous (for that is it which Envy
commonly abhors) who shall love Men, or reward Virtue? He is no true Christian
that abhors Men through Envy or Cruelty? for he follows not the principal
Virtue which Jesus Christ did practice. God being Divine became Humane, and
being God, clothed himself with our Nature, to become Man; and can thou
abhor thine own Nature, or at least a Man? Tell me, after what manner did God
converse with Men, being perfect God and perfect Man? How meek! how gentle! how
favorable! how sweet and gracious toward all Men!

Of Courtesy.
And this he did amongst other things, to teach us not only Humility, but even
Courtesy, Humanity, and Civility, as Beams of that Charity; for that Infinite
Love bestowed and communicated himself on that manner, with his very Humanity.
The Savior of Souls condemns any one that shall be rude and discourteous, or
that shall call his Brother Raca, which in the Opinion of grave Expositors,
signifies a manner of discourteous and reproachful Behavior; and St. Paul also
makes Courtesy an holy and a Sacred thing, counselling that in honor we
should prefer one another, Honor se invicem praevenientes; as who should say,
be Courteous, and prevent one another in Civility, or strive each of you to be
the first in Courtesy.

Think not that Humanity and kind: Behavior is a slight matter in the
Spiritual Life. No; it is of great weight, and of much worth. When thou art
invited, says our Savior, sit not down in the chiefest place, least a more
honorable than thou come, and thou be forced with shame to take the lower
Room. Thou should strive to be Courteous and Civil; for it is a great good
to thy self, and very pleasing to others. Thy love of God cannot be great, if
it make thee not show thy self meek and courteous toward Men. That has but a
very small force which cannot break forth through the thickness of four
fingers, and that is as much as the distance can be from thy heart to the
outside of thy breast. If thy love of God be a true love, it is not possible
thou should forbear to love his Creatures; and thou will do it so much the
more, by how much the more the love of God is pure and perfect in thee. In the
same proportion that thy love of God increases, thy love to thy Neighbors will
increase likewise; and in the same proportion the one wastes and decays, the
other ceases and vanishes also. If God, who is love it self, do love Man, how
can a Man that loves God forbear to love Man, and to desire his good? The love
of God to Man appeared before his Divine Majesty created him; his love being
uncreate and eternal in it self, though in respect of its manifestation to
Mankind it had a beginning.

That loving Apostle, the glory of Apostleship, the beloved Evangelist, and the
adopted Son of the most blessed Virgin, wrote an Epistle persuading to the love
of God, and of Men; and being grown so old that his Disciples were fain to
carry him in their Arms, all his Sermon was, Little Children, love one another.
All we Men are Sons by Grace of one same Father, which is God; and Sons by
Baptism of one same Mother, which is the Church. We are all made by one same
Creator; all redeemed by one same Price, which is the Blood of Christ; and all
nourished by one same Milk, which is his most holy Doctrine and admirable
Sacraments. And is it possible that so many Bonds and Obligations should not
tie Man close to Man, nor make them love and help one another? Is it possible
that Wrath, Passion, and Envy should break all these Obligations? No, No. Love
Humane Nature, for though it were not noble in it self, yet it being created by
God, it becomes noble, and is illustrious by being redeemed, honored, and
favored by his most precious Son. That which cost much is of great value; but
the repairing of Man's Nature cost the Blood of the Eternal Son of God. He
clothed himself with it, and honored us also by it. God Created Man after his
own Likeness; Who will not esteem Man for being the Image of God? And the more,
because God afterward, by becoming Man, made himself the Image of Man.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of Diligence and Fervency, and of the Mischiefs of Omission and Sloth.
THE Virtues help forward one another; The love of God will guide thee to that
of Men. This love will bring thee to fervency, and fervency will open the Gate
to zeal, and zeal for the good of thy Neighbors, burning in Charity both for
them and for thy self, will open thee the Gate of Heaven. This fervency and
this love will not suffer thee to be lazy and sleepy; for sleep is no usual
Companion of Lovers. Charity and Sloth cannot dwell together in one breast. To
sleep much, and to love much, are not things consistent. My Father always
works, says the Lord, and I work. What wonder is it that the Father and the
Son should always be working, since through the Holy Ghost they are always
loving?

There can be no such thing as a lazy Spritual Person; for so much as he has
of sloth, so much he wants of being spiritual. Love is full of an holy
disquiet. It is a sweet longing and refreshing; and if it be afire, how can
idleness and sloth be in so active and stirring an Element?

Fly from sloth in the Spiritual Life; fly from it, I say, for it is a great
and terrible Evil. Go learn of the Ant, says the Holy Spirit to the sluggard.
Judge what the Vice is, and what the Person is that is infected with it, who
needs to be taught by so contemptible a Master; and how much more wretched and
contemptible is the Scholar? Sloth stupifies the Senses, dulls the powers of
the Soul, puts shackles upon all the Faculties, and by little and little strips
the Spiritual Man quite naked, and leaves him merely natural and sensual. Sloth
is the Mother of Omission, and Omission is manifestly the ruin of us. Do thou
see all the evil that is in the World? It all proceeds and takes birth from the
Omission of good. Do thou see the World to be full of wickedness? It ever
springs and grows up in idleness.

How well did he, that beat the Master, when he saw the Scholars loitering in
his presence! he justly punished that defect, even by falling into some excess.
If Omission of Superiors did not foment the neglect and carelessness of those
under their Government, there is no doubt, but they would be reformed. I sleep,
and while I am sleeping, those under my charge are ruined waking. My sleep
becomes their death, and my sloth and remisness their utter destruction.

God deliver me and thee from those Vices which consist in not doing; for they
have a face and outside of Innocence, but within their Bowels they are full of
innumerable Crimes, since they cherish all those which they do not correct. God
in judging us, though he will judge us for every sin, yet I observe that the
Articles of Accusation at that high Tribunal are all of Omission. I was hungry,
and thou gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and thou gave me nothing to drink;
naked, and thou did not cloathe me; sick and in prison, and thou visitedst me
not. But Lord! Are there not other sins of Commission? Do thou only Charge us
with those of Omission? Are there not a thousand wickednesses and beastly
filthinesses, as well as heinous Cruelties committed? And do thou only take
notice of Perfections and Virtues not performed? But what if this be meant of
that part of the Universal Judgment which concerns the Heads and Governors of
this World, as well Secular as Ecclesiastical, and that God intimates that the
sins of Commission of their Subjects are included in those of Omission of their
Superiors, and that in judging these he also condemns those?

What if the Eternal Judge, finding the World ruined by their neglecting to do
their duty, condemns the wilful sins of the one sort in the careless sins of
the other? What if he judges Idleness, as being the Mother of Wickednesses? and
sentences the debauched and dissolute Sons, in the lazy and careless Fathers,
they being thereby the Root of their Vices? I know not how that will be, but
this I can tell thee, that thou ought to shun Sloth and Omission, as the
fruitful Seed-plot of Vices and Wickedness of all sorts. Take notice of, and
hearken to those Reproofs that our Lord gives to the Masters of the Law, and
thou shall see that all of them tend and are directed to reform those Heads,
because in them consisted the destruction of the Members, but he almost always
favored and protected the Multitude; he bore with them, he fed them, he had
compassion on them, he wrought Miracles to give them food, both Spiritual and
Corporal. And what, Were there not many wicked among those common People? Yes,
no doubt there were, but they were common People. But against the Masters of
the Law, who slept in their Vices; against the High Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, who had placed the Tables of the Law among the Tables and Coffers of
their Covetousness, and who left off Preaching and Teaching, to the end that in
the mean while they themselves might be left, and assisted to rob and steal;
against these his Reprehensions were most vehement and severe. He called them
Serpents, Generation of Vipers, Sepulchers full of Corruption, Sons even of the
Devil himself; and finally in this the meekness of the Lord was turned into
Zeal, Justice, and Rigor.

If the Preacher pass over sins in silence, how shall the sinful hearer ever
come to amendment? If the Confessor dissemble, how shall the Penitent ever be
reformed? If the Shepherd sleep, and the Wolf be very vigilant, what shall
become of the poor defensless Flock? If the Father of a Family be remiss, What
shall become of the Son that is let loose among the heats of Youth? If the
Mother sleep carelessly, and be silent, what will the Daughter do having the
liberty of Courtship? If the Magistrates sleep in Security, what will not be
attempted by the seditious and tumultuous People? Do thou see how this sleep,
which we call Omission, is Sloth, is Death, is Misery, and Confusion?

It may well be defended, that all the ruin of Mankind sprung from the
negligence and sloth of our first Father Adam; because he was not diligent and
careful to make his Wife keep at a distance from the forbidden Fruit, and from
having conversed with the Serpent. Is it not certain, that if Adam had pulled
Eve by the Arm, when she drew near to the Tree of Knowledge, and had carried
her to walk in some other part of the Garden far from danger and death, that
the ruin of us all might have been prevented? Adam says nothing; Eve holds
Discourse with the Serpent. It was probable that from thence would arise the
Temptation of that deadly Apple, from whence we inherit an immortal Mortality.

Do thou see the Fault of Pilate? He condemned our Savior to the Death of
the Cross, and which is more, at the same time declared him Just and Innocent.
All which in my judgment proceeded from Sloth and Omission. It was manifestly
so; for when the Jews brought him as guilty to be examined, whereas he might
have done Justice with diligence, truth, courage, and rectitude, he through
Sloth and Omission not doing so, and through desire of putting off that
business from his own Tribunal, because it was very troublesome to him,
referred it to Herod, to avoid being tired with long Discourses, and wearied
with a Process, in which he saw there were such strong Accusers engaged.

Why, was it not as easy, O Pilate! and more just, to dispatch Justice and
free Innocence, when thou saw it in the cruel hands of Malice and Slander,
then to remit a Prisoner to Herod, who did not desire it, nor had formed any
competition about it? It was more just, I confess, says Pilate, but not so
easy; and I embraced that which was easiest, and left Justice on the other
hand.

Herod sent our Savior back again to Pilate, and he begins again to be vexed
at so entangled a Cause; for on the one side, he knew the Innocence of Christ,
and on the other, he saw the Power of his Slanderers. To free our Savior, and
chastise the Jews, Fortitude and Diligence were necessary; but to condemn him
there needed nothing but Injustice and Cruelty. Pilate had no desire to make
use of these, but being too remiss a Judge, he wanted Courage to use the other.

Well then, what remedy? What is to be done in this Case? says the perverse.
Magistrate, Let us Scourge Jesus, let us Crown him with Thorns, and then show
these ungrateful People their King, whipped, spit upon, and abused; for how
powerful soever their Fury be, it is not possible but that Compassion will
soften and overcome it. But, Pilate, was it not easier and more just to
condemn, and scourge, and crown the guilty Scribes and Pharisees with Thorns,
than to use an holy and innocent Person in that pittiless manner? More just,
it is true, (replys that partial Judge) but not more easy; for they are many,
and he is but one. The correcting of them could not be effected without
difficulty, but to chastise the Innocent, is very easy. I forsake Justice to
follow that which is safe and easy, and so let Innocence pay for the fault of
my Sloth and Remisness.

And how succeeded the Omission of so faint-hearted a Judge, with this cruel
Expedient of saving our Savior by scourging and crowning him with Thorns? Much
worse, than if without any pity or remorse he had given him out to be
crucified. For the People being hard and obstinate, were not softened with the
Pains of the Holy Jesus, but rather they became more obdurate in their sin,
seeing that their Passion and Wickedness was more courageous than the heart of
the Judge; and therefore not doubting to get the Victory over him, they cried
out more fiercely with loud Voices, Let him be crucified, Let him be crucified.

Then the Judge, being of himself cowardly and fearful, was the more afraid,
hearing such furious Cries, and finding that the matter grew harder upon him,
was conquered by them; and being slothful, timorous, and unactive, resolved to
condemn him, because he had not the courage, diligence, and industry which were
necessary to save him.

But, Pilate, if thou meanedst to condemn him after he was scourged, buffeted,
and crowned with Thorns, and after thou had shown him to the People as a
Mock-King, affronted and abused; had it not been a less Evil to have condemned
him before, and to have prevented all those Pains and Reproaches? It would have
been a less Evil, (says he) I confess; but my faint-hearted lukewarmness used
them as means to save his I^nocence; and the discourses of a slothful person
tend always to his own convenience, and the injury of another.

Observe what a kind of pity that of the slothful man is? and thou will find it
more cruel then Cruelty it self. If Pilate had condemned our Savior at once,
how unjust, how severe, how cruel soever, yet he had spared him five thousand
Lashes, and an infinite number of other Reproaches; whereas by being pardoned
and defended with such sloth, his Pains and sufferings were infinitely
aggravated. Besides, the lightness wherewith this infamous Judge passed over
such terrible wickednesses, was in a manner worse then all the rest; for with
but washing his Hands in a little Water, the President declared himself, and
all the People Innocent, and the Innocent Guilty. He declared the Innocent
Guilty, because though he knew and confessed his Innocence, yet he suffered him
to be Crucified as a Criminal; and he Absolved the guilty People, because he
forbore to Chastise them, though he knew their Malice.

The reason of this is, that amongst all the other great Evils, of the Sloth,
Omission, and Negligence of Judges, this is one, that it is very short-sighted,
and forgetful of all the Mischiefs that it does; for it looks with very little,
or no light at all, upon those Evils which either it commits or permits.
Pilate condemns our Savior, and delivers him into the hands of his Enemies; he
delivers up that blessed Lamb to those ravenou^ Wolves; he gives them a greater
liberty than they had before; and not only whips and imprisons him; but
condemns him also to be Crucified; and with a little Water not only washes
himself from all these Wickednesses, but commends himself, and expects to be
thought a just, an holy, and an innocent Judge.

A City shall be enflamed with heinous Crimes, a Commonwealth shall burn in all
manner of looseness and debauchery, and a lazy slothful Governor shall in the
mean while sleep carelessly whole nights and days; and although all those
Enormous Crimes are committed, because his remisness forbears to correct them;
yet because he does not act those things himself, he thinks he is holy,
justified, and guiltless.

No, do not so; do thou strive in thy Person, and in thy Employment to act with
attention, diligence, and vigilance, abhorring Sloth and Remisness. Do not make
the sins of others become thine own Crimes through Omission. Take not upon thee
the Office of a Judge, Magistrate, or Superior, unless thou have Vigilance,
Diligence, Zeal, and Courage to correct Offenses. It is not I that tell thee
this, but the Word of God in the Proverbs; as who should say, If thou art a
Governor, and allowest those that are under thy Charge to commit Wickedness,
thou make their Faults to become thine own. Measure therefore thy strength
before thou undertakest such an Employment, and having entered into it a Judge,
take heed thou come not out of it a Criminal.

Sloth and Negligence are, as we have seen, hurtful in all Persons, but in
Prelates, Magistrates, and Superiors, it is the Pest of the Public; for under
the coldness and indifferency of Omission, there is no Mischief that will not
be ventured upon, all bold daring Crimes being the Consequences of it; and it
is better to live, where nothing, than where every thing is counted lawful. But
in the Spiritual Life, Diligence is that which promotes it, securing our inward
Advancement, and our going forward in the way of Virtue; for every step that
Diligence takes, adds Glory to the Crown of our Reward.

The time of our Race passes swift away, that of our Life flies very fast, and
which is most dangerous, Death hastens, and then we shall neither have time to
run, to work, to make satisfaction, nor to recover the opportunities we have
lost; and therefore it is necessary to make use of this present Moment, before
it pass, for it is impossible to be recalled.

Work, while you have light, says the Savior of Souls; Work before my Time
come, in which I shall call you to account, and judge you for your Time. On the
other side, while you have light, walk and work, before the Daylight of Life
pass away; least having spent your time viciously or idly, (which is all one)
the darkness of the Night of Death seize upon you at unawares. Can any Evil be
greater or equal to that of loitering all the day in idleness and vice,
expecting the darkness of Night, and of Death, the punishment of idle, vicious,
and slothful Persons? The Life of our Savior in this World, was all working,
suffering, taking pains, walking, watching, teaching, putting Men in mind of
the account they were to give, of the Universal Judgment, of Hell, and of
Glory. His Zeal, his Diligence, and his Goodness not suffering his Charity to
be one moment idle.

Why stand ye here all the day idle? said he in the Parable to those that were
found in the Marketplace; as who should say, Can you spend all the Day in
sloth and idleness, while Night, the Sword of the slothful, hangs over your
Head, and will certainly fall upon you? If you will not work in the Day, how
will it be possible for you to work in the Night? If you refuse him the Day,
which is the time of working rightly, and with profit; it is manifest that in
the Night you will find nothing but Errors and Mischiefs. Who would refuse to
go his Journey while the Sun shines, believing that he shall find his way
better in the dark? Therefore shake off idleness, and embrace fervency and
diligence. Do you think you shall be able to find diligence at your Death, when
you have wasted all your Life in laziness, and in sloth? or that you shall find
Amendment when you come to be judged, Idleness being the Mother of all Vices?

The Saints call Idleness the Sepulcher of the Living, because Worms,
Rottenness, and Corruption are engendered by it, and that it foments all kinds
of Miseries together. That holy Man understood it well, who living in the
Desert, busied himself in carrying stones from one place to another, and in
bringing them back thither again; and being asked why he did so, he answered, I
avoid idleness, or at least I master that body that would master me.

No Vice is so destructive to the Spirit, nor so kind a Companion to the Flesh,
as idleness; and although it seems the least, is yet the cause of the greatest
Evils. Besides, being slothful and idle in good, there is no ill which does not
increase and become worse by it; for it is the same thing as to set open the
Gate of the Soul to all the Passions and Vices that shall have a mind to enter.
There is no Vice so mean, but will adventure to assault an idle Man, because it
looks upon him as one that will not take the pains to make any resistance,
being so weak as to have yielded up himself even before he be attempted, and so
all wickednesses take confidence to come upon him, and assume to themselves a
Jurisdiction over him.

If the Devil be diligent, watchful, bold, strong, heedful, crafty, and cruel,
What will he be not able to do against a weak, idle, careless, and disarmed
Man? The holy, the spiritual, and the diligent, who night and day busy
themselves in some virtuous Employment, have much ado to escape free from the
Assaults of the Devil? How then shall the slothful be able to defend himself
from so designing and so dangerous an Enemy?

So much thou do increase in holiness, as thou do increase in diligence,
and therefore work always without ceasing; for those works are Safety and
Reward, and do advance thee in Spirit and Charity. The blessed Virgin came to
so much Perfection by working; for having begun with such unspeakable Graces,
she rose to more than can be imagined, only by going on each moment, increasing
and improving her former Gifts and Graces. The holy Apostles were the Light of
the World; and observe how diligent they were. They went about like the Sun in
perpetual motion; and by that means Twelve Men alone were able in a little more
than Thirty Years, to enlighten, to reduce, and to confound the blindness of
the Gentiles throughout the whole World. How could holy Persons in former Ages
become in few Years such Prodigies of Holiness, but by their diligence to
increase and redouble their Talents, and by constantly following the Dictates
of the Holy Spirit which governed them? Even those valiant and ambitious Men
that heretofore conquer'nt so many Nations and Countries, could never have done
it, but by diligence: One of those being asked, How in less than Nine Years he
had gained so many Kingdoms; answered, Non procrastinando, by not delaying till
to Morrow.

If this be necessary for the Conquest of frail, mortal, and inconstant
Kingdoms, that are but Heaps of Dung; What diligence and care is needful in us
Christians, for the gaining of the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven? Traffic, till I
come, (says the Savior of Souls;) Be industrious, and suffer not your Talents
to lie idle.

That slothful Servant, who buried his Talent, did no other harm, but that he
did so, and sat down quietly by it; and yet for all that, the Lord condemns him
to Hell, and calls him wicked Servant; Serve nequam, Cursed of God, because
being lazy and sluggish, he gave that to the Earth, and to what is Sensual,
which was due to Heaven, and to what is Spiritual.

Our Humane Condition and Misery can hardly hold to an Indifference. If thou
do not labor in that which is good, thou will take pains in that which is
Evil; not to watch, is to fall asleep; not to serve God and please him, is
little better than to offend him; and in the Opinion of those who will allow no
indifference in things, it is (as I have showed) absolutely to offend him.

Believe me, it is not for nothing that Christ so often calls upon us to Watch:
He pronounced that word fourteen times, and his blessed Lips exhort us to it so
often, with that very same word, Watch. Sloth, Idleness, Omission, and
Negligence, is the sleep of Death, which carries us to Death Eternal. Watch
then, for the Devil sleeps not; for thine Appetite sleeps not. Watch, least the
Bridegroom find thee without Oil, like the foolish Virgins, when he shall come
to judge thee. Watch, for the Thief goes about carefully to rob thy House.
Watch, for the Infernal Lion goes about seeking to devour thee. Watch, and
expect the coming of thy Lord, with thy Lamp burning, when he shall come from
the first Marriage unto the second; that is from his first to his second Coming.

Finally, If thou will be a true Spiritual Person, thou must work, and labor,
sweat, and walk without stopping, and with fervent steps follow the Lord, who
goes before thee carrying the Cross on his Divine Shoulders, and giving
strength, breath, and courage unto thy Fervency by his Love.

NOVEMBER.
The First WEEK.
Of the Twelve Fruits of the Holy Spirit in General.
IT is time now to gather in the Fruits of this Spiritual Year, that we may
praise God in the advantages of a Plentiful Increase. St. Paul, the Light and
the Apostle of the Gentiles, teaches us, That the Fruits of the Spirit are
Twelve: to wit, Charity, Peace, Long-suffering, Benignity, Faith, Continence,
Joy, Patience, Goodness, Meekness, Modesty, and Chastity.

I admire that he puts the End in the Middle, and seems to make the Root to be
the Fruit: For I should think that the Fruits of the Spirit were the Graces and
the Blessings we have already treated of in some of the former Months; that is
to say, a happy Death, Absolution from Judgment, a Pardon pronounced to us at
the passing of that Sentence, and the Reward, Crown, and Glory of the Blessed
in the other Life, which is given to those that have fought a good fight in
this; but to make the Fruit of the Spirit, and of being virtuous, to be Virtue
it self, seems to me either to put the end of Virtue in the middle; or else to
anticipate that Fruit in this Life, which only can be attained perfectly in the
Life Eternal.

But St. Paul by naming the excellent Fruits of the Spirit, wisely answers the
wicked of this World, who hold the Spiritual Life for Folly, and laugh at the
Godly, for mortifying and persecuting themselves with Abstinence and other Acts
of Repentance, living retired and abstracted from the World, and despising
Humane Delight and Felicity. Loose and debauched Persons use to ask those of
stricter Life, What Fruit do ye get by that Mortification, by that Solitariness
and Fasting wherewith ye torment and destroy your selves? Had you not better
live merrily, and enjoy the Pleasures of the Flesh, as we do? The Apostle
replys, What Fruits do we get? Twelve heavenly Fruits the Holy Spirit gives us,
which we would not Exchange for all the Fruits, for all the Delights, and for
all the Pleasures which the World can bestow. And we must take notice, that he
most discreetly forbears to reckon for the present Fruits, those Eight
Beatitudes with which Christ begins his Sermon upon the Mount, for they are
Promises of Blessings in the future; and though some of them are not without
effect, even in this Life, yet they all chiefly regard the Life to come. He
says, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; that is, with
everlasting Comforts. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth;
that is, the Land of the Living, which is Heaven. Blessed are those that hunger
and thirst after righteousness; that is, do earnestly desire to be good: for
they shall be filled; that is, shall have most perfect goodness in Glory.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; that is, at the Day of
Judgment. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are
the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. Blessed are
they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
Heaven. St. Paul would not reckon these for the Fruits of the Spirit, because
our Savior had spoken of them before in his Gospel; and these are not the
Fruits of our Banishment, but of our Country. Those Beatitudes are the Fruits
of these other Twelve, which St. Paul here names. That which he meant, was to
turn the Argument upon those poor deceived Wretches of this World; saying, Do
ye ask us, What Fruit we have in mortifying our selves by the power of the
Spirit? We answer, That we not only obtain Eternal Glory (as Christ promised
us) in the Life to come, and that proportionable to what we suffer here; for he
says, We shall receive an hundred fold: but that even in this Life he gives us
Fruits of Glory, Comfort, Peace, and Joy; and the Spirit causes such heavenly
Effects in us, as give our Life the advantage far above all the Feasts and
Merriments of yours. St. Paul seems to compare Spiritual Delights with Sensual
Pleasures; and the Recreations of the Good, with the Pastimes of the Wicked.
This appears in that he does not count Eternal Glory for the Fruit of the
Spirit; but those Effects which the Spirit it self produces in this Life, which
are Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, etc. as if he should have said, The Spirit has
two sorts of Fruits; one for this Life, which is an Internal Glory; and the
other for the Life to come, which is both an External, Internal, and Supernal
Glory. Two Fruits, one of Temporal Peace upon Earth, and the other of Eternal
Peace in Heaven.

This Question, which sinners make to the righteous, seems to correspond to
that which St. Paul makes to sinners, when he asks them, What fruit had you
then in those things whereof you are now ashamed? and they, (if they will
answer truly) can answer nothing, but that Grief, Misery, and Confusion has
been the Fruit of them: but they answer only with another Question, saying, And
you, What Fruit do you get by following of Virtue? To which St. Paul answers,
Not One Fruit, but Twelve most savory and pleasant ones, which are the cause of
Eternal Fruits. He likewise implicitly puts the Beatitudes for the Fruit of the
Spirit, and comprehends them in these Twelve, as one that gives the name of the
Effect to the Cause; for it is as if he had said, Do thou assure me that thou
enjoyest these Twelve Fruits of the Spirit in this Life, and I will assure
thee, that thou shall enjoy those Eight Beatitudes in the other Life. Do thou
assure me that thou live here in the Kingdom of Grace, and I will assure thee
that thou shall Reign there for ever in the Kingdom of Glory.

It Is true, one would think that these Twelve Fruits, which we now speak of
gathering in, and storing up for the Harvest of the Spiritual Year, seem to be
those common Virtues we spoke of in the Second Part; but though they be like,
there is great difference between them; for this Peace, this Chastity, this
Charity, this Benignity, etc. are not altogether the same with those there
spoken of; but these do presuppose those, and these are a Supreme Habit which
God gives by his Holy Spirit, whereby he raises, facilitates, perfects, and
crowns those Virtues which are there begun, and brings them to an high, and
heroical Perfection. The Reason upon which I ground my self, is, That those
Virtues, though they be serviceable for the Exercise of Grace, yet they are not
called the Fruits of the Spirit, but Virtues which conduce to the Spirit, and
with which we begin and proceed in the Spiritual Life; but these Fruits which
St. Paul here mentions, are more than Virtues, they are Gifts and Fruits which
grow from the Spirit; and as a Tree, after having been dug about, manured,
pruned, and taken care of all the Year, does by gathering an inward Sap beget
the generative virtue of its Fruit, defends it by its Bark in the Winter,
shelters it with its Leaves in the Summer, seasons it with the Sun and the Air
in the Autumn, and lastly, offers up its Fruit to be gathered by the owner,
which is the best of all his Labors: So also these Twelve Fruits of the Holy
Spirit, are the best of the Spiritual Life, and much more excellent than those
Virtues wherewith Men begin, and go on in it at the first, and these grow from
them into a Fruit, which by and through their means, the Holy Spirit ripens,
and makes more fragrant, more savoury, and more substantial, than all those
Virtues of the beginning.

We will go on, discoursing of these Twelve Fruits in the remaining Weeks of
this Spiritual Year, to the end that thou may rejoice in finding, That
Blessedness is not only the Reward of Virtue, but that Virtue it self is
Blessedness already; and that thou may see, and know, and feel within thy
self, that whatsoever is not Spirit, and Virtue, and the Love of God, is
nothing but Sadness, Pain, and Misery.

Of Charity, the first Fruit of the Holy Spirit.
Here St. Paul, the great Master of Souls, seems in these Fruits, and Gifts of
the Holy Spirit to join the beginning with the end, and the Root with the
Fruit; for he says, that the two first Fruits which the Holy Ghost gives to a
Spiritual Man, are Charity and Peace.

This Charity, which the Apostle here offers, as the highest Gift and Fruit of
the Divine Spirit is reduced into two kinds: First that which the Soul bears
toward God, not only when it begins to be in Grace, (for that may be with many
imperfections and fastnings to worldly things) but an excellent, perfect, and
inflamed Charity, which with its fire burns up, and with its flame consumes all
the Dross, Imperfections, and Miseries which our wretched Nature sends up as in
smoke, to the Region of the Spirit. This excellent and superior Charity, which
neither suffers nor allows so much as a consent to the smallest sins, nor
admits voluntary imperfections and adhaesions to earthly things, how little
soever they be, and which, if they come, does not entertain them, but presently
casts them out and bewails them, is a great Gift of the Holy Spirit, the
highest of all its Fruits; for this strips the Soul of all that is imperfect,
and clothes it with all that is holy, perfect, and heroical. This Fruit of the
Spirit is the Source and Original of whatsoever good our weakness is capable
of; it takes off those Skins that covered the old Adam, and adorns us with the
Garment of Grace of the new Adam, Jesus Christ our Lord. Those Skins are our
Passions and Imperfections; and this Garment is made up of our Savior's
Virtue. This Heroic Charity not only begets, but defends the new Man in us; it
roots out our old customs of sin, pulls up those habits of sensual delight, and
throws out those formerly beloved Vices and Miseries, wherewith it has been
choked up; so that the Lord's Inheritance becomes clean and fitly tilled, to
receive the spiritual Seed, namely, those Gifts and Graces which God is pleased
to communicate to Souls. Where God bestows the Fruit of this ardent Charity, I
count that Soul to be safely got into Port, as having by the Grace of our Lord
overcome those strong Billows, and broken through those contrary Winds, that
would have hindered its passage; because God affords therewith a constancy and
firmness in holy Exercises, a continual desire and longing to prosecute, and to
finish its Course, and to die in Christ, with Christ, and for Christ; for all
things else, it neither values them, nor loves them, nor fears them. He that
has gotten to receive from God this high degree of Charity, is governed in all
things by his Hand, and punctually follows his Directions; for he loves the
Name of God, and that Love moves and guides, informs, counsels, and accompanies
him from Life to Death. This Love is that which the Church asks of God for her
faithful Children, when she says, O Lord, who never failest to help and govern
them, whom thou do bring up in thy steadfast fear and love; keep us, we
beseech thee, under the protection of thy good Providence, and make us to have
a perpetual fear and love of thy Holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

St. Paul had this Fruit of Charity, when he said, Who shall separate me from
the love of Christ? Who? Neither Tribulation, nor Sword, nor Persecution, nor
Death, no, nor Hell itself; which is, as if God having clothed and armed that
Saint with this Charity, had made him capable to defy all Creatures, and all
things contrary to the love of his Creator.

This Charity and Fruit of the Holy Ghost he had, when he said, That he desired
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that his Soul filled and enflamed
with Charity (which is the ripe and seasonable Fruit of the Holy Ghost) waited
to be gathered by the hand of the Master of that Garden who planted it in him;
and had not the Earth for its Center, which corrupts and rots the Fruits that
fall upon it; but Heaven, where he was to be laid up and preserved for ever.

This Charity and Divine Fruit of the Spirit that Saint had, who said, I live,
but not in my self, and I so earnestly long after so high a life, that I even
die, because I do not die; as St. Paul also said, I live, yet not I, but
Christ, who lives in me; his Death was Life, and his Life Death; as he
likewise spoke, Who shall deliver me from this body of death? or from the death
of this Body, as holding the life of this Body to be no better than death, and
very death it self to be as life, because it was to be a sweet passage to him
to Eternal Life. All the Saints have held the same, for God communicates this
high Fruit of Charity, either more or less to them all, and all of them have
suffered this amorous Impatiency, which is that the Spouse in the Canticles
expresses, when she says, Encompass me with flowers, for I die for love.

O sweet Death! O glorious Life! O healthful Sickness! O Celestial Fire, which
kindlest and enflamest, which enlightenest, and enamourest, burning with
delight, and by thy consolations changing Earth into Heaven! O eternal Jesus! O
sweet! O glorious! O loving and powerful Lord, grant that I may die of this
Wound! Grant I may be enflamed by this Heavenly Fire. Grant I may see by this
Light, and be consumed by this Heat. O that I might be turned into ashes in the
burnings of this amorous Fire! and that I may cease to be in this life, to the
end, that I may be with thee eternally in the other! Ah! when a Soul once comes
to know and to understand this Love, how little does it regard the loves of
this World; I mean not only those that are light and vain, but those also that
are allowable, if they be worldly; for God cleanses and purifies the Soul in
such manner, from all Propriety, (although it be of those Affections which are
tolerable, yet imperfect through their excess) that he possesses the Soul
totally with his love, and from the most inward to the uttermost extent of the
heart, and from the superior to the most inferior parts of it, fills it
wholly with himself; so that if such an one loves his Parents, whether Natural
or Spiritual, he does it in God, and for God; and if he loves his Brethren,
whether those of Nature, or those of Grace, he loves them also in God, and for
God, who orders and governs all his Love. This the holy Soul says in the
Canticles, when amongst other Favors her Spouse had done her, she
acknowledges, that he had ordered and governed her Affections. As if she had
said, though there were Charity in me, yet it was inordinate, for I loved some
more than I ought to have loved them; others, when I ought not to have loved
them; and others after another manner than I ought to have loved them. I loved
more than I ought to have loved, because that Affection, which I gave
inordinately unto a Creature, (although a Father) I stole from the Creator, who
is my true Father. I loved them for that, which I ought not to have loved them
for, that is, for mine own Delight, for mine own Interest and Comfort; and
though my love was Lawful, yet the end of it was Natural, when it should have
been Supernatural. I loved them after another manner than I ought to have done;
for my love was Sensual, whereas it should have been Spiritual; and all this
the Spouse felt very much, even in those loves which were allowable, and
complained of it to her Beloved, and his Divine Majesty (as being much pleased
with it) took into his own hand the love of his Spouse toward her Neighbors,
and toward all Creatures, and ordered it rightly, making her to ove them all,
in that manner, for those ends, and in that degree, which he approved. And
this, which the Spouse asked of her Beloved, we ought oftentimes to beg of him;
for our self love (if the Lord does not rectify and reform it) destroys and
burns up the Soul with an inordinate fire; and so the love of God is the only
love, which can be called love, without fear of loving too much, and all other
loves whatsoever, are loves of fears and jealousies, and disquiets to an holy
Soul. They are loves intermixed with fears, whether I do not exceed, whether I
do not take from God that which I give to the Creatures, whether I do not tie
my Soul too fast unto them, and entangle it with snares in the way of my
Spiritual Life.

O Lord, thou love of all the Creatures, how miserable is this Life! how full
of Thorns and Stumbling blocks! how full of Griefs, Hazards, and Dangers! Since
I cannot love that which is good and allowed, without the fears of running into
that which is evil and prohibited. O God, do thou regulate our love. O thou
Eternal Good, grant that we may only love thee, and that in thee alone, we may
love those whom thou would have us to love, and that we may do it, when, and
how, and for those ends that thou approvest. Let none other love but thine, O
Lord, enter into my Soul. Drive out of it all other loves but that; and if any
other would force an entrance into my heart, let the strength of thy love
defend it, and not suffer any other love to disturb my Soul, nor oppose thy
love within my Soul. Thy love, O dear Lord, is a sweet love; it is Cheerfulness
and Comfort, Quiet and Contentment; it is Joy and Glory. All love besides this,
and contrary to this, is Perturbation and Disquiet, Heaviness and Pain, Sorrow
and Affliction.

Finally, all the Saints have tasted of this Fruit; and I have only given thee
an Example of St. Paul, to the end, thou may know, that the Holy Spirit and
its Fruits are the same in the Primitive Church, in these times, and will be so
in those that succeed us; for God never waxes old, neither do his Gifts and
Graces decay; and if we miserable sinners, neither have, nor feel those Fruits,
it is because we hinder them with our Passions, and by giving the Rein freely
to our Inclinations; for there are many now in the World, who have and enjoy
this heroical, orderly, and perfect love to God, and to their Neighbor; but
let thou and I, who are weak and frail, endeavor to exercise our selves in
those first Virtues, and to cultivate the Tree of our Souls with Repentance and
Contrition, with Mortification and Tears; but above all, with the Blood of the
Lamb, and with hearty Prayers to him, who shed it through the excess of his
love, that he would give us that sweet and excellent Fruit, that most ravishing
and glorious Love.

The Second WEEK.
Of Peace, the Second Fruit of the Holy Spirit.
NExt to this Savoury Fruit of Divine and Humane Charity, or of Love to God and
our Neighbor, follows the Delightful Fruit of Peace, which quiets and
recreates the Soul, freeing it from those common Perturbations that use to
disturb it.

Fear and Hope are two Humane Affections, which do disquiet and discompose
Worldly Minds; God drives out these two from a holy Soul, with two Celestial
Gifts, which are Remedies against their Poison, and these be the Fear of God,
and the Hope of Glory. From the instant that our Soul fears God alone, it
despises all things else; from the instant that it hopes only for things
Eternal, it tramples upon those that are Temporal. Such a Man keeps Peace with
all Persons, because he neither troubles, nor importunes; he neither vexes, nor
is jealous of any body; since no body can deprive him of Eternity, which is all
he pretends to. This Fruit of Peace also has two parts; one inward, Peace of
the Soul with God; the other outward, Peace with the Creatures. From the inward
Peace with God, which is the Root, springs up the outward one, and spreads into
several branches of the Creatures, just as an outward heat proceeds from a
secret fire, and the brightness of light from flame, and the love of our
Neighbor from that of God.

The inward Peace of the Soul depends upon the Unity and Conformity of a
Spiritual Man's Will, with the Will of God; for if he loves and desires the
same thing, and conforms himself to all that God does, and resigns himself to
all that he suffers; and does so not only after things have come to pass, but
even prevents them with his desire that the Will of God should be done in him;
it is manifest, that by such an Unity and Conformity, he must have a constant
Peace; and that there can be no disagreement between that and him. This Union
with the Divine Will, and the finding no contraction between it and the Humane
Will, begets Love and Peace with our Neighbors, and makes it communicate with
all Creatures; for since it neither loves them, nor desires any thing from
them, in any other way, than according to God's Will; and that God's Will is in
order to Peace, because it is the Original of Peace; it necessarily follows,
that he must also have Peace with all the Creatures.

And so the true Spiritual Man, who loves God with that Holy Fruit of Charity
we have spoken of, loving his Neighbors also in their proportion, and keeping
Union with the Will of God, and inward Peace with him; and for his sake with
his Neighbors in all things that are good and holy, must needs satisfy and
content all Persons, if they be good; and if they be not so, though he does not
content them, (because that is not in his power) yet he satisfies them with his
Reason, though perhaps they will not acknowledge themselves to be satisfied;
for if they be his Superiors, he obeys them with Humility, behaves himself
toward them with Respect, and yields readily to their Orders and Commands;
obeying his Superiors in the same manner as he obeys the Will of God. If they
be his Equals, he gives them all that belongs to them, and applies himself with
Charity to assist in their Affairs. He eases them in their Troubles, comforts
them in their Afflictions, counsels them in their Doubts, and helps them in
their Necessities: And if they be his Inferiors, he loves them with a Fatherly
Affection, bears with them and favors them, guides and directs them, supplies
their Wants, and affords them a Remedy so far as he is able in whatsoever they
have need, for he loves himself for their sake.

Thus the Holy Spirit says, Great is the Peace of those that love God; because
they have both outward and inward Peace, with him, with themselves, and with
all Men; since they neitheir love, nor do, nor desire, nor pretend to any
thing, but what God wills.

I like all this very well, you will say, but how will you give me Peace with the
Wicked? How can a Judge have Peace with Robbers and Murderers? A Superior
with an Insolent and Rebellious Subject? An Honest and Loyal Subject with a
Cruel and Merciless Superior? Or any one Man with another, that persecutes him
without Reason? Is it necessary, that a Man's Will must not be moved with these
things, and that neither his inward nor outward Peace must be disturbed by them?

There is a great deal of difference, I answer, between holding Peace with the
Wicked, and Conformity with the Wicked. This ought never to be done, the other
may be done always. Conformity speaks Union of Wills in respect of their
Objects, and this a good Man cannot have but with those that are good, and in
those things that are good; for that cannot be called Peace, that is War
against God. If I to keep Peace with the World, should forsake that which is
good, and offend God, the Author of Peace, who is the chiefest Good, that were
but an evil Peace, a seeming Quiet, but a real Disquiet. This is that the
Prophet spoke of, That they should say, Peace, Peace, when there was no Peace;
For there is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked. And thus when the Savior
of Souls left Peace, as a Legacy, to his Holy Apostles, he told them, that the
Peace he gave them, was his, not that of the World, nor as the World gives it;
for that is a Peace with Vices, with Passions, and Sensualities; but a cruel
and furious War against God. With such Persons, nor with their Sins, we must
have no Conformity; which is that the World would have, to make us all of her
color; but we may have perfect Peace, and which is more, perfect hatred at the
same time, not abhorring those which are evil, but that evil which is in them,
and loving their Persons, that we may draw them into the way of goodness. A
Superior, who is a good Man, may Correct and Reform, and Love those whom he
does Correct; nay, rather he does Correct and Reform them, because he loves
them with a very perfect and superior love. Well may a Companion Love and
Counsel, Advise and Guide his Companion to that which is good, and have a
dislike of the evil which he commits; nay, because he loves him, he guides and
draws him from that which is evil. Well may a Subject disapprove the sin of a
vicious Superior, and love him without helping him to effect it; nay, because
he loves him, he will not give more matter to his Condemnation, nor add more
Fuel to the Fire of his Punishment. What! Do thou think, that Jesus Christ
our good Master, did not love those Buyers and Sellers, whom he whipped out of
the Temple, when he overturned the Tables of the Money Changers to banish
Covetousness out of his Father's House? It is certain that he did love them,
but he corrected them to amend them, and such a Mischief needed such a Remedy.
He relieved their afflicted Souls, that were kept in Slavery by their
Covetousness, and set their Reason at liberty, which was captivated, and kept a
Prisoner by their Passion. Reproof and Chastisement are as an Alms to the Soul
that is poor in Virtue, and that is in great Necessity for want of Light,
Counsel, and Direction. Such an one stands in need to be corrected and to be
relieved with Instruction and Reformation, by such means as may conduce most to
his Amendment. Who says that a Physician hates his Patient, when he Cures him
with a bitter Potion? He hates the evil Humors in his Body, and destroys and
drives them out with that bitterness. Nor is the Surgeon less kind when he
cuts and lances, than when he binds up a Wound with an healing Plaster; And
therefore sick and wounded Men do both thank and pay them for that sharpness
and bitterness, whereby they recover the sweetness of their Health. And inward
Peace with God, and outward Peace with our Neighbor, may be preserved by us,
and yet we not have any Conformity with them in their evil; for since Peace is
inseparable from Love, it follows necessarily, that from the time we begin to
love them, we must have an honest, good, and holy Peace with them, which is the
true Peace indeed, for the other is not Peace, but Destruction, and a cruel War
against God.

This difference there is between the Will of God and that of Men; that to the
Will of God we must Conform without any limitation, or exception whatsoever.
Let him command, order, and dispose whatsoever he pleases, for with him there
are no Conditions nor Capitulations to be made; We are totally to perform, and
absolutely to desire whatsoever God wills; but with the Creatures it is
otherwise, for since their Rule is not Infallibly good and holy, as that of
God, but very weak and fallible, we must not deliver up our selves to that, nor
to their Will, without Conditions; and the first of them is, that we never
swerve, nor vary from that Superior Will, and that our Prince, our Father, or
our Friend must never require any thing from us, but that which is agreeable to
the Will of God. And if they, or any of our Neighbors go beyond that, we must
give them Peace, but not Conformity; we will give them Love, to the end that
they may love God, and that we may draw them toward God, and bring them to
God; but we will not give them Conformity, for then we should offend him, as
they do.

This orderly, perfect, and holy kind of Peace is a very high fruit of the Holy
Ghost; for in it infinite good things are contained. And as the Ancient
Philosophers and Poets held, that upon the top of Mount Olympus there was a
perpetual Calmness and Serenity; so the Person to whom God gives both inward
and outward Peace, is above all Humane Perturbations, and feels not any
Troubles to disquiet and molest him, for he humbles and resigns himself freely
to the Will of God in all things. If evil Men persecute him, he bears it
patiently, and reduces them, if they can be reduced; but if not, he turns
himself toward his God, and begs of him to reduce them, and to bring them home
to himself; and there is nothing high nor low, great nor small, that can take
away that Peace and Tranquillity of Mind, which God gives him, by the means of
his Love; for in that love there is a full resignation to all that God does,
disposes, or permits; and there he quiets, comforts, and chears up himself,
where the Will of God is; for in that the true Peace consists.

The Third WEEK.
Of the Third and Fourth Fruits of the Holy Spirit, Longanimity, and Benignity.
THE Apostle of the Gentiles proposes Longanimity as a Fruit of the Holy
Spirit, because it is not only profitable, but necessary for the preservation
of Peace and Charity, and is a most excellent Virtue of Souls. Longanimity
signifies a dilating and enlargement of the heart, which gives it a capacity of
bearing both inward and outward Troubles; and having this, nothing affrights or
amazes, nothing terrifies nor afflicts it. And if God did not give this
admirable Fruit and Gift to the Soul, it would be lost, and fall away at every
step, and neither act with valor, constancy, nor perseverance.

The heart of Man is so little, that it is not sufficient to give a small
breakfast to a Kite, and so of it self it is not capable of any great thing,
being so wretched a Morsel. Can the Sea be contained in a Thimble? Can the
thing contained be greater than what contains it? If the Vessel of this Human
Nature, that is, Man's heart be so narrow; what great thing can find room
within it? Now see the Miracle that God works with the Spiritual Man; and how
high a Fruit this Longanimity and the Enlarging of the Heart is, which God
gives to a Soul, according to the measure it has served, loved, and pleased
him; or according as he thinks fit to give it of his own good will, making it
so capacious, as to be able to contain the Sovereign Gifts and Virtues of God,
and which is more, even God himself, who contains all things.

It would be a rare thing, if a Man that lives in a poor little Cottage, should
of a sudden find himself in a Royal, Stately, and Majestic Palace, or in a
huge populous City. What a wonderful Enlargement would that be of his poor
Hermitage? O Divine Beauty! O heavenly Architect! O immense good of Souls! How
vastly thou dilatest! how strangely thou enlargest Man's heart with thy Grace,
and with thy Spirit! Who does not sometimes see a Man great in Wit, in Fortune,
and in Quality? Who in a few years (nay perhaps in a few Months) before was
busily running after childish Pleasures, and dragged along by his mean, vile,
and sensual Appetite, in such trouble, anguish, and affliction, that his Soul
(hardly so big as a Child's Rattle) was capable of nothing but empty Vanities,
his Heart being scarcely so big in comparison, as a Pepper Corn, mistaking
every action, stumbling at every step, every thing afflicting him, every thing
tormenting him, and God of a sudden entering into him, and with Sovereign Light
enlarging his Heart, and spreading out his Mind by Longanimity; he begins to
despise and to mock at those things which he so fondly hunted after before, and
pretended to, as things highly considerable; but now being made capable of
greater Matters, turning his back to such mean, vile Trifles, he seeks after
that which is really great and high, that which is heavenly and unspeakable,
without ever resting or contenting himself, till he have attained it. What is
this? who enlarged that Heart? Who stretched out that narrow Vessel, which
before was filled with a few small drops, and now nothing can fill it but the
unmeasurable Sea of the Passion of our Lord? Who made a Giant of this Dwarf,
that before could hardly wield a Straw, and now like Sampson, is able to throw
down and carry away Pillars, and bear all the strong weaknesses of this Life?
Who has made him, that before cried as a Child, because he could not get an
Hobbyhorse (for such are the highest things the World can give) now undervalue
and despise whole Nature, to ingulf himself in the vast Ocean of Grace? Who
has made him, that a while before followed, hunted after, and embraced Dung
and Corruption, to think the whole Heavens too little for him, aiming to seek
and possess the Creator of them, and of himself? Yesterday he was as busy in
making little Houses of Sticks upon the Sand, and covering them with Straw, as
Children are about making Dirt-Pies in some Corner; and now he tramples upon
the Stars, and pretending to Eternity, can content himself with no House but
the Empyreal Heavens. Who could work these Miracles but the Holy Ghost, giving
that Heart his Fruit and Blessing, in that high Gift of Longanimity, which
enlarges it, and dilates the Soul, making it capable of those infinite good
things; that Supreme Gift being the Tree which bears these admirable Fruits?
This St. Paul knew, when he said, When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I
thought as a Child, and did as a Child; (and in all that he acknowledged his
own littleness) but now that I am a Man, I act as a Man, and put away all
childlish things. Behold the difference between a Child and a Man: In a Child
all things are childish; in a Man they are serious. In a Child there is neither
strength nor capacity; he is a public Necessity, that lives upon Alms, which
Charity bestows upon him, whether it be of his Parents, or of his Nurse, or of
any other, that takes pity on him. A Man has strength and ability, he is a
public Succor, that is capable of any thing. Now the same difference that
there is between a Man and a Child, (nay a far greater) there is between a good
Spiritual Man, and a wicked debauched Fellow, that lives in a loose and sinful
Course, I say a much greater; for the growth of a Child that becomes a Man, is
a natural Growth, which is short, limited, and slow, increasing by very
insensible degrees, and that hardly rises six Feet from the Ground in fourscore
Years; but the growth of a Man that was wicked, and to whom God has showed the
kindness to make him good and holy, and to give him that Gift of Longanimity,
that is, a growth of Grace, in which there is no Geometrical material Distance
or Degrees, but is all Supernatural. Behold the distance there is between
Heaven and Earth, that between an evil and good Man is yet greater. Nay, how
far it is from Hell, which is much lower than the Superficies of the Earth,
unto the Empyreal Heaven, where God himself does inhabit; and so great is the
distance between a vicious and a virtuous Person. Now consider what difference
there is between a heart, when God has enlarged it with this Gift of
Longanimity, and what it was before; for that, which was so filled with some
trifling Passion, that the Breast was not able to contain it, but it broke
forth and ran over through the Lips, is made capable to receive even God
himself, so vast is the difference between an evil and a good Man. And take
notice that this place of St. Paul may also be understood, not only of the
infinite distance between the Heart of a Man, when it is limited and straightened
in the Miseries of this World, and when it is possessed of God, and made
capable of his Gifts and Mercies; but also between the Heart, that went on in a
course remisly virtuous, and that had but begun to take some steps in the
Spiritual Life; and an Heart, that by holy Exercises and Perseverance in
Prayer, has obtained of God to be enlarged by this Gift of Longanimity; for
though it was hard for St. Paul, and even impossible, after the instant of his
Conversion, to have his Heart taken up with slight or trifling things, because
God from the very beginning of his Conversion, made that Vessel of Election so
capable, as to receive his rarest Gifts and Graces, for he had rare Light, rare
Knowledge, and rare Zeal, for the Honor and Glory of God, even from the very
first; yet other Spiritual Men go on following the steps of the Spirit in that
proportion which the Lord has been pleased to communicate to them, according to
the measure of their Service; but in the beginning they were Children, as St.
Paul says, and God afterward by degrees makes them to grow up Men, to become
great, and strong, and bold, to own and to persist in a virtuous Course; and
God gives them such largeness of heart at length, that those who in the
beginning were scarce able to such a little Milk, can now digest the strongest
Meat; and those who at first were disquieted with every thing, and whose weak
Stomachs turned at the swallowing of a Pea, are now able, like Estriches, to
digest Iron. They can bear, and teach others so to do; they can suffer
cheerfully, and guide others in the same way, without any trouble. And it is
certain, that this high Gift and Fruit of Longanimity, though it be very
important for all, yet it is most so for Superiors, for in them it is
necessary, that they may know how to bear with patience the Faults and
Impertinencies of those under their Charge, and to govern them with patience,
and without passion. And so when God endued Solomon with what he needed for the
Government of such an innumerable multitude of Subjects, he, amongst those
other Virtues and Gifts wherewith he adorned him, bestowed on him also, as the
Text says, this Longanimity and Largeness of Heart, so that it contained even
the Sands upon the Seashore; as who should say, that Royal Breast was capable
of all things; nothing could overwhelm or trouble him, for he dispatched all
Affairs with calmness and serenity.

A Spiritual Man sometimes disquiets himself because there are sins in the
World. What? Would he that there should be none? If there were sins in
Jerusalem where Christ himself lived, who was able to remedy them, Shall there
be none where he dwells? Let him remedy those he can, and let him beg of God
with Tears and Prayers, that he would remedy the rest, but let him lay aside
all solicitude and disquiet, and possess his own Soul with Patience. A
Spiritual Man is troubled that he cannot mend a thousand little Faults in
himself. What? Would he shine here in Perfection? Let him humble himself and
acknowledge his Misery, and pray to God for the remedy. Let him bewail his
Defects with humility, for God sees his sorrow and pain, and knows what he has
need of; and if he delay his Amendment to day, probably he will grant it to
morrow. In this respect largeness of heart is needful for all things, and thou
must understand, that God is not a God of Affliction and Disquiet, but of Peace
and Tranquillity.

Next to the Holy Spirit of Longanimity, St. Paul reckons that of Benignity,
which is an outward pleasingness, proceeding from an inward one, whereby a Man
behaves himself with Charity toward all; and it was discreetly done of the
Apostle to place this after Longanimity, because it is a sweet Effect of that
most generous Virtue, and as it were a Fruit, or benefit of that Fruit. For
Benignity, which is that outward gentleness of Behavior, is exercised not only
with the good, but oftentimes also with the evil and the wicked, to mend and
reclaim them, and to bring them into a better way; and which could not be done
by Benignity without Longanimity; for if I should converse so much with those
that do ill, as to disturb my self, and abhor and disdain them; if I should be
weary of them, or despise them, how could I behave my self toward them with
Benignity? How could I by Charity draw them to Grace and to Charity? and how
could I win them with sweetness, and bring them gently to that which is right?
Gracious and righteous is the Lord, says David. First he calls him gracious,
then righteous; because by his graciousness and benignity, he brings sinners
into the right way, as it follows in the same Verse of that Psalm. And in
another, O taste and see how gracious the Lord is. Taste of that which is
gracious and sweet, to the end that Nature afterward may be able to suffer
those bitter Remedies which Grace applies, for the curing and rectifying of it.
Benignity then is an heavenly and gracious Affection, and an Effect of
Longanimity and Charity; or I may call it Charity, practiced both toward the
good and toward the bad. Benignity is like the Sun, which does good to all
without difference, it covers, warms, quickens, cherishes, guides, and directs
all, whether they be good or bad. This heavenly Gift is, as we have said, one
of the most important Virtues of the Spiritual Life, but chiefly for
Superiors, and therefore they will do well always to pray for it, because it
tempers and moderates that Zeal, which else commonly burns with too much
violence in their Charity. To make Iron cut well, they use to temper it with
Steel, which is softer, and makes it cut more smoothly than it would do, with
its own hardness and brittleness. The Winter does not leap of a sudden into the
Summer, nor the Summer into the Winter; but the cold of the Winter is sweetened
by the benignity of the Spring, and the heat of Summer is qualified by the
temperate Weather of the Autumn. For a good Man to think that he can make an
evil one good and holy in an instant, or to conquer that force by force, is
neither very easy nor convenient. Even God himself works naturally, and makes
use of these natural means to bring Souls to his interior and spiritual
Secrets. That Divine Lord ordinarily catches and gain Souls by their Bodies;
and so in Judea and Palestine, he cured and rejoiced them with Corporal Health,
and then bestowed Spiritual Health upon them also. To his holy Disciples first
he promised Kingdoms, and Glories, and Crowns, and Thrones of Eternity, to the
end that afterward they might be the better enabled to bear Crosses and
Persecutions, Deaths and Torments. First they saw him Glorious and Triumphant
in Mount Tabor, to the end that afterward they might be able to endure the
Pains and Sorrows of Mount Calvary.

The Jews murmured, because the Disciples eat a few Ears of Corn, (a goodly
cause of murmuring) and the Lord answered, They now have the Bridegroom with
them, and so it is fit there should be some little allowance and permission in
his Presence; but the time will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, and then shall they fast in those days; and so it is needful sometimes to
bear, and to show Long-suffering, to the end, that afterward by this outward
Benignity and gentleness of Conversation, we may pass on to fervency of
Affection, and to the unspeakable effects of Charity, and of the Spirit. Though
Christ did abolish the Rites and Ceremonies of the Old Law; though he buried
it, and sealed it up, and covered it with the Law of Grace; yet he would have
it buried with Honor, and that it should be practiced upon some Occasions,
even after it was abolished; as may be seen in the Holy Scripture, and Divines
say, it was to make it honorable Obsequies of Graciousness and Benignity; for
that was Holy before, which God prohibited afterward; and so do thou endeavor
to converse with Benignity, in all things, and with all persons, whether they
be good or bad. Do thou to all, whatsoever thou would have them to do to
thee; and believe, that Benignity is a most powerful and effectual Instrument
of Grace, and of Charity.

St. Ambrose counsels his Bishops, that in their first six Months, they should
show all Gentleness, Benignity, Courtesy, and Respect, with Decency; for the
Will being once gained by Gentleness, the People of their Diocese will
afterward easily lend an Ear to their Doctrine. The greatest Jurisdiction is
that of the Countenance, much more powerful and effectual, than that of the
Hand; for that begets Fear, and sometimes Hatred; and Hatred one while begets
Contumacy, and another while Despair. But on the contrary, a meek and gentle
Countenance begets Love, and that makes the Will of Man more pliable, and to do
any thing better and sooner. I might say, that Benignity is that, which seasons
all Humane Actions, and is as Leaven, which gives savor to our Bread, or as
Sugar, which gives sweetness to our Food. It is as a Celestial Bath, which
softens and supplies, and gives a nimbleness of motion; and a Superior
oftentimes obtains more with a kind Look, than with an angry Threat. This the
holy King David begged of God, when he said, Let the beams of thy countenance
shine upon me, and teach me thy statutes. Make me glad with thy gracious
Favor, O God, and then command whatsoever thou will; for a gentle Superior
finds no resistance in his Subjects. With this kind of countenance it was, that
Christ looked upon St. Peter, when he brought him back into the right way; and
by one kind glance of his Eye, disposed him to that sorrow, which neither the
so-often-crowings of the Cock, nor the foretelling of them, and of his Fall,
could effect. That gracious look drew Rivers of Tears from his Eyes, and he
wept with the remembrance of that Gracious Love and Benignity, which those
Divine Eyes had cast upon him. Therefore pray to God for Benignity, and make
use of it toward all Persons, for it is the Temper that will make thy Zeal
more constant, and thy Charity more effectual.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of the Fifth and Sixth Fruits of the Holy Spirit, Faith and Continence.
SAint Paul likewise reckons Faith for one of the Fruits of the Spirit; and
that excellent Virtue, being the Root of our Good Works, from which Hope and
Charity do grow, and from which all Christian Perfection, and all Spiritual
good things proceed, as from the Source and Fountain; It is necessary to think,
what kind of Faith the Apostle speaks of; for this does not seem to be well
fitted, as a Fruit of the Spirit, but rather that the Spirit should be counted
as the sweetest Fruit of Faith. That Faith is the Original and Beginning of our
Improvement, and not the Fruit, but the Root of it, is evident; for without
Faith there can neither be Hope, nor Charity, nor any other Moral Virtue; nor
without Faith can any one be saved, nor do any good Action, nor think any good
Thought. Look what the beginning is in respect of the means and of the end;
that beginning is Faith. Look what the Foundation is in respect of the
Building; that Foundation is Faith. Look what the thing contained is in respect
of that which contains it; that which contains it, is Faith. Look what the
first Number is in respect of all those that follow it; that first Number is
Faith. Look what the Matter is in respect of the Form; that Matter is Faith.
Finally, look what the Root and Sap is in respect of the Fruit and Branches;
that Root and Sap is Faith: And so we see, that St. Paul acknowledging, that
Charity, as the end, is a greater Virtue than Faith; yet he makes Faith the
greater, as the beginning; and therefore he says, there remain these three,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the greatest of them is Charity. Note, that he
places Faith first, because without it there can be no Charity; and because
that Crowns Faith; for it lasts and continues, even when we come to our
Heavenly Country, whereas Faith and Hope are the Virtues of our Banishment, and
Hope ceases with Possession, as Faith does by Evidence and Light. Charity is
the greater, as the Object, End, and Crown of the other Virtues; and Faith is
the greater, as the Beginning and Original of them: Therefore it is necessary
to determine what St. Paul speaks of, when he makes Faith a Fruit of the Holy
Spirit; it being the Root of all the Fruits of the Spiritual Life, without
whose beginning there can be no Fruit at all. I should believe with some
Expositors, that he speaks of an high Gift of Faith, of a Supreme Magnitude, of
an Heroic habit of Faith, which all the Creation obeys, and becomes subject
to; which is a piece, (to speak on that manner, though with impropriety) which
is a piece, I say, even of Omnipotency itself. Think of that Faith our Savior
spoke of, when he said, if we had so much of it, as a grain of Mustard Seed, we
should do very mavelous things. Think, when he said, If we had Faith, and
should say to a Mountain, that it should be plucked up, and thrown into the
Sea, it should be so. Now it is this kind of Faith the Apostle of the Gentiles
speaks of. Think what Faith the Apostles had and prayed for, when they said,
Lord increase our Faith; for that they had, was the Theological Virtue; and
that they prayed. for, was this high Gift, which the Apostle means in this
place.

Consider the Father of that Demoniack, who begging of Christ to cast the Devil
out of his Son, was asked by his Divine Goodness, Do thou believe that I can
do this? And the poor afflicted Man answered, Lord, I believe, help thou my
unbelief; as if he should have said, Although I do believe, yet I fear my
Incredulity; and therefore, O Lord, I fain would believe with an higher Faith,
and with a more firm Assurance. The Faith then which that Man desired over and
above that which he had already, is that Fruit which is here spoken of by St.
Paul. Consider that Faith, for the want of which our Lord reproached St. Peter,
when he leaped out of the Ship into the Sea, to go to adore him, and feared,
and sunk, and begged help, whereupon the Lord stretching out his hand to
succor him, said, Why art thou fearful, O man of little Faith? That Faith
which our Savior found wanting in St. Peter, although he had so high a Faith,
as to throw himself into the Sea, is this Fruit of the Spirit. That Faith which
gave him the boldness to leap into the Sea was great; and that Faith which he
had in crying out to the Lord for help, was that Faith, which we call the
Theological Virtue; but that, which he wanted yet, and which our Savior found
wanting in him, was this high Gift of Faith. Consider that Faith, with which
the same St. Peter, being with St. John in the Porch of the Temple, which was
called Beautiful, after the Passion of our Lord, said unto the lame Man that
begged an Alms of him, Silver and Gold have I none, but that which I have, I
give thee; In the Name of Jesus of Nazareth rise up and walk; and he cured him
in such a manner, that it seemed, as if St. Peter had taken Strength and Faith,
as Money out of his Purse. Now this Sovereign Gift of believing, that God can,
and that God will work such a Miracle, and that it will succeed according to
his Faith, is the Gift which St. Paul here speaks of. Consider that Faith of
the Centurion, and that of the Canaanitish Woman, which the Lord so highly
commended; that Faith is this Fruit of the Divine Spirit. That Faith, whereby
the Gospel was propagated, which the Lord gave to his Apostles, after he had
confirmed them in Grace, and which was necessary to conquer the Gentile-World;
and which in less than an hundred years enlightened all the World, so that
those Trophies of Faith were seen and heard, and felt in all places, and the
Echo of them resounded into all Countries; that Faith, which we might explain
and set forth by many other Examples, St. Paul here calls the Fruit of the
Spirit; but after Christ had formed and established his Church, he has very
seldom given this kind of Faith, unless unto some few, that have led a very
Spiritual Life, and have often conquered the Flesh by the Spirit, and have held
the Inferior part of Nature so subdued by Grace, that God has been pleased to
bestow this high Gift of Grace upon them, for the Service of his Church, in
some extraordinary occasion.

Some others will have this Faith and Fruit of the Spirit here mentioned, to be
an high Gift of believing the Truths of God, and his Promises. Behold that
which the Blessed Virgin had, in believing the Sovereign Mystery of the
Incarnation of her Son, and that profound Humility, wherewith she captivated
her own Understanding and her Will unto the Power of God: Behold that Faith,
wherewith the Prophets believed and declared such Heavenly Mysteries, long
before they came to pass: Behold that belief of Faith, which the Lord found
wanting in Moses and Aaron at the Waters of Strife, in the Desert, for which
they were condemned never to enter into the Land of Canaan: Behold that Faith,
which the Holy Angel Gabriel wanted in the Holy Priest Zachariah, when he
declared to him, that the Baptist should be born of an Ancient Mother, and
struck him dumb, because he believed not: Behold that Faith, which the three
Children had in Babylon, when they told the Tyrant, that though he should cast
them into the fiery Furnace, or into the Den of Lions, yet the Lord their God
would deliver them; nay, and though he should nor deliver them, yet would not
they quit their Faith, nor cease to believe in that same God; which was a most
excellent and discreet Answer. Now this Fruit proceeded from the Spirit, which
governed those Holy Souls, and others, that have been favored and adorned with
this Heroical degree of Faith.

There be some also that say, that this Gift or Fruit of the Holy Spirit is the
Gift of Fidelity to keep Faith and Promise to our Neighbors. Though this be
holy, profitable, and necessary, (for if the due regard of this Virtue fall to
the ground, all Peace and Truth in Correspondency between Man and Man falls
with it) yet for all that, I am of Opinion, that this Holy Fruit is no other,
but that Supernatural Gift first mentioned, and that whosoever has that, shall
have all the rest; for they depend upon its Power and Virtue. And therefore do
thou act with Diligence and Constancy. Pray continually with Fervency, and love
thy Redeemer ardently and tenderly; for to those who do these things, God
grants this Fruit and excellent Gift of the Spirit.

Of Continence.
Continence, which is the Sixth Fruit of the Spirit, though it seem to be the
Antidote of that Vice, which is forbidden in the Seventh Commandment; yet I do
not believe, that in this place, it signifies the Fruit of Chastity; for St.
Paul puts that expressly for the last of the Twelve; and it is not probable,
that he would offer us the same Fruit twice, for that would be an imperfect
repetition, and cannot suit with the Wisdom of that Spirit, which guided his
holy Pen; and so my Opinion is, that in this place by Continence is meant an
Universal Girdle or Wall, that encompasses the honest Appetite on every side,
to the end, that it may not go beyond the due compass allowed, nor break forth
to any thing prohibited; but that it may preserve, guide, and promote the Fruit
of the Holy Spirit. Continence is a Gift, and a general Virtue, whereby
whatsoever is loose and destructive; whatsoever is opposite or repugnant to the
Divine Spirit, is restrained. It is a Bridle to the Appetite, and the Bit that
curbs it, and brings it so under subjection, as to make it go right. It is the
Mother of the Spirit, and that which most nourishes and advances the Virtues
thereof, making it to become great and heroical. This Gift of Continence begets
Mortification in all things, subdues the Flesh, and makes it yield to Reason:
It also begets self-denial, whereby a Spiritual Man rejects his own Will, and
delivers himself up to be disposed by the Will of God. It begets that Heroical
Humility, whereby he brings down Pride, and flies from his own Excellency, to
prostrate himself before the Excellency of God.

This Girdle of Continence, which St. Paul here speaks of, that which the Lord
bids us to gird our Loins withal, against his coming to Judgment; for being
begirt therewith, and having our Lamps burning in our hand, we shall be
admitted unto that everlasting Wedding. The Ancient Philosophers were wont to
say, as we have told you already, that the greatest part of Virtue consisted in
Abstinence; and here St. Paul with a great Propriety, calls that kind of
Abstinence, by the name of Continence, because that looks at the interior
defense of the exterior; but this at an interior care and attention, so to
encompass that, which is within, that nothing from without may ever be able to
overcome it. That encompasses one, or some single Virtue, this all; That is a
Natural Virtue and Heedfulness, this a Supernatural and Heavenly one, which in
all things looks toward God, and is given by God; and this is that Continence
which St. Paul here speaks of, and which thou art to pray to God to bestow upon
thee.

DECEMBER.
The First WEEK.
Of the Seventh and Eighth Fruits of the Holy Spirit, Joy and Patience.
JOY is properly a Fruit of the Holy Spirit in those who follow and advance in
the Spiritual Life; for since all their Care and Diligence consists in emptying
the Soul from its own Will, which is that that begets the Passions of it; and
that they are a certain Vermin, which sting, disquiet, discompose, and disturb
it; having once freed itself from them, the Heart remains quiet, the Soul
clear, and God works in it, as in his own dwelling, fills it with himself, and
with his Blessings. It is manifest that God is all Peace, Quiet, Cheerfulness,
and Joy, and this Joy is not only found in very Spiritual Persons, whom God by
continual Exercises of Mortification and Self-denial, has made capable of those
Gifts; but even in beginners also, for it is most certain that in the first
steps of Spiritual Life, the very being eased of the burden of their sins, and
the seeing themselves delivered from that intolerable load, causes in them an
unspeakable Joy and Gladness. See how often it comes to pass, that a Man
enlightened by God, with the knowledge of his sins, finding the grievous Wounds
they have made in him by his long continuance in a debauched and wicked Life,
upon his making a general Confession of them, and taking a firm Resolution to
forsake them, feels in himself an inward Joy and Contentment; as if in taking
away the Passions and Sins out of his Soul, his Body also had been freed from
Chains and Imprisonments; And he, that a while before, being pressed down under
the hard Yoke of his Offenses, lived in Sorrow, Affliction, Disquiet, and
Anguish; presently after Confession and Absolution becomes light, and free,
lively and joyful by the assurance of Pardon. Now, to the end thou may see
and believe the Wonders of God, though this happen to all that lead Religious
lives; yet most frequently to those, that live the most strictly, and use the
sharpest Exercises of Repentance and Mortification; for God will manifest his
Power, and the effects of his Spirit, and make Humane Nature know, that in
seeking his Infinite Goodness, they shall find more Motives and Exercises of
Joy, than they could have apprehended occasions of Trouble before in those
Severities.

O the Goodness and Power of God! O the Greatness of his Mercy! Here methinks
he Triumphs over our Nature, and will have the Devil, the World, and the Flesh
to know, and Men (as well the bad as the good, and the holy as well as the
profane) to understand, that God gives more Joy and Comfort in one day of a
virtuous Life, than wicked Persons feel in many years of their repeated
Delights. This is so efficacious an Argument to any understanding Man in favor
of the Spirit, that all they whose Judgments are awakened, must not only know
and avow it; but that some have thereby been moved to forsake the World, and to
follow that holy Call unto a Devout Retirement; and others by seeing the Joy,
the Peace, the Comfort, and the Delight, which they have met with in those that
have embraced the like Austerities, have with great Devotion followed their
Example, and have gone to seek that holy Joy in their Conversation and manner
of Life, which they vainly had endeavored to give themselves, by running after
the Pleasures of this World.

What is this, O Christian? What do thou forsake, and what do thou seek
after? What? Will thou leave the Delights and Jollities of this Life? He
Answers, No; I leave only the Disquiets and Vexations of it. What? Do thou
seek after Grief, Sorrow, and Repentance? No, says he, I neither seek, nor find
any thing, but Consolations and Satisfactions. I live here in this Religious
course, as if I were already in Glory; and while I spent my time in the
debauched Rambles of the World, though I had outward Pleasure, I had an inward
Hell. And that thou may practically see, what the Joy is of those that serve
God, (besides innumerable Examples that might be given of it) I can assure
thee, that I my self knew a Man, not in a Religious House, but abroad in the
World, who having left a very loose and wicked Life, upon the Light of Truth,
that had undeceived him, was seized with so excessive a Joy soon after his
Conversion, that not being able to contain himself, he would rise by Three of
the Clock in the Morning, and sometimes much sooner, to break forth into Divine
Praises, and give vent to the overflowings of his Delight, by singing Psalms,
which he was not able to forbear. What is this, Lord? What is this? Yesterday a
Thief and a Murderer, that filled the Air with the Cries of those that felt
his Violence; and to day fills it with soft Tunes of his Spiritual Music!
Yesterday a Devil, to day an Angel. Yesterday groaning under the Chains of
Vice, to day rejoicing for the recovery of his Freedom! O the Infinite Goodness
of God! How wonderfully thou workest with the Sons of Men! In short, this
inward Joy increases in such manner in the Spiritual Life, that if God did not
enlarge the hearts of those, to whom he gives it, they would even burst and dye
in the excesses of it, and pass from that Spiritual to Eternal Joys; for being
greater than can be entertained within the bosom of their Soul, it breaks out,
and finds itself a passage through their Lips, and through their Eyes. There
are some that cannot contain themselves in their Prayers, but prostrate
themselves, and cry out, as one did, Hold, Lord, It is enough, it is enough.
And it is reported of another, that he even died with such transports, and that
not so much grief for his Sins, as the high delights of his Joy, and the
efficacious Power of the Divine Love, was the cause of his Dissolution. Ah! If
thou did but taste the Joyful Affections, and Glorious Delights of the Love
of God; If thou did but taste of that ravishing Wine, which makes glad the
heart, that is filled by the love of him that trod the Wine Press alone, thou
would know where the holy and true Joy is to be found, and would abhor all
the Delights and Pleasures of this World, in comparison of it. This Joy
overcomes all Difficulties, it tramples them down, and flies above them, it
burns and consumes them, and makes the greatest Labors to become a Pleasure.

The Masters of the Synagogue called the Apostles before them, reproved them,
scourged them, threatened them, and commanded them, that they should not Preach,
sending them away not only punished, but reproached, and shamefully affronted;
but they go out, and presently Preach again with exceeding Joy, (as the Text
says) that they were thought worthy to suffer for the Lord's sake. Take heed,
say some, to the Apostles, it is not two Months since the Jews crucified your
dear Master; and if you do not forbear to Preach, they will do the same to you.
What care we? answered they, if the Joy we feel outweighs that fear; nay, that
Joy has already banished it, and made us utterly insensible of it, arming us
against the worst that they can do. This Joy, and this Courage continued in
their Successors, many of which so readily embraced Martyrdom. A Tyrant
commands St. Lawrence to give him up the Treasures of the Church, who replies,
he will do it very willingly. He goes and distributes the Treasure amongst all
the Poor he could find, and brings an Army of Lame and Blind, of weak and
diseased Persons unto that Covetous Praetor, saying very cheerfully to him,
Here I have brought you the Treasures of the Church. Take heed, good Man, the
Tyrant will be revenged on thee. Let him do what he can, I care not; for my Joy
in serving God is dearer to me than my Life. They lay him upon a Grid-Iron with
live Coals under it, which kindle the fire of his Joy and of his Love at the
same time that the flames do scorch his Body; yet he smiling and jesting, says
to the Tyrant, Now this side is broyl'd enough, it is time to turn the other,
and you may eat of it. Who among such real Torments, among that Fire, Smoke,
and Confusion, could produce that holy Jest, that Joy, that cheerfulness, that
pleasantness of Wit and Contentment? God, and none but God, who was pleased to
make that Martyr's Joy to Triumph over all his Sufferings. Who made St. Andrew
the Apostle to sing the Praises of the Lord, when he was fastened upon the very
Cross, but this Joy, this wondrous Fruit of the Spirit? Certainly there is no
Cheerfulness, no Contentment, no Joy, but in God. Rejoice, and be glad in the
Lord, ye righteous, says David; and in another place, Great is the joy of those
that fear the Lord. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, says our Savior, when ye
shall suffer for my Names-sake; for great is your reward in Heaven; and Christ
himself, for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the shame. Thus that inward Joy drives away and banishes all the toils and
troubles, and all the Sufferings of the Spiritual Life. This Fruit then of the
Spirit, which is called Joy, contains in it both Honor and Profit, and is well
worth thy praying for, since it facilitates and sweetens all thy Pains, and
will make thee forward and cheerful in giving up thy self to undergo any thing
for the Lord's sake; and will thereby make thee to be favored, and be loved by
him; For, as the Scripture tells us, God loves a cheerful giver.

Of the Fruit of Patience.
The Fruit of Patience is more properly called a Fruit, than the rest, because
Christ literally calls it so; where speaking of those that keep the good Seed
of his Divine Word, and of his holy Inspirations in their hearts; and lay them
up, and put them in practice, He says, they shall bring forth their fruit in
Patience; that is, because a cheerful and resigned Patience is one of the most
excellent Fruits of the Holy Spirit, and the most profitable and necessary to
serve God with Purity; the most profitable, because the Lord says, In Patience
ye shall possess your souls; which is the greatest profit that can be attained,
or thought of in this life, as who should say, if your Life be Spiritual, full
of Tribulations, and a sharp continual War both within and without; if it be a
Conquest that consist in dying, not in killing; not in Persecuting and
Oppressing others, but suffering Persecutions, and in subduing ones self,
certainly Patience is very necessary for that War. And as in those of the
World, Men get the Victory by Impatience, by Anger and Fury, by Force, and by
Revenge; so in the Spiritual Warfare, we must Conquer by Suffering, and by
Humility; for the Combat here is to undergo Pains and Hardship; to live and
die, with bearing, and with Patience. This Fruit is also necessary, because by
it the rest are preserved; The Apostle explains it, where he says, Patience is
necessary for you, that ye may obtain the Promises; and in another place, That
ye may be made worthy of the promises of Christ; that is, that ye may obtain
the Blessings, which are set forth in the Eight Beatitudes; and in many other
places, where the Lord says, Your name is written in the Book of Life; and that
there ye shall receive an hundredfold, whatsoever ye shall have forsaken here
for the love of God. Patience is necessary, because neither Faith, Hope, nor
Charity, nor any other of the Moral and Cardinal Virtues, without Patience are
of any worth; for in losing that, they lose their Beauty, and become vain and
ineffectual. Finally, if this be a life of Labors and Afflictions, of Slanders
and Reproaches, what Virtue can be more profitable, more necessary, more
important, and of more frequent use, than Patience? For all the blows, both
inward and outward, that are struck at the Mind of Man, must be received upon
the Shield of Patience, and he that wants that, can never be able to sustain
the Combat; therefore St. Paul, when he furnishes the Christian with Spiritual
Arms, puts upon his left Arm the in-expugnable Shield of Patience, that he may
be able to withstand the fiery Darts of his Enemy, Assumens scutum
inexpugnabile Equitatem, observing that in the word Equitatem, he not only
meant to express ordinary Patience, but an equality of Mind, which is the
Excellent and Heroic Patience, and that is the Fruit here spoken of; as who
should say, It must be a Patience full of Equality, receiving Crosses and
Afflictions with as great a Cheerfulness and Contentment, as thou could do
their contraries. Take notice that St. Paul says not, that thy Patience should
be equal, but even Equality itself. Consider the Joy thou have for the Favors
of God; thou ought to have the very same, when he sends Tribulations, for
they also are his Favors. Give not thy Affections more to things that are
Delightful, than to those that are Disgustful; to Pleasure, than to Pain; to
Comfort, than to Affliction. Thy Cheerfulness ought to be equal in Sufferings,
as in Joys; in Rebukes, as in Applauses; in being pulled down, as in being
advanced; and in suffering Affronts, as in receiving Honors. And this which
seems to be a very hard Law, is so sweet an one, that though St. Paul contents
himself here with an Equality, yet some Saints, as we see in the Examples that
have been given, pass on further, and express more Joy in Sufferings, than in
Comforts; though these come from God, and those from the hands of Men. As we
may believe, that the Divine Goodness of our Lord took more delight in
Redeeming Mankind upon the Cross, than in the Glories of his Transfiguration
upon Mount Tabor; though upon Mount Tabor those Favors came from the hands of
his Father; and upon Mount Calvary his Sufferings came from the hands of Men.
So likewise those who suffer for God, the Holy Apostles, and all those that now
follow, or have followed them, rejoice more in Pains and Tribulations, which
God sends them by the hands of Men, than in those Favors and Comforts, which
they receive immediately from God himself: Therefore our Savior said to his
Disciples, at his going to his last Supper, when he was beginning to enter upon
his Holy Passion, With a great desire have I desired to eat this Passover with
you; but he said no such thing to them, when he went to the Glories of Mount
Tabor. In imitation of this, we read of one, that for a favor begged of Christ
to be crowned with Thorns; another to bear the marks of his Wounds, with a
lively feeling of his dolorous Passion: One Devout Soul begs, Lord, if I may
obtain my desire, grant that I may be despised for thy sake; Another meditating
on Christ crucified, Lord, I desire nothing but thy self, and to be crucified
with thee. This in my Opinion was an high and wise Petition, because he asked
to suffer with Christ in this life, as Christ in this life had suffered for
him; and then presently to have Christ himself for a Reward in the Life
Eternal; for he that begs for Christ crucified to be made his, it is clear, he
does not beg for a Glorious Christ, but wounded, bloody, and in the anguish of
his Passion; and so he asked not the Crown of Thorns alone, nor the five Wounds
alone, but also what he suffered, in the scourgings at the Pillar; Not only the
Mockeries, the Buffetings, and the pains of his Passion, but the Slanders,
Affronts, and Persecutions, which he suffered before it; And not those alone,
but whatsoever he suffered from his Blessed Mother's Womb, and the Manger, till
he expired upon the Cross. This we ought to ask and imitate in this life, and
to advance thereby in Grace and Patience, and thereby thou shall see how
certain it is, that such Holy, Devout Persons not only do possess that equality
of Patience, wherewith St. Paul Arms his Spiritual Man, in receiving Affronts
and Crosses, with as cheerful a Countenance, as the Pleasures of this World;
but that their Delight is greater, and their Patience more cheerful in
suffering, than their Joy is in rejoicing.

The Second WEEK.
Of the Ninth and Tenth Fruits of the Holy Spirit, Goodness and Meekness.
THese two Fruits of the Spirit, which God gives to those that are exercised in
the Spiritual Life, are as the Cause and the Effect; for in truth Goodness is
the Mother of Meekness. And as some Fruits by reason of their great fecundity,
grow one within another; and as an Ear of Corn produces many Grains, so
Goodness produces Gentleness, Meekness, and Affability, repeated again and
again in all its words and actions. And we must take notice that this Goodness,
which St. Paul names here for a Fruit of the Spirit, is not barely that Virtue
which is the first cause of Grace; that is to say, a disposition to receive and
to hold it, by the Soul's being free from the guilt of any great sin; for that
is a Fruit of the Divine Goodness and Mercy, which gave the Soul light and
strength to cast out sin, rather than a Fruit of the Spirit. But the Goodness
here meant is in my Opinion an high Gift of Grace and Favor, which God grants
to holy Souls, after they have served him long in the Spiritual Life; whereby
the Soul is cleansed and purified, not only from greater sins, but even from
lesser (nay, even the least) Passions; and by taking away those Barks, as it
were, and inward Rinds of our Nature, lays it bare and naked, from those folds
and doublings of imperfect Habits, leaving the Soul in so great a purity,
truth, and sincerity, that St. Paul calls it perfect Goodness. It is as if God
should make an Old Man to become a New Man; or as if an old decayed and broken
House, should by his Power not only be repaired, and strengthened, and made up
again in the same proportion, grace, and Beauty it had at first, but also be
brought to a greater perfection, and enriched with more costly Ornaments. And
though it still leaves in him the incitement and provocation to sin; (for that
never ceases, nor does Grace take it away) yet it is as much weakened and
disabled, as Reason was in it before.

This Goodness and Sincerity the Lord found in holy Job, and to give him an
high Praise indeed, he said, He was single and upright. God by his Grace had
taken from him all those folds and doublings, which we have in our Souls, those
corners and hollow places, where Malice uses to dwell. He had cast out all
Imperfections from thence, and had filled it with his Lights and Virtues,
making him a Mirror of his high Perfections. This Goodness and Sincerity is
that, which Christ desired to find in his Disciples, when they were contending
who should be the greatest, and he Discoursing upon it, took a Child, and
laying his Holy Hands upon the Head of that little Angel, said unto them,
Unless ye become as this little Child, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
Some Authors say, this Child was St. Ignatius, afterward Bishop of Antioch,
and Martyr, who was one of the most Holy Disciples that the Apostles had, and
from that touch of Christ's hand, he became so much in love with him, that he
took for his Motto, Amor meus crucifixus est, For his only Love was Christ
crucified; and at his Martyrdom, this holy Man defied the Lions that were to
tear him in pieces, and said to them, I am the Wheat of Christ, and I shall be
ground by your teeth, that I may be worthy to be made the Bread of that Lord.
This Digression I have made to quicken the Faith of Clergymen, for if Christ
but by touching him, made him to become so holy, how holy ought we to be, who
not only touch the Bread of the Lord, but the Bread, which is the Lord, and do
so often Consecrate and Receive it. Two things God required of the Apostles, in
imitation of that Child; first, Humility, for since they were proudly striving
who should have the highest place, he could not set before them a fitter
Example, than that Age, and that Humility. Do ye desire to be great? Then ye
must become little, that ye may be great; For he that would be exalted, must
humble himself, and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Behold, I came
down from Heaven, and have humbled my self, by taking the form of a Servant, to
be despised upon Earth; and ye poor Earthen Vessels, are ye lifting up your
heads, and your pretentions to the highest places in Heaven? The second thing,
that he required of them, was, that they should have the same Sincerity,
Goodness, and Purity of Soul, which that Child had. Unless ye become pure and
simple, as this child, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
This was to move them to that first Grace in all its Purity and Perfection,
since without that no Soul can enter into Heaven. For a Christian must be
brought back to that first Grace and Purity, which he received in Baptism,
either by keeping his Soul from sin, even from the lightest; or else after
having sinned, whether lightly or grievously, by washing his Soul with Tears of
Repentance and Contrition, and cleansing it from all stain and guilt by Faith
in the Passion of Christ, and by partaking of his Body and Blood in the Holy
Sacrament; and so the Soul is brought into the Purity of that little Child, and
made capable of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now the Sincerity, and Charity, and clearness of Conscience, wherewith the
Lord by the force of the Spirit, and by the holy Exercises of the Spiritual
Life cleanses and purifieth a Soul, St. Paul calls Goodness, which in
substance is an inward and superior degree of pureness of Conscience, so
simple, and so perfect, that it resembles the Innocence of a Child. This
Goodness is an absolute compliance of our Thoughts, Words, and Actions to the
Will of God. It is a full resignation to whatsoever God does; that goes
whithersoever his Divine Majesty directs; performs whatsoever he appoints, and
seeks, and follows, and loves God in all things. By this kind of Goodness a
good Man does not seem to be in search of that which is good, but to be already
in the possession of it, and holds it as a thing, which he had found before.
This Purity of Loving, Thinking, Speaking, and Doing, the Lord Jesus required
also in his Disciples, when he said to them, Let your words be Yea, Yea; and
Nay, Nay; as if he should have said, let your words speak according to your
hearts; and your hearts speak according to my holy Will. Say neither more nor
less than what ye think, for the Speech ought in all things to be conformable
to the Thoughts; and whatsoever is more, can neither be Goodness, nor
Sincerity; for Christ himself says, that it is sin; and therefore to praise a
Man very much, we properly say, he is a Man that thinks what he speaks, and
speaks what he thinks; for the former praises his Truth, and the other his
Ingenuity and Goodness. This intrinsic Goodness is that which is in God by his
Essence, and that for which he is so often praised in the Scripture, saying,
Thou art good, O Lord, teach me to be good by thy goodness; as who should say,
O uncreated Goodness, impart some of thy Goodness to me; and the Soul begs this
same Goodness with a gentle Sweetness and Meekness, when she prays, Let the
light of thy countenance, O Lord, shine upon us, and teach us thy statutes,
which is a Prayer we ought very often to make to God.

Of Meekness.
This kind of Goodness is accompanied with Meekness, as Light is with
Brightness; for that being true, and sincere, and holy, and having so much of
God in it, his Divine Majesty does, as it were, cloth him outwardly with the
latter, who inwardly possesses the former; making a sweet and gentle Meekness
to shine through all his Deportment. And so thou may know a good heart by a
peaceable quiet behavior; for nothing moves or disturbs it. Nothing disturbs a
good Man, because his Confidence and his Affection are only placed in God; he
loves and seeks him, and disregards all things else. Nothing affrights him, for
his Goodness by Love does cast out Fear; he desires nothing that is Temporal,
for he sees whatsoever is so, passes away, and comes suddenly to an end.
Nothing moves him, because he only seeks for God, who is unmovable. Nothing
afflicts him, because he resists and conquers all Crosses with his Patience. He
wants nothing, because he possesses God, who possesses all things; and desires
nothing, because God alone is to him All-sufficient. Now consider, what
Meekness that Soul must have, who neither loves, nor desires, nor pretends to
any thing; who is neither troubled, nor affrighted, nor discomposed at any
thing; but in all Occurrences rests quietly in God.

This is a rare Meekness indeed; I say, rare, because it is admirable; and
because I believe few have it in this Mortal Life; since we see that even the
holiest Men have been angry, and there are Persons that are very perfect, who
Reprove and Chide, who Reform and Punish with Anger. Nay, even Moses himself,
who is called the Meekest Man upon Earth, was certainly transported with great
Anger, when he threw down and brake the Tables of the Law, which God had
written with his own finger.

God and his Love can do all things; and no body can number, or weigh, or
measure the Miracles of his Grace. But thou deceivest thy self, (as I have told
thee) if thou think that a Spiritual Meekness excludes Zeal for Reformation;
since the being gentle in Heart, and very courageous in Zeal, may well enough
consist together; and it was a great cause of surprise and indignation for
Moses to find that People worshipping an Idol, that had so manifestly seen the
Power of God so many ways made known to them in their Protection and
Deliverance. And Christ himself, who far excelled Moses in Meekness, as in all
other Virtues, was angry, when he whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, urging that Verse of the Psalm, The Zeal of thine House has even eaten
me up. And when he reprehended the Masters of the Law for destroying the Law,
and suffering the People to be loose and wicked; though he was angry with them,
yet he was not the less meek in heart, for the gentleness and serenity of it
shined even through his Zeal; and even then also he might have said, Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly of heart. He meekly had a sweetness within his
Zeal, as the Honeycomb was in the mouth of Samson's Lion. He showed his Anger
to draw them to his Meekness, and seeing so many Discourses, and so many
Sermons, and so many Miracles had wrought nothing upon them; to soften their
hardness, as we do Iron by Fire, he applied that of his Zeal for a Remedy. The
Vices do oppose and hinder one another, but the Virtues do assist and help one
another. A Man cannot be Prodigal and Covetous at the same time; for if he will
give Prodigally, he must part with that Money, which his Covetousness would
fain keep; and the Slothful Man cannot be Ambitious, for that Vice requires
great Diligence, and Pains-taking; but Sloth is Idle, and loves ease; and thus
it is with other inordinate Passions: But the Virtues are helpful to each
other, and while some of them are put in practice, the rest of them lie
peaceably in the Soul. Thus Meekness, after having exercised Zeal in
Reformation, receives that Person with a gentle sweetness, whom it had drawn to
Virtue with much Rigor and Severity: And so let Meekness remain in thine
heart, with Goodness, even when thou have occasion to use thy Zeal, that it may
be according to Knowledge and Discretion; for thou must take care to show no
more of it than is needful, and that when the Cause of God, or what concerns
his Service, does require it.

The Third WEEK.
Of Modesty and Chastity, the two last Fruits of the Holy Spirit.
MOdesty also is an excellent Fruit of the Spirit, and a very substantial one;
for it not only contains that which is good, and beautiful, and gracious, and
perfect in the appearance; but it mingles itself very essentially in all our
Actions. Modesty is not only an outward composure of the Countenance, Person,
and Habit, though that be a very commendable and exemplary Virtue; but it is a
perfect manner of performing all we do, and a decent way of doing, whatsoever
we undertake. All our Actions in this Life are compounded of Substance and
Circumstances, and these change the manner of what we do; for if they be well
ordered, it becomes perfect; but if otherwise, it is defective. Modesty then is
a good, discreet, and prudent way in ordering all the Actions of a Christian,
and the Circumstances of them; and to find out that way, is a most excellent
Gift, and great Fruit of the Spirit. A Preacher may Preach with a good and
graceful fashion, and manner of delivery; or with one that is very unpleasing
to his hearers; and that very defect may make a very good Preacher to be
thought an ill one; so that his Voice and Action is not less considerable, than
what he says. He may Discourse with, and Reprove one of his Flock with a very
good Intention, but his Doctrine, and his Advices will have no Effect, if they
be given in a harsh, imprudent, and undecent manner. In the Spiritual
Government, whether Politic or Moral, all depends upon the manner; for that
changes the substance in such sort, that that becomes Poison without it, which
with it is a Medicine and an Antidote. What imports it, that the Penitent
mortifies, and punishes, and persecutes himself, if it be by an outward way of
Penance, so vain, and so affected as to show Hypocrisy? On the contrary, the
same thing being done in secret, and well ordered, may have a very good Effect,
as proving the reality of Repentance by that indignation against our selves,
for having offended so gracious a Father. God in the Prophecy of Isaiah,
reproves their manner of Fasting, as having too much in it of their own Will,
and tells them, He will not accept their Fast, because the way of it wus
totally unpleasing to him. This Fruit of a good Mode in all our Actions, and
Modesty, which is an Effect of that Mode or Manner, is that, which in other
places, the Scripture calls the Spirit of Discretion; which is to discern, and
to distinguish the good way from the bad; and to choose and judge between two
ways of doing any thing, that which is the better, and more conducing to its
end; only here is the difference, Discretion comprehends the substance of
Actions, as well as the Circumstances; but Modesty employs itself more
particularly about the Circumstances, than about the Actions themselves. All
things have their terms and measures, and to go beyond them, is to offend
against Modesty, and to lose the things themselves by the Mode of doing them.
Every Action, and every Resolution is clothed and colored by its
Circumstances. Now to make the Garment long or short, large or strait,
according to the Person, and to suit or change the Colors, or to mix them
together with a good fancy, gives not only the Beauty, but the Convenience and
Perfection of the Dress. A Man must use Mildness in Reproving, because the
Person requires it, who perhaps will be enraged, or driven into despair by
Sharpness; and therefore to make use of that, and neglect the other, is to lose
the substance for the manner, and to frustrate his own design, by having chosen
a wrong way. On the contrary, if I have to deal with another Nature, that by
Gentleness grows more negligent, and runs into greater Liberties, but by Rigor
may be restrained, and kept to the performance of his Duty; then in taking that
way, and leaving the other, I shall obtain my end, and make the Circumstance to
gain the Substance.

In great Painters, that which most raises their Reputation, is their well
disposing of their Colors, not only in fitting and mixing them amongst one
another, but in ordering them upon the Picture, and in suiting and laying them
in proportion to the intent and action of the Subject. Just so we are to do in
Spiritual Affairs, striving (as good Painters) first to make an exact Draught
of the Design, and then to color, and form, and reform it with such skilful
touches, as may bring it to an entire Perfection. How many great, nay, very
great Men in Knowledge, and in Discourse, and in desire of doing good, have
lost themselves by their way of going about it, and have not only lost
themselves, but even those also, to whom they intended that good? Therefore the
Director of this Modesty, or Mode of Acting, must be Prudence, which is one of
the chiefest Virtues of the Spiritual Life: A Virtue so high, and of such
pre-eminence, that it not only governs itself, and Mankind, but also all the
other Virtues. To govern those that are Virtuous, is a great Dignity and
Pre-eminence; how great an one therefore must it be to govern the Virtues
themselves? And this is that, which Prudence does, which is the Natural Mother
of Modesty, or the right Mode of performing any Action.

That which I ground my self upon, to believe that this Fruit is not only an
outward Modesty, but an holy Habit, or manner of doing that which is honest,
decently; that which is good, perfectly; and that which is best, discreetly; is
(besides that some Expositors are of that Opinion) the Experience I have had of
the Treacheries of an outward Modesty, and how little that is to be trusted for
a Proof of that which is interior and substantial. Now a thing, that is in
appearance, and without substance, cannot be a Fruit of the Holy Spirit. It is
a good thing to seem good, and therefore an outward Modesty has some degree of
Goodness; but it is not to be valued unless the internal answer to the
external. An outward behavior modestly governed, while the inward thoughts are
loose and ungoverned, what is it but a well-composed Falsehood, and a well
studied Hypocrisy? And all this is highly abominable to God; nor do I wonder
he should abhor it, for his Divine Majesty is Truth and Sincerity itself; and
therefore he must of necessity detest a substantial Lie, masked under the
appearance of a Truth. Christ reproved the Pharisees for making clean the
outside of the Cup and Platter, while within they were full of the deadly
Poison of Extortion and Excess. Make clean (said he) the inside, and thereby
the outside will become clean also. He also calls them whited Sepulchers, which
had the appearance of Virtue and Religion, but within were full of Bones,
Worms, and Rottenness; as if he should have said, Ye have lively Passions
within, while your Passions seem utterly mortified without. Thus this outward
Modesty, while it corresponds with the inward, is both Virtue and Example; but
if it be not proportioned to that, it is but a Mantle of Snow that covers an
heap of Dung; the Sun of Truth comes and melts it, and then it is so much the
worse, by how much before it appeared the better. Outward Modesty is always
convenient, in as much as it covers Imperfections, to the end that a fault may
not pass on to a scandal, which is the worst and the most hurtful thing in the
World; yet when an ill Man makes use of outward Modesty to give Credit to his
Authority, and to those Erroneous Practices which he inwardly favors, that
concealed Wickedness is a great deal worse than a manifest Crime. A Wolf in
Sheep's clothing is much more dangerous to the Flock, than when he appears in
his own shape, for so he is known both to the Dog, and to the Shepherd. The one
does but whistle, and the other presently flies at him; but when he comes in a
fair Disguise, he is unknown to both, and the poor Flock is in danger to become
his Prey. Every body that has Eyes, may escape a Precipice, but hardly any body
can escape a Snare; for that has a seeming show of Security, but the other
visibly shows the Hazard and the Danger. The Common Enemy is never more
dangerous to Souls, than when he tempts with pretenses of Good; for he that
takes him for an Angel of Light, and of Holiness, will more easily suffer
himself to be persuaded, than if he saw him in the Deformity of the Devil.
Though the Devil was a Serpent, yet some Expositors say, he spoke not to our
first Parents in the figure of a Serpent, but clothed himself with a beautiful
Appearance, for fear lest Eve seeing him so ugly, should have been afraid of
his approach, and so not have suffered her self to be persuaded by him. He took
the Colors of the Forbidden Fruit, which was Beautiful in show, and Poison in
reality.

Thus the Substantial Fruit of the Holy Spirit, which thou must endeavor to
obtain, is not only an outward Modesty, for under that great Treacheries, and
much Hypocrisy may lie hid, though of itself it be good, when it is not
abused; but an outward and an inward Modelty coupled together, as well in the
actions, as in the manner of doing them; and in ordering all we do in such a
way, that the Circumstances and Substance may receive mutual Advantage from one
another, and may together be like a fair gilt Case and Dialplate, exactly
fitted to the proportion of a well-wrought Clock, whereby being preserved from
Rust and Foulness, and defended from those Accidents that might spoil and
disorder it, the motions of its Wheels are kept regular, and it is not only an
Ornament to the place where the Maker sets it, but a needful Help and Direction
to all that look upon it for the disposing of their Time, and of their Affairs;
and thereby the worth of the Case is also improved, as a necessary and proper
means of attaining the end for which the Clock is designed; but if that be
taken away, the Case remains an empty useless thing; and though the sight of it
may please Fools and Ignorant Persons, who regard not, though the Hand point to
a wrong Hour, yet those of discerning Judgments will soon perceive the want of
life and motion, and disregard it as a thing of a flight and inconsiderable
value.

Of the Fruit of Chastity.
The Fruit of Chastity is also a more excellent and higher Virtue, than that we
formerly spoke of; for this Fruit grows out of that, being the Flower of that
Tree, and the production of that Holy Root. This is a Chastity of an Heroical
degree, a Chastity of Supreme Magnitude; it is that, which those Saints were
blessed with, who gave their Lives to defend it, or not to lose it. This is
that, which the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of Virgins, and the prime
Example of Chastity, had. This is that, which Joseph had, not only the
Patriarch, who was first of that Name, when by his Chastity he triumphed over
the wanton Lightness of his infamous Mistress, choosing rather to suffer a
cruel Imprisonment, than to blemish it, or do a Treachery to his Master; but
also the other Patriarch Joseph, the Husband of the Blessed Virgin, more Holy,
and more Chaste than the former. This is that, which the great John Baptist had
in losing his Life, for having endeavored to cleanse the heart of that Tyrant
Herod from the Vice contrary to Chastity, which cost him his Head, that was
sacrificed to the Revengeful Adulteress. And this is that, which many of the
Primitive Christians valued to so high a degree, that nothing could stain the
whiteness of their Chastity but the Blood of their own Veins, which was shed
for the preservation of it.

This excellent Virtue may live and reign also even in Wedlock, and shine
brightly in holy Matrimony; for Continence, Temperance, and Modesty, in the use
of Marriage, is perfect Chastity; sanctifying, honoring, and authorizing that
holy Bond, as St. Paul says. This Fruit of the Spirit is acquired, or, to say
better, given by God, through the Holy Spirit, both to the married, and
unmarried; to Virgins, and to all those that have exercised themselves in
keeping a clean and holy Purity, both in Body and Mind. And although all these
Twelve Fruits of the Holy Spirit are owing to his Infinite Bounty; yet this of
Chastity is so more than all the rest; for if, as we have said, none can have
that former degree of Chastity, out by the Gift of God, Nemo enim continens
esse potest, nisi Deus dederit; how can any one by other means obtain this
Flower of Chastity, which is the Crown and Fruit of that excellent Virtue,
which honors and improves even Chastity itself, being exercised in such
occasions, and with such Heroical Virtues, as do much increase the Glory of it?
Nor does the dependence of this Admirable Virtue upon the Bounty of God more
than others, increase the difficulty of it; for in my Opinion, and according to
my way of Understanding, it is so much the better to be exercised, because it
depends upon his most Holy Hand. We ought never to think our Comfort and
Happiness more secure, than when it is in the hand of God; and if I could
forsake whatsoever I have, or can have, and utterly renounce it, and give it up
to his most blessed hands, without returning to ask it again, I would renounce
it only that I might depend totally and absolutely upon such liberal hands. It
is clear, that all our Ruin and Destruction depends only upon our own Weakness
and Misery; and that all our Strength and Happiness depends only upon God: And
therefore one of the Reasons, why Chastity is possible, is because it depends
more upon the Bounty of the Lord than other Virtues, for if it depended only
upon our selves, there would be no such thing as Chastity in the World. We are
weak, wretched, and miserable Vessels, filled with Passions; and so of our
selves we can neither receive, nor keep those Treasures which God bestows upon
us. Even our Freewill, though continually defended and assisted by Grace,
(without which we could not make so much as one step in Goodness) is every
moment choosing the worst; and having Eternal Life on the one hand, and an
Eternal Death on the other, we embrace Death, and turn our backs upon Eternal
Life. What therefore would become of Chastity, that high Gift, if we depended
upon our selves, and it were not given us from above? Thus though all depend
upon God, yet chiefly the Gift of Chastity, this most sweet and excellent
Fruit. The Grace of entertaining holy Thoughts, is his; that of flying the
Occasions that are dangerous, and of loving this unspotted Virtue, is from his
Favor; and the preserving, and persevering in it, all proceeds from his
Powerful Hand. Therefore thou ought with great care to strive to follow the
Chaste Motions of his Holy Spirit, to avoid all Places and Companies that may be
dangerous, endeavoring to subdue and mortify thy self, earnestly praying to
God for his Favor, and acknowledging that if his Divine Majesty give it not,
there is nothing in thy self but Misery and Destruction, and that all thy Good,
thy Remedy, and thy Chastity consists only in his Grace, Mercy, and Goodness.

The Fourth WEEK.
Of Perseverance, and Prayer to God.
O That I had these Gifts! O that I might die with these Virtues of the
Spiritual Year! O that I were able to spend my Hours, my Days, my Weeks, my
Months, and my Years in this safe Doctrine!

Be not discouraged, do but go on; persevere, and call upon God in Prayer, for
that is all thy Remedy. Constancy, Perseverance, and Continuance in Prayer
obtain all things. Many run, says St. Paul, but one alone wins the Prize: Many
Virtues run in the Spiritual Life, many are exercised and practiced, but the
Reward and Crown is given only to Perseverance; without that Gift the rest will
profit nothing. Take notice what our Savior says, That if we seek, we shall
find; if we ask, he will give us; and if we knock, he will open unto us.
Remember how he tells you it succeeded to the Man, that awakened his Friend to
borrow three Loaves, by reason that a Stranger was come into his House; he came
unseasonably to him, disturbing his Rest in the Night; yet he let him have
them, because of his Importunity, which without that he would not have done for
his Friendship. Remember the poor Widow, that persisted earnestly to beg of the
Unjust Judge, who carelessly delayed to dispatch her business; her Importunity
did more than the Right of her Cause, for that overcame his Sloth, when this
was not at all regarded. Call to mind that Christ says, If a Son importunes his
Father for an Egg, he will not give him a Scorpion, but the thing he desires.
All these Comparisons our Savior sets before us, to the end we may persevere,
and not faint, nor turn back again to slothfulness, but that we should still
pray, and beg, and call, and cry, for at last he will hear us. He that puts his
hand to the Plow, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. What,
shall he lose it only for looking back? In but looking back, there is great
danger of losing it. Have thou not seen it in Lot's Wife, who only by looking
back toward Sodom, was turned into a Pillar of Salt, to season us by her
Punishment, and to give us warning, not to do as she did? Having once renounced
the World, and its Vanities, we must not so much as think upon them with
delight, or trouble for having left them; for this is a looking back. O how
many Virtues and Perfections! how many excelencies of Holiness, have fallen by
looking back, and not pressing on constantly forward to the Mark of our high
Calling? What lofty Trees, and tall Cedars of Libanus have fallen at the feet
of little Shrubs?

Remember Solomon, more Rich in Gifts than in Wealth. Remember Judas the
Apostle, chosen of God for one of the firm Pillars of his Church. Look upon
Origin, the Master of Christian Instruction, and upon Tertullian, a stout
Defender of the Faith, and the Terror of Heretics: What wonderful, what
dreadful Falls were theirs? How fair, how safe, how excellent were their
beginnings, and their progress! But how unfortunate, how sad, how doubtful
their conclusions! Whence all that Mischief, whence all those great
Misfortunes? Because they persevered not, they continued not instant in Prayer.
They grew weary of asking, and of well-doing. They trusted in themselves, who
should only have put their trust in God, and been fearful of themselves.

It is clear, that in Solomon there began at first some secret thought, and
that his Wisdom was so high, that he either made no reckoning of it in the
beginning, or that being so Wise a Man, he found out some plausible Reasons to
bring Idolatrous Queens into his House; believing that in regard of his great
Holiness and Learning, there could not be so great danger for him, as for
others; nor that cause in him to avoid it, which moved God to forbid his People
the taking of Women of another Religion: He presumes, being a Man that used to
speak with God, he should never suffer himself to be persuaded by them; but
rather that he should convert them, and gain their Souls, by drawing them over
to the Worship of the true God: But they were more powerful with their Beauty
and Allurements, than Solomon with all his Eloquence; and their Persuasions
overthrew him and all his Wisdom. Then he found Reasons to allow them Temples
only for themselves at first, and within a while by Idolizing them, he became
an Idolater with them in that Temple of the Devil. O how great a Fire was
kindled from one Spark! Shut thine Eyes, and thine Ears against all Evil, cut
off the first thoughts, and first beginnings of it; make have from the path of
Destruction, and from whatsoever may draw thee near to any thing that is evil;
and if thou will be safe, look upon the danger of a Mischief, with the same
fear, and with the same hatred, that thou look upon the Mischief itself.

How wise and cautious were the Recabites, who being forbidden by their
forefathers to drink Wine, would never so much as eat Raisins, and why?
Because Raisins are made of Grapes, and of those Grapes, Wine; and they feared,
that by eating dry Grapes, they might be tempted to eat ripe Grapes; and so by
degrees to squeeze out the Juice to make Wine and from making Wine at last to
come to the drinking of it. Thus it concerns thee to be careful never to turn
back from the way of God, neither with thy Sight, no, nor with thy Hearing, nor
with any other of thy Senses, or Faculties. Walk still forward without
stopping; for not to go forward, is to go backward. If thou give but one of
thy Senses up to danger, by that it will gain thy whole Soul with all its
Senses, Powers, and Faculties. David did not give up his Heart to the danger,
nor his Understanding, Will, and Memory; nor his Hearing with the rest of his
Senses and Faculties; No, no; he gave only a Glance, he did but look upon
Bathsheba, and having only allowed that nimble Sense to the hazard, by it the
Devil caught him, and so gained his Understanding, Will, and Memory, with all
the rest of his Senses, Powers, and Faculties, and triumphed a whole Year
together over that poor King, who afterward did no small matter to make his
escape out of that Slavery, and to rescue himself by the force of Penitential
Tears, after the suffering of many great Afflictions. To God all must be given,
all that thou have, without reserving any thing whatsoever; for he is the Lord
of all, from whom thou have received all thou have. To the Common Enemy allow
not so much as the smallest share imaginable; for if any thing be given him,
how little soever it be, that may be the occasion of very great Mischiefs. When
Moses contended with Pharaoh about letting the Children of Israel go, that
Barbarous King seeing his Power, contented himself with less and less in every
Capitulation, and came lower and lower from one demand to another, only that
something might remain in his possession, that belonged to the People of God,
hoping by that means to find out an Excuse to keep them still his Captives; but
Resolute Moses stood firmly to his first demand, and would not make him the
least abatement, telling him finally, That there should not remain so much as a
hoof of the smallest Beast that belonged to any Israelite, but that all,
absolutely all, should go out of Egypt. This Example thou must follow; leave
nothing, nothing at all to the Devil, but give all; all is little enough to be
given to God. The Tyrant contents himself with a very little at first, knowing
how probable it is, that from such small beginnings, he shall make himself
Master of all at last. In his first attempt he seems very modest, and makes as
if he thought all were too much, but in the end he thinks all too little. How
many Cities have been lost, and taken by their Enemies at the entrance of a
very small Breach, or of some little hole, or narrow passage, that has been
neglected, or less carefully guarded? We have often seen, that at some little
Wicket or Cleft in a Wall, where a Man could hardly put in his hand, the
Enemies with very little Industry have made Passages for whole Armies to enter.
Therefore after so many Virtues, which I have set before thine Eyes, I
especially recommend these two, Vigilance and Diligence; for they are the most
serviceable for the obtaining the Gift of Perseverance.

Consider well what it is that may separate thee from God; observe it with
Vigilance, and fly from it with Diligence. Be not negligent, do not sleep, for
then thou will be encompassed with Enemies, and with that roaring Lion, as St.
Peter calls him, who goes about, seeking whom he may devour. Pray still, for by
Prayer thou shall obtain Perseverance. That important Gift depends wholly upon
God; it is he that gives it, to him thou must owe it, and it cannot be merited
in this Life, though in it it may be obtained. By how much the more this Gift
of Perseverance depends upon God, with so much the greater, and the more
repeated Instances ought thou to beg it of him, and to strive to win him by
fervent Love, by Prayers, Tears, and Contrition.

O Father, that I could but know, whether or no I shall Persevere in the
Spiritual Life! O that I were sure that I should be so happy, as never to turn
back from it! With what Comfort, and with what Joy and Gladness should I serve
God?

But do not desire, nor search to know, what thy end shall be. Be careful to
learn thy Duty, and to perform it; be careful to serve and to please God, and
if thou do so, hope assuredly; for if thy Life be Virtuous and Pious, the end
of it will be Perseverance. Endeavor to spend thy days in Holy and Virtuous
Employments, and thou may confidently trust in the Divine Goodness, that thy
Death shall be such as thy Life has been. What can thou get by knowing what
will become of thee in the other Life? To presume and grow careless, if they
tell thee thou shall be saved; or to be discouraged, and despair, if they say
thou shall be damned; In which desperate condition it is impossible thou
should be saved; and in the other by Pride and Negligence, thou must
necessarily be damned. Will thou have me tell thee, what will become of thee
and me in the other Life, and whether we shall be damned, or saved? Then let us
both observe how we live, and what our Actions are in this Life, for according
to them it shall befall us in the other. This is most certain, no good Man was
ever condemned, nor evil Man saved, while they continued to be such. If thou
live well, hope, and trust in God, that he will save thee; but if ill, and
do not amend, thou may be certainly assured, thou shall be condemned. All
thou shall desire to know beyond this, will bring thee into great danger either
of Distrust, or Vanity, but can no ways be profitable unto thy Soul. Believe
and think worthily of God, for he is Goodness itself. Can thou possibly
think, that his Infinite Mercy will let thee perish, if thou servest him? Can
thou think, if thou beggest of him, that he will deny to Pardon thee, who do
confess and adore him during thy Life? He that at his Death begged Pardon for
those that were Crucifying of him? If thou and I do all we can to please him,
though we are weak, though we are ungrateful, what will not God, who is
Sovereign Goodness, and Super-abundant in Mercy, do for those that strive all
they can to please him? But on the contrary, if we offend and provoke him to
wrath, and do neither humble our selves, nor ask Pardon, what can we hope for
from a Just and an Almighty Lord, being offended and provoked? Let us cast away
and forsake our Evil, and then be certain, that in God we shall find nothing
but Goodness and Pity. Let us throw down our Arms, and cast away those Weapons,
wherewith we have fought against him; let us fall prostrate at his Feet, and
not be so foolish, as to fight against an Omnipotent God; and if we cease to
sin against him, Repenting, and bewailing our former evil ways; God who is
strict, severe, and rigorous to the Wicked, will be found gracious, sweet, and
merciful to the Penitent. It cannot be certainly known in this Life, what will
become of a Soul in the other; but we may well conjecture, and I would have
thee govern thy Life by that, which may probably be conjectured, and not weary
and distract thy self in seeking after certain Proofs of that which cannot
possibly be known.

If I see a Man that fears God, that loves and serves him, that frequents the
Sacrament, that is constant in Prayer, that often recollects himself to think
of Eternity, that is kind to the Poor, and forward to relieve them; that hears
the Word of God with Humility and Delight, and who, if through frailty he falls
sometimes, presently seeks to God for Pardon, with Penitent Tears humbling
himself, confessing his sins, and flying from the occasions of them; I dare be
bold to conjecture and to hope, nay, to be well assured in the Divine Goodness,
that the Soul of that Man will not fail to be saved. But if on the other side,
I see one forgetful of Eternity, regardless of Heavenly things, much given to
the Pleasures, and Honors, and Riches of this World, full of Vices and
Passions, without any remembrance of Death or Judgment, Heaven or Hell, making
it his only business to delight and to entertain himself, to eat and drink with
Curiosity and Excess, and that does no right to others, nor will suffer any the
least wrong done to himself; I cannot but fear upon these grounds, that he will
not escape Damnation; and I neither hold that to be Presumption, nor this rash
Judgment; for that is an Holy Hope, which we ought to have in the Divine
Goodness and Mercy; and this a Pious Doubt and Fear, which is due to the Divine
Justice. This manner of Conjecture is taught us by the Holy Scripture, and
therefore it cannot be an evil thing; for I see that Lazarus, a poor humble
Beggar, that bore his Miseries with Patience, was saved; and I see the rich
hardhearted Glutton, who fared deliciously, and wallowed in his Vices, was
condemned. Now, how should I frame my Conjecture, but by the Experience of what
I have seen? I see Judas, despairing of God's Mercy after his Fall, was
condemned; and St. Peter after his, by weeping and repenting, was saved; and
must I not needs gather from thence, that he who distrusts God's Mercy, will be
condemned; and he that begs it, and trusts in it, will be saved? I see, Saul,
who made no reckoning of his sins, was condemned; and I see David, who lamented
and forsook his, was saved. Must I not needs collect from hence, that he who
regards not, and is not concerned for an evil Life, will most probably have an
evil Death; and that he will have a good one, who turns from his evil ways, and
amends them during his Life? I see Covetous Cain condemned, because he was
Covetous, and repented not himself of his Covetousness; and I see Liberal Abel
saved, because he frankly offered to God of the Fruits of his Flock. From hence
I must necessarily think, that he who denies or grudges to bestow part of those
Goods in the Service of God, which he received from him, is going in the broad
Path of Destruction; but he that gives cheerfully and bountifully to the Poor,
and by returning that part, acknowledges that he has received all from a more
Liberal Hand, is going in the right and certain way to Heaven, where he shall
receive an hundred fold, and be eternally Crowned.

In short, I see nothing else in the Scripture, but Examples of the good, that
are saved; and of the wicked, that are damned; and that the Gift of final
Perseverance, is given by God to those at their Death, who by their constant
Prayers, and Good Works, have made it their endeavor to obtain it, during the
course of their Life. That Prodigy of the World, the good Thief, who escaped
from Shipwreck at his Death upon the Plank of the Cross, was an instance of the
extraordinary Power of Grace, and one of those strange Wonders that concurred
at the Crucifying of our Savior. It was like the tremblings of the Earth, and
the cleavings of the Rocks; like the tearing of the Vail of the Temple, and the
Dead breaking out of their Sepulchers, to return to life; like the darkning of
the Sun, and the disturbance of the whole Frame of Nature. Amongst these and
other Prodigies, that great Wonder may justly be reckoned, that he should die a
Saint, who had been a Thief during the whole course of his Life, till that
moment. And observe, that though there were many Graves that opened, and many
that arose from the Dead; many Rocks that were cleft, many Lights that were
darkened, and many Signs, that manifested the Power and Efficacy of the Death
of Christ; there was but one of a Conversion at the last gasp. And though the
Lord Jesus had another Thief as near him, to whom he might have showed the same
Mercy; yet he suffered him to die in his Impenitency, and to go to the Devil.
The very words which Jesus spoke when he saved the good Thief, do contain a
warning, that no Man may venture to delay his Repentance till his Death; for he
said, Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. All which words seem to be full of Limitations. Verily, Verily, I say
unto thee, is, as it were, a kind of Oath; for a thing so admirable, as the
saving of a Man at his Death, who had all his Lifetime been a Thief, and a
wicked Person, seemed to stand in need of an Oath for to make it be believed. I
say unto thee is added, as who should say, Do not believe others, if they
should say, it is easy for those to be saved, who delay their Repentance till
their Death; No, that is no easy matter; but I will now at this time make that
easy for thee, which else does seem impossible; as if he had limited that
Grace then unto that Soul, because it departed from his Body in the sight of
his dying Savior. I say unto thee now, for as for others, I shall see
hereafter, how I shall deal with them. This day, that is, this day of so great
Mercy; this day, a day of so many Prodigies; this day, when I desire to show
how far my Grace and Mercy can extend; for other days, I shall refer them to my
Justice, and to the Occasion. Thou shall be with me; thou that dyest with me,
shall go with me; but if thou had not kept me Company in Death, thou should
not have kept me Company in Paradise. All which are rare Singularities, which,
if they do not shorten the Power of God, and his Grace toward others, yet St.
Austin notes, that they may well make Man's Presumption tremble. Finally, we
have more reason to fear in this case God's Justice, for that the other Thief
was not saved, (though he was so near our Savior) because he had delayed his
Repentance till Death; than to be too confident of his Mercy, who saved the
good Thief with so many limitations.

What is all this, but to warn us to do well, while we live, and enjoy our
Youth, our Health, and our Strength; and not to defer our Amendment till the
hour of our Death? And to make us observe, that good living, and good dying go
together, and that evil living, and evil dying do so too; and that to expect
those Miracles when we die, which only happened at the Death of our Savior,
will instead of making him our Friend, while we live, most certainly provoke
him to be our Enemy at our Death, and Judgment. Thus Good Works are the
probable Signs of a good Death to follow; and an ill Death is the sign of Evil
Works, which went before.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1692.
THE Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, concerning
himself: Treating of a Natural Man's Happiness, wherein it consists, and of
the means to attain unto it. Translated out of the Original Greek, with Notes.
By Meric. Causabon, D. D. The Fifth Edition. To which is added, The Life of
Antoninus, with some select Remarks upon the whole, by Monsieur and Madam
Dacier. Never before in English. In 8o. 1692. The Wisdom of God, manifested in
the Works of the Creation. In two Parts, viz. The Heavenly Bodies, Elements,
Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables, Animals, (Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Insects)
more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its Figure, Motion, and
Consistency; and in the Admirable Structure of the Bodies of Man and other
Animals, as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray, Fellow of the Royal
Society. The Second Edition, very much enlarged. In 8o. 1692. Three Discourses
concerning the Changes and Dissolution of the World. The First of the Creation
and Chaos. The Second of the General Deluge, Fountains, formed Stones,
Subterraneous Beds of Shells, Earthquakes, and other Changes in our Terraqueous
Globe. The Third of the General Conflagration, Dissolution, and means of
bringing them to pass. Of the Future State, etc. The Second Edition, Corrected,
and very much enlarged, and Illustrated with Copper Plates. By John Ray, Fellow
of the Royal Society. In 8o. 1692. A Treatise of Church Government: Or, A
Vindication of Diocesan Episcopacy, against the Objections of the Dissenters,
in Answer to some Letters lately Printed concerning the same Subject. By Robert
Burscough, M. A. In 8o. 1692.
Several Books Written by the Reverend Dr. Rich. Lucas, Vicar of St. Stephen's
Coleman-street.
Practical Christianity: Or, An Account of the Holiness which the Gospel
enjoins, with Motives to it, and the Remedies it proposes against Temptations;
with a Prayer concluding each distinct Duty. In 8o. 1685. Enquiry after
Happiness, in several Parts, etc. The Second Edition enlarged. In 8o. 1692. The
Duty of Apprentices and Servants. 1. The Parents Duty, how to Educate their
Children, that they may be sit to be employed and trusted. 2. What Preparation
is needful for such as enter into Service; with some Rules to be observed by
them how to make a wise and happy Choice of a Service. 3. Their Duty in Service
toward God, their Master, and themselves, with suitable Prayers to each Duty,
and some Directions peculiarly to Servants for the Worthy Receiving the Holy
Sacrament. Published for the Benefit of Families. In 8o. A Sermon Preached at
the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Lamb, July 23d. 1686. In 4o. A Sermon Preached at the
Assizes held at Horsham in Sussex, August 23. 1691. Christian Thoughts for
every day of the Month, with a Prayer, wherein is represented the Nature of
Unfeigned Repentance, and of Perfect Love toward God. In 12o. 1692. The Plain
Man's Guide to Heaven: Containing, First, his Duty toward God. Secondly,
toward his Neighbor: With proper Prayers, Meditations, and Ejaculations.
Designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, Labourer, and such like. In
12o. 1691. Devotion and Charity, A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, March
30. 1692. The Christan Race, A Sermon Preached before the Queen, July 31. 1692.
Mr. Thornton's Sermon at the Assizes held at Chelmsford in Essex, September
2d. 1691. Mr. Gee's Sermon before the Queen, Aug. 7. 1692. Dr. Stanley's Sermon
at the Consecration of Thomas, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, January 10. 1691/2. The
History of the Roman Conclave: Containing the Rites and Ceremonies used and
observed at the Death, Election, and Coronation of the Pope: As also an Exact
Description of the State of Rome during the Vacancy of that Chair. Together
with a brief Account of the Life of this present Pope, Innocent XII. By W. B.
M. A. 1691. Medicinal Experiments: Or, A Collection of Choice Remedies, for the
most part Simple and easily prepared, which being cheap, may be made
Serviceable to poor Country People. By the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire late
Fellow of the Royal Society. Licensed Nov. 18. 1691. by Sir Robert Southwell,
President of the Royal Society; and the major part thereof Printed before the
Author's Death, who Deceased December. 30th. 1691. To which is annexed a
Catalogue of all his Theological and Philosophical Works, together with the
Order of Time wherein each of them has been Published respectively. In 12o.
1692. Of the Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines to the Corpuscular. By
the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society. In 8o. 1686.
Miracles Works above and contrary to Nature: Or, an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinosa's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Mr. Hobs's
Leviathan, etc. In 4o. 1683. History of the Original and Progress of
Ecclesiastical Revenues. By the Learned P. Simon. 1685.

