THE WAY TO HEAVEN MOST CLEARLY DISCOVERED: AND The manner how to walk in this
Way exactly described.

With a brief Vindication of the Church of England Against all her Enemies.

By Nicholas Philips, late Chaplain to His Majesty's Garrison in the Isles of
Silly.

Isa. 30.21. This is the way, walk in it.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brown, 1681.

To my Dear Mother, The Church of England.
Dearest Mother,
I Esteemed it a great happiness, that I had the honor to have my New Birth
from thy Womb, and to be suckled up from my Cradle with the sweet Milk of thy
sincere Doctrine. And if thou be not ashamed of such a Son, next to my
Christianity, I esteem it my greatest glory to have had such a Mother.

But I esteem it a greater happiness, that I had the Grace given me to stick to
thee in thy adversity, and not to leave thee, nor to turn from following after
thee, when thou were turned from a Naomy into a Marah, and all thy beauty and
pleasantness was changed into deformity and sorrow.

But O I esteem it my greatest happiness, that upon the turning of thy
Captivity, and the recovering of thy pristine Beauty and Splendor, thou have
not cockered me with thy Smiles and Favors (Prosperity being of all estates
the most dangerous Enemy unto Piety) but kept me under with thy Frowns and
Censures, the Furnance of Affliction, always causing the Fire of Piety to burn
the brighter.

And though the unkindness of Friends wound deeper than do the Swords of
Enemies; yet as no opposition of Foe could, so no unkindness of Friend shall,
divorce me from thee. And I am as unseparably devoted to thee, as Ruth was unto
her Naomy; The Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but Death part thee and
me. And I am immutably,

Thy Dutiful and Obedient, Though Unworthy Son, Nich. Philips.

The Way to Heaven clearly Discovered, etc.
Acts 2. 47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.


THese words are the conclusion of the History, which St. Luke gives us, of the
first gathering of the Holy Catholic Church by the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior, immediately upon his glorious Ascension into Heaven, and the gracious
Descension of the Holy Ghost upon them at Jerusalem upon the day of Pentecost.

Christ's Church like a grain of Mustard Seed, unto which he compares it in the
Gospel, from a small Seed grew up by d^grees into so great a tree, that it was
able in a short time, to afford shelter and protection to the Fouls of the Air,
unto such as from all parts of the world, unto which the Air lies open, should
repair unto it: And according to the prediction of the Gospel Prophet Esaias chapter
60. ult. his little one soon became a thousand, and his small one a great
Nation.

Christ at the first Gathering of his Church called only the twelve Apostles,
Mat. 10. Afterward, he enlarged their number, by adding to them the 70
Disciples, Luke 10. After his glorious Ascension into Heaven, and when the
Church was met together, for the choosing of an Apostle, into the room of the
Traitor Judas, we find them increased to the number of an hundred and twenty,
Acts 1.15. But upon the gracious Descension of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles
at Jerusalem upon the day of Pentecost, we find it to grow up so fast that on
that very day as is testified here, v. 41. no less than 3000 Souls were added
unto it.

And these 3000, being by the Apostles miraculous speaking of all Languages,
gathered from out of all Nations under Heaven, were Primitiae Ecclesiae
Catholicea, The First Fruits of the Holy Catholic Church. Hitherto the Church
had been national, and singular, confined within the limits of the Jewish
Nation, with whom God dealt better than with other people, gave his word unto
Jacob, his Statutes and Ordinances unto to Israel, Psalm. 147.19. But from
henceforth it grew to be Catholic and Universal, extending it self into all
Lands, and consisting of the Faithful in all Nations, who though divided in
body, are united in Soul, knit together by Faith, as the Members of a Natural
Body are by joints and sinews in one Communion and Fellowship, in the Mystical
Body of Christ, having all one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5.

And that there is no salvation to be obtained by any one, of what people,
nation or Language, of what Age, Sex, or Condition soever, that is not added
unto, and made a Member of this Holy Catholic Church: The sacredly-inspired
penman of the Holy Ghost, St. Luke here assures us, by telling us, That the
Lord added to the Church daily, such as should be saved.

In handling of which sacred Maxim and Position I shall (Grace assisting me)
show you, 1. What the Church is. 2. That Salvation is not to be obtained any
other way than by being added unto it. 3. That the principal Agent in this work
of Salvation is Almighty God, and that it is the Lord that daily adds men unto
the Church. 4. The means and instruments, which God ordinarily makes use of in
this great work of Man's Salvation. 5. And lastly, the means which men, who are
put into the state of Salvation, and added to the Church, must be careful to
use, if they will keep themselves in the Unity and Community of the Church, and
in the state of Salvation. And,


First, Of the Church.

Church is a word of various signification, and in several senses shall we find
it used in holy Scripture; but chiefly it signifies, and mostly it is there
used for the whole number of the Elect, that ever were or ever shall be in the
world, in what place soever, either in Heaven or Earth, they are dispersed. So
that this Holy Catholic Church consists of two principal parts: 1. Of the
Triumphant part in Heaven, where the departed Saints, and such as are loosed
from the burden of the flesh, are rejoicing for the Conquest which they have
gotten over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; a singing continually of
Hallelujahs, of Songs and Psalms, and Thanksgivings unto God, for giving them
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Of the Militant part of Earth,
where the living Saints are still a fighting against the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; a sighing for their manifold frailties, and fleshly corruptions, and
a longing to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.


Now though this Militant Church of Christ be but one body, and Christ says of
his Dove, his undefiled one, That she is but one* the only one of her Mother,
Cant. 6.9. Yet as the vast Ocean, which is but one and the same Concourse of
Waters, has diverse Appellations, changes its Name, and is distinguished by
the several Regions on which it borders; and there is the Spanish Ocean, the
British Ocean, the German Ocean, and which make but one and the same Sea: so
the Holy Catholic Church, which is but one body, has diverse names, and is
distinguished by the several Countries wherein the Members of it reside; and
there is the Greek Church and the Latin Church, the English Church and the
Dutch Church, etc. who though they may differ from each other in some
Circumstantial and Extrafundamental Points of Religion, yet so long as they
agree in the Substantial and Fundamental Points thereof, have all one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, are all but Members of one and the same Holy Catholic
Church. One and the same Sun shoots out from it many Beams of Light, one and
the same Kingdom has in it many Counties, one and the same Tree many Branches,
one and the same Body many Members; so has also one and the same Mystical Body
of Christ, one body but many members, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.20.

Now the true and infallible marks whereby a particular national Church may be
known to be a Member of the Holy Catholic One, are (as our Church of England
has well said in her Articles of Religion, Artic. 19.) The word of God
sincerely preached, and the blessed Sacraments rightly and duly administered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, and in what ever Congregation of men,
professing the Faith of Christ, the word of God is sincerely preached, and the
two Essential Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are
rightly and duly administered according to Christ's Ordinance, by persons
lawfully called, sanctified, and set apart for the work of the Ministry, there
is a true branch of the Holy Catholic Church, and with it may any one that
professes himself a Christian, safely join, and from it must no man that lives
within the bounds and limits thereof presume, to separate himself if he will
obtain Salvation.

And that this Member of the Holy Catholic Church wherein we live, The
national Church of England is such a Church, we need not make use of many words
to prove, since that which is the best of witnesses, Her works most clearly
approve and manifest it. Her Doctrines she confirms not by Traditions, Miracles
or Dreams, by the Decrees of Councils, or Decretals of Popes, but by the Holy
Scriptures, and she says not, Sic dicit Papa; but Sic dicit Dominus. The
blessed Sacraments, she neither sophisticates nor mutilates; neither adds to
them, nor substracts from them. In administering the Sacrament of Baptism, she
makes no mixture of Salt, Spittle, Oil, Milk, etc. but makes use only of pure
Water, and the words of Consecration which Christ himself instituted, Baptizing
with Water, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. In administering of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, she does not make a God of the Bread, and
lift it up for the People to Worship and Adore; nor does she think the Wine too
good, for any but the Priests to drink; but having Blessed and Sanctified both
Elements with the very words of Consecration which Christ himself used, she
according to his Institution and Practice, delivers both Bread and Wine into
the hand of every particular Communicant.

Charged is our Church on the one hand by the Papists with Innovation and
Separation; and on the other hand by the Presbyter and Sectaries, wi h Popery
and Superstition. And I shall crave leave in a word, to vindicate her against
them both.

To the Papists, who charge us with Innovation and Separation, and ask us where
our Church was before Luther's time, we say at Rome, though lying hid there
under a great heap of Popish Trash; and Luther with his Associates did but that
with better success, which others before them had attempted: As the
Berengarians in Italy; the Waldenses in France; the Hussites in Germany; the
Wickliists in England, etc. shake off the Corruptions and Superstitions of the
Romish Innovators; but did not separate from and forsake the Orthodox,
Primitive, Catholic Doctrines of the Church of Rome.

The Church of England holds no other Doctrine than that which the Church of
Rome Primitively did, and which St. Paul taught them in his Epistle unto them,
viz. justification only by the blood of Christ. If upon this Foundation the
Romanists have built up a great heap of Wood, and Hay, and Stubble, added as
things necessary to Salvation, The Adoration of Images, The Invocation of
Saints, The Supremacy of the Pope, The lawfulness of Deposing and Murdering of
Kings, Masses, Merits, Pardons, Purgatory, and a number of the like Trash,
which were never prescribed by God in his Word, never practiced in the Church
of God, no, not in the Church of Rome it self, for the first Five Hundred Years
after Christ, they, and not we, are the Innovators, we separated from them no
farther than they separated from themselves, and their original purity.

Let the Church of Rome return to her self and her original Purity, and though
we will not down on our knees and honor her for our Mother, yet we will run
with open Arms to embrace her, and will own her for our elder Sister. And
though we will not give her a Supremacy over the rest of the National Churches
of Christ, yet we will grant her a primacy in the Church of Christ; and because
Rome was the chief City, and Empress of the World, her Bishop shall have the
first place assigned him in a General Council, if ever the World be so happy as
to have one again.

To the Presbyters and their spawn of Sectaries, who charge us with Popery and
Superstition, and say that we have borrowed most of our Rites and Ceremonies
from the Papists, we say,

That if nothing which the Papists believe and practice is to be believed and
practiced by us, we must go look for a new God, a new Christ, and a new Heaven,
as well as a new Religion; for they believe all the Articles of the Three
Orthodox Creeds, as well as we, hope to be saved by the same Christ, and to go
to the same Heaven that we do.

When the Church of England separated from and renounced the Church of Rome,
she did not separate from, and renounce what she received from the sacred
Scriptures, from the four first general Councels and the Orthodox Fathers of
the Church, but only from what she innovated, was brought in and intruded upon
the Church of late years by the pride, and avarice, the superstition and
fopperies of the Popes and their Consistories, she piously separated the
precious from the vile, winnowed away the Chaff from the Wheat, kept what she
found pious and primitive, but rejected what she found to be superstitious and
novel: Did not cast away both because the one was naught, and under pretense of
reforming utterly deform Religion, did not run from one extreme into another,
from Idolatry and the worshipping of Images into profaneness, and the not
vouchsafing to worship God himself from a bad religion into no Religion.

She kept such a Decorum in her carriage, that when she repudiated and cast off
the too too gaudy dress of the Babylonish Harlot, she leapt not straight with
some of her Neighbor Sisters into the contrary extreme of a slovingly Garb,
but having respect unto the Apostolical Canon, 1 Cor. 14. ult. she ordered all
things in the public worship of God, to be done decently and in order,

The Ceremonies used in our Church are not many and burdensome, but few and
significant, such as tend to Edification and instruction, are not Popish and
Superstitious, but Pious and Primitive, have their grounds in the Scripture;
the Approbation and Practice of Antiquity, and the Church of Christ in all Ages.

Come, come, be not more nice than wise, my over precise and scrupulous
Brethren; but become ye now at length wise unto Salvation. There is a better
way sure to fly from one extreme than to run into the other, even to embrace
the golden means that lie between: What the Church of Rome, as Popish, has
innovated, and is in her Erroneous and Superstitious, reject with us and
forsake: But what the Church of Rome, as it was Christian, and a Depository of
the Sacred Truth, has received from the Sacred Scriptures and Reverend
Antiquity, and is in her Pious and Primitive, embrace with us and practice. And
let us become one, join hearts and hands, as well in practicing the Virtues we
find in the Church of Rome, as in opposing the vices and errors which we find
in it.

Surely they who, for such things as are of an indifferent nature, and which
every particular Church has power to alter and change, to impose or abrogate,
separate from our National Church of England, which I have proved to be a true
Member of the Holy Catholic Church, expose their Salvation to a great hazard;
for out of the Church; as says my second position, there is no salvation to be
obtained; the Lord adding unto the Church daily such as shall be saved.

That the Church is Via Regia, the King of Kings Highway to Heaven, and that
there is no way for any one to obtain Salvation, but by being added to it, is
most plainly demonstrated unto us by that which St. Peter 1 Ep. 3.20. calls the
Type and Figure of it, Noah's Ark: For as all the People that inhabited the Old
World, excepting only those Eight Persons that entered into the Ark, perished
in the Flood of Waters which God brought on the Earth; So all the people of the
New World, who enter not into the true Ark, the Church, shall be consumed in
that dreadful fire, wherewith God will one day burn up both the Heaven and the
Earth. And therefore Baptism which is the Sacrament of initiation, the door
whereby we enter into the Church, is by St. Peter Ib. v. 21. said to save us,
as the Ark did those of the Old World that entered into it.

Illustrated also is this Truth unto us in Scripture by diverse apt Similitudes
and Comparisons.

Called is the Church, Col. 1.18. A Body, of which Christ is the Head, and
every true Believer a Member in particular: Now as the Head does not impart his
influences, and perform the Office of a Head to any Member that is separated
and divided from it: So Christ will not impart the Divine Influences of his
Saving Grace, and perform the Office of a Savior unto any one, but only unto
such as are united and added to his Body the Church.

Compared is the Church to a Household, and called Ephesians. 2.19. The Household of
God; now as the Pater Familias, and Master of a Household, though he may out of
charity sometimes give unto others, yet makes provision only for those of his
own Family; so though God out of his immense bounty, and gracious goodness,
imparts his general Mercies unto all creatures, preserves both Man and Beasts;
causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall on good and bad, just and
unjust; yet his special favors, and singular graces he reserves only for those
of his own Family the Church. He is good to Israel, but chiefly unto those in
Israel who are of a pure heart, says the Prophet, Psalm. 73.1. He is the
Savior of all men, but especially of those that believe, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.10.

Likened is the Church to a City, and called Heb. 12.22. The City of the Living
God. Now as a man cannot be protected by the strength of a City, and partake of
the privileges and immunities thereof, unless he put himself within the Walls,
and become a Citizen: So a Man cannot be protected by that strong City which
has Salvation appointed for its Walls and Bulwarks, but only such a one as is
admitted into the New Jerusalem, and become a Fellow Citizen with the Saints.

Compared is the Church to a Mother, and called Gal. 4.26. The Mother of all
True Believers. Now as no one can live a natural life without a Mother to
conceive, bring forth, suckle and nourish him; so no man can live a spiritual
life, the life of grace here, and of glory hereafter, who is not begotten of
the immortal seed of the Word, of his Mother the Church, regenerated and
newborn, who is not fed and nourished up in sound Doctrine by the sincere Milk
which issues forth of her two Breasts, the Books of the Old and New Testament:
And in this sense it is a trite and common saying among the Ancient Fathers,
That he shall not have God for his Father, who has not the Church for his
Mother.

Likened is the Church by our Savior, John 15.1. to a Vine, of which as he
there tells us he is the heart, his Elect the Branches, now as that Branch
cannot bear fruit except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, says he to his
Disciples there, v. 4. except ye abide in me, intimating thereby most plainly,
that unless we be ingrasted into Christ the true Vine, and added to his Church,
we can have no true hopes of obtaining Life and Salvation through him. Since it
is confirmed then unto us by such a cloud of Witnesses, that out of the Church
there is no Salvation to be obtained.

1. Gross and absurd is the opinion of those Libertines who think a man may be
saved in any Religion; So he live an outward moral civil Life. The Jew in his
Judiasm. The Turk in his Mahometism. The Heathen in his Paganism. They may as
well say that a man might be saved in the Flood out of the Ark, by climbing up
to the top of some House, or Tree, or Mountain. That a man being separated from
the body may live, a branch Cut off from a Tree bear fruit.

2. Fearful and dangerous is the estate of those Athiests and sensual
worldlings, who neither regard any Church, nor think on any religion at all,
but live like beasts always grazing in the earth and never so much as lift up
their hearts or eyes to heaven.

Ravenous Ravens may, I grant, find pleasure and present relief, out of the
Ark. And profane Esauites, may think themselves happy enough in having plenty
of belly cheer and temporal blessings. But the innocent spotless Dove when out
of the Ark can find no place any where to set the sole of her feet on till she
return thither again. And a true Israelite when he has with King Solomon tried
all the things in the world, pleasures, riches, honor, will in the end
conclude with him, that all worldly things are vanity and vexation of Spirit.
And that there is no true content, nothing that can satisfy a man's mind, no
hope of Salvation to be had any where, but in the true Ark of Gods Church.

3. Damnable is the estate, and on the very brink of hells pit are the feet of
those Factious and Schismatical Spirits, who out of pride and singularity of
heart, or because they disgust some of the outward external ceremonies of our
Church, forsake the Society of the faithful, separate themselves from the
lawful allowed Church assembly, and repair to Conventicles and private
meetings, where having no lawful allowed priests to officiate, they cannot have
the word of God sincerely Preached, nor the Sacraments rightly administered
according to Christ's Ordinance; for though it be granted lawful for private
persons within the limits of their own family to open and expound the Scripture
according to their talent; yet he who without a lawful call and mission shall
presume in a public Congregation to handle and expound the word. Though he
handle it never so well and expound it never so truly, yet does he not preach
nor is his Doctrine sufficiently qualified for the Salvation of Souls. For how
can they Preach except they be sent, demands the Apostle, Romans 10.15. proving
most plainly by this his interrogative that effectual Preaching, such as is
sufficiently qualified for the Salvation of Souls, is the proper work of the
Ministry, of those that are lawfully Called and Sent forth to execute this
public function in the Church. And no man, as says the Apostle, Heb. 5.4.
may take this hence to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron
(i.e.) unless he have as Aaron had, not only an inward call and inclination of
the Spirit, but also an outward one, and a solemn ordination to the sacred
function.

4. Since there is no Salvation to be had out of the Church, and the Lord
adds daily unto the Church such as shall be saved! Oh how infinitely are they
bound to be thankful unto God, and always to praise and bless his holy name,
who find themselves to be placed in the state of Salvation, or made visible
Members of the holy Catholic Church; for it is not by their own natural
inclination, nor by the care or piety either of their natural or spiritual
Fathers, (though these be good helps and means) that men are placed in the
state of Salvation and added to the Church, but by the exceeding goodness,
mercy and grace of God. And it is as says my third position, the Lord that
daily adds unto the Church such as shall be saved. God is the principal agent
in the great work of men's Salvation, he is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, the beginner and perfecter of every good work, yea he that works in us
both to will and to do of his good pleasure, as says the Apostle, Phil. 2.13.

Rebecca may look the Venison, but it is Isaac that must give the blessing;
Paul may plant and Apollo may water, but it is God that gives the increase. He
he it is, who persuades wild Japhet to come and dwell in the tents of gentle
Sem, that being men, as the Apostle phraseth it, that were born Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers and Foreigners, to become fellow Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God.

Now this work of man's regeneration, of his being begotten a new in the Gospel,
and added to the Church, God works not extroardinarily, by miracle, but
ordinarily by means. And the ordinary means which God makes use of for the
perfecting of this great work, we may find here in this Chapter, by the means
which he used for the making of this great addition to the Church of 3000
Souls, to be the word preached, faith to apprehend and belive it, and baptism
to confirm and Seal it.

These primitive Converts had the word preached unto them by Saint Peter: And
being convicted in their Consciences of the Truth of it, they believed it. And
applying themselves to Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles for advice what
to do that they might be saved, they were prescribed by them the baptism of
repentance for the remission of their sins. Repent, and be baptized every one
of you in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins, v. 38. And they
as it is testified, v. 41. thankfully embraced his advice, gladly received his
word, were immediately baptized, and on that very day there was an addition
made unto the Church of no less than 3000 Souls.

And of these initiating grounding Ordinances and Graces I would more largely
discourse, but that I remember you are persons, who being born of Christian
Parents, and within the pale of the Church, are already by Baptism added to the
Church, and made visible Members thereof; and therefore it is more seasonable
and necessary to show you the way and means which you must be careful to use,
if you will keep your selves in the Church and the State of Salvation; and this
if you will do, you must take these Primitive Christians here at the 42. v. for
your pattern; For they being by Baptism added to the Church, continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and
in Prayer.

And of these Four precious, preservative, confirming Christian Duties I shall
now by Gods gracious assistance orderly discourse.

And first of the Apostles Doctrine: By the Doctrine of the Apostles is here
signified that form of sound Doctrine, concerning Christ and his being the true
Messiah promised unto the Fathers, which the blessed Apostles first viva voce
in their Sermons and Harangues delivered unto the people, and afterward for
the instruction of the Church unto the worlds end, wrote in their Gospels and
Epistles.

This contains in it all things necessary unto Salvation, both as to the
credenda, and what we are to believe; and to the agenda, and what we are to do.
And he who being by Baptism received into, and added to the Militant Church on
earth, receives nothing as an Article of Faith, and recessary to be believed,
but what can immediately be induced out of the holy Scriptures; and who in
matters of Obedience resigns up himself wholly to the practice of those Rules
and Directions, which are given us in the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, shall not fail in due
time to be made a glorious Member of the Church Triumphant in Heaven. And able
are holy Scriptures to make a man wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is
in Christ Jesus, as it is written, 2 Timothy 3.15.

Surely he who to Heaven will be directed aright, must neither be guided by the
false fire of the Conclave or the Conventicle, must neither rely on unwritten
Traditions, nor on unwarranted Revelations; but must make that bright shining
and unerring light, Gods holy Word, his only Director and Guide, must neither
add to it, nor diminish from it; must neither turn to the right hand and do
more, nor to the left hand and do less, than is enjoined him in the holy
Scriptures. And accursed be he, yea though he be an Angel from Heaven, that
shall presume to preach any other Doctrine, contrary to that which the holy
Apostles have delivered unto us, says S. Paul, Gal. 1.8.

A Treasury full of all manner of precious Stones is Gods holy Word, and there
is no one of what condition or quality, sex or age soever, but has his
particular Rule given him in the Scripture, and may if he come to the hearing
or reading of Gods holy Word, with an heart humbled and willing to be
instructed, find what he in his particular vocation and calling must especially
do and perform, what he must especially shun and avoid.

And it is indeed the Reformation of those Abuses which we commit in our
particular Callings, wherein the power of Grace and Religion does most
especially appear. Religion, Religion, my Brethren, is not a thing merely of
public and common profession; it dwells not only in Churches and Temples; no,
it has a principal respect to the well ordering of our particular and personal
Callings; it says to us as Christ did to the man in the Gospel, whom he
dispossessed of a Legion of Devils, Go home to thy House, and let thy behavior
and carriage there, evidence and show forth the truth and sincerity of thy
Religion.

We read Deuteronomy. 11.20. that the Jews were commanded to write Gods Law not only
on the Doors of their Temples, but also on the Doors of their Houses, that so
they might meditate and think on it to do it, not only on the Sabbath and holy
Solemnities, when they were called upon to go up into the House of the Lord;
but all the days of their life, and as often as they went in and out at their own
Doors; that so they might learn to regulate their personal Employments, and the
works of their particular Callings, according to those Directions which are
given by God in his holy Law. And it is indeed according to the ordering of our
selves in our particular Callings, that God will proceed with us at the last
day; and when summoned to appear before his dreadful Tribunal, we shall not be
called to give an account of other men's Stewardships, but of our own, and how
we have demeaned our selves in that state of life, wherein he has been pleased
to place us.

Surely Brethren, if we who have the Gospel printed amongst us, bibles at home
in our Houses, and I hope read therein every day: If we who have the Gospel
preached amongst us, and may if we be not sloathful and negligent on every
Lords day, hear it expounded and applied in our Churches and Synagogues, would
instead of curiously inquiring out of it with S. Peter, what is other men's duty
and required of them; set our selves with S. Paul to inquire out of it what is
our duty, and required of us in that station wherein God has placed us; and
set our selves sincerely about the doing of it, we should most clearly manifest
our selves to be true Members of his Militant Church on earth, and should not
fail in due time to be made glorious Members of his Church Triumphant in Heaven.

The second thing which you must learn of those primitive Christians, if after
you have been added to the Church, you will continue and preserve your selves
in the Church, is to continue steadfastly in the Apostles Fellowship. By
Fellowship with the Apostles is here signified conformity unto them, in those
laudable and decent Rites and Ceremonies, Customs, and Orders, that were
practiced by them in their Church Assemblies and public Meetings. In which
whosoever refuses to have Community and Fellowship with that Church, into
which he is admitted by Baptism, and of which he is made a Member, is void not
only of all Religion, but even of all Reason and common Civility.

The actions of Religion and Divine Worship are twofold, either Essential and
ordinate, or circumstantial and subordinate.

1. The essential and ordinate parts of divine Worship are Faith and Holiness
of Life, and our Rule for this must be Gods Holy Word, and we must receive
nothing as an Article of Faith, a thing absolutely necessary unto salvation,
which cannot be immediately deduced out of it.

2. The circumstantial and subordinate Actions of Religion, are the time, the
place, the vesture, the gesture, which are required to be observed in our
performance of Church Duties; and these things being not absolutely determined
of God in his Holy Word, are left to the determination of the Church: And God
in that general warrant which he has given the Church, 1 Cor. 14. ult. Let all
things be done decently and in order, has empowered her to cut out and shape
each particular decency and order, as will best suit with the condition, the
comeliness, and the edification of every particular National Church: and it is
no more necessary that all Churches should observe one and the same Rites and
Ceremonies, than it is that all Nations should wear one and the same kind of
clothes.

Surely these Orders and Ordinances, Rites and Ceremonies, which by our lawful
Superiors, we are enjoined to observe in our. Church meetings and Assemblies,
though they cannot immediately be deduced out of Gods Holy Word; yet if they be
not contrary unto it, but serve for decency and comeliness in the service of
God, are part of those Ordinances of men, unto which we are commanded by St
Peter, 1 Ephesians. 2.13. to submit for the Lords sake: And therefore though pride
or arrogance, contempt or neglect, to violate and break the established Order
of the Church, is to be guilty of no less crime than Disobedience to the
Commands of God; Indeed the word (...) which our Translators here render
Fellowship, is the very word, which St. Paul, in the 1 Cor. 16.3. uses to
fignify the Collections and Comributions, which were made for the poor, and
that in this sense it is to be taken here, is the opinion of the incomparable,
judicious Dr. Hammond in his Annotations on that place.

Piously, indeed with great praise to themselves, and much comfort to the
afflicted, Members of Christ were Collections for the poor ordained by the
Apostles to be used in their Church meetings, As I have given order unto the
Church of Galatia, Even so do ye (says St. Paul) to his Corinthians, 1 Cor.
16.1 on the first day of the week, Let every one lay by of his store as God
has prospered him for the poor.

And though the practice of this Apostolical, Primitive, and most Christian
duty be strictly enjoined in our Liturgy, to be used on every Lords day, and
solemn Festival, and after the Sermon is ended, the Priest is required to
return to the Lords Table; and thereby reading some Select portions of
Scripture, to stir up the people to acts of Almsgiving, Charity and Piety; yet
to the eternal stain of the Piety and Charity of our Priests and people be it
spoken, it is but in very few places observed.

Many of our Priests who seem to be zealous observers of the Liturgy of our
Church, are notwithstanding to save their own purses, and because they will not
give good example unto others, very loose in practicing this principal part of
it, and rarely or never (unless upon some extraordinary occasion) do they stir
up their people to Almsgiving, and Charity, exposing themselves thereby to that
woe which our savior in the Gospel pronounced against the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23.23. for their strict observing the lesser matters of the
law, the tything of Mint, Annise, and Cummin, and their neglect of the
weightier matters thereof, the practice of Judgment, Mercy and Faith.

And though most of our people think that their ready and cheerful paying of
these rates, and taxes, which are required of them, for the relief of the poor
and the repairing of the Church, will excuse them for not giving any thing at
the Offertory; yet they must know that in paying these rates and taxes there is
nothing of Religion, more then obedience unto the Law, and it is no more than
Turks and Pagans, if they lived amongst us, should pay, or than the Heriticks
and Schismatics that do live amongst us, do pay. God approves of no forced
oblations and naught but Free Will offerings will please him: and therefore if
you will find favor in his sight, and be accepted when you present your selves
before him, you must not come empty handed, but must bring your presents with
you when you come into his Courts, says David, Psalm. 96.8. your gifts when you
come to his Altar, says Christ, Matthew. 5.13.

Never, Oh never think brethren, that God who has given you all that you have,
will accept at your hands those cheap sacrifices of Prayer, Praise, or Hearing,
that lost you but a little lip and ear-labour. You know who it was that said,
It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive. And there is assuredly
more of Christianity and true Religion in one merciful tender hearted,
compassionate act of mercy and charity, than there is in the fruitless hearing
of an hundred Sermons, or in the vocal uttering a thousand Prayers and Praises.

And verily, if men would but spare something out of their weekly superfluities
and idle expenses, to bring with them on Gods day, to Gods house, there to
offer it up unto him as a Testification of their gratitude, and thankfulness
unto him for the many Mercies he has bestowed upon them, they would find it so
far from impairing, that it would improve their estates, and draw down a
blessing upon all the works of their hands: The

3. Thing that we must learn of these Primitive Christians, if we will keep and
preserve our selves in the Church and in the State of Salvation, is to be
constant Guests at Gods holy Table, and to continue steadfast in the breaking of
bread, for they, etc.

By breaking of bread is here signified the holy Communion and the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, in the Celebration of which, for our better apprehension of
his Death and Passion, and to set him forth as it were evidently crucified
before our Eyes, our Lord commanded that bread should be broken, and Wine
poured out, and delivered to the Church and Congregation of the Faithful.

Breaking of bread and eating of bread are often, I grant in the Old Testament
used to signify, an ordinary and common meal; but in the New Testament,
especially after our Saviors instituting of his holy Supper, it is used to
signify the Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of our Lord; and in this
sense it is not only used here, but also in Acts 20.7. And in this sense it is
still used by some of our Sectaries, who usually express the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, by the terms of breaking of bread.

And verily the thankful remembrance of his Death, which Christ has required
of us, so often as we eat of this Brend, and drink of this Cup, should to
manifest the gratitude that lodges in our heart and that we always carry about
in our Bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus be always (i.e.) as often as
opportunity is offered, celebrated in us.

Seldom met the Fathers of our Faith, the Apostles, and primitive Christians
(especially on the Lords Day) but they had with the Word preached and Prayer,
the Holy Sacrament also administered among them: And in imitation of this
Apostolical primitive practice, it is the constitution of our Mother the Church
of England, That the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, should in Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches (where there are many Priests and Deacons, who being
Christ's menial Servants ought chiefly to commemorate his Death) should on every
Lords Day and Festival be administered, in Oppidal and great Congregations
monthly, in Rural and the least Assemblies quarterly: And to mind the people of
this most Christian Duty, and to show his readiness to administer, if the
people were piously disposed to receive the Holy Sacrament, is the Priest by
the Rubric of our Church enjoined on every Lords Day and Festival to stand at
the Communion Table, and there to read all the Communion Service appointed for
that Day.

No greater testimony assuredly can any man give of his Christianity, and that
he is truly thankful unto God for giving his Son to dye for his sins, and
hopeful by virtue of his death to escape eternal death and damnation, than when
he finds joy and delight and spiritual pleasure, in that great mystery of our
Religion, the often communicating and feeding on the Body and Blood of his
Savior, the only means which he has ordained, to make us always mindful of
what he did and suffered for us. This this, the truly Pious man wishes, might
not only be his yearly, quarterly, and monthly food; but even his daily bread,
and he is even sick of spiritual hunger when he comes to the Church and finds
not a Communion there.

And surely they who when the Holy Sacrament is administered in that particular
Church and Congregation, whereof they are members, refuse (without some lawful
cause, and impediment) to come and Communicate with the Church, ipso facto
Excommunicate, and put themselves, out of the state of Salvation. The,

4. Thing which we must learn of these primitive Christians here, is to
continue steadfast in prayer. For they, etc.

By Prayer, is not here meant private prayer, the prayers that are composed by
private persons, and said in private places; but by prayer is here meant
public or common Prayer, the Apostles Prayer, the Churches Prayer; such
Prayers as by the Apostles, and their Successors the Governors of the Church
are composed for the use of the Church, with which all the Congregation are
well acquainted, in which they may all safely join, and unto which they may all
cheerfully say, Amen.

Prayer is indeed a Duty unto the performance of which God has often in
Scripture made promise of Salvation, but no Prayers are so acceptable unto him,
or so pleasant with him, as are public and common prayers: And never are his
ears so open to hear, nor his mercy so ready to grant requests, as when he is
called upon in the voice of his Church, and all the Congregation of the
faithful join together in prayer with one Accord, as did the Apostles, Acts
1.14. when with one voice, and one heart, with one mouth, and with one mind,
with the same words, and the same Spirit they presented their Supplications
unto him.

And though some of our Priests, who are more observant of the Peoples humor,
than of the Constitutions of the Church, and seek rather to gain applause to
themselves, than glory to their God, use according to the Geneva Mode, a
private spirited Prayer of their own conception, in the public Congregation,
before their Sermon; yet in so doing they not only cross the practice of the
primitive Church, which never allowed any thing to be said before the Sermon,
but the Lords Prayer, or gemina Salutatio, but also the Orders and
Constitutions of our National Church, which instead of allowing any such thing,
expressly forbids it in her 55 Canon: no private spirited prayer then being
allowed to be used in our Church, no such Prayer can be used, without wilful
and manifest contempt and disobedience, which as we are assured, 1 Samuel 15.22.
will mar the best of Sacrifices and make them unacceptable unto God.

And as no Prayers ought to be said in the public Congregation, but the
Apostles Prayer, the Churches Prayer, Common Prayer; so in the performance of
this Duty, we must be steadfast and permanent, and with these primitive
Christians, continue steadfastly in prayer: And surely such an Apostolical, such
a primitive, such a religious way of serving God does our Church prescribe in
her Liturgy, that she endeavors to make our whole Life Angelical and Divine;
for it not only prescribes a Form of Prayer to be used; on Sundays and
Holydays, but a Form to be used on every day of the week. And the Curate that
ministers in every particular Church or Chapel of this Nation, is bound by
the Rubris of the Church, daily Morning and Evening to say Common Prayer in the
Church wherein he Ministers.

To be the Lords Remembrancer daily morning and evening, to mind him of the
peoples wants, and to intercede for them, is, what ever the world thinks of it,
the chief and principal part of the Priestly office: But alas such Priests are
here now a days as rare to be found, as black swans: And the world had not more
cause of old, to complain of unpreaching Ministers, than she has now of
unministring Preachers, most Ministers contenting themselves with a single
preachment on the Lords day, altogether neglecting the principal parts of their
Priests office, daily morning and evening to offer up unto God the Prayers and
Praises of the Church in behalf of the people.

I know the Priests are wont to lay the fault on the People, and to say that
they will not come to join with them in Prayer, on the week days; and the
People again retort it back upon the Priests, and say that they will not be
constant and continue in the practice of this duty: But to speak truth to the
shame of both parties, it is from the profaness and impiety, the worldliness
and wickedness that now a days harbors in the hearts, both of Pastor and
People, that this Heavenly employment is altogether neglected amongst us, and
men can find time for the doing of any thing, rather than the service of God.
But let him go (what ever he be) both for a worldly and a wicked one too, who
thinks he can make better use of his time, than to bestow it upon God, and his
service, or that any part of his time is better spent, than that which is spent
in his house in Prayer and Praises.

A man may I grant build a Church in his bosom, and serve God in his heart,
though he never cloth his thoughts with words, and he does so whenever with
holy Hannah he prays silently in his heart unto God. A man may build a Church
at his beds side, and he does so, whenever he does humbly prostrate himself in
prayer before God. A man may make a Church of his House, and he does so as often
as he there with his Family offers up the Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise unto
God. But oh! it is the highest exaltation, the noblest Devotion of a truly
pious Soul, when it praises God in his Sanctuary, praises him in the
Congregation of his Saints; and he is with David, Psalm. 122.1. Even ravished
with joy and gladness, whenever he is called upon to go into the House of the
Lord to perform this.

Pray, pray, pray, my beloved Brethren, always, in all places, and upon all
occasions, but by no means neglect ye the public Prayers of the Church. Carry
always about within you good thoughts and pious meditations, and live ye holily
and well, so shall you make a Temple of your bodies, and have always a Church
within you. Govern well your own families, and bring up your Children and
Servants, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and let the Burnt offering
of prayer, and praise be daily Morning and Evening, offered up there; so shall
you always dwell in Hallowed ground, and have with Philemon, a Church at home
in your own house. But O let your feet never fail to to tread Gods Courts, and
to frequent his house of prayer, when ever public common Prayer (though
nothing else) be said there, so shall you manifest your selves, to be Gods
menial and household servants; and shall not fail to partake of the blessings
which he has promised, Psalm. 84.5, to those that dwell in his house and are
always praising him, Gloria in excelsis Deo.

FINIS.

