THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor COMPLETE: IN DEFENSE of the FIRST PART,
AGAINST Two ANSWERS, One Written by Mr L'ESTRANGE, CALLED The Papist in
Masquerade, etc. And another By an Unknown Hand.

LONDON: Printed for I. Graves, and are to be sold by most Booksellers. 1681.

THE PREFACE.
UPon perusal of a Pamphlet written by so ingenious an Author as Mr.
L'Estrange, called, The Papist in Masquerade, in answer to the Character of a
Popish Successor, my expectation was strangely frustrated, when I found the
Book look more like a Poor Robin's Almanac than an Answer, the major part of
the Pamphlet being a kind of Red-letter Calendar in two Columes, with the
Popish Worthies on one side, and the Republican ones on the other; as Raviliac
on that hand and Oliver over against him; and so Mariana and Knox, Pius Quintus
and Buchanan, Guido Faux and Hugh Peter's, etc. I confess, had he designed to
publish the Villainies both of a Popish and a Republican Conspiracy, and after a
plain demonstration of the Government's being really undermined by both those
threatening Enemies, had given his Country some light to steer in the golden
Medium between both those fatal Extremes, his Intention had been honest, and he
had writ like a Patriot: But alas! that is none of his Province; his Talent is
otherwise employed: for the sole drift of his Book was not in the least to
expose Popery any farther than to make the Fanatical and Jesuitical Principles
agree; for take his Opinion abstracted from that Design, and his whole Book
has no other aim but to make all our dangers of Popery and a Popish Successor,
and all the whole Plot against the King, Religion, and Government, (to use his
own Phrase, p. 69.) but a painted Lion upon a Wall; and the Prosecutors of that
Plot, and the Opposers of those Dangers, a real Bed of Vipers. In fine, the
main purpose he drives at, is to make an exact Parallel between this Age and
that of 40 and 41, etc. And that he may so do, you must allow him this great
Fundamental, That all the Sticklers against Popery and a Popish Successor, are
Fanatics; and that all Fanatics hate both the King and Kingly Government, and
are tooth and nail downright Republicans. Upon this Basis his whole Fabric
stands.

But to rectify his Mistake in this great point: Have not four Parliaments
successively been satisfied in the truth of a Popish Plot for the murder of the
King, and subversion of the Government, and jealous of the dangers of Popery,
like honest Patriots mustered all their strength to prevent it? If the Plot
were only a Bugbear, how comes it that the Wisdom of the Nation in four
Parliaments together, has not discovered the Cheat? or if they do know the
Cheat and act themselves the Legerdemain, and so make the prosecution of the
Plot but a Presbyterian Artifice to inflame a Kingdom, in order to playing the
game of 41 ore again, as his impious detractions would insinuate, I would ask
him, first, How comes it to pass that all the Plot-Evidence have all along so
constantly adhered to their Attestations, and that too in so beggarly and
starving a Cause, after such vast and tempting Proffers for retracting of their
Evidence; and vaster Rewards, no doubt, they might have, upon the discovery of
such a Presbyterian Cheat, if it were one, not only as a Ransom for so many
Great men's lives, but likewise from the greatest hands of the Nation that would
desire nothing more than such a Discovery? Secondly, I would ask him how it
came about that the first of these four Parliaments grew so vehement against
the Plot? they, I hope, he will confess were a Protestant and a Church of England
Parliament; they were elected Members just after the King's Restoration, in all
the height of the Ecstasy of England, when Majesty and Monarchy were the
Peoples Darlings even to Idolatry, at a time when the Horrors of the Civil
Wars were fresh in their memories, when the very thought of Presbyterian or
Independent Commonwealths, with Rumpers and Rumps, were as detestable as Hell!
That Parliament, I hope, thus chosen and thus qualified, he will allow had no
Presbyterian Gall in their Veins, and no Canker of 41, being the very men that
on the contrary made the Laws against all Dissenters, and in all their Acts
throughout maintained the Dignity and Glory of the present Church of England;
and yet this Parliament, as little Presbyterian as it was, gave the first
stroke against the Plot; as I remember, 'twas they that discovered those swarms
of Papists that had infested the King's Guards, and his Court it self, and
crept into almost all Offices of Trust, and by whom planted, I need not tell
him: And as I remember, those were the very men that created the Test, and made
the Reception of the Protestant Sacrament, and the Renunciation of the
Idolatries of Rome, an Introduction to all Employments, on purpose to sweep out
those Locusts: Nay, those were the very men that removed our Popish Heir
presumptive from his Admiralty, and all other his Preferments; and no doubt had
they continued still, would have very little varied from the true and
honorable English Genius of the last: So that without shamming this inveteracy
only upon Dissenters, there has been a Protestant People, a Protestant House
of Commons, and Protestant Lords, (Protestant Lord Bishops only excepted) that
have struggled both against Popery and a Popish Succession. So that upon Mr.
L'Estrange's Argument that the present Dangers of England lie only in a
Republican Conspiracy, and that the present state of 80 and 81, is but a kind
of transmigration of the Spirit of 41 and 42, in order to the revival of the
old Game of 48; it is not only the Dissenters but the Protestants are in the
Confederacy; and so the whole Nation is in a Spirit of Rebellion, (the innocent
Papists only excepted:) that is, There Is a Plot lies at every door but the
right. However, the Pamphleteers of this Age will not be so satisfied: for it is
the great Maxim they all lay down, Every man that is for excluding a Popish
Successor is a Fanatic, and every Fanatic (as I told you) a Republican. But
to convince 'em, if they are not incorrigible, that it is not only a Fanatical
Exclusion, What if I picked out even of the very protesting Lords themselves,
several of them of famous and exemplary Loyalty, so far from the possibility
either of Fanatics or Republicans, that they have been Caviliers and Loyalists
through all our late Troubles; one or two of them that have been Generals in
the King's service; a third, whose Father lost his head for him; a fourth, that
for asserting the King's Right in the Field, had no other Reprieve from a
Gallows but his Majesty's Return; a fifth, that beside the constant sums sent
over to the King in his Exile, after a total sequestration of his Estate,
pawned even his last Stake, his Plate, to serve him; with several other
Sufferings that many others of 'em underwent: And yet the Scriblers of these
times shall tell you there is never a Mothers son of them all that loves either
the King or the Government, but is a rank Fanatic; for the very thought of an
Exclusion turns ipso momento Fanaticism. So that it will be worth a man's while
to give the world the true definition of a Fanatic, and a full interpretation
of the word. Formerly in old times, a Fanatic so called, signified an
Enthusiastic in Religion, one that pretended to Inspiration and new Light, or
had a picque against a Liturgy or Surplice, or the like: But a Fanatic of 79
and 80, is quite another thing, and the word of a quite different
signification; for now, He that values the safety of himself and his Posterity,
he that thinks he has an Estate and Liberty worth preserving, a Country worth
saving, a Religion worth defending, and indeed a God worth serving, is a
FANATIC.

But 'twill not be amiss to instance the validity of some of those Comparisons
he makes between the present Iealousies and those of the late times. Mr.
L'Estrange, p. 21. says Earl before the Commons, Nov. 5. 1644. Readiness Sons are
not spared, no nor may Agag or Benhadad, though themselves Kings: Zimri and
Cosbi, though Princes of the people, must be pursued into their Tents. This is
the way to consecrate your selves to God. Upon which he remarks, And what was
the ground of all this Fierceness, but a Popish King, though the glory of the
Reformation, for want of a Popish Successor?

So that here lies the Analogy betwixt our Fears and theirs. Then the
groundless Fierceness lay against a pretended imaginary Popish King, though in
truth the Glory of the Reformation; and now the fierceness lies against a real
Popish Subject, that may be our King, the very Infamy of all Apostasy, when
degenerated to such principles, and yet born of such a Father. And afterward
in the same page, he says, Mr. L'E. This is enough to convince the world that
the very sound of Popery will do the business as well without a ground as with
it; and whoever goes to alarm the people upon this desperate point, had need
give good security for his Allegiance.

And what is all this, but to tell us, because a Bugbear frighted us once,
therefore a real Fiend must not fright us now? So that his whole Discourse can
be reduced to no other heads but these.

First. It makes the most uncharitable inferences that it is possible for Malice
or Ill Nature to invent. Because a Judas once kissed and betrayed, and a Joab
embraced and stabbed, therefore no man must ever kiss or embrace without a
treacherous and murderous intention. The hatching of the old Republican
Conspiracy under the fictitious fears of approaching Popery, must now make the
just fears of the true danger of Popery equally guilty of the same Treason and
Combination.

Secondly, He cuts off the whole Right and Liberty of the Subject at one blow.
Because a knot of Achitophels once pretended Grievances where none was, to
accomplish their own wicked purposes; therefore no Subject shall or may
petition or vote, though in a legal Parliamentary way, for the redress of the
greatest Grievance in Nature, and that in the plainest and most imminent
Exigence of a Nation; but must be forced silently to sit down by his hard Fate,
and be debarred the privilege of Laws, nay even of his very Prayers for his
Deliverance.

Now is it not a little hard, that after the goodness of our most gracious
Sovereign that has made An Act of Oblivion, Mr. L'Estrange's Vengeance alone
should be implacable, and set the Childrens teeth an edge for the sour Grapes
their Grandfathers eat so long ago, by entailing a Curse upon their Posterity
in secula seculorum? But how ridiculous and how false soever were the fears of
Popery in the last Age, how treacherous the Serpent that lurkt under those fair
but false pretenses, and how fatal soever the sting that attended it, yet our
endeavors sure may beboth legal and honest, against the plain and visible
dangers of Popery under the threatening influence of a Popish Heir; manifested
such a one, not only by the long and indefatigable Machinations of Hell in his
behalf, the most horrid Iesuitish Confederacy against the life of a Protestant
King, a Protestant Church and Government, animated and founded on their
Assurance of establishing their own infernal Reign under the umbrage of his
Scepter, a scepter designed to be made out of that consecrated Ponyards hilt
reserved to cut a passage for him to a Throne through the heart of a Protestant
Majesty, a Scepter that both like Moses and Aaron's Rod, at once should bud and
blossom for the Glory of Rome, but turn a devouring Snake for the Heretic
Confusion and Destruction; manifested such a one, I say, not only from all
this apparent Testimony, but even by a yet stronger demonstration, those
printed recorded Pacquets of Letters which as littora scripta manet, fly in
the face of all Dispute, and stop the very mouth of Flattery, Equivocation, and
Artisice, by plainly exposing to all Eyes and all Understandings a private
Intrigue and Correspondence between the Heir of a Protestant Kingdom, and the
Pope, the most implacable Enemy both of Protestant Kings and Kingdoms; a
Correspondence too subtly disguised in MYSTERIES and CHARACTERS, that usual
Hocus pocus-Language where the World has so often been the Cully, whilst
Treachery played the Iuggler: So that to match the present Genius of England
with that of 41 and 42, as all the scribbling canting Favorers of Popery would
impudently sham upon the world, is to make even North and South meet together,
to unite the most opposite Contradictions in Nature, to make a Plot and no
Plot, shadows and substances, truth and falsehood, dangers and no dangers,
Protestants and no Protestants, nay Patriots and Traitors the very same thing,
the design of that Age being to reduce us to Slavery, and this to free us from
it.

But suppose (as they say) there were some turbulent malecontented Spirits in
the Nation of Commonwealth principles, and that they herded amongst the honest
and worthy Opposers of Popery, resolving to play the Spider and extract poison
from the same Flower from which the Be sucks Honey. Let us but consider two
things, and then we shall find how impossible it is for them to attain their
desires, and perfect so extravagant a projection. 1. The Grievance of the
Nation is a Popish Successor; and that Grievance once removed by a Bill of
Exclusion, we countermine all the Arts and Subtilties of Rome, that have or can
be formed against us, and raise an impregnable Bulwark against all our Enemies
on that side, and at the same time they will not only supply the King with
money, which is one of the strongest Nerves of power, but also it will
undoubtedly restore him the entire Affections of all or most of the Commonalty
of England which have or can be alienated, or estranged by his unhappy and too
vigorous defense of a Successor so universally odious: so that these
Republican Matchivilians join in the very project that destroys them; for by
this means what the Monarch wins, the Republican loses. 2. It Is an undeniable
Truth, that the whole Populace in general abhor such a thought, and the
Miseries of the late Civil Wars are too lively in their memories, for them ever
to be wrought up again into the same Frenzy.

Though the deluded Multitude were then put out of love with Kings, they found
too soon by woeful Experience, that the Protectorate was ten times worse, and
whatever prejudice they had conceived against the old unhappy King, yet the
grievous Oppressions, Taxes, and standing Armies under Gromwel, quickly opened
their Eyes, and to their own sad cost, assured them they had not mended but
marred their condition by rebelling: And that Oliver's policy in deposing a
King to establish a Protector, was but an old Roman Iuggle revived; when as
History tells us, after the Romans had been weary of Kings, as a power too
Arbitrary for them, they were cunningly drawn in to a subjection to that of
Imperator, which was ten times more Tyrannick of the two, and sheltered the
Cruelties of the worst of Monsters, a Nero and a Caligula: So that in our
circumstances, it is almost impossible that English men should be twice gulled
with the same Cheat, or their Swords be ever drawn in our old unnatural Broyls;
but if ever that day shall come that they are drawn again, it must be only
then when a Popish Successour's possessing the Throne shall represent to them a
more terrible Scene of Misery than a Civil War can bring: so that if ever they
are inflamed into that desperation, it must be when they shall run headlong
into a less Charybis to avoid a greater Scylla. But whether one be greater or
less than the other, or they but think it so, yet this is most certain, Popery
and Rebellion are both those dangerous Gulphs that will either of them swallow
up the peace of England. And as it is unanswerably true, that the glory of God,
the defense of our Lives and Liberties, and the support of our present Monarchy
of England, are only to be upheld by a Protestant Interest, and that Interest
is never to be effectually secured but by a Popish Exclusion: So that Exclusion
likewise at the same time puts an end to all our dangers on the other side,
viz. to all thoughts or possibility of a Rebellion.

But to give a truer account of the present State of England than Mr.
L'Estrange has done in affinity to 41, I will confess this present Age has
derived one thing from 41 and 42, and that is a Curse they left behind 'em, the
Curse of the Shepherds Boy in the Fable; our crying out so often formerly,
Help, Master, help, the Wolf's in the Shepfold, when he was not there, has made
us disbelieved at last now he is there; and like him too, be left most helpless
when we most want it.

Postscript.
THE Author of The Character of a Popish Successor was so far from priding
himself upon that Piece, that his greatest Ambition in writing it, was the
serving his Country; and he is very well pleased to see so many Scions since
sprung from that Root. But one particular Acknowledgment he is bound to make
for the unexpected Favors it has received, that the Authorship of a Book that
has no other Merit than the Truths it relates should be so esteemed, that
coming Fatherless into the World, it has since had the honor of so many kind
Friends, that like the Rival Cities of old for the Birth of Homer, have given
it their Adoption.

THE CHARACTER OF A Popish Successor COMPLETE.
THE first Allegation Mr. L'Estrange makes against the Characterizer's
Reasonings is, That his Masterpiece is a Paradox, by the supposal of a most
excellent person, and yet making him the greater Devil for his Virtues; and so
he sums up the Characterizer's opinion in short thus:

Chapter His Fortitude (says he) makes him the more daring in the Cause of Rome;
his Justice makes it a point of Conscience to deliver us up to the Pope; his
Temperance in the government of his Passions, makes him more close and steady;
and his Prudence crowns the work by the assistance it gives him in the
management of his Policies and Conduct; and so he goes on. What boots it in a
Popish Heir to say, he is the truest Friend, the greatest of Hero's, the best of
Masters, the justest Judge, and the honestest of Men? All mere treacherous
Quicksands for a People to repose the least glimps of Safety in, or build the
least Hopes upon.

Thus much the Character. To which he answers,

This is fairly pushed, I must consess; but it is only a Cast of his Rhetoric:
for every body knows that all Christian Princes thus qualified, and under
Articles of Treaty and Agreement, keep touch even with Infidels, nay, and
Infidels with Christians.

This is all he has in his whole Pamphlet in answer to this part of the
Character: for he thinks he has made the Characterizer's whole Argument so
plain a contradiction in its self, that he needs no other Brand than his own
words, to stigmatize him; and the very repetition of a Supposition so
monstrous, is its own confutation.

But this on our Answerers part is not so fairly pushed: for thus far here is
neither Rhetoric nor Reason. For what Relation can Christian Princes keeping
touch with Infidels, and Infidels with Christians, upon Articles of Treaty and
Agreement, have to a Popish Successour's Tyranny and Injustice over his own
Subjects? Does it follow, Because the French King upon Articles of Treaty and
Agreement, has kept touch with the Swede, though the most inveterate Enemy of
the Popish Religion perhaps of any Protestant Prince in Christendom, and
consequently the most opposite to his own persuasion, that therefore he has not
overleap'd all the due and lawful bounds of the French Government, and
tyrannically enslaved his People; nay, contrary to the solemn Covenant at Nants
in behalf of the Hugonots, most inhumanely persecuted the poor Protestants?
What if a Christian Prince keeps his Articles with Turks or Infidels, nay
Villains and Robbers, the Pirates of Argiers or Sally? Nay, what if Q. Mary her
self had done as much, must it therefore follow that she would not break her
Vows and Protestations with the Norfolk and Suffolk-inhabitants, and burn the
very men that mounted her into her Throne, when animated by the Withcrafts of
Rome? But that the Fidelity betwixt Prince and Prince may more plainly appear
to hold no proportion or affinity with that betwixt Prince and People; or
foreign Articles either for the enlargement or security of Empire, the
promotion of Trade, or any other State-interest, with a Church Government or
Church-persecution at home, we shall give this undeniable Reason.

A King for breach of Faith with his People, esteems himself only accountable
to God; but for breach of Faith with Foreign Princes, either Christian or
Infidels, he is accountable to Man, and may draw down a just War upon his head
for such a Violation; nay, perhaps wholly dispossess himself of the hopes of
Foreign Assistance for the future in his greatest dangers and exigences,
occasioned by the stain such Infidelity may lay upon him, when his more venial
breach of Vows at home, shall be no blot in his Scutcheon. And whereas here
he is only answerable to God, what if his Priests, as in Queen Mary's Case,
impose so far upon his blinded Zeal till they make him believe that the
performance of Protestations in cases derogatory to the glory of Heaven, and
against the propagation of Christianity, shall be more answerable to God than
the breaking of them?

But Mr. L'Estrange resolves to play the State-Sophister, and gives us this
trial of his strength in his very first page, to let us know how great a
Casuist and how potent an Antagonist we must expect to find him.

But here the other Answerer is a little more prolix upon this subject, and
tells the Characterizer, That in a Roman Catholic he makes Virtues themselves
turn Vices, and equals if not outgoes Transubstantiation it self. And to
justify the four Cardinal Virtues from the Characterizer's making them an
Instrument of our Destruction, he assigns 'em a quite contrary operation in a
Popish Successor than that in the Character, viz.

If he has Fortitude, which is a Virtue equally distant from Temerity and
Rashness, as from Fear and Cowardice, it will withold him from attempting
things impossible; as setting up Arbitrary Power, or introducing Popery. If he
be a man of Justice, that should give us the greater assurance that his Courage
shall be no otherwise exercised than for our Safety and Honor, to whom all his
endeavors by all the Laws both Humane and Divine are due, and to which he
shall be by Oath obliged. But here by the way, I could have wished our Author
had left out the word [Divine;] for those hearty endeavors the Divine Laws of
a Popish Successor will instruct him to exercise for the Safety and Honor of
a Heretic Nation and Heretic Religion, we are better informed of. But to
proceed, If he is a Master of Temperance, what is that but a Bridle upon all his
Excesses, a perpetual Bosom-Monitor that will withold his Arm and allay his
Heat, and curb all the motions of Cruelty and Revenge? And lastly, if he has
Prudence, that will teach him not to exasperate a People of so stiff a Neck,
nor lose the hearts of his Subjects for their difference of opinion, and
thereby peradventure endanger the loss of his Crown, etc.

Now this Author I confess has pushed a little fairer than the other; for he has
given us an Argument that looks like Sense, though it be none: for what is all
this to the conduct of an inflexible Papist? The Characterizer tells us, that
in a Bigoted Prince, his Morals shall be Slaves to his Zeal; and accordingly
instances how far they shall be instrumental to the Protestant subversion and
destruction: But here the Answerer artfully leaves out the main point, and
tells us what a mere moral man would do, in case of succeeding to the Crown of
England. He mounts the poor Postilion into the Saddle, and tells us how his
mere Morality would drive; but takes no notice of that Lordly Charioteer,
Religion, that holds the Reins above him, whose nod he obeys, and at whose
absolute command he turns either to the right or the left. So that as this
Answerer has stated the case, I am thus far of his mind, That had we an Heir
apparent of no more Religion than a Julian or a Nero, and yet at the same time
were completely Master of the moral Virtues, possibly he might steer as he
proposes: but let him recollect himself, and put Popery and Morals together,
and then he will find his mistake. For my part, I am ashamed that any men that
pretend to write Sense, should endeavor to persuade us that a Popish Bigot,
and a man of courage and wisdom in a Successor, should not go farther toward
the establishing of Popery, than a Coward and a Fool; so that not only his
Morals, but every other natural Gift or Perfection, shall be particularly
assistant to the Ruin both of Protestant Religion and Liberty. But because
Example is more powerful than Precept, I Will give you a taste of the Popish
Morals in a very remarkable Story.

Soon after the selling of Dunkirk, from which time the poor Protestants in
France date the Era of their Calamities, it being about that time that the
French King began to disturb their Peace, infringe their Liberties, and
demolish their Churches, contrary to all the sacred Bonds of the solemn
Engagement at Nants; the distressed Hugonots groaning beneath a greater load of
Misery than any of the rest of the French Subjects, their fellow-slaves, under
the persecution of his new Ashtaroth Arbitrary power, thought fit privately to
implore the intercession of a powerful Neighbor, a Protestant Monarch, to
mediate in their behalf in mitigation of the French King's unchristian-like
severity; and accordingly chose a very honest and wise man, by name Rohux, an
Inhabitant of Nisme in Languedock, for this secret Embassy, as being a person
formerly very fortunate in England before on the like occasion, having obtained
a lucky Favor from Cromwell in reconciliation of a difference betwixt the
French Protestants and Cardinal Mazarine. This Rohux thus commissioned, the
approach to Majesty being difficult, to make his Access more easy, applies
himself first to a visibly Protestant Heir apparent, hoping to strengthen the
power of his own Supplications by the introduction and countenance of so great
and so princely an Advocate. This Royal Heir or Masquerader, or by what other
Title disguised or distinguished, with a seeming-cordial Friendship embraces
the poor Hugonots Cause, and day after day receives his Address with many
solemn but airy promises of speedy Assistance; but in the mean time, disgusted
and galled to the Soul at so audacious and impious a Petition as the Protestant
preservation, and abhorring so detestable an Employment, nay, the very name of
the Heretics Defender, instead of his promised Aid, he on the contrary most
cunningly laid the Platform of a Revenge as exquisite as so heinous a Petition
deserved. Immediately he goes to the French Ambassador, and tells him how one
of the French Subjects had very arrogantly and scandalously calumniated his
great Master with obprobrious names of Tyranny, Oppression, and breach of
Faith; into which very Language he himself before had exasperated him, on
purpose to make his Ruin secure, which the bare accusation of a Suit in behalf
of his Religion, would not alone have effected. The Ambassador, as bound in
duty, for the vindication of his King's Honor, desires a farther testimony of
the Offense and Offender: Which the Royal Informer effectually gives him, by
appointing another Conference with Rohux; where privately he plants this Kingly
Representative as an Honorable Evesdropper, to over-hear a Repetition of the
whole Discourse, and confirm his Belief from his own Ears.

Now some people would start an Objection, and say, That this humble Office and
low-spirited Snare against the life of a poor wretch, might derogate from the
Glory of two such Illustrious Personages; the one for the greatness of his
Employment, and the other the greatness of his Birth. But to remove their
mistake, I assure 'em there is not that Deed so abject, when acted for the
Cause of Rome, that cannot be transformed into Princely and Heroic, by the
stupendous power of that infallible Church, where even Daggers and Ponyards
admit of Consecration.

But to return to our History. This Conference contrived and managed as heart
could with, the Ambassador posts over this Rohux Treachery to France, whilst
he, poor unsuspecting Innocence, continues his daily Prayers to his Great
Advocate. But finding in time so many delatory Demurs, he luckily at last
discovers he is betrayed: Upon which, dreading the Vengeance of the French
King, not daring to return to France, he steals away into Switzerland for his
protection; but the French King being advertised of his Motions, gets him
trepan'd by an Ambsuscade in the night, and being by surprise forced out from
thence into France, he is broken upon the Wheel.

Now who so blind as cannot but plainly see that each particular Cardinal
Virtue in this Illustrious Hero, were most signally exercised in this
Triumphant Encounter? First, here was Courage even to admiration; he played the
Romish Champion young, and early flushed himself in Heretic Blood, whilst like
a second Alcides, who strangled Snakes even in his Cradle, he most victoriously
tore up that Heart by the roots whose Tongue durst but hiss against the Papal
Dignity, as the first bold Prologue of his more undaunted Achievements, and
more dazzling Glories yet to come.

Then here was Justice to the height; an impudent French Villain as he was, to
cross the Seas on so infamous a Commission as the Rebuilding of the
Hugonot-Temples, those Altars of Baal, which the God-like hand of France had so
justly laid in Ruin? an Impiety so heinous as forfeited both Life and Soul,
and deserved the severest Rods and Axes of Justice: He deserved 'em, and he had
'em.

Then here was Temperance even to astonishment; here was no launching into
Passion, no Thunder in his Tongue, nor Basilisks in his Eyes, at the surprise
of so execrable a Petition as the imploring his Intercession for the loathed
Heretics Deliverance: Alas, no, his Temperance, like a Bosom-Monster (as our
Author has it) bridled all those Excesses, and treated this notorious Suppliant
with those hearty professions of kindness, and promised services, till he
betrayed his bones to the Wheel, with a Conduct and Aspect so moderate and so
serene, as the old Romans lead their Victims with Flowers and Garlands to their
Execution.

Then here was Prudence beyond example; first, in inflaming the poor Frenchman
into declamations and detractions against the Majesty of France, thereby to
manage his Tragedy more artfully, by making him receive the Blow from the hands
of the Temporal not Ecclesiastical Justice, as dying more for a Traitor than a
Heretic: for though, it is true, the last was Crime sufficient, yet lest the
ill-judging world might mistake, and not think so, he was wisely noosed into
one Crime, to pull down the Vengeance due to the other. But what is the greatest
Prudence of all yet, this politic Hero all this while was a visible Member of
the Protestant Church, knelt at our Altars, joined in our Prayers, and shared
in our Sacrament and Communion.

But one thing I had almost forgotten; the unknown Answerer, to prepare us for
the more firm security that a Popish Successour's Cardinal Virtues shall keep
that Honorable and indeed Innocent Path that he has traced out for him, he
makes a very long Harangue in praise of his adored Mecoenas. First, for his
Courage, That his Royal Blood (as often as his King or Countries Honor or
Safety called upon him) was ever as dangerously and as freely exposed, as that
which fills the veins of the vilest Plebeian, etc, And why not? since it is no
such wondrous Novelty for even crowned heads themselves personally to fight
their own Battles: I cannot think it any great condescension in a Prince (at
that time not altogether so visible an Heir apparent) to accept of the
Admiralty of an English Navy; an Employment, where the Glory of it does more
than reward the Hazard. So that as I take it, his own Honor as well as his
Countries, called upon him.

After this, he passes to another branch of Princely Endowments, viz. That his
Friendships have ever been as firmly maintained, as they were judiciously
chosen: That his Mouth and his Heart have always been so true to one another,
that his Word has been as inviolate as the Oaths of others: And this noble
Constancy has not been the effect so much of his Honor as his Conscience, etc.
Without all doubt: Yet I have heard a very odd Story of one Mr. Coleman that
tipped over the perch about a year or two ago. I fancy I could draw a Picture
with this Label in his mouth, There is no Faith in Man, so like him, you would
scarce know one from the other: Nay, poor Jack Catch shall cry out shame of all
such usage. There was not that poorest Rogue of all the Plot-Martyrs, that had
not two or three Guinneys at least at his service, to bribe him to use a gentle
hand with them and hang 'em out of pain, before he made minced Meat of them.
But Coleman was so trepan'd into Pluto's Court, came so unprepared for the
Elysian-shades, that he that had been Master of the Purses both of the French
and English Monsieurs too, when he came to cross the Stygian Lake, had not so
much as one poor Obelus to pay his Ferriman's Fare. Durum est post omnia
perdere naulum. And methinks this was a little unkindly done; yet upon second
thoughts, possibly it might be contrived for his good. Flesh and Blood is
frail, and who knows but he might have had humane thoughts about him, and so
have fallen from the holy Cause; which careful Mother Church, for the salvation
of his Soul, in her pious and Christian wisdom, thought fit to prevent, by
making a Saint of him without his knowledge: And alas, he was shrewdly hurt,
was he not? to be tript up into Heaven, and cheated into Immortality.

But here I cannot omit one remarkable Observation of Mr. L'Estrange's, page
38. speaking of this Princes former services to his Country; where he says,

Mr. L'E. I find some people of opinion, that this King in Reversion, is of the
same Persuasion at this day, that he was when he acquired all those Glories.

Now if there be such a sort of people, and so strong a Faith in the world, I
would willingly be instructed what They, or Mr. L'Estrange for them, mean by
Persuasion. If the Popish persuasion, then they justify the severest
Reflections in the whole Character, and lay that unprincely and unchristian
Disguise at his door of kneeling at our Altars, and participating of our
Sacraments with all the meanest and basest Hypocrisy imaginable; little less
than dipping in the Dish, and drinking of the Cup, and kissing where he
betrayed. But if they mean the Protestant persuasion, of which Communion he
then visibly was* and they will be but so kind as to prove him a Protestant
still, I assure them the Author shall burn his Character, and make a public
Recantation for his Mistake; but at the same time they must give him leave to
write another tentimes bitterer than the first: For he that can suppose a
Prince really and truly a Protestant, that shall for so many years together
withdraw from his own Communion, and that too not only so manifestly against
his Interest, but against the very Dictates of his Conscience, the Duty of his
Religion, and the Glory of his God; thereby to exasperate and embroil a whole
Nation in Distractions, to inflame and widen all our Divisions, and in short,
to put out both his own Eyes to put out one of his Brothers; and all this for
just nothing, except a mere Humor, a letchery of doing Mischief for no other
end or purpose but mere Mischiefs sake, is a character of that unparalled
Ingratitude, and indeed all that is ill together, that I hope Earth nere bore,
nor Hell ere punished: for I should be sorry to think it possible there could be
such a Creature in nature; neither am I a little sorry to think there is a
people in the world that can fancy there is such a one. I confess, the
withdrawing from our Communion upon the change of Opinions, may admit of some
Apology; and our ill circumstances under that Change, are not altogether so
wonderful.

Now after this Answerer has sum'd up all his matchless Virtues, he tells you
in short, How improbable a thing it would be, how contradictory to Reason and
common Sense, that the difference of a man's opinion about some few disputable
matters of Faith, and not very material Ceremonies of Divine Worship, should on
a sudden efface all those good Characters of Magnanimity and Justice,
Generosity and Goodness, not slightly traced, but deeply engraved in his Breast.

Here the Reader may observe what a good Protestant the Author is, and how
prettily he states the little disparity betwixt the Protestant and Popish
Faith, differing only in some few disputable matters of Faith, and not very
material Ceremonies of Divine Worship. As for example: The Deifying of Wafers,
the Idolizing of Images, the Invocation of Saints, and making the Milk of a
Mary almost of as great virtue as the Blood of a Jesus; with twenty other
Trifles and inconsiderable Ceremonies. For my part, I would not be he that at
Cadice or Salamanca should make no more difference betwixt the Divine Worship
of Holy Church and that of Heretic Dogs, for fear the Lords of the Inquisition
should make some material Ceremony with me, and treat me with a Cauldron of
scalding Oil for my Entertainment. But perhaps our Answerer durst say twice as
much, if he were there; for no doubt but they know him so well, that they would
pardon his Railery, and take it for but a copy of his Countenance. But whatever
our Author's Religion is, his Memory is none of the best; for within three
leaves after this, he quite forgets himself, and unluckily compares the
difference between the two Religions in haec Verba.

This Idolatrous Superstition has been so long worn off the minds of the
People, and the Reformation so deeply and so strongly rooted in the Reigns of
four most religious and prudent Princes; the Church of England so firmly
established, and that as much by the purity of its Doctrine, the decency of its
Discipline, and the innocence of its Principles, as by the Authority of the
Public and the Laws of the Land. The Romish Church so detested both for the
dangerous Innovations of its Doctrine, and the Idolatry of its Ceremonies; and
so odious in the eyes of the People for its pernicious Principles expressed in
the villainous practices of its Professors in Massacres and Plots, etc.

But our Answerer's Ingenuity can answer all this, and tell you, What though
their Ceremonies are so idolatrous, their Innovations so dangerous, their
Principles so pernicious, their Plots so odious, their Massacres so barbarous,
and their Professors so villainous? yet a Popish Heir presumptive professing the
same Superstition, shall be a Lamb, a Dove, a Saint amongst us upon occasion,
and that too for his Reasons abovesaid: For as he told you before, he is a
person of Royal Blood, loves his Friend, is a man of Courage, and a Prince, and
has been an Admiral. A thundering Demonstration of a peaceable Popish
Innocence! Three more such unconfutable Arguments are enough to convert the
Turk, and bring in the Jews.

But now from these infallible Morals in our Heir presumptive, the great
Bulwark against all our Fears, this unknown Author concludes both our
Protestant Religion and Laws secure under him; that the present Constitution of
Government, and the present Church of England, must and shall, in spite of
Fate, continue unshaken. If the Popish Priests are such Incendiaries (says he)
and our most potent Enemies, have we not Laws against them? and then why are we
in such fear? What is left to any Monarch that succeeds, but to execute the
Laws be finds derived down to him to maintain and preserve together with his
Crown and Dignity? And though the Characterizer seems to be in so much dread of
those swarms of Roman Emissaries that will infest us under the connivance and
indulgence of a Popish Successor, he tells you he is quite mistaken; The Reign
of a Popish King will be so far from advantageous, that it will be rather
destructive to all those Iesuitical Instruments; and that it shall be so, it is
in the power of every Subject in the three Kingdoms to be a defender of the
Protestant Religion, if it want it; there being no Information, no Conviction
of Recusants, no Administration of Tests or Oaths, that shall be wanting, and
no diligence that shall be spared, backed by the Laws of the Land, which then
more than ever will be wakened against them, which cannot be dispensed withal,
but must be effectual to the utter ruin of the whole Party. Miracles and
Prodiges! And that there shall be nothing wanting on the Kings part to do all
this, this worthy Author is pleased to be his Guarrantee, assuring us in his
Name, that he will take care to let the Laws have their due course; And
whatever his private Opinion may be, whatever tenderness he may bear to the
persons be shall punish, yet he shall remember his Obligation to the public,
so far as to give 'em up to the hands of Justice with the same constancy of
mind, with the same applauses of present and commendation of all succeeding
Ages, that the immortal Brutus delivered up his darling Sons to the Rods and
Axes of the Lictours, etc.

I, here is a stupendous Character of a Popish Successor indeed! What Io
Paeans might England sing, if Rome's long hope, their Churches Champion and
Restorer, their hopeful Hercules, would build his Columns and write his Nil
plus ultra here! But alas, we are deceived, his Labors are to come; there is a
pestilent contagious Northern Heresy to be rooted out; that many headed Beast
of Errors and Schisms, that like Cerberus and Hydra, are to be subdued, whilst
in the defense of Religion and the Cause of God, he is to play a second Atlas,
and even the weight of Heaven is to lie on his shoulders. But our Oratorical
Scribler has promised Wonders in a Popish Successors Name, and elegantly picked
out a most excellent Brutus for his Comparison. I remember there was another
Roman of that Name, though not of that Nature, whose Story is equally as famous
and as pertinent to the matter in hand. A Brutus the Head and Leader of a
Conspiracy against the life of the great Caesar; a Brutus that joined his heart
and hand with the Murderers, and blended his Dagger in the Assassination
amongst the thirty mortal wounds that stabbed the Majesty of the World; a Brutus
to whom the dying Monarch with an Astonishment more surprising than the death
he received, in his last gasp could say, Et tu Brute? Is my Son, my Friend, my
Darling, my Delight, the man I have raised, loved, honored, cherisht and
defended, is Brutus a Traitor?

But to bring our Author to his right wits again, and to show him how unlikely
it is that the English Rods or Axes shall ever hurt a Son of Rome under a Romish
Successor. If the Popish or Jesuitish party have found such Mercy under the
Reigns of Protestant Kings, but shall now on the contrary stand the inevitable
shock of Statutes, Jayls, and Gibbets, under a Popish King, the Jesuits have
plotted fairly. If the Pope and his Conclave have no deeper politics than this
comes to, the very Geese that kept their Capitol before them, had more Brains
than they. If this were the effect of their hopeful Royal Heirs Conversion,
Heaven help 'em, for Hell has forsaken 'em.

No, Mr. Littleplot, once in thy life thou art mistaken; and to convince thee
that the Protestant Laws will not, nay shall not be so hard-hearted under his
Reign, nor his St. Omers Friends treated so coursly as thou imaginest, they
have had a little taste of their kinder Entertainment before hand. For Example:
Were there a Country where Commissions of Peace, day after day, and time out of
mind, have been taken away for daring but to lift a hand against a Son of Rome;
nay, at the same time when all other Recusants have been prosecuted, and that
with encouragement and reward; and all by a Royal Heir's protection and
interest. Would not any Reader reply, Will he that has been their
Guardian-Angel whilst but their fellow-Subject, suffer a hair of their heads to
perish when he is their King?

But yet our new Sir Positive will defend our Protestant Laws even in despite
of Fate, and tell you, That Justice shall guide her hand so impartially, and
poise her scales so evenly, as shall be to the admiration of present and
succeeding Ages. Now I fancy I have heard a Trial, where a Criminal of Quality
convicted of no less a Crime than the subornation and stifling of Evidence, and
in no less a Case than where the life of the King, and the subversion both of
Religion and Government were concerned, has been mulkt in the inconsiderable
sum of a hundred pound, payable perhaps at latter Lammas; a mere trifle, and
scarce more than a Peter-peny for an Absolution: Whilst in the other extreme
there has been a poor Fellow condemned to the Pillory, Imprisonment, and five
hundred pound fine, ten times more than he was worth in the world, for
publishing a scandalous reflecting line in a Pamphlet; much less offensive in
my simple opinion, than a Dagger to kill Kings and subvert States. And pray,
where will our Protestant Laws be? and what even Balances is Justice like to
have under the full-grown Scepter of a Popish Successor, if his influence is
so potent in his Minority? No, a Rhadamanth for an Astraea must be the best of
our expectations at that black day. Alas, the Sea of Rome is like the old Lake
of Sodom, the lightest Feather that offends it, sinks in it; but to its darling
Catholic Champions, it is a Lake of liquid Gold, where, incircled round in
Wealth, Glory, and Preferments, the heaviest massiest bars of Iron, Swords,
Daggers, Poniards, float on the glittering surface of Honor, and swim
securely. Nay, I would ask any reasonable man, That if the Jesuits hellish
Machination against the Kings life had taken effect, whether it is likely that
they feared smarting for it either in this world or the next, as dreading a
Vengeance temporal or eternal? No doubt but they had fairer hopes than so; for
had their execrable Blow succeeded, the blood of Majesty might in all
probability have found the same inquisition as the firing of London: Or if at
worst the world would not have been so satisfied, were not the Fanatic
shoulders broad enough to bear both the guilt and the punishment? Alas, 'twas
but at worst reviving an old experienced shift, a known pia Fraus for a
Recovery. Has not the Gunpowder-Treason (poor innocent Papists!) been a
thousand times affirmed a Plot of Cecils? Has not our late design against both
King, Religion, and Government, in contradiction of the unanimous Voice of the
whole Nation in Parliament, been confidently retorted upon the Presbyterians;
and that too without the least proof or shadow for it? And then how easily might
the Papal policy have made a Popish Murder a Fanatic Stab? and so by the
borrowed face of Innocence, have most triumphantly played the second part of
Amboyna, and have sheathed the false Sword in the false Murderers heart, whilst
the true Dagger had been consecrated, and the real Traitor canonized. Thus
wisely did the prudent Nero lay his burning of Rome at the poor innocent
Christians doors, and then with all the most exquisite studied Cruelties, made
the Christian bones rue for what the Infidels hand had perpetrated.

But to return to our Author, I will refer him to some modern Records, more
applicable to our purpose than the History of his immortal Brutus. Have we not
lately perused whole scrowls of Letters from our Saint Secretary Coleman to
French Confessors, French Ministers, and all for French Interest; and as many
Rome-wards bound to Jesuits, Cardinals, and Pope himself, fraught with golden
Mountains, and promised Miracles to be acted by the Royal -- for Rome's Glory,
Catholic Cause, and Mother Church: And will any person of common sense believe
that our trusty and well-beloved Secretary promised more in the name of Al.
than Al. would perform. And were all those sums of money to be returned from
France to England to be laid out only in Rosaries, Beads, and Crucifixes.
Believe it who can; for for my part I am an Infidel. Alas no, our hopeful
English Son of Mars, that modern Achilles, without whose Arm our Protestant
Troy could never fall, was no doubt to have been brought over to Rome's Holy
War, as once the old Achilles to the Grecian. The subtle France, like the
cunning Ulysses, plays not the Peddler with such small Wares, such effeminate
Toys and Trifles; but wisely hides a sparkling Sword amongst those guil'ded
Bawbles, a Sword, a Temptation fit for a valiant Masquerader; an Instrument
worthy Rome's Hero.

Besides, have we no Records but Coleman's? Have we not had whole Pacquets from
Al. Al. Al. to that Priest, this Jesuit, and the other Cardinal; but more
especially with Commendations to his Holiness, his Adored Holiness; and all
wisely and artificially coucht in CHARACTERS? And can any man, with half the
brains of a Woodcock, believe that they were all but so many How do ye's; or
some idle Compliment only to beg a Chip of the Cross, or a Rag of the Virgins
Petticoat?

If the designs of Al. were honorable, why an Intrigue betwixt the Heir of a
Protestant Kingdom, and the professed and greatest Enemy of our Religion and
Liberties? Or if that Commerce between 'em could by any extorted supposition,
or upon any pretense whatever, be imagined to be innocent, why was the whole
Correspondence disguised in RIDDLES and in CHARACTERS? Why in such mystic
Clothing, those fraudulent Missives of Hell, and the usual notorious Masks of
Villainies, Treasons, and Conspiracies.

Now from this Testimony, I would ask if it be reasonable to suppose that the
Protestant Religion and Liberty, and the Laws of that wild Boar Harry the
Eighth, and his Daughter Bess that She-devil, will be defended by a Popish
Successor, when in defending of them he must rob both the Church and God
himself of their Right; and as much as in him lies, strike his Dagger into the
sacred Gates of Rome, and dart a Javelin at the very heart of Christ's own
Vicar, and Gods undeniable Representative; and at the same minute be obliged to
daily Outrages, nay Butcheries too upon the very persons of Gods Elect, the
Pillars of Religion, and the very Successors of the Apostles themselves? A
pretty kind of Law, that shall oblige him to commit at once both Murder and
Sacrilege; and all this, forsooth, in defense of a Religion, as they will swear
for it, sprung from Harry the Eighth's Codpiece, maintained and preached only by
a pack of Reprobate Rascals, a Bastard-sort of Priests ordained by the by at
the Nagshead-Tavern. -- I, but there lies his Honor and Coronation Oath in the
way to a Crown, that shall oblige him to do all this. And so if there lay a
knot of Thieves in a man's way home, that should compel him to engage and
promise 'em to meet 'em such a day with a good Horse under him, and a good pair
of Pistols before him, to take the Rode with them, and rob and murder in their
company. A pretty piece of Honor that, and a strange point of Conscience, that
shall tie him to keep his word with them!

Let us but rightly consider; is it to be conceived that the Pope with all his
wisdom and politics, will ever be guilty of so much Ill-husbandry as to make
no better Emprovement of such a pretty spot of Ground as England, when he has
once retrieved it again into his own Hucksters hands, a Popish Successors
possession, as to let it lie waste still, because it has lain so for so many
Ages last past, with scarce any thing more upon it than a parcel of rank Weeds
and Thistles that have been running up to Seed for above a hundred years
together? Persuade him to it, if you can.

I will only refer my Reader, for his diversion, but to one short passage in
the abovenamed printed Pacquets of Letters, where his transported Holiness, at
the receipt of a comfortable line or two from a very good Hand, and as it is to
be imagined, a true and trusty Friend, is said to have Wept for Joy. Now I
would seriously ask my Reader, if he believes those precious Tears, that
sanctified Brine, that, like Aaron's Ointment, trickled down the Beard of the
Reverend Sire, dropped at the hearing of no better News, and at the prospect of
no fairer hopes than this. My life for yours, there was no such meaning in it.
No; for once I Will give you a better KEY for those CHARACTERS: Our Protestant
Sun, 'twas hoped, was near setting when that Dew fell.

From this we come to the power of a Coronation Oath with a Popish Successor;
and there our Answerers are extraordinary vehement against the Character for
averring, That if the Popish Religion will absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance to an Heretical King, why may it not release a King from his Faith
to an Heretical excommunicated People. Upon which, Mr. L'Estrange remarks,

Mr. L'E. Take it for granted, there is no trusting to the Oath of a Roman
Catholic Prince, and ye cut the very Ligaments of Society and Commerce.
There Is an end of all Treaties and Alliances, amicable and mutual Offices
betwixt Christian Princes and States. Nay, in one word, erect but this Maxim,
you turn Europe into a Shambles, and put Christendom without any more ado into
a state of War, etc. Though by the way, all this makes nothing to his purpose:
for Treaties, Alliances, and Commerce betwixt Christian Princes and States,
have no Affinity with a Princes keeping Faith with his People upon the account
of Religion; as had been proved before.

But from this he goes on, and says,

Mr. L'E. I am not ignorant yet, either of the Doctrine, or of the practice of
several profligate wretches of the Roman Communion, in this impious particular:
But they are such then that are wholly lost in Brutality and Blindness; and I
neither do nor can believe all Papists to be equally susceptible of that
unchristian Impression. It is a Position that may be made use of at a dead lift
to serve a political turn: And the Trick will not pass neither, but upon some
enthusiastic sick-headed Zealot, that takes all his Dreams for Visions, and
the vapors of his Distempers for Revelations. Now in my apprehension, never
did any man so forget himself as Mr. L'Estrange has done here: He believes
here, that that unchristian Impression, as the Allowance of Perjury, is only
the Tenet of some profligate wretches wholly lost in Brutality and Blindness.
But at the latter end of his Book, page 83. he downright contradicts that
belief, and says,

Mr. L'E. Pope Pius Quintus absolved the Subjects of Queen Elizabeth from all
their Oaths of Allegiance to her for ever. So that now belike it was not only
the Maxim of the abovesaid profligate wretches, but even of the Great
Successor of Peter, and the Voice of Infallibility it self; and that too not
the product of Blindness and Brutality upon Dreams and Vapors, but the
deliberate Act and Decree of the Imperial See of Rome.

I could make several other instances in this kind, as the Popes absolving the
Subjects from their Allegiance to K. John, etc. but it is the common Theme of
all Pens, and so much the known practice and principle of their Popes through
all Ages, that I shall not think it worth my while. Besides, Mr. L'Estrange
forgets himself a little further in this point, and says in the same 83 page,
That the Romish Jesuit holds that Dominion is founded in Grace, and upon that
principle deposes Protestant Princes, etc. Then adds, That the Pope may deprive
a King of his Royal Dignity for Heresy, Schism, etc. ( as in the Bishop of
Lincoln 's Popish Principles. p. 20.) and after Excommunication, says Mariana,
in case of obstinacy, the people may take away his life.

After these Affirmations of Mr. L'Estrange, if these are the principles of the
Pope and Jesuit, I hope we may safely conclude, That they that set such little
value on the sacred Dignity and Persons of Kings themselves, when once
attainted with Heresy, that not only their Crowns are forfeited, but their
very Lives lie exposed to the fury and hand of every vile Plebeian, should in
all reason set less on the Rights, Privileges, and Lives of Subjects under the
same Attainder: for no doubt, if Heresy can make a forfeiture in the first,
the Devil's in it if it does not in the last. So that by his leave, where is all
the Oaths, Honor, and all the Mighty and Illustrious Attributes he gives our
Popish Successor in vindication of the Protestant Peace and security under
him, whilst these are the principles not only of the Jesuits that seduced him,
but of the very Head of his Church, that Lord God the Pope? But according to
his first belief, if this were really the opinion of some Doctors, but not all,
he would do well to prove that Father Patrick, that cursed Incendiary of all our
Distractions, was not one of those Affirmative Doctors, and Benningfield his
successor another of them. No doubt the subtle Rome in converting our Heir
presumptive, did not bound its ambition in the gaining one single Soul, but the
recovery of a Kingdom was their design. In his conversion they had brought
their long Hopes to a perfection, they had found that second Moses, who under
the God-like influence of Rome, like a Cloud by day, and a Pillar of fire by
night, should guide and lead 'em through all opposition and all dangers to
their beloved Canaan, a Land that flows with Milk and Honey, Rome's old
Treasure-house, that dear Puteus Inexhaustus, England.

And is it to be imagined, if Fides non est tenenda cum Haereticis were ever in
request, it should be wanting now, on so glorious an occasion; or so
inconsiderable a Trifle as a Coronation Oath should blast so forward and so
sacred a Design. And if, as he confesses, that Tenet is only made use of to
serve a political turn, I would gladly be informed what greater or more
political turn it could serve, than for the Conversion of England, that great
Work which the unknown Answerer tells us, Has, like China, been a hundred years
a ripening.

But here our Answerers continue, and assure us we need have no fear of any
such prejudice in that case from our Popish Heir, considering, as Mr.
L'Estrange says,

Mr. L'E. If he could so scandalously play the Hypocrite as to change his shape
at that rate as the Character says, and act any part for his advantage, which
Rome or Rome's Interest shall impose upon him, what should have hindered him
from continuing a Protestant to the Eye of the World, though a Papist in his
heart? since that was the only means to have gained him his point. And as the
other Answerer enlarges upon it, If out of the conscience of an Oath, and the
Obligation he believed was in it, he has already parted with the places of the
greatest Honor and Profit in the Kingdom, is it likely he will ever have a less
veneration for that most religious one he must take at his Coronation? Or is it
likely if he had made no scruple of an Oath, he would have refused it at a time
when he might have removed all suspicions and Iealousies of his Religion by it,
and thereby have facilitated his way to a Throne?

Now I wonder to what Readers these Authors write, that at this time of day
they would make us believe that his squeamishness against the Test and the Oath
of Supremacy, made our conscientious Heir quit his honorable Employments! As
we better remember* 'twas not so much the Test, as the Test-makers, that
disgusted him, his natural antipathy to Parliaments, his continual little
thoughts of that Great Council, (and less of them he will have, if ever he
comes to the Crown) with his disdain that such insolent Earth and Ashes should
dare to give Laws to his Divinity. So that in short, his Pride, not Conscience,
got the Ascendant; and whatever advantages he might have gained by keeping his
Employments and swallowing the Oaths, yet such is his perverse and stubborn
Haughtiness, that he would rather cry, Sink Interest, perish Succession, and
even Popedom it self, rather than truckle to what I scorn.

But Mr. L'Estrange, methinks, of all men should be farthest from supposing it
a difficulty in a Papist to take an Oath he never intends to perform, when in
the 4th page of his Book he grants the very Protestants themselves, nay the
Church of England Protestants, upon occasion, may do the like: Where he says,

Mr. L'E. In the case of a Popish King, who is either kept out or driven out
from the Exercise of his Right by the tumultuary License of the Rabble, an Oath
of Abjuration in case of any fair opportunity for him to assert his Claim with
his Sword in his hand, will be so far from engaging any man against him, that
yielded contrary to his Conscience to swallow it for the saving of his Stake,
that he will find no firmer Friends to his Cause or Interest, than those men
that are stimulated both by Honor and Revenge to the execution of their Duties.

Now by those firm English Friends that may take this Abjuration-Oath against
their Consciences, he cannot mean the Fanatics; for they it is supposed are the
Drivers out, that impose this Oath. Besides, Mr. L'Estrange is so far from
believing that Party capable of coming under the denomination of a Popish
Successour's Friends, that on the contrary it has been the drift of almost all
his Pamphlets to prove them his only implacable Enemies. Neither can those
firm Friends here mentioned, be understood the Popish Party; for upon the
supposition of this tumultuary driving out of the Popish Heir from his Right,
it is likewise to be concluded that Party will most of them share in his Fate;
that there will be very few of them left to be put to that Oath of Abjuration:
or if there were, and they would take such an Oath, it would be so far from
doing their business; that lying under such a brand of Infidelity already (as
they do) all the Oaths they could ever take would never be believed: so that
the saving of their Stake that way would be impossible. So that it is plain (as
I said before) by those Abjuring Oath-swallowing Friends, he can mean no other
but the Church of England Protestants.

And yet methinks after Mr. L'Estrange has so long and so vigorously played the
Church of England's Champion, so strenuously maintained the integrity and
purity of that Belief and Communion, with the undaunted courage of its
Professors, continually copying and patterning their Perfections from a
no-less sacred Original than the Fortitude, Patience, and Perseverance of the
Primitive Christians; it is a little odd, as I may say, from a Protestant
Defender, and indeed unlike himself, after all this, to lay so wretched, so
despicable, and so cowardly a Condescension at their doors; as the Abjuration
of Gods Anointed and their native Sovereign to save a Stake, a Cow, a Farm, or
a Cottage. Aye, but that Abjuration is but a Copy of their Countenance, he
tells you. Fie, Mr. L'Estrange, this is worse and worse! What, the Members of
the Church of England's Communion so notoriously break a Gospel-precept, as to
come to a So help me God, with a Lie in their mouths, and a Reserve in their
Hearts, to play the Hypocrite, and that too even with Oaths; and so do so
impious an Ill that Good may come of it! Are these the true passive obedient
Sons of the Church, those unshaken Professors of Christianity, the Martyrs that
will be upon occasion under a Romish Tyrant? But cry you mercy: Now I think
on it better, I find Mr. L'Estrange is only making room for more Masqueraders;
as he made the Fanatics Papists in Masquerade, so he intends to make the
Protestants Abjurers in Masquerade.

But to return to our Coronation Oath: If the Members (as he says) of a
Religion that professes against breach of Oaths, shall yet swallow one against
Conscience for the saving a Stake, and that so inconsiderable a Stake as the
possession of a Subject; I suppose he will allow that a Member of a Religion
that absolves Oaths, will not stand out at the swallowing one for the securing
so great a Stake as that of three Kingdoms. So that without any other Evidence
than his own, where is the obligation of an Oath, or indeed the least shadow of
a Trust to be reposed in a Popish Successor?

But however, Mr. L'Estrange goes farther, and gives us an Example of the
Innocence and Indulgence of a Popish King, in favor of Protestants, page 49.
He acknowledges indeed, That Queen Mary did persecute the Christians: And
before, page 26. he yields with the Character, That she brake her promise with
the Norfolk and Suffolk Inhabitants, and with a mean ingratitude to the
generous Loyalty of that people, persecuted and burnt those very men that gave
her the first lift to the Crown. But though, as he grants, all this is true,
yet he says, All Princes are not alike: Queen Mary persecuted the Protestants;
Henry the fourth of France did not so: And it is as good an Inference from the
instance of Henry the fourth, that a Popish Heir will not be a Persecutor, as
from that of Queen Mary that he will. But where the Popes Authority intervenes,
both King and People are bound to obey. And yet we see, for all the power of
the Pope and the Covenant of Holy League to boot, the people of France, though
Roman Catholics, would not submit to the dispossessing of a Protestant
Successor; neither did that generous Prince upon the reconciling of himself
afterward to the Church of Rome, exercise any one act of Tyranny over his
Protestant Subjects: which is enough upon this point.

Enough indeed, unless there were more Truth or more Reason in it: For to pass
by the Clemency and Moderation, he designs to prove from the Example of this
Popish King, here is one of the most notorious falsehoods averred that ever
looked Light in the face. The Roman Catholic people of France were so far from
admitting this Protestant Successor to the Throne, that it is recorded, they
shut their very Gates against him; and so little acknowledged him their King,
that the Pope and the States of France were for setting up no less than three
Competitors against him: nay, there were such insolent indignities and
oppositions offered him, that the only cause of his changing his Religion was,
that nothing less than his Reconciliation to the Romish Faith, could gain him
his Birthright and his Crown. And all this is so plainly and so amply testified
from the French History, that never was any Assertion more false than this of
Mr. L'Estrange. And then his Inference of a Popish Successors Lenity to the
Protestants, from the instance of this Popish King, is the weakest and
shallowest that ever any man of sense could have thought on: For this King was
at best but one of Mr. L'Estrange's Abjurers in Masquerade; for it is most
apparent that the saving of his Stake, his Crown, not the dint of their
Arguments or Persuasion, the strength of the Romish power, not that of their
Religion, made him a Convert. And if this King of all mankind had proved a
Protestant persecutor, he had been a Monster indeed, and worse than a Nero; for
he must have acted quite contrary to the Dictates of his Soul and Conscience.

Now more and above all this, the Reader is here to take notice, that out of
all the Chronicles of all Ages, and of all the Popish Kings in Europe, this is
the only Popish Prince he has found out for an Example of Goodnature, and a
true and Favourer of the Protestants. Now I profess, might I advise him, if
either the Popish Records afforded no other instance in this kind, or his
Reading could not find it out, he should even throw up the Cudgels and answer
no more Characters, but believe a Popish Successor's Cause either impossible to
be defended, or himself incapable of doing it.

But this breaking of Oaths still sticks in his Gizard, and he cannot forbear
another fling at it.

Mr. L'E. Taking his position for granted, that a Popish Prince is bound by his
Religion, to act contrary to his Oaths and Promises, Honor and Justice, the
Dictates of Nature, the Laws of Nations, and the Bonds of humane Society;
contrary to all this (I say) and to his Interest too, be must be unmanned as
well as unchristian'd; an Excommunicate to humane Nature, and excluded from all
the Benefits and Offices of Mankind. It must be a strange digestion sure, that
can put over all other Impieties, and turn the violation of all that is sacred
in Nature into a meritorious Virtue.

Never did Mr. L'Estrange in all his Fardles of writing sum up so many Truths
as in these few lines: For indeed (as he says) a Prince that is guilty of all
this, must be both unmanned, unchristian'd, and an Excommunicate to humane
Nature, etc. if the Gospel and Christianity be truth; for the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles will pronounce him such a one, But all this while the
Reader is to observe, that this great Truth is urged by Mr. L'Estrange in
favor of his great Mecaenas, designing it not so much to set this Brand upon a
Popish Successour's perfidy in such a case, as to let us understand it is a
picture of a Popish Successor so strangely deformed, and so extravagantly
monstrous, that it is not to be matched or copied in Flesh and Blood, and indeed
has no being in Nature. But not to let him carry it off so, what does he think
of Sigismond King of Sweden, crowned in the year 1580. who in the very exact
parallel to our present state of England, being privately bred by his Mother a
Roman Catholic, unknown to his Father, and afterward being elected King of
Poland, openly professed the Romish Religion; but upon his Fathers death,
returned to his Hereditary Swedish Kingdom: where with much difficulty he was
received; but under all the solemn conditions and engagements that could
possibly be made between Prince and Subject, of his maintaining and upholding
their Lutheran Religion. But on the contrary, no sooner were the Reins in his
hand, but with all the fiercest Career of Infidelity, as if Hell drove him, he
presently erects Popish Churches, places Popish Governors in all his Forts and
Castles, encourages and countenances no other Persuasion, but striving by all
Arts imaginary to bring in the Romish Religion. Upon this notorious Perjury his
Subjects gave him the Reward which Mr. L'Estrange has elegantly allowed such
Perjury deserved; they excluded him from all the Offices and Benefits of
mankind: for accusing him of breach of Faith and mischievous practices against
the Government, they deposed him. And this was done by Lutheran Protestants,
neither Presbyterian nor Independent Fanatics; yet with offer of crowning his
Infant-son Vdislaus, provided they might have the breeding of him in their own
Belief; which he refusing after seven years Treaties and other Endeavors for
accommodation, all in vain, in the year 1607. they crowned his Uncle Charles
the third Son of his Grandfather Gustavus Errichson.

Now how many Bejesuited, Fanatical, Rebellious, Covenanting, Traiterous,
Holy-leaguing, Dissenting Psudoprotestants, would Mr. L'Estrange have called
these Lutherans, were his Pen retained against them? and what Volumes would he
publish in vindication of Iure Divino and unalterable Succession, etc. with all
the Curses of Bell, Book, and Candle, against them, as he has done against the
Popish Character, for making so slight of that indispensable Duty, Passive
Obedience; though as ill luck would have it, certainly the busy Spirit of Mr.
L'Estrange was not then in the world: for there are no such vilruent Records
against them either in any of the Historians of that Age, or indeed ever since.
Now one Remark I would make upon this Sigismond, to continue the parallel to
our Case: He was a Prince in his nature as Heroic as we have or can have a
Popish Heir, worthy of all those praises that either of these two Answerers
have given the last; and in short, to use one of their own words, A Prince for
every thing else, bating his Persuasion, brave to admiration: Which one thing
must more particularly witness for him, his being elected King of Poland, a
Nation which we all know make their choice for a King out of the gallant,
famous, and illustrious Worthies of all the Princes and Nobility through the
whole Christian world. And yet we fee neither Magnanimity, Justice, all the
Cardinal Virtues that adorned him, nor all the promising Perfections and
Accomplishments of Nature, strengthened with all the Bonds of Protestations,
Oaths, or Sacraments, could hold the headstrong Violence of his Religion.

But to return to Mr. L'Estrange, in answer to the Character's proving how
improbable, nay impossible it is to suppose we may have a Roman Catholic King,
That shall discountenance Popery, cherish Protestantism, and effectually deter
all those that shall endeavor to undermine or supplant it, he says.

As to the Influence, which a Popish Suceessor may have upon Ecclesiastic
Matters (As in the Character), There needs no more to be said in it then this;
that the King has been Graciously pleased, to offer the passing of any Bill for
securing the Protestant Religion, without Barring or diverting the Succession.
And such expedients have been also framed to that effect, as have been by great
Authority judged competent for the obviating of that difficulty.

The first part of this Assertion, all the world knows to be truth* but if such
Competent Expedients have been framed, either the Framers of them have been the
Unkindest Men in Christendom, or the three last Parliaments the Unluckyest: The
first, in either never producing or publishing those expedients for the Nations
service, in this time of exigence, or the last in never having the good fortune
to meet with them; for if the Parliament at Oxford were not damnably mistaken,
or very lewdly forgetful, they have declared ( Nemine Contradicente) that
neither they, nor their Predecessors have ever heard or seen one syllable of
such a Frame of Expedients offered them; so that with Mr. Lestranges Pardon,
his above named Great Authority has been greatly unkind in this Matter, or else
their expedients were like one of the Virtuosoe's Engines never designed for
use. But he goes on. As to the rest I will not deny, but that it is a hard
thing for a Prince to teize and persecute a people of his own Religion, purely
Eonomine for their being so. And it is very probable too, that he will connive
as Men of that persuasion in many cases, where the Law directs a Punishment.
And what is there more in this, than what has been done already more or less
from the Date of the Statutes themselves to this very Day: And what is done by
the Government it selftowards the Nonconformists at this Instant! Where is the
great Crime now, (upon this Admittance) in not punishing the Papists, so long
as the Protestants are not persecuted.

Here the Reader by the by may take notice, that these two Answerers did not
confer Notes, for one says a Popish Successor will be a second part of the
Immortal Brutus, and the other that he will be a quite contrary manner of Man.

But here I would beg Mr. Lestrange to explain himself: if he means by a Popish
Successors conniving at Men, of his own persuasion, to be no larger an extent
of Royal favor, than what that party have received in the two last Kings
Reigns, the privilege perhaps of no more than a Queens or an Ambassadors
private Chapple, for the visible worship of the whole party throughout all
England, then he contradicts the confessions of all the late Popish Martyrs,
for amongst all their plot silence, they unanimously confess they had a fair
list for a Toleration. And in case of such a Toleration in the next Kings
Reign, under a Popish Successor; wha'rs that less than Sigismunds erecting of
Popish Churches, and with them no doubt placing Popish Governors in all Forts
and Castles, Popish Ministers in all offices of trust, with Popish Generals,
and Popish Admirals upon occasion, encouraging and countenancing no other
persuasion, and striving by all Acts imaginary of setting up the Romish
Religion, and all this daily pusht forwards farther and farther, higher and
higher by Degrees. Alas! the Character never designed to sham such a ridiculous
impossible supposition on the world, that the Persecuting fury of a Popish King
shall falt down upon us like Fire from Heaven, all of a sudden, and no less
miraculously, or that Popery or Arbitrary Power, should grow up like Jonas
Goad, in a Night. Alas, Smith field Stakes, Lollards Towers, and Inquisition
Houses are the work of time; and therefore where as yet, open Hostility cannot
march, nor greater Conflagrations be attempted, they must have redress to less
Games in the mean while, the use of smaller Firebrarnds, and Foxes Tails to
tie 'em to.

In the next page he continues very smart upon the Character, part of which to
be better understood, I must be forced to repeat.

Char. Speaking of a Popish successor, executing the Laws.

A very pretty chimera? which is as much as to make this Popish King the
greatest Barbarian of the Creation, a Barbarian, that shall cherish and
maintain the Dissenters from Truth, and punish and condemn the pillars of
Christianity and proselytes of Heaven: which is no other than to speak him the
Basest of men, and little less then a Monster. Besides at the same time that we
suppose that King that dares not uphold nor encourage his own Religion, we
render him the most deplorable of Cowards, a Coward so abject, that he dares
not be a champion even for his God. And how consistent this is with the Glory
of a Crowned Head, and what hope England has of such a Successor, I leave all
men of sense to Judge.

Mr. Lestrange. Behold here is the upshot of his high flown paragraph

[A Popish Prince that puts the Laws in execution for the punishing of Papists
and for the countenancing and protecting of Protestants, is little less then
the basest of monsters.] How comes it then that the Crown of France has not
treated the Protestants there, as this Pictur-drawer pronounces, that a Popish
Successor would treat his subjects here? The Protestants have now and then been
severely handled, I know, in France, as the Papists upon some junctures have
been in England: and now of late wors then usual. All which has been
influenced as well by reasons of state, as by impulse of Religion. But shall we
pronounce the most Christian King the greater monster for his better usage of
us etc.

Now I dare defy the world to find me out that author, that ever wrackt his
Brains to labor out such mormoes as this; a discourse so entirely mal a
Propos, and altogether so little to his purpose; what can he intend, or what
would he argue from this? is there any resemblance between the State of England
and France; is the French King, (as the character says) bound to condemn the
pillars of christianity and proselytes of Heaven? or has he any Laws to put in
execution against the Papists? do his Laws uphold no other Religion but the
Protestant, and in defense of that, declare Popery Treason, and oblige him to
hang every Popish Priest in his Kingdom. Is there therefore the least
compulsion upon him to render him that Barbarian or Coward mentioned in the
Character. Nay on the quite contrary is not Popery there the Established Lord of
the soil, and the Protestant Religion only an inmate by toleration. Is there
any more Hugonot Churches to that Great City Paris, then one straggling one,
like our Pancras, for all the Protestants in that Populous Town.

And now what if Mr. L'estrange would bring no less then 20. precedents of good
natured French Kings that have not molested the Hugonots under them. Has not
their own Religion the ascendant of the Nation, does it not flourish and
triumph in Pomp, State and Glory, whilst the poor Hugonot persuasion only
humbly truckles beneath it, and what then, if their Royal mercy does not
persecute the Protestants, is there any thing in that mercy so monstrous or so
unnatural; or is their any Laws, Restrictions or Clogs upon the French King
that can give such a shock to the soul of a Papist as the Protestant Laws of
England.

I confess Mr. Lestrange in one clause before was much in the Right, where he
affirmed the continuing a Protestant to the Eye of the World had been a means
of gaining the point: and it is no less a truth, that showing the Cards before
the playing, has often endangered the Game. And indeed I have heard some smart
sort of People a little Satirical upon this Subject. I remember a passage of
this kind I read to'ther day, being an invective against Machiavel for an
unlucky Miscarriage in one of his great Designs, which translated into our own
English runs thus.

Oh! that our shallow thoughtless Machiavel should have so much zeal, and so
little Brains to manage it. Such a Bigot, such Principles, such Resolution,
such Infatuation: Impenetrable to all foolish effeminate thoughts of humanity;
a temper as rough, and as brutal as a second Ajax, untainted with remorse or
pity, that hates all thoughts of gratitude, friendship and fidelity, as much
as Rome loves greatness, as deaf to a Kings interest and a Kingdoms Groans, as
Romes own wish could form him. That excellent matchless engine for our work,
had not this only wretched ill conduct blasted all, and cracked the whole
foundation. Had he but played the sly and wise Ulysses till under his disguise
he had stolen their fatal Palladium, and left their ruind Troynovant
guardianless and defenseless, our Glory had been complete.

How might our great, our adorable Machine have succeeded, had not this unlucky
Marr-al ruind it? How might the reaking Gore of Butchered Infidels have
fatten'd the Land, and with the Steam perfumed the Skies, and smelt sweet in
the Nostrils of the Saints. We had a time, we had a day, a favorable smiling
Courting Hour, the morning Dawn to our great Iubile: But oh! that dear, that
blessed Minute's gone. A Curse of all unthinking greatness! How might this mighty
Hunter have pursued the glorious Game, like the immortal Roman Tullia that
drove her Chariot over her murdered Fathers heart, and Rod tryumphant over the
crackling Bones of Majesty, had he not so rashly pulled off the Vizard too
soon, thus senselesly turned up his Cask, and showed the fatal Face within it.
And by that only accursed unfortunate Act, wakened a whole alarmed Nation to
snatch the Reins, from this bold Rider, and cry, stop Iehu.

Well, but Mr. Lestrange, through almost all his whole Pamphlet is still upon
the impossibility of Popery, and Arbitrary Powers advance into England. Page
82. he says, take the matter as they suppose it, a King upon a Throne that is
principled for Arbitrary Government and Popery, but so clogged and shackled
with Popular and Protestant Laws, that if he had never so great a mind to it,
there is not one Subject in his Dominions, that would dare to serve him in his
Design.

Now the King of France we see has made himself absolute* and that as I take it
by the help of his Subjects; and why English Men should not dare to do any
thing, that the French have done before them, I cannot understand. Neither do I
find, but a Popish King might not only have good Irish Hands out of his
Dominions, but good English ones too upon that occasion, for besides his Popish
Friends, we have but too many of all Religions, but more of no Religion at all,
whose desperate Fortunes would make their hearts leap at so pleasing a motion,
and push for a change at any rate to fish in troubled Waters, and that too
notwithstanding the hazard of their Necks, upon a Scheame of Law which he
proposes Page 40, to be formed for that purpose. Nay that Scheame of capital
Laws should serve for an incentive to their Resolution, and make 'em wade the
deeper, the more unsafe and dangerous it should be to retire.

In the foregoing Page he says,

Mr. Lest. that possibly there may be a Popish King that may not have the will
to change the Government, in respest of the immorality of inclinin to such a
violation of his trust and word, but most certainly not, in regard of so
manifest an inability to bring it to pass.

Now it is evident the Plotters and Jesuits have not believed it such an
impossible exploit, and why may not a Prince of their own Opinion, and their
own Industry for Rome, upon the presumption of whose principles and for whose
sake their whole Machine moved; with a Crown on his head, and a Sword in his
hand believe as they do? So that were there a real inability in the case, yet
if the blindness of zeal and the oversight of Ambition shall not distinguish
that inability to be manifest till the event and fatal success has proved it
so, what shall that hinder his endeavors in attempting and prosecuting it, and
then where is the certainty of his will against it. And these endeavors once
prosecuted amidst all the violent Inrodes or subtle Attaques that shall be made
for Popery and Slavery, no God have mercy to his Kindness for it, it is none of
his fault that he lays his Bones by the seige, and does not live it out to put
us to Storm.

And I need not insist how far the Peace, Prosperity and Freedom of this once
flourishing Kingdom will suffer under such a seige and how far they will be
daily harassed and galled with so potent and so pressing an Enemy. At best they
must expect to have their Laws snapt asunder as often and as fast as Sampsons
cords, and their City gates in the scuffle twing'd off, and if at last they
play the Philistians, and live to pick out both his Eyes for it, the end of all
must terminat in Sampsons fate, they will have an old heavy roof pulled down both
upon his head and theirs together.

The next thing Mr. L'estrange falls foul upon, are the Acts of Parliament
recited in the character, and here he either tells the Reader they are nothing
to the characters purpose, or if they are, he finds such flaws in the
Lawmakers that made them, that they are unreasonable, and consequently void in
themselves, as you shall hear anon. And so he fairly trips up the heels of
Kings, Lords and Commons at once, and makes their whole authority insignificant
because their Laws are against Mr. L'estranges inclination.

First, he is very angry with the character, for advancing the Popish Succesour
first from the Possibility of a good man, then from bad to wars, and at last to
a downright Traitor: and that from a statute of Queen Elizabeth, that declares
every subject of England, that shall take absolution from Rome, or own the*
Popes supremacy, or pay any Fealty to the Sea of Rome guilty of High Treason.
And then he answers this by saying, there are two provisoes in the Act that
makes the case somewhat different from what the Characteriser has Stated it. viz.

1 Provided always, that for as much as the Queens Majesty is otherwise
sufficiently assured of the faith and loyalty of the temporal Lords of her high
Court of Parliament: Therefore this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
not extend to compel any Temporal Person, of or above the degree of a Baron of
this Realm to take or pronounce the Dath abovesaid, (viz. of Supremacy) nor to
incur any penalty, limited by this Act for not taking or refusing the same
(etc.)

2. Provided also, that if any Peer of this Realm shall hereafter offend
contrary to this Act, or any Branch or Article thereof, that, in that and all
such case and cases, they shall be Tried by their Peers, in such manner and
form as in other cases of Treasons they have used to be tried, and by no other
means.

Now I would defy any impartial Reader to Judge if ever any thing was so
weakly and so impertinently urged as these two Provisoes. The first tells you
that the Queen was so assured of the Loyalty of her Nobility, that she would
not put them to the trouble of Swearing to confirm it, as the Law required from
her Inferior Subjects, but on the other side the second Proviso tells us that
notwithstanding that, if any of them offended against the Law or any Branch or
Article of it, they should find no more Mercy than the meanest Commoner in her
Kingdom, but be equally Tried for High Treason. Now what he drives at by this
objection or what favor these Provisoes make for a Popish Heir, I declare I
cannot Imagine, neither do I believe he knows himself.

Upon this he comes to a touch of Conscience, and says; It would be well if
every man that presses with this unprecedented rigor upon the Person here in
Question, would lay his hand upon his Heart, and say, if the King has Pardoned
me Ten Thousand times more than this comes to, with what reason or Conscience
can I Importune His Majesty thus bitterly against his Brother.

Ten Thousand times more than this comes to, is a very great disproportion. But
thus much I am certain, for the Heir of a Protestant Kingdom, and the Son of a
Protestant Martyr, to be perverted to the Religion and Interest of Rome, so
notoriously destructive to the English Government, and thereby to be the cause
of all those Distractions in the Nation, that tie up the Hearts and Hands of
the Subject, from their Duty to the best of Princes, and weaken both his
greatness at home, and his Alliance abroad; and not only this, but to be
seduced to a persuasion, in such a juncture of Affairs, on whose only score,
have all the late Conspiracies against His Majesty's Sacred Life been contrived
and animated, This I say, is bad enough, but to find out a man Guilty of Ten
Thousand times more than this comes to, and Pardoned for it too, is (to use his
own word) to give us an Original of an unprecedented Criminal, and as
unprecedented Mercy. But if he intends this as a lash against the Author of the
Character, I Will venture to clear him, for to my knowledge, he is a Person so
far from laying his hand on his Heart, and owing any Benefit to Royal Pardons
or Acts of Oblivion, that I must say this truth for him. January 48 was past
before he was Born.

In the next Page he confesses that the Strongest Argument he finds in the
whole Character is this. Char. if ever a Papist mounts this Throne, then all
their murmurs their petitions, protesting and Association Votes will be
remembered to the purpose, upon which he makes this remark. Mr. L. Now what can
be a greater Indignity to the Justice and Resolution of that Illustrious Body
(viz. the Parliament) then to imagine so narrow a thought could any way
influence the Candor and Solemnity of their Debates.

Yes, indeed, what greater indignity then to imagine it. For if as the
Character says, and Mr. Lestrange grants, they will be remembered to the
purpose, and the Heretic Dogs, upon his mounting into the Throne may live to
be hanged for their Barking, what greater indignity to the Courage and
Resolution of those Illustrious Patriots then to imagine they will slacken their
Votes and Debates against a Popish Succession for fear of his Revenge. So
cowardly a thought indeed (as he says) would be too narrow for the Souls of
English Men.

From this he comes to the main point the Characters proving the Succession of
the English Crown to be wholly subjected to the disposal Determinations and
Limitations of Parliament.

The Parliament (says the Character) 25 of Henry the 9th, settled the Crown upon
the Heirs of that Kings Body by Queen Anne, and in the 28 repealed that Act,
and intayl'd the Succession upon the Heirs of his Body by Queen Jane, Mary and
Elizabeth being declared illegitimate. And in case they died without issue then
the Parliament Empowr'd him by the same Act to dispose of the Succession by his
own Letters Patents or his last will. In the 35th. Year of his Reign the
Parliament granted the Succession to Edward, and for want of the Heirs of his
Body to the Lady Mary, and the Heirs of her Body, and for want of such Heirs to
the Lady Elizabeth, under certain Limitations and Conditions contained in that
Act.

But to prove all this nothing to his purpose he makes these six Objections.

Mr. Lest. First, he says the Charasteriser infers that a Parliament may Order
or Dispose the Succession. But whither they may or no, here is little or nothing
proved from these Citations. First under the ambiguity of the word Parliament,
he would have this thought to be the single Act of the Lords and Commons, when
the Enacting authority of it was solely in the King. This first Objection has
more quibble than reason in it, and deserves no serious Answer. For the
Character is so far from starting up an Ordinance instead of an Act of
Parliament, that no man of sense can extort any such meaning from him.

Secondly he says. These Statutes do not so properly transfer a Right, as
declare and notify the Persons, for the prevention of disputes and
competitions, as appears by the preamble to that of the 28th. Statute.

Wherefore we your most humble and obedient Subjects, in this present
Parliament Assembled, calling to our Remembrance the great Divisions which in
times past have been in this Realm, by reason of several titles pretended to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm. which sometimes and for the most part ensued,
by occasion of ambiguity and doubts, then not so perfectly declared, but that
Men might upon froward intents expound them to every Man's sinister Appetite and
Affection, and Posterity of the lawful Kings and Emperors of this Realm;
whereof has ensued great Effusion and Destruction of Man's Blood, as well of
the great Number of Nobles, as of other the Subjects, and especially Inheritors
in the same, And the greatest Occasion thereof has been, because no perfect
and substantial Provision by Law has been made within this Realm it self: When
doubts and questions have been moved and proponed of the certainty and Legality
of the Succession, and Posterity of the Crown, etc.

Mr. L* Now so far is the intent of this Act from diverting the Succession,
that the express end of it was the setting of it right, by the avoidance of a
former settlement upon the nullity of the Marriage. And afterward 26th. of the
same King. cap. 2. The Act here before mentioned is called: The Act for the
establishment of the Succession of the Heirs of the Kings Highness in the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. Mr. L. Now there is a great deal of difference
betwixt translating the Succession from the wrong to the right, and the
diverting it from the right to the wrong.

Now certainly never had any objection less sense in it then this, for if this
Act empowered the King upon the failure of Edward, Mary and Elizabeth, to give
the Crown to whom he pleased, as really it did, and that must be expounded to
give it only to the next right Heir. Now their could be but one right Heir in
the case, and consequently if that right ought to possess, the empowring the
King, to dispose of the Crown where he pleased, was downright nonsense and a
palpable contradiction in the very words. So that for instance had Henry the
8th Upon presumption of this Act, out of some particular inclination,
bequeathed the Reversion of his Crown to a Tenth Cozen removed instead of a
First, and this Law had been to have been read by Mr. L'estranges Spectacles,
the very end they made it for, ( viz.) to keep peace and quiet had been utterly
destroyed; for instead of Reconciling all differences between future
pretenders, and fixing the succession, it had only given new occasions for
fresh Feuds, and so the Parliament had only wisely made an Act to ruin the
very intent of it is Creation.

Mr. L. Thirdly, this change and disposition of settlement though it pased all
the formalityes of Bill and Debate, yet the First spring of it was from their
certain knowledge of the Kings Pleasure to have it so, without which they durst
never have ventred on such a proposition.

Mr. L. Fourthly, matter of Fact is no proof of Right, and especially a Fact
accompanied with so many circumstances of cross Capers and contradictions, as
the pronouncing of the same persons to be both Illegitimate, and legitimate,
etc. And a Man cannot imagine, without a scandal to that Grave and Wise
Assembly, that the levity of those Councels and that humor of Swearing and
Counter-swearing could be any other than the caprice of their new Head and
Governor.

Now pray observe the slyness of this slur he puts upon Majesty: He cunningly
insinuates that Matter of Fact may not be Matter of Right, and that when the
Humor, Caprice or Pleasure of a King influences the Votes of his Parliament to
make it so.

Now upon concession of Mr. Lestranges opinion, here is a broad gate opened for
a Rebellion; for by his Argument it is but disallowing the rightfulness of
Hearth money, and indeed almost all the rest of the Kings Revenues because the
King generally asked the Parliament money first, and so since the first spring
of those grants were from the knowledge of the Kings pleasure to have it so,
it is but Mr. L'estranges denying the matter of right in this case, and so he
makes the King a Tyrant to demand his own, and thereupon encourages the Subject
to the most impudent undutifulness and disloyalty in nature. Now those cross
Capers and contradictions, as he calls them, in declaring the same Persons one
while Illegitimate and afterward legitimate is one of the greatest Arguments
that the conservation of a Nations Peace, was held a greater piece of
Conscience in that Age, then the maintaining the right of Blood, when
Illegitimacy it self upon occasion could be restored to the power of
Succession. Neither was there any such Swearing or Counterswearing or any such
levity (as he calls it) in that grave Assembly, for the Oath they enjoined the
People in fidelity to the Kings Heirs could have no other meaning than whilst
they were Lawfully so, and in all Justice the Obligation of it expired in
course, when the Law declared them no longer such. Nor was it indeed any more
than the Tenure of our present Oath of Allegiance, in which we swear to be
faithful to the King's lawful Heirs and Successors, which the Ignorance of some
People has used as an Argument against the changing of Succession; as thinking
they have sworn fealty to the next of Blood, whereas in reality there is nothing
in that Oath that binds them to the Person but the Thing, to no particular Man
any further than as he is Heir and Successor, Lawfully so, and no Man truly is
either Heir or Successor til he Inherits and Succeeds, and as it is most
ridiculous to think the intent of an Oath of Allegiance is to make a Man Swear
Loyalty to a fellow Subject, as as the greatest Heir apparent is no more whilst
the King Lives, so the duty of that part of the Oath cannot necessarily be
understood to commence or take effect till the present Kings death, and then if
in the mean while the absolute Power of the Land, the King, Lords and Commons
have constituted a new Heir and Successor, the obligation of that Oath of
Allegiance can have no other Aspect, then to the Heir and Successor so
constituted.

Mr. Lest, fithly, with Reverence to the utility and constitution of good and
wholesome Laws, it is not presently to Cite a statute and say, there is a
precedent, for those Laws that are repugnant to the Light of nature and Common
Right are Nullities in themselves.

Now here is one of the boldest Master strokes of the pen that ever came in
print. This point once gained, all the Protestant Laws since the reformation,
and the whole fabric of the present Government are totally subverted. It Is but
a Popish Successors believing and maintaining that all the Protestant Laws ever
since Henry the 8ths. perversion are against the light of nature, and
consequently Nullites in themselves: So down goes the Protestant Church, up
start the old Statutes de Haeretico comburendo, the old Smith field Fireworks,
whilst Popery comes in in the open face of day most triumphantly introduced
even by the awful Divinity of Law and Justice for its Supporters. So that after
all Mr. Lestranges Vindication of the Honor, Honesty, Veneration of Oaths,
Performance of Laws, and Preservation of the Protestant Religion in a Popish
Successor, he has very subtly sound him out an Evasion to be a greater Tyrant
and Devil than the Author of the Character could paint him, and that too with
all the Innocence in the World, and even without the least Blemish of
Infidelity. But to come a little nearer to him, in the first Place these Acts
for the settlement of the Crown were so far from being repugnant to the Light
of nature, that on the contrary it is evidently manifest that the Lawmakers
that made them moved by no other Guide or Light but that. For since self
Preservation is the first and greatest thing that the light of nature teaches
all Mankind, the very preamble to the Acts confirm us that the preservation of
themselves and their Heirs in Peace and Tranquillity, and to avoid the future
Effusion of English Blood, was the sole End and Design of those Acts.

Secondly these Acts have nothing repugnant or destructive of common right. For
if by common right, he implies a right to any possession or pretension derived
from human Power and the Laws of Man, then it is plain by the Constitution of
our Government, where our Laws are not like these of the Medes and Persians,
that the Lawmakers that gave can take, and in that respect there is no right so
firm, which the absolute Power of the Law lying in the three States in
Parliament cannot shake. But if by common right he means a right derived from
the Laws or Commands of God, and therefore those Acts of Parliament are
nullities in themselves, because repugnant to the Rules and Duty of
Christianity. Then he would do well to tell us when that Law of God was made or
that Command given. But that there is no such Law nor any such Rules of
Christianity is plainly to be demonstrated from the most eminent precedents of
holy writ; where we find proximity of blood has been so far from challenging
that unalterable Right of Empire that on the other side there have been several
Changes of Kings made in that case even amongst Gods own People and that always
by his Consent, and sometimes by his special Order. Besides if any such Law of
God had been made, and left us in holy Scripture, it is certain that Law ought
to have no more obligation over one Christian Kingdom than another, and then
consequently Venice and Holland that have no Kings at all, and Poland that
always elect their Kings, by Mr. Lestranges Inference live Age after Age in
continual Violation of Common Right, the Duty of Christians, and the Laws of
God. I do confess I have heard of a Command of Christ that says, Let every
Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of God;
whosoever therefore resists the Power resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation; and therefore if the
higher Powers of England the King, Lords and Commons are an Ordinance of God
too, it is an Article of my Creed, That he that denies their Authority and
Power, and not content with that only, endeavors to persuade and seduce the
rest of his fellow subjects to the same denial is not only a Traitor to his
Country, but from Christ's own Sentence shall receive, if possibly, a double
Portion of Damnation.

But now for his Sixth Observation on this Statute.

Mr. L. Lastly he brings instance here to prove that a Parliament may divert
the succession, but he shows withal, that there can be no security even in that
Exclusion, showing that what one Parliament does another may undo, so that now
we are upon equal Terms of security or hazard, either in the exclusion of the
successor or in restraining him, for if he be tied up by one Parliament,
another may set him at Liberty; and if he be excluded by one Parliament,
another may take him in again.

Now certainly this is the most comical humor I ever met with, to advise a
Parliament to have a care of excluding a Papist for fear another Parliament
restore him. Persuade them to fear that once, and make them Jealous of fancyes
and Chimeras indeed. But to dissipate all shadows of any such dangers, there
are some heads as wise as Mr. L'estranges (no disparagment) that are of opinion
if one English Parliament once exclude a Popish successor we may safely defy
Five Hundred Parliaments afterward to restore him. The disinheriting of a
Popish successor being a kind of Limbus, that if we have once got him into it,
it is damnable odds that all the intrest of Rome with Ten Millions of Masses
never get him out of it. I must confess if we could have a Parliament of Mr.
L'estranges particular choosing, the Consistory of Cardinals for the House of
Lords, and St Omers College for the House of Commons much might be; but till
then we are pretty safe in that point.

But amongst all Mr. L'estranges despicable thoughts of the Decrees and power
of Parliaments in Henry the Eight's days, he clearly forgets to answer that Act
of Parliament of Queen Elizabeth's mentioned in the Character, in which 'twas
made Treason for any man to affirm that the disposal of the Imperial Crown of
England lay not in the Queen and Parliament, and indeed that Act comes so near
the present face of the affairs in England, that it was made upon the self
same occasion, that the Bill of Exclusion was endeavored by the late
Parliaments, (viz.) with an intention of putting by Mary Queen of Scots the
then next Popish Heir from the Succession, had not her Conspiracy against the
Life of the Queen, put an end to all farther care, by the forefeiture of her
head. But these Six Objections with the help of Common Right and the Light of
Nature may serve to answer both; and truly Mr. L'estrange has given us the top
of his Politics, and the utmost strength of his Reason for the defense of a
Popish Successor, in opposition even to the Supreme Authority of the Nation,
and against all the precedents of Laws and History. But alas! what signifies
Supreme Authority, Presidents, Laws, etc. There Is nothing so sacred which
stands in their way, that the Champions of Rome must not endeavor to overthrow,
and when the Popish Interest cries Halloo, they must Bark at least though they
cannot Bite. Now it is plainly to be discovered at what Foundation he strikes,
by lessening and enfeebling the Legislative Power of the Nation, and though he
wisely lays the Scene at such distance as the remoter Age of Henry the 8th, yet
we understand where he aims the lash he gives, and what Gall his Ink's made of.
But truly in his Remarks and Reflections upon the Capriches (as he calls them)
of Henry the 8th, with the weakness of his great Council, the shallowness of
their Debates, and the invalidity of their decrees, he chooses the safer
Subject. The Majesty he reviles, and the Authority he ridicules, being so long
since inoffensive Dust and Ashes, that he has this Reason for his Boldness, and
this shield for his Defense. Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles.


But to answer those strait-laced Consciences that so vehemently maintain and
assert Succession to be Iure Divino, and cannot be altered by any human Laws, I
will put this instance.

Suppose a King has two Sons, the eldest of which, ambitious of a Crown, and
mislead by the ill Counsel of his Priests, favorites or the like, conspires to
depose his Father, and in Order thereunto, confederates with some neighboring
Monarch; who upon assurance given him, by this Aspirer of resigning of some
part of his Dominions to him, or becoming tributary to him, furnishes him with
Money and Men, by which assistance he flies out into an open Rebellion against
his Father, upon which the Father commissions his younger Son to fight this Rebel
Prince, who beats him, and makes him fly out of his fathers Dominions to that
confederate neighbors Protection, upon which the King with the unanimous
consent of his loyal Subjects passes an Act for a total Exclusion of the Elder
son from the Crown, and to place the Succession in the younger. Now will any
Man say that this is not warrantable and just both by the Laws of God and Man.
For if it be unwarantable, and that this Rebel Prince must still suceeed, then
consider what follows.

Frst, here is a manifest obstructing of the distribution of the greatest
Justice both human and divine. For whilst this Prince continues safe by his
Flight, and his foreign Protection, from any personal Sufferance for his
Crimes, and at the same time it is granted he cannot suffer in his Birthright,
then this indispensable continuation of succession confers the greatest Earthly
felicity and reward viz. a Diadem on the greatest of Criminals, one Doubly a
Traitor not only against the Lords anointed, but even to the Fountain of his
own Royal Blood, and the Author of his being, a Father.

Secondly; it makes crowned Heads the most miserable State of all man kind; nay
they are below the meanest Peasant in their Kingdoms: For the vengeance of a
Subject, having the Power to disinherit, shall pursue a Rebel son even to the
East Indies, whilst a King, who they say, has, or should have long hands shall
notwith all his thunder reach the worst of rebels cross the next Sea, or
perhaps the next County. So that where is their boasting themselves to be Gods
Vicegerents, when they alone of all Men are most debarred that greatest
Prerogative of a Diety, REVENGE.

3d, By this means Majesty that should be most sacred, and the person of it
most religiously guarded, and defended, lies more exposed than all Mankind
besides, for if it be true that. Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.


And the lust of Inheritance makes the Blood of the Impatient Heir boil high
for possession, then it is most true, where the Inheritance is Greatest, and the
Temptation Strongest, as in the case of a Crown, that there the Blood boiles
highest. And if so, and Birthright be still unforfitable, then to the
strongest Temptation here is the least danger, and the greatest Encouragement
for gratifying that lust, and accomplishing all such tempting desires. So that
upon this position, who so armed for a Traitor as he that is Born to a Crown,
and who so unsafe as he that wears it. But surely it is inconsistant with that
particular care, that God takes for the Preservation of Kings, to entail that
Ius Divinum upon them, that places them infra statum Humanum.

However to give a little clearer light into this great point of Succession I
shall trouble my Reader with one instance more.

It cannot be disputed but that either Queen Mary or Queen Elizabeth did
succeed to the Imperial Crown of England not by Divine Right of Succession,
since Queen Elizabeth was Born whilst Queen Katharine the Mother of Queen Mary
was living, but one of them must undoubtedly enjoy the Crown Iure
Parliamentario: if the latter, (as cannot be denied) and that Succession is
Iure Divino, then she was an Usurpess upon the Right of the House of Scotland:
and what then is the consequence of all this!

First, it shakes, and strikes at the Foundation of the Church of England,
which derives all its Power and Authority from the Crown which began in King
Henry the 8ths, and were more fully confirmd by Queen Elizabeth, and therefore
the Church of England was settled by a Princess de facto and not de jure,
insomuch that it undermines the very basis of the Hierarchy and Ecclesiastic
power, and the order of the whole Clergy, who derive their Distinctions and
Ordinations from that Queen.

2ly. It may call in Question all the Grants of that Queen, which have not been
confirmed by the Scottish Line, and destroy the many and great Privileges
conferred on both the Universities.

3ly. According to the Rule of Ius Divinum it may raise a Question hereafter of
what validity those Honors are which that Queen was pleased to confer upon
several great and eminent Families.

Lastly it would well become many worthy and learned Men seriously to consider
whether they do not labor to do the Work and Drudgery of the Church of Rome,
who assert so fatal a Principle, whereby they make Queen Elizabeth an
Usurpress, and build the superstructure of the Protestant Religion, the right
of the Church, and the Legality of the whole Clergy of England, upon such a
sandy and ruinous Foundation as the High and Mighty Ius Divinum. But if we will
allow that Princess our lawful Queen, which I hope no Man will have the
Impudence to deny, then the disposal of the Crown by Parliament is just.

But if Ius Divinum that lay buried 44 Years together must make a Resurrection
in our present Distractions of England, and both Honor and Conscience render an
exclusion Bill unlawful, how came the proposition of making a Popish Successor
but a Nominal Prince, and settling the Administration in Protestant hands: If
that may be, then here is Ius Divinum quite laid aside: for Divine Right of
Birth entitles a Prince to the power as well as the name of a King, and if that
right be sacred and inviolable, no one part of it more than another ought or
can lawfully be alienated. But if the greatest part of it be by the greatest
Authority allowed justly Alienable by Act of Parliament, there is an end of all
Divine Right, and a concession of the Jurisdiction of Parliaments, insomuch
that if they may legally take away the Kernel, and leave only the Husk of
Succession, by the same Authority they may as well take away both: and a total
Exclusion is no more repugnant to Honor or Conscience then an Exclusion in part.

But if any Man has a curiosity to examine the Effects of Exclusions in part,
viz. Limitations and Restrictions that have been put upon the English Crown, I
will only advise him cursorly to run over the contests between King John and
the Barons; Henry the 3d, Edward the 2d, and Richard the 2d and their Barons,
and the troubles of Henry the 6th, and the several Agreements made between him
and the D. of York, and he will easily satisfy himself that notwithstanding the
several Agreements Restraints and Limitations put upon the Crown, and those
confirmed not only by Acts of Parliament but solemnly ratifyed in the Face of
Heaven by many Oaths and dreadful Excommunications by the Church, yet none ever
held: but so soon as those Parliaments were dissolved, or the first opportunity
or advantage happened, those Kings by the ill advice of their Favorites and
Minions broke all, whereupon both parties flying to Arms, the King accusing
them of Treason, and they Him of Perjury, the rise of all those long and bloody
Civil Wars had no other ground but this.

But to back his last six Arguments in defense of the Succession we find him
for the next three or four Pages together corroborating his Opinion with the
practice of the primitive Christians. First he tells you it is a Gospel precept
not to do ill that good may come of it, such as the unwarrantable devesting of
a Prince of his Birthright though for any safety or preservation whatever. So
that in the case of England supposing it would come at last to a downright
persecution under a Popish Successor, yet to stand upon our Guards to prevent
it would be more than ever the primitive Christians did under the ten
Persecutions; and we have not only their Example but their express Doctrine
against it. And therefore (as he says in another place) it is our Duty to bless
God for the Peace and Happiness we now enjoy, and rather wait his farther
pleasure with thankfulness and resignation, then with murmuring and a^^trust to
Anticipate future Evils and Prejudge Providence to come.

Now never was any thing more plausibly managed to so little purpose, for the
Correspondence between ours and the primitive Christians case is here so
incoherently Balanced, that never were Arguments more Sophistical. The
primitive Christians preached Obedience to Nero, yes, and they had forfeited
their Christianity if they had done otherwise, but what was that Nero, an
absolute Monarch: and what those primitive Bishops? not such as ours, they were
not a part of the Legislative Power of the Nation, as our Prelates are. If Nero
invented Wracks, Tortures and Gibbets for persecuting or murdering the poor
Christians, he did it by his own uncontrollable Authority, nor were those
primitive Bishops called to make Laws, and therefore had not the lawful power
of the least Vote in Moderation of Neroes Cruelty, or in Redress of the
Christians Torments. I am sure if they had had any such voting or law-making
Power, and yet out of a base principle of cowardly Fear on one side, and like
fordid Sycophants out of a servile Flattery of Neroes barbarous Inclinations on
the other side, had neglected the means, (as much as in them lay) of preventing
those Persecutions, they had been rather Wolves then Shepherds over the flock
of Christ, and Accessaries to all those Butcheries that Nero committed against
them. For not to oppose where opposition is lawful, is to permit, and to permit
is to Act. So that there would not have been that Engine made to rend the
Tortured Christians Bones, that they them selves in so doing had not lent a
helping hand to the winding of it up. Nor is it to be doubted but that if those
Primitive Prelates had had those Sacred Recorded Statutes, those Royal decrees,
Presidents and Laws before 'em, wherein the disposal of the Crown under which
they lived had lain in the Absolute Power of the Nation, it being declared no
less then Treason to deny it, and that the Kingdoms safety in despite of
Birthright had sometimes Authorized the change of the Sucession; had these
Prelates, I say, lived under such a Government, and at the same time sat at the
Helm like ours, it is to be presumed upon the certain prospect of a next
Successor of known Principles of Barbarity and persecution, with the Innate
implacable inveteracy against Christians and Christianity; they would boldly
and unanimously have endeavored and Voted for his Removal, and whatever
Obedience they Preached to a Nero upon a Throne, they would have thought it
neither an Obligation of Conscience or Christianity to have lent their
Assistance to the mounting a Nero into a Throne. So that it is more than likely
under such a Power and such Circumstances they would have stood upon their
Guards, (as the Character says) against so dangerous and so fatal a Succession;
not stood upon their Guards, as Mr. Lestrange interprets it, with their Swords
in their hands, but as the Author meant it, with their Eyes and Tongues in
their heads and resolution in their Souls, to see the real dangers themselves
and their Religion are in, and to propose and provide all lawful and necessary
means to prevent them.

Nor would they upon second thoughts with Mr. Lestranges tender Conscience have
judged this legal and manly Resolution in defense of their Religion to fall
under the Praemunire mentioned in the 3d. P. of his Book, a Prostituting of
their Souls to save their Skins and Fortunes. This I am sure, they could never
with Reason or Religion have judged it any such Prostitution, but if they had
made Religion and Conscience the Pretense to judge it so, and thereupon had
directed and managed all their Studies, Labors, Endeavors, Votings, Preachings,
Insinuations and Encouragements for the Establishment of such a Successor, they
might very seasonably fall under as severe a scandal, and I am sure as justly
deserved, as what Mr. Lestrange has given the Fanatics under the Name of
Papists in Masquerade; for in this case the wiser part of the World would have
shrewdly suspected they had been more Heathens in Masquerade, than Christians.

Neither is there (by Mr. Lestranges Permission) that incumbent Duty upon
Christianity, to be so wholly employed in blessing God for our present Peace
and Prosperity, as to wait his farther Pleasure and Providence to come with so
entire a Resignation, till we neglect a lawful Preservation when approaching
Ruin threatens us; he that by the Blessing of God stands upon the firm Shore
and sees that terrible and unusual Torrent come rolling on, which in
Probability may break the banks and drown him, is so far from being oblidged to
an idle standing still, and a resignation to the will of Providence, whether
the Innundation shall break in, and he sink or swim: That if he miscarries by
that idle neglect of himself, it will not at all clear him from being accessory
to his own destruction, (and therefore answerable for it) by excusing himself
to God, and saying, Lord, I submitted to thy pleasure.

From this we come to the Characters Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which the
Character avows may be laid aside under the Tyranny of a Popish Succession; in
answer to which we have Mr. L'estrange very severe against him, for so bold and
so dangerous a position, and perhaps if there be any glimpse of Reason
throughout his whole answer it is there; but however that the Authors Opinion
may not appear so strangely enormous, nor his position so wholly destructive to
Government, and so opposite to Christianity, as his answer would render it; let
us venture to make a little explanation of the Character. First then to
distinguish what that Tyranny is which he justifies we may lawfully oppose, and
what Invasion that, we may justly repel, I must refer the Reader to the
Character page 22d.

Char. What does this Popish King by admitting the Popes Supremacy, but divest
himself of half his Royalty, whilst like the Junior King of Brentford in the
play he resigns and alienates the Right hand power of Majesty to an Invader and
Usurper; and thus we are enslaved by a medley Government betwixt Tyranny and
Usurpation. and again. page 6.

Char. If he be a Man of Justice that still makes for Rome, for whilst he
believes the Pope to be Christ's lawful Vicar, and that Office includes the
Ecclesiastic Supremacy, no doubt but he will think it as much the duty of his
Christianity to give the Pope his right as to take his own. So that upon this
supposition of the Popes Supremacy restored, the Author has stated both our
Tyrants and our Slavery. But to return to Mr. L'estrange. page 73.

Mr. L. In our Oath of Supremacy we swear that the King is the ONLY SUPREME,
Governor SUPREME, so none, (not the Pope) above him, and ONLY SUPREME, so none
coordinate or equal with him.

If so, and the King is Supreme Governor Ecclesiastic and Civil, and a Popish
King notwithstanding shall alienate half his Supremacy to the Pope, then the
Pope is co-King with him; and that it may not be objected that Supreme
Ecclesiastic Power is not Kingly Power, where the Highest and last Appeal
lies, there lies Royal Power, and therefore whilst the highest and last appeal
in all causes Ecclesiastic, in such a Government is lodged in the Pope his
Power is Royal. For it would be very absurd to say that a Supreme Moderator in
causes betwixt Man and Man should be a Kingly Governor, and a Supreme Moderator
in causes between God and Man should be none. That were to place a Majesty in
that Authority that says Thou shall not steal, and none in that that says Thou
shall have no other Gods but me. It Is true the Pope to mince the matter, and to
Sham upon those Romish Kings that Admit of his Church Supremacy, very cunningly
usurps the Prerogative without the Name, and therefore wherever he is Supreme
Judge, he lets the Temporal Sovereignty be still the Supreme Sheriff, for
wherever his Tribunal condemns, the Popish King is Hangman Generalissimo to
execute. Yet still in reality his Power is never the less Kingly, when we see
that this Popish Executioner under him, is so far from the Exercise of any
Regal Authority in his Sheriffalty, that he is but a substitute of the Popes,
and accountable to the Pope for the least neglect or misdemeanor in his office
of that kind, so that the reestablishment of the Popes Supremacy here, is
setting up a new Kingly Power. But by what Title? None. For granting his
Supremacy of old was his right whilst he possessed it, yet considering that right
has been lost above a Hundred years together, by the Laws of Conquest it is now
wholly expired, and he can lay no more claim or pretense to it after so long an
alienation, then the Christians to Constantinople, or the Danes or Saxons to
England. Now it is a known Maxim in England that a King of himself cannot give,
sell, or alienate all, or part of his hereditary Sovereign Power, neither can
he any more restore the Pope (out of a freak of conscience) to his Supremacy,
or his Abbey Lubbers to their old fat pastures, then he can say to the Duke of
Saxony, Sir, lay claim to half England and it is yours, and therefore land a
colony in the West of England, and Crown your self King there, whilst I content
my self with the Sovereignty of Yorkshire, and two or three more Northern
Counties about it. Nay suppose a King should say so, and this Saxon Prince upon
that presumption should come, and make a Seizure, there is never a Subject in
England, notwithstanding their Lawful Sovereigns special Gommand to them to
yield Obedience to this usurping invading Saxon, that may not justly and with a
safe Conscience oppose this Invader, and shoot him though the heart at the very
first step he makes into England. For whatever passive Obedience is due to our
Native Prince we have none due to a Foreign Invader. So likewise it is a plain
case that the Popes Supremacy entering into England is an Invading and Usurping
Royalty. For though we are bound to pay fealty, to what ever Deputies,
Viceroys, or Subministers the King shall Ordain or Institute under him, yet the
Popes Supremacy cannot come under that name, for it ceases to be Supreme if
there be a Power above it. So that whenever the King shall say to the Pope
assume your Prerogative, there is never a Subject of England, that may not by
violence rescue an Heretic from a Stake that is condemned by that Prerogative,
or any delegated Authority from the Usurped Supremacy of the Pope, nay if they
burn the very Tribunal about those Jesuitish Judges ears that pronounced that
Heretics Condemnation, they may Justify the Fact both to their King and their
God.

The Papist in Masquerade draws now near to a Conclusion, and gives the
Characteriser a dead doing blow at last stroke, by the Argument raised against
the Characters position, that Kings were made for the People, and not the
People for the Kings. Though by the way the Characterisers assertion is not
only one Drs. opinion; for if he will allow King James to have as much sense as
himself, we shall find him, (if we may take his Royal word for it) a little
leaning toward the Characters side, witness this clause in one of his Speeches
in Parliament. Anno 1603.

As I am a Head and Governor of all the People in my Dominions, who are my
natural Vassals and Subjects considering them in number and distinct Ranks; so
if we take the People as one Body and Mass, then as the Head is ordeind for the
Body, and not the Body for the Head, so must a righteous King know himself to
be ordained for his People, and not his People for him; for though a King and
his People be Relata, yet can he be no King if he want People and Subjects; but
there be many People in the World that lack a Head, etc

But no matter for all this, Kings are but Men, and this human Error of King
James, must not dare to oppose the more sacred Authority of Mr. Lestrange. For
to bafflle this gross Mistake of them both, he continues,

But after all these Words, to show that Government originally was not popular,
I shall add a few more to prove the Institution of it to be purely Divine;
which Opinion, in truth, needs not any other support then the Authority of the
holy Scriptures. By me Kings reighn etc. I have made the Earth, the Man, and
the Beasts that are upon the Ground by my great Power, and my Out-stretch'd
Arm, and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me Ier. 27th. 5.

Now I cannot find by this Text: By me Kings raighn etc. But that by me
Subjects possess their lawful Inheritances might claim the same right. For an
Empire to a Monarch and a Lordship to a Subject, a Naboths Vineyard, or an
Ahabs Kingdom are equally the Gift of God, and by our Authors reasons may
equally pretend to a Divine Iustitution. Neither is there so much Support as he
calls it in this holy Authority, but I can match it with another as holy and as
much to his purpose, which tells us, not a Sparrow falls to the Ground without
the will of my Father, etc. Now if no King reighns without him, and no Sparrow
falls without him; a Manmight ask him why the holy Authority of this last Text
might not make the falling of a Sparrow have as much of divine Institution in
it as the Enthroning of a Monarch. Nor can I perceive that there lies so much
stress in Gods giving the Government of the Earth, Man, and Beasts to whom it
seemed Meet to him, as to Nebuchadnezar in the Text, but that a MEAN, MEAN,
TEKEL, UPHARZIN, written by the Almighties own hand against his impious Heir,
the sacrilegious Idolatrous Balshazar was as much the Word of God, and had as
much divine Institution in it as by me Kings reign. But to proceed in our
Authors argument.

Mr. L. That which we now call Kingly Government was at First called Paternal,
and after Patriarchal etc. And we sind by the powers they excercised etc. And
so he advances in a Florid Descant upon this Subject till he lodges the first
Paternal Kingly Government in Adam.

Here you may perceive he is harping at the old Iure Divino, but I shall wave
that point of dispute, and even with granting his supposition true, out of his
own opinion invalidate the chief argument of all his discourse, and the
Fundamental Design of his whole pamphlet, (viz:) Unalterable Right of
Succession. If then (as he says) the Patriarchall power was Kingly, how comes
it to pass that Esau forfeited his Royal Inheritance? and Jacob his younger
Brother got it from him; nay the alienation of his Birthright (as Regal and as
Divine as our Masquerader would have it,) was transferd to the younger Brother
even by God himself, and that too (as we read in Gods promis to the Mother)
before they were born. Nay though the Father Isaac had no prejudice against
Esau, but resolved to make him his Heir, and accordingly sent him for venison
to cherish his heart, that he might receive his Blessing and with it the
Assurance of his Inheritance; yet when Jacob by Artifice, and his Brothers
borrowed Name had deceived the Father, and extorted the Blessing, we find the
grant of his Inheritance, though fraudulently obtained was so far from being
retracted, that the Fathers promise and word even to the Counterfeit Esau was
more sacred, then all the formidable ties of Blood, and the inviolable Right of
Succession. Now I hope, our wise Author will not quarrel with Isaacs Injustice
and appeal to the Light of Nature and Common Right for the Redress of Esaus
wrongs. Perhaps it may be objected rhat Esau sold his Birthright foolishly for
a Mess of Pottage, though that we find had no influence on Isaacs
Determination, yet if a Royal Birthright could be sold or forfeited either by
the Folly or Fault of the Heir, where is SUCCESSION? and if in our present State
of England we have an Heir of those corrupted Principles, and that depraved
Infatuation, till he has prodigally forfeited his Fathers and his Grandfathers
Blessings, the one having sealed the Protestant Faith with his Blood, and the
other having particularly entayl'd a curse upon all his Progeny that should
ever Apostatise from the Protestant Truth to the Popish Superstition, if we
have an Heir so bewitched by the Charms of Rome, which like the Sirens songs can
convert Reason into Madness, or rather like Circes Bowls transform Men into
Swine, why not the Prodigals fare the husks, a more proper Reward from him,
than a Coronation Festival. This I am certain, if he had Esaus Fate, the
Blessing and Inheritance should go together.

I shall only instance one particular more out of holy Writ, I hope his etc.
in the last Paragraph will allow the Judges of Israel were a Kingly Power as
well as the Patriarchal, and that they may indeed appear so, we find their
Government the most agreeing with the present Monarchy of England, for they had
the Power of Life and Death, Peace and War in their Prerogative, but then as a
Restriction against Absolute and Arbitrary power, (like our Common and
Ecclesiastic Laws) their Constitution of Government was limited and confined
withing the established and recorded Mosaic Law which was the ultimate Verge of
their Jurisdiction both Civil and Spiritual. Now here in the case of Samuel
Judge of Isreal we find him parting with his Royalty and conferring it upon his
two Sons even in his own Life time: after that we find the Israelites disgusted
against their ill Government and asking for a King, that is such a King as
those of the Nations round about them, viz. an Absolute Monarch. And upon this
Saul stepped up into the Throne. Now here we may observe there was so little
Regard had to the Right of Succession that their lawful Judges even after
possession were divested of their Royal Dignity, and that too (mark it) not
only upon the Peoples Request, but even by a Command from the immediate Voice
of God, without the lest Reflection of the Duty of passive Obedience to Samuels
Sons those corrupted Judges of Isreal. And though it may be objected that God
was angry with the Children of Israel for their desires of Change, in that they
had followed other Gods, and that this asking for a King as we read) looked
like rejecting of him that had brought them out of Egypt, and delivered them
from the Hands of their Enemies, yet since God complied with that desire, no
Man must say, this Change was unlawful or the removal of their Royal Judges
unjust. But in Answer to all this, our Masquerader will not want a
Justification for the unalterable Right of Succession, nay rather than stand
out at a dead Lift he will start you up a common Right and a Light of Nature
that upon occasion shall supersede even the Records of Scripture and the very
immediate Acts of God. Nay we find, after the Constitution of that more
absolute Jewish Monarchy which began in Saul, that his very next Successor was
a Stranger to his Blood, a Man of a quite different Family; in so much that
David the Man after Gods own heart, a man so eminently beloved of the Almighty,
that from his Loins the promised Messiah should procceed, was a Prince so far
from owing his Crown to the Right of Birth and Blood, that he was anointed King
even in his Predecessors life in spite of the Greater sons of Saul those
nearer and juster pretenders to the Crown had Birthright given them title to
it. But so Early a sea-mark did God set up against that fatal Rock, unalterable
Succession; and so timely a care did the great Founder of Empires, the Divine
Omnipotence take, to show that the Dispensations of Majesty for his Peoples
good and his own Glory, were to be preferred before the Sovereignty of Birth,
that blinder gift of Chance. But to come a little down to our own age, even in
all our latest Modern constitutions of Monarchy, and that not only in England
but all the Christian Kingdoms in Europe, we find there is not altogether that
infallibility in Birth right, but that Fools and Madmen notwithstanding their
proximity of descent are excluded from Empire, so that by Mr. Lestranges
permission a Shallow Perecranium or an Addled one upon occasion shall put very
good Royal veins out of play. So that to make Monarchy go a little hand in hand
with our new natural Philosophy, some Critics will tell you, that the Life of
it lies more in the Head than the Heart, that is, in the Brain than the Blood.

And that I need not stray far for an Instance, have we not had a late King of
Portugal deposed as Delirious and Frantic and consequently rendered by Law
incapable of reighning, and all this done by his own Subjects and those of his
own Religion, without the least Reflection of Treason or Rebellion or the
Aspersion of lifting a hand against the Lords anointed.

Nay if truth might make bold in England there be those that dare honestly
venture to say there must go so strong a Dose of Folly and Madness or indeed
both together to make up the composition of a Popish Heir to the Protestant
Crown of England, especially an Heir that can be fond of the Gugaws, Bawbles
and Trumpery of the Romish Superstition as to hazard three Crowns for them, and
that too by an Apostasy from a native Hereditary Protestant Faith, not only
derived down to him, but more signally sealed by a Royal Fathers Martyrdom, a
light which certainly would shine through all the mists and fogs the Iesuitish
Magic has or can cast about him, though thicker if possible then the Egyptian
Darkness it self, a Darkness to be felt; were there not a Skull in the case
more than strangely impenetrable, and a Cerebellum if possibly more than
supernaturally impedimented: so that if in Truth he but fairly stood the Test
of an old Statute we have already, the Begging of his Reversion would be so
feasible that it would be cross we won, and pile he lost.

But to come yet a little nearer to the mark, as it is most undoubtedly true
that Souls are never Generate, and consequently not always derived from the
Father that Begets, it sometimes so falls out by the Caprice of some ill
natured planet, or to come to a more Christian notion, by the indisputable Will
of Omnipotence that moulds the Clay as he pleases, to make such infinite
disproportions in the unequal distributing of those sparks of his own Celestial
fires called souls, that so much over rule the inferior Mass of Flesh and
Blood, and sometimes so far Estrange and alienated a Son from the Nature,
Temper, and indeed almost every thing of the Father, till it does worse then
Bastardize even Legitimacy it self.

FINIS

