Theatrum Poetarum, OR A COMPLETE COLLECTION of the POETS, Especially The most
Eminent, of all Ages. The Ancients distinguished from the Moderns in their
several Alphabets. With some Observations and Reflections upon many of them,
particularly those of our own Nation. Together With a Prefatory Discourse of
the POETS and POETRY in General.

By EDWARD PHILLIPS.

-- (...).

Hesiod. Theog. London, Printed for CHARLES SMITH, at the Angel near the Inner
Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. Anno Dom. M.DC.LXXV.

(...) Perfection of knowledge the one, how immers't in swinish sloth and
ignorance the other; I am apt to wonder how it could possibly be imagined that
the same rationality of Soul should inform alike, as we are obliged to believe
by the authority of Sacred Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the Souls
Immortality, the whole mass and frame of Human Nature, and not rather that
there should be a gradation of Notion from the lowest brute up to the Angelic
Region: But that calling to mind the common maxim of Philosophy, that the
perfection of Soul is the same in the Infant, as in the ripe of age, only
acting more or less vigorously, according to the capacity of the Organs; I
thence collect that there is also a different capacity of the Organs, whence
arises a different Spirit and Constitution, or some intervening cause, by
which it either acts or lies dormant even in Persons of the same age: the first
is that Melior Natura, which the Poet speaks of, with which whoever is amply
endued, take that Man from his Infancy, throw him into the Deserts of Arabia,
there let him converse some years with Tigers and Leopards, and at last bring
him where civil society and conversation abides, and ye shall see how on a
sudden, the scales and dross of his barbarity purging off by degrees, he will
start up a Prince or Legislator, or some such Illustrious Person; the other is
that noble thing called Education, this is that Harp of Orphe^s, that Lute of
Amphion, so elegantly figured by the Poets to have wrought such Miracles among
irrational and insensible Creatures, which raises beauty even out of
deformity, order and regularity, out of Chaos and confusion; and which if
thoroughly and rightly prosecuted, would be able to civilize the most savage
natures, and root out barbarism and ignorance from off the face of the Earth*
those who have either of these qualifications singly, may justly be termed
Men; those who have both united in a happy conjunction more than Men; those who
ha^^ neither of them in any competent measure, certainly, in the conduct of
their lives, less then Men, and of this last sort is composed that greatest
part by far of our habitable World, (for what the Nature and distinction is of
the Inhabitants of other orb^is^ to us utterly unkown though not any where
circumscribed, but diffused alike through the 4 quarters) commonly called to
Euripides for Tragedy, yet nevertheless sleep inglorious in the crowd of the
forgotten vulgar: and for as many of those Names of Writers, whether more or
less Eminent, as have been preserved from utter oblivion, together with an
account for the most part of what they writ, all Learned Men especially such as
are curious of antiquity are obliged to those generous* Registers who have been
studious to keep alive the memories of Famous Men, of whom it is at least some
satisfaction to understand that there were once such Men or Writings in being:
However since their works having by what ever casualty perished, their Names,
though thus recorded, yet as being dispeirc't in several Authors, and some of
those not of the most conspicuous note, are scarce known to the generality,
even of the Learned themselves, and since of later Ages the memories of many
whose works have been once made public; and in general esteem, have
nevertheless through tract of time, and the succession of new Generations,
fallen to decay and dwindled almost to nothing; I judged it a Work in some sort
not unconducing to a public benefit, and to many not ungrateful, to muster up
together in a body, though under their several Classes, as many of those that
have employed their fancies or inventions in all the several Arts and Sciences,
as I could either collect out of the several Authors that have mentioned them
in part, or by any other ways could come to the knowledge of, but finding this
too various and manifold a task to be managed at once, I pitched upon one
Faculty first, which, not more by chance than inclination, falls out to be that
of the Poets, a Science certainly of all others the m^st^noble and exalted, and
not unworthily termed Divine, since the height of Poetical rapture has ever
been accounted little less then Divine Inspiration: Pardon me therefore most
Honored Friends, if having undertaken a Province more weighty and difficult
then the account of any other Art and Science, and which beyond all others
exercises the utmost nicety and sagacity of judgment, I ambitiously make
address to the Patronage of Persons of so fair a reputation, as well in Poetry
as other parts of Learning, and who are your selves partys not obscurely or
without just merit concerned, whom against what ever may happen either of
deserved or undeserved Censure, vouchsafe but the two first letters of their
Names, and these, it is to be supposed, desire to be known only to some
Friends, that understand the Interpretation of those letters, or some curning
Men in the Art of Divination; now as to the last part of the objection, I have
so much the more confidence to stand upon my own justification, by how much I
rely upon this Maxim, that it is less injustice to admit of 20 that deserve no
notice or mention, then to omit one that really deserves; and here methinks
there seems to arise a large field of examination and distinction, between
those that are in truth of no value or desert, and those that are generally
reputed so; it is to be observed that some have been once of great esteem, and
have afterward grown out of date, others have never arrived to any esteem, and
possibly in both cases the merits of the cause may have been various on either
side; yet I am apt to believe that as it, is a more frequent thing to over then
undervalew, so a universal contempt is a shrewd, not infallible, sign of a
universal indesert; the reason is plain, for though no doubt the number of the
judicious and knowing is as great if not greater then ever, yet most
confessedly not so great as that of the ignorant or only superficially knowing,
there are many that think, few only that judge; therefore things of the most
transcendent excellence are for the most part only valw'd by Persons of
transcendent judgment, whereas the indifferent and plausible are received with
general and vulgar applause. So that those Works which being advantageously
published, nevertheless obtain no Fame, may be justly suspected of little or no
worth, since, had they been excellent, they might falling into the hands of the
few that judge, have been vuoy'd up by their authority, had they been
plausible, they would h^^e been cried up by the many that think. And shall such
very Ignore and contemptible pretenders, ^e allowed a place among tht most
renowned of Poetic Writers, among so many Loureated heads, with the triumphant
wreath of Parnassus? I beg your ^avourable attentions, yours in the first
place, most often equal Judges, yours in the next, most Courteous Readers, let me
plead a little for the well meaners only, as something Sympathising with those
for whom I ^lead; Virtue will plead for it self, and ^eeds no Advocate; first
let it considered time^ some that had their Poetical excellencies if well
examined, and chiefly among the rest Chaucer, who through all the neglect of
former^ aged Poets still keeps a name, being by some few admired for his real
worth, to others not unpleasing for his facetious way, which joined with his
old English intertains them with a kind of Drollery; however from Qu.
Elizabeth's Reign the Language has been not so unpolisht as to render the
Poetry of that time ungrateful, to such as at this day will take the pains to
examine it well: besides if (...) Poetry should Pleas but what is calculated to
every refinement of a Language, of how ill^ consequence this would be for the
future, let him consider and make it his own case, who being now in fair repute
and promising to himself a lasting Fame, shall two or three Ages hence, when
the Language comes to be double refined, understand (if Souls have any
intelligence after their departure hence, what is done on Earth) that his Works
are become obsolete and thrown aside. If then their Antiquated style be no
sufficient reason why the Poets of former A^es should be rejected, much less
the pre^^^e of their antiquated mode or fashion (...) of Poetry, which whether
it be altered for the better or not, I cannot but ^ook upon it as a very
pleasant humor, that we should be so complyant with the French custom as to
follow set fashions; not only in Garments, but also in Music, (wherein the
Lydian mood is now most in request) and Poetry: for Cloths I leave them to the
discretion of the Modish, whether of our own or the French Nation; Breeches and
Doublet will not fall under a Metaphysical consideration, but in Arts and
Sciences, as well as in Moral Notions, I shall not scruple to maintain that
what was verum and bonum once (...) to be so always; now whether the
Tr^nck-Hose Fancy of Queen Elizabeth's days or the Pantaloon Genius of ours be
best; I shall not be hasty to determine, not presuming to call in question the
judgment of the present Age, only thus much I must needs see, that Custom and
Opinion ofttimes take so deep a root, that Judgment has not free power to act.
To the Ancient Greecs and Latins, the Modern Poet^ of all Nations and for
several Ages, have acknowledged themselves beholding, for those both Precepts
and examples which have been thought conducing to the perfection of Poetry; for
the manner of its Garb, and dress, which is Verse, we in particular to the
Italians, the first of the Moderns that have been eminently Famous in this
Faculty, the Measure of the Greec and Latin Verse being no way suitable to the
Modern Languages; and truly so far as I have observed the Italian Stanza in
Heroic Poem, and the Sonnet, Canzon, and Madrigal in the Lyric, as they have
been formerly more frequently made use of by the English than by any* so except
their own proper Language they become none better then ours, and therefore
having been used with so good success, I see no reason why they should be
utterly rejected; there is certainly a decency in one sort of Verse more then
another which custom cannot really alter, only by familiarity make it seem
better; how much more stately and Majestic in Epic^ Poems ^ especially of
Heroic Argument^, Spencers's Stanza (which I take to be but an Improvement upon
Tasso's Ottava Rima, or the Ottava Rima it self, used by many of our once
esteemed Poets) is above the way either of Couplet or Alternation of four
Verses only, I am persuaded, were it revived, would soon be acknowledged, and
in like manner the Italian Sonnet and Canzon; above Pindaric Ode, which,
whatev^r the name pretends, comes not so near in resemblance to the Odes of
Pindarus, as the Canzon, which though it answers not so exactly as to consist
of Stroph, Antistroph and Epod, yet the Verses, which in the first Stroph of
the Canzon were tied to no fixed number, order or measure, nevertheless in the
following Srophs return in the same number, order and measure, as were observed
in the ^ir; whereas that which we call the Pindaric, has a nearer affinity
with the Mono^rophic, or Apolelymenon, used in the Cho^^^s of Aeschylus his
Tragedies: one thing more is to be observed between the Italian Verse and ours,
namely that the Dissyliable, which in that Language is the only way of Riming,
is also in ours, very applicable to Rhyme, and has been very much used
formerly; I was going to say with as much grace, sometimes, if not more, then
the Monosyllable; but that I am loath to appear too singularly addicted to that
which is now so utterly exploded, especially since there are other things of
much greater consequence then the Verse; though it cannot be denied, but that a
Poetical fancy is much seen in the choice of Verse proper to the chosen
subject, yet however, let the fashion of the Verse be what it will, according to
the different humor of the Writer, if the Style be elegant and suitable, the
Verse whatever it is, may be the better dispenc't with, and the truth is the
use of Measure alone without any Rhyme at all, would give far more ample Scope
and liberty, both to Style and fancy then can possibly be observed in Rhyme, as
evidently appears from an English Heroic Poem, which came forth not many years
ago, and from the Style of Virgil, Horace, Ovid, and others of the Latins,
which is so pure and proper, that it could not possiby have been better in
Prose: another thing yet more considerable is conduct and design in whatever
kind of Poetry, whether the Epic, the Dramatic, the Lyric, the Elegiac, the
Epanetic, the Bucolic, or the Epigram; under one of which all the whole*
circuit of Poetic design, is one way or other included; so that whoever should
desire to introduce some (...) of Poem of different fashion, from any known to
the Ancients, would do no more then he that should study to bring a new Order
into Architecture, altogether differe^^ both from the Doric, Ionic, Corinthian,
Tuscan and Composite. Epigram, is as it were the fag end of Poetry, and indeed
consists rather of conceit and ^cumen of Wit, then of Poetical inventions yet
it is more commendable to be a Martial in Epigram then Juvenal's Codrus in
Heroic Poetry. The Epaenetic, comprehends the Hymn, the Epithalamium, the
Genethliacon, or what else tends to the praise or congratulation of Divine, or
on Earth Eminent Persons the Bucolic, on Eclogue, pretends only the familiar
discourse of Sheapheards about their Loves or such like concernments, yet under
that umbrage treats often times of higher matters thought convenient to be spoken
of rather mysteriously and obscurely, then in plain terms: the Elegi^^ seems,
intended at first for complaint of crosses in Love, or other calamitous
accidents, but became applicable afterward to all manner of subjects and
various occasions: the Lyric consists of Songs or Airs of Love, or other the
most soft and delightful subject, in verse most apt for Musical Composition,
such as the Italian Sonnet; but most especially Canzon and Madrigal before
mentioned, and the English Ode heretofore much after the same manner: the
Dramatic comprehends Satyr, and her two Daughters Tragedy and Comedy: the Epic
is of the largest extent, and includes all that is narrative either of things
or Persons, the higst degree whereof is the Heroic, as Tragedy of the Dramatic,
both which consist in the greatness of the Argument; and this is that which
makes up the perfection of a Poet; in other Arguments a Man may appear a good
Poet, in the right management of this alone a great Poet; for if Invention be
the grand part of a Poet or Maker, and Verse the least, then certainly the more
sublime the Argument, the nobler the Invention, and by consequence the greater
the Poet; and therefore it is not a mere Historical relation, spic't over with
a little slight fiction, now and then a personated virtue or vice rising but of
the ground, and uttering a speech, which makes a Heroic Poem but it must be
rather a brief obscure or remote Tradition, but of some remarkable piece of
story, in which the Poet has an ample field to enlarge by feigning of probable
circumstances, in which and in proper Allegory, Invention, the well
management^ whereof is indeed no other then decorum, principally consists,
and wherein there is a kind of truth, even in the midst of Fiction; for what
ever is pertinently said by way of Allegory is Morally though not Historically
true, and Circumstances the more they have of verisimility, the more they keep
up the reputation of the Poet, whose buisiness it is to deliver feigned things
as like to truth as may be, that is to say not too much exceeding apprehension,
or the belief of what is possible or likely, or positively contradictory to the
truth of History. So that it would ^e absurd in a Poet to set his Hero upon
Romantic actions (let his courage be what it will) exceeding Human strength and
power, as to fight singly against whole Armies, and come off unhurt, at least
if a mortal Man, and not a Deity or armed with Power Divine; in like manner to
transgress so far the compute of time as to bring together those that lived
several Ages asunder; as if Alexander the Great should be brought to fight a
single Duel with Julius Caesar, would either argue a shameful ignorance in
Chronology, or an irregular and boundless license in Poetical fiction, which I
reckon is allowed the Poet chiefly upon this consideration; because being
supposed as he ought, to understand the ways of Heroic virtue and Magnanimty
from better principles then those of common and implicit opinion, he has the
advantage of representing, and setting forth greater Idea's, and more noble
Examples then probably can be drawn from known History, and indeed there is no
ingenious or excellent quality either native or acquired wherewith he should
not be fully acquainted, no part of Learning in which he ought not to be
exactly instructed, since as a curious piece of History painting, which is the
highest perfection in the Art of Picture, is the result of several other Arts
as Perspective, Proportion, the knowledge of History, Morality, the passions of
the mind, etc. so Heroic Poesy ought to be the result of all that can be
contrived of profit, delight or ornament either from experience in human
affairs or from the knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, it being but requisite
that the same Work which sets forth the highest Acts of Kings and Heroes should
be made fit to allure the inclinations of such like Persons to a studious
delight in reading of those things, which they are desired to imitate.

They likewise very much err from probability of circumstance who go about to
describe ^ntient things after a modern Model, which is an untruth, even in
Poetry it self, and so against all Decorum, that it shows no otherwise th^n as
if a Man should read the Ancient History of the Persians or Egyptians to inform
himself of the customs and* manners of the modern Italians and Spaniards;
besides that our Author should avoid, as much as might be, the making such
descriptions as should any way betray his ignorance in ancient customs or any
other knowledge, in which he ought industriously to show himself accomplished.

There is a also a Decorum to be observed in the style of the H. Poem that is
that it be not inflate or gingling with an empty noise of Words, nor creepingly
low and insipid, but of a Majesty suitable to the Grandeur of the subject, not
nice or ashamed of vulgarly unknown, or unusual words, if either terms of Art,
well chosen, or pr^per to the occasion for fear of frighting the Ladies from
reading, as if it were not more reasonable that Ladies who will read Heroic
Poem should be qualified accordingly, then that the Poet should check his fancy
for such either Men or Ladys whose capacities will not ascend above Argalus and
Parthenia. Next to the Heroic Poem, if not as some think equal, is Tragedy, in
conduct very different, in height of Argument alike as treating only of the
Actions and concernments of the most Illustrious Persons, whereas Comedy sets
before us the humors, converse and designs of the more ordinary sort of
People: the chief parts thereof are the (...), and (...) by which latter is
meant that moving and Pathetical manner of expression, which in some respect is
to exceed the highest that can be delivered in Heroic Poesy, as being
occasioned upon representing to the very life, the unbridled passions of Love,
Rage and Ambition, the violent ends or down falls of great Princes, the
subversion of Kingdoms and Estates, or what ever else can imagined of funest or
Tragical, all which will require a style not ramping, but passionately sedate
and moving; as for the Ethos, waving farther large Discourses, as intending a
Preface only, not Poetical System, I shall only leave it to consideration
whether the use of the Chorus, and the observation of the ancient Law of
Tragedy, particularly as to limitation of time, would not rather by reviving
the pristine glory of the Tragic all, advance then diminish the present, adding
moreover this caution that the same Indecorums are to be avoided in Tragedy as
have already been intimated in Heroic Poem, besides one incident to Tragedy
alone, as namely that Linsie-woolsie* intermixture of Comic mirth with Tragic
seriousness, which being so frequently in use, no wonder if the name of Play be
applied without distinction as well to Tragedy as Comedy; and for the Verse if
it must needs be Rhyme, I am clearly of opinion that way of Versifying; which
bears the name of Pindaric, and which has no necessity of being divided into
Strophs or Stanzas would be much more suitable for Tragedy then the (...)
Rhapsodie of Riming Couplets, (...) whoever shall mark it well, will finds it
appear too stiff, and of too much constraint for the liberty of conversation*
and the interlocution of several Persons: and now before conclude, I cannot but
call to (...) something that may be yet alleged againt some very noted Writers
either Phil^s^^ph^rs, Historians, Mathematicians (...) the like, here
mentioned, who for what they are said to have written in Poetry, being perhaps
but small or inconsiderable, will scarce be thought worth (...) played among the
Poets; It is true indeed, they do not shine here as in their proper Sphere of
Fame, nevertheless since it is not ungrateful to many to know all that has
been written by famous Men* as well in the Arts they least, as those they most
profess, and since the Register of one Science only may well take the greater
Scope within that circuit, I judged it not impertinent to mention as well those
Famous Men in other Faculties, who have also writ Poetically, as the most
Famous of Poetical Writers, considering especially how largely the Name of Poet
is generally taken; for if it were once brought to a strict Scrutinie, who are
the right, genuie and true born Poets, I fear me our number would fall short,
and there are many that have a Fame deservedly for what they have writ, even in
Poetry it self, who if they came to the rest, I question how well they would
endure to hold open their Eagle eyes against the Sun: Wit, Ingenuity, and
Learning in Verse, even Elegancy it self, though that comes nearest, are one
thing, true Native Poetry is another; in which there is a certain Air and
Spirit; which perhaps the most Learned and judicious in other Arts do not
perfectly apprehend, much less is it attainable by any Study or Industry; nay
though all the Laws of Heroic Poem, all the Laws of Tragedy were exactly
observed, yet still this tour entrejeant, this Poetic Energie, if I may so call
it, would be required to give life to all the rest, which shines through the
roughest most unpolish't and antiquated Language, and may happly be wanting, in
the most polite and reformed: let us observe Spencer, with all his Rustie,
obsolete words, with all his rough-hewn clowterly Verses; yet take him
throughout, and we shall find in him a graceful and Poetic Majesty: in like
manner Shakespeare, in spite of all his unfiled expressions, his rambling and
indigested Fancys, the laughter of the Critical, yet must be confess't a Poet
above many that go beyond him in Literature some degrees. All this while it
would be very unreasonable that those who have but attempted well, much m^re
those who have been learned, judicious or Ingenuous in Verse should be
forgotten and left out of the circuit of Poets, in the larger acceptance.

Thus, most Worthy Arbiters, I have laid before you the reason and occasion of
this design, have Apologized for what I judged most obnoxious to Censure or
Objection; have lastly, delivered my own sentiment in some things relating to
Poetry, wherein, if I have differed ought from the received opinion, I can
safely aver, that I have not done it out of affectation of singularity, but
from a different apprehension, which a strict inquiry into the truth of things
(for there is also a Right and a Wrong, a Best and a Worst, as well in Poetical
as other Assertions*) has suggested to my reason, persuading my self, that no
right judgment can be given, or distinction made in the Writings of This or
That Author, in whatevor Art or Science; but, without taking ought upon trust,
by an unbiased, and, from the knowledge of ancient Authors; judicious
examination of each; being also sufficiently assured of the concurrence with me
in this matter, of all impartial Readers; of yours especially, m^ most honored
Friends, whom I wish that fate which I am concerned in for all deserving
Writers, a lasting Fame, equal to the merit (...) what you have so
advantagiously published to the World.

ERRATA.
Page 5. lin. 24. for Mercer, read Macer. p. 15. l. 11. for Poets, r. Poet. p.
24. l. 8. for l. 8. Epigr. 25. r. l. 7. Epigr. 26. Ibid. l. 21. r. Asclepiades.
p 31. l. 9. r. Stagira. p. 44. l. 25. for Philiip, r. Philip. p. 59. l. 19.
after Pass, a comma. p. 60. l. 10. r. Epigr. 71. p. 78. l. 2. after Fable, r.
Anacalyptomene. p. 96. l. 24. for Pori o^, r. Poictou. p. 97. l. 27. after
Instistutor, r. of the solemnisation. p. 106. l. 28. r. Ancients. p. 110. l.
17* for Lucullus, r. Lucilius. p. 122. l. 19. for Stephanus, r. Heinsius. p.
141. l. 4. r. Apollonius. p. 156. l. 1. for one, r. and: p. 152. after Minias,
a comma, and none after Painter. p. 153. l. 2. after year, r. 1590* p. 169. l.
7. for 20 second, r. 22d. Ibid. l. 17. r. Halieutic. p. 172. r. Ferreus. p.
175. l. 25. Epigr. r. 86. Ibid. l. 28. r. Sublimitate.

In the second Part: p. 21. in the marg. Note, for sibi, r. tibi. p. 79. l. 17.
r. combat. p. 110. l. ^8. dele has. p. 115. r. K. Henry the Eighth's Reign. p.
116. l. 10. r. Sir John Sucklin. p. 118. l. 25. r. Laetus. p. 153. l. 12. r.
Bellunensian.

Eminent Poets Among the ANCIENTS,
ABARIS, a Scythian, the Disciple (as says Jamblichus) of Pythagoras, and sent
Ambassador (as says Harpocration) from the Scythians to the Athenians; he
wrote in verse the Journey of Apollo to the Hyperboreans, the Scythian Oracles,
the Nuptials of Hebrus, with other things; whither he lived in the time of
Phalaris, and wrote that Epistle which bears his name, is disputed by Vossius.

Abbianus, an old Greec Epigramma, tist, some of whose Epigrams are to be found
in Planudes his Florilegium.

Abbo, an ancient Monk of St. German a Pratis, who flourish't in the time of
Carolus Crassus, he wrote a Poem of the seige of Paris by the Normans, which is
yet extant. Barthius calls him Albo, and gives him the Surname of Cernuus.

Abronius Silo, a Poet who flourish't in the time of Augustus, and is mentioned
by Marcus Seneca to have been a hearer of Porcius Latro; contemporary with, and
mentioned by the said Seneca was another Silo, the Son of the foresaid Abronius.

Accius, a Latin Tragaedian contemporary with Pacuvius, but somewhat younger,
he was in great favor and esteem with Decius Brutus, who adorned Temples and
Monuments with his verses. Of which diverse are cited by Charisius out of his
Atreus, Bacchis, Io^, Philocteta, Epinausimache.

Aceratus, an ancient Grammarian and Epigrammatist, who has a name in the
Greek Anthologie.

Achaeus, the Son of Pythodorus and Pythoris, he flourish't from the Seventy
fourth to the Eighty second Olympiad, and wrote very many comoedies, whereof
two are remembered by Athenaeus, viz. his Cycnus and his Maerae.

Addaeus of Mitilene, and Addaeus of Macedon, both cited in the Greec
Anthologie.

Admetus, a foolish Poet in the time of the Emperors Trajan, and Adrian, the
Epigram he orderd to be inscribed upon his Tomb is derided by Demona^c in
Lucian.

Adrianus, a Roman Emperor, under whose name there is a witty Epigram in the
Greec Anthologie; besides several Anacreontics and Iambies in Latin mentioned
by Spartianus.

Aeantides, one of the Seven Greec Poets (the other Six being Homerus Junior,
the Son of Myro a Poetess of Byzantium, Sositheus, Lycophron, Alexander,
Philiscus and Dionysiades,) who according to the account of the Scholia's of
Hephaestion were called the Pleiades; though Isacius T^etzes reckons but two of
the above mentioned in this famous Septemvirate, viz. Lycophron and Homerus
junior, and makes the rest to be Theocritus, Nicander, Callimachus, Apollonius,
and Aratus, and the Scholiast of Theocritus in stead of Nicander and
Callimachus puts in Philiscus, and Ae^n-a tides.

Aegidius, a Greec Benedictine Monk who flourish't about the year Seven
hundred, he wrote a book de Pulsibus in verse, and another de urinis, there is
also an Epigram of one Aegidius in the Greec Anthologie.

Aelius Julius Crottus, an ancient writer of Eglogues, and also of Iambics
Hendecasyllables, and other sorts of Lyric verse.

Aelius Saturninus a Roman, who for certain libelling verses against Tiberius
was condemned to death, and thrown down headlong from the Capitol, he is
reckoned among the Poets by Lilius Giraldus. There flourisht also about the
same time Caius Germanicus Caesar* (the Son of Drusus) whom Ovid in his Fasti
celebrates for a Poet, the Epigram upon the Thracian Boy, who had his head cut
off by ice is thought to have been his* Caius Lutorius Priscus a Roman Knight,
famous for his Elegy upon Germanicus poisoned by Piso; but put to death by the
Senate for writing against Drusus. Phaedrus a Thracian who turned into Jambic
verse certain Fables of Aesop, which are mentioned by Avienus in his Praeface
to Theod osius Macrobius; Marcus Aemilius Scaurus a Tragic Poet, who for some
expressions in his Atreus, which were interpreted by Tiberius as meant of him,
was driven to lay violent hands on himself. Caius Cominius a Roman Knight, who
notwithstanding his Libelling verses against Tiberius mentioned by Tacitus is
scarce allowed a Poet by Vossius; Lucius Fenestella, whom Vossius imagines to
have been a Historian mistaken for a Poet; and lastly, Alphius Avitus whom see
in Flavus.

Aemilianus a Greec Epigrammatist, whose name is in the foresaid Anthologie.

Aemilius Mercer, a Latin Poet of Verona, whom see in Publius Ovidius, he is
also mentioned by Servius upon the Fourth book of Virgils Georgics, and the
first of his Aeneids also by Charisius and others, though it is doubted whether
that Poem which we have extant under his name de virtutibus Plantarum be really
his.

Aenicus, a writer of Tragedies, whose* Antea is by some ascribed to Pollux.

Aeschines, an Athenian, whom Plutarch (writing his life among the Ten famous
Orators) relates to have been first a Tragic Poet, he is also mentioned by
Philostratus in the lives of the Sophisters.

Aeschrion, a Poet of Mitylene in high esteem with Aristotle, as Nicander in
his book de disciplina. Aristotelie testifies.

Aesc^ylus an Athenian Tragic Poet, born in the Village of Eleusis,
contemporary with Pindarus in the Sixty ninth Olympiad, according to the old
Scholiast, but as Mr. Stanly in his most accurate Edition of this Author makes
out by diligent computation, and his Collection out of Mr. Seldens Marmora
Arundeliana, in the Sixty third. The Son of Euphorion, and Brother of Cynegyru^
and Aminias who signalized themselves in the battle of Marathon and the
Sea Fight of Salamis in which our Poet also was present, of Sixty six Drama's,
which he wrote (being Victor in 13) and Five Satyrs, we have extant only Seven
Tragedies, his Prometheus Vinctus, his Septem contra Thebas, Agamem^on, Persae,
Eumenides, Icetides, and Choephorae. But though he was Victor 13 times, yet it
is said he took it so to heart to be vanquished by Sophocles then a young man,
that he left his Co^ntrey and betook himself to Hiero King of Sicily, where he
made his Tragedy Aetna so called from the City of that name which Hiero was
then building Homonimous to the Mountain, others say it was because he was
vanquished by Simonides in his Elegiac verse upon the slain at Marathon, after
he had been resident at Gela Three years, he dyed of a fracture of his skull
caused by an Eagles letting fall a shellfish out of his claw upon his bald
head, which seems to have been portended by the Oracle, which being consulted
upon the manner of his death, answered (...), this happened in the Sixty ninth
year of his age according to the above mentioned computation; he is mentioned
by Horace as the first bringer up of the Tragic pall, and of the splendid
apparate of Scenes and persons, and by some of the Tr. Buskin; There was also
of this name a Poet of Alexandria whose Amphitryo and his Carmina Meseniaca are
mentioned by Athenaeus.

Aeschylus the Tragedian had two Sons, Euphorion and Bion, who were both
Victors by their Poems in the Olympic games.

Agathias a Smyrnaean, who flourisht in the time of the Emperor Justinian, and
wrote besides his History of Belisarius and Narses, a Poem Entitled
Dionysiaca, and also several Epigrams which are extant in the Greec Anthologie;
contemporary with whom was Tribonianus Sidetes, who wrote in verse a Comment
upon Ptolomi'es Canon, with some other things mentioned by Suidas.

Agathon, a Tragic Poet, who flourisht in the first year of the Ninetieth
Olympiad, and was Victor by his Lenaei, he is mentioned by Athenaeus and
Philostratus. There lived also much about the same time a Comic Poet of the
same name, who is cited by Aristotle.

Agathyllus, an Arcadian Elegiographer mentioned with praise by Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus.

Agidius Delphus a Greec Poet, who flourisht in the primitive time of
Christianity, and deserves to be remembered for his version of St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans into Greec verse.

Agis Amphiptolemus, several verses of his are cited by Pausanias.

Agis a Poet of Argos, whom Curtius brands for a bad Poet, and yokes with him
one Chaerilus both for time and badness of verses. This Chaerilus was in high
favor with Alexander the Great, and as ill as his verses were, for they are
very much condemned by Horace. l. 11* Epist* they were received as the
Celebrators of his Acts; there were also two others of the same name, ^he one a
Samian, who Elegantly set forth the victory of the Athenians over Xerxes, for
which he was both highly rewarded and honored, the other (if it were not the
same as Vossius seems to disprove by the interval of time) a companion to
Lisander, and solemnizer of his Victories.

Alanus a Sicilian, both Poet and Eminent Orator, who wrote a book de planctu*
Naturae, partly in verse, partly in Solute Oration.

Albinus see Decius Laberius.

Albius Tibullus, an Elegant Latin Elegiac Poet, whose works are commonly
printed with Catullus, he was a Roman Knight.

Alcaeus, a Lyric Poet, who according to Eusebius flourisht in the Forty fourth
Olympiad, and as Diogenes Laertius testifies, was a great Enemy to the Tyrant
Pittacus, who was also a Poet, as his Six hundred Elegiac verses mentioned by
Suidas testify, and of the number of those accounted the Seven Sages of
Greece. He is mentioned by Horace in the Ninth Ode of his Fourth book; There
was also of the same name a Comic Poet, whose Endymion and Pasiphae are
mentioned by Pollux, and several other Comedies of his by (...), he contended
at Athens with Aristophanes, whose contemporary he was, together with
Aristomenes an Athenian, whose Comedy called Admetus is mentioned by the
Scholiast of Aristophanes, he is one of those called (...) or Secundarii by
Suidas, and the anonymous Author of the History of the Olympiads; Nicophon,
whose Adonis is mentioned by the said Scholiast, as his Sirenes and other
Comedies of his by Suidas, by whom he is called Nicophron. Nicochares the Son
of Philonidas, and a contemporary of Aristophanes; his Amymone, Pelops,
Galatea, and several other Comedies are mentioned by Suldas, Pollux, Athenaeus
and Aristotle; Callistratus an Athenian Comic Poet an Emulatour of
Aristophanes; much about the same time also lived Apollophanes, whom Suidas and
Aelian mention for Comic poesy, but Fulgentius mentions him (if it be the
same) for Epic poesy.

Alcander, an ancient writer conjectured a Poet by Vossius, from a passage of
Clemens Alexandrinus.

Alcimeenes, a Tragic Poet of Megara mentioned by Suidas, There was also of the
same name an Athenian comic Poet, whose Thesaurus and Peccantes are mentioned
by the said Authors.

Alcimus Ecdicius Avitus, an Archbishop of Vienna, who flourisht in the times
of the Emperors Zeno and Anastatius, and wrote in Hexameter verse, de Origin
mundi, and several other Theological discourses; besides some things in prose,
there flourisht also in the time of Zeno another Bishop of Vienna, namely
Claudianus Mamertus, who wrote a poem, de statu animae, and another, contra
vanos poetas; also Claudius Marius Victor, a Rhetorician of Marseilles, who
wrote upon Genesis in Hexameter verse to his Son Aethereus, with some other
things which are said to be yet extant.

Alcman a Lyric Poet of Lacedemon, who began to flourish in the Twenty seventh
Olympiad, there was also of the same name, a Messenian, who was also a Lyric,
and appeared in the Fourth year of the Thirtieth Olympiad, both mentioned by
Suidas, and one of them by Pausanias for his poem of Castor and Pollux.

Aldhelmus, (from the Saxon word Althelm i. e. old Helmet) an ancient Saxon
Poet, who flourisht in the tim of Justinianus Junior, he was the Son of
Kentenus, brother to Ina King of the West Saxons, having visited the chief
Universities of France and Italy, at his return he was made Abbot of
Malmesbury, and afterward Bishop of Shirburn; Besides his great proficiency in
all parts of Divine and humane learning, he was particularly excellent in
Oratorie and Poetry; wrote several Odes and other Poems; among which was his
Acrostic of Thirty eight verses mentioned by J. Pitseus in his Scriptores
Anglici.

Alexander a Grammarian and Tragic poet of Aetolia, whose verses are cited by
Parthenius and Strabo. Of the same name also was he whom Cicero mentions, with
such mean approbation of his poetry, whither the same with Alexander the
Ephesian* Surnamed Lychnus, who wrote Geographie in verse, is doubted by
Giraldus, also the Roman Emperor of that name surnamed Severus, wrote the
lives of some of the foregoing Emperors in Greek Verse, as is testified by
Lampridius.

Alexis, a Thurian Comic Poet, who flourisht in the time of Alexander the
Great, very many comedies of his are mentioned by Athenaeus and Pollux, he was
Uncle to Menander, about the same time was Philippides the Brother of
Morsimus; and, as Plutarch affirms, favored by King Lysimachus, he is said by
Suidas to have written Forty five Comedies, and by Agellius to have dyed for
joy; being unexpectedly proclaimed Victor at the Olympian Games; also Neophon
or Neophron a Tragic poet of Sicyon, who wrote One hundred and twenty
Tragedies, and is thought to have been the Author of that Medea, which is
commonly attributed to Euripides, he was put to death with Callisthenes the
Philosopher, whose intimate friend he was as Suidas affirms; and lastly, Lycon
a Comic Poet mentioned by Plutarch in his life of Alexander.

Alfred, a King of this Island of ever glorious memory, the Fifth from Ecbert,
in whom began the English Saxon Monarchy, he was equally Renowned, both for
Arms; and Arts, in the first whereof he signalis'd himself by his frequent
Victories over the invading Danes, in the last, both by his favor to learned
men; and his own Studious addiction to all sorts of Learning, by which he
gained himself the Character of a great, both Theologist, Philosopher,
Jurisconsult, Historian, Mathematician, Musician, and among the rest of Poets
also.

Alphenus Varius, see Anser.

Alphius Avitus, the Author of certain books inscribed Excellentium in dimeter
Jambic verse, being much ancienter* than Alcimus, for whom he is by some
mistaken.

Amipsi^s, a Contemporary of Aristophanes, his Comedy entitled (...), is
mentioned by the Anonymous Author of the description of the Olympiads, and by
the Scholiast of the said Aristophanes.

Ammonus and Eusebius Scholasticus, two Authors mentioned by Socrates and
Nieephorus; they lived in the time of Theodosius Junior, and wrote both o^ them
in verse a History of the War against Gaina the Goth.

Amaenus, a writer of an uncertain age, but for certain ancienter than the time
of the Emperor Charles the first, he is mentiond in some old Manuscripts, as
the Author of that Enchiridion of the old and new Testament in verse, which
Sichardus ascribes to Sedulius.

Amphilochius, a Bishop of Iconium, who flourisht in the time of the Emperor
Julianus, and wrote among other things a Poem in Iambic verse to Seleucus,
concerning the Canonical books of the Scripture. To him St. Basil Dedicated his
book, de spiritu Sancto; about the same time lived Eudaemon of Pelusium, who
besides what he wrote in Grammar and Rhetoric is said by Suidas to have written
several Poems, he was a companion of Libanius the Rhetorician, in Julian's time
also lived Calistus, who as Socrates and Nicephorus affirm wrote in Heroic
verse the Acts of the said Emperor, also Milesius of Smyrna favored of
Anatolius, and related by Eunapius to have excelled in all kind of Poetry, and
with him Ionicus, a Poet and Physician of Sardis. And lastly, Gregorius of
Nazianzen, whose Divine Poems both in Hexameter and other sort of verse are yet
extant, he is remembered by Hieronimus, whose Master he was.

Amphis an Athenian Comic Poet, the Son of Amphicrates, he was as says
Laertius contemporary with Plato who was sometimes the Subject of his comical
wit.

Anacha^sis, a Scythian mentioned among the Philosophers, he was Brother to a
Scythian King, and lived in the time of Craesus King of Lydia, his Mother being
a Grecian Woman* he wrote the Scythian Laws in verse; besides a Poem of the
frailty of humane life consisting of Eight hundred verses.

Anacreon, a Lyric Poet of Teos, several of whose Poems are yet extant, he
flourisht in the 61 and 62 Olympiad, as Eusebius and Suidas affirm, and as
Pausanias in his Attics and Strabo testify, was in high favor with Polycrates
the Tyrant of Samos, whom he often celebrates in his verses.

Ananius, an Jambic writer of an uncertain age mentioned by Athenaeus in his
Dipuosophists, and Isaacius upon Lyeophron.

Anaxandrides, a Comic Poet of Rhodes, or as some say Colophon, who flourisht
in the Second year of the One hundred and first Olympiad, as Suidas and the
Author of the Olympiads testify, he is cited by Aristotle in his Rhetorics
and Ethics; of the Sixty five Comedies he wrote (in Ten whereof he is said to
have been Victor) his Odysseus is chieflly commended by Athenaeus: in the same
Olympiad appeared also Eubulus Cettius a writer as says Suidas of between the
Media and Nova Comedia, he wrote Twenty four Comedies, whereof his Nutrices,
Clepsydra, and Cercopes are cited by Athenaeus, and his Calatophori by
Ammonius, then also flourisht Mnesimachus a Writer of Media Comedia, his
Hippotrophus, Bustris and Philippus are cited by Athenaeus, this Author is
very much commended by Diogenes La^rtius in his life of Socrates.

Anaxiles, see Plato.

Anaxipolis of Thasus, see in Antipater.

Anaxippus see in Menander.

Anitius Manlius Boethius Severi^us, a most learned and Elegant writer in the
time of Zeno and Anastatius, he together with his Wife Helpis, to omit all
other parts of Learning, was particularly Eminent in poetry, as his Five
books, de Consolatione Philosophiae testify, he was put to death, together
with Symmachus by Theodoric King of the Goths in Italy.

Auna^us Cornutus, a Tragic poet, whose works are totally lost, who lived in
the time of Claudius and Nero, and was the Master of Persius the Satyrist.

Aunianus, an ingenuous and learned Poet mentioned by Agellius, or Aulus
Gellius, as he is generally called; he flourisht in the times of the Emperors
Trajan and Adrian, his Fescennine verses are mentioned by Ausonius in his
Thirteenth Idyl at the end of the Cento Nuptialis.

Anser, Bavius, and Maevius, three ill Poets contemporaries of Virgil, by whom
the two last are mentioned, about the same time also flourisht Publius Syrus a
Comic writer, Corni^icius, one of Virgils detractors, Cai^s Asinius Pollio,
Alfenus Varius a more famous Juris Consult than Poet, Cornelius Gallus, Cassius
Severus one of Caesar's Assassinats, and as some think the Author of that
Tragedy of Thyestes, which is ascribed to Quintus Varus, also Gracchus,
Codrus, whom Virgil mentions with praise in his Seventh Eglogue, there being
another of the same name in Domitians time, whose Theseis is derided by
Juvenal, Caius Rabirius, who wrote in verse the War between M. Antonius and
Octavius in an inflate style, for which he is taken notice of by Ovid, Lucius
Julius Calidius mentioned with singular praise by Pomponius Atticus, to which
purpose a passage of the said Atticus is cited by Cornelius Nepos in his life.

Antagoras of Rhodes, see in Menander.

Anthippus, a Comic Poet of an uncertain age.

Antigrammaratus, a Poet mentioned by Lilius Giraldus to have lived since
Charles the Great, though in what particular age is uncertain; as likewise
several others which are likewise mentioned by him, as Decianus of Emerita a
poet and philosopher, Dracontius, who wrote a poem called Hexaemeron, or the
Six days work, Facetus, and Joannes Nantuillensis an Englishman, who wrote a
poem called Archithenium; though in a rude and disorderly style, Floretus,
Gamphredus and Pamphilus a writer of Elegies.

Antilochus, a favorite to Lysander the Lacedaemonian, whom he celebrated in
his verses, and was rewarded with a Cap full of Silver, he flourisht in the
Ninety fourth Olympiad, in the first year of which the said Lysander took
Athens; contemporary with whom was Morsimus the Son of Philocles, and the
Sister of Aeschylus, he wrote a Tragedy, which is mentioned with derision by
Aristophanes, also Critias one of the Thirty Tyrants of Athens imposed by
Lysander, chiefly noted for his Elegy to Alcibiades and his fragment of Jambic
verses extant in Sextus the Philosopher* Athenaeus mentions a Poet of the same
name the Son of Callaeschrus, but thought to be not the same.

Antimachus, a Colophonian Poet mentioned by Pausanios and Plutarch, the
subject of his Poem was the expedition of the Argives against the Thebans.

Antipater of Sidon, a Poet and Historian, who appeared in the 179 Olympiad,
Ptolomaeus Lathyrus then Reigning, he is taken notice of by Cicero in his books
de Oratore; in the Reign of the said Lathyrus, lived also Anaxipolis of Thasus,
and Dionysius surnamed Scytobrachion, whom Suidas will have to be of Mitylene,
(though others say of Miletus,) and that he wrote the expedition of Bacchus and
Minerva, and six books of Argonauts; besides Antipater of Sidon, there was also
another of the same name of Thessalonica, who lived in the Reign of Augustus,
of which time he and Bathyllus were the chief Pantomimi, as is testified by
Dion, Z^simus, Suidas and others, in the Greec Authologie are several Epigrams
both of his and the other Antipater.

Antiphanes Caristius a writer of Media Comedia, who flourisht in the first
year of the Hundred and fourth Olympiad, very many of his Comedies are
mentioned by Julius Pollux and Athenaeus and by this last, his saying to
Alexander the Great, about one of his plays, which was recited to the said
Alexander.

Antipho the Rhamnusian, see Dionysius.

Antistius Sosianus, see Euodus.

Aphareus, see Isocrates.

Apollinaris, a Bishop of Laodicea in Syria in the Reigns of Julian,
Valentinian and Valens, and the beginning of Theodosius the Great, besides his
devine poems, among which some reckon Christus patiens, which is generally
ascribed to Gregory of Nazianzene, he is highly eminent among the ancient
Ecclesiastic writers treated of by Hieronimus for his 30 books against
Porphirius, for which Philostorgius prefers him before Eusebius and Methodius,
with other things, both in Theology, History and Poetry; Particularly we have
extant his Metaphrase upon David's Psalms in Greek verse, besides which he is
said by Suidas to have turned the whole book of the Hebrews into Greek verse,
for a more particular commendation and Character of him see Joannes
Sarisburiensis de Nugis Curialium, Vincentius Lirinensis in his Commonitorie,
Theophilus of Alexandria l. 1. paschali and Vossius l. 2. de Historicis
Graecis. There was another Apollinaris celebrated by Martial. l. 8. Epigr. 25.
yet scarce allowed by Vossius to pass among the number of the poets, but him
vulgarly called Sidonius Apollinaris, see in Caius.

Apollodorus Gelous, a Comic poet, contemporary with Menander, several of whose
Comedies are remembered by Athenaeus Suidas and Pollux, and from whom as Donatus
testifies Terence took his phormio and H^cyra. There was also a Tragic poet of
Tarsus so named Six Tragedies of whose writing are mentioned by Julius Pollux;
another of that name was a Grammarian the Son of s^clepiades and Disciple of
Aristarchus the Grammarian and panetius the Rhodian philosopher, and this was
the Author of the book of the Genealogy of the Gods yet extant, entitled
Bibliotheca, which is vulgarly imputed to Apollodorus Atheniensis; Therewas
also as Vossius observes out of Suidas, a comic poet of the same name, who
wrote 47 Comedies, and was Five times sole Victor at the Olympic games.
Athenaeus mentions also Apollodorus Caristius, who whit her he were not the
same with Gelous is in some dispute.

Apollonius of Rhodes, see Eratosthenes.

Apollophanes, see Alcaeus.

Aquilius (or as some say Attilius or Cecilius) Severus a Spaniard, who lived
in the Reigns of Julian and Valentinian, he is made mention of by Hieronimus
among the Ecclesiastic writers for his (...) or History of his life both in
prose and verse.

Aquinius, Cesius and Suffenus, Three ill poets mentioned by Catullus in his
verses to Licinius Calvus, and his Epigram to Varus, and also by Cicero in his
Tusculan questions.

Araros, a comic poet of the Greecs the Son of Aristophanes as Suidas
testifies, who mentions his Hymenaeus one of the Six Comedies he is said to
have written, Four Comedies of his are cited by Athenaeus.

Arator, a Latin poet who flourisht in the time of the Emperor Justinian, and
wrote the History of the Acts of the Apostles in two books in verse, which he
is said to have dedicated to Abbot Florianus, and to Vigilius Bishop of Rome.

Aratus, a Greec poet of Soli, in Cilicia, as says Eusebius in his Chronicle,
he flourisht in the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus and Antigonus Gonatus, with
whom he lived in very great favor and esteem, his poem of the Description of
the Celestial constellations, and of the prognostics of the weather which is
yet extant, was highly esteemed by those of his time, as Aristarchus of Samos,
the two Aristilli Geometricians, the two Euaeneti, Crates, Numenius the
Grammarian, Pyrrhus of Magnesia, Zeno and Thales.

Archedicus a comic poet, who wrote against Demochares; two comedies of his
writing, Thesaurus and Diamartanon are cited by Athenaeus.

Archestratus a Syracusian, or as some say a Geloan the Disciple of Terpsion,
he is said to have written a poem of Belly-chear, or things belonging to the
Gullet.

Archias an ancient Greec Epigrammatist, of whom there are extant 28 Epigrams
in the Greec Anthologie, this probably was the Author of that poem mentioned
by Cicero, for the description therein, of a strange accident that happened to
Roscius the Comedian.

Archilochus a Parian, who flourisht in the Second year of the Twenty ninth
Olympiad in the Reign of Candaules and Gyges Kings of Lydia; he was of so
virulent and invective a style, that by the bitterness of his verses he drove
Lycambe to self Murder by the halter; contemporary with him were Simonides
surnamed Melicus (for there were several others of the same name, as Simonides
Ceus (the Son of Leoprexes) a Lyric poet who flourisht in the time of Xerxes,
Themistocles and Hiero of Syracuse, Simonides Magnesius an Epic poet who wrote
the Acts of Antiochus the Great, Simonides Eretriensis who wrote in Trimeter
Jambic the conven^ion of the Greecs at Aulis, and lastly Simonides the Son of
Crineus surnamed Amorginus, who besides several Elegies ^e wrote, is thought by
some as Suidas testifies to have been the first writer of Jambic verse) and
also Aristoxenus of Selinum who is celebrated by Epicharmus.

Archippus a Comic poet who appeared in the First year of the Ninety first
Olympiad, and was once Victor, his Comedy called Ichthys is mentioned with
praise by Julius Pollux and Athenaeus, and several Comedies which have been
ascribed to Aristophanes are thought to be his as Suidas testifies.

Architas an ancient Greec Epigrammatist who happily may be thought the same with
the famous Pythagorean Philosopher of Tarentum.

Arctinus of Miletus, an ancient and elegant Greec Poet mentioned by Eusebius
in his Chronicle as the Author of two Poems, Aethiopis and Ilii Hal^sis; he
was the Disciple of Homer, as is delivered by Tsetzes, and also by Suidas from
the Testimony of Artemon of Clazomenus, and is thought to have flourisht from
the first to the Ninth Olympiad.

Arion, a Lyric Poet and Musician of Methymna, the same no doubt whom the Poets
saved from drowning by the charity of a Dolphin, he began to flourish in the
Thirty eighth Olympiad as Suidas affirms, and is thought by some to have been
the Disciple of Alcman, and to have been the first beginner of Dithyrambs,
Satyrs, and of the Chorus in Tragedy.

Aristaeus, an ancient Greec Poet of an uncertain age.

Aristarchus, see Cratinus.

Aristeas, a contemporary of Anacharsis the Scythian, he wrote the History of
the Arimaspi in Hexameter Greec verse; a very strange thing is reported of him
(as likewise of Hermotimus of Clazomenus) namely, that at certain times his
Soul was wont to pass out of his body and return again.

Aristius Fuscus a contemporary of Horace, who directs to him the Two and
twentieth Ode of his first book, but whither a Poet himself is questioned by
Vossius.

Aristomenes, a comic Poet of Athens who (as Suidas testifies, and the Author
of the Olympiads) began to flourish in the Eighty eighth Olympiad, and was one
of those called (...) or Secundarii.

Ariston, a Tragic Poet of Chios of an uncertain age, who as Plutarch and
Laertius testify, was banished Athens for writing a Tragedy against
Menestheus; also Three Epigrams in the Greec Anthologie go under the name of
Ariston.

Aristonymus see Callimachus.

Aristophanes an Athenian, the most Renowned of comic Poets, and contemporary
with Sophocles the Tragic Poet, and also with Socrates whom he makes an object
of his wit in his Comedy called Nubes, as he does Cleon and Nicias two
Magistrates of Athens in his Equites, and Georgia; he flourisht from the Eighty
fifth to the Ninety first Oympiad, and wrote a considerable number of Comedies,
whereof many are yet extant, and many lost. At the same time flourisht
Teleclides a comic Poet also of Athens, several Comedies of whom are mentioned
by Athenaeus, who says also that the History of the Telchines was ascribed to
him; then likewise there began to write M^rychus a Tragic Poet, though ^a
foolish one as he is accounted by Aristophanes according to his proverb of him
Moricho Stultior. There was also another Aristophanes noted among the
Grammarians.

Aristophon, an ancient Greec Poet of an uncertain age, whose Philoctetes is
mentioned by Plutarch:

Aristoteles, the Philosopher of Sagira, who besides the many other works he
wrote, among which is his Art of Poetry, is delivered by Ambrosius and
Brognolus to have written a Paean to Hermias, and some other things in verse.

Aristoxenus of Selinum, see Archilochus.

Arrianus, or as some write him Rhianus, a contemporary of the Emperor
Tiberius, who was much delighted with his Greec verses. Lilius Giraldus his
mistake concerning him, see rectified by Vossius in his book de poetis Latinis.

Aruntius Stella a Latin Poet, no less noted for his verses upon his Mistress
Violantilla's Dove, than those upon the victory of Domitian (in whose time he
lived) over the Sarmatians.

Asaph, a great Musician among the Jews, and as some think chief Master of King
David's Q'uire, and setter of diverse of his Psalms to Music, or, as others
suppose, the Author of them himself.

Arystilus, a contemporary of Euripides or thereabout, and reckoned by some
among the number of Greec Dramatics.

Asclepiades a Tragic Poet, the Disciple of Isocrates, he is mentioned by
Plutarch in his lives of the Ten Rhetoricians.

Asius, a Samian, the Son of Amphiptolemus, a Poem of his called Genealogiae,
is mentioned by Pausanias in his Messenics, his fable of Metabus and Menalippe
by the Scholiast of Homer, supposed to be Didymus; besides some few verses of
his cited by Athenaeus from Duris the Historian.

Astydamas the Son of Morsimus, he began to write in the Second year of the
Ninety fifth Olympiad, as Diodorus and the Author of the Olympiads testify,
and wrote as says Suidas 140 Tragedies (in 15 only whereof he was Victor)
having abandoned Rhetoric, wherein he was a hearer of Isocrates, he had a Son
of the same name, who began to flourish in the 102 Olympiad, his Tragedies
mentioned by Suidas are Nine, namely, Hercules, Satyricus, Epigoni, Ajax
Furens, Bellerophon, Tyro, Alcmena, Phaenix, Palamedes.

Attilius, see Statius Caecilius.

Augeas a writer of Media Comedia of an uncertain age, of whose writing two
Comedies, viz. Rusticus and Poeta are mentioned by Suidas.

Aulus Cornelius Severus, see Publius Ovidius.

Aulus Furius, an ancient Latin Poet of Antium, whom Cicero mentions in his
Brutus, he was a contemporary and familiar friend of Quintus Catulus.

Aulus Persius Flaccus an Eminent Satyrist who flourisht under Nero, there are
Six Satyrs of his extant, which are commonly set forth in a volume together
with Juvenal.

Aulus Cornelius Alpinus, see Publius Ovidius.

Auleas, the Third Tragic writer from Theomis, who is delivered by some to have
been the First inventor of Tragedy.

Aulus Sabinus, see Publius Ovidius.

Aulus Serenus, an ancient Lyric Poet among the Latins of an uncertain age, he
is remembered by Terentianus, Diomedes, Nonius, Servius, Hieronymus,
Fortunatianus and Capella, which two last Authors cite this verse of his.

Perit avipedis animula Leporis. Aurelius Apollinaris, a Celebratour of the
Acts of the Emperor Carus in Iambic verse, as is testified by Vopiscus in his
life of that Prince.

Aurelius Prudentius Clemens, a Christian Poet, who flourisht in the time of
Theodosius the Great and his Children, he wrote in Latin verse Psychomachia, de
Martyrum Coronis, and some other works which are yet extant; but that
Enchiridion of the old and new Testament, which is usually Printed at the end
of his works, is said to have been written by Amoenus, or as some say by
Sedulius.

Ausonius, see Decius.

Autocrates, an Athenian Comic Poet of an uncertain age, whose Timpanista is
mentioned by Suidas.

Axionicus, another Comic writer of the Greecs of an uncertain age, his
Phileuripides, Chalcidicus, and Tyrrhenus are mentioned by Athenaeus.

B.
BAbrias, by some called Gabrias, a Poet of an uncertain age, who converted
Aesops Fables into Greec Iambic verse, as Avienus testifies in his Praeface to
Theodosius Ambrosius, those Fables which go under the name of Gabrias, being
judged to have been rather the works of Ignatius Diaconus.

Bacchylides of Ceus, see Cratinus.

Bassus an old Epigrammatist, several Epigrams of whose writing are extant in
the Florilegium of Planudes, he is sometimes mentioned with the surname of
Lollius added, if at least it be the same Bassus.

Batalus, a writer of Lascivious verses, upon the extraordinary deformity of
whose body the Poet Antiphanes wittily played.

Batton, a Comic writer of an uncertain age, whose Androphonos and Euergete are
remembered by Athenaeus and Suidas.

Batulus, an Ephesian, whither Poet, Flutinist or Actour is uncertain.

Beda, surnamed Venarabilis, an ancient English Priest who flourisht from the
time of Justinianus the younger to Constantinus Copronymus (which was toward
the end of the Saxon Heptarchy) and who being chiefly a Historian, yet claimed
the title of a Poet by his Hymns, his Poem of Justin's Martyrdom and some other
things, some Mentioned, others Extant in the Collection of Epigrams and Poems,
set forth by Pithaeus, and Printed at Paris.

Bias of Priene, see Epimenides.

Bentamin Halachadites, his Omeis is Cited by Joannes the Son of Serapion.

Bion, a Greec Poet of Smyrna, whose Epitaphium Adonidis and other Idyls are
Printed with Hesiod and the rest of the Poetae Minores.

Besantinus, an ancient Epigramatist, whose Name is found to some Epigrams in
the Greek Anthologie.

Blaesus, a Latin Poet of an uncertain age, born, as says Stephanus, in
Capriae an Island of Italy.

Boethius, a Poet of Tarsus, who Celebrated, in Greek Verse, the Victory of
Marcus Antonius, as Strabo affirms. Under the Name also of Boethius (probably
the same) are certain Epigrams in the Greek Anthologie. But there was another
of the same Name of little Fame and of an uncertain age.

Boiscus, a Poet of Cyzicum, of an ununcertain age, whom Vossius l. 2. de re
poet: affirms to have been the first Author of the Tetrameter Octonarie
Jambick.

Burchardus Pylades a Brixian, whose Five Books of the Genealogies of the Gods,
are set forth with Hesiod in Oporinus his Basil Edition.

Buslidius, a Poet of an uncertain age, of whom what Verses are Extant are in
the Book of Epigrams, of the Schola Christiana, Printed at Basil.

Butas, an elegiack Poet, of an uncertain age, who having written fabulously,
de Romanorum rebus in Grverse, is remembered by Plutarch, Arnobius, Pithaeus and
Heraldus: But by Plutarch reprehended as fabulous.

C.
CAecilius Argivus, a Greek Poet doubtless very ancient, remembered by a Poem
he is said to have written de Piscibus.

Caecilius Cyprianus, an ancient Bishop of Carthage, who lived under Philippus
Arabs, Decius, Gallus, Volusianus, Valerianus, and Galienus: (the last of whom
is himself also received a Poet by certain Verses of his yet Extant) and at
length suffered Martyrdom. The Poems that go under his Name are Genesis,
Sodoma, an Invective against an Apostate Senator; and a Hymn for Easter Day,
the two first whereof Sixtus Senensis believes were written by Tertullian, the
last some ascribe to Victorinus.

Caelius Sedulius, a Scottish Priest, who lived under Theodosius Junior;
besides what he wrote in Prose, viz. A Comment upon St. Paul's Epistles, he
also wrote in Verse his Opus Paschale, or, Paschal work: of which Pope Gelasius
in his Decrees gives a particular commendation. This Work being afterward by
himself put into Prose is yet Extant in the Book called Bibliotheca Patrum Tomo
8; he wrote besides two Hymns, one upon Christ's Nativity, the other upon
Epiphany.

Caesius Bassus, a Lyrick Poet, who flourisht in the time of Nero (who was also
by the testimony of Seneca and Martial, a very approved Poet himself) and is
twice hinted at by Juvena in his Satyrs: he is by Fabius, who knew him, ranked
in the next degree of Lyrics to Horace. There was also another Caesius (in the
time of Catullus) whom see in Aquinius.

Cajus Asinius Pollio, see Anser and Publius Ovidius.

Cajus Cilnius Mecaenas, ibid.

Cajus Cominius, see Aelius Saturninus.

Cajus Cotta, see Publius Ovidius.

Cajus Florus, an ancient Latin Poet, who wrote of the same Subject with
Valerius Flaccus in Heroic Verse.

Cajus Germanicus, see Aelius Saturninus.

Cajus Helvius Cinna, the Author of an old Latin Poem, entitled Smirna, which,
as Servius testifies, was a Work of no less then ten years.

Cajus Julius Caesar, the Great Roman Captain, who first made himself Master of
the Roman Empire, and was also an Elegant writer, besides whose Commentaries
which are extant, there are reckoned up several other Works of his writing
which are lost, and among the rest a Tragedy, entitled Oedipus.

Cajus Laelius, see Terentius.

Cajus Lucilius, a Roman Poet of the Equestrian Order, Born in the 158 Olympiad.

Cajus Lutorius Priscus, see Aelius Saturninus.

Cajus Pedo Albinovanus, see Publius Ovidius.

Cajus Rabirius, see Anser.

Cajus Sollius Apollinaris, a Sidonian Poet, whose Father was an Officer of
great Authority under the Emperor Honorius, and he himself under Theosius the
younger and Valentinian the third, thrice Master of the Militia, and four times
Prefect of the Praetorium: he was also in very high Esteem and Authority with
Maximus Augustus, Avitus whose Daughter he Married, and Majorianus by whom he
was advanced to the Dignity of a Count: under Severus he defended Arvernia
against the Incursions of the Barbarians. Under Anthemius also he was still
advanced, and at length made Bishop of Arverni; after which abandoning Poetry
he betook himself wholly to the Study of Theology: he is much more happy in
his Verse, as is to be seen in 24 little Poems of his yet extant, than in his
Prose, wherein his Style is very harsh and crabbed, and very much discommended
by Ludovicus Vives.

Cajus Valerius Catullus, an Epigrammatist of Verona, of whose witty and
elegant Poems we have many yet extant.

Cajus Valerius Flaccus Setinus Balbus, a Latin Poet of Padua, who Dedicated
his Argonauticks, or Poem of the Expedition of Jason, for the Golden Fleece to
the Emperor Domitian; which Poem being extant, he is said to have written in
Imitation of Apollonius Rhodius.

Calfurnius, see Titus.

Callias, an Athenian Tragic Poet, of an uncertain age, the Son of Lysimachus,
a Rope-maker; his Grammatica is remembered by Athenaeus, his Cyclopes by Pollux,
his Aegyptius, Atalanta, Pedetae, Ranae and (...) by Suidas.

Callimachus, an excellent Greek Poet of Cyrene, in great favor and esteem
with Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, in whose time he lived, and of his Son Euergetes
in honor of whose Queen he wrote his Fiction, called Coma Berenices: he also
wrote Hymns, Elegies and Epigrams, whereof many of his Hymns and Epigrams, as
also several fragments of his other works are yet extant. There was also of the
same Name a Colophonian Poet, mentioned by Tatianus in his Oration to the
Gentiles; and Eusebius in his Evangelical preparations. Contemporary with
Callimachus of Cyrene were Heraclitus of Halicarnassus (whose Epigram upon the
death of the said Callimachus is cited by Laertius in the Life of Heraclitus.
And Timon of Phliasus of the Pyr^honian Sect, who was in great favor with
Antigonus Gonatus in whose time he lived; he wrote Books of Natural Philosophy
in Verse Hexameter, besides 40 Tragedies, 30 Comoedies with Satyrs, and several
other works, among which his Books called Sylli are particularly treated of by
Sotion. There was another Callimachus, a Heroic Poet, Sister's Son to him of
Cyrene, as Suidas testifies.

Callinus, an Elegiack Poet, somewhat antienter than Archilochus, as Athenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Strabo testify.

Callistratus, see Alcaeus.

Callistus, see Amphilochius.

Calvus, an ancient Poet, out of whom Verses are cited by Servius, Charisius,
and Gellius.

Camerinus, and Thuscus, see Publius Ovidius.

Caninius Rufus, a writer of the Dacian War in Greek Verse, as Plinius Junior
testifies in one of his Epistles.

Canius, see Curiatius Maternus.

Cantharus, a Comic writer of Athens, of an uncertain age whose Comedies
Medaea, Tereus, Symmachiae, Myrmeces, and Aedones, are all mentioned by Suidas,
his Tereus, also by Athenaeus.

Capella, see Publius Ovidius.

Capito, an Alexandrian Poet, of an uncertain age, who besides what he wrote in
Prose wrote also a Poem, called (...), or of Love affairs, of which Athenaeus
makes mention.

Capnias, an obscure Poet of an uncertain age, whose writings are said by
Suidas, to have been of so little esteem that they vanished into smoke, which
alludes to his name, their loss not being in the least regarded.

Carcinus, an Athenian Tragic and Lyrick Poet, who began to flourish about the
100th Olympiad, viz. in the time of Phillip of Macedon, and contemporary with
Plato, who besides his Philosophical writings, is said to have written several
Tragedies, which he afterward burnt, as Laertius testifies. The Tragedies of
this Carcinus remembered by Athenaeus, are his Achilles and his Semele. There
was also another Carcinus of Agrigentum, whose Comedy entitled Plutus is
mentioned by Athenaeus; he lived as appears from Polycritus Mendesius, a little
before the other, Contemporary with whom were Eudoxus of Gnidus who wrote
Astrology in Hexameter Verse, besides another Eudoxus, a Comic Poet of
Sicilie, as also Anaxilaus, or Anaxilas, who in a Comedy of his called
Botrylion, nips Plato. Two other Comedies of his (...) and (...) are cited by
Athenaeus.

Carneades, an Elegiack Poet, of an uncertain age, made mention of by Laertius
as a different person from Carneades the Philosopher. Suidas mentions three
Philosophers but no Poet of that name.

Carus, see Publius Ovidius.

Cassius Severus, see Anser.

Cato, by some called Batto, a Comic Poet of an uncertain age, but the more
eminent was Valerius Cato, whom see in Valerius.

Cephisodorus, see Euripides.

Chaeremon, see Philistion.

Choerophon, ibid.

Charmus, a Syracusian, of an uncertain age whose Poem entitled (...) or (...)
argued him a person more given to his belly than Epicure himself.

Chedmon, an old British Poet, who as it were by divine Inspiration, to use
Cambden's own words, in the year 680 with his sweet Verses full of Compunction
drew men from Vice to Virtue.

Chersias, see Epimenedes.

Chilo, ibid.

Chionides, an Athenian writer of Vetus Comoedia, who according to Suidas,
began to flourish in the 70th Olympiad; of his Comedies there are remembered
his Heroes commended by Pollux and Suidas, his Mendicae commended by Athenaeus,
and his Assyrij, or Persae.

Choerilius, an Athenian Tragoedian, who is said to have written 150.
Tragedies, and to have overcome in 13.

Choerilus, see Agis.

Christodorus, an Epick Writer, who described in Greek Verse in six Books, the
taking of Is^^ria, by the Emperor Anastasius, under whom he flourisht: besides
some other things mentioned by Suidas. About the same time also lived Timotheus
of Gaza, a Grammarian, who wrote a Tragedy entitled Argyripus, and also a
History of Animals in Verse: Quintus Smyrnaus, Surnamed Calaber, as being found
at Hydruns, a Town of Calabria, by Cardinal Bessarion; he continued the
Description of the Trojan* War in Heroic Verse, from where Homer left; which
Work of his being of the number of those that have happily escaped the gulf of
Oblivion, was first published at Venice by Aldus Manutius.

(...), an Egyptian of Lycopolis, whose Description of the Rape of Helena, in
Greek Verse; which is also extant, and commonly Printee at the end of Homer's
Iliads; together with the little Poem of the Destruction of Troy, by
Tryphiodorus an Egyptian likewise. The Calidonica and Persica, which Coluthus
and the Odysseia, and Ilia (...), which Tryphiodorus, by the testimony of
Suid^^ had written; being all lost. Within the same interval comes in Musaeus,
whose little Poem of the Loves of Hero and Leander, in yet extant, which by the
good leave of J. Caesar Sealiger, whoever considers the Style may imagine to
have been written by a much later Greek Author (as this Musaeus the Grammarian
was) than that Grand Musaeus spoken of by Virgil* Under the same Ana^^asius
also flourisht Marianus, the Son of Marsus, as is testifid by Suidas, who also
writes that he Metaphras'd upon Theocritus, Aratus, Ni^ander's Theriaca, and
several of C^lli^^achus his Works.

Chrysippus, a Writer of Georgi^s, but whether in Verse as Giraldus only
surmiseth, or in Prose, is questioned by Vossius, there was also of the same
name reckoned among the Poets one of Tyanea, whose (...) is mentioned by
Athenaeus, who lived but an age or thereabout after him.

Cynaethon, a Lacedemonian, who began to flourish in the fifth Olympiad, and
wrote a Poem called Telegonia.

Cinaethus, a Chian; who flourisht in the Sixty ninth Olympiad (as says the
Scholiast of Pindarus) and wrote a Farce of Homers Verses.

Cinesias, a Theban Dithyrambic writer, see Philyrinus.

Citerius Sidonius, a Syracusan, of whom there is extant a Latin Epigram in the
Parisian Collection, Entitled Epigramata and Poematia vetera.

Claudianus Mamerius, see Alcimus.

Claudius Clandianus, an Alexandrian (as it is conjectured) who flourisht in
the time of Theodosius the great and his children, Christian Emperors, though
he himself continued an obstinate Gentil; however, for his eminency in Latin
Poetry (whereof his Proserpina's Rape, and several other Poems yet extant, are
a testimony) he had his statue erected by Arcadius and Honorius, about the same
time (as some think) lived Pontius Paulinus Bishop of Nola, a Disciple of
Ausonius, to whom he wrote several Verses; as also the life of St. Martin, and
upon the birthday of Celsus, and St. Faelix of Nola, with some other things
which are yet extant; likewise an Epitome of Suetonius in Verse, which is lost.
2. Flavius who is delivered by Hieronymus one of his acquaintance, to have
written the Art of Medicin in verse Hexameter, 3 Licentius of Hippo, whom St.
Austin, who was of his acquaintance, celebrates for an eminent Poet, and takes
notice of his Poem of Pyramus and Thisbe. He also wrote hymns and several other
things, and is remembered by Paulinus and Posidonius. 4. Rutilius Claudius
Numatianus a Gaul, whose Itinerarium, in verse, wherein he discovers himself an
enemy to Christian Religion, is extant in Pithaeus his Collection.

Caludius Clemens, a Scotch-man, who flourisht in the year of our Lord 810. He
was the Disciple of Beda, and one of the Founders of the University of Paris:
many things he wrote in Theology, and is delivered by some, to have been also
an excellent Poet. Camb. Rem.

Claudius Marius Victor. See Alcimus.

Cleanthes, a Successor, as says Eusebius, to Zeno in his School, and a writer
of Physics in Hexameter and Iambic verse; which work is in H. Stephanus his
Collection. It is also affirmed by Laertius, who wrote his iife, that he wrote
a Book de Poeta. About that same time also lived Sophron a Comic writer, of
whose writing, and not of Sophron's the Syracusian, Vossius thinks the Comoedy
Nymphonus to be, which is cited by Pollux; contemporary with whom were
Damoxenus an Athenian Comic writer, out of one of whose Comoedies about 70.
Verses are extant in Athenaeus, from whom are cited by Suidas, his (...) and
(...), and also Lycophron, one of the forementioned Seven Pleiades so called, a
Grammarian and Tragic Poet of Chalcis (for there were several others of that
name) he wrote an obscure Poem, Entitled Alexandra or Cassandra, which is yet
extant; besides other things mentioned by Suidas, which are lost.

Clearchus, a Comic Poet, of an uncertain time, out of whose Corinthii a
Sentenee is cited by Athenaeus. The^^ is also a small fragment of him in the
common Edition of the Poetae Minores.

Cleobulus of Lindus, one of the Seven Wisemen of Grecce, many of whose
Sentences and wise sayings were written in Verse.

Cleon, an ancient Greec Poet, from whose Poem Entitled Argonautica Apollonius*
Rhodius is thought to have taken the pattern, and much of the matter of his
Poem as the Scholiast of Apolloninus testifies:

Cleomenes, a Dithyrambic Poet of Rhegium, whose Poem Entitled Meleager, is
cited by Athenaeus; whether this be the the same with that Cleomenes cited by
Clemens Alexandrinus is doubted by Vossius.

Cleopbon, an Athenian Tragic Poet of an uncertain time; several of whose
Tragedies are mentioned by Suidas.

Clidemus, another Poet, unknown both as to the place and time he lived in.
Whose At this is cited by Athenaeus.

^ Clodius Sabinus, an elegant Poet; as well as writer of Latin and Greec
declamations; he is said also to have written a Poem of the Trojan War.

Clonas, an Epic and Elegiac Poet of Tegea; some say Thebes, who is said to
have been the first inventor of certain Moods in Music.

Cneus Aquilius, see Statius Caecilius.

Cneus Cornelius Gallus, a famous Elegiac Poet of Forolivium, so high in favor
with Augustus that he was made first Prefect of Egypt; he translated
Euphorion a Greec Author into Latin, and wrote four Books of Elegies upon his
beloved Cytheris, Volumuius his freed woman, whose forsaking him, and running
away with Antonius into Gallia, is the subject of Virgils Tenth Eglogue, in
which she is is called Lycoris.

Cneus Lentulus Getulicus, a Latin Epigramatist, of whom there are some
fragments in Petrus Crinitus. He loved Cesennia, whom he very much celebrated
in his Verses.

Cneus Matius, the Author of a Poem, Entitled Ilias in Fifteen Books. He is
cited by Charisius.

Codrus see Anser.

Coluthu see Christodorus.

Cometas, surnamed Scholasticus, a Greec Epigramatist, whose name is to an
Octostichon in the Fourth Book of the Greec Epigrams. Another Cometas, surnamed
Chartularius, has his name to a Hexastichon in the same book if it were not
the same person diff^rently surnamed.

Corinnus, the first Composer in Verse (as some say) of that Trojan story, out
of which Homer took his Iliads, and the Disciple of Palamedes, whence though
the certain time when he lived be unknown, he is concluded to have been
ancienter than Homer; yet Vossius seems to doubt whether there were ever any
such person.

Corippus, a Grammarian, who living in the time of Justinus junior, wrote in
praise of that Emperor in Heroic Verse; for which he is branded with a very ill
character, by Nicolaus Alemanuus, in his Preface to Procopius. Contemporary
with whom lived Stephanus an Affrican Presbyter, who wrote the life of St.
German, as it is thought, in Verse; and that at the desire of St. Anacharius,
Bishop of Altisiodorum.

Cornelius Licinius Gallus, the same most probably with Cneus Cornelius Gallus.

Cornelius Longinus, an ancient Epigrammatist, of whom there is preserved an
Octostichon in the Sixth book of the Greec Anthologia or collection of Epigrams.

Cornelius Nepos, a Contemporary of Cicero, most noted for his Lives, but for
his putting Dares Phrygius his History of the Trojan war into Latin Verse, not
to be here omitted.

Cornelius Severus, see Publius Ovidius.

Cornificius, an old Latin Poet, whose Book de natura Deorum, and of Hymns, are
mentioned by Macrobius.

Corvinus Clemens, an ancient Poet, whom Cuspinian in his Book de Consulibus,
affirms to have set forth in Verse the Acts of Alexander the Great.

Co^mas, see Joannes Damascenus.

Cr^^tor Solensis, see Philetas Cou^.

Crates, a Tragic Poet, whom some think to be the same with Cr^tes the Theban
Cynic Philosopher, besides whom Laertius reckons Nine more of the same name;
the chief whereof were Crates the Comaedian; whom see in Cratinus, Crates
Thriasius and Crates Mallotes, the two last whereof I question whether they
were not to be accounted rather Critics than Poets.

Cratinus, an Athenian writer of Vetus Comaedia, who began to flourish in the
Second year of the Eghty First Olympiad; he wrote 21 Comedies, in Nine whereof
he was Victor, as is testified by Suidas; his Threiciae Horae, and others of
his Comedies are mentioned by Pollux, Athenaeus and others. Contemporary with
this Cratinus was Plato the Comedian, who is affirmed by Suidas to have written
Twenty Eight Comedies, of which his Adonis, Europa, Mammacythus, etc. are
remembered by Pollux, Athenaeus, Harpocration and Hesychius. Secondly,
Aristarchus of Tegea, a Tragic Poet, who of Seventy Tragedies was Victor only
twice: He lived, as says Suidas, above a hundred years. Thirdly, Bacchylides,
a Lyric Poet of Ceus Simonides his Brothers son; he was in great esteem with
the Emperor Julian, as says Ammianus Marcellinus; he wrote Hymns which are
remembered by Menander the Rhetorician, and in the Pythian Games his Poems were
preferred by Hiero before the Odes of Pindarus. Dionysius Pheraeus reckoned by
Plutarch, among the number of Poets. And Lastly, Crates the Comedian, mentioned
with commendation by Aristotle in his Poetics; and Aristophanes in his Equites,
his (...) and others of his Comedies, are mentioned by Pollux and Athenaeus.

Creophylus, an ancient Greec poet, reckoned by some, Contemporary with Homer.

Cresconius, an African Poet, whom some name Crescentius; he wrote in Verse the
Wars of the Emperor Justinian in Africa.

Crinagoras, an old Epigrammatist, of whom there are found about 19 Epigrams in
the Greec Anthology.

Critias Callae^schrus, an Elegiac Poet mentioned by Athenaeus, and out of whom
(if it be the same) Stobaeus quotes several Senarie Jambi^s.

C^riatius Maternus, a Tragic Poet, who lived in the time of the Emperor Titus
Vespasian (who is delivered to have been himself no contemptible Poet, by
Eutropius, Isidorus, Suidas, and Suetonius, by whom mention is made of
Tragedies and other Poems of his in Greec) there are remembered of this
Curiatius two Tragedies only, Medea and Thiestes; Contemporary with him were
first Sall^ius Bassus, who was so well esteemed by Vespasian, that he bestowed
on him Fifty Sesterces, he has also from Fabius and Tacitus the Character of
an excellent Poet. Secondly, Curtius Montanus, an Orator, and by the testimony
of Tacitus, if not a Poet, yet at least a writer of Verses. Thirdly, Domitian
the Brother of Titus, and after him Emperor* a very considerable Poet, by the
Testimony of Fabius, Martial, and Valerius Flaccus, and by Vossius affirmed the
Author of the Translation of Aratus. Fourthly and Fifthly, Turnus and Scaeva
Memor Brothers, the first a Satyric, the other a Tragic Poet, both mentioned by
Martial in one of his Epigrams, by the Old Scholiast of Juvenal, and by
Sidonius Apollinaris. Fifthly and Sixthly, Canius and Passienus the first, a
Gaditan, mentioned by Martial in two of his Epigrams for his facetiousness, as
also his wife Theophila being for learning compared with Sappho for chastity
preferred; the other an Elegiac and Lyric Poet of Vmbria, mentioned by Pliny in
his Sixth Epistle to Romanus; he is said to have been the Grandchild or great
Grandchild to Propertius. Seventhly, Fulgentius Plan^iades, of whose writing
Scaliger suspects the Tragedy Octavia to be, which is commonly ascribed to
Seneca. Eighthly, Paccius who wrote Alcithoe. Ninethly, Faustus, whose Thebae
and Tereus are remembered by Juvenal in the beginning of his Seventh Satyr.
Tenthly, Rubrenus Lappa, whose Atreus is mentioned by the same Author in the
same Satyr, if the Exposition of Britanni^us and Pulmannus will pass for Barton
Holyday, in his Illustration of Juvenal, judges Atreus to be not the Title of a
Tragedy, but rather the name of a Usurer, to whom this Lappa pawned his Dishes
and Cloak for want. 11ly. 12ly. 13ly. Mareus Vnicus, Ligurinus and Lustricus
Brutianus, all mentioned by Martial, and the last by Pliny also. 14ly.
Theodorus a Jew, whose House and Poems appear by one of Martial's Epigrams to
have been burnt. 15. Licinianus, Martial's Countryman, and so celebrated in
one of his Epigrams. 16. Voconius Victor, celebrated also by the same Martial,
l. 7. Epigr. 29. and remembered by Pliny, in an Epistle to Priscus. 17.
Votienus, not only imagined but concluded a Poet from Martial, l. 8. Epigr. 72.
18, and 19. Sabellus and Musaeus (not the Author of Hero and Leander, he
writing in Greec, though later and this in Latin) both obscene Poets, and the
first remembered by Martial, l. 12. Epigr. 43. besides Aruntins Stella, Codrus,
and Apollinaris above mentioned.

Cyllenus Petianus, an old Epigramatist, of whom two Epigrams are preserved in
the first Book of the Greec Anthology.

Cyliscus, a Tragic Poet, whom Pliny delivers to have been painted by
Protogenes, in a posture of meditating.

Cynaethus v. Cinaethus.

Cyrus, a Panopolitan Epigrammatist, in great esteem with the Empress Eudocia,
wife of T^eodosius junior, in whose time he flourisht, and by whom he was
advanced to be Bishop of Cotyacum in Phrygia; several of his Epigrams are
extant in the Fourth Book of the Greek Anthologia. Contemporary with him was
Synaesius, Bishop of Ptolemais; who besides other Poems, wrote Ten Hymns which
are yet extant. And also Nonnus likewise of Panopolis, the Author of a well
known Greek Poem, Entitled Dionysiaca in 48 Books, and whose Paraphrase upon
St. John's Gospel in Heroic Greek verse, is of sufficient esteem among the
learned.

Cyrus Theodorus Prodromus, a Divine Epigrammatist, who living in or somewhat
near the time of the ancient Fathers, wrote in Greek Verse, partly in Iambic,
partly in Heroic Tetrastics, the summary heads of the Pentateuch, or Five Books
of Moses, and also of Joshua, Judges and Kings; and in the New Testament, of
the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles; also Iambic and Heroic Tetrasticks upon
the Three Great Hierarchs, St. Gregory, Basil and Chrysostom, with some other
things: his Works were Printed at Basil by Bebelius. An. 1536.

D
DAmasus a Spaniard, who lived in the time of Valentinianus, Gratianus,
Valentinianus junior, and Theodosius Magnus, and was Bishop of Rome; he has
left several Poems and Hymns which are sung in the Church of Rome, and is
laureated a Poet by Suidas.

Damochares, a Grammarian, and Writer of Epigrams, whereof some are to be found
in the Greec Anthologie.

Damocrates, a Poet of an uncertain time, who wrote in Verse several medicinal
passages extracted out of Galens works.

Dam^xenus, an Athaenian Comedian, whose Syntrophi and Heauton Penthon, are
quoted by Athenaeus, he is also mentioned by Suidas, see Cleanthes.

Daphitas, a Poet and Grammarian, who for certain bitter Invectives against
Monarchy, was crucified upon Thorax, a mountain of Magnesia.

David, The 2d. King of Israel and Judah, commonly celebrated with the
threefold Title of King, Priest, and Prophet; to which may be added also that
of Poet, if under the name of Vates Prophet and Poet were not included
together. His Divine gift in Poetry appears in the composition of those most
Celestial Hymns or Psalms, which take place among those Sacred Books which
make up the Old Testament, of which is generally reputed the entire Author,
but was certainly the Author of most if not all of them.

Decius Junius Juvenalis, see Junius.

Decius Laberius, a Mimic Writer, who began to flourish in the Third year of
181st. Olympiad, and was Contemporary with Cicero (who though a much better
Orator than Poet, yet we have extant among his Works something also of his
Poetry) his Aquae, Aries, Augur and very many more of his Mimes are reckoned up
by Charisius; his Rector, Salinator and Scripturae are remembered by Agellius,
much about the same time also flourisht 1. Lucius Cornelius Sylla, a famous
though cruel and tyrannical Roman Commander; who as says Athenaeus wrote in
his own tongue many facetious Satyrs and Mimes, with which according to
Nieolaus Damafcenus he was much delighted: Plutarch in his life reiateth that
he made Verses while he was besieging Athens. 2. Quintus Hortensius, who
besides his Fame in Oratory, had so much of a Poet as to make a parcel of
wanton Verses, which are remembered by Ovid in his Elegies, and by Agellius. 3.
Marcus Valerius Cato, who wrote two Poems Lydia and Diana. 4. Marcus Furius
Bibaculus, diverse of whose Verses are cited by Macrobius and Agellius, among
which there are some that appear to have been imitated even word for word by
Virgil, he is said by Suetonius and Tacitus, to have written invective Verses
against Julius Caesar. 5. Titus Pomponius Atticus, whose Excellence in Poetry
is fully set fortth by Cornelius Nepos, in the Description of his Life. 6.
Marcus Terentius Varro, who is styled Philosopher and Poet, by Hieronymus in
his Chronicle; and out of whose Poems we have several fragments yet extant,
especially of the Satirae Mcnippeae, together with diverse Epigrams both in the
Appendix of Virgil, collected by Scaliger, and in the Collection of Epigrams
set forth by Petrus Pythaeus, but his Books de Re Rustica and lingua Latina are
most looked upon; besides him, there was another Varro, surnamed Atacinus, not
much less ancient, who also wrote Poems, viz. Argonautics, and a Poem of the
Sequanic War. 7. Quintus Cicero (Brother of Tullius) whose Verses of the Twelve
Signs are yet extant in Pithaeus his Collection. 8. Albinus not Aulus
Posthumous, though both indeed wrote the same subject, viz. the History of the
Roman Affairs, but Aulus in Greek Prose, the other in Latin Verse. 9. Caius
Helvius Cinna, who wrote an obscure Poem, Entitled Smyrna, which the Grammarian
Crassitins undertook to interpret; besides which Isidorus has a Tetrastic of
his, upon the writing of Aratus his Poem in a leaf of Mallows. 10. Caius
Licinius Calvus, of whom there is nothing remembered but his Epigram upon Cn.
Pompeius. 11. Macer (not Aemilius Macer the Botanic Poet) of whose Poem
Entitled Iliaca, see Scaliger upon Eusebius.

Decius Magnus Ansonius, a Physician and Poet of Burgedala, who flonrisht in
the time of the Emperor Valentinian the Elder, and his two Sons Gratianus and
Valentinian the younger, by whom he was preferred to great honors, having been
Praeceptor to the two young Princes, besides those Poetical works of his which
are extant; he wrote Fasti, and some other things which are lost.

Demetrius, a Satyric Poet of Tarsus, of an uncertain time, besides whom there
were three others of the same name; the one a Comedian, surnamed Phalereus
(whether the Grammarian so surnamed I find not) out of whose Fable Entitled
Sicilia, Athenaeus cites 4 Verses, the other an Epic, the last an Iambic writer.

Demochares, a Solian, whose Fable Entitled Demetrius is remembered by Plutarch
in his Life of Demetrius Poliorcetes.

Democritus and Demodocus, two ancient Epigrammatists, whose Names are
preserv^d by several Epigrams yet extant in the Greek Anthologie.

Demolchus a Syracusian Comic Poet, who flourisht in the 73d. Olympiad, and
taught Fourteen Fables in the Doric tongue; he was the Son of Epicharmus a
Physician.

Demonax, an old Greek Poet quoted by Stobaeus, in his Sermon de Superbia.

Dexicrates, an Athenian, whose Fable Entitled (...) is remembered by Athenaeus
and Suidas.

Dicaeogenes, a Tragedian and Dithyrambic Poet, remembered by Harpocration,
Suidas and Stobaeus.

Dinolochus, see Euripides.

Diocles, ibidem.

Diodorus, an old Greec Poet of Sinope, out of whom several Iambic verses, are
quoted by Stobaeus, in his Sermon de contrahendis Nuptiis and elsewhere; some
think him to be the same with Diodorus a Comic Poet of Syene, whose Tibi^ina,
Panegyristae and Epiclerus, are cited by Athenaeus, and who is also mentioned
by Suidas.

Dionysiades, see Aeantides.

Dionysiodorns, a Trazenian, out of whom a Verse is cited by Plutarch, in the
beginning of his Life of Aratus; he is also taken notice of by the Scholiast of
Apollonius.

Dionysius, surnamed Epaites, an Elegiac write^r, out of whom Parthenius is
said to have borrowed the 15th. History of his Erotica. Of this name there are
several others, not to be forgot. The first and most considerable for a Poet,
was Dionysius of Alexandria, vulgarly surnamed Afer, whose Periegesis or
description of the World in Greek Verse, ia now in great esteem among the
learned; there was also a Poem called (...), written either by this or another
Dionysius; he is thonght by Vossius to have lived about the time of Tiberius or
not long after. Dionysius Pheraeus, whom see in Cratinus; Dionysius
Scytobrachion, whom see in Antipater, Dionysius, a Greec Hymnographer, but of
what age or surname is not found (if he be not one of those above mentioned) of
whom there are some few Hymns now extant, with the Musical notes to them,
lately set forth, with the Edition of Aratus, Printed at the Sheldonian Theater
at Oxford. Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, who is said to have written several
Comedies and Tragedies, whereof his Adonis and Thesmophoros are cited by
Athenaeus. In his time lived Antipho a Rhamnusian, both Tragic and Comic Poet,
mentioned with praise by Aristotle in his Poetics, and one of the Ten Orators,
whose lives are written by Plutarch and Philostratus; some say he was put to
death by the Thirty Tyrants, others by Dionysius for deriding his Comedies.
Also Sthenelus a Tragic Poet, remembered by Aristotle in his Poetics and
Harpocration.

Dioscorides, an ancient Greec Epigramatist, whose name is to very many
Epigrams in the Greek Anthologie. As like wise

Diotimus. And also

Diotiuchus.

Dioxippus, an Athenian Comedian, of whose writing there are remembered these
Comedies, viz. his Philargyrus, Diadicazomenus, Historiographus and
Antipornobosci.

Diphilus, see Menander.

Domitius Marsus, see Publius Ovidius.

Dorcatius, a Latin Poet of an uncertain time, out of whom Isidorus, l. 8.
Orig. l. 69. cites two Verses.

Doricus, otherwise Dorias, his Octostich upon Milo of Crotona, is cited by
Athenaeus, l. 10.

Dorillus, a Tragic Poet, remembered by Suidas.

Dorotheus, a Sidonian Poet, who wrote Apotelesmata, which M. Manlius is said
to have imitated; he is cited by Athenaeus.

Dorus, a Greek Comic writer quoted by Stobaeus.

Dosiades, a Rhodian, mentioned by Lucianus and the Scholiast of Simmias; he
wrote a Poem called Ara, which was a certain number of Verses in form of an
Altar: but that Ara printed at the end of Theocritus is proved by Salmasius who
set forth Simmias his Ovunt to have been neither written by Theocritus nor
Dosiades.

Draco, the famously cruel Lawgiver of the Athenians, he is said to have
written precepts of life in 3000 Verses.

Dracontius, see Antigrammaratus.

Drepanius Florus, (doubtless not the same as Pacatus Drepanius, the
Rhetorician) an eminent French Poet who lived in the time of Constantinus
Pogonatus and Clodovaeus Secundus, King of France, his Psalms, Hymns and other
divine Poems are extant in the Book called Bibliotheca Patrum.

Dromo, a Comic Poet, whose Psaltria is quoted by Athenaeus.

Dropides, see Epimenides.

Duris, an Epigrammatist of Elea, whose Epigram upon the deluge of Ephesus, is
extant in the Florilegium of Planudes.

E
ECdorus, an old Greek Poet out of whom several Iambic Verses are quoted by
Stobaeus in his Sermon de Ignobilitate.

Ecphantides, a Comic Poet, to whom one of the Chaerili (but which of them is
uncertain) was amanuensis in the writing of his Comedies, as is testified by
Hesychius.

Egemon, see Hegemon.

Egnatius, a Deacon of Constantinople, who wrote in Verse the lives of two
Patriarchs, Tarisius and Nicephorus; Iambics against Thomas Aucartes a grand
Conspiratour against the State, with some other things.

Empedocles of Agrigentum, a writer of natural Philosophy in Heroic Verse,
following therein Parmenides, whose Disciple he is said by some to have been,
though by others the Disciple of Telauges the Son of Pythagoras, in the
Collection of Philosophical poesy, set out by H. Stephanus, are certain
fragments both of him and of Parmenides the Disciple of Xenophanes, besides
which there is extant a small Astronomical Tractat Entitled Empedocles his
Sphaera; he began to flourish in the 48th. Olympiad, as the Anonymus Author
and Laertius testify. At the same time with Empedocles flourisht Epicharmus a
Sicilian also, and Physiological Poet, there being fragments of his among the
rest in the above mentioned Collection; besides very many Fables of his which
were in much request; many whereof are cited by Pollux and Athenaeus, Likewise
at the same time (besides Simonides the Son of the Lyric, to whom Vossius
scruples to allow a place among the Poets) Archelaus an Athenaean, some say a
Milesian whom Giraldus will have to be a physiological Poet, though Vossius
makes a Question.

Endeleichus, otherwise called Severus Sanctus, a Rhetorician of an uncertain
time, whose Eclogue about the death of Oxen, is extant in the Collectiset forth
by Pithaeus.

Ennodius, by Bernardus Saccus surnamed Juvenalis, and by some called Euodius,
of whose writing certain Hymns, Panegyrics, Epigrams, etc. are set forth by
Andreas Schottus.

Ephippus, see Theopompus.

Ephraem, one that wrote the History of the Constinople Emperors in Iambic
Verse; he lived about the time of Michael Ducas.

Epicharneus, see Empedocles.

Epibycus, a Chian Poet of an uncertain time, taken notice of by Athenaeus and
Suidas.

Epicrates, see Theopompus.

Epigenes, a Comic Poet, of whom four Comedies are cited by Athenaeus.

Epigonus, an Epigrammatist of Thessalonica, whose name is to several Epigrams
in the Greece Anthologie.

Epilycus, an Athenian Comic Poet, whose Coraliscus and Phoraliscus are cited
by Athenaeus.

Epimenides, a Cretan, who is delivered by Suidas, to have written in Verse
Argonautics; also certain old heathen Rites called Expiationes, the Genealogy
of the Gods, and of the Curetes, and Corybantes, and of the different nature of
things, in 9500 Verses; he was also a famous Philosopher, and by Athenaeus
accounted the Author of the Telchinian History. He began to flourish about the
44th. Olympiad, and is by some reckoned among the Seven Wisemen in the place of
Periander. About the same time with Epemenides flourisht 1st. Bias of Priene,
one of those Seven, accounted the Wise men of Greece, who is said by Laertius
to have written the affairs of Jonia in Verse. 2 Solon, the great Lawgiver of
Athens, whose life see in Plutarch and Laertius; he was very considerable in
Poetry, and so was his Brother Dropides, though inferior to him. 3 Chilo,
another of the Seven, all that is remembered of him is an Elegy consisting of
200 Verses. 4 Thales of Miletus, another of the Seven, who is said to have
written in verse concerning Meteors and other things in natural Philosophy. 5.
Pittacus, Tyrant of Mitylene, whom see in Alcaeus. 6. Periander, Tyrant of
Corinth, another of the Seven, but of whose poetry I find little or nothing
remembered. 7. Chersias of Orchomenus, who was a great enemy to the Tyrant
Periander; certain Verses of his are cited by Pansanias in his Boeotics. 8.
Thespis a Tragic Poet, as says Laertius, though Suidas says an Actor only,
and that he first brought in the use of Vizards, whereas some there be who
affirm him to have been the first of Tragaedians, others, that Epigenes of
Sicyon was before him: 9. Mimnermus a Colophonian, some say Smyrnaean, whom
Pausanias in his Boeotics affirms to have described in Elegiac verse a fight
between the Smyrnaeans and Lydians, under Gyges; he is also reckoned among the
Elegiacs by Censorinus; there are extant certain verses of his about the
Climacterie year, in Opposition to Solon's opinion.

Epinicus, a Comic Poet of an uncertain time, whose (...) is cited by Athenaeus.

Eratosthenes (the Son of Aglaus, some say Ambrosius) a Cyrenean, not only
Philosopher, Astronomer and Geometrician (whose Astrismes, Epistle to Ptolomy
about the duplication of the Cube, and some other fragments have been lately
published with Aratus from the Sheldonian Theater at Oxford) but (according to
Suidas and Strabo) excellent Poet, contemporary with him (he living in the time
of Philadelphus and his Successor) and succedent to him in the custody of
Ptolomies Library was Apollonius of Rhodes, who was the Disciple of
Callimachus, and whose Argonauticks we have extant set forth with a learned
Scholiast, whom Stephanus calls Tarrhaeus, another contemporary was Euphorion
of Chalcis the Disciple of Lacydas, he was Library keeper to Antiochus Magnus,
and wrote, as says Suidas, several things in Heroic Verse; his Works, as says
Suetonius, were in very much esteem with Tiberius, as also those of Rhianus,
another of the same age, who is the same with the abovementioned Arrianus.

Ericus or Hericus, a Poet of Altissiodorum or Auxerre, who lived in the time
of the Emperor Charles the 3d. surnamed Crassus; he wrote a Poem of the life
of St. German which is yet extant.

Eriphus, a Comic writer among the Greecs, Three of whose Fables are quoted by
Athenaeus in his Dipnosophist. l. 14.

Erycius, the Author of several Epigrams in the Greec Anthologie, and cited by
the Commentatour of Apollonius.

Ethelwolphus Bernicius, surnamed Lupus an English Poet, who flourisht in the
Year of our Lord 750. being in the Reign of the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus, Pipin King of France, and Ethelwolph of Northumberland; he wrote a
Poem of the Original of St. Peter's Church in the Western part of
Northumberland, which Poem he dedicated to Bishop Egbert.

Euages, a Greec Poet of an uncertain time, taken notice of by Dionysius in his
History of Music; he was a a person of little learning, being as some say bred
up a shepherd, but very happy for his fancy and ingenuity.

Euangelus, a Comic Poet of an uncertain time, whose Fable (...) is cited by
Suidas and Athenaeus.

Euanthes, an Epic Poet of an uncertain time, out of whom Athenaeus cites
certain passages concerning^ Glaucus Anthedonius and of Ariadne.

Evax, a King of Arabia, who is said to have wrote a Book of precious stones in
Verse.

Eubulus Cittius, see Anaxandrides. Eudaemon, see Amphilochius.

Eudemus, a writer of several things in the art of Medicin in Greec verse, and
therefore cited by Galen in his Second Book of Antidotes.

Eudoxus of Gnidus, see Carcinus.

Eueclus, the esteemed writer of certain Verses called Cypria Carmina, by some
attributed to Homer, before whom he is said to have been; he is quoted by
Tatianus against the Gentiles by the name of Eumiclus, by Eusebius by the name
of Euculus, and by Pansanias, by the name of Eucleon.

Euenus, an Elegiac Poet, who began to flourish in the first year of the Ninety
first Olympiad, and was the Master of Philistus the Historian. There are extant
of his certain Elegies cited by Stobaeus; Six Epigrams, Two upon Venus of
Gnidus, and one upon Myro's Cow, and Three others, besides a Verse cited by
Aristotle.

Eugenes, an Epigrammatist, whose name is preserved in the Greec Anthologie.

Euhemerus see Menander.

Eumelus, a very ancient Greec Poet, contemporary as some think with Hesiod.

Eumolpus, the ancientest of Greec Poets next to the ancient Orpheus, whose
Disciple he is delivered by Suidas to have been, and the Son of Musaeus, and to
have written 3000 verses, of which his Poem of the mysteries of Ceres chiefly
consisted.

Euodus of Rhodes an Epic Poet in the time of Nero; but of his works which were
in Latin Verse there was nothing extant in the time of Suidas. There is also
the name of Euodus to some Epigrams in the Greec Anthologie; Contemporary with
him was Labeo, who is delivered by the old Commentator upon Persius, who
mentioned him in the first Satyr, to have translated into Latin verse, though
with little acuteness or judgment Homers Iliads and Odysseus; also Antistius
Sosianus who was banished for the Libels which he made in verse against Nero.

Euphanes, an ancient Poet, out of whose Musae diverse Sena^y Iambic verses are
cited by Athenaeus.

Euphantus of Olynthus, see Philetas.

Euphorion, a Poet of Chalcis remembered by several poetical Works, as his
Elegies, his Hesiodus, his Mopsopia or (...), his Five Books of Oracles, his
Epicedium upon Protogoras the Astronomer, etc. Certain verses out of Euphorion,
but whether this of Chalcis, or another the Son of Aeschylus, is uncertain, for
both are mentioned by Suidas, are quoted by Stobaeus.

Euphron, a Comic Poet of an uncertain time, whose Musae, Synephebi, Theori and
Aeschra are remembered by Athenaeus, Suidas, and Stobaeus.

Euphronius, a Poet of an uncertain time who is delivered by Strabo to have
written of Priapus in Greec verse.

Eupolis a Comic Poet, who flourisht with Aristophanes in the Eighty fifth
Olympiad in the Fourth year whereof his (...) were acted, as is testified by
the Scholiast of Aristophanes.

Euripides, the Prince and Coriphaeus of Greec Tragoedians, who was born in the
Seventy fifth Olympiad (as Laertius, Suidas and Emanuel Moscopulus testify)
the Son of Mnesarchus and Clito, the Nobility of whose birth Philochorus
vindicates against the common opinion of her being an Herb-Woman; he is said to
have been worried to death by the dogs of King Archelaus (to whose Court he
betook himself upon the discontent of his Second Wife Chaerila's adultery with
Ctephisophon) either by chance or set on by Lysimachus Master of the Kings
dogs, by the instigation of two envious poets Aribeus a Macedonian, and
Crateuas a Thessalonian, in the Seventy fith year of his age, leaving behind
him 3 Sons Mnesarchus, Mnesilochus and Euripides; And having flourisht from the
77th. to the 92d. Olymp. equal with that other excellent Tragoedian Sophocles,
who as Suidas and others affirm, was born in the Seventy third, and is said to
have written 33. Tragedies (and to have been Victor Twenty four times) of which
7 only are extant: as of Euripides his Ninety two Tragedies, Eighteen are
extant. There was also another Sophocles, the Grandchild of the former, who is
said to have written Forty Tragedies, and to have been Seven times Victor;
much about the same time with Euripides flourisht 1st. Panyasis a Heroic poet,
the Uncle or Cousin German of Herodotus; he was one of those Six, as says the
Interpreter of Oppian, who were called by way of Eminence the Poets; the other
Five being Homerus, Eupolis, Hesiodus, Antimachus and Nicander. 2d.
Menalippides, a Lyric and Dithyrambic Writer, Sisters Son of another
Menalippides, whom see in his proper place. 3d. Stesimbrotus, of whom, as also
of Panyasis, Antimachus Clarius was a hearer. 4th. Hermippus, a one-ey'd
Comedian who is delivered by Suidas to have written Forty Fables, several of
which are remembered by Athenaeus and Pollux; he was an enemy to Pericles
(against whom he wrote Anapaestics) and to his Wife Aspasia, who was not only a
Mistress of Eloquence and general learning, but eminent also in Poetry. 5.
Phrynichus, a writer of Vetus Comoedia, mentioned by Pansanias and Hephaestion;
several Comedies of his are mentioned by Athenaeus, Pollux, Harpocration,
Suidas, and the Scholiast of Aristophanes. 6, 7. Lycus or Lycis and Amipsias
(the last already mentioned) two Insipid Poets derided by Aristophanes. 8,
Theodectes, a kind of Tragoedian, since he is said to have written the
Arguments and first Delineations to many of, if not all Euripides his
Tragedies. But there was another of the same name, whom see in Theopompus. 9.
Nicomachus a Tragoedian also much celebrated for his Oedipus, and sometimes
Victor over Sophocles and Euripides themselves, as Suidas testifies. 10.
Theognis, a Comoedian, who from his frigidity or faintness of style, was
surnamed (...), i. e. Snow he contended with Nicomachus, and was vanquished by
him, together with Euripides. 11. Philocles Comedian, Aeschylus his sisters
Son, he was derided for his deformity by Aristophanes in his Thesmophoriazusai,
his Tereus is mentioned by the Scholiast of Aristophanes, and by Stobaeus; he
had two Sons Morsimus and Philippides, of whom elsewhere. 12. Cephisodorus, an
Athenian writer of Vetus Tragoedia, his Antilais, Amazones, Trophonius and Sus
are remembered by Suidas; there are besides two others of the same name, who
were also Historians. 13. Socrates, the Philosopher, who by his Hymn to Apollo,
and his turning Aesops Fables into Verse (a little before his death) for which
he is commended by Cebes in Plato, approved himself a Poet. 14. Diocles an
Athenian writer of Vetus Comoedia, whose Melissae and Thalatta are both
mentioned (the first with particular commendation) by Athenaeus and Pollux. 15.
Sannyrio, or (as Giraldus calls him.) Samyrion a writer of Vetus Comoedia,
mentioned by Athenaeus for his (...), by Suidas for his (...) and (...). He was
for his slenderness of voice, nicknam'd Canabus by Strattis, 16 Philondes an
Athenian Writer of old Comoedie remembered by Athenaeus; he, having been
formerly a Fuller, scapes not a jeer from phanes (no more than his son
Nicochares) nevertheless his Cothurni is mentioned with commendation by
Athenaeus and Pollux. 17. Thearus, another Object of Aristophanes his laughter.
18. Strattis, a Comedian, of whose writing Cansabon upon Athenaeus reckons 23
Comedies, whereas Suidas mistakes him for a Tragoedian, which gave occasion to
Giraldus to mention another Strattis; he was of a biting wit, like
Aristophanes. 19. Dinolochus, a Comic Poet of Agrigentum, who wrote Fourteen
Fables in the Doric Dialect. 20. Philyllius, another writer of old Comedy,
remembered by Athenaeus and Pollux (as also another of the same name of an
uncertain time, who wrote a Poem of Cities in Iambic Verse, and of whom Suidas
also and Stephanus take notice) besides Empedocles, Parmenides, Epicharmus,
Eupolis, Euenus, Cratinus and several others.

Euschemus, an ancient Comic writer, out of whose Empolis diverse Senary Iambic
Verses, are cited by Athenaeus in his 13th. Book.

Euthycles, a Poet of an uncertain time, who wrote two Poems (...), the first
of which is mentioned by Suidas.

Euthydemus, an Athenian of an uncertain time, who set forth some things of his
own, under Hesiod's name.

Eutyches, a Comic writer, one of the most copious among the Greecs, of whose
many Comedies, the names are to be found in Athenaeus, and Raphael Volaterranus.

Ezechiel, a Jew, whose Tragedy of Moses, Entitled (...) is extant with a
Latin Translation set forth by Fridericus Morellus.

F
FAbius Dorsenus, or Dossennus an ancient Latin Comic Poet, though of what time
is not known; he is remembered by Horace. l. 1. Epist. by Pliny. l. 14. c. 13.
and by Festus in the word Temetum.

Fabius Planciades Fulgentius, see Curiatius.

Facetus, a Latin Poet, who flourisht since the time of Charles the Great, but
in what particular age is unknown to Giraldus, who makes mention of him.

Fannius, see Publius Ovidius.

Faustus, see Curiatius.

Ferius Hilpericus, see Paulus Diaconus.

Flavius, see Claudius Claudianus.

Floretus, one of the uncertain aged Poets, mentioned by Giraldus; some have
thought him to be the same with St. Bernard, Abbot of Claraeval.

Florus, a Latin Poet, who flourisht in the time of the Emperor Adrian;
whether the same with that Florus mentioned by Polianus among the Greec
Epigrammatists is uncertain, but there are besides Three others differenced by
their Praenomina, viz. Caius Florus already mentioned, Julius and Paulus.

Fontianus, an ancient Latin Poet, whose description of the Roman Provinces in
verse, seems by an Epistle of Beatus Rhenanus to have been in the hands of
Philippus Puchaimerus.

Fortunatus, an ancient Bishop of Poictou, who lived in the time of Justinus
junior, to whom he dedicated a Book of his Poems, and another to the Empress
Sophia.

Fulpertus, a Gallic Bishop, who flourisht about the Year of our Lord 1010.
among other things he wrote diverse Hymns in honor of the B. Virgin.

G
GAllienus, see Caecilius Cyprianus. Gallus Milo, see Theodulphus.

Gamphredus, one of the uncertain aged Poets, mentioned by Giraldus.

Gannius, a Latin Poet, who lived before the time of Charles the Great, but in
what age is uncertain. Several of his verses are cited by Festus in the word
Adoris.

Geminus, an ancient Epigrammatist, several of whose Epigrams are extant in the
Greec Anthology.

Georgius Pisides, Dean of Constantinople, and Keeper of the Emperors papers
and Records, as Suidas and Nicephorus testify; he wrote a Poem of vanity, and
also of the six days work of Creation, a good part is yet extant, and of that
which is lost, some fragments are cited by Suidas, Cedrenus and Nicet^s,
besides some other things of his writing, mentioned by Suidas.

Gerbertus, a Frenchman, brought up in the Abbey of Floriac, and for his great
proficiency in the Mathematics (for which he was by some accounted a Magitian)
and other learning preferred to be Bishop of Rhemes, afterward Archbishop of
Ravenna, and lastly Pope of Rome, by the Title of Sylvester the Second. He is
noted for an Elegant Writer of Latin Verse, from his Poem in Laudem Boethii, of
which there is a fragment in the Parisian Collection, Entitled Epigrammata and
Poematia vetera; also several verses of his are selected by Brietius.

Germanicus, see Aelius Saturninus.

Gildas, an ancient British Author surnamed Cambrius, to distinguish him from
two others; for Joannes Baleus, in his Scriptores Anglici, names three, viz.
Cambrius a Native of Cambria, or Wales; Albanius, and Badonicus; but Cambrius
(the ancientest of the Three, for he flourisht in the Sixtieth year, from our
Saviors Nativity, under the Reign of Arviragus King of Britain, according to
Ponticus Virunnius) chiefly for Poetry, his Cambreidos being remembered by the
forementioned Baleus, besides Egrams and other Poems of various argument;
however Badonicus so called from Badonia or Bath, the place of his Nativity,
Besides his Epistle of the Conquest of Britain, is said to have written some
things in Verse; and there are who think him to have been the Author of the
Comedy Aulularia or Querolus, vulgarly ascribed to Plautus, which Vossius
thinks to have been written by neither of them, but by an unknown Author.

Gitiadas, a Lacedaemonian, who having made the Statue of Pallas Chalcioeca,
composed a Hymn, which was to be sung yearly by the Lacedaemonians at the
Anniversary of that Goddess; also several Odes in the Doric Dialect.

Godebertus, a Presbyter, who flourishing in the Year 500. wrote in Heroic
Verse Historical passages from the beginning to the birth of Christ.

Gordianus, one of the Caesar's, or rather the Father of him who was afterward
Emperor; he wrote, as says Capitolinus, a Poem Entitled Antoninias or the
lives of the two Antoniues Pius and Marcus Emperors.

Gracchus, see Anser.

Gratius, se^ Publius Ovidius.

Gregorius Nazianzenus, one of most eminent of the Greec Fathers, who besides
his very many Volumes in Prose, wrote also several things in Verse, as his Poem
in Hexameter, containing a Dialogue between Virginity and Marriage. The praise
of the Macchabees, and of Maximus the Philosopher, with other things.

H
HEcataeus, an Epigrammatist of Thasus, who makes one among the rest in the
Greec Anthologie.

Hedylogus a Samian, or as some say Athenian Poet, of whose writing several
Epigrams are cited by Athenaeus, he was the Son of Hedyle a Samian Poetess.

Hedylus, a noted Epigrammatist, cited by Athenaeus in several places, and it
is probably the same Hedylus whose name is to several Epigrams in the Greec
Anthologie

Hegemon, an Alexandrian Epic Poet, whose Description of the Battle of Leuctra
is cited by Stephanus, and out of whose Dardanics (if it were the same Hegemon
that wrote them) Aelian cites several passages: there was also another of the
same name a Thasian surnamed (...), i. e. a Lentil; he wrote a Poem Entitle
Gigantomachia, a Comedy called Philinna, as also several Inscriptions and
Impresa's in Verse: he is mentioned by Aristotle.

Hegesianax, or as some call him, Agesianax, a writer of Mythologie in verse,
as Hyginus testifies, certain of whose verses are cited by Plutarch in his
discourse of the apparition in the Moon.

Hegesilaus, a Comic Poet, whose Fables are mentioned by Tatianus, in his Book
against the Greecs.

Hegesinus, a famous Greec Poet, out of whom diverse Verses are cited by
Pausanias in his Baeotics.

Hegesippus, a Comic Poet of Tarentum, whose Adelphi, Opsartica and Phileteri,
are cited by Athenaeus; Suidas sirnames him Crobylus, and ascribes to him the
Seventh Philippic Oration, commonly ascribed to Demosthenes, as others do the
Oration for Halonesus. There are also several Epigrams of his in the Greec
Anthologie.

Hegias, a Poet of an uncertain time made mention of by Pausanias.

Heliodorus, a Medicinal Writer in Verse, out of whom several verses are cited
by Galen, whether the same Heliodorus, out of whose Poem de Spectaculis
Italicis, Stobaeus cites several Verses in his Sermon de morbis, may be
quaeried.

Hemitheon, a Obscene Poet of Sybaris, who lived in the time of Augustus; he is
mentioned by Philo Lucian. Ovid. l. 11. de tristibus and Martial.

Heniochus, a writer of Media Comoedia, whose Fables are reckoned up by Suidas;
he is also mentioned by Athenaeus and Theophilus.

Heraclides, surnamed Poeticus, to distinguish him from Heraclides Ponticus the
Grammarian (who also is said to have written several Tragedies which go under
the name of Thespis) a writer of Sentences and Precepts in Verse, besides whom
there was also an Epigrammatist of the same name remembered by Laertius.

Heraclitus, a Lyric Poet, whose Poem of the Twelve Gods is mentioned by
Laertius. Of those of the same name, that famous Philosopher of Ephesus, is
also reckoned among the Poets, besides him of Halicarnassns; whom see in
Callimachus.

Hermesianax, an Elegiac Poet of Colephon, whose Poem of the Description of his
own Country, is remembered by Pausanias, besides whom there was also another of
the same name who wrote a Poem of the Persian Affairs.

Hermippus, see Euripides.

Hermocreon, the Author of several Epigrams which are extant in the Greec
Anthologie.

Hermodorus, or Hermeodorus another Epigrammatist of the same society.

Hermodotus, see Menander.

Herodes, an Iambic writer quoted by Stobaeus.

Herodicus, a Babylonian, of whose Verses against the Grammarians, diverse are
repeated by Athenaeus at the end of the Fifth Book of his Deipnosophists.

Hesiodus so named, (...) from the chastity of his Poetry, an ancient Greec
Poet surnamed Ascraeus from Ascra, a Town in Baeotia, the place not of his
birth (as has been generally supposed) but of his Education according to
Herodotus, Strabo, Stephanus and Valerius Probus; for he was born at Cuma in
Aeolia; the Son of Dius and Pycimede; he is affirmed by Philostratus, Velleius
Paterculus, and M. Varro contrary to the Opinion of Porphyrius and Solinus (the
First of whom sets him 100. the other 130 years after) Contemporary with Homer,
which opinion is confirmed by an Epigram of Dion, and the Discourse in the 5th.
Book of Plutarch's Symposiaca, which makes out that Homer and He contended at
the Exequies of Oelycus the Thessalian, and Amphidamas of Chalcis: some say
Stesichorus the Poet was his Son by Ctemene the Daughter of Physigaeus, others
that Ctemene was not his Wife, but deflowered by him, for which he was slain at
Oenone by her Brothers Ampiphanes and Ganetor; however it were, it is agreed by
all, though differently related by Pausanias, Thucydides and Plutarch; his
several Works are reckoned up in all Fourteen, as well extant as not extant, in
a Catalogue, which is inserted in Daniel Heinsius his Edition of this Poet. his
Extant works are a Poem Entitled (...) (which contains certain rules and
precepts of husbandry) another called (...) or the Generation of the Gods, a
third (...) or the shield of Hercules, Besides some fr^gments of another Poem
which is not entirely extant, Entitled (...), but neither (...) nor (...) are
judged by Scaliger to have been written by Hesiod, but some other ancient poet,
whose name is unknown

Hetruscus Messenius, an old Epigrammatist, whose name lives only in the Greek
Anthologie.

Hiero Ferreus, an Athenian, whose Poems were extant in Plutarchs time, as he
testifies in his Nicias.

Hilarious, a Bishop of Poriton, who flourisht in the time of Constantius the
son of Constantine, he is celebrated by Isidorus for the Hymns he wrote among
which three that bear his name are yet extant; about the same time Marius
Victorius taught Rhetoric at Rome, and was St. Jerome's Master in that Art; he
wrote a Poem in Heroic verse concerning the Seven Maccabaean Brethren martyred
with their Mother by Antiochus Epiphanes. See more of him in Hieronymus de
viris Illustribus.

Hilasius, a Poetical writer of an uncertain age, but not very ancient; of
whose Verses upon Virgil and some other subjects, some Remains are extant in
Brietius, and the Parisian Collection, Entitled Epigrammata and Poematia
Vetera: he is one of the Twelve, surnamed the Grammatic or Scholastic Poets.

Hildephonsus, otherwise called Illephonsus or Alphonsus, a Bishop of Toledo
who flourisht in the time of Heraclius and his children, as also of Pope
Honorius (to whom are attributed Twelve Distichs concerning Christ's ascension
and the Apostles looking on; Extant in the Book called Bibliotheca Patrum) he
wrote several Hymns, Epitaphs and Epigrams, and is thought to have been the
first Institutour of the B. Virgins conception; he died Anno 667.

Hincmarus, surnamed Senior, (to distinguish him from his Grandchild Hincmarus
Bishop of Laudunum) an Archbishop of Rhemes created in the Year of our Lord
845. whose Vein in Latin Poetry what it was, appears by a fragment thereof
collected by Jacobus Sirmondus.

Hipparchus, a Greec writer of Vetus Comedia, mentioned by Suidas, and whose
Ilias Aegyptia, Thais and Anasozomenos (if it be the same Hipparchus as
probably it is) are quoted by Athenaeus; also four Senary Iambics are repeated
by Stobaeus in his Sermon pro Artibus out of his Zographus.

Hippicus the same with Ibycus.

Hipponax, see Xenophanes.

Hipposthenes, an Iambic Poet, quoted by Stobaeus.

Hippothoon, another whose Senary Iambics upon envy, are alleag'd by the same
Author, in his Sermon upon the same Subject.

Hippothoos, an old Greec Poet of little fame, but for the same Stobaeus, who
sometimes quotes his verses.

Hipys, see Xenophanes.

Homerus, the Apposititious, rather then true name (which was Melesigenes) of
the most renowned of Greec Heroic Poets, and as is most generally alleag'd, the
ancientest of those of whose works we have any entirely extant, as we have his
2. Heroic Poems, Ilias and Odysseus, the first describing the Trojan War for
the first nine years; the other, the wandering life of Ulysses after the taking
of Troy; not to mention his Hymns, his Batrachom yomachia and other small poems
besides which he wrote many other things which are not extant. See Melesigenes.

Homerus junior, see Aeantides.

Homerus Sellius, a writer of Arguments in verse, upon the Comedies of Menander.

Hostilius, a Latin Poet who wrote the Roman Annals in Verse, out of whom one
Verse is cited by Priscian in his sixth Book, there was also of the same name a
Mimographer, remembered by Tertullian, in the 15th. Chapter of his Apologetics.

Hostius, a writer of the Istrian War in Latin verse; which work some impute to
Hostilius probably upon a mistake of one for the other.

Hugobaldus, see Theodulphus.

Hyperochus, a Poet of Cuma, whose History of his own Country in Verse is
remembered by Athenaeus and Pausanias.

I
IBycus, a Poet of Rhegium of an uncertain age. See also in Xenophanes.

Idaeus, surnamed Rhodius from his Country, the son of Issus an Epic Poet, who
doubled all Homcrs works by inserting his own Verses line for line, yet keeping
the sense; he also wrote the Affairs of Rhodes in 3000 verses, as Suidas
testifies.

Joannes Babucalus, an Epigrammatic Poet, whose Epigram upon the burning of
Beritus and several others, are extant in the Greec Florilegium.

Joannes Damascenus, a writer in the time of Leo Isaurus and Constantinus
Copronyinus, who besides several things which he wrote in Prose which are yet
extant, wrote also a Dramatic Poem o^ Susanna remembered by Eustathius upon
Dionysius Afer, but not now extant; about the same time lived Cosmas of
Jerusalem surnamed Hagiopolites, Bishop of Maiuma; he wrote Thirteen Hymns
which translated into Latin are extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum heretofore
mentioned.

Joannes Geometra, a Constantinopolitan Poet, whose Paradise or Garden of moral
Tetrastich Epigrams, and his five Hymns upon th Blessed Virgin, were set forth
by Federic Morellus at Paris, Ann. 1595.

Joannes Nantuillensis, an Englishman who wrote a Poem called Archithemium,
remembered by Giraldus.

Joannes Psellus, wrote in Greec verse upon the three ancient Greec Fathers St.
Chrysostom, St. Gregory, St. Basil, and also upon the seven last Synods.

Jon, a Tragic Poet of Chios, who wrote many Tragedies (some say 12. some 30.
some more) he is mentioned by Athenaeus, and his Epigram of Pherecides, cited
by Laertius in the life of that Philosopher; he is by Aristophanes in his (...)
surnamed (...) or Early.

Jonicus, see Amphilochius.

Jophon, an ancient Greec Poet mentioned by Suidas.

Isaacus, a Priest of Antioch, who lived in the year of our Lord 458. L^o being
Emperor in the East, Majoranus in the West, he is said by Gennadius in his
Book De viris Illustribus, to have wrote besides several things in Prose, the
ruin of Antioch in Elegiac Verse. About the same time lived Petrus Edissenus a
Priest also, who according to the said Gennadius, wrote several Psalms, besides
other things in Prose. In Zeno's Reign also flourisht Pelagius Patricius, who
composed a Poem of the History of the life of Christ out of a Cento of of
Homers Verses, which some (though without ground) have ascribed to the Empress
Eudocia; moreover there were reckoned among the Poets of that time Pampr^pius
of Panopolis and Marcinus of Neapolis, both the Disciples of Proclus according
to Suidas, the first, if not both persisting to the last in Gentilisme.

Isagoras, a Tragic Poet of Byzantium the Disciple of Chrestus, he flourisht in
the time of the Emperor M. Antoninus surnamed the Philosopher, and is
remembered by Philostratus.

Isocrates, a Tragic Poet, whom Giraldus thinks to have been the same with
Isocrates the Orator, though Suidas more probably judges him to have been
another person the Disciple of the Orator; he was of Appollonia, or as some
say of Heraclea. His Son in Law Aphareus was the Author of Thirty seven
Tragedies, as says Plutarch, in the lives of the ten Rhetoricians.

Juba, a King of Manritania, in the time of the Emperor Augustus, who being a
lover of Learning in general, was also particularly addicted to Poetry; his
verses upon Leontius the Argive, are cited by Athenaeus out of Amarantbus de
Scaena.

Julianus, one of the Twelve uncertain aged Poets, of whom there are several
Certamina or contests upon some one Subject in the like number of verses, to be
seen in the Parisian Collection, Entitled Epigrammata and Poematia Vetera, and
few in Brietius his Acute dicta Vet. Poet. Lat. The rest of the Twelve are
Hilarious already mentioned, Maximianus, Vitalis, Basilius, Asmenus, Vomanus,
Euphorbus, Palladius, Asclepiadeus, Eusthenius, Pompeianus; though there are
who think Julianus and some other of these Names to be but fictitious, and set
to some of the Verses to fill up the number and make the Certamen the more
pompous.

Julius Curiatius Maternus, a Latin Tragoedian, whose Medea, Thiestes and Cato
are mentioned by Cornelius Tacitus in his Dialogue de Oratoribus. See Curiatius

Julius Diocles, an Epigrammatic Poet, of whom yet there is nothing preserved
but an Epigram or two in the Greec Anthologie.

Julius Caesar, see Caius.

Julius Florus, see Florus,

Julius Montanus, see Publius Ovidius.

Julius Paulus, an ancient Latin Poet mentioned with particular commendation by
Agellius; he flourisht in the time of the Emperors Adrian and Antoninus Pius.

Julius Pomponius Secundus, a Tragic Poet, mentioned by Quintilian, besides
whom there was another Pomponius Secundus a Comic writer heretofore mentioned.

Junius Juvenalis, a most elegant Latin Satyrist (as appears by his Sixteen
extant Satyrs) of Aquinum, a Town of the Volsci; he flourisht in the time of
the Emperor Domitian.

Juvencus, see Rhemnius Fanni^^

Juventius, an ancient Comic (...) but of an uncertain age, mentioned by Varro
and Agellius.

L
LAbeo, a Latin Poet, of whom Fulgentius in his Mythologie makes mention.

Lactantius Firmianus, see Rhemnius.

Laelius (otherwise Laevius being probably judged the same person) a Poet of an
uncertain time, though sufficiently ancient; he wrote a Poem called
Erotopaegnia or amorous Sports; and if he were the same with Laevius, as is not
to be doubted) another Entitled Centa^ri.

Lamprocles, a Dithyrambic writer, cited by Athenaeus.

Lamynthius, a Milesian^ Elegiac Poet, whose Poem upon his Lyde, in various
kind of Verse, is mentioned by Athenaeus.

Largus, a Latin Poet Contemporary with Ovid, who makes mention of him, with
reference to something he wrote of Antenor.

Lasus Hermioneus, see Onomacritus.

Latronianus, a Spaniard, very much commended by St. Jerome for his excellent
Genius in Poetry; he was put to death as the same Author testifies, at
Triers, by Maximus the Emperor, upon pretense of Haeresie, together with
Priscilianus, who was his Colleague, Foelicissimus and others.

Laureas Tullius, the Freed-man of Marcus Tullius; there are said be extant of
his composing several Greec Epigrams; that upon the Fountains of Cicero's
Accademy is cited by Pliny in his natural History.

Lentulus, a Mimic writer mentioned with commendation by Tertullian, and
associated with Hostilius.

Leonides, see Peritus.

Leontius, a Tragic Poet of Argos, of an uncertain time but among the Anci^

Lesches, or Leschides a Lesbian, whose Poem Entitled Ilias parva is mentioned
by Eusebius; out of this Poem Pindarus is observed by his own Interpreters to
have borrowed: contemprorary with him was Alemaeon, whom some think to be the
same with Alcman the Lyric. Suidas mentions among the Poets one Leschides who
fought under King Eumenes.

Leuceas, an ancient Poet of Argos whom Pausanias testifies to have written of
the manners and customs of Nations in Verse.

Leucon, a Comic Writer, whose Fable Phrateres is mentioned by Athenae^s.

Liberius and Belisarius, Two, but very indifferent Poets according to the
account of Brietius, however mentioned for their Achrostichs upon Sedulius, and
thought by Labbeus to have written in the Year of our Lord 462.

Licentius, an African Poet born at Hippo, see Claudius Claudianus.

Licinianus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Licinius Imbrex, see Publius Licinius Tegula.

Licymnius a Chian, remembered by Athenaeus, and by Parthenius in his Erotics,
styled Melopoios.

Lygurinus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Linus, a Poet and Philosopher so ancient, that according to the Poetical
Mythology; he is said to have been the Son of Apollo and Psammata the daughter
of Crotopus, King of the Argives, and to have taught Hercules Music, Poetry,
and other Arts, and to have been the inventour of Lyric Poesy. Of this Linus,
or which is most probable, a younger Linus a Theban, for such a one Suidas
mentions, Ten Verses are cited by Stobaeus, in his Sermon de prudentia, and a
Distich, in his Sermon De Spe.

Livius Andronicus, a Roman Comedian, who flourisht immediately after the first
Punic War, being about the beginning of the 135th. Olympiad, he is said to have
been the first Author of Latin Fable or Comedy, the next after whom was
Cnaeus Naeuius, who also wrote a History of the first Punie War, wherein he
himself had been present.

Lucius Accius, see Accius, and also Statius Caecilius.

Lucius Affranius, a Latin Comic Poet, of whose writing there are quoted
Fourteen Comedies his Aequales, Brundusini, Cinerarius, Consobrini, Dedi^^o;
Emancipatus, Materierae, Pantaleo, Pompa, Repudiatus, Sorores, Talio,
Temerarius, Vopiscus.

Lucius Annaeus Seneca, a Corduban, both Philosopher and Poet, and Uncle of
Lucan; there are several Tragedies which go under his name, whereof Medea, and
some others are generally believed not to be his, if the rest or part of the
rest be.

Lucius Coelius Lactantius Firmianus, see Rhemnius.

Lucius Cornelius Sylla, see Sylla.

Lucius Domitius Nero, see Nere.

Lucius Julius Calidius, a Roman Poet, made mention of by Cornelius Nepos in
his life of Pomponius Atticus, as the next for elegancy after Lucretius and
Catullus.

Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella, a Gaditan, who flourisht under the Roman
Emperor Claudius, and wrote his Tenth Book de Re Rustica (which whole work is
commonly put forth with Cato, Varro and other Latin Authors of that subject)
inscribed Hortus in no unelegant Verse, considering the nature of the Work.

Lucius Luscius, see Statius Coecilius.

Lucius Fenestella, an ancient writer reckoned in the number of Poets by some,
though with little ground in the opinion of Vossius.

Lucius Paulus Passienus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Lucius Plotius, a favorite of C. Marius, whose Acts he celebrated in Verse.

Lucius Pomponius, perhaps the same with Pomponius Secundus.

Lucius Varius, see Publius Ovidius.

Lucullus, a Satyrist of Arunca, who is said to have writ 30 Books of Satyrs,
and to have been the first of the Latins in that kind of Poetry.

Lyceon, an ancient Poet, but of an uncertain time, who according to Pausanias,
wrote the Lycian Mysteries in Verse.

Lycon, a Jasensian, whose Poem upon Pythagoras is cited by Athenaeus. See also
in Alexis.

Lycophron, see Cleanthes.

Lycus or Lycis, see Euripides.

Lydius Cattus, a Poet of Ravenna, but of what age is uncertain, some Poems of
his are said to have been Printed at Rome.

Lysimacbus, a Comedian of Boeotia, remembered by Lucian.

Lysippus, a Tragic Poet remembered by Athenaeus and Suidas for his Bacchae and
Thyrsocomos.

Lysis, a Tarentin, both Philosopher and Poet; he was of the Sect of
Pythagoras, and had the education of that famous Theban Captain Epaminondas;
his also Laertius affirms those golden Verses to be, which go under the name of
Pythagoras.

M
MAcedonius Hypatus, an Epigrammatist, of whom there are diverse Epigrams to be
found in the Greec Anthologie.

Machon, a Sicyonian, or as some say a Corint bian, remembered by Athenaeus.

Maecius, or Maecius, see Quintus.

Magnus, an Athenian writer of antiqua Comoedia; he is remembered by
Aristophanes in his Equites, and by Julius Pollux, Suidas, and Athenaeus, who
quotes two of his Comedies which are happily those two of the Nine which he wrote
in which Raphael Volaterranus mentions him to have been Victor in the Olympic
Games.

Magnetius Rabanus Maurus, see The^dulphus

Majoranus Salentinus his Epitaphs upon Bessarion and Argyropolus are to be
read in the Icones of Paulus Jovius. Manethos, a Mendesian or of Diospolis,
testified by Suidas to have written certain things of natural Philosophy and
Astronomy in Verse.

Marcus Manilius, see Publius Ovidius.

Marachus, otherwise called Malachus an ancient Poet (but of an uncertain time)
of Syracuse mentioned by Aristotle.

Marcellus, surnamed Sidites from Sida a City of Pamphylia; a Poet who
flourisht in the time of the Emperor M. Antoninus, as Suidas testifies, and
wrote the whole Art of Medicin in Heroic Verse in 42. Books, of which work we
have extant a small remnant of his (...) or Book of the Medicinal use of
Fishes. There is also mentiond flourishing in the time of Theodosius Senior,
Marcellus, who is said to have writ in Verse de Medicina, and therefore happily
by those that consider not the distance of time, may be mistaken for the other.

Marcus Accius Plautus, see Statius Coecilius.

Marcus Accuticus, see Statius Coecilius.

Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, the Author of a Tragedy Entitled Atreus, for which
he was put to death by the Emperor Tiberius.

Marcus Annaeus Lucanus a Corduban Poet, and the Nephew of Seneca, his Poem
Entitled Pharfalia, wherein he is said to have been assisted by his Wife Polla
Argentaria, is extant and in sufficient esteem.

Marcus Argentarius, an ancient Epigrammatist, whose name is subscribed to
diverse Epigrams in the Greec Anthology.

Marcus Attilius, a Tragic writer styled by Cicero, Poeta durissimus; by
Licinius Scriptor ferreus, he Translated into Latin Sophocles his Electra.

Marcus Aurelius Olympius Nemesianus, a Carthaginian, whose Cynegetics or Poem
of Hunting, together with 4. Eglogues of his, are mentioned by Flavius
Vopiscus, beside a fragment of his which was by Sanazarius showed to Giraldus;
he lived in the time of the Emperor Carus, and had Eglogues written to him
from Calphurnius Siculus.

Marcus Bavius, a Poet mentioned by Virgil in his Eglogues.

Marcus a Benedictin Monk in the time of Justinus Thrax, who wrote in Verse
Hexameter the life of St. Benedict, whose Disciple he was.

Marcus Foelix Ennodius, a Native of Arles, some say Milan; he flourisht under
Theodoricus King of Italy (by whom he was made Bishop of Ticinum) and
Anastasius the Emperor, to whom he was sent Ambassador, and died in the year
of our Lord 521. He was accounted for those times a very Ingenious Poet, and of
his Poetry some small fragments are to be seen in Brietius his Acute Dicta.

Marcus Furius Bibaculus, one of the Catalogue of Suetonius his famous
Grammarians, but placed by Crinitus and Giraldus among the Poets.

Marcus Marullus, a Mimic writer in the time of the Emperor M. Antonius, he is
mentioned by Capitolinus.

Marcus, a Bishop of Hydruns, who wrote an Acrostic Hymn upon the Sabbath, the
Latin Version whereof is extant in the Bihliotheca Patrum.

Marcus Junior, alias Pompeius, an ancient Epigrammatist, of whom there is
extant an Hexastich, in the first Book of the Greec Anthologie.

Marcus Pacuvius, see Statius Coecilius.

Marcus Popilius, see Publius Terentius.

Marcus Terentius Varro, a no less learned than elegant ancient Latin writer,
famously known by his Books, de Re Rustica, which are published together with
Cato and the other ancient Writers of that Subject, besides which and his Book
de Lingua Latina, and also his Satyrae Minippeae, he wrote also several other
works in Prose which are lost, and something in Verse, whereof some small
fragments are seen in the Parisian Collection Entitled Epigrammata and Poematia
Vetera, and Brietius his Acute Dicta. He is highly extolled by Cicero in his
Tusculan Questions, also by Terentianus Maurus, Lactantius Firmianus, and
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. See also Decius Laberius.

Marcus Tullius Cicero, the most eloquent of Latin Orators, and moreover the
Author of several Poetical works, as his three Books of his Consulship in
Heroic Verse; his Poem or (...) to Coesar, besides his Translation of Aratus
his Phenomenon, and Diosemeia into Latin Verse.

Marcus Valerius Martialis, see Statius.

Marcus Valerius Phocas, an Illustrious Grammarian, as Aulus Gellius styles
him, of Berytus in Phoenicia, who from a Centurions Office in the Roman service
betook himself to Letters, as Suetonius testifies, from whom and from Eusebius
his Chronicle he appears to have flourisht in the time of Nero. Of his life of
Virgil, which he wrote in Latin Verse, some fragments are extant in the above
mentioned Parisian Collection, and in Brietius.

Marcus Vnicus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Marianus, see Christodorus.

Marinus, a Neapolitan Philosopher, and Rhetorician, the Disciple and
successor of Proclus, whose life he wrote in Verse.

Marius, see Publius Ovidius.

Marius Victorinus, see Hilarious.

Marsus, an old Latin Poet, cited by Pliny in his 33d. and 34th. Book of his
natural History.

Martianus Mineus Foelix Capella, an African, who is judged by Schaenerus and
others to have liv^d about the time of the Emperor Mauritius; he wrote
(besides his Book of the Nuptials of Mercury and the Arts, which is extant)
Satyrica, a work mixed of Prose and Verse together; he is mentioned by Severinus
Boethius, and diverse learned men of the Moderns.

Matro, one of the uncertain aged Poets; a little Poem of whose not altogether
unelegant, is to be seen in Athenaeus.

Maximianus, a Roman Emperor, some of whose Poetry is cited in the fragments
of the Gregorian Codex.

Melanopus, an ancient Poet of Cuma remembered by Pausanias in his Eliaca.

Melanthius and Melitus, see Oenomaus,

Meleager, a Gadaren, whose Charites is cited by Athenaeus, whether the same
with that Meleager, of whom there are several Epigrams in Planudes his
Florilegium, is uncertain.

Melesigenes, that most renowned of Greec Heroic Poets, commonly known by the
name of Homerus from his blindness; not that he was born blind, but fell blind
by an accident while he resided at Smyrna, in the Dialect of which Country at
that time blind people were styled (...), or else (...) i. e. to follow,
because when the strangers were warned out of that City, he followed among the
rest. He was called Melesigenes, as born upon the banks of the River Meles of
Critheis (the daughter of Menalopus) who is generally agreed on to have been
his mother; but who his father was, is more controverted; since Critheis is
said to have been charged by her Guardian Cleo^tax of not coming fairly by her
great belly: but this imputation of his spurious birth is removed by those that
affirm Critheis married to Maeon, from whom (whether he were her fathers
brother, to whose charge she was committed, as says Aristotle, or a King of
Lydia, to whom she was presented by Pirates, as says Plutarch,) he was called
Maeonides; he flourisht as Suidas testifies before the first Olympiad 57 years,
but as Porphyrius 130. Cicero in his Tusculan questions will have him
contemporary with Lyeurgus; besides his two grand Poems Iias and Odysseus, and
other works already mentioned. Very many of his Verses upon several accidents
and occasions are to be found in Herodotus his life of this famous Poet,

Menalippides, a Dithyrambic Poet of Melos, the Son of Crito, he flourisht as
says Suidas about the 65th. Olympiad, and wrote several things in Heroic verse
besides Elegies and Epigrams, he is by some confounded with another
Menalippides, a Milesian, of whom already in Euripides.

Me^ander an Athenian, the Son of Diopithes, and Disciple of Theophrastus, he
was the Prince and first Author of Nova Comoedia, and is said to have written
108 Fables, and in 8 of them to have been Victor; very many of his Comedies are
remembered by Athenaeus, Pollux, Pliny, Stobaeus, Sidonius Apol^inaris, and
others; he began to flourish about the 114th Olymyiad, Ptolomaeus Lagides then
reigning. Of those 27 Comedies of his, said by Michael Neander, to have been
extant in some Library at Constantinople, I find no certain proof; contemporary
with him, and a Writer also as some say, of Nova Comoedia, was Phileman the Son
of Damon; he is said, in contest with Menander, to have had several times the
better; his (...) is thought to have been imitated by Plautus in his Mercator.
Some other Comedies of his are also mentioned by Athenaeus and Pollux: He wrote
also (...), but probably not in Verse. Stobaeus also quotes diverse Senary
Iambics out of Philemon, but it is uncertain whether this Philemon or his Son of
the same name, of whose writing Suidas says there were 54 Fables. Of the same
time also was 2. Euhemerus, who wrote (but whether in Verse is doubted) a
History of the Ethnic Gods which Ennius translated; he is reckoned among the
Elegiacs by Censorinus. 3. Simmias the Rhodian, who besides his Ovum already
mentioned, wrote a little Poem Entitled (...) or the hatchet. 3. Posidippus
Cassandrius, the Son of Cyniscus, who succeeded Menander in Nova Comoedia; his
Fables as says Suidas, were Thirty, among which was his Pomoboscus. Some
fragments of him are to be found in the common Edition of the Poetae Minores;
there was besides him another of the same name an Epigrammatist. 4. Diphilus of
Sinope, out of whose Synapothnescontes Plautus is thought to have borrowed. Of
100. Comedies he is said to have written 33. are named by Athenaeus; he is also
quoted by Pollux, Stobaeus and Clemens Alexandrinus, by whom as also by
Eusebius, he is called (...). 5. Rhinton of Tarentum a Potters Son, who wrote
Thirty eight Tragi-Comedies, whereof his (...) was one. 6. Sophilus a Comic
Poet, some say of Sicyon, some of Thebes, out of his (...) an Iambic verse is
cited by Laertius in Stilpo. 7. Stephanus the Son of Alexis, who is said to
have been the Uncle of Menander; he was a writer of Media Comoedia. 8.
Zenodotus the Disciple of Philetas, whom he succeeded in the tuition of Lagides
his Sons. 9. Theocritus of Syracuse the Son of Protagoras and Philine, whose 33
Idyls or Bucolic Elogues, with several Greec Epigrams and the Altar (if that be
his) are handsomely set forth by Stephanus, with the ancient Scholiasts. 10.
Antagoras of Rhodes, who was in great favor with King Antigonus, as appears
from Pausanias, Plutarch, Athenaeus, he wrote a Poem Entitled Thebais, but
there is nothing of his extant, saving one Epigram and a few Verses cited by
Diogenes Laertius. 11. Hermodotus, another favorite of Antigonus, as appears
from Plutarch in his Apophthegms, and his Book of Isis and Osiris. 12.
Anaxippus, a writer of Media Comoedia, whose Citharaedus and other Comedies are
cited by Athenaeus. Of the above named Philemon the Elder, Theophrastus was a
familiar acquaintance, who, as Laertius says, wrote a discourse of Comedy, but
whether he composed any thing in verse is doubted.

Menecrates, a Comic Poet of Syracuse, whose Manestor and Hermoncus are cited
by Athenaeus, Suidas and Volaterranus.

Menelaus, a Heroic Poet of Aegos whose Thebais is mentioned by Suidas and
Volaterranus.

Menippus, a Comic writer, whose Cercopes and other things are cited by
Athenaeus and Volaterranus.

Merboldus, otherwise called Marbodaeus, a writer of Gems and precious stones
in Hexameter Verse, who comes near the Verge of the Moderns; for he flourisht
about the year 1050.

Meroboudes, a learned Spaniard surnamed Scholasticus, of whose not unelegant
Verses de Christo some fragments are to be seen in Brietius and other
Collections, according to Labbous his Chronology, he flourisht about the Year
400.

Meropius Pontius Paulinus, see Pontius Paulinus in Claudius Claudianus.

Mesomedes, a Lyric Poet of Crete, who living in the time of Adrian celebrated
his Minion Antinous,

Metagenes, an Athenian Comic Poet, whose (...) is cited by Athenaeus and
Suidas.

Methodius, a Christian Greec Poet, Bishop of Tire, who suffered martyrdom
under the Emperors Decins and Valerius.

Metrodorus, an old Epigrammatist, whose Decastich upon human life, and others
are extant in the Greec Florilegium.

Michael, surnamed Grammaticus, an Epigrammatist, of whom there is extant a
Hexastich in the Fourth Book of the Greec Anthologie.

Milesius see Eudemon.

Mimnermus, see Epimenides.

Mirteus, an old Epigrammatist, of whom diverse Epigrams are to be found in
Paulus Jovius his Icones.

Mnasalees, a Sicyonian, certain of whose Epigrams are to be found in Athenaeus.

Mnesarchius, an old Epigrammatist, of whom there is extant a Tetrastich in the
Greec Anthology.

Mnesimachus, see Anaxandrides.

Monius, an old Jambic Poet, and one of the Dipnosophists in Athenaeus.

Morsimus, see Antilochus.

Morychus, see Aristophanes.

M^schion, another Iambic Poet, quoted by Stobaeus in several places.

Moschus, a Sicilian contemporary with Aristarchus and Cratinus; he wrote
Bucolics, whereof some few are extant and printed for the most part together
with Theocritus.

Moses, the first great Prophet and Lawgiver among the Jews, and whose Divine
gift in Poetry appears not only in those Hymns or Songs he made upon the
children of Isreal's deliverance from the Egyptian Pharao and others of their
enemies, but also the Book of Job, which is no other than a kind of Tragic
Poem, (and so many learned men judge) is supposed to be his.

Musaeus, some very ancient Writer, whosoever he was, whose name has been ever
illustrious among the Greecs and Latins both, for his antiquity and eminence in
Poetry, if at least there were not more of the same name, as there are reckoned
Four; namely, First, Musaeus, the Son of Thamyras, a Theban; he is said to have
been a Melic Poet, and to have wrote Hymns and Odes. Secondly, Musaeus, the Son
of Eumolpus an Athenian, who wrote in Greek verse the Generation of the gods.
Thirdly, Musaeus of Eleusis, the Son of Antiphonus, and Disciple of Orpheus,
who is said to have wrote Precepts of the life in 400. Verses to his son
Eumolpus. Fourthly and Lastly, Musaeus an Ephesian Poet, who was living in the
time of Eumenes and Attalus, King of Pergamus; now which of these was that
grand Musaeus spoken of by Virgil, is hard to determine; but probable it is,
that it was the ancientest of them (if there be more then one) and the same
with Moses the Jewish Lawgiver, of whom the Greecs, having but an obscure
tradition, might possibly frame an Original according their Poetical fancy, and
possibly divided into two or three; and this seems the more probable from the
agreement of the name, for Moses at this day is pronounced by the Greecs (...);
however it were, the little Greec Poem Entitled Hero and Leander, which goes
under the name of Musaeus, and is by some particularly ascribed to Musaeus the
Son of Eumolpus, is doutless the work of some much more modern Author (as
Vossius and other learned men judge) whether Musaeus the Grammarian or some
other that takes that name. See Curiatius Maternus.

Myrtilus, see Philetas.

N
NAevius, an old Latin Comic Poet, who also wrote Epigrams, and a Tragedy
Entitled Hesione, which together with his Comedies Ariolus and Leome are
mentioned by Aulus Gellius, some things also of his writings, are cited by
Fulgentius in his Mythologie.

Naucrates, see Theopompus.

Nausicrates, a Comic Poet, whose Nauclerus and Persis are mentioned by
Athenaeus and Suidas.

Naumachius, a Christian Poet, of what time is uncertain; he is remembered by
Giraldus and Erasmus, and several Verses of his are cited with high
commendation by Arsenius Bishop of Monembusia, and in diverse places of Stobaeus,

Nausicrates, a Comic Poet of an uncertain time, the Author of Persis and Now
(...), mentioned by Suidas and several times by Athenaeus.

Neophon or Neophron, see Alexis.

Neop^olemus, a Epigrammatist, quoted by Stoboeus in his Book De Laud Martis.

Nero, the Fifth Roman Emperor from Julius Caesar, whose vein in Poetry is not
altogether past by in silence by learned men, and whose glory it was no less to
be accounted an excellent Tragic writer, then it was his delight to be an
Actour of the most Tragical and funest deeds.

Nestor Larendensis, the Author of a Poem Entitled (...), he lived in the time
of the Emperor Alexander severus.

Nicander, a Colophonian (some say Aetolian) of whom two Poems, his Theriaca
and Alexipharmica are yet extant; he flourisht (as says an Anonymous Writer of
his life) in the time of Attalus the last King of Pergamus* and wrote several
other things which are lost, among which was his (...) a Poem of the same
nature as Ovid's Metamorphoses. Contemporary with him was Sositheus, a
Syracusian, some say, Athenian, others, Alexandrine Tragic Poet, and one of the
Pleiadcs heretofore mentioned.

Nicarchus, a Greec Epigrammatist, of whom there are several Epigrams to be
found in Planudes his Florileginm.

Nicenaetus, an ancient, but uncertain aged Epic Poet of Samos (some say
Abdera) remembered by Athenaeus, Parthenius, and of the Moderns, Lilius
Giraldus; he also wrote diverse Epigrams, whereof 2. Testratichs are to be found
in the Greec Anthology.

Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopulus, a Constantinopolitan writer of Greec
Epigrams consisting of loose Senarie Iambics, that is loose in quantity though
not in measure.

Niceratus, an Epigrammatist, whose name is preserved in the Greec Anthology.

Nicias, another Epigrammatist, of whom only five Epigrams are extant in the
Greec Anthology.

Nicodemus, an Epigrammatic Poet of Heraclea, of whom there is extant an
Antistroph of 14 Verses in the sixth Book of the Greec Anthology.

Nicolaus Damascenus, a very learned man who living in the time of Augustus
Caesar, was highly honored and loved by that Emperor (who was himself also
adicted to Poetry, and a Composer of Greec Verses, as is testified by
Suetonius, Pliny and Macrobius) he wrote several Comedies and Tragedies (as
says Suidas) of which his Tragedy of Susanna is remembered by Eustathius upon
Dionysius.

Nichomachus, see Euripides.

Nicostratus, see Theopompus.

Nonnus, see Cyrus Panopolitanus.

Nothippus, a Tragic Poet of an uncertain time, surnamed (...) mentioned by
Athenaeus.

Numa, see Quintus Horatius.

Numorianus, one of the Roman Emperors, who by the Testimony of Flavius
Vospiscus excelled all the Poets of his time; he is said to have contested with
Nemesianus, and to have out gone Aurelius Apollinaris.

O
Octavius, see Publius Ovidius.

Octavius Augustus, see Nicolaus Damaseenus.

Octavius Ruffus, a learned Latin Poet, of whose Verses there are many cited by
Pliny, and also by Cuspinian in his Consules.

Oen^maus, otherwise called Diogenes, an Athenian Tragic Poet, who wrote Eight
Tragedies which are mentioned by Suidas and Athenaeus. Contemporary with him
were Melitus, an Orator and Tragic Poet, though none of the best, one of the
accusers of Socrates. 2. Melanthius, an Elegiac Poet, mentioned by Athenaeus,
and out of whom Plutarch cites a Distich in his Cymon. There was also of the
same name a Tragic Poet, if it were not the same as some think. 3. Timotheus a
Milesian, who wrote Eighteen Dithyrambics, Twenty one Hymns, Thirty six
Preludes, Eight Descriptions, besides several Dramatic stories, and a Tragedy
called the birth of Semele; how excellent he was in Music, and how great an
improver of that science, may be seen in Suidas and Clemens Alexandrinus. 4.
Philoxenus, of Cithera, by whom Dithyrambics are said by the Scholiast of
Pindarus to have been first invented, though Herodotus thinks rather by Arion
the Lesbian. 5. Telestes of Selinus a Comic and Dithyrambic Poet, whose
Dithyrambs are said to have been sent by Harpalus to Alexander the Great; also
Suidas mentions out of Athenaeus two Comedies of his, Argo and Aesculapius. 6.
Polyeidus a person celebrated by Diodorus: Siculus, as well for Music and
Painting as for Poetry.

Olen, a writer of Hymns, mentioned by Pausanias in his Attica and Corinthiaca.

Olympius a Lydian, both Musician and Elegiac Poet, mentioned by Suidas to have
flourisht before the time of the Trojan War.

Onestas, surnamed Corinthius, has his name in Planudes to several Epigrams
there collected.

Onomacritus an Athenian, who lived about the time of the Tyrant Pisistratus,
and is judged by many to have been the Author of those Argonautics and other
Poems which go under the name of Orpheus (who lived before the Trojan War, and
of whom nothing is extant, nor any thing remembered but his (...) and (...)
mentioned by Philostratus) he also wrote certain answers of Oracles in Verse
which were ascribed to the Old Musaeus, About the same time lived Lasus
Hermioneus, the Son of Chabrinus, whose Ode inscribed Centaurus is mentioned by
Athenaeus; he has been reckoned by some in the number of the Seven surnamed
Wise, in the place of Periander, and his great addiction to Music is
particularly taken notice of by Theo of Smyrna; he is also said to have been
the first that contended in Dithyrambic Poetry.

Ophelion, a Comic Poet, metioned by Athenaeus and Suidas.

Opilius Macrinus, one of the Roman Emperors, whom Julius Capitolinus
reports to have made Epigrams and several other Verses.

Oppianus a Cilician, who living in the time of the Emperors Severus and
Caracalla, dedicated to the latter his (...) or Poem of Fishing, and his (...)
or Poem of Hunting, both yet extant.

Oroebantius, an ancienter Greec Poet, as the Traezenians affirm, then Homer
himself, whose Ilias Phrygia, for that is said to have been the Title of his
Poem, was reserved to Aelian's time, as that Author himself testifies.

Orentius, an ancient Bishop of Aragon, who lived in the time of Anastatius,
and is reported by Sigebertus Gemblacensis to have turned the Commonitory into
Hexameser Verse.

Orpheus, a Poet of Crotona, who flourishing in the time of Pisistratus the
Tyrant, wrote Argonautica a Poem de Gemmis and Hymns, all which are extant; but
Orpheus the great Thracian Poet and Musician celebrated by Virgil, must needs
have been of a far higher antiquity (and some suppose him to have lived about
the time of the Hebrew Judges) in so much that the Greecs probably ignorant of
his true Original, thought good to find out for him a Poetical extraction, as
the Poets had ever at hand some God or Goddess for any ancient Hero, as well in
Arts as Arms, that wanted a mortal Father or Mother; and so Orpheus must be
supposed to have been the Son of Apollo and Calliope, besides that in other
respects he was the Subject of Poetical Fable; though rather as a Musician than
Poet, for he is said, by the charming power of his Harp, to have tamed the
wildest beasts of the Forest, and made the Woods and Rocks to follow him, and
to have recovered his Wife Euridice from the shades beneath, had not her own
folly caused her to be snatched back again; for grief whereof abandoning the
company of all women, he was, as the story goes, torn in pieces by the Thracian
women that sacrificed to Bacchus, amidst their raving O^gies. Certain Verses
out of Orpheus are quoted by Stobaeus and other ancient Authors; but whether
of this Son of Apollo may be questioned; for as there are mentioned several
Musoeus's, so Suidas reckons up diverse Orpheus's.

Osidius, or Hosidius Geta, an ancient Roman Poet, but of uncertain time, who
as is testified by Tertullian, out of a Cento of Virgils Verses, composed a
Tragedy of Medea.

P
PAccius, see Curiatius Maternus.

Pacuvius, see Statins Caecilius.

Palaephatus an Athenian Poet, who by the Testimony of Suidas and Volaterranus,
wrote a Poem de Situ Orbis, another of the Contention between Minerva and
Neptune, consisting of a Thousand Verses; a Colloquie between Venus and Cupid,
consisting of 5000 Verses, Latona's hair, and some other things.

Palamedes, an Epic Poet of Argos, whose works Homer, for envy, is said to have
suppressed.

Palladas, an Epigrammatist, mentioned by Isaacius Tzetzes with commendation;
several Epigrams of his are extant in the Greec Anthology.

Palladius, surnamed Grammati^us, an Epigrammatist, of whom there are several
Epigrams in Brietius, the Parisian, and other Collections; he is one of the
Twelve Scholastici already mentioned. See Julianus.

Pamphilus, an Elegiac Poet mentioned by Giraldus.

Pamphus, an Athenian Poet, who wrote Hymns which were publicly sung by the
Athenians, as is testified by Pausanias, l. 7.

Pamprepius, see Isaacus.

Pancrates, an Arcadian Poet, who wrote of Sea Affairs, out of whom some things
are cited by Athenaeus.

Panolbius, an ancient Poet, who besides some other things, wrote an Epitaph
upon Hypatia the Daughter of Erythraeus.

Panyasis, see Euripides.

Parmenides, Ibid.

Parmeno, a Byzantin Poet, cited by Athenaeus.

Parthenius Nicaeus, an Erotic or writer of amorous Affairs in Verse; he was
taken in the Mithridatic War, as is testified by Maerobius, and is thought to
have been Virgils Master in the Greec tongue.

Patrocles, an Iambic Poet, out of whom certain Verses are cited by Stobaeus;
he may happily be the same with Patrocles Thurius, a Tragic Poet, mentioned by
Clemens Alexandrinus.

Paulinus, alias Pontius Paulinus, a Native of Burdegala, and Bishop of Nola,
whom see in Claudus Claudianus.

Paulus Cyrus Florus, Silentiary of Constantinople in the time of the Emperor
Justinian, whose Acts he wrote in Verse, as is testified by Cuspinian; also
Paulus Silentiarius (whom some make to be a distinct person from Paulus Florus)
his Description of the Temple of Constantinople in Verse, and other Poems, are
mentioned with high commendation by Agathias, he has also very many Epigrams
in the Greec Anthology.

Paulus Diaconus, an Aquileian, taken by Charles the Great, in the Lombard War,
together with Desiderius; besides what he wrote of History which is extant, and
other things in Prose; he also wrote several Hymns, some whereof are sung at
this day in the Roman Church. Contemporary with him were Ferius Hilpericus, who
wrote in Verse the meeting of Charles with Leo, rather than Alcuin, to whom some
have ascribed that work, and also Petrus Apollonius Collatius, who wrote the
destruction of Jerusalem in Heroic Verse.

Paulus Passienus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Pedo Albinovanus, see Publius Ovidius.

Pelagius Patricius, see Isaacus.

Pentadius, an uncertain aged Poet, though not very ancient, of whom several
acute and pretty conceited Epigrams are to be found in Pithaeus, and the
Parisian Collection, as his Epigram of Fortune, Narcissus, the Tomb of Hector,
Lupus the Statuary, the approach of the Spring, and several other things, and
some fragments in Brietius his Acute Dicta.

Periander, see Epimenides.

Peritus, a lias Leonidas, an Epigrammatist, scarce remembered, but by what he
has in the Greec Anthology.

Perisaulus Faustinus, an uncertain aged Poet, whose Poem de Appetitu, Encomium
Stulstitiae and other things are said to be extant at Rome.

Perses, the Brother of Hesiod, who wrote to him his (...); he is reported to
have written something in Epic Poetry. He was also an Epigrammatist, if it were
the same Perses who has three Tetrastichs in the Greec Anthology.

Petreius, otherwise called Petridius, and the same, as it is thought, whom
Pliny calls Petrius, mentioning his Poem Entitled Ophiaca^ or Remedies against
the biting of Serpents.

Petronius Arbiter, an Elegant writer in the time of Nero; he is called by
Tacitus alluding to his name Arbiter Eloquentiae, his Satyrica mixed of Prose
and Verse together, with several fragments, is yet extant, though very much
maimed and defective in many places. Contemporary with him was Silius Italicus
a Spaniard, thrice advanced to the Consulship of Rome, and in great favor with
the Emperor Domitian, ^ his Poem of the Punic War, is yet extant.

Petrus Collatius Apollononius, a Presbyter of Novara, whom Margaritus Binius
judges to have flourisht about the year of our Lord, 690. in the Reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great; and with Binius, Brietius, inclines to agree
against Barthius and Vossius, who would have him Contemporary with Angelus
Politianus; his Latin Poem, in four Books, of the taking Jerusalem by Titus,
was set forth by Gagnaeus a Parisian Theologist, and afterward more correct by
Hadrianus Vanderbruchius.

Petrus Edissenus, see Isaacus.

Phacellus, an Epigrammatic Poet, remembered but by one Tetrastich in the Greec
Anthology.

Phoedimns, an ancient Elegiac Poet, of Bysanthe in Macedon, as Stephanus
observes.

Phaennus, the Author of two Tetrastichs in the Greec Anthology.

Phanocles, the Author of a Poem Entitled, The Rape of Ganimed, and another of
the death of Orph^us, out of which certain Verses are cited by Stobaeus.

Phanias, an Epigrammatic Poet, remembered but by one Octostich in the Greec
Anthology.

Pherecrates, a Comic writer, Contemporary with Aristophanes and Plato the
Comedian. Nineteen Comedies of his are cited by Athenaeus, Eretianus and
Pollux; he is also mentioned by Suidas and Stobaeus.

Pherenicus, an Epic Poet of Heraclea, whose writings are cited by Athenaeus.

Phidamus, an Epicurean Poet and writer of Lascivious Verses.

Philacus, an Epigrammatist cited by Athenaeus.

Phileas, an ancient Epigrammmatist cited by Stobaeus in his Perigorica.

Philemon, see Menander.

Philetaetus, the Son of Aristophanes (the Comedian as it is thought) himself
also a Comic writer, of the Twenty Comedies which he is said to have written,
his (...) and Seven more are quoted by Athenaeus, and others of them by Suidas.

Philetas, an Elegiac Poet and Fpigrammatist of Cous, who flourisht in the time
of Philip of Macedon and Alexander the Great; and had the Education of
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus. He was celebrated by Ovid and Propertius. Much about
the same time flourisht Sosicles a Tragic Poet of Syracuse; he is said to have
written Seventy three Tragedies, and to have vanquished seven times and has
been reckoned by some one of the Pleiades aforementioned; also Myrtilus and
Herniippus two writers of Vetus Comoedia, the first an Athenian, whose
Tetanopanes and Amores, are cited by Suidas; the last of them see in Euripides;
likewise Euphantus of Olynthus, whom besides the History of his own time,
Laertius affirms to have written very many Tragedies, and to have been the
Master of King Antigonus, and the Disciple of Eubulus. Lastly, Crantor of Soli,
a hearer of Xenocrates; he is reported by Laertius who writes his life, to have
written certain Poems which he left sealed up in the Temple of Minerva.

Philicus, see Aeantides.

Philippides, see Alexis.

Philippus, see Theopompus.

Philiscus, a Comic writer, whose Adonis, Birth of Jove, and other Comedies are
mentioned by Suidas. This was not that Philiscus the Thasian, who wrote of
Bees. There was also a Tragic Poet of the same name, mentioned by Suidas to
have written Forty two Tragedies; who by some is other wise called Philistus.

Philistion, a Comic writer of Prusa, or some say of Sardis, among whose
Comedies his (...) are chiefly remembered, his name was famous in Rome, he being
taken notice of by Martial, Sidonius Apollinaris and Ammianus Marcellinus. He
flourisht toward the Ninty Second Olympiad. viz. before the death of Euripides
and Sophocles, and with him were Contemporary Cherophon an Athenian Tragic
Poet, familiarly acquainted with Socrates and Demosthenes, as Vlpian affirms;
the only Tragedy of his remembered is his Expedition of the Heraclidoe; also
Chaeremon a Comedian, the Disciple of Socrates, as Giraldus affirms; his
Pentheus is remembered by Aristotle; his Hippocentaurus, Vreus and Alphesibaea
by Athenaeus, besides many more mentioned by Suidas; about the same time lived
Theophilus a Comic Poet and Physician of Epidaurus; he is said to have written
Euripides his Epitaph which some ascribe to Thucydides; his Pancratiasta is
cited by Athenaeus, besides other Comedies of his, mentioned by Suidas.

Philistus, a Tragic Poet of Cercyra, who lived in the time of Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus, see also Philiscus.

Philo, a Comic Poet, out of whom some things are cited by the Scholiast of
Aratus.

Philocalus, a Trojan, of whom there is said to have been extant a Book of
Epigrams, printed in Italy.

Philocles, see Euripides.

Philodemus, a Gadaraean Poet, mentioned by Cicero, in his Oration against
Piso. He flourisht in the time of Ptolomeus Auletes, being contemporary with
Alexander and Parthenius aforementioned, and Theophanes the Lesbian, who
besides the History of Pompey's Acts, being his Companion in the Wars, he
wrote, composed also the History of the Mithridatic War in Verse; and the same
Theophanes, as is supposed, was the Author of two Epigrams which are yet
extant in the Greec Anthology.

Philolaus, the Author, as Joannes Picus is of opinion, of those Verses that
go under the Title of Pythagoras his golden Verses.

Philonides, see Euripides.

Philostratus, an Athenian, who, besides the lives of Pelopidas and
Epaminondas, is said by Laertius, to have written a Poem Entitled Theseis. He
has also, if it be the same Philostratus, a Tetrastich in the Greec Anthology.

Philoxenus, see Oenomaus.

Philyllius, see Euripides.

Philyrinus Cinesias, a Dithyrambic Poet, mentioned by Suidas.

Phlegides, an ancient Poet remembered by Aristotle, in his Book de Somno and
Vigilia, and also by Themistius.

Phocylides, see Xenophanes.

Phocinorides, a Comic Poet of obscure note, as being little mentioned by
Authentic writers.

Phoenicides, an ancient Comedian, whose (...) and (...) are remembered by
Athenaeus and Suidas.

Phormus, a Syracusian Comic Poet, whose Atalanta is quoted by Athenaeus.

Phrynichus, an Athenian Tragedian, whose Pleuronia and Eight other Tragedies
are remembered by Suidas. He was the Disciple of Thespis, and the Son of
Polyphradmon, and had himself a Son so named, a Tragic Poet also. There was
also another Phrynichus a Comic Poet, whom see in Euripides.

Pigres of Halicarnassus, the Brother of Artimisia, whom, by the name of
Tigretus, see in Theopompus,

Pindarus, a Theban Lyric Poet, of the Village of Cynocephali, the Son of
Scopelinus, or (as others with more probability affirm) of Daiphantus; there be
also, who affirm him the Son of Pagonides and Myrtis, which being a mistake, is
thought to have risen from his being a Disciple of the said Myrtis, or at least
of Scopelinus, who being the Husband of this Myrtis, taught him to play on the
Flute; which skill having attained, he betook himself to Lasus Hermioneus to
learn on the Harp; he was in great esteem among the Gree^s, as the Favorite of
Apollo and Pan, which last was reported to have delighted to hear him sing in
the mountains, and to have danced at the singing of one of his Peans. He was
contemporary with Aeschylus, who began to flourish about the Seventy sixth
Olympiad; his Odes are yet extant, amply set forth with Scholiasts, besides
which he is said to have written Tragedies, Hymns, Paeans, Dithyrambs, Threnes,
Epic Poems, Epigrams and other Poems, in all Seventeen distinct Works. He dyed
about the 66th. or as some say, the 80th. year of his age, in the 86th.
Olympiad.

Pisander Camyraeus, a very ancient Poet, some say ancienter than Hesiod, and
contemporary with Eumolpus, but the most agree that he flourisht in the 33d
Olympiad, in the Reign of Xerxes; his Poem, Entitled Heracleis, or the labors
of Hercules, is remembered by Pansanias; he is also mentioned by Hyginus, the
Scholiast of Aristophanes, Censorinus and Fulgentius; there was also another
Pisander, a Larendensian, in the time of Alexander Severus; he wrote a Poem
Entitled (...) or the Nuptials of Jupiter and Juno.

Plato, a Comic Poet (not the Philosopher) of whom, see more in Cratinus whose
contemporary he was, as also of Anaxilas whose Fourteen Comedies are mentioned
by Athenaeus.

Pittacus, see Alcaeus.

Plautius, see Statius Caecilius.

Plotius Crispinus, and Plotius Tueca, two Contemporaries of Horace and Virgil,
both mentioned for Poets by Horace, but the first with contempt, the other with
honor.

Polyeritus, a writer of the Sicilian Affairs in Verse; for which he is
mentioned by the Author de admir^ndis additionibus generally reputed to be
Aristotle.

Polyeidus, see Oenomaus.

Polyeuctus, a Comic Writer, whose Heniochus is mentioned with commendation by
Athenaeus and Suidas.

Polyides, an uncertain aged Poet out of whom Stobaeus quotes several Verses,
which by some are attributed to Euripides, he may be probably conjectured to be
the same with Polyidus.

Polymnestus, a Colophonian, the Son of Miletus; he is remembered by
Aristophanes, Cratinus, Alcman, Pindarus, Pausanias, Plutarchus, Athenaeus and
Suidas.

Polyochus, remembered by Athenaeus, who out of his Corynthiasta cites several
Senary Iambics.

Polyphradmon, see Phrynichus.

Polystratus, one of the Society of Epigrammatists, in the Greec Anthologie.

Polyzelus, an ancient Poet, though of an uncertain time; he wrote a Poem
called Niptra, the birth of the Muses, the birth of Dionysius and Venus, with
other Poems.

Pompeianus, see Julianus.

Pomponius Secundus, an ancient Latin Comic writer, whose Auctoratus, Capella,
Lena, Machomalites, Synephebi are quoted by Charisius: of his life Caius
Plinius wrote two Books, he was also favored by Germanicus.

Pontianus, an old Epigrammatist, who has a name in the Greec Anthology.

Pontius Paulinus, see Claudius Claudianus,

Ponticus, see Quintus Horatius.

Porcius Licinius, of the noble Family of the Licinij, an ancient Latin Poet,
out of whom Agellius cites some few Verses. He is generally supposed to have
been contemporary with Cato.

Posidippus, see Menander.

Pratinas, a Tragic Poet of Phliasus, who contended, as says Suidas, with
Aeschylus and Chaerilus; he is also said by the same Author to have been the
first writer (...) tyrs, moreover he is cited by Athenaeus.

Priscianus, a Grammarian of Cesarea, who flourisht under the Emperor
Julianus, and wrote a Book of the Art of Grammar to Julianus, and a Book of
Natural questions to Chosroes King of Persia, besides which, he wrote in Latin
Verse a Version of Dionysius Afer's Periegesis or Poem, de situ Orbis.

Priscus, see Publius Ovidius.

Proclus, see Cyrus.

Proculus, see Publius Ovidius.

Prodicus, an eminent poet of Phocis, out of whose fabulous Poem Entitled
Mynias the Painter; Polygnotus is said by Pausanias to have drawn several
designs.

Promithidas, a Mimic Iambic Poet of Heraclea, cited by Athenaeus.

Prosper, a Poet of Aquitain, therefore surnamed Aquitanicus, who flourisht in
the latter end of the Reign of of Valentinian the Third, and afterward under
Maximus, Avitus, Majoranus and Severus; besides several things in prose, the
chief whereof is his Chronicle to the year 155. (...) or the next is said to
have been the last year of his life; he wrote also Epigrams, and also (if it
were not as some say writ by Claudianus Mamertus) a Poem de providentia Dei. He
was, as says Licosthenes, Bishop of Rheginum, others of Orleans, though
Labbaeus with whom Brietius agrees, learnedly proves him to have been neither.

Ptolomaeus, surnamed Chemnus, an Alexandrian, who flourisht under the
Emperors Trajan and Adrian, he wrote, besides what in History, a Historical
Drama, Entitled Sphinx, and another Poem Entitled (...) as consisting of an
equal number of Books, with Homers Ilias. There was also another Ptolomaeus an
Epic poet of Cythera, who wrote of the virtues of the herb Psalacantha, as
says Suidas; besides several Epigrams of his (if it were the same Ptolomy) in
the Greec Anthology.

Publius Licinius Tegula, an ancient Latin Poet who as Livie the Historian
testifies, composed a Song) in like manner as Livius Andronicus had done
before him) to be sung through the City of Rome by Twenty seven Virgins:
whether this Licinius were the same with Licinius Imbrex, the ancient Comic
Writer, cited by Agellius is disputed.

Publius, or Publilius Optatianus Porphyri^s, a Poetical writer, in the time of
Constantine the Great, for his Panegyric to whom, and the favor of that
Emperor upon it, in recalling him from banishment, he is rather to be taken
notice of, than for the goodness of his poetry, which is very crabbed and
obscure; nevertheless this work of his being preserved in the Augustane Library
of Velserus, was set forth by Pithaeus in the year

Publius Ovidius Naso, the most fluent of Latin Poets, whose Metamorphos^s,
Epistles, Fasti, Tristia, Amores, etc. are in most public credit and familiar
use. He flourisht together with Virgil (whose most excellent Poems, viz. his
Eglogues, Georgics, and Aeneis, have their deserved esteem ameng all learned
men) and Horace (whose Odes, Satyrs, Sermones, Epistles, and Art poetic have
the like) in the time of Augustus by whom Ovid was banished for his familiarity
with Julia, the said Emperors daughter. Contemporary with these three renowned
Poets, were First, Caius Asinius Pollio, a Tragedian, Historian, and eminent
Captain in War; he is mentioned with honor, both by Horace and Virgil. ^ Gaius
Cilnius Mecaenas, a favorite of Augustus, and not only a favourer and patron
of Poets, especially of Virgil and Horace, but also a Composer of Verses
himself, whereof some are collected by Giraldus, others are to be seen in the
Collection of old Epigrams. 3. Lucius Varius, who has a very honorable
mention from Horace in several places; he is said to have written several
Tragedies, among which that of Thyestes is disputed whether his or no. 4.
Sextus Propertius, an Elegiac Poet of Vmbria, whose Elegies we have extant,
besides whom there seems to have been an^^her Propertius, cited by Fulgentius
Planciades; he was a great Emulator of Philetas and Callimachus. 5. Aulus
Cornelius Alpinus, a Turgid Poet, if it were the same whom Horace mentions. l.
1. of his Sermones, Sat. 10. To him some have ascribed a Poem Entitled
Memnonia, or the History of Memnon. 6. Sextilius Ena, a Poet of Corduba; the
beginning of whose Poem, concerning Cicero's Proscription, is mentioned by
Marcus Seneca. 7. Gratius, a Faliscan, whose Cynegetics or Poem of Hunting, is
not forgotten by Ovid. This Poem was first brought out of France, and published
by Sanazarius. 8. Caius Pedo of Albinova, the Author of a Poem Entitled
Theseis, which is taken notice of by Ovid, in his Pontic Elegies; of the Tenth
whereof in l. 4. the said Author is wholly the Subject; one whom Horace takes
notice of twice, though little to his praise, yet his poems had the fortune to
be laid up in the Temple of Apollo, and the Muses, together with his Picture.
14. Titus Valgius, whom Tibullus ranks next to Homer, and Horace compares with
Virgil and Varius. 15. Octavius, a p^^ncipal, both Poet and Historian in the
esteem of Horace; The manner of his death is signified by a Verse in the
Virgilian Appendix. 16. Ponticus, an intimate Friend both of Propertius and
Ovid, by the last of whom he is mentioned, and by the first compared with
Homer. 17. Cajus Melissus, a freedman of Mecaenas, and preferred to be Keeper
of Augustus his Library in the Octavian Portico; he is reckoned by Ovid among
the Comedians. 18. Caius Asinius Gallus, the Son of Asinius Pollio; he is
reckoned among the Poets by Giraldus, from the commendation of Pliny; and
Tranquillus cites an Epigram of his against Pomponius Marcellus. Besides these,
there were several others; as, Tu^anius, a Tragic Poet; Lupulus Siculus, a
Comedian, and Actor of his own Co-and also of an ^legy upon the death of
Mecaenas. 9. Aulus Sabinus, another of the same order remembered several times
by the said Ovid, and said to be the Author of some of those Epistles which
are ascribed to Ovid; as of Paris to Helena, and four or five others; he left
some things unfinisht, as appears from l. 4. Eleg. 16. of the Pontics. 10.
Titus Septimius, a Lyric and Tragic Poet, mentioned by Horace in his Epistles.
11. Aulus Cornelius Severus, the Author of a Poem Entitled Aetna, which has
been heretofore attributed to Virgil; also certain Verses are cited by Marcus
Seneca concerning the death of Cieero, as is supposed out of a Poem of the
Sicilian War, which by Fabius the Historian, he is delivered to have written:
to him belongs one Elegy in the fourth Book of Ovids Pontics. 12. Domitius
Marsus, the Author of a Poem Entitled Amazonis, mentioned by Martial in one of
his Epigrams; he makes one in Ovids Catalogue, and is also taken notice of by
Petronius Arbiter. There is extant of his, an Epigram against Tibullus. 13.
Fannius, medies; Carus Numa Marius (whether the famous Rhetor^cian of that name
and time is uncertain) the two Priscus's, Proculus an imitator of Callimachus,
Fontanus, Capella, Cajus Cotta, Julius Montanus, Camerinus and Thuscus,
Aemilius Macer of Verona, with others already mentioned, all celebrated by
Ovid, with an account for the most part of the subject of their Poems, only
Marcus Manilius or Manlius, whose Astronomical Poem we have yet extant: of all
the Poets that we hear of, of that time, (for to think as Guevartius, that he
was the same with Manlius Theodorus, in the time of Theodocius the elder; his
dedicating his Poem to Augustus, renders it absurd) is omitted by him.

Publius Porcius, the Author of a Poem, Entitled, de pugna poreorum, of which
every Verse begins with the letter P.

Publius Statius Papinius, see Sta^ius.

Publius Syrus, a Mimic writer, who after the death of Decius Laberius, kept up
the reputation of the Scene at Rome.

Publius Voluminous, a Latin Poet, out of whom several Verses are cited by
Plutarch, in his life of Marcus Brutus.

Publius Terentius Afer, see Statius C^cilius.

Publius Virgilius Maro, the Prince of Latin Heroic Poets; his Aeneis, however
not uncensured by some, being equalled by none of the ancient Latins that are
extant; and so particularly esteemed by Augustus Caesar, that after Virgils
death, who had left in charge with some friends to have that Poem burnt, he
committed it to the custody and strict care of Lucius Varius, and Plotius
Tucca, with command, that nothing should be altered. He was the Son of Maro, a
mean person; some say a Potter, and Maia (whose dream of her bringing forth a
Laurel branch, boaded very significantly) born in the 177th. Olympiad, in the
Ides of October, at Andes, a Village not far from Mantua, whence he is styled
the Mantuan Swan, also see Publius Ovidius.

Pythagoras, a Samian, one of the most famed of ancient Greec: p^ilosophers,
and the reputed Author of those (...) or golden Verses, which are commonly
published under his name, in the common Edition of the poetae mino^es, though by
some ascribed to Philolaus.

Pythangelus, a Tragic Poet, and Grammarian, not less notorious for his
lewdness, than for his poetry.

Pythostratus, an Athenian, who is said to have written a Poem Entitled
Theseis; he is remembered by Laertius in the life of Xenophon, together with a
Brother named also Xenophon.

Q
QVintus Cicero, see Decius Laberius.

Quintus Cornificius, an old Latin Epigrammatist, contemporary with Salust;
having a command in the Wars, he was slain by his Soldiers, for calling them
Helmetted Hares.

Quintus Ennius, the ancientest of Latin Poets that we hear of next after
Livius Andronicus, and Cnaeus Naevius; he wrote besides his Annals in Verse,
Satyrs, Comedies and Tragedies; of all which we have nothing now remaining,
excepting some few fragments.

Quintus Fabius Labeo, see Statius Cecilius.

Quintus Horatius Flaccus, a most illustrious Lyric Poet of Venusium in Apulia;
not for the Nobility of his birth, for he is reported the son but of a mean
person, some say a Salter; but for that delicacy of wit, purity of style, and
weight of judgment, both in his Lyrics and other Writings, which gained him the
esteem of the noblest of Favorites, Mecaenas, and by his means, of the greatest
Prince upon earth, Augustus, by whom he was advanced to such a Fortune, a Farm
in the Sabine Territory.
as being returned back again, at his death, which was in the Fifty sixth year
of his age, made Posterity take notice, that Horace made Augustus his Heir. He
is certainly not equalled in that kind of Poetry he undertook, to any of the
ancient Greecs and Latins that are extant, Pindarus himself only, and that
scarcely too, excepted.

Quintus Hortensius, a Noble Roman Orator, if not Poet also, as some represent
him, though we have nothing of his extant.

Quintus Lutatius Catulus, an ancient Latin Epigrammatist of a witty and
voluptuous strain, suitable to his Conversation, very much in favor with
Cornelius Cotta and Lucius Crassus.

Quintus Maecius, sometimes simply Maecius, subscribed to Eight Epigrams in the
Greec Anthology.

Quintus Nonius, an old Latin writer of those Comedies called Attellanae.

Quintus Rhemnius Palaemon a Contemporary of Claudian. He is reported to have
been very fluent in making Verses ex tempore; for which he is vilified by
Martial. Some confound him with Rhemnius Fannius, but erroniously.

Quintus Septimius Florens Tertullianus, see Tertullianus.

Quintus Serenus Sammonicus, a sufficiently esteemed Latin Poet, in the time of
the Emp^rour Severus; of the many things he is said to have written in Verse,
we have only something of his left de Medicina. He was slain by Antonius
Caracalla, as says Spartianus, in the life of that Emperor, and as
Capitolinus affirms, left his Son a most noble Library, consisting of 62000
Volumes, of which he made so good use, that he became Preceptor to the Emperor
Gordianus ju^ior.

Quintus Smyrnaeus, see Christodorus.

Quintus Trabeas, the Eighth in place among the ancient Latin Comic writers,
according to the opinion of Volcatius, Sedigitus.

Quintus Valerius Saranus, a very ancient Versifier, honored by Cicero, with
the Title Doctissimus Togatorum.

R
RAbanus Maurus, see Theodulphus. Regianus, a writer of an uncertain age, whose
Poem of the waters of Baiae is commended by Brietius, both for the ingenuity of
the Matter, and as written in no bad Verse.

Rhemnius Fannius, an elegant, both Grammarian and Poet, who flourisht in the
time of Constantine the Great; he was the Disciple of Ar^obius; and so was
Lactantius Firmianus, who had the education of Crispus Caesar, and wrote a Poem
Entitled Odoeporicon, being a description of his journey from Africa to
Nicomedia, besides certain divine Poems which have been attributed to him,
though Venantianus Fortunatus is by some thought rather to be the Author of
them: to Lactantius, Fannius dedicated a Book which he wrote of Medicinal
Ingredients in Hexameter Verse; moreover a Treatise of Weights and Measures is
most probably judged to be his, though some have attributed it to Priscian.
About the same time also flourisht Tiberianus, one or two of whose Verses is
cited by Giraldus; Publius Optatianus Porphyrius, who wrote a Panegyric in
Verse to Constanti^e the Great, for which he was recalled from banishment; he
is remembered by Hieronymus, Fulgentius, Beda, and Rabanus Maurus. Likewise
Juvencus, a Nobleman, and Priest of Spain, whose Evangelical History in
Hexameter Verse is yet extant; besides which, he wrote a discourse of the
Sacraments in Verse, which is mentioned by Hieronymus in his Viri Illustres.

Rhianus, a Cretan, Native of Been, an ancient City of that Island; though some
say he was of Ithaca, others of Mycene; he was contemporary with Eratosthenes,
and though at first but a poor servant or keeper of a Palaestra, obtained by
his own industry the reputation of an eminent Grammarian; and at last wrote a
Poem Entitled Heraclias, in four Books, as Suidas testifies; but Pausanias
says, he described in Verse the war of the Lacedaemonians with the Messenians.
Probably distinct from this Rhianus, of whom there is also extant a fragment de
Imprudentia in the common Edition of the minor Poets, is he whose Epigrams are
cited by Athenaeus and Stobaeus.

Rhinton of Tarentum, see Menander.

Romulus, the first King and Builder of Rome, who is said to have written to
his Son Tybertinus certain Fables Ent^tled Aesopic, from their imitation of
Aesop.

Rubrenus Lappa, see Curiatius Maternus.

Rufinus, an Epigrammatic Poet of whom there are about 28 Epigrams preserved in
the Greec Anthology.

Rufus of Ephesus; see Serapio.

Rufus Festus Avenius, (or as some say, Anienus) a contemporary of, Macrobius,
who lived under Gratianus and Theodosius; he translated Aratus and Dionysius
into Latin Verse, and wrote a Tractate of the Sea coasts in Iambic Verse;
something of both which works is to be seen in Rithaeus his Collection together
with an Epigram of his about the Sirens, with several other Poems. Moreover, he
Translated Aesops Fables into Elegiac, and all Livie into Iambic Verse.

Rusticus Helpidius, see Theodolus.

Rutilius Claudius Numatianus, see Claudius Claudianus.

Rutilius Geminus, an ancient Roman Author, who besides his Books Entitled
Pontificals, wrote also a Tragedy called Astyanax.

S
SAbellus, see Curiatius Maternus,

Sabinus, an ancient Epigrammatist, of whom there is extant a Tetrastich, in
the Sixth Book of the Greec Anthology.

Sacadas or Sacas, an ancient Tragic Poet of Argos, who is said to have been
first Author of the Stroph, and the first Institutor of the Doric Chorus: he
is taken notice of by Pindarus, and also by Pausanias and Plutarch. Moreover,
Suidas makes mention of Sacas a Tragic Poet, which probably may be the same
person.

Salleius Bassus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Solomon, the III. King of Israel and Judah, no less glorious in peace than his
Father David had been in War, and famous throughout the earth for Riches and
Wisdom, the Excellency whereof appeared not only in the Justice and Prudence
of his Government, while the vigor of his age lasted, but also in his many
Writings, were they all exant; in he shows himself an Excellent both
Philosopher, Theologist and Poet; namely his natural History of Plants (the
loss of which so useful a Subject is much to be lamented, his Gnomonica or
Proverbs much like in Divinity what the Writings of Phocylides and Theognis are
in Morality, his Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, and his Song of Songs, a sort
of Lyric Poem including, under an amorous argument, relating as some think to
the Loves between him and the Queen of Sheba, a divine Allegory.

Sanctus Severus, see Endeleichus.

Sanga, a Roman Poet, mentioned by Paulus Jovius, in his Book de Piscibus.

Sannyrio, see Euripides.

Scoeva Memor, see Curiatius Maternus.

Scyras, a Comic Poet of Tarentum, whose Meleager is quoted by Athenaeus.

Scynthinus, an Iambic Poet of T^^s, mentioned by Laertius in Heraelitus, and
Licinius Calvu^.

Secaeus, an Epigrammatic Poet, of whom there is extant a Tetrastich in the
Greec Anthology.

Secundus, another of the same Society.

Sentius Augur, a Roman Epigrammatist said to be an imitator of Catullus,
likewise Stobaeus and Stephanus.

Septimus Severus Afer, Twenty second Roman Emperor from Julius Caesar; he is
said to have been the Author of a certain Poem de laudibus Jani, in which he
endeavors to imitate Callimachus.

Serapio an Athenian, both Poet and Physician, very well esteemed by Plutarch,
who mentions him in his Book of the Delphic Oracle.

Seuleucus, a Halieueic or Piscatory writer in Verse, of Tarsus, mentioned by
Athenaeus.

Sextilius Ena, see Publius Ovidius.

Sextus Aurelius Propertius, an Elegiac Poet of Menavia in Vmbria, of whose
Poetry, what is extant, is commonly published with the Poems of Catullus and
Tibullus; he was in great favor with Cornelius Gallus and Mecaenas.

Sextus Turpilius, a Comic writer, contemporary with Terence, of whom was a
familiar friend; he is allotted by Sedigitus the Seventh place among the Latin
Comaedians.

Silanio, an ancient Poet, mentioned by Plutarch in his Book, Entitled, How
young men ought to be hearers of the Poets.

Silius Italicus, see Petronius Arbiter.

Simmias of Rhodes, see Menander.

Simonides, see Archilochus.

Simulus, a writer of the Roman Affairs in Verse; out of whom certain Verses
are cited by Plutarch in his life of Romulus.

Simylus, an Iambic writer, out of whom Stobaeus cites Twelve Senaries, in his
Sermon pro Artibus.

Socrates, see Euripides.

Solon, see Epimenides.

Sopater, a Parian, surnamed (...), or (...), several Comedies, of whose
writing are remembered by Suidas; besides him, both Athenaeus and Suidas speak
of another Comedian of the same name, a Phacian, whose Bacchis the first of
whom cites.

Sophilus, of Sicyon, see Menander.

Sophocles, a noble Athenian Tragic Poet; of whom see more in Euripides.

Sophron, see Cleanthes.

Sosicles of Syracuse, see Philetas.

Sosiphanes, an Iambic writer, out of whom diverse Senaries are cited by
Stobaeus.

Sositheus, see Menander.

So^ades Maronides, a writer of such lascivious Iambics, as from him were
called Versus Sotadei. There was also of the same name an Athenian Comic, some
say Tragic, Poet, whose Encleiomenae and Paralytromenos are mentioned by
Athenaeus, though some will have them to be one and the same person.

Soterichus Oasites, a Heroic Poet who besides his Encomium of Dioclesian, in
whose time he lived; wrote also a Poem Entitled Bassarica, with the life of
Apollonius Tyaneus, and some other things, as Suidas witnesses.

Spintharus, a Tragic Poet of Heraclea, made mention of by Laertius, his
Tragedies were Semele Fulminata, and Hercules Ardens.

Stasimus, or Stasinus, the Author of a Poem concerning the Affairs of Cyprus,
out of which, two Hexameters are cited by Stobaeus, in his Sermon de Verecundia.

Statius Caecilius, an ancient Latin Comedian of Insubria or Gallia Cisalpina,
which at this day is called the Duchy of Milain; of many Comedies which he
wrote (among which was his Asotus) diverse fragments are collected by Robertus
Stephanus; about the same time flourisht Marcus Pacuvius, a Tragedian of
Brundusium, Ennius his Sisters son; of the many Tragedies which he wrote, his
Orestes is particularly remembered by Festus, Nonnius and Cicero in his Dialogue
of friendship; and to Pacuvius not inferior Lucius Accius, of whom Agellus out
of Sempronius Asellio gives a most advantageous Character; of his Tragedies,
his Nuptiae is remembered by Athenaeus, and his Mercator by Varro, in imitation
perhaps of Diphilus, by whom two with the same Title were written; also
Attilius, whose Electra translated from Sophocles, is mentioned by Suetonius.
He is also styled by Licinius Poeta Fercus and by Cicero P. durissimus, from
the Crabbednes of his style. Also Marcus Accius Plautus, that witty Comedian of
Sarsi^ae in Vmbria, whom in a great measure we yet enjoy, viz. in Twenty
Comedies. Also Cneus Aquilius, to whom the Comedy Boeotia has by some been
attributed, which Varro rather adjudgeth to Plautus, as is testified by
Agellius; another Comedian Marcus Acuticus, to whom Varro attributed many
Comedies which had been judged to have been written by Plautus; also the
Comedian Plautius, who as Agellius observes, is by some mistaken for Plautus,
by reason of the nearness of the name; also Caius Lucilius, great Uncle to
Pompey; he served under Scipio Africanus, in the Numantine War, and is said to
have been the first that brought Satyr in use among the Latins, and to have
written a Comedy, Entitled Nummularia and certain Epodes. Then Publius
Terentius Afer, six of whose Elegant Comedies remain preserved from Oblivion;
he was a great imitator of Menander, whom he professes to have followed in many
of his Comedies almost word for word, and was assisted in some of them (as he
himself confesses) by Caius Laelius, surnamed the wise, and P. Cornelius
Scipio Africanus, between whom and Terence, there was a very intimate
friendship and familiarity. Nor do Valgius and Memmius stick to affirm that
some Comedies which go under the name of Terence were entirely Scipio's.
Quintus Fabius Labeo, and Marcus Popilius, both men of Consular authority, and
both Poets, and such whom Terence acknowledged for his Assistants, as Suetonius
in his life observes. Also Lucius Luscius, whom Volcatius Sedigitus reckons in
the Ninth rank of Comedians; of whose Comedies that Entitled Thesaurus, is only
remembered. Lastly, Turpilius, who in his Thrasyleon, imitates a Comedy of
Menanders, so Entitled.

Statius Papinius, or as many write him Publius Papinius Statius, a Neapolitan,
who flourisht under Domitian, though by some confounded with Satius Surculus
the great Rhetorician of Toulouse, in the time of Nero; there are of his
writing extant, his Thebais, Achilleis and Sylvae: the two first being
commented upon by Placidus Lactantius, with him were contemporary Caius
Valerius Flaccus: of whose writing we have Eight Books of Argonautics, but left
imperfect, which loss Quintilian bewails. Also Marcus Valerius* Martialis, a
Native of Bilbilis, now called Bilbao in that part of Celtiberia or Cantabria,
now called Biscaia. He was by Domitian, with whom he was in great honor,
advanced to the Tribunate and Equestrian dignity, and to whom he directed many
of his Epigrams, Fourteen Books of which are happily preserved to us; he
mentions the foresaid Flaccus, in one of his Epigrams, with great testimonies
of friendship and kindness. Also Decius Junius Juvenalis, whose Satyrs are
likewise extant, two of which are thought to have been written when he was made
Prefect in a Cohort in Egypt at 80. years of age. About the same time
Terentianus Mau^us is thought to have lived, at least if it were the same
Terentianus whom Martial speaks of l. 1. Epigr. 87. as is probable he was, and
in like manner the same to whom Longinus dedicates his Book de sublilimate.
There is extant an elegant Poem of his de Art Metrica.

Statylius Flaccus, an Epigrammatic Poet, of whom there are extant one or two
Epigrams in the Greec Anthology.

Stephanus, surnamed Sabbaita, or the follower of St. Sabba (a Saint in the
Greec Calender) who is thought to be the Author of a Greec Tragedy, which is
extant, of Christ's death. The Comic Poet of the same name, see in Menander.

Stesichorus, a Lyric Poet, who flourisht about the 42d. Oiympiad, as appears
from Suidas, Eusebius and the Anonymous Author. His Palinody upon the praise
of Helena, is mentioned by Philostratus, in his life of Appollonius Tysneus.
There is also mentioned by some a son of Hestod, named Stesichorus.

Stesimbrotus, see Euripides.

Sthenelus, see Dionysius.

Strabus of Fulda, see Theodulphus.

Strato, a writer of Media Comedia, whose Phoenix is made mention of by Suidas.
There was besides him another Strato, an Epigrammatist, of whom there are
several Epigrams in the Greec Anthology.

Strattis, see Euripides.

Succius, a Comic Poet, remembered by Suidas. There is chiefly noted a Comedy of
his, Entitled Piscatoria: Some think him the same with Sutrius, out of whom
several things are quoted by Fulgentius, in his Mythology.

Suevus, an Epic Poet, out of whose Idyl, Entitled Moretum, Macrobius in his
Saturnalia cites 8 Verses.

Suffenus, see Aquinius.

Sulpitius Lupercus Servastus junior, a Poetical writer of an uncertain time,
but certainly not very ancient: his Elegy de cupiditate, and Ode, de qualitate
Temporis, want not the commendation of a happy vein and purity of Latin style.

Sutrius, see Succius.

Syagrus, a Greec Poet, reputed of very great antiquity, even next after the
ancient Orpheus and Musaeus, by the testimony of Aelian in his various History,
by whom also he is said to have have writ a Poem of the Trojan war.

Sylla, see Decius Laberius.

Symposius, an Author not unelegant in the esteem of Vossius, though slighted
by Giraldus. There are set forth of his writing, with the Notes of Jos^phus
Castalio, 100 Aenigmatical questions or Riddles in Greec Hexameter Verse.

Syn^sius, see Cyrus of Panopolis.

T
TEleclides, see Aristophanes.

Telestes, see Oenomaus.

Terentianus Maurus, see Statius Cecilius.

Terentius Libo, a Poet of Fregella, remembered by Donatus from Metius.

Terentius Varro Atracinus, a Contemporary with Cicero and Hortensius; he wrote
Argonautics in imitation of Apollonius Rhodius, also Epigrams and an Elegy upon
his beloved Leucadia. There flourisht also about the same time Cajus Laelius,
who is reckoned among the Latin Poets.

Terpander, a most eminent and ancicient Greec Poet and Musician, whom Eusebius
delivers to have flourisht about the 33d. Olympiad, though Glaucus thinks him
to have been much ancienter than Archilochus.

Tertullianus, the Divine Orator for the Christians; besides what he wrote in
Prose, he wrote also five Books in Verse against the Heretic Marcion, together
with a little Poem of Sodom, and another of Jonas and Nineve.

Thales Milesius, see Epimenides.

Thamyras, a Thracian Poet, who wrote three Thousand Verses of a Theological
subject.

Theocritus, a Sicilian Poet of Syracuse, whom see in Menander; besides whom
there was another Theocritus of Chios, as the Syracusian himself testifies in a
Tetrastich Epigram upon himself.

Theodectes, see beneath in Theopompus, and also in Euripides.

Theodolus, a Latin Poet, who flourisht in the time of Zeno and Anastatius. He
wrote a History of all the Miracles in the Old Testament in Verse, which is yet
extant. Contemporary with him were Godelbertus, whose History from the
Creation, to the Birth of our Lord, in Verse, is also extant. And Rusticus
Helpidius, a Nobleman, and Physician to Theodoric the Gothish King of Italy.
His History of the Old and New Testament in Verse, with his Poem de Beneficiis
Christi, are set forth by Georgius Fabritius; but that de Cosolatione doloris,
is lost.

Theodonis, a Poet who living in the time of Ptolemaeus Dionysius, is remembered
by Suidas; among other things he is said to have wrirten Verses upon Cleopatra.

Theodoridas, a Syracusian Poet, mentioned by Athenaeus and Stephanus.

Theodorus, a Colophonian, whom Pollux mentions to have made Verses to be sung
for each season of the year. Of the same name there was a Tragic Poet,
mentioned by Laertius; as also another who lived under Domitian, whom see in
Curiatius Maternus.

Theodosius, a Poet of Tripolis (not the same with him whose Books of the
Sphere are set forth by Pena) he wrote, as says Suidas, Verses of the Spring,
with some other things in Verse Hexameter.

Theodu hus, an Abbot of Floriacum, and afterward Bishop of Orle^nce, in the
time of Ludovicus Pius; he composed a Hymn which was used to be sung on Palm
Sunday, which with some things is to be seen in the Bibliotheca Patrum
heretofore mentioned. Contemporary with him was Magnetius Rabanus Maurus, Abbot
of Fulda, and afterward Bishop of Mentz, whom Vicentius of Bellovacum accounts
a Poet, second to none of his time; that which is most memorable of his
Writings, is, his Isogrammatic Poem, in praise of the Cross, which he addressed
to Pope Gregory the Fourth: the Disciple of this Rabanus was one Strabus, a
Monk of Fulda, who besides his Gloss upon the whole Scripture, is said to have
written something in Poetry; about the same time lived Hugubaldus, who
dedicated to the Emperor Charles the bald, a Poem which he wrote in the praise
of bald men, whereof every word began with C. To whom also Gallus Milo, Abbot
of Saint Amand dedicated a Poem which he wrote de Sobrietate.

Theogenes, a Megarensian, who flourishing in the 59th: Olympiad, wrote Elegies
and other Poems.

Theognetus, a Greec Comic Writer, cited by Athenaeus.

Theognis, a Megarensian Poet, whose Sentences in Greec Verse, are extant, and
commonly printed with H^siod, Theocritus and the rest of the Poetae minores. He
was born, as says Eusebius, about the 58^h. or 59th. Olympiad, and lived
until the Persian War, being contemporary with Simonides Ceus, and
Onomacritus, of both whom he makes mention; the Tragic Poet of the same name,
see in Euripides.

Theolytus, a Lesbian of Mitylene, whose Poem Entitled Bacchiea, is cited by
Athenaeus, he is also taken notice of by the Scholiast of Apollonius.

Theophanes, a Lesbian, who flourisht in the time of Ptolomeus Auletes; besides
his History of the Acts of Pompey (whom out of fr^endship and kindness, he
accompanied in the Wars) he is said to have written the Mithridatic war in
Verse, as Janus Douza is of Opinion; there are moreover, two Epigrams of his in
the Greec Anthology. Of the same name was likewise a Bishop of Nice, whose
divine Hymns are mentioned by Theodorus Prodromus. The Latin Version of one
whereof viz. that upon the Aununciation of the Sacred Virgin, being an
Acrostich, is to be found in the Bibliotheca patrum heretofore mentioned.

Theophilus, see Philistion.

Theopompus (not the same with that Noble Orator and Historian the Disciple of
Isocrates) a writer of Vetus Comaedia, contemporary with Plato, at whom he had
a fling in some of his Comedies (if it were the same) his (...), and several
others of his Comedies are cited by Athenaeus, and some by Pollux. Of the same
name was an Epic Poet of Colophon celebrated by Athenaeus. Contemporary with
him were Naucrates, Isocrates, and Theodectes, who all three contended with him
at the solemnity of Mausolus his Funeral, instituted by Artemisia, at which as
Suidas says, Theopompus; as the nameless describer of the Olympiads,
Theodectes overcame: this last was of Phaselus in Lycia, the Disciple of Plato
and Isocr^tes, and as some say of Aristotle; he is said to have written the Art
of Rhetoric in Verse, and Fifty Tragedies, whereof one was Entitled Mausolus.
Besides these were Nicostratus, not he of Olynthus who was a Historian, a Comic
Poet surnamed, by Laertius, Clytemnaestra, Fifteen of whose Fables are
remembered by Athenaeus, and for the excellent conduct of his Action, P^llux
calls him (...) and Stephanus (...), several S^nary Iambics also are quoted by
Stobaeus. Tigretus, otherwise called Pigres (the Brother of Artemisia) who
turned Homers Ilias into an Elegiac Poem by subjoyning a Pentameter after every
Hexameter; some likewise attribute to him Margites, Batrachomyomachia, and some
other things. Also Ephippas, a writer of Media Comaedia, out of whose
Codoniastae, Philyra, and Obeliaphori, certain passages are cited by Athenaeus.
Also Epicrates of Ambracia, a writer of Media Comoedia, among whose Comedies
(in some of which he is said to have been somewhat Scoptic against Plato and
Speucippus) his Amazones and Emp^ros are mentioned by Suidas: and much of the
same time Philippus, a writer in like manner of Media Comoedia, whose (...) is
remembered by Suidas from Athenaeus as he says, perhaps confounding it with
(...), which is indeed mentioned by Athenaeus, also Xenoclides whom Vlpian
affirms to have been an Athenian; he is commended by Demosthenes for a very
good Poet.

Thespis, see Epimenides.

Thuscus, see Publius Ovidius.

Tiberianus, see Rhemnius Fannius.

Ticida, an old Latin Epigrammatist, Contemporary with Catullus.

Tigretus, see Theopompus.

Timachidas, a Rhodian; who as says Suidas, wrote in Verse the manner of
setting forth of Feasts and Banquets out of which work Athenaeus cites certain
Verses of the fish Pompilius.

Timesitheus, a Tragic Poet of whose writing there are remembered his Danaides,
and a 11 more Tragedies.

Timocles, an Athenian Comic Poet, whose Demosatyri, Centaurus, Cauniae
Epistolae, Epichaerecacus, and Philodicast^ are remembered by Suidas, together
with Dionysiazusae, Polypragmon and Eleven more of another Comic Poet of the
same name.

Timocreon of Rhodes, a writer of Vetus Comaedia, who flourisht about the 75th.
Olympiad: he wrote among others, as Suidas testifies, a Comedy against
Simonides Melicus and Themistocles, with both of whom he was at very great
enmity; what his Epitaph was, is to be seen in Athenaeus.

Timon of Phliasus, see Callimachus.

Timotheus of Gaza, see Christodorus.

Timotheus of Miletus, see Oen^maus.

Titianus, a Rhetorician, who erected a School at Lions; he is remembered by
Ausonius for his Apologies in Trimeter Iambics.

Titinnius, a Latin Comic Poet, whose Barathrum, and 7 other Comedies are cited
by Charisius.

Titius Septimius, see Publius Ovidius.

Titus Annianus, see Annianus.

Titus Calsurinus Piso, a Sicilian Poet, whose Bucolic Eglogues are commonly
printed with Gratius, the Faliscan, his Poem of Hunting.

Titus Lucretius Carus, one of the most ancient, for he flourisht about 168th.
Olympiad, in the time of the Cymbrian War, and for Majesty and Elegancy of
Style, to be rankt among the best of Latin Poets; whoever shall observe his
neat Digressions, for there he chiefly shows himself, his main Subject being a
kind of System of Epicurean Philosophy, in Heroic Verse, Entitled de Rerum
Natura. There is also another Titus Lucretius, a Roman Knight, and writer of
Mimes, in the time of Julius Coesar.

Titus Pomponius Atticus, see Decius Laberius.

Titus Quintius Atta, an old Latin writer of those sort of Comedies, called,
from the kind of Garment used by the Actors, Togatae.

Titus Valgius, an old Latin Poet, of whom several Verses are cited by Crinitus
and Servius,

Titus Vespatianus, a Roman Emperor, who besides his great actions in War, for
which he is renowned in History, was considerable in Poetry, having written
Tragedies in Greec, with several other Poems both in Greec and Latin by the
Testimony of Eutropius, Isidorus and Suidas,

Toxotius, a Roman Senator, whose Poems were extant in the time of Capitolinus.

Trabea, a Comic Poet, quoted by Cicero and Charisius, see Qu. Trabeas.

Tribonianus Sidetes, see Agathias.

Triphyllius a Cyprian Bishop, who, as Suidas testifies, wrote the life and
miracles (in Iambic Verse) of Spiridion, Bishop of Tremithus in Cyprus, who was
present at the Nicene Council.

Tryphon, the Son of Ammonius a Grammarian and Poet of Alexandria, cited by
Athenaeus and Suidas. There is a Tetrastich of Tryphon, surnamed Mercurius, in
the first Book of the Greec Anthology.

Tryphiodorus, see Christodorus.

Turanius, see Publius Ovidius.

Turcius Rnfus Festus Asterius, a Roman Consul, together with Flavius
Praesidius, in the time of Anastatius; he is said to have written in Verse a
Comparation of the Old Testament with the New, which some nevertheless
attribute to Sedulius, others to Momertus.

Turnus, see Curiatius Maternus.

Turpilius, see Statius Caecilins.

Tyrtaeus, an Elegiac Poet, who as Suidas says, flourisht about the 35th.
Olympiad. In the Messinian War he was once chosen by the Lacedaemonians (into
whom he inspired courage by the Martial spirit which his Verses breathed)
General against the Messenians.

V
VAgellius, an old Latin Poet, remembered by Seneca, of whom he was an intimate
friend.

Valerius Aedituns, an old Latin Epigrammatist, in whose Verses, his two
Mistresses Pamphilia and Philerote are very much celebrated.

Valerius Cato, a Grammarian and Poet, who flourisht in the time of Sylla:
Besides what he wrote in Grammar, he wrote also several Poems, among which his
Lydia and Diana are principally approved. He is mentioned most particularly by
Suetonius in his Book de Illustribus Grammaticis.

Venantius Honorius Clementianus Fortunatus, a Christian Poet, who flourisht in
the time of the Emperor Justinus the younger; he wrote in Verse, de partu
Virginis, de Beneficiis Christi, de B. Martino; besides his Hymns, and several
divine Poems mentioned by Giraldus, among which are thought to be some which
have been attributed to Lactantius.

Vestritius Spurina, a no less famous Soldier (for he overcame King
Breveterius, for which he was honored with a Statue) than Lyric Poet, in the
time of the Vespatians. He addicted himself much to the Imitation of Horace.

Victorinus Pictaviensis, see Caecilius Cyprianus.

Victorius, a Contemporary of Sidonius Apollinaris; by whom he is celebrated in
the last Epistle of his fifth Book.

Virgilius Romanus, a Comic Poet, in the time of the Emperor Trajan; he is
mentioned with great commendation by Pliny, in his Epistle to Caninius Rufus.

Voconius Victor, see Curiatius Maternus.

Volcatius Sedigitus, the Author of a Treatise of the old Latin Poets, both
before and in his time, in Senary Iambic verse.

Vomanus, one of the 12. surnamed Scolastici, of whom see in Julianus.

Votienus, see Curiatius Maternus.

X
XEnarchus, a Comic Poet remembered by Aristotle in his Poetics; several of his
Comedies are reckoned up by Athenaeus and Suidas.

Xenoclides, see Theopompus.

Xenophanes, a Physical Poet of Colophon, who Flourished until the 72d
Olympiad, and farther, as appearr from Athenaeus; he is delivered by Laertius,
who wrote his Life, to have written of the Foundation and Antiquities of
Colophon, and of the Colonie transplanted from thence to Elea, in Verse, and by
Hieronymus, in his Eusebian Chronicle, to have Composed several Tragedies,
though with what ground I know not; but there is nothing Extant of his, except
certain Fragments in H. Stephanus his Collection; it is doubted by Vossius
whether Xenophanes, cited by Athenaeus be this of Colophon, or another; but
that Xenophanes, mentioned by Fulgentius was of Heracleopolis. About the same
time flonrisht Ibycus (not he of Rhegium) otherwise Hippicus, Hippias or Hipys;
certain fragments of whom are to be seen in H. Stephanus his Collection of the
fragments of the Lyric Poets. Phocylides, a Milesian, commonly reputed the
Author of that Nuthetic Poem, printed among the Minor Poets, though Vossius
judges the Author thereof, of a much later time, an Alexandrine Jew, or else
Christian of the same name also. Hipponax, a Poet mentioned by Pliny, l. 35. c.
5. and perhaps the same Ephesian Poet, whose Senary Iambics are quoted by
Stobaeus; his Parodia and Synonyma by Athenaeus, and who is also mentioned by
Suidas.

Z
ZEnodotus of Ephesus, see Menander.

Eminent Poets Among the MODERNS.
AAron Batalaeus the Author of a little Poem, Entitled, Plausus Triviliensis,
Printed at Basil, with some small Poetical pieces of the choicest of the Modern
Poets.

Abraham Cowly, the most applauded Poet of our Nation both of the present and
past Ages; his early Muse began to down at the Thirteenth Year of his Age, he
being then a Scholar at Westminster School, in Two little Poems Antonius and
Melida, and Pyramus and Thisbe; which discovering a Maturity of sense above the
Years that writ them, were thought worthy to be then published, though not to be
inserted into the now completed Edition of his Works, divided into 4 parts,
his Mistress being the amorous prolusions of his Youthful Muse, his
Miscellanies or Poems of various Arguments, his most admired Heroic Poem
Davideis, the first Books whereof he Composed, while but a young Student at
Trinity College in Cambridge; and lastly that is in order of time though not
of place, his Pindaric Odes, so called, I suppose, ftom the measure in which he
Translated the first Ithmian and Nemean Odes, whereas the form of those Odes in
the Original, is very different, and yet in Imitation of him, it is pleasant to
observe what a notable Trade has been driven of late in Pindaric Odes: Besides
these Poems of his in English, there is Extant of his writing in a Volume by it
self a Latin Poem of Herbs and Plants; also he has Translated Two Books of his
Davideis into Latin Verse, which are in the large Volume among the rest of his
Works.

Abraham France, a Versisier in Queen Elizabeth's time, who imitating Latin
measure in English Verse, wrote his Iviechurch and some other things in
Hexameter, some also in Hexameter and Pentameter, nor was he altogether
singular in this way of writing; for Sir Philip Sidny in the pastoral
interludes of his Arcadiae, uses not only these but all other sorts of Latin
Measure, in which no wonder he is followed by so few, since they neither become
the English nor any other Modern Language.

Abrahamus Laescherus, the Author of a Poem Entitled the Monomachie or single
Combat between David and Goliath, his Two Books of King^ also, and Lamentations
of Jeremie in Latin Verse were printed by the famous Oporinus, not to mention
his Epicedes, Epithalamies, and other Poems.

Actius Sincerus Sanazarius, a Neapolitan Poet, of principal Fame and
Reputation for Latin Verse, gained by his Poem de partu Virginis, his piscatory
Eclogues, Epigrams, etc.

Adamus Regius a Scoth-man, whose Latin Verses are Extant among the works of
some of the chief Latin Poets of that Nation.

Adamus Schroterus a Silesian, who wrote an Epithalamium upon the Nuptials of
Sigismund K. of Poland, with Catharine the Daughter of the Emperor Ferdinand.

Adamus Siberus a Germane, the Author of Proseucha pro Ecclesia, Epinicia,
Acholastica, and several other Poems.

Adriano Polito a Comic writer among the Italians.

Adrianus Blienbergius, Adrianus Laurentius, and Adr. Marius a Triumvirat of
Adrians, of no obscure name among the Belgic Poets.

Adrianus Junius, a most learned Physician of Holland, and moreover by the
Testimony of Melchior Adams a Critic, Poet and most exact Historian and
Antiquary.

Adrianus Turnebus Professor Regius at Paris of Philosophy and the Greec
Tongue, he is reckoned among the French writers of Latin Poesy.

Aegidius Menagius a Frenchman, whose not uneloquent Poems consisting of
Elegies, Epigrams, and Varia Garmina in Latin, Ecloge of various Poems in Greec
his Italian Rhyme, his Sonnets, Madrigals, Balades and Epistles in French were
printed at Amsterdam Anno 1663.

Aemilianus an Elegiac Poet, who wrote Epigrams, and an Epicedium upon the
Emperor Frideric.

Aenaeas Sylvius a Hetrurian, born in the City of Siena, and by the name of
Pius Secundus, Exalted to the Papal Chair, if ever any, by the merit of his
great Learning and Excellent Parts, which produced almost innumerable Volumes
of various Arguments, and among the rest some in Verse not of the meanest value
for Wit and Poetic Fancy, particularly his Epigrams, his Niraphilenticum, and
his Epistolar Poems.

Agnobo Firenzuola, see Ottavio Rinuecini.

Alexander Brassicanus, see Joannes Alexander Br.

Alexander Brom an Atturny of the Mayors Conrt, yet Poetically addicted, a Man
of Law and Poetry at once, (strange incongruity one would think) and that of so
Jovial a strain, that among the Sons of Mirth and Bacchus, to whom his
Sack-inspired Songs have been so often Sung to the sprightly Violin, his name
cannot choose but be immortal, and in this respect he may well be styled the
English Anacreon; many also of the Odes of Horacc, who was likewise a good
Fellow, are of his Translating; nor are there wanting among his Extant Poems
many other various Subjects as well serious as otherwise; there is also of his
writing a Comedy called the Cunning Lovers.

Albertus Cistarellus the Author of a Poem in praise of St. Anna Goriciana.

Alcadinus a Sicilian Poet, who wrote in Verse the Tryumphs of the Emperor
Henry, and the acts of his Son Friderie.

Alessandro Gatti, an Italian writer of Madrigals.

Alexander Prior of the Monastery of Essebie, in the Reign of K. Edw. the
Third, and reckoned among the chief of English Poets and Orators of that Age.

Alexander Rosse a Scotch writer, of whose Poetry the only thing noted is his
Cento out of Virgil, Entitled Virgilius Evangelizans.

Aloysius Cherchiarius a Regular of the Congregation of Somascha, who
professing Poetry and Oratory, opened an Academy at Venice, called the Academy
of the Generosi.

Andreas Alciatus, a famous Juris-consult of Milan, who though a writer of many
learned works in Prose, is yet best known by his Book of Hieroglyphical Emblems
Elegantly illustrated and explained in Elegiac Verse.

Andrea di Bergamo an Italian writer of Satyrs, which were printed at Venice
Anno 1556.

Andreas Canonherius a German of much esteem for Latin Verse, and therefore by
Learned men ranked among the German Poets.

Andreas Dactius, a Florentine, the Author of a Poem Entitled Aeluro-Myomachia,
or the Battle between the Cat and Mice; besides underwoods, Epicediums, and
other Poems of various Argument.

Andreas Fabricius, a Poet of Chemnitz, the Author of a Poem Entitled Christus
Lachrymans, which was printed at Wittenberg in the Year 1551.

Andreas Janus Lascaris, a writer of Rhyndacum, with whose Treatise of the
Roman Militia, Collected out of Polybius his History, are Extant a numbe^ of
Greec and Latin Epigrams of his Composing.

Andreae Giuseppe Rossolo, an Italian, Author of a Poem Entitled Giacobbe
Ripatriante, which was printed at Rome Anno 1646..

Andreas Libavius a German, whose not unhappy Vein in Latin Verse obtains him a
place among the eminent Poets of that Nation.

Andreas Melvinus a witty and learned Scotch-man, and particularly famed for
Latin Poetry; very notable is his Distich to the Lady Arabella, with whom he
was fellow prisoner in the Tower. Causa mihi tecum communis Carceris, Ara
Bella tibi causa est Carceris Ara mihi.


The cause of his Commitment being his writing Verses against the Altar at
Whitehall.

Andreas Navagerius, a Venetian, both Historian Poet and Orator, but among his
Poems his Eclogues are particularly famed, being printed by Oporinus among the
Eclogues of other conspicuous Poets.

Andreas Papius, an exact Master of the Two learned Tongues, yet withal so
excellent in Music and Poetry, as if either of them had been his whole
business.

Andreas Bamseius, a Scotch Latin Versifier, of whom what is Extant, or at
least attainable, is to be found in a Collection Entitled Deliciae Poetarum
Scotorum.

Angelinus Gazaeus, a Belgic Poet, whose Pia Hilaria, or Divine Latin Poems are
generally esteemed.

Angelo Badalucchi, see Dominico Cornacchini.

Angelo Grilli, an Italian Lyric Poet, or writer of Sonetts, Madrigals and
Canzonetts.

Angelus Politianus, a most conspicuous Itali^n Author, the writer of many
learned and polite Volumes, among which those in Verse are not the least in
same, viz. his Sylvae, his Treatise of Poetry and Poets, and his Epigrams.

Annibal Nicolini a Dramatic Poet of Eugubium a Town in the Duchy of Spoleto,
but chiefly in the pastoral way.

Antimo Gallo, an Italian Lyric, or, pourer forth of amorous conceits in
Sonetts, Madrigals etc

Antonie Brewer a contributer to the English Stage by his Lingua, Loves
Loadstone, and the Country Girl, Comedies, The Lovesick King and Landagartha,
Tragecomedies, and Loves Dominion a Pastoral.

Antonio Cornazano an Orator and Poet of Ferrara, among whose other Poems of
various Subjects the principally noted is that of the Life atd Death of the
Blessed Virgin.

Antonio Hungaro, an Italian, both Comic Poet, and writer of Sonetts.

Antonius Brun a writer of certain Lyric Poems printed at Noremberg by Joannes
Petreius.

Antonius Codrus Vrseus, a learned and polite Author, in Proof of works of
various Subjects, in Verse of 2 Books of Sylvae set forth by a great admirer of
them Philippus Beroaldus-junior, besides Satyrs, Eglogues and Epigrams.

Antonio Decio de Horta an Italian Tragic Poet.

Antonio Facchenetti, an Italian Dramatic Poet, but chiefly in the way of
Pastoral.

Antonius Fayus an eminent French writer, out of whose writing there is also a
Miscellanie of Emblems and Epigrams.

Antonius Franciscus Rainerius an Italian Versifier, but chiefly in the Latin
Idiom.

Antonio Geraldino, Protonotary to the Apostolic See, and Poet Laureat of Rome,
he is principally recommended to the World by his Divine Bucolics, which have
been Printed in several places; his other chiefest Works are his Acts of the
Kings of Spain in various Verse, his Fasti in Elegiac, his Hymns of the Heroes
in Lyric, the Acts of the Martyrs in Heroic.

Antonio Mancinelli, a Grammarian most professedly, who wrote several
Grammatical Treatises at Venice about the Year 1490. but both many of them, and
some also of other Subjects, in Verse; he is much esteemed also for his
Comments upon Virgils Eclogues and Georgics, and upon Horace his Odes, his Book
of Epigrams, with other things.

Antonius Millaeus the Author of a late Poem Entitled Moses Viaetor, printed at
Lions Anno 1636.

M. Antonius Muretus, a most learned Fr. Commentator and Eloquent Orator; and
also so much a Poet that Scaevola Samarthanus in his Elogies of the Learned Men
of France, among other Commendations, has also this of him, That he was so
like Catullus, that Catullus was not more like himself; he dyed Anno Dom. 1585.

Antonius Sebastianus, a Native of Minturno, who is not ashamed to appear among
the choice Latin Poets of Italy. Of like Estimation is,

Aonius Palearius another Italian writer of Latin Verse.

Archangelio Archangelio, see Dominico Cornacchini.

Armentoldo Samponiano a Noted Italian writer of Pastoral Dramatic Poesy.

Arthurus Johnstonus, an eminent Scotch Physician, who in his younger Years had
the reputation of so excellent a Poet, that he was Laureated at Paris before he
had fully arrived to the 23d Year of his Age; of his Poetical works there are
particularly Collected rogether, his Epigrams, his Parerga, his Musae Aulicae,
his Reges Scoti, and his Heroes Scoti, his Paraphrastical Translation of
David's Psalms is also remembered with particular Commendation.

Sir Aston Cockain the Author (what ever he has written in Poetry besides) of
several things to the Stage, as the Obstinate Lady, a Comedy, Trappolin
supposed a Prince, and Tyranical Government, Tragecomedies, and Thersites an
Interlude.

B.
BAlduinus Berlegomius, a Hollander, whose happy Vein in Latin Verse gives him
place among the Belgic Poets.

Baptista Candelarius a Consul of Roan, mentioned by R^visius Textor with much
Honor among the Learned Men and Poets of his time.

Baptista Faustus a Carmelite Friar of Mantua, and therefore generally Sirnam'd
Mantuanus, vulgarly of such fame for his Poetry, that he is compared even with
his Countryman Virgil, but not by Lilius Giraldus, who takes the liberty to
term him rather an Extemporary than Mature Poet, and indeed whoever looks well
into his homespun and plain Verse, shall find him no Virgil though a Mantuan,
which may in part be attributed to the multitude of his Writings; for besides
his 10 Eglogues (the most known and published of all his other Works) 8 of which
he confesses to have written when a Young Student at Padua; there are of his
writing almost innumerable other Volumes as well in Verse as Prose, of which
first kind are his Lives of St. Denis, St. George, St. Lewis Morbiolus in
Heroic Verse, his Hymn upon the Nativity of St. John Baptist in Elegiac, his
description and praise of Refrigerius his Villa in Heroic, his 4 Books of
Sylvae, etc. he dyed Anno 1516. in the 72d Year of his Age.

Baptista, a Friar of Ferrara, of the Order of St. Mary of Mount Carmel,
chiefly famed for History, but taken notice of also for his Book of Epigrams.

Baptista Fiera, a Philosopher and renowned Physician of Mantua, and for
Poetry, if not equal in fame to the Mantuan Carmelite before mentioned, yet by
no means to be omitted, for his 4 Books of Evan^^^ical History in Verse, with
several Hymns he dedicated to Pope Adrian the 6th; besides which there are
Extant of his writing Sylvae, Elegies, Epigrams, and other Poems.

Baptista Guarini, a learned Son of a learned Father, of Verona: among his
Poetic works, for besides the many things he wrote in Prose, he had a Vein
sufficiently flowing in all kinds of Poetry; his Dramatic pieces are not the
least in vogue; but above all his Pastor fido has been naturalized in all
parts of Europe, where the Italian Tongue is not a stranger, and perhaps not
the latest of all here in England by the Elegant Pen of Sir Richard Fanshaw,
who went Lord Ambassador from his present Majesty of Great Britain to his
Catholic Majesty Philip the 4th.

Baptista Persius his Eclogue Thirsis was printed at Strasburg by Jacobus
Jucundus in the Year 1540. and at Basil by Oporinus.

Baptista Bishop of Reggio, the Author of several Divine Poems, viz. de flenda
cruce in ^^egiac Verse, de morte, de B. Virgin, etc.

Baptista Sanga his Poems are peculiarly mentioned by Giraldus and Conradus
Licosthenes.

Battista Spagnolus an Italian, who for his faculty in Latin Verse is remembered
among the chief Italian Poets of that kind.

Barnabas Brissonius a Frenchman, no less Eminent for his Learning than for
the great place of Trust and Dignity he he held in the State, Equivalent to the
Lord Chief Justice with us. B. Andrews calls him the Varro of France, and K. H.
the 4th used to boast that he durst oppose him against the learned man any
Prince in Christendom could produce against him; his most celebrated Work in
Prose is his Book de formulis; and for what he wrote also in Latin Verse he is
also ranked among the principal Poets of his time.

Bartholomaeus Amantius, an Assistant to Petrus Appianus the famous German
Cosmographer of Leysnick, in his Collection of ancient Inscriptions which was
pompously set forth with Ornaments of Verse (the part of Amansius*) and
Sculpture at the charge of Reymundus Fuggerus at Ingolstade; he was flourishing
about the Year 1543.

Bartholomaeus Anulns, a French Poet, whose Picta Poesis consisted of the
descriptions of certain Emblematical Figures in the nature of those of Alciate.

Bartholmew Traheron, a not altogether obscure writer in his time, namely in
the Reign of K. Edw. the 6th, as well in Verse as Prose.

Barton Holyday an old Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, who besides his
Translation of Juvenal with Elaborate Notes, has writ several other things in
English Verse rather Learned than Elegant, and particularly a Comedy called The
Marriage of the Arts.

Basilio Zanchio a Canon of the Lateranensian Order, a Native of Bergamo, a
Town in the Seigniory of Venice, of whose Works his Eclogues and Epigrams are
not the least in repute; there is also another Basilius of Parma, whose Verses
are mentioned by Baptista Mantuan in the latter end of his Third Book of Sylvae.

Benedetto Varchi, see Ottavio Rinuccini.

Benedictus Jovius, the Brother of Paulus, his Epigrams, his Distichs to
Laurentio Medici, his Poem of the Fountains of Como, and another Entitled
Philautia, are for Verse of no less account than his History of Como, and his
Book of Architecture for Prose.

Benedictus Lampridius a Cremonese writer of Epigrams and Lyric Odes both Greec
and Latin.

Benedictus Luscius, chiefly to be remembered for his Epithalamium to John
Frideric Prince Elector of Saxony.

Benjamin Johnson, the most learned, judicious and correct, generally so
accounted, of our English Comedians, and the more to be admired for being so,
for that neither the height of natural parts, for he was no Shakesphear, nor
the cost of Extraordinary Education; for he is reported but a Bricklayers Son,
but his own proper Industry and Addiction to Books advanct him to this
perfection: In three of his Comedies, namely the Fox, Alchymist and Silent
Woman; he may be compared, in the Judgment of Learned Men, for Decorum,
Language, and well Humouring of the Parts, as well with the chief of the
Ancient Greec and Latin Comedians as the prime of Modern Italians, who have
been judged the best of Europe for a happy Vein in Comedies, nor is his
Bartholmew-Fair much short of them; as for his other Comedies Cinthia's
Revells, Poetaster, and the rest, let the name of Ben Johnson protect them
against whoever shall think fit to be severe in censure against them: The Truth
is, his Tragedies Sejanus and Catiline seem to have in them more of an
artificial and inflate than of a pathetical and naturally Tragic height: In the
rest of his Poetry, for he is not wholly Dramatic, as his Underwoods, Epigrams,
etc. he is sometimes bold and strenuous, sometimes Magisterial, sometimes Lepid
and full enough of conceit, and sometimes a Man as other Men are.

Bernardinus Parthenius, a Native of Spilimberg, who has a place among the
choice Collected Works of the Italian writers of Latin Verse.

Bernardino Percivallo, an Italian Dramatic Poet, but chiefly in the way of
Pastoral.

Bernardino Pino, see Dominico Cornac^hini.

Bernardino Rota, see Ottavio Rinuccini.

Bernardus Bauhusius, a Belgian, the most notable Man was ever heard of for
Ringing the Changes in Verse; for in a Poem he wrote of the B. Virgin,
Entitled, Proteus Parthenicus unius versus, he is said to have changed one
Verse 1022. times according to the reputed Tot sibi sunt, Virgo, dotes, quot
sideracoelo.
number of the constellations; he is mentioned by Sweertius in his Athenoe
Belgicae, and by Andreas Valerius in his Bibliotheca Belgica.

Bernardus Praetorius reckoned among the principal of German writers, who have
been Eminent for Latin Poesy.

Bernardo Tasso, the Father of that Renowned Italian Poet Torquato Tasso,
himself also the Author of a noted Poem Entitled Amadei.

Le Sieur de Boisval the Author of a French Heroic Poem Entitled Esther.

Bonaventura Vulcanius, an Author of much Esteem for the many learned Works he
has put forth, and for what he writ in Verse, ranked in the number of Belgic
Latin Poets.

Mr. Bouillon, a Frenchman, of whose writing there are Extant Epigrams and
other pieces of Poetry.

Mr. Boursault, a French writer of Poems, Entitled Poesies d'Obligation and
d'Amour printed at Paris Anno 1667.

Mr. Breboef, a late French Poet, of whose Poesy diverse things are printed at
Paris not many Years since.

Bruno Nolano, see Dominico Cornacchini.

Burchiello, see Ludovico Dolce.

C.
CArolo Flamma, an Italian Dramatic Poet, but chiefly in the way of Pastoral.

Carolus Malatesta, an Italian writer reckoned among the principal of that
Nation for Latin Poesy.

Carolus Malepertius, a Belgic writer of Latin Verse.

Carolo Noci one of the chief of the Italian writers of Pastoral.

Carolus Vtenhovius, a Native of Gant, Born of a Noble Family, a Man of a
wandering and unsettled kind of life, but steadfastly addicted to Learning in
general, and to Poetry in Particular.

Celio Calcagnino, a most universally Learned Italian Writer, among whose many
other Volumes in Humanity, Antiquity, Philosophy and Theology, his 3 Books of
Sonnets are not in the least repute, being commonly printed, together with
those of Ariosto and Pigna.

Celio Magno, an Italian Poet, especially in the way of Sonnets and other Lyric
Poetry.

Cesare Caporale, see Ludovico Dolce.

Cesare Cremonino a Pastoral writer among the Italian Dramatics.

Cesare Rinaldi, a Lyric Poet or Sonnet writer of Bononia, an Ancient Town and
University of Romania.

Cesare Simonetti, an Italian Dramatic Poet, but principally in the way of
Pastoral.

Le Sieur Chappelain, the Author of a French Poem Entitled la Pucelle, or
France's delivery.

Mr. Chevreau, the Author of certain French Poems printed at Paris Anno 1656

Christopherus Aulaeus, his Epicedium upon the death of Anne Queen of Hungary
and Bohemia, his Tristia, his Epigrams, and his Invective against the K. of
France, are all mentioned by Gesner in his Bibliotheca.

Christopherus Caseanus, his Querela nostrorum temporum was printed at Basil by
Oporinus 1552.

Christophoro Castelletti, see Dominico Cornacchini.

Christopher Marlow, a kind of a second Shakesphear (whose contemporary he was)
not only because like him he rose from an Actor to be a maker of Plays, though
inferior both in Fame and Merit; but also because in his begun Poem of Hero
and Leander, he seems to have a resemblance of that clean and unsophisticated
Wit, which is natural to that incomparable Poet; this Poem being left
unfinished by Marlow, who in some riotous Fray came to an untimely and violent
End, was thought worthy of the finishing Hand of Chapman; in the performance
whereof nevertheless he fell short of the Spirit and Invention with which it
was begun; of all that he has written to the Stage his Dr. Faustus has made
the greatest noise with its Devils and such like Tragical sport, nor are his
other 2 Tragedies to be forgotten, namely his Edw. the II. and Massacre at
Paris, besides his Jew of Malta a Tragecomedie, and his Tragedy of Dido, in
which he was joined with Nash.

Chr. Oclandus, an old English Poet, that is, one of the oldest of the Moderns,
who wrote in Verse a Historical piece, called Anglorum Praelia.

Christophorus Longolius, a Parisian, who besides many things in Prose, wrote
also Elegies and Epigrams.

Christopherus Palmensis, his Distichs were printed at Basil by Robert Winter;
he flourished about 1486.

Christophorus Pannonius is chiefly remembered for his Elegy to Nicolas Perenot
Granvile printed with Paradin's ancient state of Burgundy, ut Basil.

Cbristophorus Schellembergius, a German Poet, principally remembered for his
Epithalamium upon the Marriage of Wolfangus Meurerus, a noted Physician, his
Friend.

Christophoro Sicinio, see Dominico Cornacchini.

Christophorus Stummelius, a German, not unfam'd among the Latin Versifiers of
that Nation.

Christopherus Syngelius, mentioned for his Elegy upon Magdalen (the Wife of
Vdaricus Earl of Reinstein) who great with Ghild perished miserably by an
accidental Fire in the Year 1546.

Claudius Paradinus, a writer of Emblems in Imitation of those of Alciate.

Clemens Marotus a French Poet of Cahors, whom Antoin Verd in his Biblio^hec
styles the Poet of Princes, and the Prince of the Poets of his time.

Clemens Janitius, a Polonian Poet Laureat, whose I. Book of Tristia, I. Book
of various Elegies, and another of Epigrams are said to have been printed at
Cracovia.

Conradus Celtes, a German, both Philosopher, Orator, and Mathematician of
great Fame, but withal so highly applauded for his singular gift in Poetry,
that he was honored by the Emperor Frederic, at the Suit of the Duke of
Saxony, with the Poetical Wreath in the 32d. Year of his Age, as says
Boxhornius in his Monuments and Elogies of Illustrious Men; but Pantaleon in
his Book de viris Illustribus says by the Emperor Maximilian in the 35th.
Year of his Age Anno 1494. however all agree he was the first Poet Laureat
among the Germans.

Conradus of Alyzeia, a Town of the Palatinate, but in the Diocese of Mentz, of
whose Poetical Works (for he wrote also in Prose) the chief are his Poem of the
Virgin Mary, and the Redemption of Humane kind, his Epistles to diverse Friends
and his Book of Odes he is mentioned flourishing in the Year 1370.

Conradus Lautenbachius, a highly reputed German, Theologist, Historian, and
also Poet.

Conradus Leius, a German writer, particularly commended for what he has
written in Latin Verse.

Conradus de Mure, a Canon of the Church of Zurich in Switzerland, whose Poem
of the Natures of Animals is not forgotten among the rest of his Works; he is
mentioned flourishing Anno 1573.

Conradus Ritterhusius, a German of no obscure Fame among the Poetical Writers
of that Nation.

Corneille, the great Dramatic writer of France, wonderfully applauded by the
present Age, both among his own Contrymen, and our Frenchly affected
English, for the amorous Intreagues, which if not there before, he commonly
thrusts into his Tragedies and acted Histories; the Imitation whereof among us,
and of the perpetual Colloquy in Rhyme, has of late very much corrupted our
English Stage.

Cornelius Musius, a Latin Poet, none of the least considerable of the Moderns.

Cornelius Schonaeus, the Author of a well known Work Entitled Terentius
Christianus, consisting of several Divine Comedies taken out of the Sacred
Scripture, and written in Terence his style.

Cosm^ Manuci, an Italian as his name Imports, but an English writer of the
Just General a Tragedy, and the Loyal Lovers, a Tragecomedie.

Curtesius Curtesius a Poet of Padua, who wrote in Verse the death of St.
Justina, and the Loves of Orestilla.

Cyril Turner, a writer of Two old Tragedies, the Atheists Tragedy, and the
Revengers Tragedy.

D.
DAniel Heinsius, the most famed of Hollanders, and most Celebrated by * Jos.
Scaliger, Douza, Seldom, etc.
Learned Men for his egregious Wit, and deep proficiency in all kind of
Literature, he was Born at Gaunt Anno 1582. came to be History professor,
Secretary, and Library Keeper at the University of Leide^; in Prose he is
Eminent for his Exercitations upon the New Testament, and diverse Philological
Works, in strict Oration for his Excellent style in Greec and Latin Verse, of
which sufficient Testimonies are Extant, and for which he is compared by
Causabone in his Epistles to Homer for the Greec, and to Ovid and Propertius
for the Latin, besides what he wrote poetically in his Native Tongue.

Damasus Blienburgius, a Hollander, who for what he has written in Latin
Poesy is remembered among the chief of Belgic Latin Poets.

Dantes Aligerus, a most Renowned Florentine, and the first of Italian Poets of
any Fame or Note for Vernacular Verse; but that which most proclaims his Fame
to the World is his Triple Poem Entitled, Paradise, Purgatory and Hell; besides
which he wrote several things in Prose; the Meridian of his flourishing time
was the Year 1321. the Emperor Jews the 5th Surnamed Bavarus then Reigning.

David Echlinus a Scotch-man, whose Poem Entitled Ova Paschalia is to be found
in a Collection of the choice Works of several Scotch Latin Poets; as likewise

David Humus his Lusus Poetici.

David Kynalochus, his Poem de Hominis procreatione, and de Anatome.

David Wederburnus his various Poems.

Diomede Borghese, a Lyric Poet, or Sonnet writer of Siena.

Dionysius Lebius Taubilius, a learned German writer as well in Verse as Prose.

Dionysio Guazzoni, a Dramatic Poet of Cremona, chiefly in the way of Pastoral.

Dionysius Gotofredus, a French Civilian, of that Eminence, that he is styled
by Learned Men the Papinian of his time, and by Dilherus in his Academical
Disputations is highly commended for his Notes upon the Body of the Civil Law,
yet amidst so laborious a Study, and such a painful Work, he could sometimes be
vacant to the Latin Muse.

Dominicus Baudius, a most grateful Associate and Favorite to the most
Learned, and also the most noble persons of his time both in England, France
and the Low Countries, and among the rest (coming into England in the retinue
of a Splendid Embassy from the States to Queen Elizabeth) to the great Patron
of all virtue Sir Philip Sidny, for the singular Merit of his Worth and
Learning, of which he had given large Proofs in several famous Universities,
especially that of Leyden, to which at last he wholly betook himself, and with
great Reputation read Eloquence and History; his Extant Latin Poems are
particularly commended by Grotius and others, the most Excellent of Modern
Poets themselves; he was Born at Lisle in Flanders, the Son of Dominicus and
Marie Heems on the 9th. of the Ides of April 1561.

Dominico Cornacchini an Italian Dramatic, but particularly in the way of
Comedy, among the Multitude of which kind of writers scarce to be numbered,
these following deserve not to be past by in silence, viz. Christophero
Sicinio, Archangelo Archangelo, Bernardino Pino, Christophero Castelletti, Gio.
Battista Verini, Angelo Badalucchi, M. Hieron: Burgaglio, Ludovioo* Fenarolo,
Adriano Polito, Bruno Nolano, Raphael Trianoro, Ludovico Contareno, Gio.
Battista Gelli, M. Hieron: Razzi, M. Ludovico Paterna.

Dominicus Lampsonius a Belgian, who being equally happy both in the art of
Painting and Poetry described in Verse the Life of Lambertus Lombardus a most
Excellent Painter, and his Master in that Art, 1598.

Dominicus Mancinus, an Author no less Elegant then Learned, who professing
Theology and affecting Poetry, applied his Muse to Divine and Moral Subjects,
his Poem on the passion of our Savior, and another of the 4 Cardinal Virtues
and their Offices, in Elegiac Verse were both printed at Basil Anno 1543. he is
Recorded flourishing Anno 1494.

Domitio Marino, a Venetian both Philosopher and Physician by profession, but a
writer also of Poems, which were printed by the Sons of Aldus Manutius Anno
1550.

E.
EDmund Fairfax, one of the most Judicious, Elegant and happily in his time, most
approved of English Translatours, both for his choice of so worthily Extolled a
Heroic Poet as Torquato Tasso; as for the exactness of his Version, in which he
is judged by some to have approved himself no less a Poet than in what he has
written of his own Genius.

Edmund Prestwich, the Author of a Comedy, which came forth about 20 Years ago,
called the Hectors or False Challenge; as also Hippolitus a Tragedy, what ever
he might have written besides not remembered.

Edmund Spencer, the first of our English Poets that brought Heroic Poesy to
any perfection, his Faery Queen being for great Invention and Poetic height
judged little inferior, if not equal to the chief of the ancient Greeks and
Latins or Modern Italians, but the first Poem that brought him into Esteem was
his Shepherds Calendar, which so endeared him to that Noble Patron of all
Virtue and Learning Sir Philip Sidny, that he made him known to Queen
Elizabeth, and by that means got him preferred to be Secretary to his Brother
Sir Henry Sidny, who was sent Deputy into Ireland, where he is said to have
written his Faerie Queen, but upon the return of Sir Henry, his Employment
ceasing, he also returned into England, and having lost his great Friend Sir
Philip, fell into poverty, yet made his last Refuge to the Queens Bounty, and
had 500 l. ordered him for his Support, which nevertheless was abridg'd to 100.
by Cecil, who hearing of it, and owing him a grudge for some reflections in
Mother Hubbards Tale, cried out to the Queen, What all this for a Song? This he
is said to have taken so much to Heart, that he contracted a deep Melancholy,
which soon after brought his Life to a Period: So apt is an Ingenious Spirit to
resent a slighting, even from the greatest Persons; and thus much I must needs
say of the Merit of so great a Poet from so great a Mona^ch, that as it is
incident to the best of Poets sometimes to flatter some Royal or Noble Patron,
never did any do it more to the height, or with greater Art and Elegance, if
the highest of praises attributed to so Heroic a Princess can justly be termed
Flattery.

Edmund Waller of Beckonsfeild, one of the mo^^ famed Poets, and that not
unworthily, of the present Age, being yet surviving; especially, and (wherein
he is not inferior to Carew himself,) in the charming sweetness of his Lyric
Odes or amorous Sonnets long since wedded to the no less charming Notes of H.
Laws, at that time the Prince of Musical Composers, and one of the principal
Gentlemen of the Chapel, as also of the private Music to his late Majesty King
Charles the First. In his other acoasional Poems his Verse is smooth, yet
strenuous, not barren of conceit, and frequently adorned with proper Similies.

Sir Edward Dier, a person of good account in Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
poetically addicted, several of whose Pastoral Odes and Madrigals are Extant in
a printed Collection of certain choice pieces of some of the most eminent Poets
of that time.

Edward Shirburn, an intimate Friend and Acquaintance, as well of the ancient
Greek and Latin, as of the choicest of Modern Poets, both Italian, French and
Spanish, and in what he has Elegantly and Judiciously Translated either of the
former or later, a discoverer of a more pure Poetical Spirit and Fancy, then
many others can justly pretend to in their original Works; his Version of those
Books of Manilius, which relate merely to Astronomy, is a very Noble Work,
being set forth with most Exact Notes, and other Learned and proper
Illustrations.

Eilardas Alma, a H^llander, whose Fame is not altogether unknown to the
Learned for what he has written in Latin Poesy.

Eilardus Lubinus, a Learned German, who amidst several Elaborate Works in
Prose, was not wholly unconversant with the Muses, being therefore reckoned
among the Latin Poets of that Nation.

Elias Putschius, a Low-Countrey-man, who has written sufficiently in Latin
Verse, to be numbered among the Latin Poets of that Nation.

Elkanah Settle, a present writer to the English Stage, to which he has
already contributed Two Ttagedies, Cambises, and the Empress of Morocco; for
which he has the applause of some, the severe censure of others, and perhaps
neither according to exact desert; to those that err on the right hand that is
that over-praise, little is to be said; to the others it may be pleaded in his
behalf, that his soaring up to too much affected and immoderate heights, which
I take to be his chief failing, may possibly be allayed by the more Mature
Judgment of riper Years, he being yet but a young Man.

Elysius Calentius, a writer in Latin Poesy famous in Italy in the Reign of
the Emperor Maximilian; his Elegies, Epigrams, Epistles, Poem of Hectors
apparition, and another of the War between the Frogs and Mice, Satyrs against
the Poets, and other things were printed at Rome Anno 1503.

Emanuel Thesaurus, a Patrician or Nobleman of Turin, the Capital City of the
Dukedom of Savoy, and of the Order of the great Cross of St. Lazarus and St.
Maurice, whose Patriarchae, or Genealogy of Christ divided into Four Periods
according to the Four Ages of Man, is written in a style called Lapidaria, so
called as proper for Inscriptions upon Tombs, being a middle style between
Oratory and Poetry, between strict and solute Oration.

Engelhardus Funkius, a Poet of Swobach in Franconia, who wrote in E^egiac
Ve^se an Encomium of his Country, Epistles, Epigrams, and several other
Miscellaneous pieces; he is Recorded flourishing in the Year of our Lord 1494.

Erasmo Valvasonio, an Italian Poet, who wrote Five Books in Verse de Re
Rustica, or of Country Affairs, in that kind of Stanza commonly called among
the Italians Ottava Rima.

Erycus Puteanus, an Fminent both Historian and Poet, who, as Causabon in his
Preface to the Augusta Historia says, was justly reputed in his time among the
chief Ornaments of France; he is most known by his Insubric History, but
withal not unremembred for his Elegant Latin Poems, among which his Musarum
Ferculum is particularly quoted by a Learned English Author.

Euricius Cordus, a late German Poet, whose Opera Poetica were printed at
Helmested Anno 1614.

F.
FAmianus Strada, an Italian, both Poet, Historian and Orator of principal
Repute, being a Native of Rome, where he was professor of Rhetoric for 15
Years; his History of the Low Country Wars, and his Academical Prolusions are
the chiefest and most famed of his Works, in the last of which he so
ingeniously imitates the style of each of the principal Ancient Latin Poets,
that thereby he shows himself a great Master in Latin Poetry.

Le Sieur de Fargues, the Author of a French Heroic Poem Entitled David.

Faustus Sabaeus, a Brescian, of whose Latin Poetry there is sufficient Extant
to place him among the chief Italian writers of that kind.

Felix Fidlerus, a German Poet, whose most particularly mentioned Poems are his
Eclogue, Entitled Philotas, dedicated to the Bishop of Arras, and his Elegy
upon the death of Cardinal Perenot Granvile.

Florentius Schonhovius, a Belgic writer, Native of Gouda, of whom there is
Extant a Poem Entitled Lalage, or Amores Pastorales, with the selected Works of
several other noted Latin Poets of that Country, in which Society Antonius
Schonhovins is also one.

Florentius Volusenus, one of the association, with those other noted Latin
Poets of Scotland, the choice of whose Poems are Collected together in a long
since published Volume.

Foppius Scheltonus Aesema, a Frisian, whose Juvenilia are to be found with the
selected Works of other Belgic Poets already mentioned.

Francis Beaumont, an inseparable Associate and Coadjutor to Fletcher in the
making of many of his Plays, besides what he made solely himself; there is also
Extant a Poem of his Entitled Salmacis and Hermaphroditus a Fable taken out of
Ovids Mctamorphoses.

Francesco Biondi, an Italian Poet, whose most noted Work is his Erimena.

Francesco Bracciolini, another Italian Poet, the most particularly mentioned
of whose Works is his Cruce ricuperata, or regaining of the Cross.

Francesco Contareni, a Venetian not of the meanest rank of the Lyric Poets of
Italy.

Don Francesco Manuel, a Spaniard, whose Obras Metricas, or Poetical Works were
printed at Leon, Anno 1665.

Francesco Maria Molza, a Poet of Modena, reckoned among the chief of the
Ly^ics or Sonnet writers of Italy; there is also particularly taken notice of
his Elegy in the name of Catharine Queen of England to K. Henry the 7th.

Francesco Mataracio, a Poet of Perusia, a Town of that part of Tuscany, which
is called Lo stato della chiesa, and belongs to the Pope; his mentioned Poems
are Epistles to several Friends, and Epigrams but he wrote also in tendency to
Poetry, Instructions for the making Hexameter and Pentameter Verses.

Franciscus Niger Bassianus, a Learned writer both in Prose and Verse, in which
last way his most famed piece is his Epitome of Ovid Metamorphoses in
Phaleusian Verse.

Francisco Ottavio, an Italion Poet, known chiefly by his Elegies to Julia, and
his Epistles.

Francesco Peto, a Poet of Fondi, a Town of Campania, whose Sylva to Augustinus
Niphus is of what he wrote in Verse the most particularly remembered.

Francisus Franchinus, a retainer equally to Mars and the Muses, who attending
on the Emperor Charles the Fifth in his Algerine Expedition, at his return
wrote an Elegant description of the said Expedition in Verse.

Franciscus Modius, an Eminent both Civilian and Poet of Bruges in Flanders.

Franciscus Panigarola, one of the Society of those Latin Poets of Italy, whose
several Works, or what is of them choicest, are published together.

Francisco Petrarcha, a Florentine Poet, Renowned both for Latin and Italian
Poesy; his Italian Sonnets in Celebration of Laura, and his Triumps are in
very high Esteem.

Franciscus Philelphus, a Knight of Tollentinum, the Author of a Multitude of
Volumes, whereof very many in Verse, particularly his Sfortias, his Poem in
Commendation of Aenicius Davalus, his Odes both Greec and Latin, which with the
rest of his Poetical Works advanced his Fame in Poetry to the title of Poet
Laureat; he is Recorded to have Flourished about the Year of our Lord 1481.

Franciscus Pigna, a Countryman and Associate of the Poet Curtesius.

Franciscus Portus, a Modern Greec Poet, chiefly Epigrammatic.

Francisco Puteolani, a Poet of Parma, one of the chief setters forth of the
Acts of Lodowic Sforza, the Famous Soldier of that Age.

Francis Quarles, the darling of our Plebeian Judgments, that is such as have
ingenuity enough to delight in Poetry, but are not sufficiently instructed to
make a right choice and distinction; his Emblems being a Copy from Hermannus
Hugo's Original, his Version of Job into English Verse, his Feast of Worms, or
History of Jonas, and other Divine Poems have been ever, and still, are in
wonderful Veneration among the Vulgar, and no less his Argalus and Parthenia, a
History taken out of Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia; there has been also Acted a
Comedy of his called the Virgin Widow.

Don Francesco de Quevedo, a Spanish writer, of signal Fame and Credit both in
Prose and Verse, of which later kind are his Obras Metricas, or Poetical Works,
which were printed at Brussels Anno 1660.

Franciscus and Justus Raphelengius, Two Belgic writers, whose Varia Carmina
are with the selected Works of others accounted the chief of that Country for
Latin Verse.

Franciscus Sphondratus, an Italian, whose Latin Poem de Raptu Helenae is
Extant among the Collected Works of diverse others, accounted the prime of Italy
for Latin Poesy.

Francesco Vinta, an Itaelian of principal Note among the Pastoral and Comic
writers of that Nation.

Fredericus Dedecindus, a German Poet, known most especially by his Poem in
praise of a Country Life, and his Epithalamium upon the Marriage of Paulus
Gusebelius with Magdalena Moniera of Wirten-berg.

Fredericus Taubmannus, a German, chiefly famed for a most Learned Commentator
and Philologist, but not to be wholly left out of the Number of Poets.

Fridianus Piginutius, an Italian, who being Orator and Poet to Eruestus Duke
of Saxony, wrote in the Latin Idiom Elegies to Conradus Celtes, and Martinus
Pollichias, a Saphic Ode to St. Sebastian, to implore an aversion of the
Pestilence, which were printed with Celtes his Book of the Art of Versifying.

Sir Fulk Grevil, Lord Brook, a great Friend and Associate of Sir Philip Sidny,
whose Life he wrote, as also several things in Poetry both Dramatic, as his
Tragedies of Alaham, Mustapha, and Marcus Tullius Cicero, and others commonly
of a Political Subject, and among the rest a Posthume Work not published till
within a very few Years, being a Twofold Treatise, the first of Monarchy, the
second of Religion, in all which is observable a close, mysterious and
sentencious way of writing, without much regard to Elegancy of style* or
smoothness of Verse.

Le Sieur de Furetiere. the Author of certain French Poems printed at Paris
Anno 1650.

G.
GAbriel Cabrera, see Ludovic^ Dolce.

Gabriel Faernus, a very Learned Man, and diligent Inquirer into Latin Authors,
as his setting forth of Terence, and some pieces of Cicero testify; Moreover
he so ingeniously Paraphrased upon Esops Fables in diverse kinds of Latin Verse,
that he merits to be ranked among the Poets; he is of that Rank of Eminent Men,
that in Chronology come under the Year 1561.

Gabriel Zinani, an Italian, whose Extant Sonnets, Madrigals, etc. give him
place among the Lyric Poets of that Nation.

Gallus Chrudimenus, a writer in Verse, for Elegancy reckoned of the chief of
Modern Latin Poets.

Gaspar Barlaeus, a learned and witty Batavian, and of so Eminent a Fame among
the Belgic writers of Latin Poesy, that Vossius in his Book de Art
Grammatica, by doubting whether he were the better Philosopher or Poet, seems
to Intimate his Excellence in both Faculties; several of his poetical Works are
quoted by a Learned English Author, as his Hymns, his Poem in praise of the
Garden of Leyden, his Britannia triumphans, etc.

Gaspar Bruschius, a Poet Laureate of Egra in Bohemia, whose poetical Works are
many, and of various kinds, besides what he also wrote in Prose.

Gaspar Ensius, a German Poet, who for what he has written in Latin Verse is
reckoned among the principal Latin Poets of that Nation.

Gaspar Greterus, Chaplain to the Prince of Wirtenberg, and a copious writer
both in Prose and Verse; among his poetical things his Gospels in Latin Verse
are particularly taken notice of.

Gaspar Main, a Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, where he lived for many
Years in much Credit and Reputation for his florid Wit, and Ingenious Vein in
Poetry, which produced Two Witty and well approved Comedies, the City Match and
the Amorous War; nor did he, since his application to Theology, of which he was
Dr. and his Ecclesiastical preferment, totally relinquish those politer Studies
to which he was before addicted, having lately published Lucians Works, of his
own Translating into English.

Gaspar Vrsinus, a Noble Poet of Veli, among whose Poems his Monostichs of the
Alban and Roman Kings, and other Illustrious Men of Rome, as also of the Roman
Emperors and Popes, down to Charles the 5th. and Pope Hadrian 6th. also his
Distichs of the Roman Emperors are especially noted.

Sir Geoffry Chaucer, the Prince and Coryphaeus, generally so reputed, till
this Age, of our English Poets, and as much as we triumph over his old
fashioned phrase, and obsolete words, one of the first re^iners of the English
Language, of how great Esteem he was in the Age wherein he flourished, namely
the Reigns of Henry the 4th, Henry the 5th, and part of Henry the 6th, appears,
besides his being Knight and Poet Laureat, by the Honor he had to be allied by
Marriage to the great Earl of Lancaster Jobn of Gaunt: How great a part we have
lost of his Works above what we have Extant of him is manifest from an Author
of good Credit, who reckons up many considerable Poems, which are not in his
published Works; besides the Squires Tale, which is said to be complete in
Arundel-house Library.

Georgio Anselmo, an Epigrammatist of Parma.

Georgius Benedictus, a Hollander of principal repute among the Eelgic wtiters
of Latin Poesy.

Georgius Bersmannus, a German of no inferior Estimation among Learned Men;
but particularly famed for his happy Genius in Latin Verse.

Georgius Buchananus, the most celebrated by the Learned Men of his time, of
all the famous writers that Scotland has produced, and that not without
reason, being in his Prose both Elegant and Judicious, (in so much that Vossius
selecting out for several Countries each of their prime Historians, names him
for the History of his own Country) and for Verse, if not the chief of Modern
Latin Poets, as some account him, yet at least the chief of that Nation, which
however barren of Soil Esteemed, yet has been sufficiently fruitful of good
Wits, and Men famous particularly for Latin Verse; being so conspicuous a
person no wonder he was made choice of for the Education of a Prince that was
born to the sole Monarchy of Great Britain.

George Bullen Lord Rochford, Brother to Queen Anne, 2d Wife to K. Henry the
8th, among other things has the Fame of being the Author of Songs and Sonnets,
which doubtless wanted not the applause of those times.

George Chapman, a Poetical writer, Flourishing in the Reigns of Queen
Elizabeth and King James, in that repute both for his Translations of Homer and
Hesiod, and what he wrote of his own proper Genius; that he is thought not the
meanest of English Poets of that time, and particularly for his Dramatic
writings, as his Blind Beggar of Alexandria, All Fools, The Gentleman Usher,
May Day, The, Widows Tears, Mounsieur d'Olive, A days Mirth, Eastward hoe,
Comedies; Bussy d'Amb^ys, Caesar and Pompey Tragedies.

George Fletcher, the Author of a Poem Entitled Christ's Victory and Triumph in
Heaven and Earth over and after Death; he wrote in the Reign of King James and
King Charles the First.

George Etheridge a Comical writer of the present Age; whose Two Comedies, Love
in a Tub, and She would if She could, for pleasant Wit, and no bad Economy,
are judged not uuworthy the Applause they have met with.

Georgio Gradenico, see Ottavio Riuuco^ni.

George Gascoign, one of the smaller Poets of Queen Elizabeth's days, whose
poetical Works nevertheless have been thought worthy to be quoted among the
chief of that time; his Supposes, a Comedy; Glass of ^overnment, a Tragecomedy;
J^^^sta a Tragedy, are particularly remembered.

George Herbert, a Younger Brother of the Noble Family of the Herberts of
Montgomery, whose florid Wit, obliging Humor in Conversation, fluent
Eloquution, and great proficience in the Arts, gained him that Reputation at
Oxford, where he spent his more Youthful age, that he was chosen University
Orator; at last taking upon him Holy Orders, not without special encouragement
from the King, who took notice of his parts; he was made Parson of Bemmerton
near Salisbury; in this state his affection to Poetry being converted to
serious and Divine Subjects, produced those so generally known and appro^ed
Poems Entitled the Temple.

Georgius Macropedius, a German Poet, whose most noted Poems beside his
Comedies Andrisca, Hecastus, Rebels and others, and some Tragedies out of
Sacred History, are his Bassarus, Lazarns Mendicus, and his Calender of the
principal Feasts of the Church in Heroie Verse.

Georgius Myliusa German Poet, whose Two Books of Elegies were printed at
Leipsich in the Year 1557.

George Peel, a somewhat antiquated English Bard of Queen Elizabeth Date, some
Remnants of whose pretty pastoral Poetry we have Extant in a Collection
Entitled Englands Helicon.

George Riplay, a Canon of Bridlington in the time of King Henry the 7th, who
in old English Verse wrote several Chemical Mysteries pretending to Lead to the
attaining of the Philosophers Stone.

Georgius Rotallerus, a German Poet, who besides his Latin Version of Hesiods
opera, and dies, in Elegiac Verse, and also Three of Sophocles his Tragedies,
as his Ajax, Electra and Antigone, has also written Epigrams and some other
Poems.

Georgius Sabinus, a Brandenburger, the Son in Law of Philip Melanchton, a
Person of no obscure Fame among German writers both for Verse and Prose.

George Sands, a well approved writer of his Travels into Foreign Parts; but a
much more admired Translator of Ovid's Metamorphses into English Verse, and
Paraphrast of David's Psalms; and not unapplauded for his Tragedy of Christ's
Passion.

Georgius Siputus Daripenus, a German Poet, the most particularly remembered of
whose Poems are his Congratulatories upon the Arrival of the Emperor
Maximilian to Colen.

Georgius Thurius, a Hungarian, one of the most Eminent of that Nation for
Latin Poesy.

Georgius Tilenus, a German writer not forgotten among the chief of the Latin
Versisiers of that Nation.

George Withers, a most profuse pourer forth of English Rhyme, not without
great pretense to a Poetical zeal against the Vices of the times in his Motto,
his Remembrancer, and other such like Satirical Works; besides which he turned
into English Verse the Songs of Moses, and other Hymns of the Old Testament; in
all which, and whatever else there is of his disperced up and down; for his
Works however Voluminous, have been scarce thought worthy to be Collected into
a Volume; whoever, shall go about to imitate his lofty style, may boldly
venture to ride post and Versifie; yet because vulgarly taken for a a great
Poet; and by some for a Prophet; in regard many things are fancied to have come
to pass, which he pretended to predict, he must not be omitted; but the most of
Poetical Fancy which I remember to have found in any of his Writings, is in a
little piece of pastoral Poetry called the Shepherds Hunting.

Gerardus Bucoldianus, a German, both Orator and Poet, the chiefly remembered
of whose Poems is that of the Muses progress into Germany: He Flourished at
Bon^nia in the Year 1535.

Germanus Auber^us Aurelius, one of principal note among the French Poetical
writers of Latin Verse.

Germanus Brixius of Auxerre, a Canon of Paris, among whose Poetical writings
there are principally mentioned his Antimorus, or Invective against our
Countryman Sir Thomas More; his Elegy upon the death of Fran is Deloin; and
his Epigrams upon the death of K. Francis the First of France.

Germanus Valens Guelius, a curious Critic in the Greec Language, and not
meanly versed in all kind of Humane Li^erature; but according to the Testimony
of Thuanus, principally addicted to Poetry.

Giacopo Alegreto, a Poet of Forli a Town in Flaminia, of whom there is Extant
a Bucolic Poem, mentioned by Biondi.

Giacopo Gaddi, an Italian, who shares in Fame among the Poetical Wri^ers of
that Nation.

Giacopo Ca^^^eo, an Italian, Author of a Poem Entitled Peregrino, which was
printed Anno 1538.

Giacopo Sadoletti, a Contemporary, Associate, and as it were Co-partner with
Pietro Bembo, not only in agreement of Studies, they being both Eminent writers
as well in Verse as Prose; but also of their Fortunes and Preferment in the
World, they being both chosen by Pope Leo, the 10th, to be his Scretaries
together, both advanced to the Purple by Paul the 3d, uuder whose Reign they
both dyed.

Gilb^rtus Ducherius Vulto, a Poetical writer, of whom, what ever he wrote
beside, there are Extant Five Books of Epigrams, and an Eclogue printed by
Oporinus at Basil.

Giovanni Ambrogio Marini, an Italian Poet, whose Cal^andro Fidele was printed
at Venice Anno 1664.

Giovanni Andrea Rosetti, a late Poetical writer among the Italians, the Author
of a Poem Entitled M^rmono d'Helicona*

Giovanni Andreini, another Italian, Author of a Fantastic Poem, as he himself
calls it, Entitled Olivastro, which was printed at Bologna Anno 1642.

Giovanni Antonio Flaminio, see Joannes Antonius Flaminius, in regard what he
wrote was in Latin Verse.

Giovanni Battista Marini, an Eminent Italian writer, who besides his Sonnets
wrote an Heroic Poem Entitled Adonis.

Giovanni Battista di Pesaro, another of the same Nation, not to be left out of
the Number of Italian Poets.

Giovanni Battista Pigna, a noted Italian Lyric Poet, whose Four Books of
Sonnets were printed at Venice by Vincentius Valgrisius Anno 1553. with those
of Calcagnino, Ariosto, and other Famous Poets of that kind.

Giovanni Boccaccio de Certaldo, a most generally known and Extolled Florentine
Writer, and worthily ranked among the Poets not only for his Bucolies* but
several other writings of a poetical nature, as his Genealogia di Dei, his
Huomini Illustri, his Decameron, etc. besides which he wrote several other
things both Historical and Geographical; he Flourished in the Year 1375.

Giovanni della Casa, an Italian Lyric Poet, whose Rhyme or Sonnets were printed
at Venice Anno 1559.

Giovanni Georgio Trissini, a Knight and Count of Vicenza, of a very Celebrated
Fame for what he has written both in Poetry and Oratory; he was Born in the
Year 1478. being the Son of Gaspar Trissini, by Cecilia Bevilacqua, the
Daughter of Gulielmo a Gentleman of Verona.

Girolamo Caso an Italian Lyric Poet or Sonnet writer of Vderza.

Girolamo Gratiani, an Italian, Author of a Poem Entitled La Cleopatra, which
was printed at Venice Anno 1668.

Girolamo Preti, see Ottavio Rinuccini.

Girolamo Ronconio, a Dramatic writer of Siena, but chiefly for Pastorals.

Giulio Goselani, an Italian writer of Rhyme or Sonnets, which were printed at
Venice Anno 1588.

Mr. Gomb^ud, a French Epigrammatist.

Gothofredus Torinus, a French Poet, Eminent among the chief writers of Latin
Verse of that Nation.

Godfry Prior of Winchester, an Old English Poet as he is reckoned, by Cambden
in his Remains; he is indeed a borde^er between the Ancients and Moderns, for
he Flourished about the Year 1100.

Gnalterus de Castellione, a Philosopher, Theologist, and, as his Poem setting
forth the Acts of Alexander the Great in Heroic Verse Testifies, Poet also, of
Lisle in Flanders, though some ascribe this Work not to Gualterus, but
Guillermus de Castellione, by whom then it is to be supposed to have been
Dedicated to Gnalterus*

Guido Cavalcanti, see Ottavio Rinuccini.

Guido, First Presbiter, then Bishop of Ferrara, who wrote in Verse Remarques
upon the Old and New Testament, which Work he called the Pearl of the Bible,
and Dedicated it to Pope Clement the 5th, his Fame brake forth about the Year
1310. so that he was Contemporary with Dante, and as it were a Frontier Author
between the Ancients and the Moderns.

Guidus Posthumus Sylvestris, a Poet of Pesaro, who wrote Two Books of Elegies
to Pope Leo.

Gulielmus Bigotius de la Valle, a French Poet whose Catoptron, a Poem
containing precepts for the Instruction of Youth, is the principal of what is
Extant of him.

Gulielmus Budaeus, a most learned Parisian, among whose many Treatise; in all
sorts of Humane Literature; his Elegies, Epigrams, and other things in Poetry
are not forgotten.

Gulielmus Durandus, Surnamed Speculator, from his Treatise Entitled Speculum
juris, a learned French Bishop, and one of the most noted Men of his time, (and
he was Flourishing about the Year 1300.) for perfection in several Faculties;
so that he has from Pasquier in his recherches de la France, the Character
both of an Excellent Poet, solid Divine, and exact Lawyer.

Gulielmus Gnapheus, a Poet of Hague, whose most noted Poems, besides his
Comedies the Prodigal Son, and Misobarbarus, and his Tragecomedy Hypocrisis,
are his Triumph of Eloquence in various Verse; and his Poem of Psyche's
Calamity and Restoration.

Gulielmus Hondius, a late German Poet, whose Cithara Spiritualis Sex Chordarum
was printed at Colen Anno 1637.

Gulielmus Modicius, an Italian, for Latin Poesy reckoned among the principal
of that Nation.

Gulielmus Salustius Bartasius, or du Bartas, a French Poet, whose Poem of the
6 days work of Creation, translated by Joshua Sylvester, has had a very great
Fame here in England, and is yet in great Esteem with many.

Gulielmus X^lander, a learned both Logician, Mathematician, Musician,
Historian, Philosopher, Linguist, and also Poet (as Melchior Adams in his Life
Characters him) of Augusta, born in the Year of our Lord 1530. he was Professor
of the Greec Tongue at Heidelberg.

H.
HAns Sacs Teucherus, a Poet of special note among the Germans.

Helius Eobanus, a Hessian of like authority, and pre-eminence among the German
Poets, as Tasso has been among the Italians; of his many poetical Works the
chief are his Bucoli^ Idyls, his Sylvae, his Elogies of Famous Men, his sacred
Heroines, his description of the City Norimberg in Verse, and of the Prince of
Hessen's Victory against the Sueves, besides his Elegant Version of David's
Psalms in Elegiac Verse.

Henricus Curandinus, a German particularly taken notice of among those of that
Nation that have been Eminent for Latin Poetry.

Henricus Andersonus, a Scotch-man, whose Eglogues, and Musarum Querela are
among the selected Works of other Noted Latin Poets of that Nation.

Henricus Bebelius, a Poet of Justingen, a Town which gives Title to a Barony
in the Circle of Suevia, who among many other things both in Prose and Verse
wrote de Art Condendorum Carminum.

Henricus Danskinus one of the Society of those Eminent Latin Poets of
Scotland, of whose Works a particular selection is published.

Henricus Ecardus, a Poet of Noremberg, in which Town his Poems were printed by
Georgius Merkelius Anno 1553.

Henricus Euticus, a Poet of Franconia, who wrote in Verse a Book of Jests, and
Witty Conceits, a Satyr aginst Sophists, and Enemies of the study of Humanity,
the praises of the B. Virgin, Epigrams, and some other things; he Flourished
Anno 1494.

Henricus Florentinus wrote a description in Verse of the Grandeur and state of
the Emperor Frideric, and is quoted by the Learned Felix Malleolus.

Henry Glaphthorn, a Dramatic writer not altogether ill deserving of the
English Stage by his Hollander, Ladies Privilege and Wit in a Constable
Comedies; his Argalus and Parthenia a Pastoral; and Albertus Wallestein a
Tragedy.

Henry Howard, the most Noble Earl of Surry, who Flourishing in the time of
King Henry the 8th, as his Name is sufficiently famous for the Martial Exploits
of that Family for many Generations, so deserves he, had he his due, the
particular Fame of Learning, Wit, and Poetic Fancy, which he was thought once
to have made sufficiently appear in his published Poems, which nevertheless are
now so utterly forgoten, as though they had never been Extant, so Antiquated at
present, and as it were out of fashion is the style and way of Poetry of that
Age; whereas an English writer of those times in a Treatise called the Art of
English Poesy alleges, That Sir Th. Wiat the Elder, and Henry Earl of Surry
were the Two Chieftains, who having Traveled into Italy, and there tasted the
sweet and stately Measures and Style of the Italian Poesy, greatly polished
our rude and homely manner of vulgar Poesy from what it had been before, and
may therefore justly be showed to be the Reformers of our English Meeter and
Style.

Henricus Husannus, a German conspicuous among the Latin Versifiers of that
Nation.

Henry King, late Bishop of Chichester, a no less Grave and Reverend Divine in
his later time then, in his youthful Age, of an obliging Conversation by his
Wit and Fancy, and both in his Younger and Elder Years a constant lover of
Music, Poetry, and all Ingenuous Arts; the Effect of his latest and most
serious Muse being his generally admired and approved Version of David's Psalms
into English Meeter.

Henricus Lo^itus Glareanus, a Helvetian of the Town of Clarona, among the vast
number of whose Elaborate Treatises in various kinds of Learning; his poetical
pieces were both enough, and sufficiently in repute to gain him the Title of Poet
Laureate; nor was his Name less Eminent in Music: He is mentioned Flourishing
at Friburg a Town of Bisgoia, in the Circle of Alsatia Anno 1551.

Henricus Meibomius, an Elegant Poet, Expert Musician, and Judicious Historian
of Lemgoia, one of the 7 Free Cities in the Circle of Westphalia.

Henry Lord Morly. a Nobleman of great account in the Reign of King Henry the
8h, by whom he was sent with the Garter to the Archduke of Austria: There are
mentioned with Honor in our English Histories several Works of his writing,
for the most part poetical, and particularly several Tragedies and Comedies.

Henricus Oroeus, a not uneminent Modern writer of Latin Verse.

Henricus Petreius, a noted both Civilian, and Poet of Hardcsia.

Henry Picardet, a Frenchman, whose Poesies Francoises were printed at Paris
Anno 1663.

Henricus Ranzovius, a Learned German, particularly famed among many others of
that Nation for his Excellent faculty in Latin Verse.

Henricus Smetius, a Nobleman and Physician of Alosta in Flanders, who besides
his Prosodia, a well known and much used Book among the Versifying Boys in
public Schools, by which they are taught the quantity of words in Latin Verse,
by Examples out of all the choicest Latin Poets, had in his younger Years
discovered also his own petic Genius, in several pieces of Latin Poesy, as his
History of the Kings of Judah, his History of Susanna, his Treatise of several
parts of Medicin, and his Translation of Homers Batram^omachia.

Henry Vaughan, Surnamed Silurist, from that part of Wales whose Inhabitants
were formerly called Silures; the Author of certain English Poems, which came
forth Anno 1658. under the Title of Olor Iscanus.

Henricus Rollochus, one of the Number of Scotch writers of Latin Verse, whose
selected Poems are published together.

Hercules Strozza, see Titus.

Hercole a Poet of Vdene, a Town under the Seignorie of Venice, chiefly known
by his Psyche, o^ Poem of the Soul.

Hermannus Hugo, an Eminent Philosopher, Theologist, Musician and Poet of
Brussels in Flanders, from whose Original those Divine Emblematical Fancies
that bear the Name of Quarles are derived.

Hermolaus Barbarus, a Patrician, or Nobleman of Venice, whose profound
Learning and great Parts advanced him to be Archbishop and Patriarch of
Aquileia, and afterward to the College of Cardinals.

Hieronymus Amaltheus, a most excellent Philosopher and Physician by
profession; but moreover a Composer of such Elegant Verses for his diversion,
that M. Antonins Muretus, an Exact Judge of those things, gives him the Palm
before all the Italian Poets of his time; he is mentioned Flourishing in the
Year 1574.

Hieronymus Balbus, a writer of Gorcum, who besides several prosaic Treatises,
wrote a Book of Epigrams concerning the Turkish Affairs, to Pope Clement the
^h; the mentioned time of his Flourishing is the Year 1520.

Hieronymus Fracastorius, so profound in Philosophy, and the Mathematical Arts,
especially Astronomy, and so happy a professor of Medicine, that he might well
have been excused from Poetry; yet his greatest Aemulators, says Thuanus,
could not but confess that his style came very near the Majesty of Virgil.

Hieronymus Donatus, an Eminent both Philosopher, Theologist, Mathematician,
Orator, and also Poet, by the Testimony of Angelus Politianus, who mentions
him in his Miscellanies.

Hieronymus Guntius, a Poet of Bibrac, one of the 35 Free Cities in the Circle
of Suevia, who supplied several Greec Poets of the latter date, as Prodromus,
Xanthopulus, Psellius, Philus, Callieles, and Nonnus Panopolita, a multitude of
Verses expunged and lost by the injury of time, and other accidents, to which
their Manuscripts had been exposed, besides several Epigrams of his own both in
Latin and Greec.

Hieronymus Spartanus, the Author of a Poem printed by J. Oporinus at Basil
Anno 1550. Entitled Miles Christianus, written in Elegiac Verse.

Hieronymus Zieglerus, a writer of diverse Tragecomedies, and other Dramatic
pieces out of the Old and New Testament, as his Protoplastus, Immolation of
Isaac, Nomothesia, Sampson, Heli, out of the Old; his Vineyard, Ophiletes, and
Royal Marriage out of the New; besides a Tragedy out of Profane History,
Entitled Cyrus Major.

Hippolytus Capilupus, an Italian of paincipal Note and Fame among the Latin
Poets of that Nation.

Honoratus Tascitellus, an Italian Author of a very Elegant Latin Poem
Dedicated to the Lady of Piscaria.

Honorio Navazzotti, an Italian Poet, who by his Poem Celebrating the Virtues
of a 100 Noble Women of Casal, celebrates his own memory.

Hubertus Susannius, a Writer of Soissons, both in Prose and Verse, of which
last kind are his Book of Epigrams, his Book of Games, his Eclogue entitled
Sylvius, his Poem upon the Resurrection, with some other things of various
subject.

Hugo Grotius, a Native of Delph in Holland, born in the year of our Lord 1513,
whose equal in fame for Wit and Learning, Christendom of late Ages has rarely
produced, particularly of so happy a Genius in Poetry, that had his Annals, his
Book De Veritate Christianae Religionis, De Satisfactione Christi, and other
his extolled works in Prose, never come to Light, his extant and universally
approved Latin Poems, had been sufficient to gain him a Living Name.

Huldricus Huttenus, a German born, but Knight of France, among whose Poetical
works collected together and printed at Frank ford an. 1538, are his Satyr
against the times of Julius Secundus, his Hortatory to the Emperor Maximilian,
to prosecute his War against the Venetians, his Poem in Heroic Verse concerning
the Fishing of the Venetians, his Marcus in the same kind, a pleasant Poem
entitled Outis, etc.

Huldricus Scoberus, another German Poetical Writer of the number of those
Latin Versifiers of that Nation, whose fames are not obscure among the Learned.

Huldricus Vannius, a Poet of Ausburg, the Author of a Heroic Poem entitled
Christ's Passion.

Humbertus Momnoretanus, the Author of a Sylva in praise of Upper Burgundy,
which is printed with Gilbertus Cognatus his Descriptiou of Burgundy.

Humphry Mills, a Poetical Writer of the last Age, but whose name I believe by
this time is known to few, notwithstanding two Volumes of his Poetry were once
published under the title of the Melancholy Vision, consisting of several Moral
and Divine Contemplations.

I.
Jacobus Balde, a Jesuit, of whom there are extant Miscellaneous Poems, divided
into 4 tomes.

Iacobus Catzius, an eminent Low Country Man, both for Dignity, for he was
Syndic of West-Freise Land, and Gelder Land, and his zeal to Learning and the
Arts, among which Poetry was not his least excellency, as appears by his
Patriarcha Bigamus published with several Poems of Gaspar Barlaeus, and
Cornelius Boius, by both whom he was highly celebrated.

Iacobus Ceporinus, a learned Grammarian and Commentatour of Zurich one of the
Chief Cantons of Switzers, much esteemed for his Scholia's upon Hesiod,
Dionysius Afer, and Aratus, as also for a Book of Lepid Greec Epigrams of his
own Composing.

Iacobus Crellius, wrote in Greec Verse Arguments upon all the Books of the Old
and New Testament.

Iacobus Crittonius, a Scotch, Writer, particularly in Latin Verse, among
several other noted Men of that Nation, of whose Latin Poems there is a Select
collection.

Iacobus Ghibbesius; a late Author of Lat. Odes, which were printed at Rome
an. 1665.

Iacobus Grevinus, an advancer in the Study of Poetry (to which in his younger
years he especially addicted himself) to that degree that Thuanus mentioning
with praise his Gelodachrys and other Poems, thinks him wo^thy to be compared
with the most admired of his time, either of France or other parts, and for his
Version of Nicander into French Verse, (when not totally abandoning Poetry, he
betook himself to Physic) with the most elegant of the Ancient Greecs and
Latins: he was flourishing about the year 1570, but what ever else, he intended
to oblige the World with; immature death prevented.

Iacobus Iaspar, a Danish Poet, who wrote a Consolatory Poem to the Prince of
Orange, upon the death of his Firstborn Daughter, and a Genethliacon upon the
Birth of Renatus the young Prince, both which are printed with Gilbertus
Cognatus his Description of Burgundy.

Jacobus Lectius, a late German Poet, whose Varia Poemata were printed at
Geneva, an. 1609.

Jacobus Macolonus, a Scotch-Man, whose Anthroporia Xeniorum is extant among
the Selected works of others of the prime Latin Poets accounted of that Nation

Jacobus Micyllus, a famed Writer of Strasburg, whose Epigrams both Greec and
Latin, Elegy of the Falcon and the Pie, Epistle to Joachimus Camerarius in
Elegiac Verse foretelling the precise time of the ruin of the old Castle of
Heidelberg, speak him no less a Poet then the rest of his elaborate Works a
universal Scholar.

Jacobus Montanus, a Poet of Spire, one of the 18 Imperial Cities: He wrote
Christ's Passion in four Books in Elegiac Verse, Hymns upon the Feast days of
the whole year, in diverse kinds of Verse, the Hero of Tarsus, or the Life of
St. Paul, in Heroic Verse, beside some things in Prose.

Jacobus Rueff, a Chirurgian of Zurick, who besides several useful things in
Prose, among which is his Catalogue of the Chief Physicians and Astrologers to
his time; wrote also several things in Dramatic Poetry, as his Comedy of
William Thel, the principal promoter of the Helvetian Conspiracy, the Rape of
Paulina, the Cheat of the Priests of Isis, with some others of Divine argument
taken out of the Holy Scripture.

Jacobus Sadoletus, see Giacopo Sadoletti.

Jacobus Schoepperus Fremonianus, the Author of a Tragi-Comedy entitled the
Monomachie, or single Combta between David and Goliab.

Jacobus Wimphelingus, a Native of Sledstadt in Germany, and Presbyter of the
Church of Spire, a very copious and fruitful writer both in Prose and Verse, of
which last kind were his Poem in praise of the B. Virgin in Elegiac Verse,
dedicated to Bartholdus Archbishop of Mentz, his Angelical Nuncio in Heroic
Verse, his Poem to Philip Count Palatine in Heroic Verse, his Elegy to his
Eldest Son Lewis, his Poem to Eberhard Duke of Wirtenberg in Heroic, not to
mention his Hymns, Epigrams and other various Pieces of Poetry. He flourisht at
Spire an. 1494.

Iacobus Zevecotius, a Hollander esteemed among the Chief of Belgic writers in
Latin Verse, and of whose Poems there are particularly quoted by learned Men;
his Elegies, his Tragedy Terris-munda, and his Maria Graeca.

James Shirly, a just pretender to more then the meanest Place among the
English Poets, but most especially for Dramatic Poesy, in which he has written
both very much; and for the most part with that felicity, that by some he is
accounted little inferior to Fletcher himself; his Comedies are the Ball, the
Humorous Courtier, the Brothers, Love in a Maze, the Gamester, the Grateful
Servant, the Bird in a cage, the Constant Maid, the Coronation, the Court
Secret, the Example, Hide Park, the Lady of pleasure, the Opportunity, the
Wedding, the Witty fair one, the Royal Master: Tragedies, the Cardinal, the
Maids Revenge, Chabot Admiral of France, the Traitor; the Imposture, a
Tragy-Comedy; Arcadia, a Pastoral, etc.

James Stuart, a King of Scotland, the first of that Name, who being taken
prisoner, and brought to London, where he was educated in all kind of Liberal
and accomplishing Arts and Sciences, proved a great proficient in all, and
particularly left recorded Memorials behind him of his perfection in Music and
Poetry.

Ianus Antonius Balyfius, one of the chief ornaments of his time for polite
Learning, but most peculiarly eminent for what he has imparted to the world of
his Poetical fancy.

Ianus Chunradus Rhumelius, a writer of Latin Verse, with success sufficient to
be rankt among the Chief of modern Latin Poets.

Ianus Anysius, a writer of Satyrs and other Poems, which he dedicated to
Cardinal Pompeio Colonua.

Ianus Cornarus, a learned German Author of Zwiccaria, among whose multitude of
other works, his Carmen Propempticon to Franciscus a Stiten, is not forgotten,
he is mentioned flou rishing in the year 1551.

Janus Douza, a Belgic both Poet and Orator, born at Nortwick in Holland, of a
Noble Family; what with his Poems wherein he discovered a most acute wit and
sublime fancy, and the Annals he wrote of his own Country, with no less
judgment then learning, he obtained to be generally styled the Varro of
Batavia, and Common Oracle of the Academy. He is recorded flourishing in the
year 1604.

Janus Lernutius, a learned German, particularly remembered among those of that
Nation that have a fame in Latin Poetry.

Jean de Marests, a French Author of a Poem entitled Clovis, or La France
Christienne.

Janus Pannonius, a Poet of Hungary, of whose Poems there are extant his
Panegyrical Sylva, to the Bishop of Funfkirken, his Panegyries to Gavariuo of
Verona, and Giacopo Antonio Marcello of Venice, his Proseu^htich to Frederik
the 3d for the Peace of Italy, besides Epigrams, Elegies and other Miscellanies.

Janus Parrhasius, a Calabrian, proclaimed by Alstedius the most excellent Poet
of his time; he was born in the year of our Lord 1470.

Joachimus Axonius, a Poetical writer among the Latin Versifiers of Belgium, or
the Low-Countrys.

Joachimus Bellaius, a Kinsman of Cardinal Bellaius, in whose Family, for he
himself was not a Person of any great Fortune, he enjoyed a happy vacancy to
his study and Muse, to which he was wonderfully addicted: his Tristia, and his
Ludi Rustici are particularly mentioned by Thuanus, with commendation.

Joachimus Camerarius, a universally learned and most renowned writer, among
whose almost innumerable Volumes there are not a few in Verse, as particularly
his Precepts for Childrens decent behavior, his Description of the
Constellations, his Prognostics of the weather* all in Elegiac Verse; also his
Epigrams for the Ordering Diet, in respect to the alteration of the year.

Joachimus Myrioianus, a German of whose Poetical writings, there are extant
his Verses against Luther, his Elegy upon the death of Empserus his Epicedium
to Simon Pistor, upon the death of his Wife and his Paraph^ase in Verse upon
the Lords Prayer.

Ioachimus Mynsingerus Dentatus, a Jurisconsult by Profession, of Frundeck in
Germany, but not thereby wholly taken off from his addiction to the Muses, by
whose instinct he wrote among other things a Poem, which by its title Austrias
pretends to be Heroic.

Ioachimus Vadianus, a Helvetian, both Physician, Poet and Orator; the chief of
whose Poetic works are his Poem in praise of the Emperors Frederic the third,
and his Son Maximilian, his Epi^aph of Rodolphus Bishop of Wurtsburg, his
Eglogue entitled Faustus, his Elegy of the Armories and Ensigns of honor given
by Sigismund K. of the Romans to the Family of the Vadiani, his Elegy
describing his combat with Death, and his Ode upon the Resurrection; he died in
the year of our Lord 1551.

Ioan^es Albinus, a German Poet eminent among the writers of Latin Verse of
that Nation.

Ioannes Alexander Brassicanus, an industrious publisher of several ancient
Authors, which were before unknown, as the works of Eucherius, the Greec
Geoponics of Constantine, Bishop Salvianus his Book of judgment and Providence,
and Petronius Arbiter's Satyrs, besides what he set forth of the productions of
his own fancy, which were his Idyliium to Charles King Elect of the Romans,
Elegies, Epigrams, Dialogues in Verse, and other Poems.

Ioannes Altus, a Poet of Hessen, who wrote an Epithalamium to Ioannes
Fabricius Montanus, and put into Verse Suetonius his History of the 12 Cesars.

Ioannes Antonius Flaminius, a writer of Forum Cornelii, a Principal Town of
Flaminia, who wrote in Latin Verse 2 Books of Sylvae, and 3 of Epigrams,
besides an elegant Paraphrase upon several of David's Psalms; in Prose a
Treatise of the several Sects of Philosophers, and of the original of
Philosophy.

Ioannes Antonius Hermaphroditus, the Author of certain Verses which are extant
among other choice Poetical Collections in Albertus de Eyb's Margarita Poetica.

Joannes Arnolletus, the Author of a small triple Poem entitled Faith, Hope and
Charity, which not amounting to a Volume of it self, was printed with a
Collection of Choice Poems of several Authors by Robert Winter at Basil.

Joannes Arnoldus, a Poet of Bergella, who wrote an Encomium upon the Invention
of Chalcography in Elegiac Verse.

Joannes Atrocianus, a German Author next after whose Commentaries upon Macer's
Book of Planets, there is mentioned an Elegy of his upon the Rustic war, begun
in Germany in the year 1525; he is mentioned flourishing in the year 1528.

Joannes Aventinus, a writer of several Treatises in Prose, especially in
Grammar, and not altogether a stranger to Verse, in which however he is only
taken notice of for his Hymn of the Celestial Sphaere.

Joannes Anratus, The Regius Professor of the Greec Tongue at Paris under
Charles the 9th of France, and one of the 3 most approved French Poets, (the
other two were Hospitalius and Turnebus) whom Vtenhovius in a Latin Distich
sets in Competition against 6 Italians, namely Sanazarius, Fracastorius,
Flaminius, Vidas, Navagerius and Bembus.

Joannes Aurelius Angurellus, a Poet of Rimini, who being addicted to that kind
of Mysterious Philosophy, that pretends to the finding out of the Phisopher's
Stone, wrote a Poem in Heroic Verse, entitled Chrysopoea, or The Art of making
Gold in 3 Books, which he dedicated to Pope Leo the 10th; another called
Geronticon in one Book, besides 5 Books of Iambics, 2 of Sermones, and 2 of
Odes.

Joannes Baleus, an English writer, who flourisht in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, best known by his Treatise, which give; account of all the Eminent
writers of our Nation of what Art or Faculty soever, and by what he has
thereby contributed to this work, the better meriting to be here inserted, to
which place the title he derives is by those Dramatic Pieces out of Holy
Scripture, which we find enumerated among the rest of his works.

Ioannes Baptista Almadianus, a Viterbian, of whom there are several Elegies in
Latin Verse upon the death of Platina, extant at the end of Platina's works.

Ioannes Baptista Egnatius, an Eminent and General Professor of the Liberal
Arts at Venice, of which City he was also a Native; the only Monument of whose
Poetic Genius we find mentioned among many other of his Volumes, is his
Panegyric in Heroic Latin Verse, upon Francis the first of that Name, King of
France.

Giovanni Battista Pigna.
Ioannes Baptista Pigna, another Venetian, of whose writings there are 4 Books
of Sonnets printed at Venice, together with the Sonnets of Celio Calcagnino,
and Ludovico Ariosto, by Vincentio Valgrisio.

Ioannes Baptista Scaphenatius, a Milanese, of whose writing something is
preserved among the Collected works of several Eminent Italian writers of Latin
Poetry.

Ioannes Barclaius, a most acute learned and Elegant Scochman, and very famous
for what he has written both in Prose and Verse; but especially for his
Argenis, and his Euphormio, both which works, though written for the most part
in solute Oration, yet may very well be accounted Poems, not only for that they
are intersperst throughout with Verse, but also for that they have their
Political and Moral truths allegoris'd or coucht under feigned and invented
Story.

Ioannes Boccatius, see Giovanni Boccatio.

Ioannes Bonfinius, a Frenchman of Auvergne, whose Basia and other Poems were
printed at Leiden an. 1656.

Ioannes Busmannus, a writer of Poems which were printed at Wirtemberg an. 1337.

Ioannes Carbonirosa, an Author of Kirkhoven, who among other things wrote
certain Dramatic Pieces out of the Holy Scripture.

Joannes Columbinus, the Author of a little Poem entiled Contra Philomusum, or
against the Contemners of School Divinity.

Joannes Cotta, a native of Ponte Aliaco, a Town upon the River Athesis, who
published an Elegant Book of Latin Epigrams; but whose Noble Book of
Chorographie begun in Verse, was not only left unfinisht, but also that which
was done of it lost, together with his learned Scholia upon Pliny.

Joannes Crato, a Silesian, born at Vratisla^^ the Chief City of that Country,
in the year of our Lord 1512; he is styled by Boisa^dus in his Icones the
Hierophantes of all polite Literature, and had indeed the general reputation as
well of an excellent Poet as of a profound Philosopher, and most skilful
Physician; but for being so great a Philosopher and Physician, it was, that he
remained Counselor and Chief Physician for 26 years to 3 Emperors
successively, Ferdinand the first, Maximilian the second, and Rodulphus the
second.

Joannes Dantiscus, a Polonian, who wrote in Heroic Verse a Poem entitled
Soteria, to Sigismund de Erberstein, a Knight of Poland, upon his return from
Muscovie; another upon the Victory of Sigismund King of Poland against the
Waywod of Moldavia: also a Sylva in Elegiac Verse, upon the calamities of his
times. He was flourishing in the year 1531.

Joannes Elius, a writer of Divine Odes, mentioned in Hervagius his Catalogue.

Joannes Fabritius, a Native of Berkena, in Lower Alsatia, who wrote in Verse
the History of Gulielmus Thellius, which dedicating to Conradus Pellicanus, he
published himself with other Poems of his: He flourisht at Zurich in the year
1554.

Joannes Filiczkius, a Hungarian Poet, remembered for what he has written in
Latin Verse among the Chief of that Nation.

Joannes Franciscus Camaenus, a Native of Perusia, a Town of Hetruria, but
under the Pope's Dominion, who wrote an Heroic Poem (in name at least) of the
Rape of Philenis, which with several other Poems, as Eclogues, Elegies,
Epigrams, Odes, Epicedia, etc. was printed at Venice, by Gulielmo de Fontaneto
an. 1520.

Ioannes Franciscus Mutius, an Italian, of whom what is extant in Latin Verse
is to be found among the selected works of diverse of the principal Latin Poets
of that Nation.

Ioannes Franciscus Picus Mirandula, the Nephew of that Miracle of his time
Picus Count of Mirandula, and as related to him by Blood, so also by Ingenuity
and perfection of learning: both his Books de Veritate Fidei Christianae, and
also his Sacred Poems are mentioned with high commendation by Paulus Iovius, in
his Elogies, and also by Boissartus in his Icones.

Ioannes Franciscus Quintianus Stoa, an Italian writer of very many Poetical
things in Latin Verse, besides some in Prose; among his first kind are his
Threnodies upon the deaths of the K. of France, the K. of Scots, Queen Anne,
Philippus Beroaldus, etc. His Poem of the Amors of Mars and Venus in 8 Books,
his Cleopolis or Sylva upon the Glory of the City of Paris, his Sylva in praise
of Marinus Beichemius, his Theandrogenosis and Theanastasis, the first an Ode
upon our Saviors Nativity, the second a Sylva upon his Resurrection, 7
Tragedies, whereof 2 Divine; and 5 Comedies.

Ioannes de Gerson, a French Author of a most wonderful multitude of Volumes,
whereof some in Verse, particularly his Epithalamium upon the Mystical Marriage
between a Divine and the Study of Theology. He was Chancellor of the Parisian
Academy, and is mentioned flourishing in the year of our Lord 1429.

Ioannes Fungerus, a German, who sung in Heroic Verse the Acts of Maurice
William Governor of Friseland.

Ioannes Gigas, the Author of a Treatise concerning the Certainty of Christian
Religion; to which are added his Divine Poems, besides which he wrote many
things in Poetry, as Sylvae, Epigrams, Elegies, and among the rest his Elegy
upon the 2 Eclipses of the Moon that hapened in the year 1538. his Funeral
Elegy upon John Prince of Saxony, his Encomium upon the City of Leipsich, and
his Epicedium upon the death of Erasmus.

Joannes Gilleius, a Burgundian, who among other things wrote an Elegant
Description of the Stately House and Gardens of Pagn^l, belonging to the
Gileian Family, and of the City of Salines, and the River Furiosa flowing by
it; together with the Famous Wilderness belonging to the Sieur Du Sachet.

Joannes Girardus, the Author of a Poem entitled Divionensis Stichostratia,
with two Centuries of Epigrams.

Joannes Grasserus, the Author of certain Latin Poems, which were printed at
Colen, an. 1595.

Joannes Hasembergius, a Bohemian, no less mentioned for his Drolling Verses
upon Martin Luther, then for his being Tutor to the Emperor Ferdinand's
Children.

Joannes Honterus, an Eminent Geographer of Cronstadt, in Transylvania, who
among diverse Geographical Treatises, wrote one in Hexameter Verse, divided into
four Books, entitled Rudimenta Geographica.

Joannes Hospinianus Steinanus, a Helvetian, who besides several Treatises in
Prose, wrote in Verse a Panegyric upon the Lord Magnus ab Emer^ shofen, several
Epithalamia or Nuptial Poems.

Joannes Jacobus Gabianus, the Author of a Poem entitled Romanensium Victoria,
with the Office and Commendation of St. Columbanus in Verse, Tetrasticks of the
Saints, and Distichs of Morality, with other things.

Joannes Jovianus Pontanus, a very renowned Philosopher, Orator, and Poet;
first Tutor and afterward Secretary to Alphonso the Younger King of Naples,
among his Poetical works, were his five Books of the Constellations, his Book
of Meteors, his Poem of the Culture of Citron, entitled The Hesperian Gardens,
in 6 Books, his Lepidina, or Pastoral Pomps, his Bucolics, Melissus, Maeon, and
Acon, etc.

Joannes Lanterbachius, an Author sufficiently Eminent among the German writers
in Latin Verse.

Joannes Leochaeus, a learned Scotchman, of considerable repute for his Elegant
Latin Poems entitled Musae Priores, which in his late Majesty's Reign were
printed at London, and dedicated to William Earl of Pembrok.

Ioannes Linkius, a German, reputed one of the Chief among the Latin Poets of
that Nation.

Ioannes Lorichius Hadamarus, a well approved German Author, especially for
what he has written in Poetry, as his Book of Riddles, and his Ecclesiasticus
in Latin Verse; as also his Catalogue of Ancient Civilians in Elegiac Verse,
with some other things.

Ioannes Ludovicus Brassicanus, a German, whose Carmen Odoeporicon to Ioachimus
Camerarius, is the chief of what I find mentioned of his Poetry: In Prose he
wrote a Comment upon Cicero's Book De Legibus, and other noted things.

Ioannes Major, a Belgian, reckoned among the Principal writers of that Country
in Latin Poetry.

Ioannes Maria Velmatius, an Italian, whose Latin Muse traveled through the
whole Bible.

Joannes Maurus, the Author of a late Latin Poem, entitled Theatrum Vniversae
vanitatis, printed at Paris anno 1668.

Joannes Mercurius Morsheimerus, a German, who wrote a Poem in Elegiac Verse,
in praise of Autumn; he flourisht at Heidelberg an. 1552.

Joannes Metellanus, a Scotchman, whose Epigrams are published among the
selected Poems of several others, esteemed the Chief Latin Versifiers of that
Nation.

Joannes Morisotus, a Physician of Dole, who besides what he wrote in Prose,
both in Physic and several other subjects, wrote also in Verse, Ethologia in 10
Eclogus, 6 Aucupatory Eclogues, 7 Books of Odes, a Poem entitled Herculeis,
another Antonias, or the Life of St. Antony; the Tragedy of Dido, 2 Books of
Divine Epigrams, and other things.

Joannes Muscopius, a German, mentioned particularly for his Epithalamium upon
the Nuptials of Simon R^stius, with Margereta, the Daughter of Antonius Turlera.

Ioannes Passeratius, a Professor of the Latin Tongue in the University of
Paris, where what he wrote as well in Verse as in solute Oration, both in the
French and Latin Tongues, had no vulgar repute; the mentioned time of his
Flourishing is the year 1602.

Ioannes Phernandus, a German, who besides other things, in Verse, wrote the
hours of the Holy Cross, and of the Compassion of the B. Virgin in Elegiac
Verse: he flourisht an. 1494.

Ioannes Picus, Count of Mirandula, the Phoenix of his Age, and darling of the
Muses, as he is styled by Scaliger: Sixtus Senensis also in his Bibliotheca,
for his many concurring excellencies, as his rare Beauty of Body and Mind, his
Nobility of Birth, admirable Wit and profound Literature, Sirnames him the
Phoenix; but Politian in his Epistles, among other great Characters gives him
particularly that of egregious Poet: what Miracle then would he have been, had
be lived longer? for he died in the 32 year of his age, being the year of our
Lord* 1449.

Joannes Pierius, a Poet of Valeria, among whose Poems there are noted his
Fable of Leucippus, and that of the Carp-Fish, his Epistle of Protesilaus to
Laodamia, his Amicitia Romana, his Joathas, etc.

Joannes Pedioneus, a Writer of Hymns in Latin Verse.

Joannes Posselius, a learned Writer (among other things) of Rules or Precepts
of human Life in Greec Verse.

Joannes Posthius, a learned both Physician and Poet, born in the Palatinate
anno 1537; his Poetical works were his Parerga Poetica; his works belonging to
Physic, his Anatomical Observations, and some other things.

Joannes Rhellicanus, a Poet of Zurich in Switzerland, who at the end of
Homer's Life, which he translated out of Plutarch, has a Poem entitled
Stockhornias, in which he describes a journey he made over the Mountain
Stockhorn, in the Territory of Bearn: He wrote also another Poem of the 3 Men
of Baden, who were beheaded for Religion; he was flourishing anno 1538.

Joannes Richius, a Poet of Annoveriacum, who in a Poem which he wrote in
Heroic Verse of the Nuptials of Volradus Count of Waldec and Anastasia the
Daughter of the Count of Swarzemburg; gives a summary view of the Lives and
Transactions of several of the Counts of Waldec: he also wrote a Propempticon
of the Lord Franciscus a Stiten, taking a Journey into Livonia.

Joannes Rosa, one of those Latin Poets accounted of the prime of Scotland, who
are joined together in a published Collection of their several Selected Works.

Joannes Sambucus, a Hungarian, accounted one of the Chief of that Country for
Latin Poesy; there are principally taken notice of his Carmina Ethica, or Moral
Precepts in Verse.

Joannes Sapidus, a Poet of Schledstadt, one of the Imperial Cities in the
Circle of Rhine. He wrote, besides Epigrams and other Miscellaneous Poems, his
Anabion, or Lazarus redivivus, a Divine Comedy.

Joannes Schosserus, a German Writer, well approved for his Latin Poems.

Ioannes Scotus Scototarvatius, a Scotch Knight, and Person of Eminent Dignity
in the State, yet more advanced in Fame, by the Place his Elegies have obtained
among the most esteemed Latin Poets of that Nation.

Joannes Secundus, an Elegant Poetical Writer of Hague, as appears by his 3
Books of Elegies, his Funera, Epigrams, Basia, Odes, Epistles, and Sylvae.

Joannes Sekervius, a Poet of Vratislaw, one of the Chief Cities of Poland, of
whose Poetical invention there are principally mentioned 2 Elegies of Jacob and
Esau, reciprocal from one to the other.

Joannes Serranus, a Gallic Writer of Vivar, whose Version of several of the
Psalms of David, exceed in the judgment of Duport, what ever had been done
before of that kind.

Joannes Simonius, a German, among whose Poems we find his Princeps most
especially quoted.

Joannes Sommerus, a Hungarian of no obscure Note, for what he has written in
Latin Verse.

Joannes Spangenbergius, a German Theologist and Preacher at Northausen, an
Imperial Town in the Circle of Saxony, who as he wrote many things in Prose,
so he was not averse to Poetry, as appears by his Version of David's Psalms
into Elegiac Verse.

Joannes Stabius, an Austrian, both Poet and Mathematician, and honored with
the Title of Historian to the Emperor Maximilian: several things he wrote in
Verse, but what he wrote in Prose were chiefly Astronomical and Geographical.

Joannes Stella, a Venetian Poet, who wrote the Lives of several Popes, in
Latin Verse.

Joannes Stigelius, a famous German Astronomer, and not obscure Poet, which
last Character he bears from his Epithalamium of Georgius Sabinus, and Anne the
Daughter of Philip Melanction; his Versification of several of David's Psalms,
with other Scripture Hymns; his Epicedium upon the death of Euricius Cordus,
another upon the death of Anne Wife of Philip Earl of Nassaw; his Eclogue
Jolas, upon the Emperor Charles 5th, etc. He Flourisht in the year 1554.

Joannes Tetthingerus, an Author of Tubingen, one of the 16 Earldoms in the
Circle of Suevia, who set forth in Heroic Verse the 4 Wirtembergs wars, which
lasted for many years; he flourisht at Pfullendorf anno 1534.

Joannes Thomas Musconius, a Member of that Society of Italian Poets, who are
joined together in a Published Collection of their selected Works in Latin Verse.

Joannes Thuilius, a Poet of Mons-Mariae, who saluted Nicolaus Contarenus Duke
of Venice, with a Solemn Panegyric in Verse, and was highly in Favor with
Andreas Maurocenus, and Dominicus Molinus for his Exalted Vein in Poetry.

Joannes Versola, a Spaniard, who by King Philip the Second then in England,
and Married to our Queen Mary, was sent Ambassador to Rome. The Verses which
he took delight to Compose in the interval of his more serious affairs, had the
esteem of Learned Men, and were printed at Panormus in Sicily, under the Title
of Epistles.

Ioannes Vrsinus, an Eminent Professor of Medicine, which Apollo-like he joined
with Poetry: he described in Elegiac Verse the Prosopopoea or Metaphorical
Representation of diverse Animals, as also the Diaetetical part of Medicine:
besides a little Book of Moral Sentences in Verse, like that of Cato.

Iodocus Badius Ascentius, a Commentatour upon Tully's Offices and Epistles,
and Boethius de Consolatione Philosophiae: Erasmus compares him to Budaeus,
whom he calls the Ornament of France. Moreover, by a late English Author he is
charactered the most famous Philosopher, Rhetorician and Poet of his time.

Iodocus Gallus, a Dr of Theology of Rubeaqua, a Town in Upper Alsatia, and
Pastor of the Church of Spire, who besides several Theological Treatises, in
Prose, wrote Epigrams in diverse kinds of Verse.

John Cleaveland, a Notable High soaring Witty Loyalist of Cambridge, whose
Verses in the time of the Civil War begun to be in great request, both for
their Wit and zeal to the King's cause, for which indeed he appeared the first,
if not only, Eminent Champion in Verse against the Presbyterian Party; but most
especially against the Kirck and Scotch Covenant, which he prosecuted with such
a Satirical fury, that the whole Nation fares the worse for it, lying under a
most grievous Poetical Censure. In fine, so great a Man has Cleaveland been in
the Estimation of the generality, in regard his Conceits were out of the common
road, and Wittily far fetched, that Grave Men in outward appearance have not
spared in my hearing to affirm him the best of English Poets, and let them
think so still, who ever please, provided it be made no Article of Faith.

Sr John Davis, the Learned and well accomplished Father of a no less learned
and accomplished Daughter the present Countess Dowager of Huntington: his Poem
Nosce teipsum, (besides which and his Orchestra published together with it, both
the products of his younger years) I remember to have seen from the hands of
the Countess a judicious Metaphrase of several of David's Psalms) is said to
have made him first known to Queen Elizabeth, and afterward brought him in
favor with King James, under whose auspices addicting himself to the Study of
the Common Law of England, he was made the King's First Sergeant, and
afterward his Attorney General in Ireland.

Sr John Denham, late Surveyour of his Majesty's Works; but of a much more
ce^ebrated memory by the Fame of what he has written in Poetry, especially his
Coopers Hill, and his Tragedy The Sophi, which having been long since published
and in general esteem, came forth again a few years since, joined with the rest
of his Poetical Works, which together amount to a considerable Volume.

John Done, a Student in his younger years in Lincoln's Inn, whither he
betook himself from the University of Oxford; but instead of po^ing upon
readious Reports, Judgments and Statute Books, he accomplished himself with the
politer kind of Learning, moderately enjoyed the pleasures of the Town, and
frequented good Company, to which the sharpness of his Wit, and gayety of
Fancy, rendered him not a little grateful; in which state of life he composed
his more brisk and Youthful Poems, which are rather commended for the height
of Fancy and acutness of conceit, then for the smoothness of the Verse. At last
by King James his command, or rather earnest persuasion, setting himself to the
study of Theology, and entering into Holy Orders, he was first made Preacher of
Lincoln's Inn, afterward advanced to be Dean of Paul's: and as of an Eminent
Poet he became a much more Eminent Preacher, so he rather improved then
relinquisht his Poetical Fancy; only converting it from human and worldly to
Divine and Heavenly subjects.

John Driden, Poet Laureat, and Historiographer to His present Majesty: with
whom such has been the approbation and acceptance his Poetry has obtained,
especially what he has written of Dramatic, with wonderful success to the
Theater Royal, viz. Comedies, several abounding with no vulgar wit and
ingenuity, as the Maiden Queen, the Wild Gallant, the Mock Astrologer, Marriage
a la mode, the Amourous Old Woman, the Assignation: Tyrannic Love, and Amboyna
Tragedies; besides Historical Drama's; viz. the Indian Emperor, and two parts
of the Conquests of Granada, in which if he have indulged a little too much to
the French way of continual Rhyme and interlarding of History with ascititious
Love and Honor, I am apt to impute it rather to his complying with the
modyfied an gallantish humor of the time, then to his own well examined
judgment.

John Fletcher, one of the happy Trinmvirat (the other two being Johnson and
Shakespeare) of the Chief Dramatic Poets of our Nation, in the last foregoing
Age, among whom there might be said to be a symmetry of perfection, while each
excelled in his peculiar way: Ben. Johnson in his elaborate pains and knowledge
of Authors, Shakespeare in his pure vein of wit, and natural Poetic height;
Fletcher in a courtly Elegance, and gentile familiarity of style, and withal a
wit and invention so overflowing, that the luxuriant branches thereof were
frequently thought convenient to be lopt off by his almost inseparable
Companion Francis Beaumont.

John Ford, a Dramatic Writer some years since, of Tragedies and Comedies, in
their season I suppose not wholly strangers to the English Stage: His Tragedies
The Broken Heart, Loves Sacrifice, and It Is pity she is a Whore; his Comedies
the Fancies and the Lady's Trial, he wrote also a Tragy-Comedy Loves
Labyrinth, besides the Dramatic History of Perkin Warbec.

Sr John Gowr, a very Famous English Poet in his time, and counted little
inferior, if not equal to Chaucer himself; who was his Contemporary, and some
say his Scholar and Successor in the Laurel: For Gowr was also both Poet
Laureat and Knight. His Chief Works may be gathered from his Tomb in St. Mary
Overeis Church, where lying buried, he is represented with his head upon three
large Volumes thus inscribed, the first Votum Meditantis; the next Confessio
Amantis, the 3d Vox clamantis, of which last being printed in the Reign of King
Henry the 8th, the Impression is not yet totally extinguished: the other two,
doubtless, if not printed, are preserved in Public Libraries: For his Confessio
Amantis I have seen in a private Library, in a large Folio Manuscript of Vellam
fair written, containing the whole circuit of Natural Philosophy, and the
allegories of all the Poetical Fictions; but that there were other things of
his writing appears by what is extant of him in Chaucers published Works.

John Hall, a Poetical writer, who never having had any great Fame, that ever I
heard of, no wonder if now totally forgotten; especially since his Poem
entitled The Court of Virtue, was published no less while ago then the year
1565. Of the same name also flourisht within these 30 years a Bishopric of
Durham Man, who besides his juvenile Poems, memorable only for their airy and
youthful wit, improved afterward to a more substantial reputation for what, he
has wrote as well in Verse as Proof; but a Poem he began of great and general
expectation among his Friends, had he lived to complete it, would doubtless
have very much advanced and completed his Fame.

John Harding, a writer recorded in History for one of the Chief of his time;
viz. the Reign of K. Edward the 4th, and claiming his Seat among the Poetical
Writers, by his Chronicle in English Verse.

John Hauvise, a Monk of St. Albans, whom living about the Reign of K. Richard
the first, or not long after, Camden quoting him in several places of his
remains, reckons among the Chief of English Latin Poets of that Age.

John Hoddesdon, one of the last Age, who with his Sion and Parnassus, makes a
shift to crowd in among many others, not of the greatest Fame. And so likewise,

John Kennedie, a Scotchman, with his History in Verse of Lycanthropos and
Lucilla.

John Lane, a fine old Queen Elizabeth Gentleman, who was living within my
remembrance, and whose several Poems, had they not had the ill fate to remain
unpublisht, when much better meriting then many that are in print, might
possibly have gained him a name not much inferior, if not equal to Drayton,
and others of the next rank to Spencer; but they are all to be produced in
Manuscript, namely his Poetical Vision, his Alarm to the Poets, his Twelve
Months, his Guy of Warwic, a Heroic Poem (at least as much as many others that
are so Entitled) and lastly his Supplement to Chaucers Squires Tale.

John Leland, an Antiquary of London, who Flourisht in the year 1546; and wrote
among many other Volumes several Books of Epigrams, his Cignea Cantio, a
Genethliae of Prince Edward, Naeniae upon the death of Sr Thomas Wiat; and
several other things in Verse.

John Lilly, a Writer of several old fashioned Comedies and Tragedies, which
have been printed together in a Volume, and might perhaps when time was, be in
very good request, namely Endymion, The Woman in the Moon, Midas, Mother
Boniby, Galatea, Sapho and Phao: Comedies, a Warning for Fair W^men.

^^hn Lydgate, an Augustine Monk of St. Edmunds-Bury, who had the reputation of
a person much accomplished, by his travels into Italy and France; and besides
several things of his of polite Argument in Prose, was much esteemed for what
he wrote also in Verse; as his Eglogues, Odes, Satyrs, and other Poems.

John Marston, a Tragic and Comic Writer, not of the meanest Rank among our
English Dramatics. His Comedies are the Dutch Curtisan, the Fawn, What you
will; His Tragedies Antonio and Melida, the Insatiate Countess, besides the
Malecontent a Tragy Comedy; the Faithful Sheapheard a Pastoral.

John Milton, the Author (not to mention his other Works, both in Latin and
English, both in strict and solute Oration, by which his Fame is sufficiently
known to all the Learned of Europe) of two Heroic Poems, and a Tragedy; namely
Paradise lost, Paradise Regained, and Sampson Agonista; in which how far he
has revived the Majesty and true Decornm of Heroic Poesy and Tragedy: it will
better become a person less related then my self, to deliver his judgment.

John Ogilby, one of the prodigies of our Age, for producing from so late an
initiation into Literature, so many large and learned Vol. as well in verse as
Prose: in Prose his Volumes of the Atlas, and other Geographical Works, which
have gained him the Style and Office of his Majesty's Cosmographer; in Verse
his Translat. of Homer and Virgil, and which is the chief of all, as Composed
propria Minerva: his Paraphrase upon Aesop's Fables, which for Ingenuity and
Fancy, besides the Invention of new Fables, is generally confess't to have
exceeded what ever has been done before in that kind.

John Philips, the Maternal Nephew and Disciple of an Author of most deserved
Fame late deceas't, being the exactest of Heroic Poets, (if the truth were well
examined, and it is the opinion of many both Learned and Judicious persons)
either of the Ancients or Moderns, either of our own or what ever Nation else;
from whose Education as he has received a judicious command of style both in
Prose and Verse, so from his own natural Ingenuity he has his Vein of
Burlesque and facetious Poetry, which produced the Satyr against Hypocrites,
and the Travested Metaphrase of two Books of Virgil, besides what is dispeirc't
among other things; nevertheless what he has writ in a serious Vein of Poetry,
whereof very little has yet been made public, is in my opinion, nothing
inferior to what he has done in the other kind.

John Skeleton, a jolly English Rimer, and I warrant ye accounted a notable
Poet, as Poetry went in those days, namely King Edward the fourth's Reign,
when doubtless good Poets were scarce; for however he had the good fortune to
be chosen Poet Laureat: methinks he has a miserable loos, rambling style, and
galloping measure of Verse; so that no wonder he is so utterly forgotten at
this present, when so many better Poets of not much later a date, are wholly
laid aside. His chief Works, as many as I could collect out of an old printed
Book, but imperfect, are his Philip Sparrow, Speak Parrot, The death of K.
Edward the fourth, A Treatise of the Scots, Ware the hawk, The tunning of
Eleanor Rumpkin; in many of which following the humor of the ancientest of our
modern Poers, he takes a Poetical liberty of Satyrically gibing at the vices
and corruptions of the Clergy.

Sr John Sucking, a witty and elegant Courtier under his late Majesty; his
Poems which being few, besides his Dramatics Aglaura, Brenoralt and the
Goblins, are collected together with his Letters into a Volume, entitled
Fragmenta Aurea, have a pretty touch of a gentile Spirit, and seem to savor
more of the Grape then Lamp, and still keep up their reputation equal with any
Writ so long ago; his Plays also still bring audience to the Theater.

John Webster, an Associate with Thomas Decker, in several not wholly to be
rejected Plays; viz. Northward Hoe, the Noble Stranger, New trick to cheat the
Devil; Westward Hoe, the Weakest goes to the wall, Woman will have her Will,
with Samuel Rowly in the Cure for Cuckolds, a Comedy; besides what he wrote
alone, the Devils Law case, a Tragy-Comedy, the White Devil, the Duchess of
Malfy, Tragedies.

John Wilson, a late Writer with no bad success of two Comedies, the Cheats and
the Projectors; and the Tragedy of Andronicus Commenius.

Jonas ab Elvervelt, an Holsatian, who wrote a Description of the State of that
Country, in Elegiac Verse.

Josephus Iscanus, or Joseph of Exeter; the very first (of the Moderns both in
time and Fame) of Latin Poets among the English: who accompanying King Richard
the first in his Expedition into the Holy Land, had the better advantage to
celebrate, as he did, the Acts of that Warlike Prince, in a Poem entitled
Antiocheis: He wrote also 6 Books De Bello Trojano, in Heroic Verse; which as
Cambden well observes, appears to be no other then that Version of Dares
Phrygius, into Latin Verse, which has been generally imputed to Cornelius
Nepos. have been equal to his undertaking.

Joshua Sylvester, the English Translator of Du Bartas his Poem of the six
days work of Creation, by which he is more generally famed; (for that Poem
has ever had many great admirers among us) then by his own Poems commonly
printed therewith.

Juan de Mena, a Spaniard, whose Poetical Works were printed at Antuerp anno
1552.

Julius Ascanius, a Native of Crenta in the Venetian Territory; a taste of whose
Poetical Fancy is extant among other the choice collected works of the most
noted Italian Writers of Latin Verse.

Julius Caesar Stella, the Author of a Latin Poem of Heroic title Columbeis.

Justulus, an Eminent Author of Spoleto; whose writings are chiefly Poetical,
as his Poem of the Culture of Saffron, another of Silkworms, his Epicedium of
Pomponius Laeta, his Musae Phanestres, his Description of the Mountain adjacent
to Spoleto, his Poem to Ferdinand of Arragon, and some others.

Josephus Justus, and Julius Caesar, two most celebrated Authors, Son and
Father, of the Illustrious Family Della Scala of Verona, and therefore
generally known by the Surname of Scaligeri; of whom Julius has the testimony
of the Great Thuanus, for a Person unparalleled by any of his Age, and scarce
giving Place to any of the Ancients, as Josephus is by the same Historian rankt
in the next Place to his Father Julius, whose extant Poems, both Greec and
Latin have gained him among Learned Men, a particular reputation of an
excellent Poet; and if in any, doubtless in that very respect above all others,
he is to be preferred before his Son Joseph, who, though accounted in the
number of Poets also; yet is much more famed for what he has written in Prose:
yet as much a Poet as Julius passes for, his judgment of some of the Poets in
his Critica, might for ought I know, if well examined, bring in some question,
whither if he had undertaken those great Provinces in Poetry, which require the
highest judgment, his success would(...)

Justus Lipsius, one of the most Illustrious Antiquarys, Critics and
Commentatours of his time in Christendom, by the testimony of Thuanus, Dilherus
and Aubertus Miraeus: and though what he has written in Poetry, is not so much
taken notice of, as his Antiquae Lectiones, his Notes upon Tacitus, his
Saturnalia, and other famed things in Prose; yet to be reckoned also among the
chief of Belgic Latin Poets, for he was born at Brussells, for his excellent
Genius in Latin Verse: he was a constant admirer of Joseph Scaliger, and by him
no less beloved: He was Flourishing beyond the year 1606.

Justus Ricehius, a Native of Gaunt, who for his Varia Carmina, is inserted
among the Belgic Writers of Latin Poetry.

L.
LAelius Capilupus, a Mantuan, who had such an artful and igenious way of
making Centones, out of his Countryman Virgil's Verses, that by Learned Men he
is judged to have excelled Ausonius and Proba Falconia, in that way of writing;
he is mentioned Flourishing in the year 1560.

Laevinus Torrentius: see Levinus.

Lambertus, a Benedictine Monk of Liege, who besides his Life of Heribertus
Archbishop of Coloign, wrote a Book of Hymns in various kinds of Verse.

Lambertus Danaeus, a Writer of Geography in Latin Verse.

Lancinus Curtius, wrote decads of Epigrams, which were printed at Milan by
Rochus and Ambrosius de Valle anno 1521.

Lorenzo Bonicontri.
Laurentius Bonicontrius, a Commentator upon the Poet Manilius, his
Astronomica, being himself both an Astronomer and Poet: his chief Poetic work
being his Tractate of things Natural and Celestial, in Heroic Verse: He was
Flourishing an. 1494.

Lorenzo Gambaro.
Laurentius Gambarus, a principal Favorite of Cardinal Alexander Farnese, and
that chiefly for his fine with and gentile Spirit in Poetry.

Laurentius Niendalius, the Author of Latin Poems which were printed at Vtrecht
an. 1641.

Lazar^ Buonamico, an Italian Poet of Basiana and Paduan Professor 20 years:
his most noted things in Poetry are his Epistles in Verse to Vrsinus Velius of
Silesia, Donatus Rullus of Venice, Altenerius Avogarus of Verona, and several
other Eminent Men of Italy and other parts. Within the time of his
Professourship is comprehended the year of our Lord 1553, the mentioned time of
his Flourishing.

Leonardo Salviati, an Italian Comic writer, whose Comedy called La Spina being
particularly taken notice of, was printed at Ferrara an. 1592.

Leonardus Brunus, an Eminent both Philosopher, Historian, Orator, and also
Poet of Aretium, and thereupon generally known by the Appellation of Leonardus
Aretinus.

Leonardus Pellicanus, the Brother of the most learned Conradus, and had he
lived, might perhaps have arrived somewhat near his perfection, if not equaled
him at least in another kind; for his Genius was Poetical, but he was snatched
away in the flour of his age by an untimely death, in the year 1510 at
Rubeaqua, the place also of his nativity, a Town of Upper Alsatia: however, he
left behind him no inconsiderable Fame, by his elaborate Elegy upon the death
of the Lady Margaret, the Wife of Philip Count Palatine, and Duke of Bavaria;
and his Poem upon the Resurrection and Last Judgment, besides Epigrams in
various kind of Verse.

Levinus Brechtus, a Friar Minorite of Lovain, who wrote the Lives of diverse
Illustrious Martyrs, both in Frose and Verse.

Levinus Torrentinus, a Native of Gaunt, highly extolled by Meibomius, for his
Learning in general; by Sandius for his Notes upon Suetonius and Horace; and by
Aubertus Miraeus for his Odes and Lyric Poetry: For his excellent Genius in
which he prefers him next after Horace himself; he was the next Bishop of
Antuerp after Franciscus Sonnius, and was Flourishing beyond the year 1595.

Lodovic Carlisle, the Author of diverse formerly not unesteem'd, and not yet
totally forgotten Tragi-Comedies; as the two parts of Arviragus and Felicia;
The Passionate Lovers, in 2 parts; Osmond the Great Turk, or the Noble Servant,
a Tragedy.

Lopez de Vega Carpio, the most noted writer among the Spaniards of Comedies,
and other Dramatic Poems; but more noted for the multitude (for he is exceeding
Voluminous) then for the goodness of them, and for his singularity in making
but 3 Acts to each Fable or Play. He also wrote a Poem of Sr Francis Drake's
Exploits in the West Indies.

Lorenzo Medici, a Noble Florentine, as his Name imports, whose Poesy Volgari
was printed at Venice an. 1554.

Lucas Shepherd, an English Poet of Colchester in Essex, of so much note in
Queen Mary's Reign, that he is thought not unworthy of mention by some of our
English Historians.

Ludolphus Pithopoeus, a learned and ingenious Hollander; but most particularly
taken notice of among the Belgic Latin Poets, for his singular faculty in Latin
in Verse.

Ludovicus Alealmus, a French Poetical writer, having a principal Place among
the Latin Versifiers of that Nation.

Ludovico Ariosto, one of the two most celebrated Heroic Poets of Italy; and
thereupon Competitor with Torquato Tasso the other: his Poem entitled Orlando
Furioso, takes its argument from the Expedition of the Emperor Charles the
Great against the Saracens in Spain. There are also of his writing several
Elegant Comedies.

Ludovicus Andreas Resendius, an Eminent both Poet, Orator, Theologist and
Antiquary.

Ludovico Bigi Vittorio, or Pittorio, a Poet of Ferrara, among whose other
Poems, as Hymns, Epitaphs upon the Saints, Satyrs, Elegies, Epigrams, etc. his
Hippolyta an Elegant Poem, is most especially noted.

Ludovico Bruno, the commended Author of a Poem upon the Coronation of
Maximilian King of the Romans: he was Flourishing in the year 1494.

Ludovico Celio Calcagnino; see Celio.

Ludovicus Celottus, a French Man, noted for his Latin Tragedies Sapor,
Chosroes, Adrian, the Tragical Marriage of Mahomet the Second; besides
Hendecasyllables upon the Birth of Christ.

Ludovicus Crucius, the Author of several Latin Tragedies and Comedies, which
were printed at Leiden anno 1605.

Ludovico Dolce, an Italian Lyric Poet or writer of Sonnets, one of the next
Classis after Ottavio Rinuccini, and the rest mentioned with him: with this
Ludovico may be ranked Ludovico Laurentio Martelli, Gabriel Chabriera, Giovanni
de Casa, Mario Colonna, Agnolo Firenzuola, Cesare Caporale, and Burchiello*

Ludovico Laurentio Martelli; see above in Ludovico Dolce.

Ludovicus Lazarellus, the Author of a Poetical Dialogue entitled Crater
Hermetis, dedicated to Ferdinand King of the Romans, and printed at Paris by
Henricus Stephanus an. 1505.

Ludovicus Mazurius, a Hollander, not inconsiderable among the Belgic Writers
of Latin Poesy.

Ludovico or Luigi Pulci, a pretender by his Morgante to a Seat among the
Italian Heroic Poets.

Ludovicus Tribaldus, the Author of a Latin Poem entitled Epenesis Iberica,
which was printed at Antuerp an. 1632.

Luigi Alamanni, a Florentine principally famous for his Heroic Poem entitled
Avarchis: he wrote also 4 Books of Agriculture in Blanc Verse, in which kind of
writing not only he, but also some others of the most judicious of the Italian
Poets, have succeeded well enough, to demonstrate that Rhyme is not so very
essential in the modern Languages, to the making up of a Verse.

Luigi or Ludovico Tansilli, an Italian Poet, best known by what he has
written for the Stage, yet not solely Dramatic, there being other things of his
writing, of which the chief is his Poem entitled Lagrime di Sancto Pietro.

Luis Galvez, a Poetical Writer of Note among the Spaniards, whose Pastor de
Philida. was printed at Madrid anno 1582.

Luke Sheapherd; see Lucas Sh.

M.
MAlens Acidalius, a Writer in Latin Poetry of the number of those that are
esteemed of the chief German Writers of that kind.

Maphaeus Barberinus, a great Ornament to the Papal Chair, to which he was
advanced by the Name of Urban the 8th, by reason of his polite Learning and
Elegance; among other Arts and Sciences, in which he had attained a great
perfection, his extant Poetry has gained him a very Flourishing Fame.

Maphaeus Vegius, a Poet of Lodi, contemporary with Angelus Politianus; among
his other Poetical Works, his most noted is his Supplement to Virgil's Aeneis:
He is mentioned Flourishing in the year 1403.

Marcellus Palingenius, Sirnam'd Stellatus Poeta, the Author of a well known
and approved Poem entitled Zodiacus Vitae, whose subject is the right
Institution of human Life, Study and Manners, and dedicated to Hercules the
Second Duke of Ferrara; it consists of 12 Books, according to the number of the
12 Signs, and each Book accordingly denominated.

Marcus Antonius Antimachus, a Native of Ferrara, who by his assiduous and
choice converse with Greec Authors, made himself so much Master of that
Language, that he has among other things both in Prose and Verse, written 8
Books of Greec Epigrams with the success of no vulgar repute; he outlived the
year 1544.

Marcus Aemilius Portus, the Son of Franciscus a Cretensian, or Native of the
Isle of Candie, a Professor of the Greec Tongue; first at Ferrara, next at
Orleans; whose Metaphrase of David's Psalms in Greec Verse is taken notice
(...) by Duport, though with no extraordinary commendation.

Marco Antonio Tibaldeo, a noted Italian Author of a Poem entitled Tibaldeo,
which was printed at Venice anno 1556.

Marcus Antonius Boba a Cardinal, whom Thuanus having convers't with him at
Rome, commends for his Vein in Poetry and his Eloquence, both in speaking and
writing.

Marcus Antonius Flaminius, an Italian, who besides that he was an excellent
Philosopher, by his sweet Vein in Latin Poesy, sufficiently appearing in his 2
Books of Carmina or Odes, indeared himself to several Eminent Men of his time,
and among others to Cardinal Reginald Pool, at whose request he made a Version
of David's Psalms, in Elegant Latin Verse, which by mistake has been by some
imputed to Joannes Antonius Fl. of Forum Cornelii.

Marcus Antonius Muretus; see Antonius.

Marcus Hieronymus Vida, a Noble Poet of Cremona, who was promoted to the
Bishoprie of Alba: his works consist chiefly of these following Poems, his
Christias or Poem of the Life and* death of Christ, in 6 Books; his three Books
De Art Poetio; his 2 Books of the care and management of Silkworms; his
Description of the Game at Chesse; in one Book; besides Hymns, Odes, Bucolic,
Eclogues, etc. He is mentioned by Thuanus among other learned Men, under the
year 1566.

Marcus Joannes Croeselius, an Elegiac Writer in two remarkable Books; the
first his Encomiums of the most noted Emperors, Kings and Commanders in War
from Constantine: the second of Men most Famous for Learning and the Arts.

Marcus Joannes Fracta, a Poet of Verona, chiefly remembered for his Poem
entitled Malteis.

Marcus Musurus, a Cretan Writer of Epigrams, whereof those are particularly
remembered which he wrote upon certain Greec Authors, set forth by Nicolaus
Blastus at Venice an. 1500.

Mario Colonna; see Ludovico Dol^e.

Marius Philelphus, the Son of Franciscus already mentioned, and Heir of his
Father's both Dignity and Fame for he was also both Knight and Poet Laureat.

Martinus Earnerus, his Sylv^^la in various Latin Verse, not unmention'd by the
Registers of the Works of Eminent Men.

Martin LLeu^llin, the not uncommended Writer of a Book of Facetious Poems,
which while he was Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, were published by the
Title of Man-Miracles; but now more conversant in another of Apollos Faculties
the Study and practice of Physic.

Martinus Bovillus, the Author of funeral Elegies, which were printed at
Brescia anno 1519.

Martinus Braschius, a German Writer of Latin Poesy, mentioned and quoted among
the choice Latin Poets accounted of that Nation.

Martinus Opizius, an Italian of special esteem for polite Literature, but
especially for what he has written in Latin Verse.

Martinus Praetorius, a German of Poetical Fame, chiefly for his Poem of Heroic
Title Austrias.

Martinus Turnemannus, a German, whose Poem entitled Triumphus Mortis, was
printed at Francfurt anno 1624.

Mattheus Argillander, a Writer of Poems, which were printed at Basil by
Oporinus.

Mattheus Delius, a German, one of the principal esteemed Latin Poets of that
Nation.

Mattheus Gribaldus, a Commentator upon the Pandects, who also wrote upon the
Modern Jurisconsults in Verse, allowing to each their several Distich.

Matteo Maria Boiardoi, a Count of Scandiano, whose Orlando Inamorato ranks him
among the Italian Heroic Poets.

Matthias Cervus, the Author of a Poem in allusion to his own Name, upon the
picture of a Heart; his famous Elegy also upon Philip Melanchthon, is
particularly taken notice of.

Matthias Surnamed from his Country Illyricus, a Greec Professor at Tubing, who
set forth Poems also of various subjects.

Matthias Mosnaverus, a Writer of Strasburg, no less famed for his learned
Epigrams then what he wrote in Prose; he is recorded Flourishing an. 1543.

Matthias Ringmannus Philesius, a native of Vogesium, the Disciple of Jacobus
Wimphelingus, and a writer of both Prose and Verse, particularly Epigrammatic.

Matthias Stoius, a Poetical writer of Regiomonte in Prussia, of whose writing
I find particularly mentioned his Elegiac Poem upon Christ's Baptism, and his
Eclogue upon the Nuptials of Gaspar Peucerus, and Magdalen the Daughter of
Melanchthon.

Mauritius Marganensis, an Englishman, who Flourisht in the year of our Lord
1210, and wrote a Book of Epigrams in various Latin Verse.

Mauritius Neoportus, another English writer (though much differing in time, as
being of the present Age, and probably now living) of a late Latin Poem;
printed at London, and entitled Votum Carolo Secundo Ang. etc. Regi.

Maximilianus Transylvanus, Max. Vignacurtius, and Max. Vriensis, a Triad of
Maximilians, all Low Country men of the number of those that have a Name for
Latin Verse. The first of Brussels, whose Varia Carmina are published with the
selected Works of diverse others of that Country: the second of Arras, whose
(...) in Res Belgas, is of the same publication: the third also of the same
society, by his Book of Latin Epigrams.

Maximus Margunius, a Grecian, who at the Dedication of certain Relics, saved
by him from shipwreck, to the Public, added also several Copies of his own
Verses, written in no unelegant style.

Melchior Acontius, a German, who has written many things in Verse, among
which is his noted Epithalamium upon the Nuptials of Georgius Sabinus, with
Anne the Daughter of Ph. Melanchton, commonly printed with Sabinus his Poems.

Melchior Agri^ola, a writer of Latin Epigrams, whose Surname is sufficient to
gain him reputation, what ever Relation he had to the Great Rodolphus.

Melchior Barlaeus, a writer, thou^h not of equal fame for Poetry with Gaspar,
yet reckoned of the number of the chiefly esteemed writers of the
Low Countries, for Latin Poetry.

Mr Menage; see Aegidius Menagius.

Mercurius Ronzius, a writer of diverse Tragedies so well esteemed, that Albertus
de Eyb in his Margarita Poetica, has made a collection of Sentences out of
them.

Michael Surnamed Anglicus, but by Nation French, of the Town of Belmont, a
Professor of Civil and Canon Law, who yet gave himself a Vacancy to Poetry, and
wrote 4 Books of Eclogues to the Bishop of Paris, two to Ludovicus Villerius,
besides several Books of various Poems.

Michael Surnamed The Cornish, Poet, a notable Rimer in Latin Verse, in the
time of K. John and Henry the third; out of whose Rhyms for Merry England, as
Cambden calls them, several passages are quoted by the same Author in his
remains.

Michael Drayton, Contemporary of Spencer and Sr Philip Sidney, and for Fame
and renoun in Poetry, not much inferior in his time to either: however, he
seems somewhat antiquated in the esteem of the more curious of these times*
especially in his Polyalbion, the old fashioned kind of Verse whereof, seem
somewhat to diminish that respect which was formerly paid to the subject as
being both pleasant and elaborate, and thereupon thought worthy to be commented
upon, by that once walking Library of our Nation Seldom; his Englands, Heroical
Epistles are more generally liked, and to such as love the pretty Chat of
Nymphs and Sheapherds, his Nymphals and other things of that nature cannot be
unpleasant.

Michael Hospitalius, a Famous Chancellor of France under Charles the 9th til
he was removed for opposing the Parisian Massacre; and one of the celebrated
Latin Poets of that Nation, for his 6 Books of Epistles in Latin Verse, and
other Poetical works: from a very ancient Medal of Aristotle, he is concluded
to have much resembled that great Philosopher.

Michael Tarchaniota Marullus, a Constantinopolitan Poet, whose Hymns and
Epigrams were printed at Fano by Soncinus an. 1529.

Michael Toxites, a Rhetian or Grison, who wrote among other things an Elegiac
Poem, entitled The Complaint of the Goose of the Ingratitude of Mankind.

Michael Vander Hagen, an Antuerpian, whose Varia Carmina rank him, with other
selected Poets of the Low Countries.

Miguel Cervantes, a Spaniard, and the Author of that famous Spanish Romance
called Don Quixot; besides Novelles and other things in Prose; and in Verse,
what ever besides, a Poem entitled Viaje di Parnasso.

Miguel, a Spanish Licentiate, whose Minerva Sacra, is mentioned with other
late Poetical pieces of that Nation.

Mr Mole, a French both States Man, for he was President of the Parliament of
Paris, and writer of Commended Poems, which were published not many years* since
at Paris.

N.
NAtalis Comes, a Grave and Learned Venetian Historian, though most generally
famed by his 10 Books of Mythology, in which he gives a Summary of the Poetical
Fables, with an Explication of all their Allegories, both Moral and
Philosophical, to which is annex't his Poem of Hunting, in Elegant Latin Verse;
besides what else he wrote in Poetry.

Nathan Chytraeus, a German, whose Vranoscopia, Geoscopia and other Poetical
pieces of that nature, are taken notice of by Learned Men, among the works of
other writers of Latin Poetry, accounted of the Chief of Germany.

Nicodemus Frischlinus, a German writer of nomean account in Poetry, not less
then Heroic as his Hebreis imports.

Nicolas Breton, a writer of Pastoral, Sonnets, Canzons and Madrigals, in which
kind of writing he keeps company with several other Contemporary Aemulators of
Spencer and Sr Philip Sidney, in a published Collection of selected Odes, of the
chief Pastoral Sonnetters, etc. of that Age.

Nicolaus Causinus, a very famous French man, Father Confessor jointly with
Iacobus Sirmondus, to King Lewis the 13th of France; besides his vulgarly so
much admired work The Holy Court, his Book De Eloquentia, his Thesaurus Graecae
Poeseos, and other things in Prose, he has also written in Verse several
Tragedies, Solyma, Nebuchadonosor, Theodoricus, etc. and other Latin Poems.

Nicolaus Cisnerus Mosbachius, a Poet of the Palatine or Territory of the
Prince Palatine of the Rhine; he was in his Prime about the year 1556.

Nicolaus Grudius, the possessour of a principal Place among the Principal
Latin Poets of Germany.

Nicolaus Kenton, an old English Poet, that is old in respect of this Age, for
he wrote in the Reign of K. Edward the 4th; and as Poetry then went, was looked
upon as a very Famous Man in those times.

Nicolaus Marius Panicianus a Ferrarese, whose Poetic writings were both many,
and of various subjects.

Nicolaus Querculus, the Author of 2 Books of Moral Hexastichs, printed by
Reginaldus Calderius at Paris an. 1552.

Nicolaus Rapinus, a Frenchman, whose Fame in Latin Poetry has a Place among
the Chief of that Nation.

Nicolaus Reusnerus, a Professor at Ienes, of universal knowledge in all Arts
and Sciences, by the testimony of Melchior Adams, in his Life, and Boissardus
in his Bibliotheca; and for his felicity in Latin Verse, rankt among the modern
Latin Poets accounted of the Prime of Germany: among the rest of his Opera
Poetica, his Monarchae is peculiarly mentioned.

Nicolaus Rhedigerus, a German, one of the principal accounted of that Nation
for excellence in Latin Poetry.

Nicolaus Rigaltius, a wri^er of Annotations upon Tertullian, for which he has
a very high commendation from Grotius, in his Epistle to Petrus Puteanus; but
besides this and several other works in Prose, he has written sufficiently in
Latin Verse to gain himself the title to a Place among the modern Latin Poets,
accounted of the Chief of France: He is also mentioned as a Person of universal
Literature by Gassendus, in his Life of Peireskius

Nicolaus Rudingerus, one of the number of those that are esteemed of the Prime
of the German Nation for a happy Vein in Latin Poetry.

Nicolaus Valla, a Roman, who besides his Latin Version of Homers Ilias and
Hesiods Opera and Dies, has also left productions of his own invention, among
which his two Epistles of Rome and Constantinople, each to other reciprocal.

O.
Octavius Boldonius, wrote Epigrapica or Elogia, in Latin Verse, which were
printed at Paris, anno 1660.

Octavius Cleophilus, an Elegant Poet of Fano, a principal Town of Marca
Anconitana, among whose Poetical works (for he wrote many things both in Prose
and Verse) are his Poem entitled Faneis, in 3 Books, and his Book De Coetu
Poetarum, in which he gives a brief touch of all the Ancient both Greec and
Latin Poets.

Octavius Meninus, a writer of Latin Poesy, among other the Chief writers of
Latin Poesy accounted of the Italians.

Octavius Rubeus, a Paduan, born in the year 1570, the Son of Iacobus de
Rubeis, and Hippolyta of the Family of the Scarpi; he wrote the History of
Brescia, with good success, and is moreover reckoned among the number of
Choicest Italians Poets.

Orlando Pescetti, a Tragic writer of Verona.

Otho of Cremona, his Latin Rythms concerning the choice of Simples and
Medicinal Ingredients were printed at Francfort anno 1533 by Christianus
Egenolphus.

Ottavio Rinuccini, an Italian Lyric Poet or writer of Sonnets, one (generally
so accounted) of the first rank after Petrarch, for Elegancy and sweetness. Of
the same Class with him we may rekon Guido Cavalcanti, Girolamo Preti, Georgio
Gradenico, Benedetto Varchi, Speron Sperone, Francesco Maria Molza, Bernardino
Rota, and Tasso himself, who was no less happy in his Sonnets then in his
Heroic Poems.

P.
PAcificus Maximus Asculanus, an Eminent both Grammarian and Poet, among whose
Poetical works his Poem Lucretia in 2 Books, and his Virginia, in as many, were
seth forth by Hieronymus Soncinus an. 1550. He wrote also 20 Books of Elegies,
a Poem to Joannes Salvalius, and an Invective against Angelus Politianus.

Pamphilius Saxus, a Discoverer of his Poetical talent, with diverse other
Italian writers in Latin Poetry; whose selected works are published together.

Parthenius Paravicinus, a Novocommensian, not of the meanest repute of the
late Italian writers in Latin Verse.

Pantaleon Candidus, a German Poet of the Chief of those that are famed for an
Elegant style in Latin Verse.

Mr Paschal, a late French writer of a Poem entitled Le Commerce du Parnasse.

Paulus Areolus, an Elegant Poet of Taleacotium, born in the year 1570. He was
preferred to the Government of Lugo by Cardinal Antonius Barberinus.

Paulus Dolscius, a Metaphrast of David's Psalms and Salomon's Book of Wisdom,
and thereupon mentioned by Conradus Dinnerus, in his Catalogue of Greek Poets.

Paulus Maccius, an Italian of Principal note and fame among the Latin
Versifiers of that Nation.

Paulus Marsus, a Poet of Piscinae, who yet writ also in Prose a Comment upon
Ovid's Fasti.

Paulus Medius Schedius, a French Poet, who had so a great repute in Italy,
that he was made a Citizen of Rome and also a Knight and Count of Padua:
besides his Schediasmata Poetica, which were printed at Paris an. 1586, he
wrote Epigrams upon all the Cities of Italy.

Paulus Musconius, a writer of Latin Tetrastichs containing a System of
Christian Religion,

Paulus Rubigallus, a Hungarian, whose Hodoeporicon or Itinerary Poem, upon his
Constantinopolitan journey in Elegiac Verse, was printed at Wirtenberg 1554,
with his Complaint of Pannonia to Germany.

Paulus Baron of Swartzenburg, and Lord of Lunenberg. His Epigrams were printed
at Augsburg by Henricus Steiner an. 1583.

Petrus Aegidius, a noted German writer both in Prose and Verse, of which last
kind are his Threnodie upon the Emperor Maximilian, his Epitaphes upon several
other great Princes, with diverse Epigrams.

Petrus Angelius Bargoeus, a Student (after several years travel into far
Countries) in the University at Pisa, where among other studies, he became
chiefly proficient in that of Poetry; from whence among other commendable
Poems, proceeded his Cynegetics, and Syrias: the mentioned year of his
flourishing was 1596.

Petrus Bembus, a Noble Venetian, whose high and well deserved reputation of a
most Learned and Eloquent Person, soon advanced him to the Purple; among the
rest of whose Poetical works, for he was also a great Historian, Philosopher
and Philologist, that which has obtained the principal fame is his Benaons, a
Heroic Poem. He was arrived to his Meridian Altitude in the year 1640.

Petrus Bolaneus, his Hymns, his Panegyric in Sapphic Verse upon the Emperor
Frederic the third, his Funeral Elegy upon Rudolphus Agricola, his Epigram made
of the Sentences of Seneca and Plato, and some other Poems, made his fame known
by the year 1494.

Petrus Bonommus, an Epigrammatic Poet of Triest, a Town of Friuli,
Contemporary with the above mentioned Bolaneus.

Petrus Christianus, a Representer in Latin Verse of the late War between the
several Princes and States in Europe; but more especially relating to what has
happened in the Low Countries.

Petrus Crinitus, the Author of a Treatise in 5 Books, of the Latin Poets, in
which there are contained several Fragments of Ancients Poets; whose complete
works are lost, besides which Treatise in Prose, he has extant two Books of
Odes, with other Poems: he survived the year 1505.

Petrus Curtius, the Author of a Poem concerning the Ancient Falisci and
Veientes; and another entitled Roma: he was flourishing an. 1526.

Petrus Labbaeus, a French both judicious Censurer of the Ancient Poets, and
accounted not the meanest himself of Modern Poets; whose Latin Elegies and
Epitaphs were printed at Grenoble an. 1664.

Petrus Lindebergius, a German both excellent Historian and Laureated Poet, by
the testimony of Olaus Wormius, in his Literatura Danica; and of his own works
namely his History of the affai^s of Europe, and his extant Poems.

Petrus Lotichius ^cundus, the most excellent of German Poets, according to the
testimony of Thuanus, next after Eobanus Hessus.

Petrus Molinaeus, the Son of that generally Learned French man and famous
Champion of the Protestant cause Peter du Moulin; himself also not unlearned,
as appears by his Latin Poems consisting in 3 parts, Hymns upon the Apostolic
Creed, 2 Gemitus Ecclesiae, and 3 Sylva variorum, published a few years since at
Cambridge, with the testimony of Dr Gunning, now Bishop of Chichester, and
other Learned Men.

Petrus Paganus, the Author in Latin Heroic Verse of the History of the Triple
Combat between the Horatii and Curiatii, the 3 Roman and 3 Alban Brethren.

Petrus Ronsardus, a French Poet of Vendosme, the most to be esteemed in the
judgment of Thuanus, not only of the French, but of all other Poets that have
lived since the time of Augustus.

Petrus Rossetus, a Parisian whose Poem entitled Christus in 2 Books, as also
his Paulus, or the D^scription in Verse of the Apostles Acts, were first
printed at Paris by Ascentius and Colmaeus afterward at Basil by Oporinus an.
1547.

Petrus Scotus, a native of Strasburg, who wrote Encomiums in Elegiac Verse of
St. John Baptist, and St. Chrysostom: and was flourishing an. 1492.

Petrus Scriverius, a Belgian of Harlem, both profound Philologist and
Antiquary, by the testimony of Boxhornius in his Theatrum Hollandiae, by
Vossius highly commended for his Comment upon Martial, by others quoted among
the Chief of that Country for Latin Poesy.

Petrus Tiara, a Frislander of no less account for Latin Poetry among the
Belgic Poets, for his Poem of the Ancient State of the Friselanders, and
another of Nobility, and the true Ensigns thereof.

Philippus Gundelius, a Paduan of whose Poetry there are especially remembered
his 2 noted Eglogues Apollonodia and Callianera, printed at Vienna 1518.

Philippus Lonicerus, a German, who has written Icones Liviani in Latin Verse.

Philip Massinger, a sufficiently famous and very copious writer, both Comic
and Tragic to the English Stage; his Comedies are his Bondsman, Emperor of the
East, Maid of Honor, Newway to pay old debts, the Picture, the Bashful Lover,
the Renegad^, the Guardian, the Great Duke of Florence: his Tragedies the Fatal
Dowry, the Duke of Millain.

Philippus Rubenius, a Kinsman of the most admired Painter Petrus Paulus
Rubens, upon whom he wrote Elegies; but of chiefest note are his Apobaterion,
and Eucharistic to Justus Lipsius, and his Lachrymae upon his death.

Sr Philip Sidny, the Glory of the English Nation in his time, and Pattern of
true Nobility, as equally addicted both to Arts and Arms, though more fortunate
in the first; for accompanying his Uncle the Earl of Leicester, sent by Queen
Elizabeth General of the English Forces into the Low Countries, he was there
unfortunately slain: He was the great English Mecaenas of Virtue, Learning and
Ingenuity, though in his own Writings chiefly if not wholly Poetical; his
Arcadia being a Poem in design, though for the most part in solute Oration, and
his Astrophil and Stella, with other things in Verse, having, if I mistake not,
a greater Spirit of Poetry, then to be altogether disesteem'd.

Philippus Porta, the next in the esteem of Thuanus, after Bellaqua, for
excellency in French Poesy (though no native himself) that is the fourth after
Ronsard.

Phineas Fletcher, the Brother of George before mentioned, whom he rather
exceeds, then comes behind in Poetic fame; for his Purple Island is yet memory,
and mentioned by many with sufficient commendation: besides which he wrote a
Poem in Latin against the Jesuits, but more enlarged in English.

Pierre Le Moine, late French Writer of a Heroic Poem entitled St. Louis,

Pierius Valarianus, a Belluuensium Writer of a Latin Poem of the culture of
Smilax or Ridnybean.

Pompeo Torelli, his Italian Poem Vittoria, was printed at Parma an. 1605.

Pompeius Hugonius, wrote a Latin Poem of the Victory of Lepanto, which is
published with the selected works of several other Italian writers in Latin
Poesy.

Porcellius, a Neapolitan, who for his acute Wit; and rather quick and ready
then sublime vein in Poetry, was in high favor with Frederik Duke of Vrbin.

Publius Faustus Andrelins, a Poet of Forli, a principal Town of Romania; the
chief of whose Poems are his Elegies upon the two Neapolitan Victories, and the
Captivity of Ludovico Sforza, his 4 Eclogues and his Book of Distichs.

Publius Franciscus Amerinus, his Funeral Poems upon Baptista Platina, are
printed with those of other Learned Men, at the end of Platina's works.

Q.
QVintius Aemilianus, a Cimbrian, or Dane, who wrote an Elegant Poem in praise
of Love, in opposition to Petrus Hedaeus his Anterotica, also an Epicedium to
the Emperor Frideric the third.

Quintus Septimius Florens Christianus, a Frenchman, so great a Master of the
Latin and Greec tongues, that for what he wrote in either of them, whither in
Prose or Verse, he stands comparable in the opinion of Thuanus, to most of the
Ancients, besides what he wrote in both style in his Mother Tongue: he is
recorded Flourishing an. 1586.

R.
Sr Ralph Freeman, the Author of a Tragedy, which by some is held in great
esteem Entitled Imperiale.

Raphael Thorius, a learned French Poet, whose elegant style in Latin Verse,
discovers it self in his noted Poem entitled Hymnus Tabaci, or Encomium of
Tobacco.

Reinhardus Lorichius Hadamarius, a German writer of many elaborate works,
among which not least to be regarded is his Description in Verse of the
luxurious and splendid Feasts of Ahasuerus and Darius Kings of Persia: he was
Flourishing in the year 1542.

Richard Brathwait, the writer of certain Poems, which coming forth about 30
years since, though of little or no fame in the World, yet not totally
perishing in oblivion have gained the fortune to be here mentioned.

Remigius Bellaqua, one of the principal Poets reputed of France, and by some
accounted the third from Ronsard, that is by those in whose esteem Joachimus
Bellaius holds the 2d place: he wrote many things in Latin, but most in the
Mother Tongue: he is commonly chronologis'd under the year 1577.

Renatus Rapinus, a French, both Critical Judge of the Poets, as appears by his
Reflections on Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry, and Poet also him self of no
obscure fame by his Latin Poem of Horticulture or Gardening, which has been of
late ingeniouly translated by John Evelin, the younger of Says Court by
Deptford, following in the trac of fame the footsteps of his Learned Father,
sufficiently known by his many both delightful, and to the Public most
beneficial works.

Richard Brom, a Servant to Ben. Johnson; a Servant suitable to such a Master,
and who what with his faithful service and the sympathy of his Genius, was
thought worthy his particular commendation in Verse; whatever Instructions he
might have from his Master Johnson, he certainly by his own natural parts
improved to a great height, and at last became not many parasangues inferior
to him in fame by diverse noted Comedies, as The Antipodes, the Novella,
Mock-Marriage, the Covent Garden Wedding, the Mad couple well Matched, the
Ambitious Politic, the Court Beggar, the City wit; but especially his Nothern
Less, his Jovial Crew, and his Asparagus Garden.

Richard Corbet, a no less witty Poetiser in his Youth, when his Iter Boreale
and other facetious Poems, were the effects of his juvenil fancy, then grave
Divine in his Elder years, when his more serious studies advanced him to the
Bishoprie, first of Oxford, then of Norwich.

Richard Crashaw, Fellow first of Pembroke-Hall, afterward of St. Peter's
College in Cambridge; a Devout pourer forth of his Divine Raptures and
Meditations, in smooth and Pathetic Verse: His Poems consist of 3 parts, the
first entitled Steps to the Temple, being for the most part Epigrams upon
several passages of the New Testament; the second part, The Delights of the
Muses, or Poem upon several occasions both English and Latin; the third and
last part Carmen Deo nostro, being Hymns and other Sacred Poems, addressed to
the Countess of Denbigh, that Religious solitude and love of a recluse life,
which made him spend much of his time, and even lodge many nights under
Tertullian's roof of Angels, in St. Mary's Church, drew him at length, turning
Roman Catholic, to betake himself to that so zealously frequented place called
Our Lady's of Loretto in Italy, where he died.

Sr Richard Fanshaw, heretofore Secretary to his present Majesty, when Prince
of Wales, and after his restoration, his Ambassador into Spain, where he died.
Besides his Translation of Guarini's Pastor Fido into English Verse, and of
Spencer's Sheapherds Calender into Latin Verse.

Richard Rablet, and Richard Turner, two Contemporaries (and therefore perhaps
worthy of mention for antiquities sake) with Drayton, with whose Owl and other
old Pieces of Poetry, two small things of theirs, Rablets Cob's Prophecy, and
Turner's Nosce te Humors, were published, and seem to be but the track of other
Poetical works, though now lost and forgotten.

Richard Lovelace, an approved both Soldier, Gentleman and Lover, and a fair
pretender to the Title of Poet; a Soldier, having Commanded a Regiment in the
late King's Army; a Gentleman of a Vicounts Name and Family; a Lover Militant
under the Bannor of of Lucasta, the Lady Regent under a Poetical Name of his
Poetical endeavors; and as to the last of his Qualififications, besides the
acute and not unpleasant style of his Verses, a Man may discern therein
sometimes those sparks of a Poetic fire, which had they been the main design,
and not Parergon, in some work of Heroic argument, might happily have blazed
out into the perfection of sublime Poesy.

Robertus Aytonus, a Scotch Poet, of whom there is extant a Panegyric to King
James in Latin Verse.

Robert Baron, a Dramatic writer, who wrote Don Quixot or the Knight of the
Ill-favored Countenance; a Comedy Gripus, and Hegio a Pastoral. Deorum Dona,
Dick Scorner, Destruction of Jerusalem, the Marriage of Wit and Science,
Masks and Interludes; Myrza, a Tragedy.

Robertus Bodius, a Scotchman, whose Latin Verses have a Place among the works
of several Eminent Scotch Poets.

Robert Chamberlain, the Author of a Comedy called The Swaggering Damsel, and
Sicelides, a Pastoral.

Robert Fleming, an English writer, recorded in History among those that
Flourisht in the Reign of King Henry the 6th; not only for his Dictionary in
Greec and Latin, but also for a work, he is said to have writ in Verse, of
various Argument.

Robert Garnier, a French Counselor of State, and writer of Tragedies.

Robert Sirnam'd of Gloucester, a not altogether obscure writer in the Reign of
Henry the Third; and seeming to pass for a Poet, in the esteem of Cambden, who
quotes diverse of his old English Rythms in praise of his native Country England.

Robert Gomersal, the Author of Lodowic Sforza, a Tragedy, and some other
things of Poetical subject.

Robert Green, one of the Pastoral Sonnet makers of Qu. Elizabeth's time,
Contemporary with Dr Lodge, with whom he was associated in the writing of
several Comedies, namely The Laws of Nature, Lady Alimony, Liberality and
Prodigality, and a Masque called Luminalia; besides which he wrote alone the
Comedies of Friar Bacon and Fair Emme.

Robert Heath, the Author of a Book of Poems, which about 20 years ago came
forth under the Title of Clarastella; the ascribed title of that Celebrated
Lady, who is supposed to have been both the Inspirer and chief subject of them.

Robert Herric, a writer of Poems of much about the same standing and the same
Rank in fame with the last mentioned, though not particularly influenc't by any
Nymph or Goddess, except his Maid Pru. That which is chiefly pleasant in these
Poems, is now and then a pretty Floury and Pastoral gale of Fancy, a vernal
prospect of some Hill, Cave, Rcok, or Fountain; which but for the interruption
of other trivial passages might have made up none of the worst Poetic Landskips.

Sr Robert Howard, of the Noble Family of the Earls of Berkshire, and Brother
to the present Earl; besides the Dignity of his present Office, as being
employed in his Majesty's Exchequer, but of the most considerable Fame by what
he has written in Poetry, especially to the Stage; viz. The Blind Lady, the
Surprisal, the Comittie, Comedies; The Great Favorite a Tragedy, Enforced
Marriage a Tragy-Comedy; and The Indian Queen a Dramatic History.

Robert Mead, the Author of two not altogether obscure Comedies. The Combat of
Love and Friendship, and the Costly Whore.

Robertus Obricius, a writer of Latin Hymns.

Dr Robert Wild, one of the Poetical Cassock, and not of the meanest rank,
being in some sort a kind of Anti-Cleaveland; in regard he stands up in behalf
of the Presbyterians as notably as ever Cleaveland did against them: the first
thing that recommended him to public Fame, was his Iter Boreale, the same in
Title, though not in Argument with that little; but much commended Poem of Dr
Corbet's, before mentioned; this being upon Monk's Journey iuto Scotland, in
order to His Majesty's Restoration, and looked upon for a lofty and conceitful
style: his other things are for the most part of a lepid and facetious nature.

Rochus, a Chartreux Monk, mentioned in History among other Eminent Men of K.
Edw. the Fourth's time.

Sr De Roquigni, the Author of a late French Poem entitled Muse Chrestienne.

Rodulphus Agricola, a most Famous writer of Groeningen in Friseland, who among
many other works wrote also Epitaphs and other Poems. There were moreover two
others of the same name, both Poets; the first Rodolphus Agricola junior, a
Poet Laureat, the other of Wassenburg.

Rodolphus Avincatius, his Poems dedicated to the Farnesi, were printed at Rome
an. 1543.

Rodolphus Avantius, an Italian writer of Odes or Sonnets.

Rodolphus Gualtherus, a Native of Zurich, in Switzerland, and Pastor of the
Church of Zurich. In Prose he wrote very many things in Heroic verse, The
Monomachie, or Single Combat between David and Goliath, with the Allegorical
Exposition thereof.

Rodolphus Langius, a German writer, Prebend of Munster, who wrote a Poem of
the 3 Magi or Wisemen, another of the Siege of Nuis to the Dean of Colen,
besides others of various subjects.

Roger Ascham, a Man of that Eminence for learning, that he was thought worthy
to be chosen Preceptor to that most Glorious Princess Queen Elizabeth; and
though principally famed for his Latin Epistles and other things in Prose, yet
mentioned with commendation by Balaeus, for Epigrams and other Latin Poems.

Roger Boil, Lord Broghil and Earl of Orery, the Credit of the Irish Nobility
for wit and ingenuous parts, and a smooth style both in Prose and Verse; in
which last he has written several Dramatic Histories, as Mustapha, Edw. the
Third, Henry the Fifth, Tryphon, and that with good success and applause, for
the way he writes in, namely the continual Riming, and love and honor way of
the French.

Mr Rostrou, a French Tragedian censured by Renatus Rapinus, in his Reflections
on Aristotle's Treatise of Poetry.

Ruccelaio, an Italian Poet, who wrote in Blank Verse of the Culture of Bees.

S.
Mr Sabliquy, his Muse Dauphine published an. 1661.

Salmonius Macrinus, an Ingenious Poet of Laudun, sufficiently known by his 6
Books of Odes, in which he made it his study to imitate Horace, both in the
Argument and manner of Verse; but especially Famous for his Lyric Poem entitled
Gelonide, which he wrote when weary of a single, he betook himself to a Married
Life.

Samuel Daniel, an Author of good note and reputation in King James his Reign;
whose History of the 11 first Kings of England from the Norman Conquest, though
it be of all the rest of his Works most principally sought after and regarded,
yet are not his Poetical writings totally forgotten, as namely his Historical
Poem of the Civil Wars between the House of York and Lancaster, his Letter of
Octavia to Antoninus, his Complaint of Rosamund, his Panegyric. etc. and of
Dramatic pieces his Tragedy of Philotas, and Cleopatra, Hymen's Triumph, and
the Queens Arcadia a Pastoral.

Samuel Purchase; see William Slatyer.

Samuel Rowly, remembered by his Comical History, When you see me you know me;
and his Tragedy, The Noble Spanish Soldier.

Samuel Woodford, a late commended Translator (if not rather Paraphrast) of
David's Psalms; in the Pindaric, vulgarly so called, and other various sorts of
Verse.

Scoevola Samarthanus, a Learned Frenchman, who wrote in Latin Verse Elogies
upon all the Eminent Men of France, to his time, for Learning and Arts.

Scipio Capycius, the Author of two learned Poems; viz. De Vate Maximo, and De
Principiis rerum.

Mr De Scudery, Governor of Nostre-Dome; the most Voluminous and of the most
Famous of late French Romancers, or rather Adulterators of true History with
Romantic entreagues of Love; yet to say truth, in a style and conduct, much
more gentile and polite then any of the old Romances could boast, and not
without a pretty representing of the height of the French Galantry and
conversation: this way of writing will easily be allowed to be a sort of
Poetry, but there are besides not very long since published his Poesies diverses.

Sebastianus Aerichalcus, a Polonian, who described in Heroic Verse, the
Affections of the Mind, out of Philip Melanchton's Book De Anima, as also the
Solar Eclipse of the year 1546.

Sebastianus Castalio, the famed Author of many learned Works, both in Prose
and Verse; among those in Prose, the most known are his Sacred Dialogues, as
being frequently taught in Grammar Schools: His chief things in Poetry, are his
Eclogue Sirillus upon our Savior's Nativity, his History of the Prophet Jonas,
in Latin Heroic Verse, his Life of St. John Baptist, in Heroic Greec Verse, his
Version of 40 of David's Psalms, and of two of Moses's Songs. He was
Flourishing at Basil about the year 1540.

Sebastianus Titio, alias Brant, an Eminent Jurisconsult of Strasburgh,
Professor both of Civil and Canon Law; but his Writings which were very many,
were of various subjects, and several of them in Verse; as his Rosary of the B.
Virgin, in Sapphics; his Elegy upon the death of the Emperor Frederic, a Book
of Epigrams, Divine Satyrs, both in Latin and Vernacular Verse, the Encomiums
of several Saints, and an Epithalamium upon the Marriage of King Maximilian,
with Blanca Maria.

Mr Segrais, his Poesies printed at Paris anno 1661.

Sethus Calvisius, a German most learned Historian, Poet, and Musician; whose
Opus Chronologicum and other Works, have their deserved same: He died at
Leipsich, in the 60th year of his age, an. 1615.

Shakerly Marmion, a not obscure or uncopious Writer of English Comedy, having
sufficiently testified his success therein, in his Antiquary, his Holland
Leaguer, his Fleir, Fine Companion, and Fair Maid of the Exchange.

Sigismundus Fulginas, Secretary of the Apostolic Chamber, one of the Authors
of those Eminent Funeral Poems upon Platina, which in honor of that Learned
Writer, are printed at the end of his works.

Simon Fagellus Villaticus, a Bohemian, whose Poetical Works are his Hymns,
Epigrams, Funeral Epitaphs, Distichs, etc.

Simon Lemnius, a German, who besides his Translations of Dionysius Aser and
Homer's Odysses, into Latin Verse, has left from the product of his own
Genius, Episodes upon Joachimus Marquese of Brandenburgh and his Lady; 5
Bucolic Eglogues, and 4 Books of Ethics in Verse. He died at Chur in
Switzerland of the Pestilence anno 1550.

Simon Ogerius, a Writer of Silvae and other Latin Poems with reputation
inferior to few of the Modern Latin Poets.

Simon Sinapius, Pastor of the Church of Lubin in Lnsatia, who wrote a Poem of
Christ's Passion, distributed into hours.

Simon Valambertus, a Writer of Epigrams and other Poems, which were printed at
Lions by Paganus, at Paris by Wechelus.

Speron Sperone; see Ottavio Rinuccini.

Saint Amant, one of the Chief in repute of French Poets, out of whom several
things being rendered English by a Person of our Nation, no less considerable
for Poetry then the other, have for certain lost no advantage.

Stanislaus Niger, a Polonian, whose Encomium of the Poets in Elegiac Verse,
was printed at Leipsich on. 1538.

Stephanus Paschasius, a French Writer, among whose other Works are his Icones,
Epigrams and Epitaphs. He was Flourishing in the year of our Lord 1546, and
stands in Ludovicus Jacobus his Book De Claris Scriptoribus Cabilionensibus,
with a high Character for universal Learning and Eloquence.

Sylvester Giraldus, a Person of a Noble Family in Cambro-Britannia or Wales,
(and therefore commonly Surnamed Cambrensis) the same House whence the
Giraldines of Ireland descended, as Cambden observes, who citing some of his
Latin verses, seems to reckon him among the Poets of those former Ages; he
Flourishing in the Reigns of K. John and K. Henry the third: to the first of
whom for the esteem his Learning had in those days, he was made Secretary.

T.
THeodericus Gresemundus, a Native of Spire, out of whose Poem De Historia
violatae Crucis, printed at Strasburg by Renatus Bek, several Verses are quoted
by Wimphelingus in his Adolescentia.

Theodorus Beza, a Famous French Theologist, and a great Champion of the
Reformed Religion; as he was a Person generally learned, so particularly he was
not a stranger to Poetry, having with good success written Epigrams and other
Latin Poems, which were printed at Paris; besides a Tragedy entitled
Sacrificium Abrahae, printed at Lions: he was Flourishing at Lausanna beyond
the year 1555.

Theodorus Geza, a celebrated Writer of Thessalonica, particularly a great
Master in the Latin and Greec Tongues, and not the least to be esteemed among
the rest of his Works: for his Book of Latin Epigrams upon the most remarkable
passages of Sacred Scripture. He deceas't in the year of our Lord 1478.

Theodorus Reysman, a German taken notice of for his Congratulatory upon the
Arrival of the Emperor Charles the Fifth into Germany.

Theophile, a late Writer of French Poems, which have obtained a general fame
and esteem.

Theophilus Folengus, a Mantuan, both Philosopher and Poet of very high repute.

Th. Campion, a Writer of no extraordinary same; but who has the honor to be
named by Cambden with Spencer, Sidny, Drayton, and other the Chief of our
English Poets.

Thomas Carew, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to his late Majesty K.
Charles the First; he was reckoned among the Chiefest of his time for delicacy
of wit and Poetic Fancy, by the strength of which his extant Poems still
maintain their fame amidst the Curious of the present Age.

Thomas Churchyard; see William Warner.

Thomas Collins, his Tears of Love, or Cupid's Progress, published anno 1615;
since the materials of it have been preserved from the injury of time, by being
bound up with other small Poetical Pieces, much of the same Stamp and standing;
it will seem but an accident of good fortune, if the Name also be preserved.

Thomas Craigius, one of the Muster Roll of Scotch Latin Poets, whose works are
collected in a Book, called Deliciae Poetarum Scotorum.

Thomas Deckar, a High flier in wit, even against Ben. Johnson himself in his
Comedy called The Vntrussing of the humorous Poet; besides which he wrote many
others, as The Wonder of a Kingdom, the Honest Whore, in 2 parts; Fortunatus;
the Whore of Babylon; If this ben't a good Play, the Devils in it. See also John
Webster.

Thomas Dempsterus, an ample Commentator upon the Grammarian Corippus his Poem
in praise of Justin the Second, himself also a Latin Vesifier among the Scotch
Poets, in the above mentioned Collection.

Sr Thomas Eliot; a Person of note in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and of whose
Writing there is a learned Treatise of Government, which has been in principal
esteem: moreover, what he has writ in Poetry is also mentioned with singular
commendation.

Th. Flatman, a Gentleman once of the Middle Temple, equally ingenuous in the
two noble Faculties of Painting and Poetry, as by the several choice Pieces
that have been seen of his Pourtraying and Limning, and by his Book of Poems,
very lately come forth, may appear.

Thomas Goff, the Author of the Courageous Turk, Selimus, Orestes, Tragedies;
The Careless Sheapherdess, a Tragi-Comedy; and Cupid's Whirligig, a Comedy.

Thomas Heywood, a great Benefactor no doubt to the Red bull, and the other
common Theaters, that flourisht in those times, with many but vulgar Comedies,
as the Brazen Age, the Eng^ish Travelers, the first and second part of Edward
the Fourth, Fortune by Land and Sea; the 4 London Prentices, the Fair Maid of
the West first and second part; the Golden Age, the Wise Woman of Hogsden, The
Iron Age in 2 parts; the Royal King and Loyal Subject, etc.

Thomas Hobbs, of Malmsbury, a Person of the more consideration for what he
has either judged, or writ in Poetry; by how much the more his writings in
Prose, have made work for so many Opposers: his Latin Poem De Mirabilibus Pexi,
want, not commendation, and he seems to have wisely consulted for his quiet at
last, after having travailed through so many Volumes of profounder Argument, in
giving himself a vacancy to the Muse, especially where Invention is no
otherwise exercised then in rendering the Inventions of others, which he doubts
not to have done more truly then any of those that went before him in the same
subject; from his Preface to which work I should choose rather to collect his
judgment of Poetry, then from his Preface to Davenants Gondibert, where no
wonder if Complement and Friendly Compliance do a little bias and oversway
judgment.

Thomas Kid* a writer that seems to have been of pretty good esteem for
Versifying in former times, being quoted among some of the more famed Poets, as
Spencer, Drayton, Daniel, Lodge, etc. with whom he was either Contemporary, or
not much later: there is particularly remembered his Tragedy Cornelia.

Thomas Killigrow, one of the Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his present
Majesty; and besides the general esteem of his Lepid Vein of wit in
conversation, the Author of diverse Comedies, Tragedies and Tragi-Comedies,
published together in a Volume, and therefore not needing to be particularis'd.

Thomas Linacer, an Eminent Grammarian, who Flourisht in the Reign of K. Henry
the 8th; and who Verfifying on several subjects, had the repute also in those
days of no mean Poet.

Thomas Lodge, a Doctor of Physic, who Flourisht in Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, and
was one of the writers of those pretty old Pastoral Songs and Madrigals, which
were very much the strain of those times.

Tho. Manly, one of the crowd of Potical writers, of the late King's time; he
wrote among other things the History of Job in Verse.

Tho. May, the vulgarly admired Translator of Lucan into English Verse; but
here chiefly to be mentioned for what he has written propria Minerva, as his
Supplement of Lucan in Latin Verse; his History of Henry the Second in English
Verse, besides what he wrote of Dramatic, as his Tragedies of Antigone,
Cleopatra, and Agrippina; the Heir, a Tragi-Comedy; the Old Couple, and the Old
Wives Tale, Comedies, and the History of Orlando Furioso: as for his History of
the late Civil Wars of England, though it were written in Prose, yet he is
thought to have vented therein the speen of a Malecontented Poet; for having
been frustrated in his Expectation of being the Queen's Poet, for which he
stood Candidate with Sir William Davenant, who was prferr'd before him.

Thomas Metellanus; the Author of a small parcel of Latin Poetry, which is to
be found in a collection of the works of diverse of the Chiefest, so accounted,
of the Scotch Latin Poets.

Tho. Middleton, a copious Writer for the English Stage, Contemporary with
Johnson and Fletcher, though not of equal repute, and yet on the other side not
altogether contemptible, especially in many of his Plays: his Comedies were
Blurt Mr Constable, the Chaste Maid in Cheapside, More diffemblers then Women,
the Game at Chesse; A mad World my Masters, Michaelmas Term; the Phoenix, A
Trick to catch the old ones: His Tragedies The Mayor of Queenborough, besides
what he wrote associated with W. Rowly.

Thomas Moravius, a Scotchman, the Author of a Latin Poem entitled Naupactias,
or the Description of the battle of Lepanto, in Heroic Verse.

Sir Thomas More, a great credit and ornament, in his time, of the English
Nation, and with whom the learnedest Forraigners of that Age were proud to have
correspodence; for his wit and excellent parts, he was chosen Speaker of the
House of Commons, and afterward advanced to be Lord Chancellor of England by
K. Henry the 8^h: however he fell unfortunately a victim to the displeasure of
that Prince. His Vtopia, though not written in Verse, yet in regard of the
great Fancy and Invention thereof, may well pass for a Poem; besides his Latin
Epigrams, which have received a general esteem among Learned Men.

Thomas Nabbes, a Writer (for the most part Comical) to the English Stage in
the Reign of K. Charles the First: the Comedies, he wrote are The Bride, Covent
Garden, Totnamcourt, Woman hater arraigned his Tragedies, The Unfortunate
Mother, and the Tragedy of King Charles the First; besides two Masks
Microcosmus, and The Spring's Glory.

Thomas Nash, one of those that may serve to fill up the Catalogue of English
Dramaties Writers: his mentioned Comedies are Summers Last Will and Testament,
and See me and see me not.

Thomas Naogeorgus, or by the vulgar app^llation Kirchmayor, a German Writer
native of Straubing, a Town of Lower-Bavaria; his works were for the most part
Poetical, namely 6 Tragedies, an Epitome of the Canons of the Church in Heroic
Verse; as also 5 Books of Sacred Agriculture, in the same kind of Verse, with
some other things.

Thomas Newton, the Author of three Tragedies; Thebais, the first and second
parts of Tamerlane, the Great Scythian Emperor.

Thomas Preston, the Author of Cambises King of Persia, a Tragi-Comedy.

Thomas Randol, one of the most pregnant young Wits of his time, flourishing in
the University of Cambridge; the quick conceit and clear Poetic Fancy
discovered in his extant Poems, seemed to promise something extraordinary from
him, had not his indulgence to the too liberal converse with the multitude of
his applauders drawn him to such an immoderate way of living, as in all
probability shortened his days; besides his two Comedies Amyntas, and the Muses
Looking-Glass, and the Interlude Aristippus, printed with his other works:
there are attributed to him, a Comedy called Hey for honesty; and down for
knavery; and The Jealous Lovers, a Tragedy.

Tho. Rawlins, the chief Graver of the Mint to King Charles the first, and also
to his present Majesty, till the year 1670, in which died: he was indeed a more
excellent Artist then Poet; yet his Tragedy called The Rebellion has been
acted not without good applause.

Thomas Read, a Scotchman, whose happy Vein in Latin Verse renders him not
unworthy to be remembered among the Learned Men and Poets of that Nation.

Thomas Seghetius, another Scotch Poet, chiefly known by his Meletemata
Hypogeia, in Latin Verse.

Thomas Shadwel, a noted Dramatic Writer of the present Age; happy especially
in several witty and ingeuuous Comedies; The Humorist, the Sullen Lovers, Epsom
Wells; besides his Royal Sheapherdess* a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy; and his Tragedy
of Psyche, or rather Tragical Opera, as vying with the Opera's of Italy; in the
pomp of Scenes, Machinry and Musical performance.

Thomas Sprat, the commended Author, for his smooth and judicious style, of the
History of the Royal Society; and in Verse a very much applauded, though little
Poem entitled The Plague of Athens.

Thomas Stanly, of Cumberlo Green in Hertfordshire; a Gentleman both well
deserving of the Commonwealth of Learning in general, by his other writings,
his Lives of the Philosophers, and his Learned Edition of Aeschylus; and also
particularly honored for his smooth Air and gentile Spirit in Poetry; which
appears not only in his own Genuine Poems, but also from what he has so well
translated out of ancient Greec, and modern Italian Spanish and French Poets,
as to make his own.

Thomas Sternhold, an Associate with John Hopkins, in one of the worst of of
many bad Translations the Psalms of David: yet in regard, as first made choice
of, they have hitherto obtained to be the only Psalms sung in all Parochial
Churches (it has been long heartily wished a better choice were made) he has
therefore perhaps been thought worthy to be mentioned among the Poets that
Flourisht in Qu. Mary's, and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Rein.

Thomas Storer, one of the Writers of Queen Elizabeth's time, of those Pastoral
Airs and Madrigals, of which we have a Collection in a Book called England's
Helicon.

Thomas Thomasinus, a Vene^ian, who studying at Padua, grew Eminent in
Philosophy, Logic and Poetry.

Thomas Watson, a Contemporary imitator of Sir Philip Sidny, together with
Bartholmew Young, Doctor Lodge, and several others, in that Pastoral strain of
Poetry, in Sonnets and Madrigals, already mentioned.

Sir Thomas Wi^t, of Allington-Castle, in Kent; a Person of great esteem and
reputation in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; with whom for his honesty and
singular parts; he was in high Favor; which nevertheless he had like to have
lost about the Buisiness of Anne Bullein, had not his prudence brought him
safely off. For his Translation of David's Psalms into English Meeter, and
other Poetical Writings, Leland forbears not to compare him to Dante and
Petrarch; being sent Ambassador from K. Henry to the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, then in Spain; he died of the Pestilence in the West Country, before he
could take shipping an. 1541.

Tobias Guthberlingius, a Hassian, Native of Crusbon, and Governor of the
College of Leovardia; where his Latin Poems were printed an. 1667.

Torquato Tasso, the Prince of Italian Heroic Poets, born at Bergamo, the Son
of Bernardo Tasso, and Portia de Rubeis: His chief Poems are Gerusalemme
Liberata, Rinaldo, Set Giornate, Gerusalemme Conquistata, Torrismondo, a
Tragedy; Amyntas, a Pastoral, elegantly translated into English by John
Reynolds: he wrote also judicious Discourses in Prose.

Sieur Du Tristan his Amors printed anno 1662

V.
VAlentinus Boltzius, a German Writer, native of Rubeaqua, who wrote in Verse
the Combat between David and Goliath; the History of Sampson; the Tragedy of
Susanna; the Comedy of the 7 Liberal Arts, and several others.

Valentinus Pacaeus, a Writer of Latin Idyls and Epigrams.

Victor Geselinus, a Writer of Latin Hymns.

Victorinus Anxiginus Scuthius, the Author of a Poem entitled The Triumph of
Christ's Resurrection, written in Elegiac Verse.

Vidus Faber Pibracius, a French Gentleman, whose Learning and excellent
abilities advanced him to be President of the Parliament of Paris; besides his
general knowledge in the Arts and Sciences, his Felicity in French Poesy, had
been sufficient to recommend him to Posterity, he was flourishing in the year
1584.

Vincentio Guidorci, his Rhyme Vary were printed at Padua an. 1634.

Vincentius Barsius, a Carmelite of Mantua, whose Alba Labyrinthus was printed
at Parma an. 1515. His Silva and Elegies at Bononia an. 1524.

Vincentius Contarenus, a Venetian, not obscure writer in Latin Poetry.

Vincenzo Martelli, a noted Man among the Italian writers of Rhyme or Sonnets.

Vitus Amerbachius, a German Writer of diverse learned Commentaries and other
works in Prose, besides what he wrote in Verse, namely Epigrams and other
various Poems, which were printed by Oporinus at Basil an. 1550.

W.
WAlter de Mapes, Archdeacon of Oxford, a Latin Rimer in the Reign of K. Henry
the Second, and may well be called a Pot Poet, for he shows his singular love
to good Liquor, in a parcel of Latin Riming Verses, quoted by Cambden.

William Alabaster, a considerable Poet so accounted, in the time he Flourisht,
which was under Qu. Elizabeth, the Chief Transactions, of whose Reign he began
to describe in a Latin Poem entitled Elisaeis, which he left unfinisht.

William Brown, the Author of a Poem entitled Britains Pastorals; which though
not of the sublimest strain, yet for a subject of that nature, amorous and
rural, containing matter not unpleasant to the Reader.

William Bosworth, the Bringer forth of a small Poem, which was printed
somewhat above 20 years since, under the title of the Chaste and lost Lovers, or
the History of Arcadius and Sepha; which from the very brink of oblivion, nor
had the loss been very great, has accidentally met with the good fortune to be
here remembered.

William Cartwright, Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, where he lived in fame
and reputation, for his singular parts and Ingenuity; but most especially his
excelling Vein in Poetry, which produced a Volume of Poems, which were published
not long after his death; and among the rest his Tragedy, The Royal Slave has
been in principal esteem.

William Cavendish, the present Duke of New Castle, and the first advanced from
Earl to that Title, for his eminent Service to his late and present Majesty: a
Person accomplished according to the Nobility of his Birth and Quality, that is,
equally addicted both to Arts and Arms, and particularly a friend to the Muses;
for besides his splendid Treatise of the Art of Horse-manship, in which his
experience was no less then his delight, he wrote two ingenuous Comedies, The
Variety, and the Country Captain.

Sir William Davenant, a very large sharer in the Poetic Fame of the present
Age, of which he was a surviving overhearer, till within these few years, and
of no less a memory for the future, for the great fluency of his wit and Fancy;
especially for what he wrote for the English Stage, of which having laid the
Foundation before by his Musical Dramas, when the usual Plays were not suffered
to be acted, he was the first reviver and improver by painted Scenes; after his
Majesty's Restoration, erecting a new Company of Actors, under the Patronage
of the Duke of York; his works since his death have been fairly published in a
large Volume, consisting of many Comedies, which need not be enumerated, as
being printed altogether, with several Tragedies, Interludes, Historical
Drama's; his Poem entitled Madagascar, a Farrago of his Juvenile, and other
Miscellaneous Pieces, and the Crown of all his Gondibert, the best of Heroic
Poems, either Ancient or Modern, in the judgment of Mr Hobs* a Learned Man
indeed, but in some other of his opinions, supposed to have been proved
fallible by those that have taken him in hand.

William Drummond of Hawthornden, a Scotch Gentleman of considerable note and
esteem, Flourishing in K. James his Reign; who imitating the Italian manner of
Versifying, vented his Amors in Sonnets, Canzonets and Madrigals, and to my
thinking, in a style sufficiently smooth and delightful; and therefore why so
utterly disregarded, and laid aside at present, I leave to the more curious
palats in Poetry.

William Gray, an Elegant writer (if we may rely upon the testimony of Balaeus)
of several things in English Verse, in the Reigns of King Edw. the Sixth and
Qu. Mary.

William Habington, the Author of Poems, which came forth above twenty years
since, under the Title of Castara, (the feigned Name, no doubt, of that human
Goddess that inspired them) but better known by his History of the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth; in which also he has a style sufficiently florid, and
perhaps better becoming a Poetical than Historical subject; in respect of his
Poems however they are now almost forgotten, he may be rank't in my opinion
with those that deserve neither the highest, nor the lowest Seat in the Theater
of Fame.

William Hammond, one of the forgotten Poem writers of the last Age.

William Hemings, the Author of a well known Tragedy called The Fatal Contract.

William Lilly, of Odiham in Ha^t shire, a Grammarian of great note in the
Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, and first School Master of Paul's School; who
besides his Lat. Grammar, the oracle of Free-Schools of England, and other
Grammatical works, is said by Balaeus to have written Epigrams and other Poetry
of various subjects, in various Latin Verse.

William Rowly, an Associate with Middleton, in the writing of several Comedies
and Tragi-Comedies; as The Spanish Gypsies, the Old Law, the Fair Quarrel, the
Widow, besides what he wrote alone, as The Woman never vexed, and the Match at
Midnight, All Is lost by Lush, a Tragedy, and joined with Webster, as the
Thracian wonder, and A Cure for a Cuckold.

William Sampson, a Tragic writer, who wrote alone the Vow-Breaker and Valiant
Scot; with Marsham, the Tragedy of Herod and Antipater; and How to choose a
good Wife from a bad, a Tragi-Comedy.

William Shakespeare, the Glory of the English Stage; whose nativity at
Stratford upon Avon, is the highest honor that Town can boast of: from an
Actor of Tragedies and Comedies, he became a Maker; and such a Maker, that
though some others may perhaps pretend to a more exact Decorum and oeconomie,
especially in Tragedy, never any expressed a more lofty and Tragic height;
never any represented nature more purely to the life, and where the polishments
of Art are most wanting, as probably his Learning was not extraordinary, he
pleases with a certain wild and native Elegance; and in all his Writings has
an unvulgar style, as well in his Venus and Adonis, his Rape of Lucrece and
other various Poems, as in his Dramatics.

William Slatyer, Compiler of the History of England, from the beginning to the
Reign of King James, by the Title of Palae-Albion; but whether in Latin or
English, I cannot certainly determine; for the Work, though of little Fame, is
in both, and the one seems to have been done by Slatyer, the other by Samuel
Purchase.

William Smith, the Author of a Tragedy entitled Hieronymo, as also The Hector
of Germany.

William Wager, the Author of that Old Interlude, called Tom Tiler and his
Wife; he wrote also two Comedies The Trial of Chivalry, and The longer thou
live, the more fool thou art.

William Warner, a good honest plain Writer of Moral Rules and Precepts, in
that old fashioned kind of seven footed Verse which yet sometimes is in use,
though in different manner, that is to say, divided into two: he may be rekoned
with several other Writers of the same time, i. e. Queen Elizabeth's Reign; who
though inferior to Sidny, Spencer, Drayton and Daniel, yet have been thought
by some not unworthy to be remembered and quoted, namely George Gascoign, Th.
Hudson, John Markham, Thomas Achely, John Weever, Chapter Middleton, George
Turbervile, Henry Constable, Sir Edw. Dyer, Thomas Churchyard, Charles
Fits-Geoffy.

Wolfangus Loriseca, a Writer of Latin Verse, Equal with those that are
accounted of the Chief Modern Latin Poets of Germany.

A Brief Supplement of some Persons and Things obmitted in the foregoing
Treatises.
Of the Ancients.
A.
ABlavius, a Great Man with Constantine the Great, by whom he was advanced to
the Dignity of Consul, but was slain by his Son, as jealous of his too much
power and greatness, and therefore might justly be styled, as he was, Pila
Fortunae, the Tennis-Ball of Fortune: His Vein in Epigrammatic Poetry appears
in two Epigrams, which are extant in Brietius, and the Parisian Collection; the
one biting one upon Constantine, notwithstanding he was so great a Favorite;
the other upon his Friend Greculus.

Alcinous, a Poet of a uncertain time, but doutless not very ancient, of whom
there is only extant in the foresaid collections, one very noble Epigram of
Homer and Virgil.

Saint Ambrose, one of the Ancient and most venerable Fathers of the Christian
Church, being Bishop of Milan, in the time of Theodosius the Great, whom his
Ecclesiastical authority and Censure, drove to a voluntary penance for his
Bloody cruelty toward the Inhabitants of Thessalonica: besides his multitude
of others Works in Prose, he left diverse Inscriptions in Verse in the great
Domo of Milan, besides several Hymns, which were anciently sung in the Church.

Antiphanes Caristius, a very ancient Greec Comic writer, even Contemporary
with Thespis, who Flourisht in the 61th Olympiad, and therefore diverse from
him who in the foregoing Treatise by mistake Surnamed also Carystius, is said
to have been conversant with Alexander the Great; besides whom there were
several other Antiphanes's, as is testified by Suidas, the Thebais of
Antiphanes Colophonius, is cited by Athenaeus; of Antiphanes, probably
Bysantius, (though that Cognomen be but once found) there are 7 Epigrams in the
Florilegium of Planudes: and this some think to be the same, whom Stobaeus
quotes very frequently, and Atheneus in no less then 105 Fables. Moreover
Plutarch in his Life of Demosthenes alleges the testimony of Antiphanes a
Poet, concerning Bataulus.

Antiphilus, an Epigrammatic Poet, whose Name is to 27 Epigrams in the Greec
Florilegium, and with the Surname Bysantius, if the same, as probably it is, to
eight more in the same Book.

Arabius, Surnamed Scholasticus, an Epigrammatic Poet, of whom there are 7
Epigrams in the fourth Book of Planudes his Florilegium.

Ariboeus, a Macedonian Poet, not so much known by any thing mentioned of his
writings, as by his envy at other Men's writings, which doubtless, was the cause
that conspiring with Crateuas, a Thessalonian (Poet also) he compast in a most
barbarous manner the death of that incomparable Tragedian Euripides, as has
been already mentioned in Euripides.

Asclepiades and Asmenus; see Julianus, in the foregoing Treatise.

Aulus Septimius Serenus, the reputed Author of a parcel of old Latin Verses
upon Janus and Hercules, whereof some fragments are preserved in the Parisian
Collection of Epigrams and old Poems; whether he were the same with the Roman
Emp. Septimius Severus, (who either for these or some other Verses, has a
place among the Poets, supposing Serenus to be mistaken for Severus,) or some
other Person, as might be inferred from the distinct appellation of Country;
the one being written Falis^us, the other Afer; besides that the Praenomen of
this Emperor is agreed upon to have been Lucius, rather then Aulus, as Brietius
observes, who nevertheless agreeing with Pithoeus, disputes not so much whether
this Aulus Septimius were the same with the Emperor, as he concludes the Emp.
to have been the Author of a Distich, which is the only part preserved of a
Poem, which seems to have been written of Country affairs, and not of those
Verses of Janus, which he imputes to another Afer, who was a little superior in
time to Terentianus Maurus, and therefore much antienter then the said Emperor,
viz. Cajus Septimius Afer.

Aulus Turpilius; see Turpilius in the foregoing Treatise.

B.
Basilius, one of those Surnamed Scholastici, or Grammatici aforementioned in
Julianus.

Belisarius; see Liberius in the foregoing Treatise.

Benedictus Paulinus, a Petracoriensian, who writing the Life of St. Martin in
6 Books, and another Poem, is probably mistaken by Authors of very good account
and Authority as Franciscus Juretus, Fortunatus, and Gregory of Tours, for
Paulinus the Bishop of Nola, to whom they ascribe those Poems, though Brietius
agreeing with Jac. Sirmondus, makes it out very clear, that they were distinct
Persons, and that Benedictus was the Author of those Poems.

P.
Caelius Lactantius Firmianus, the Christian Cicero, as he is generally
stilled; Disciple of Arnobius, and Rhetoric Professor at Nicomedia: besides his
Odoeporicon, which is lost, and his Verses of the Passion and Resurrection,
etc. which are extant, and by some ascribed to Fortunatus; his is said to have
been the Poem in Description of the Phoenix, which Vossius supposes to have
been writ by some Ethnic Author. See also Rhemnius in the foregoing Treatise.

Cajus Abronius Silo; see Abronius in the foregoing Discourse.

Cajus Aurelius Romulus, not the Founder of Rome, no doubt, already mentioned;
but some Poetical Writer of what time or place is uncertain, whose Name we find
to a Tetrastich Epigram in Gillius his Parisian Collection, entitled
Epigrammata and Poematia vetera.

Cajus Caecilius Plinius Secundus, has a Tetrastich Epigram upon Cupid and
Bacchus, in Nicolaus Gillius his Parisian sian Collection of Epigrams and old
Poems, who if he be the same with that Cajus Plinius, of Novocomo, who was the
Son of Plinius Secundus of Verona: he has from Brietius the esteem of a most
excellent Poet, for only a Fragment of one Verse, which he quotes of him, viz.
Lasciva est nobis pagina, Vita proba, besides that he was the Author of that so
much commended Panegyric to Trajan.

Caius Cassius, a Parmensian of the number of the Ancients, but of what time is
uncertain; whose name we find to a Description of Orpheus in Verse, in Nicolaus
Gillius his Parisian Collection of Epigrams and old Poems.

Cajus Julius Solinus Poly histor, a Grammarian and Naturalist of sufficient
note, though of what time, is not determined farther then that he lived beneath
Alexander Severus, even by Salmacius himself that voluminous Exercitator upon
his Plinian Epitome, besides which and other things in Prose; he is concluded
the Author of a Poem entitled Pontica.

Cajus Licinius Calvus, his Verses upon Cneus Pompeius, and several of the
Caesar's, are extant in Gillius his Epigrammata and Poematia vetera, printed at
Paris an. 1580.

Cajus Silius Italicus; see Silius in Petronius Arbiter in the foregoing
Treatise.

Cajus Sulpitius Apollinaris, a Grammarian of Carthage, who Flourisht in the
Reigns of the Antonini, and was Praeceptor to Helvius Pertinax, who before he
attained the Empire over Men succeeded him in his Empire over Boys in his
Grammar School; this Sulpitius is mentioned by Julius Capitolinus, and Aulus
Gollius, with the Character of the Learnedest Man of his time, and that little
touch we have of Poetry in his Verses upon Virgil's Aeneis, gives the greater
sense of the loss of the rest.

Callimachus, besides his extant works already mentioned, is said by Suidas to
have written many other Poems, and among the rest one entitled Ibis, an obscure
Poem, and full of Satyr against Apollonius, the Author of the Argonautics.
Moreover, there is mentioned another Poem of his entitled (...), by the
Scholiast of Homer, Priscian, and others: besides which others mention a Poem
of his named Hecale.

Cneus Naevius, the most Ancient of Latin Comic Writers after Livius
Andronicus; he was Contemporary wi^h Scipio Africanus, and died at Vtica, in
the 144th Olympiad, being banished out of Rome by the Metelli. See Naevius in
the foregoing Treatise.

St Columbanus, an Englishman Abbot of Luxovia and Bobia; besides his several
writings in Prose, there is extant a parcel of his Poetry set forth by Jacobus
Sirmondus: he was the Master of St. Gallus, and died about an. D. 514.

Corippus, an African, both Grammarian and Poet, who flourishing in the Reign
of Justinus, the Second, sung his praises in 4 Books, which he dedicated to the
Quaestor Anastatius; besides which Poem, which has been set forth by Thomas
Dempsterus the Scotchman, with laborious and prolix notes, much above what he
deserves, in the opinion of many; he is said to have written many other things
in Poetry, which have perished, and among the rest a Poem in praise of the Great
Captain Belisarius.

E.
Epictetus, (not the Author doubtless of the Greec Enchiridion) his name is to
two Distichs, in Gillius his Parisian Collection of Epigrams and old Poems.

Epigenes, a Sicyonian, by some affirmed the first Inventor of Tragedy.

Eugenius, (otherwise Evantius) Secundus or Junior, an Eminent Archbishop of
Toledo, which seat he held from the year 647 to 657, in the Reign of
Receswinthus, a Gothish King of Italy: some things of his in Verse are set
forth by Jacobus Sirmondus, together with Dracontius, whose Verses he corrected.

Euphorbius, one of those Surnamed Sholastici or Grammatici, of whom see more
in Julianus, in the foregoing Treatise.

Euphorbus Caelius Firmianus Symphosius, mentioned in the foregoing Treatise by
the name of Symphonius only, a Poetical writer of an uncertain Age, of whom
there are extant Hendecasyllables De Livore, by some attributed to Ausonius,
Choriambics De Fortuna, and several Aenigmatical Questions.

Eurialus Moranius, a Poetical writer of Asculum, of an uncertain time, and of
whom no other account can be given, but that his name is to 4 or 5 pleasant and
not unelegant Epigrams in Gillius his Parisian Collection of Epigrams and old
Poems.

Eusebius, Surnamed Scholasticus, a Greec, the Author of a Poem entitled
Gainia, or of the War against Gaina, the Gothish King, in four Books in Heroic
Verse: there is also under the name of Eusebius, (but whether the same may be
disputed, for there are several more of the same name,) in the Parisian
Collection of Epigrams and Poematia vetera, a Decastich entitled Tumulus
Veneris.

Eusthemius, one of the forementioned 12 Scholastici; of whom see in Julianus
in the foregoing Treatise.

F.
Felix, a Benedictin Monk of Crowland, whose Pathetical Description of the bugs
of Crowland, in Latin Verse, is quoted by the Learned Cambden.

Floridus, a Mimic writer of an uncertain Age, out of whose Fables, there are
only extant two Sentences, but those so acute, so much to the purpose, that
they excite in the Learned and Curious the greater desire of all the rest of
him.

G.
Getulicus, an old Historian, cited by Suetonius; but of whom there are also
several Verses to be found in Probus the Grammarian his Commentary upon
Virgil's Georgi^s; also a Testrastich and Hexastich in the third Book of the
Gr. Anthology, and Decastich in the 6th.

Glaucus, an Athenian, whose name is to several Epigrams in the first, third
and fourth Books of the Greec Anthology.

H.
Hercius, named to an Hexastich, in the Greec Florilegium.

Herondas, a Comic Poet, out of whose Fable Synergazomeni, a Senary is cited by
Athenaeus.

L.
Leo, an Ancient Grammarian, certain Greec Verses of whose writing were seen in
Manuscript by Conradus Gesnerus, but the Pentastich in the Greec Florilegium,
owns rather another Leo, viz. that Noble Greec Emperor Leo the Sixth, who
whether a Poet or not, is certainly famed for a Philosopher.

Lucilius, (not the Latin Satyrist) a Greec Epigrammatic Poet, whose name has
a large jurisdiction in the Greec Florilegium.

Lucius Annaeus Florus, the Good Fellow, who played so wittily and freely upon
the Emperor Hadrian, in that vulgarly known Epigram Ego nolo Caesar esse, etc.
which was as smartly answered by the Emperor; besides which and another neat
one upon the growth of of Roses, several Fragments of him are collected by
Salmasius, he may upon account of name be without difficulty mistaken for
Lucius Julius Florus, the Epimator of the Roman History, who in some Editions
is styled Lucius Annaeus Seneca Florus; as on the other side this Poet is
written in Gillius his Collection, Julius Florus: but the difference of time
makes the clearer distinction, the one appearing to have been Contemporary with
the Emperor Adrian, the other, as is generally received, living about the time
of Septimius Severus.

M.
Martinus Surnamed Dumensis, from the place of which he was Abbot, afterward
Archbishop of Bracata, of whose Verses collected by Jacobus Sirmondus, being
indeed but low and heavy, what notice has been taken may well be judged owing
to their antiquity, for he died an. D. 580.

Maximianus, the real Author, as he is computed by Learned Inquirers, of those
6 most obscoene Elegies, which are vulgarly ascribed to Cornelius Gallus; there
is also one of the same Name, but whether it be the same Person, is not
certainly determined, among the twelve Surnamed Scholastici or Grammatici, of
whom see more in Julianus, in the foregoing Treatise.

Minos, not that King of Crete, so famous for his Labyrinth, but the second
Tragic writer, as he is delivered, after Theomis.

Modestus, a Name only known by 2 Hexastichs upon Lucretia, in Gillius his
Collection of Epigrams and old Poems.

N.
Nicochares, an Athenian Comic Poet, of whose Fables several are mentioned by
Suidas and Athenaeus; he is said to have been Contemporary with, and by some
judged equal to Aristophanes.

Nicocles* a Comic Poet, whose Fable Acarii, is cited by Athenaeus lib. 8.

P.
Palladius Rutilius Taurus Aemilianus, a Latin writer of good note and
Antiquity (though in what Age he Flourisht, is not certainly determined) whose
Books of Agriculture are commonly published with those other Ancient writers De
Re Rustica: and among the rest of his Books, there is one De Insitione Arborum,
wholly in Verse, and that in a style that might render him esteemed a Poet,
though he were not of the Ancients.

Phaedrus, a Thracian, who living in the Reign of Augustus (whose Freedman he
is said to have been) and Tiberius, is applauded for his Version of Aesop's
Fables into such Elegant Verse, as savours of the purity of those times.

Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus, the most Illustrious of Roman Captains, if
at least we suppose him to be that Scipio Africanus, the elder, whose
incomparable sobriety and incontinence of li^e so well agrees with that only
Verse, which is delivered to be extant of his writings, Maxima cunctarum
victoria victa voluptas.

Publius Terentius Varro; see Terentius Varro Atracinus, in the foregoing
Treatise.

Puppius, an old Latin Poet of whom we only find remaining one Distich, an
Epitaph upon Publius Scipio Africanus, in the Epigrammata and Poematia vetera,
printed by Gillius at Paris an. 1580.

Q.
Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, a Roman Patrician, Senator and Consul,
Contemporary with Boethius, whose Father in Law he was: besides his Epistles
and other things in Prose, there are some Fragments of his in Latin Verse, in
the above mentioned Collection of Epigrams and old Poems.

R.
Rufus, Surnamed Domesticus, subscribed to an Epigram in the seventh Book of
the Greec Anthology.

S.
Samius, a Name subscribed to an Epigram in the third Book of the Greec
Anthology, and thought to be the same with Sammius and Ammius, in other places.

Sosicrates, a Comic Poet, whose Diadochae, Cretica and Philadelphi, are cited
by Athenaeus; and (if Sosicrates Phanagorites be the same Person) his (...),
there is also an Iambic Distich of Sosicrates in Stobaeus his Sermon De
Philantia.

Sulpitius, a Noble Roman, Poet and Orator, who was Tribunus Plebis in the
contention between Cajus Caesar the Aedile, and his Brother Lucius the Praetor:
besides what Giraldus mentions of him out of Asconius Pedianus, his choose
Heroic Verses and 70 Epigrams, may probably be judged to be, which bearing his
Name were found in a Monastery near Bobio in Italy an. 1494.

Symeon, an ancient Greec Presbyter, whose Sermones and Hymns are preserved in
the Library at Auspurgh, by the testimony of Conradus Gesner.

T.
Thaletas, a Cretan, or Illyrian, Lyric Poet, whom Suidas delivers to have
written before Homer's time: there was also of the same name a Gnossian
Rhapsodist, who, as the same Suidas testifies, wrote certain Fabulous Stories
in Verse.

Thallus, an ancient Epigrammatist remembered only by one Hexastich in the
second Book of the Greec Florilegium.

Theodoritus, an old Grammarian, of whom there is a Distich in the second Book
of the Greec Florilegium.

Theomis, a Contemporary of Orestes, and said by some to have been the first
Deviser of Tragical Melodies.

Timolaus, a Larissaean Rhetorician, who to each Verse of Homer's Iliads
inserted another of his own, yet keeping the sense entire; the beginning of
which Poems is recited by Suidas.

U.
Valerianus, his Lepid, acute and not unelegant Epigram (for such is the
commendation given it by, a judicious Author) upon the death of Cicero, is to
be found in Gillius his Collection of Epigrams and and old Poems; together with
a Tristich in praise of Hercules, he may probably be taken for the same Person
with the Emperor Valerianus, of whom there is said to be a Fragment in the
Gregorian Codex.

Vitalis, one of the 12 surnamed Scholastici, mentioned in Julianus, in the
foregoing Treatise.

Vomanus, another of the forementioned twelve; but moreover peculiarly
mentioned and commended for his Verses De Laudibus Hortuli, which are to be
found in Gillius his Collection.

X.
Xanthus, a Contemporary and Colleague of Stosichorus Himeraeus, there are
diverse of his Verses cited by Aelian lib. 4. of his Varia Historia.

Xenocrates, and Xenocritus, two Epigrammatic Poets; the first remembered by a
Tetrastich in the fourth Book, the second by an Octostich in the 3d Book, of
the Greec Anthology.

Z.
Zelotas, a Name preserved by only 2 Epigrams in the Greec Florilegium.

Zenobius, a Grammarian, besides whose Distich in the fourth Book of the Gr.
Flor. there are Verses of him cited in the Greec Cornucopia of Varinus
Phavorinus Camers.

Zonas, another Pillar of the Gr. Floril. named to a Octostich in the first
Book, and two Hexastichs in the sixth.

Zosimus, a Thasian Epigrammatist, but of whom there are only extant 2
Hexastichs in the first and sixth Book of the Greec Florilegium.

Of the Moderns.
A.
ADrianus Scholasticus, an Antuerpian, whose Varia Carmina are printed with the
selected Latin Poems of diverse other not obscure Writers of the Low Countries.

Adrianus Scorelius, his Elegies are published with the selected Works of other
Belgic Writers of Latin Poetry.

Annibal Caro, noted for his Rhyme or Sonnets equal with several other Italian
Writers of that kind.

Alexander Necham, Prior of Cirencester, the Learnedest Englishman of of his
Age, which was the Reign of King John: in the opinion of Balaeus, who also
particularly honors him with the Appellation of a famous Philosopher,
Theologist, Rhetorician and Poet; and among the rest of his works, mentions his
Carmina diversa.

Allain Chartier, Secretary to King Lewis the Eleventh of France, by whose
Queen the Lady Anne of Britain, he was so admired for his Poetry, that as she
passed by one day to her Lodging, and saw him leaning on a tables end a sleep,
she stoopt down to kiss him, with this expression in the hearing of many (as
the Anonymous Author of the Art of English Poetry testifies) We may not of
Princely Curtesy pass by, and not honor with a kiss the Mouth from whence so
many sweet Ditties and golden Poems have issued.

Antonius Schonhovius; see Florentius, in the foregoing Treatise of the Moderns.

Antonius Thylesius, wr. a Latin Poem Cyclops and Galathea.

Arnulph of Lysieux, a French Poet, taken notice of by Cambden for his Latin
Epitaph, upon King Henry the First of England.

B.
Benedictus Arias Montanus, that Learned Spaniard, famous for his Edition of a
Polyglot Bible, which neverthe^ess is far surpass't by that set forth about 12
years since, much to the credit of our Nation, by Doctor Walton, the first
Bishop of Chester, since his Majesty's Restoration: There is also mentioned
of his writing a Book of Latin Hymns.

Benedetto del Vva, a not obscure Person among the Italian Lyric writers, or
Sonnetiers.

Bernardino Tomitano, another of the same order and Quality: as likewise,

C.
Camillo Peregrino.

Caesar Delphinus, remembered by his Maxias, a Poem in Latin Heroic Verse.

Camillo Porcetti, his Venetia Diffesa, is mentioned among the late Heroic
Poems of Italy.

Charles Aleyn, wrote in English Verse the Life of K. Henry the 7th, with the
Battle of Bosworth; also the Battles of Cressy and Poictiers.

Charles Fitz-Geoffry, a Poetical writer of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, of some
esteem formerly, I judge, by that Collection of choice flowers and
Descriptions, as well out of his, as the works of several others, the most
renowned Poets of our Nation, collected above 60 years ago.

Charles Middleton, another of the same time, or there about, of the same
concernment, in the forementioned Collection.

Claudius Espencaeus, a Frenchman, whose Latin Poem Heroides is the chiefly
mentioned of his Poetical works.

Cornelius Boius, his Raptus Benjamitarum, Rhodope, E tumulo Thalamus, and
Venus orta Mari, are published in a Volume together with Jacobus Catzius his
Patriarcha Bigamus, and several little Poems of Gaspar Barlaeus, not mentioned
in the foregoing Treatise of the Moderns; as his Pharmaceutria and Damon, or
the Nuptials of Cyrus and Aspatia, in 2 Books: his Cynismus, or the Nuptials of
Crates the Theban Philosopher, with Hipparcha; his Rhadamanthus, or Poem of the
Rape of the 2 Messenian Virgins Tryphosa and Jocasta; his Virgo Androphorus,
his Amphitryo Tolosanus, and his Faces Sacrae, or Paraphrase of the Song of
Solomon.

D.
Dan Elingham, a Benedictin Monk of Linton, about the time of K. Henry the
Third, taken notice by the Learned Cambden, among the Latin Rythmers of that
time: his Verses upon John Baptist, painted in a White-Fryars weed, at the
White-Fryars Church in Nottingham, being quoted by the said Author.

Dionysius Petavius, a learned French Jesuit, chiefly famous for his most
exact Chronology, entitled Rationarium temporis; but mentioned also with
commendation by Dr Duport, for his Version of David's Psalms into Greec Verse;
besides a Book of Latin Poems.

E.
Edw. Dier, a Poetical Writer, who seems formerly to have been in good esteem,
being rank't with some of the most noted Poets of Qu. Elizabeth's time; and a
contributer with the chief of them, out of his writings to the above mentioned
Collection: and with him we may perhaps not unfitly rank, John Markham, Henry
Constable, Thomas Achelly, John Weever, George Turbervile, besides Lodge,
Green, Gascoign and others, that have been already mentioned.

Edw. Ferris, a writer for the most part to the Stage in K. Henry the 8th's
time in Tragedy, and sometimes Comedy or Interlude, with much skill and
magnificence in his Meeter, and wherein, says the Author of the Art of English
Poesy, he gave the King so much good Recreation, as he had thereby many good
rewards.

Erasmus Michael Laetus, remembered by his Margaretica, in Latin Heroic Verse.

F.
Francis Davison's Poetical Rhapsodie, dedicated to W. Earl of Pembroke, Lord
Steward of the Household to his late Majesty King Charles the First, appears to
have been in those days not ill received, since it endured four Impressions.

Francis Hubart, a writer of much about the same time, though scarce with the
same success, of the History of Joseph in English Verse.

Franciscus Maurus, known by a Latin Poem of Heroic title Franciscias, in 13
Books.

Franciscus Sweertius, his Varia Carmina are among the selected works of other
Belgic writers in Latin Poetry; as likewise,

Franciscus Thorius Bellio, his Varia Carmina.

Fridericus Hofmannus, Con-Rector of the College of Elbing; his Epigrammatum
Poeticum Colludium, or Lusuum. Epigr. Centuriae, was printed at Amsterdam an.
1665.

G.
Gandolpho Porrino, his Rhyme rank him with some others of the noted Sonnetiers
of Italy.

Gaspar Barlaeus; see Cornelius Boius.

Gaspar Schetus Corvinus, an Antuerpian, whose Varia are published with the
selected works of other Belgic writers in Latin Poetry.

Gaulfrid, one of the oldest of our Modern Poets, for he was Contemporary with
Joseph of Exeter: he is mentioned by Chaucer in his Description of Chaunticleer
the Cock's being carried away by Reynard the Fox, with great Veneration, for
his Elegy upon King Richard the First, out of which being in a more judicious
Latin strain then was the usual custom of those times, diverse Verses are quoted
by the Learned Cambden in his Remains.

Georgius Gallus Chrudimenus; see Gallus Chrudimenus, in the foregoing Treatise
of the Moderns.

Giovan Battista Guarini; see Battista Guarini, in the foregoing Treatise of
the Moderns.

Giovan Battista Attendolo, Giovanni Guidaccione, Giovan Moccarello, Giovanni
Salzilli, a Roman, Girolamo Bartolomei, Girolamo Mentouato, and Girolamo Volpe,
a Knot of Italian Poetisers, chiefly in their Lyric way of Sonnets, Canzonets,
etc. only Bartolomei is chiefly mentioned for Tragedy.

Godfry, Prior of Winchester, an Epigrammatist in the Reign of King Henry the
First, very much admired by Cambden, who in his Remains takes pleasure to quote
several of his Epigrams, and commends Winchester likewise for a Nursery of Men
excelling in the Poetical Faculty, adding that the very Genius loci does seem
Poetical.

Godofridus Mylandius wrote Latin Idyls and Odes.

Gulielmus Apulensis wrote in Latin Verse 5 Books of the Affairs of the Normans
in Italy.

H.
Henry of Aurench, a Frenchman, Poet to Philip the Second of France, whom
nevertheless our Michael, the Merry Cornish Poet, makes bold to play upon in
his old Latin Drolling Rhythmes.

Henry Bell, a Collector of the Customs under King Henry the Fourth, out of
whose Satyr in Latin Verse against the Exchequer Officers of that time; several
passages are quoted by Cambden.

Henry Constable; see Edw. Dier.

Henry, Archdeacon of Huntingdon, one of the most noted, and by Polydore and
Leland most commended of the Scriptores Angl. but besides his 8 Books De
Regibus Anglorum, and other things in History, he is said to have extolled to
the Skies, and that in elegant Verse, in the opinion of Balaeus, King Alfred
and his Daughter Ethelfleda, with other Great Persons of that time: he wrote
also Odes, Epistles, and other things in Verse.

Henry of Winchester, an old Latin Versifier, quoted by Cambden, among the
English Poetical Writers of former Ages.

Hermannus Blasius wrote a Latin Poem Arethusa.

Hercole Bentivoglio, a noted Person among the Italian Writers of Sonnets, and
other Lyric Poetry.

Hildebert, Bishop of Main, and afterward Archbishop of Tours; a borderer
between the Ancients and Moderns, for he flourisht about the year of our Lord
1090: his Exposition up^ the Office of the Mass in Latin Verse, is by some
commended for Elegancy of style: he wrote also Hymns and Orations, in several
sort of Verse, and is thought to be that old Epigrammatist, as Cambden calls
him, out of whom he cites a parcel of Latin Verses, in praise of England.

Hugh Holland, a Poetical Writer, thought worthy by some to be mentioned with
Spencer, Sidny and other, the Chief of English Poets; with whom nevertheless he
must needs be confess't inferior, both in Poetic ^ame ad Merit.

Hugh, Archdeacon of York, one whom I find mentioned among the Old English
Versifiers, and the rather to be taken notice of for Antiquities sake.

I.
Jacobus Gaddius, an Italian, noted for what he writ as well in Latin, as
Vernacular Poetry.

Jacobus Sluperius, a Flandrian, of the Town of Hersel, whose Varia are
published with the collected works of other Belgic Writers of Latin Poetry.

Dr James Duport, Master of Magdalen College in Cambridge, in which University
he was for many years (most worthily in respect of his exquisite perfection
therein) Professor of the Greec Tongue; and for Greec Verse how not inferior to
the Chief of the Moderns? his so well esteemed Metaphrases of Davids's Psalms,
Job, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles, sufficiently testify.

Joannes Callius, a Latin Hymnographer of Erford.

Joannes Surnamed from his Order Canonicus, an Englishman, the Author (among
other works) of a Book of Latin Poems, as Balaeus testifies, in the Reign of K.
Henry the Third.

Joannes Garisolius, a late German Writer of a well approved style, in Latin
Poetry.

Joannes Peckam, a Franciscan in the Reign of King Edw. the First; among whose
many other works Balaeus makes mention of his Carmina diversa.

Sir John Harrington, no less noted for his Book of Witty Epigrams, then his
judicious Translation of Ariosto's Orlando Furioso.

John Heywood, an old fashioned Dramatic writer, as appears by the title of his
Interludes; viz. The Play of Love, the Play of the Weather, the Play between
Johan and his Wife, and the Play between the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate
and his Neighbor, the Play of Gentleness and Nobility, in two parts; besides
two Comedies the Pinner of Wakefeild, and Philotas Scotch. There was of this
Name in King Henry the Eighth's Reign an Epigrammatist, who, says the Author
of the Art of English Poetry, for the mirth and quickness of his conceits, more
than any good Learning was in him, came to be well benefited by the King.

John Lacy; one of the best and most applauded of our English Actors, in this
present Age; but whose wit not wholly confined to Action, has also produced
two ingenuous Comical P^eces, viz. Monsieur Ragou, and the Dumb Lady.

John Markham; see Edw. Dier.

John de Mehunes, a French Poet, out of whom Chaucer is said to have borrowed
his Troilus and Cressida, and some other of his Poems.

John Skeleton, the Poet Laureat mentioned in the foregoing Treatise of the
Moderns, lived in the time of King Henry the Eighth; and for his Satirical
Invectives against Cardinal Woolsy, was forced to fly to Sanctuary at
Westminster, where in a years time he died, either of grief or ill usage.

John Weever; see Edw. Dier.

M.
Marco Antonio Giraldi, Marco Bartolomeo Gottifredi, Marco Lamberti, Marco
Paulo Antonio Ciocca, a Quaternion of Italian Sonnetiers.

Marco Girolamo Fracastorio, was e^ually happy in Vernacular* and Latin Poetry.
See Hieronymus Fracastorius, in the foregoing Treatise of the Moderns.

Monsieur Moliere, the pleasantest of French Comedians, for smart Comic wit and
Mirth; and to whom our English Stage has within a few years been not a little
beholding.

N.
Nicholas Lord Vaux, a Poetical Writer among the Nobility, in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth; whose Commendation, says the Author of the Art of English
Poesy, lies chiefly in the facility of his Meeter, and the aptness of his
Descriptions, such as he takes upon him to make, namely in sundry of his Songs,
wherein he shows the conunterfeit action very lively and pleasantly.

Nicolaus Stopius, a Fleming of the town of Alost; whose Varia are published
with the selected works of other Noted Belgic Writers in Latin Poetry.

P.
Paganus Piscator, vulgarly Fisher, a Notable undertaker in Latin Verse, by his
Marston Moor and other Latin Pieces, besides English ones not a few, which
however meriting (that we shall not stand now to examine) he must not be
forgotten, that was retained Poet Laureat to so Notorious a Man as Oliver
Cromwell, to whom being usurper, if his Muse did homage, it must be considered
that Poets in all times have been inclinable to ingratiate themselves with the
highest in power by what title soever.

Petronio Barbati da Poligno, a Sonnet writer among many others of the Italian
Lyrics; neither of the brightest nor obscurest fame.

R.
Richard Barnfeild, one of the same Rank in Poetry with Doctor Lodge, Robert
Green, Nicholas Breton, and other Contemporaries already mentioned in the
foregoing Treatise of the Moderns.

Robertus Baston, a Carmelite of a Noble Family in Yorkshire, who had so great
a fame in Poetry, that K. Edw. the First, in his Scottish Expedition, pitched
upon him to be the Celebrator of his Heroic Acts; when being taken prisoner by
the Scots, he was forced by torments to change his Note, and represent all
things to the advantage of Robert Bruce, who then laid claim to the Kingdom of
Scotland. Besides his Poem De Bello Strivilensi; there were published of his
writing a book of Tragedies, with other Poems of various subject.

T.
Theophilus Hogersius, a Latin Versifier among the Chief of Scotland for Latin
Poetry.

Thomas Achelly; see Edw. Dier.

Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, in King Henry the Eighth's time, is esteemed by the
Author of the Art of English Poetry, equal with Edward Ferris, another Tragic
writer already mentioned; of both whom he says, For such doings as I have seen
of theirs, they deserve the price.

Thomas Charnock, his Breviary of Natural Philosophy in English Verse, is
published together with Tho. Nortons's Ordinal of Alchimy, John Dastins's dream,
Bloomfeild's Blossoms, Abraham Andrew' s Hunting of the green Lion, G. Reply' s
Compound of A'chymy, and other collected works of the choicest of our old
Poetisers in the Mysteries of Chemical Philosophy, by my honored Friend Mr
Ashmole, a Learned and most industrious Inquirer into all the Curiosities of
Antiquity, in his Book entitled Theatrum Chymicum Britannicum.

Thomas Ocleave, a very famous English Poet in his time, which was the Reign of
King Henry the Fourth and Henry the Fifth; to which last he Dedicated his
Government of a Prince, the chiefly remembered of what he writ in Poetry, and
so much the more famous he is by being remembered to have been the Disciple of
the most famed Chaucer.

W.
Sir Walter Raleigh, a Person both sufficiently known in History, and by his
History of the World, and seems also by the Character given him by the
forementioned Author of the Art of English Poetry, to have expressed himself
more a Poet then the little we have extant of his Poetry, seems to import: For
ditty and Amorous Ode, says he, I find Sir Walter Raleigh's Vein most lofty,
insolent and passionate.

William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward of the Household to his late
Majesty King Charles the First; not only a great favourer of Learned and
Ingenious Men, but also of a Poetical Genious himself, as he discovers by those
Amorous and not unelegant Airs; which having been many years known by the
Musical numbers of H. Laws, and N. Laneer, were published under his Name in the
year 1660; and that (as a great testimony of his Genuine title to them) with
the both approbation and desire of Caeciliana Coun^ess Dowager of Devonshire,
as Doctor Done takes notice in an Epistle to her before these Poems, to many
of which also are printed the answers of Sir Benjamin Ruddyer, by way of
Repartee.

William Leighton Dedicated to King James a Poetical Piece, entitled Virtue
Triumphant, or Lively Description of the four Virtues Cardinal, which came
forth an. 1603.

William Wicherly, a Gentleman of the Inner Temple, the Author of two witty
Comedies, Love in a Wood, and the Gentleman Dancing Master.

WOMEN Among THE ANCIENTS Eminent for Poetry.
A.
ANYLE, an Epigrammatic Poetess, whose name is to 17 Greec Epigrams in Planudes
his Florilegium: her Verses of Birds are said to be yet extant.

Aspasia, a Noble Milesian Dame, said to have been the Mistress, that is the
Instructress of Pericles, the Great Athenian Philosopher and Orator; for she
was a Person of high and general Repute for her Wisdom and Learning; but most
particularly recommended to Posterity for what she has written in Poetry,
several of her Verses being remembered by Athenaeus.

Astyanassa, one of the Maids of Honor to that Helena, whose Beauty set Troy
on fire; whom yet surpassing in the theory of active love, she impudently
committed by writing to the public view, and as it is supposed, in Verse, the
Descriptions of more Spintrian pranks and Gambols, then perhaps her Mistress
ever practiced or understood; and which seem to have been a Pattern of those
lewd inventions, which the witty ribauld Aretine in after Ages, broch't for
the use of the Sons of Priapus; nor were there wanting in those times apt
Scholars to such a Mistress, who prosecuted and enlarged upon the subject she
had begun: Philenis, a strumpet of Leucadia, as unchaste, says a late Author,
in her Verses, as her life; and Elephantis, whose Molles Libelli are mentioned
by Martial, as she herself by Pliny, Tatianus, Suidas and others.

Athenais, the Daughter of Leontius, an Athenian Sophist; her self also a Woman
of that Wisdom and Ingenuity, as well natural as acquired by learning, that she
was thought worthy to be chosen for a Wife by the greatest Prince of the World,
the Emperor Theodosius the Second.

B.
Bocho, a poor Woman of Delphos, who pronouncing the Delphic Oracles, must
needs be inspired with a Poetic Spirit; besides which she is said to have
composed diverse Hymns.

C.
Carmenta; see Nicostrata.

Cassandra, the Daughter of Priamus King of Troy, a great Prophetess, and as
some think, and that probably, by virtue of the same inspiration, Poetess also.

Charixena, a very Learned Grecian Lady, who besides what she wrote in Prose,
is said to have written many things in Verse, and particularly a Poem entitled
Crumata: she is mentioned by Aristophanes.

Claudia Ru^ina, a Noble British Lady, the Wife of Aulus Rufus Pudens, a
Bononian Philosopher, and of the Roman Equestrian Order; he is delivered to
have been a great Associate with the Poet Martial, whom his advice prevailed
with to alter many of his Verses, and who in many places extols this Lady to
the skies for her Beauty, Learning, and transcendent Virtues: of her Poetic
writings there are remembered by Balaeus, her Book of Epigrams, Elegy upon her
Husband's death, and other Verses of various kind and subject: besides which
she is said to have wrought many things both in Prose and Verse.

Cleobule or Cleobuline, the Daughter of Cleobulus Prince of Lindus; she is
particularly noted for her faculty in Aenigmatical Sentences or Riddles, which
she uttered or composed for the most part in Greec Verse.

Corinna, a Theban Poetess, who wrote 5 Books of Epigrams; and is said to have
been 5 times Victress over Pindarus, she was the Daughter of Archelodorus and
Procratia, and the Disciple of Myrthis, and is mentioned by Propertius, lib. 2.
Besides her there were two others of the same Name, both famed for Poetry also,
namely Corinna the Thespian, much extoll'ed by Ancient writers, especially by
Statius: and Corinna the Roman Lady, who flourishing in the time of Augustus,
is highly celebrated by Ovid, who had a particucular friendship and admiration
for her.

Cornificia, a Roman Epigrammatic Poetesse, Sister to Cornificius*

D.
Damophila, the Cousen-German, Associate and Em^latrix of Sappho, and Wife of
Damophilus the Philosopher: she is said to have writ a Poem of Diana; besides
other Poems of an Amoumorous subject and is mentioned by Theophilus, in his
Life of Apollonius Thyaneus.

Debora, a great Prophess in Israel, of whom such was her repute at that time,
that (though a Wife, viz. of Lapidoth) she was Judge or Supreme Governess: her
divine Hymn or Song upon the Deliverance of the Israelites from Jabin, K. of
the Gananites, shows her to have been divinly inspired with a Poetic, no less
then Prophetic Spirit.

E.
Erinna, a Poetess of Teos, who is said to have writ a Poem in the Doric
Dialect, consisting of 300 Verses, besides Epigrams, though deceasing in the
19th year of her age, which was under the Reign of Dion, Tyrant of* Syracuse.

Eucheria, an unknown Poetess, except by a Fragment of 32 Latin Verses in
Gillius his forementioned Collection of Epigrams and old Poems.

E^docia; see Athenais.

H.
Hannah, the Wife of Elkanah, and Mother of the great Jewish Prophet Samuel;
for the joy of whose Birth, her divine Muse brake forth into a Hymn of
thanksgiving.

Hedyle, a Samian, or as some say, Athenian Poetess, of whom there are
remembered two Poems, her Scylla, our of which Athenaeus quotes several Verses;
and the Loves of Glaucus, which gift of Poetry, as she seems to have received
from a Poetess her Mother, viz. M^schine, noted for Iambic Poetry; so to have
bequeathed to a Poet her Son, no less famous for Epigram.

Helena Flavia, the Daughter of Coil King of Britain, and by him the Mother of
the Emperor; Constantine the Great, among the rest of her works mentioned by
Balaeus, is her Book of Greec Verses, she is said to have been the first finder
out the real Wood of the Cross, upon which our Savior was crucified.

Helpis, the Daughter, as says Ranulphus, of a King of Sicily; but for
certain, Wife of the famous Philosopher Boethius Severinus, there are extant of
her Composing, as Giraldus (...), several* Hymns upon the Apostles; famous also
and well known is her Epitaph upon her Husband.

Histiaea, an Alexandrian Poetess mentioned by Aristophanes, and Strabo in his
Homerica.

Hypatia, the Daughter of Theon, the famous Geometrician of Alexandria, and the
Wife of Ifidorus, the Philosopher; she flourisht under the Em^eror Arcadius,
chiefly for what she wrote in Astronomy, but is also mentioned by Suidas and
Volaterranus, for several Poetical works in various kind of Verse.

L.
Lucia, a Roman Poetess Surnamed Mima, from her Mimic or Cornical writings
mentioned by Pliny.

M.
Manto, a very ancient Poetess, from whom Mantua is said to have been
denominated, and who is delivered to have been the Daughter of Tyresias. Textor.

Marie, the greatest and most exalted of her Sex, as being the Virgin Mother of
the Savior of Mankind; and though her Heavenly Muse has produced but one
single Hymn the Magnificat, yet in that Hymn, as being upon the highest of
subjects, and the most celebrated in Ch^istian Church, the most Divine and
Seraphic of all P^ets.

Megalostrate, the Mistress of the famed Lyric Poet Al^man, her self also of no
mean repute in Poetry.

Michaele, a she Centaur, or at least of that progeny or generation, so
denominated, who as the story goes, instructed the Thessalians by an Elegiac
Poem in the Art of Love; which Poem Ovid is said to have (...).

Maeroe, a Woman who seems to have been of the most considerable of the
Antienos for Learning; bu^ most particularly remembered by her Hymn to Neptune.

Musca^, an ancient Lyric and Epigrammatic Poetess, whose Epigrams and Lyric^
Nomi are mentioned by Caelius Rodiginus, in the first chapter of his ei^hth
Book.

(...) a Byzantian Elegiac and Meli^ Poetess, whose M^emosyne is remembered by
Athenaeus, lib. 11. of the same Myro most probably, for Suidas mention^ two of
that Name, are those various Poems in Elegiac Verse, taken notice of by
Pausanias in his Boeotica, as also an Hexastich in the Book of the Greec
Anthology: she is delivered to have been the Wife of Andromachus, the
Philosopher.

Myrtis, an Anthedonian Poetess, of whom there is remembered Poem of the death
of the Nymph Oc^ne, for whose Love (...) died.

N.
Nic strata, or Carme^ta, the Mother of Enander, an ancient King of Italy, even
before the arrival of (...) into that Country. She is feigned, for it will be
looked upon rather as a^f^ction then real Story, to have been the first
Inventor of Verse, which thence (...) to be called Carmey.

Nossis, an Epigrammatic Poetess, and by Antipater numbered also among the
Lyrics.

P.
^amphila, an Epidaurian, the Daughter of Soteridas, of whose writi^^ several
works as well in Verse as Prose, are reckoned up by Suidas, in all which so
great was her Repute; that her Statue is said to have been erected by
Cephisodorus.

Perilla a Roman Lady, who living in the time of Augustus, was in general
esteem for her Learning and virtue, and for her addiction to Poetry peculiarly
admired and celebrated by Ovid, whose Scholar in Poetry, the 7^h Elegy of the
third Book of his Tristia, whereof she is indeed the sole subject, intimates
her to have been.

Phemonoe, the first Priestess of Ap^llo (as she is delivered to be) and
utterer of the Delphic Oracles; and also the first Inventress of Heroic Verse;
in which she is said to have written many things, as Suidas and Volaterranus
tes^ify.

Polla Argentaria, the Wife of the Poet Lucan, and as is generally believed his
Grand assistant in the correction and polishing of a great part of his
Pharsalia: she is much extolled by Martial, and also by Statius, in his second
Book of Sylvae.

Praxilla a Sycionian Dithy ambic Poetess, of whose writing there is a work
entitled Metrum Praxilleum: she is said to have flourisht in the 32d Olympiad;
and is reckoned by Antipater Thessalus among the ^ most famous Lyrics.

Proba Valeriae Falconia, the Wife of Adelphus the Roman Proconsul, in the
Reign of Honorius and Theodosius junior: she composed a Virgilian* Ge^ to upon
the History of the Old and New Testament, which was (...) by Petrus
Brub^^chi^^, an* 1541. (...) Epitaph also upon her Husband's (...) is
particularly remem^^^^.

S.
Sappho, a Lesbian, (the Daughter of Scamandarus, and Wise of (...), a ^ich Man
of Andros, by whom she had a Daughter named Cle^) nor inferior in same to the
best of Lyric Poets; and said to be the first Compose^ of tha^ sort of Lyric
Verse, which from he is called Sapphi^; in which some are extant under her
name, besides which she is said to have written Epigrams, Elegies, Iambi^s and
Monodies, and to have flourisht in the 42d Olympiad, and invented the Plectrum.
Moreover, being a Poetess her self, she is likewise the subject of Poetical
Tradition, if at least it were the same Sappho (for there have been imagined
others of the same name) who falling in love with Phao the (...) Man, and
finding her self slighted, was possessed with a worse then Poetic madness to
throw her self headlong from the rock Leucas into the Sea. Ovid, Statiu^, and
others of the Latin Poets acknowledge but one Sappho

Sibylls, several Women whoever they were (for it is not certainty agreed on
among Authors) vulgarly concluded to have been Divinely inspired with a Spirit,
both of Prophesy and Poetry: Politian accounts them to have been 12 in number,
under these Names, Am^lthea, Marpesia, Herophile, Sabbe, Demo, Phygo,
Phaetnnis, Carmenta, Manto, Pythia. Phem^noe, and Deiphobe^ Sebastianus Franc.
11, Martianus Capella but two: Aelianus in his Book de Varia Historia, reckons
(...) Erythraea, Samia, Egyptia, and Sardinia. But the general received number
of them is 10, according to Va^ro, Liactantius, Justin Martyr, St. Augustine,
and others, and those entitled as follows, viz. 1, Sibylla Agrippa, otherwise
Persis or Chaldaea, by the name of Sambethe, and by some surmis'd to have been
the Daughter of Noah: 2., Sibylla Lybica, remembered by Euripides in his
Prologue of Lamia; who ha^h been conjectured to be the same (...) 3, Sibylla
(...) by (...) in his Book of (...) 4. Sibylla Italica or (...) notice of by
(...) and Piso in his Annals (...) to have been the same with (...) the Mother
of E^ander: 5. Sibylla E^ythroea, who particularly (...) the Destruction of
Troy: 6* Sibylla (...), by the name of Pytho, men^ion'^ by ^^^tosthenes in his
Annals of (...) Cumana, by some named (...) by others Damophila, by others
Herophile; the same, as it is thought^ that brought the 9 Books to (...)
Priscus: 8, Sibylla (...) who is delivered to have flourisht in the time of
Solon: 9, Sibylla (...) 10, (...) Tiburtina, named Albun^^^, who is said to
have lived in the time of Augustu^, and to have warned (...) to worship a
Child, that should (...) of a Virgin; to which purpose also (...) those Oracles
in Greec Verse^ which whether the real work of those ancient Sibylls, to whom
they are (...), imputed, and under that motion^ (...) has been the dispute and
inquiry of many, and may very well; espe^ially in respect of some of them, the
(...) of whose being in the number of the Sibylla, may easily be questioned,
much more their being the Authors of those Greec Verses, considering either
their time or Country.

Sosipatra, a Lydian, the Wife of Aedesius, whom being of a Prophetic Spirit,
and foretelling future events, in Verse no doubt, as the Ancients especially
were wont to do, some have not doubted to place among the Poets. She is
mentioned by Eugapius and Volater^^^us.

Sulpitia, a most Learned Roman Lady, the Wife of Calenus: she is reported by
Fulgosus l. 8. cap. 3. to have written many things in Heroic Verse; and is
elegantly ce^ebrated by Martial, in the 35^h Epigram of his tenth Book, and in
the 38^h Epigram of the same Book to her Husband Calenus: under the name of
this Sulpitia, there are some Fragments printed in some Editions of Ausonius,
and a Fragment of two Epigrams in Gillius his Collection of Epig. and Po^matia
vetera.

T.
Telesil^a, a Noble Poetess of Argo^, who upon consulting the Oracle about her
health, being advised to betake her self to the Study of the Muses, grew in a
short time so excellent, that animated by the charming power of her Verse, the
Argive Women under her conduct were able to repel Cleomenes, the Spartan King,
from the Seige of Argos, and afterward King Demaratus from the Seige of
Pamphiliacum, with shameful loss and retreat.

Theano, a triple female name of considerable repute in Poetry: the first of
this Name was Theano Locrensis, or Native of the City Locri, and Surnamed
Melica, from the exact M^lody, to which all her Lyric Airs and Songs were
composed: the second a Cretan Poetess, and by some delivered to have been the
Wife of Pythagoras: the third Theano Thuria, or Metapontina, said to have been
the Wife of Carystius, some say Brantinus of Crotona, and the Daughter of the
Poet Lycophron; they are all three mentioned by (...): moreover, there are 3
Epistle^ of Theano probably one of these ^ now mentioned; though which of them
is not determined, published with the Epistles of several ancient Greec Authors
at Venice by Aldus.

Thymele, a Musical Poetess remembered by Martial, said to have been the first
introducer into the Scene of a sort of Dance, which from her is called by the
Greecs (...), from her also a sort of Altar anciently often used in Theaters,
is concluded to have taken its appellation.

WOMEN Among THE MODERNS Eminent for Poetry.
A.
ANGELA de Nugarolis, an Italian Lady, the Daughter of Antonius de Nugarolis,
of a very universal knowledge; but most especially accomplished in Grammar,
Rhetoric, and Poetry.

Anne Askew, the Daughter of Sir Wil^iam Askew, of Lincolnshire: she is is
remembered among the English writers as well in Verse as Prose, for a Woman of
singular beutie, Virtue and ingenuity; but above all for her constant assertion
of the Protestant Faith she had embraced, even to the death, which she
undauntedly suffered with many others, who upon the same occasion, in Queen
Mary's Reign, were brought to the stake.

Anne Broadstreet, a New England Potess, no less in title, viz. before her
Poems, printed in Old-England anno 1650; then The tenth Muse sprung up in
America, the memory of which Poems consisting chiefly of Descriptions of the
four Elements, the four Humors, the four Ages, the four Seasons, and the four
Monarchies, is not yet wholly extinct.

Anna Maria Shurman, an Hollandish Lady, of the most celebrated Fame for
Learning of any of her Sex that I have heard of in Europe, at this day, by her
Epistles to many of the most Eminent^y Learned Men of this Age, and other
extant and generally known works, whereof part in Verse, both in Latin, Greec
and Hebrew.

Arabella, an English Lady, in the time of King James, whose near Kinswoman she
was, and who upon her secret Marriage with Mr. William Seymour, afterward Earl
and Marquess of Hertford, was with her Husband committed to the Tower, where
she died: she was a Lady of no less Eminence for Learning and ingenuous parts,
then for her Quality; and as says an English w^iter, who makes mention of her,
She had a great facility in Poetry, and was elaborately conversant among the
Muses. What correspondence Andrew Melvin, the Witty Scotchman, had with her in
the Tower, being Prisoner there at the same time, has been already mentioned.

Astrea Behn a Dramatic writer, so much the more considerable as being a Woman,
to the present English Stage, to which she has contributed 2 Comedies, the
Dutch Lady, and the Amorous Princess, the Forced Marriage, a Tragy-Comedy, and
the Fatal Jealousy, a Tragedy.

B.
Lady (...) one of the four Daughters of Sir Antony Cook, the other three were
the Lady Burleigh; the Lady Russel; and Mis Killigrew* of whose Genius in
Poetry, whatever has been known extant, there is the testimony of a Grand
Author, viz. Sir John Harringtor, who in his Allegory upon the 37th Book of
Ariosto's O^lando Fu^ioso* gives them all a very large Character for Learning,
and particularly for Poetry; and of one of them he cite; the Latin Verses sent
from Cornwall, to her Sister the Lady Burleigh, being then at Court, to use her
utmost interest, that her Lover might not be sent abroad upon an Emba^^y, which
was intended.

C.
Cassandra Fedele, a Venetian Lady, born in the year 1465, the Daughter of
Angelo Fedele and Barbara Leonia: she was for her excellence in the Latin and
Greec Tongues, History, Philosophy, and the Arts, very much esteemed by Angelus
Politianus, and remembered by Fulgosus lib. 1. c. 3. Rerum Morabilium, for a
Volume of Latin Poems of various subject and kind.

Catherine Philips, the most applauded, at this time, Poetess of our Nation,
either of the present or former Ages, and not without reason, since both her
Fame is of a fresh and lively date from the but late published Volume of her
Poe^ical works, and those also of a style suitable to the humor and Genius of
these times.

E.
Lady Elizabeth Carew, wrote the Tragedy of Mariam.

Elizabetha Joanna Westoni^, an English Poetess of some repute in the esteem of
Farnabie, who ranks her with Sir Th. More, Alabaster, Drurie, and other English
writers of Latin Poetry.

H.
Hildegardis, an Abbess of the Benediction Order, of the Monastery of St.
Rupert, in the Earldom of Spanheim, in Germany: who besides the several Volumes
she wrote in Prose, both in Theology and Medicine, is said to have written also
a Book of Latin Poems of various argument and Verse.

I.
Lady Jane Gray, the Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, far more happy in her
Learning, wherein she took wonderful delight, and her sine Vein in Poetry, for
which she is by many highly commended, then in her being proclaimed Queen of
England; which honor after a very short time of enjoyment, brought her to an
untimely end.

K.
Mis. Killigrew; see the Lady Bacon.

L.
Lucretia Marinella, an Italian Lady; who wrote a Poem of the Dignity and
Pre-eminence of Women.

M.
Magdalena Acciniola, a Lyric Poetess, after the manner of the Italians in
Sonnet, Canzon, and Madrigal.

Margaret, Duchess of New Castle, lately deceas't, a very obliging Lady to the
World; and withal not regardless of her own future Fame, by so largely and
copiously imparting to public view her studious Endeavors in the Arts and
Ingenuities, there being three ample Volumes of hers in Print; one of Orations,
the other of Philosophical Notions and Discourses, the third of Dramatic and
other kinds of Poetry.

Mary Morpeth, a Scotch Poetess, and a friend of the Poet Drummond, of whom,
besides many other things in Poetry, she has a large Encomium in Verse.

Mary, Countess of Pembroke, the Sister of the Incomparable Sir Philip Sidney,
whose Arcadia was consecrated to her virtuous inclination to Poetry, and other
Ingenuities, there is extant of his writing the Tr. of Antonius and Albions
Triumph, besides what other things she probably may be imagined to have writ,
though now not known.

Lady Mary Wroth, the Wife of Sir Robert Wroth, an Emulatress perhaps of Philip
Sidny's Arcadia, by her Urania, a Poetical History of the same nature; but much
inferior in Fame.

Mildred^, one of the fo^e me^tion'd four Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook and
Wife to the Lord (...) who with the rest of her Sisters is equally commended by
Sir John Harrington, and others, both for Learning in general and in particular
for her Vein in Poetry.

O.
Olympi^ Clara, an Italian Lady no less famous then her Name imports* for what
she has writ in Verse.

R.
Lady Russell, one of the four Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook, already mentioned.

S.
Madam (...), the Sister of that most Famous of French Romancer^ Monsieur
Scudery; whose assistant she is said to have been in many of his works, and of
Clelia to have had the principal share: she also writ a Book of Poems, which
have the commendation of a more than feminine wit and Fancy.

U.
Valeria Miaina, an Italian Dramatic Poetess, whose Amorosa Speranza, I find
peculiarly mentioned and commended.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Charles Smith Bookseller, at the Angel near the
Inner Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street.
AMbroses Works, complete in folio, price bound 26 s. The Triumphs of Gods
revenge against Murder in folio, price bound 10 s. Lord Bacons Natural History
in folio, price bound 8 s. Cabala, sive Scrinia Sacra; the Mysteties of State
and Government in fol, price bound 12 s. Island Princess, a Play 40 price 1 s.
Faithful Sheperdess, a Play 40 pr. 1 s. Memoires of the Duke of Rohan, being a
faithful Relation of the most remarkable occurrences in France, 80 price bound
3 s. The Wits, and the Platonik Lovers, 2 Plays by Sir William Davenant, in 80
price 2 s. Young Clarks Guide into 4 parts in 80, price bound 5 s. The Works of
Francis Osborn Esquire. Divine, Moral, Historical and Political, in 80 price 6 s.
Speculum Juventutis, or a True Miror, where errors in Breeding Noble and
Generous Youth, with the miseries and mischeifs that usually attend it. As
likewise Remedies for every growing evil, are clearly made manifest and
portray'd to the life, in the no less pleasant than profitable History of
Sisara and Valinda, 80 price 3 s. Officium Clerici Pacis: A Book of
Indictments, Informations, Appeals, and Inquisitions. Also the manner of
holding the Sessions of Peace, with diverse other matters relating thereunto,
and necessary to be known by all Justices of the Peace, 80 price 3 s. The
Accomplished Ladies Delight in Preserving, Physic, beautifying and Cookery, in
12 price 2 s. 6 d. Dr. Collets daily Devotions, or the Christians Morning and
Evening Sacrifice, digested into Prayers and Medi^atations for every day of the
Week, and other occasions, with Directions for a Godly Life, in twelves, and
twenty four, price 1 s. 6 d.

