A PROBLEM CONCERNING THE GOUT: IN A LETTER TO Sir JOHN GORDON, Fellow of the
Royal College of Physicians, and of the Royal Society in London.

By G. P. Esquire;

WITH A REPLY, and CENSURE thereupon.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead overagainst St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1691.

A PROBLEM Concerning the GOUT. IN A Letter to Sir JOHN GORDON.
SIR,
YOU have, by the very Magic of your most ingenious Discourse, (with which you
honored me the other day) wrought a Cure very foreign to your Profession; you
have rectified the habit of my Mind, and expelled a noxious Error from my
Judgment. But give me leave to tell you, If you accustom your self to such
Methods, if you are at such Expense of Learning and Rhetoric, to undermine a
sandy Notion, to break a brittle Fancy in pieces, you will make the number of
your Opponents exceed that of your Converts; either by stirring up some fumes
of Pride in such as I am, to observe our crude Conceits worthy of your Censure;
or by raising an Itch of Contradiction, only to enjoy the pleasure of your
Confutation. And now, to make my submission complete, I will present you with
the Scheme of my Conceptions on that Subject, that so having rid my Thoughts of
the burden of them, they may creditably expire under the Honor of your
Correction.

I have been acquainted with the GOVT near twenty years, during which time the
troublesome (but, as I have used to treat him, not very chargeable) Guest has
constantly paid me a Visit once in the year, and sometime twice; therefore I
may be allowed to give an Account of it more than notionally and theoretically.
And tho I do not in the least pretend to any Knowledge or Judgment in the Noble
Science of Physic; yet having in my younger years been conversant in the most
delightful Study of Anatomy, I came to understand the Inside of my self, and a
little to know, and with some astonishment to admire that orderly and
stupendous Contexture of all parts of the Body, which no Hand, but that of an
Omnipotent Creator, could effect; which every man carries about him, but few
know, and none can understand, but such as have been accustomed to Dissection,
and especially of living Bodies; and is in some measure represented by a Clock,
the Order and Office of which is very admirable; but when you open the Doors,
and behold the Motions (so like to Animal) the Harmony and Subserviency of each
Wheel and Part to the other, all wonder of the Outside cease, and is
disregarded. Besides, my Age warrants me to claim the Title of a Physician, in
my own defense, that I may avoid the Epithet of a Fool; and I am obliged to
pretend to some Proficiency, that I may escape the Censure of talking like an
Apothecary.

Upon the whole, I do observe, That the Causes of that Distemper are as much
mistaken, and as little understood, as the Cure. Wherefore I am in my Opinion
very heterodox, and do think, That whosoever is so fortunate as to be affected
with the Gout, (especially if the Indications of it do commence in his
declining Age), he ought to use no means to repel it, or be rid of it, but
patiently to endure the Fit, as a lucky, tho sharp Composition for more fatal
Maladies: as I have heard or read of a Custom used in the Low Countries, That
when a Man after Fifty falls into the Gout, his Friends come about him, they
make a Feast, and rejoice at this hopeful prolongation of his Life, and a
probable addition of Twenty or Thirty years to it. And by the way, I cannot but
observe to you, That when Asa King of Judah was diseased in his Feet (which is
by all interpreted to be the Gout) it is noted of him, That he did not seek to
the Lord, but to his Physicians; he did not patiently endure the Fit, but
tampered with Plasters and Pultises.

In some Persons the Gout is Hereditary, and in some it is Original; and tho it
be ordinary to impute the Assaults of it to Excess in Diet, and other
inordinate Pleasures; yet having in my Observations remarked how many Men and
Women of the strictest Temperance, and singularly abstemious, have been in the
most miserable manner afflicted with it, while others, setting no Limits to
their Appetite, have for many Years indulged themselves in Excess, yet never
suffered in any Symptoms of it; I cannot be persuaded that it proceeds
naturally, or necessarily from such Causes.

It may justly and reasonably be called, Malae Causae bonus Effectus; and tho
possibly it were good for a man not to have that Disorder in the Humors, which
does occasion that Distemper; yet it is better to have that irregularity
dispelled by a Fit of the Gout, than to be fixed by a Disease in any of the
Noble Parts, or transformed into an acute Fever; it may be well for a man to be
of so athletic a Constitution, as to have no Disposition to the Gout; but it is
certainly better for him that once has had it, not to miss the Annual Return
of it; nay I am almost induced to say, that the Gout is so fas from being a
Disease, that it is rather a Cure, a Cure administered by Nature, without the
aid of a Physician, and infallibly effectual, if not interrupted by cross and
churlish Applications.

I am of Opinion, That this may be a proper Definition of the Gout, Arthritis
est Purgatio Nervorum. And I am inclined to suppose so, by Reasons drawn from
my own Observation and Experience. First, Because a Dullness of the Brain, and
Heaviness in the Head (which is the Root of the Nerves) is a certain, if not a
constant, precedaneous Symptom of an approaching Fit; and then when the Gout is
fixed in the Hand, or Foot, or other Joint, immediately that Cloud which
darkened the Brain, is dispelled; and the Understanding, Memory, and Fancy, is
sensibly cleared and quickened. Secondly, Another Symptom is Motio formicans, a
little stirring in the Back, like the crawling of Emmets or Pismires; which
seems to be a Goutish Humor passing along the Spinal Marrow, from whence the
Nerves are disseminated. Thirdly, Because the Operation, or affliction of the
Gout, is not exercised on the Fleshy and Musculous Parts of the Body, but is
suddenly darted and conveyed through the Channels of the Nerves into some
Joint, and yet does not remain in the Nerves; which I conceive to be performed
thus; A Nerve being composed of many filaments covered with a Membrane, is the
proper Vehicle, and Instrument both of Motion, and Sensation, the latter
whereof is performed by the Object being carried by a tremulous Motion up to
the common Sense (as a stretched Lute-string trembles at the top, when touched
at the bottom); the other by conveying the Animal Spirits between the Cavities
of those Threads or Filaments, which compose the Nerve, (as a Bundle of Quills
clapped together must leave Spaces and Vacuities, because they are round, and can
touch one another but in Linea, by reason of their Convexity); now through
these Cavities, I suppose, the malignant Ferment which Nature throws off, (and
is the very Elixir of contagious Humors) channels along, and passes to the
Joints, where if undisturbed by violent and unnecessary Applications, it gently
evaporates by insensible Perspiration, after its due Crisis and Periods.

Fourthly, Because the Gout, like other acute Distempers, has its gradual and
regular Procession, its Increment, State, and Declension; and having gone
through the Extremities of the Body, passes off (if not checked and controlled
by Plasters, Salves, and Poultises) leaving the Joint or Member free from all
Pain, but weak, and disabled from Motion, which is the proper employment of the
Nerves and Muscles. Fifthly, Because the Cramp (which is a convulsive Motion
and Distortion of the Nerves and Muscles) is constantly an Usher, or an
Attendant of the Gout.

In the Tenets of Religion, I desire to be always Orthodox; in the
Disquisitions of Natural Philosophy, I take a pleasure to be Heretical: I
subscribe to the Dictates of the Church; but I am not ashamed to be a
Nonconformist to the Theorems of Aristotle and Gallen. So being once got out
of the common Road, give me leave to ramble a little, and to present you with
some other Notions, which without arrogance I may call my own, since as no
other man (to the best of my knowledge) ever published the same; so
peradventure no man else will applaud, or abet: but for that I am no way
concerned; what I write, is for my own pleasure, and your diversion, and I am
not at all ambitious to be the Leader of a Sect, or Party.

I am of opinion, That the Gout and Stone are one and the same, conceived and
begot by the same Causes, fostered and cherished by the same Accidents, and
only differing in their Seat and Position: the one ravaging among the Joints,
and external parts of the Body; the other making its residence in the inward
Recesses of the Veins, and urinary Passages. I take the Stomach to be the
primum mobile, and principal Agent in these Occurrences, to whose Indisposition
and male administration the dolorous Consequences both of the One and the Other
are primarily to be attributed: so that the Errors in the first Concoction
(whether arising from the natural debility of that Vessel, or fomented by the
inordinate use, and the irregularities of Diet) are the Embrio, or Seed-plot,
from whence the Maladies and Disorders which infest the Body, are derived.
Hence Agues and Fevers receive the first Rudiments of their Formation, from
the crude Relics of Indigestion. Here, by precipitated Concoction, the pure and
genuine Chyle is perverted into acrimonious Humors, and Choler adust, which
become the original of Catarrhs, Consumptions, and Hydropick Distempers. But if
by the Strength of Nature, and the Pancratic Constitution of the Party, the
Malignity be removed from the Vitals, and the Venom precluded from channelling
in the Arteries; then the Ferment, or morbific Salt, is forced away, and either
ejaculated into the Nerves, which causes the Paroxysms of the Gout; or
transmitted into the Kidneys, and causes the condensing of Gravel, which
carries the Contagion off with it, if seasonably expelled; but if fixed,
engenders the Stone, and the fatal Torments that attend it. Nay, the very end
and utmost Effort, both of Stone and Gout, conclude in a sandy and calculous
Accretion; the one visible in the Bladder, the other apparent in chalky,
topaceous Stones in the Joints of the Hand and Feet: To which, let me add the
Observation of Dr. Willis, (which I have read in his Works) that having by
powerful Physic driven away the Gravel from a Patient, he became presently
afflicted with the Gout; and having forced that to depart, the Stone
immediately returned, and became his Bane.

But, what if I should strain a Point higher, and entertain you with a Fancy
just now come into my head? Because every Man (who is not taken away by a
violent Death) is said to dye of a Fever; why may it not be rationally
conjectured, that the most Notorious, Ordinary, and Epidemical Distempers and
Diseases, are but so many diversified Kinds, or Species of Fevers? And if so,
then I may be allowed to Coin a new Distinction, and divide that Universal
Minister of Death into these several Classes, Febris Venalis, Febris
Arterialis, Febris Stomachica, Febris Nephritica, and Febris Nervea. Under the
first, I place Pleurisies, and other Distempers arising from redundancy, or an
ill habit of the Blood. In the second, are comprehended Agues, violent and
malignant Fevers, proceeding from Inflammations, and Corruption of the Fountain
of Blood and Animal Spirits, the Heart. The third shows it self in Colics,
Iliac Passions, Griping of the Guts, and other Torments caused by Wind, and
fetching their Original from the Stomach. The sharp twinges of the Gravel, and
excruciating Miseries of the Stone, are excercised on the Kidneys, Vreters, and
Bladder, and may fairly pass under the Denomination of Febris Nephritica. And
doubtless the Pains and Afflictions of the Gout, may properly be Febris Nervea,
since its Swing and Operation is wholly in the Nerves, and is indicated and
determined by periodical and feverish Fits; a true Fit of the Gout being always
attended by a Febricula, or short Fever. Thus the Body of Man is assaulted by
Enemies of its own Generation; one sort of Fever storms it, another blows it
up, another undermines it; this batters it, and that pulls it to the ground;
every Man desires to live long, but no Man would be Old; and even the Gout,
which generally is the Concomitant of old Age, helps to increase the Miseries
of it. I will conclude with a Fable of the Gout and the Spider, which was told
me by a Country Gardener. The Gout and the Spider (having been old
acquaintance) met in a Summers Evening; and after ordinary Salutations, began
to congratulate each other's Felicity. The Gout extolled his good Fortune, that
was so luckily placed in a stately House near adjoining, where the owner of it
caressed him with all manner of kindness, comforting him with Plasters,
refreshing him with Oil and Frictions, covering him with Scarlet and Flannen,
and treating him with so much Civility, that he was not put to the toil of
walking, but rested Day and Night in a warm Room. The Spider said, I have taken
up my Quarters in a poor Man's Cottage, where tho my Entertainment be but mean,
yet I enjoy Safety and Tranquillity; I spread my Nets through the House, I have
as many Webs in the Loom, as would serve all my Generation, and no Body
disturbs me. Thus having mutually discanted on their Happiness, a curiosity
pricked them to change Quarters for one Night, that each might be a Witness of
the other's good Condition; so they parted, appointing to meet in the same
place, and recount their Adventures. Accordingly the Gout marches to the
Cottage, attacks the Owner, and fixes his Residence in his Great Toe. The
Spider ascends the Gentleman's Parlour, falls presently to work, and before day
he had extended his Manufacture through all the Spaces of the Room. The next
Night they met again, but in a most deplorable Condition; the Gout looked as if
he were halfdrown'd and half-dead. The Spider, as if he were frightened out of
his Wits. But wondering a while at one another's Fate, and recollecting
themselves, the Gout told his Friend, That when he came to the Cottage, he
(according to his Custom) seized on the Good man's Toe, expecting to rest
quietly there; but to his Astonishment, the Man started up, run about with his
naked Feet, and plunged himself into a Pond, and had almost drowned or choked
him, so that he had hardly escaped with Life. My Fortune has been little better
(replies the Spider); for having finished my Work, and spread my Nets up and
down the Room, I betook me to rest; but early in the Morning the Chambermaid
comes, and with her Broom and Whisk un-mercifully destroys and tears down what
I had wrought; I, upon the Alarm retreated into a Hole, and with much
difficulty made my escape hither. So after a little pausing, they took leave:
The Gout returning to the Rich Man, and the Spider to the Poor.

But lest the flat Repetition of such frivolous, and incoherent Stuff may prove
as troublesome as the Disease it treats of; or the wanton Excursions of my Pen
prove equally Vexatious to the very Twinges of the Gout; In pure Pity, and good
Manners, I desist, after I have with all possible Respect and Sincerity, avowed
my self,

November. 3. 1690. SIR, Your most Faithful Humble Servant, G. PHILIPS.

The REPLY.
SIR,
Though by your Letter you do me the Honor to represent me as molded in that of
the most extensive Friendship; and submit to my Reflections your very ingenious
and well-contrived thoughts of the Cause, previous and subsequent Phoenomena of
your old and intimate Friend, the Gout: yet I will not be guilty of so much
Vanity, as to endeavor any alteration in that Scheme which you have so neatly
and ingeniously framed: Especially your Sentiments on that Head, being espoused
and very well defended, not only by Juncken, and those Learned Physicians, who
will have the Nutritious juices to be conveyed to all the parts of the Body by
the Nerves; but also by that Ornament of Learning, Dr. Charleton, present
President of the Royal College of Physicians; for whose Learning and acute
Reasonings, I have that veneration, that I judge it almost a Crime to entertain
different Sentiments from his, in such Speculations. But I must add, without
the least flattery, That if any inducements could oblige me to become a
Proselyte to the speculative part of your Opinions on this Subject, you your
self furnish me with stronger inducements than all my Books or Converse in the
World could do. For when I consider the height of your Fancy, the clearness of
your Reasonings, the solidness of your Judgment, the great connection I find
betwixt all the Links of the Chain of your various and pleasing Thoughts on all
Subjects; the charmingness and peculiar neatness of your Pen, I am almost
persuaded to believe, that the Gout must be a critical evacuation of the Brain
and Animal Spirits, by which Hetrogeneous, Acid, Acrious, Austere, and other
troublesome Particles are thrown off from the Brain and Nerves, on the
Articulations of the Limbs, which clouds the Fancy, and lames the Reasonings of
most Men who are strangers to that Troublesome, tho Advantageous Crise: And I
must tell you, that, were I confident your old Friend would procure me those
Advantages I admire in you, I would almost court his intimate familiarity; but,
Ex quovis Ligno non fit Mercurius.

Those who will have the Cause of the Gout to be lodged immediately in the
Blood and circulating Liquors, and not in the Brain, and Genus Nervosum, and
will have the Crise performed by the mediation of the Mucilaginous and
Oleaginous Glands of the Joints, seem to plead fairer; and are exposed to sewer
intricacies, and less difficulties than the Patrons of the other Hypothesis
are; and give a clear and very intelligible account of the Genealogies of all
the Antecedent, Concomitant, and Consequent Phoenomena of that troublesome
Companion; and lest a Man of your Universal Knowledge should be a Stranger to so
useful a part of Anatomy, I presume to recommend to your perusal a little
Tract, called, Osteologia Nova, lately wrote by Dr. Havers, from whose
ingenious Pen the Commonwealth of Learning may expect what may be useful to
that Republic.

But not to trouble you further with Speculations of this kind (for in framing,
extending, and improving of fine Thoughts, I willingly and justly resign in
your favors the right hand of Fellowship) I find, not only by thoroughly
considering the animal economy, but by many years practice and experience,
that those different Hypotheses forces very little alteration on the rational
method of Cure: And you must pardon me, if I take you in task as to what
concerns the practical part of your Letter, if in good Scotch (I pretend not to
write English) I may so term it; that being a Province to which I am not
altogether a stranger.

In the first place, I must tell you, It Is my Opinion, had a Man of your Head
made it his business to be so much conversant in the Practical part of
Medicine, as you are in the Theorick, you might have easily, not only promoted
your self to the Dignity and Title of a second Aesculapius, but also, (I am
confident) you had altogether altered your Sentiments as to the Cure or Removal
of your old Friend. I could (were it necessary) adduce many Instances, and
possibly of your Countrymen, of whom some are on this place, others returned to
Ireland, whom in a little time, by the use of Internals and Topics, I freed
from that troublesome distemper, and not returned as yet.

But in the next place, you may consider (not to discourse now of the various
Particles and alterations the circulating Liquors receive from the Air, by
Inspiration and otherwise; (for the nature of a Letter will not allow of such
Excursions) that whether the Cause or Minera Morbi, lodge in the Blood, etc. or
Genus Nervosum: Mostly, the Stomach and Guts, and the various alterations the
materials of our Diet undergoes in these digestory Cavities; cannot vindicate
themselves to us, for performing their Duty so faintly; nor can we, to our
selves, for oppressing and burthening them so much. So that if the Chyle be
Acrious, Acid, Austere, or of other qualities, the Blood must participate of
the nature of the materials of which it is made. Besides, if a great deal of
Crudities, Humors, or call them as you will, nestle and stagnate in the Guts,
Stomach, or other parts of the Abdomen, which vitiate the Chylification and
Chyle, and rivolets it ill to the circulating humors, by the lactic Veins (and
if not carried off by Vomiters and Purgers according to the present
Circumstances of the Patient) in Limine, must give new matter to new recurring
Paroxisms, till a long abstinence, and often recurring Fits, emacitates the
Patient, and consumes the fomies Morbi in the first Region; which a rational
Physician can remove very soon, without the least or very little trouble to the
Patient; if Improvement or Biass ( the Brats of Authority) oblige the Physician
to be a Spectator, the Patient is like to have a pleasant time of it.

In my Practice, wherever I find the Minera Morbi, I tamper not with it, but
turns it off how soon I can: and if I occasion thereby any troublesome Disorder
in the Fluids, I force them to their proper Stations, by suitable Paragoricks:
by which Methods I never had any Disreputation, but my Patients great
Advantage. When Indications oblige, I cause open a Vein, I give Swetters and
Diuretics, by which I divert the designed Course of those troublesome fluid
Salts: and seeing the Animal Spirits are but the product of the Blood, and
cannot be expected to be of a more mild temper than their Progenitor: I alter
the circulating Fluids as soon, and much as I can, by removing out of them what
is hostile and troublesome, and lodging in them such Principles and Particles I
judge them to want. And I judge, by such a Method, (supposing still the Patient
to be rational and tractable) the Gout is not altogether so stubborn and
rebellious as he is discoursed to be; at least, I found him (in such
circumstances) obsequious enough to my Commands; so that I will not be so
unjust to the poor Criminal as many are. For should I not procure a tractable
and rational Patient, what he expects, I would rather complain of my
Timorousness, my being imposed on by the Bugbears of great Authority, and
negligence of suitable administrations, than on the stubbornness of a few
vicid, saline humors, may be cut off as to their Minera, and thrown off by
suitable Medicines in a very short time.

Sir, I find you are irreconcilable to Topical Applications, whether Pultisses,
Plasters, or all others of that kind: but when I have discoursed you a little
as to the nature of those kind Applications, I hope I may moderate your Passion
against them; and do some of them the Honor as to procure them your most
serene and obliging Countenance.

I must confess to you, and acknowledge, that such of them as are emplastick,
astringent, and so contract the Pores, and stops the insensible transpiration,
deservedly merit very much your displeasure, on the Grounds and Reasons you
intimate in your Letter. But such internal applications as open the Pores,
dissolves Coagulations, (by blunting the acid coagulating Salts) in the
cutaneous Glans, and possibly alters very much the texture of the circulating
Liquors, without any previous trouble to the Stomach) I hope I may presume, to
usher those to your acquaintance: and I have that very great esteem for your
Merit, that I would not make you uneasy, by giving your Esteem and Friendship
to any, but those I can venture my reputation for what I promise in their Name.
And if you command me to disclose to you the very Secrets of my Cabinet, your
Commands will be obsequiously obeyed.

I do not much admire the Custom of Holland; nor do I believe a Rational and
Sedulous Physician (if the Patient be tractable) will suffer the Gout to run
all these Stages; for I know by many Experiences, it may be strangled when in
embrio, or may be destroyed in the Bud, before it can blossom; or if it do,
may be made fall before it ripen, sublata causa tolitur effectus: but if we
suffer our digestions to be lesed, vitiate, and oppressed, the circulating
Liquors to be loaded with troublesome Salts, or other particles; if we lodge and
continue in the Center, and digesting Cavities of our Body, such a mass of
incommoding Humors, which must of necessity produce many Distempers, according
to the Texture of the Fluids and particular Mechanisms of the Solids of those
concerned; then the Holland Custom takes place, and not only the Gout, but
other Distempers, both Acute and Chronic, runs their particular Stages in great
Triumph, which we owe to our own Inadvertency, or our Physicians neglect; for
our Health and Sicknesses are Mechanical, depend on Mechanical Principles; and
he who understands this Mechanism well, and adverts attentively to all its
Motions, Measures, and Stops, can order the bodily Machine so, that Opinions
handed down to us from Antiquity, as to the Nature of Diseases, and Methods of
Cure, will very soon and easily be antiquated with the serious Observers of
what concerns Health and Sickness.

I do not question Persons of both Sexes, who lived very temperately, as to the
Solids and Liquids of their Diet, are originally (if I may so term it)
obnoxious and predisposed for several particular Distempers, from which many
(who are absolute Slaves to their Palates, and venture on all irregularities of
that Nature, and are intimate to all sort of Debauches) are exempted; but this
depends mostly on the primative Configurations, and Mechanisms of the Glans,
Tubulae, and other secretory Organs of the Body, which are not framed at the
same rate in all individuals; whether this difference of particular Mechanisms,
or Organizations, proceed from Hereditary (if the word may pass) Principles, or
from other superior or concurrent Causes, I will not give you or my self the
trouble to determine.

This Letter will not allow me to give you my Reflections on your Ingenious
Speculations about the Nature of Fevers, and your placing them in their several
Ranks and Classes, lest I should give you the trouble to read a Pamphlet
instead of a Letter, which by its length is become too bulcous already, and may
rob you of too much of your time, which you always employ to better purpose;
but if This please, that may be the Subject of a Second Entertainment. You did
me the kindness to read me some Essays you have yet kept in their Retirement;
but in my Opinion they very much deserve a better Fate; and I am confident, you
will very much oblige the Learned part of Mankind, if you give them that dress,
in which they may be in their hands. Sir, believe me, that none esteems your
self, and the products of your Pen more, than

Your very Humble Servant, J. GORDON.

FINIS.

