THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND In the PRESERVATION of IRELAND. Humbly Presented to
the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.

By G. P. Esquire

Nam tua Res agitur, Paries cum proximus ardet, Et neglecta solent Incendia
sumere Vires. Licensed, July 15th. 1689.

J. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for Rich Chiswell at the Ros^ and (...) St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXX^.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
I do not in the least presume to inform Your Judgments, or to supplicate your
Charity by the Boldness of this Dedication. The Wisdom of the Nation cannot be
Ignorant of all matters Foreign or Domestic, that concern the Honor, Safety,
and Advantage of it. And you have already expressed such a feeling Commiseration
of the Calamities of Ireland, that it would seem an Offense unpardonable, to
solicit your Compassion by an immodest Importunity.

You have Testified your Tenderness, in promoting the Brief, and General
Collection, for the Relief of the Distressed Protestants of Ireland.

You have Signalized your Zeal to the Protestant Interest, by a deliberate
Contrivance, and a ready Expedition of the Pole-Bill, appropriated, and
appointed only for the Reduction of Ireland.

You have Published your Resolution to interess your selves in the Cause of
Ireland, by a Noble Promise to supply the KING with what shall be further
requisite for the Recovery of it.

You have Vouchsafed a Generous Regard to a multitude of Exiled Gentlemen (of
whom some seasonably and prudently withdrew, others with great Hazard and
Difficulty escaped; but all Voluntarily dssierted then Houses and Estates,
because they would not strengthen the hands of the Papists, or contribute to a
French Usurpation or the Exclusion of the English Right and Title) by designing
some competent Provision for their necessary Support proportioned to their
respective Sufferings; and by so affectionate and repeated Addresses to His
Majesty in their Favor (who tho he needs no Intercession for the Care of His
Subjects, yet He loves and delights to seem persuaded by His Parliament) you
have made them your Votaries, you have obliged them by everlasting Bonds of
Gratitude, and they shall be recommended to Posterity as the first that ever
went under the Honorable Character of Pensioners to the Parliament.

You have demonstrated your Abhorrence of all clandestine Practices, by a
strict Inquisition after the Authors and occasions of the procrastinated Relief
of Ireland. and the Miscarriages of particular Men in their Trusts, and
Employments: Whereby England, is put to an After-game, and obliged in their own
Defense to retrive that Kingdom, at the hazard of many Lives, and the Expense
of a vast Treasure, which by the very Countenance, and appearance of a small
Succor had been easily, cheaply, and safely assured and preserved Nay under
your Protection, I will speak out the Truth: When London Derry had shut their
Gates against the Irish, and Iniskillin soon after refused to admit a Popish
Garrison; when the Protestants in Dublin were Numerous, Rich and Stout; when in
Munster, the Earl of Inchiquin (with many others) was very apprehensive of the
imminent danger, and ready with the least Assistance from England, to secure
the Protestant Interest there: When the Lord Kingston in Conaght out stripped the
Deputy, and made up his Musters of Horse and Foot before him: when forty
thousand brisk men were upon Watch and Ward in Ulster; and the Earl of
Tyrconnel (utterly irresclute what Measures to take) said to a Person of Honor
(who urged him to lay down the Sword, and Submit to the English Government)
What would you have me do? I see no Commission to demand the Sword, would you
have me cast it over the Castle Walls? I say in this Juncture, any one eminent
Person, attended with a small Party, and furnished with a reasonable Proportion
of Arms and Money, had without blows, or slaughter, secured the Kingdom of
Ireland, in their Allegiance to the present King and Queen; and with much Ease
prevented, and curbed the insultory Insurrections in Scotland.

But alas! while the Parliament are busy in discoursing, and debating the
Business of Ireland, the Clergy are for the most Part silent; the one Votes for
them, but I do not hear, that the other Prays for them; the miseries of Ireland
are Remembered in the Parliament House, but Seldom mentioned in the Pulpit;
being omitted in their Addresses to the Throne of Mercy, by a very regardless
Preterition.

For my Part, I had neither taken upon me the Confidence to make this Address,
nor given the world the Trouble of this undigested Pamphlet (hudled over in
have, and without the Advantages of Study, Books, Advice, or Retirement) but
that a sort of Men no way considerable in number, or Interest, perverse in
their Humor, as Flattering in their judgments, assume a Liberty to retail their
raw and unconcocted Notions in Cossee-Houses (where Men pretend a Privilege,
to say any thing but their Prayers) and with as little Charity as Discretion,
to arraign the Judgment, and censure the Actions of the Irish
Protestant-Refuges, and severely to upbraid them with their Banishment and
Poverty, as the disserved Effects of their own Perverseness, in not Submitting
to him; who deserted the principal Kingdom, and restless himself in that which
is Subordinate. Nay, some have proceeded to that degree of uncharitable Frenzy,
that they have belched out their balsphemous Curses on poor bleeding Ireland:
Sinking it into the Sea with their Execrations, and disparaging it as an
incomber'd Estate, not worth the Redemption. Would God! it might please the
King to undeceive this murmuring Crew, by Commanding them on the Expedition
with Duke Schomberg, or Count Solmes; that they may see the Country they so
much despise, and be convinced how little Reason they had to undervalue it. And
I am humbly of Opinion, that it would conduce much to the regaining that
Kingdom, if the King would think it fit, to employ the Gentlemen of that
Country upon that Service. It is not to be imagined, how far Loyalty, whetted
with self-Interest, will go, or what Exploits may be performed by such as fight
with a double Courage, to serve the King, and to recover their Own.

Thus far I have pleaded for my Country, let me now be a Suitor for my self. If
a glowing Zeal, for Religion; an anxious Sympathy with my Friends; and a
pungent sense of my own Sufferings have transported me into any Impertinency: I
humbly implore Pardon from the Honorable House of Commons, for the Rudeness of
this Address.

George Philips.

The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland.
From these Considerations.
I. The Advantage to the Kingdom of England in general. 1. By the Revenue. 2.
The Fertility, and Plenty. 3. The Number. 4. The Religion. 5. The
Consanguinity, and Assinity. 6. The Employments Ecclesiastical, Civil and
Military.
II. The Advantage to the Trade of England. 1. By the Situation. 2. The
Exportation. 3. The Importation. 4. The Ingenuity of the Inhabitants. 5. The
Benefit to the KING.
III. The Danger of falling into the Hands of the French. 1. By Engrossing all
Trade. 2. By Intercepting the Trade of England. 3. By Interrupting the Peace of
England.

THE Interest of ENGLAND, IN THE Preservation of IRELAND.
The Introduction.
THERE were two things which mainly contributed to the Ruin and Desolation of
Ireland, and reduced it to that deplorable Condition, under which it now
languisheth; Resistance, and Non-Resistance. The latter sprung from a fond and
tame submission to the Arbitrary Government in Ireland; the other was
occasioned by a vain and fruitless Expectation of Relief from England. If the
People of that Country had not been over-lavish in their Loyalty, they had not
been so unfortunate in their Opposition. In the Reign of King JAMES, they were
unreasonably passive; in the Reign of King WILLIAM they have been
unprosperously active. Strange Fate! To be Losers by the One, and not to be
Gainers by the Other! To be possessed of their Estates under a Popish Prince; and
to be kept out of them under a Protestant! Had they been independent, and
trusted to their own Legs, possibly they had stood firm at this Day: but they
are miserably overthrown, by leaning too much on their Supporters. If there
were any room in our Church for Merits, the Protestants of Ireland would be
entitled to a great Stock, for suffering under King JAMES; and for acting
under King WIELIAM: but alas! they are despised for the one, and derided for
the other: so difficult a matter it is to walk steddily upon the uneven surface
of sublunary Places; here you encounter a Precipice, there a Quagmire: That
very way which seemed the direct Road to Safety and Tranquillity, may perhaps
lead you into inextricable Troubles, and often ends in certain Misery and
Destruction.

When the Late King (in pursuance of his Design to subvert that Church, which
He complemented with the Character of Loyalty, and as solemnly promised to
defend and support it) was so far distracted by pernicious Counsel, to
prostitute the Kingdom of Ireland to the licentious Will of a Jesuitical
Tyranny; and to make an Essay of settling that Idolatrous Worship there, which
was too early, and unseasonable for Him to attempt in England: when the Sword
was put into the Hands of a bigoted Zealot, and more than a million of British
Protestants subjected to the Dominion of an Irish Papist; there was no Murmur
heard, no mutinous Whispers spread abroad to discompose the People, or affront
the Government: men sighed, and submitred; they groaned, and gave Obedience,
with a patient Resignation to the Will of God, and the Commands of the King:
The Protestants through the Kingdom were disarmed; the Officers of the Army
were divested of their Commissions; the Soldiers disbanded and cashiered,
stripped and disarmed, without demanding a Reason for such unwarrantable
Dealings, or disputing the Pleasure of their Superiors: the Papists were
obtruded into the Privy Council, and Chief Ministry of State; all Justices of
the Peace were superseded, who did not carry the Mark of the Beast: the Public
Revenue committed to such Hands, as would surely employ and improve it to the
sinal extirpation of Heretics; yet all things proceeded in a silent Calm,
without Noise, or Grumbling: where Mass houses were erected, and publicly
frequented; no man offered to pull down their Altars: where the Friars walked
the Streets in their uncouth Habits; no man threw Dirt at them: the Popish
Religion was prohibited by Law; yet never contravened by Force: The People
abominated that Superstitious Way; yet never expressed their Resentments by Rage,
or Discontent: The Charters of their Towns and Corporations were condemned and
vacated; yet no spark of Sedition was kindled among the Inhabitants: The famous
Act of Settlement was daily eluded; Possession and Property were no sufficient
Guard against Irish Encroachments; yet no man incurred the Penalty of a
forcible Deteiner: the Doctrine of Non-resistance (which was so frequently
preached in other Places) was there actually and really practiced; and
Obedience) if there be not a Contradiction in the Terms) was truly passive.
Thus posting themselves under the Covert of Privacy, and Retirement, they
silently expected a Day of Deliverance from the Appointment of Heaven, without
the interposition of any Humane Machinations.

In this Posture Affairs stood in Ireland, during tho short (if it had not been
sharp) Reign of King JAMES: and so probably they had continued, at least for
some time, after the miraculous Revolution in England. But He, having Abdicated
the Government, and deserted the Throne, and unnaturally truckt One Kingdom
with that Christian Monster of Turkish Barbarity, for the empty Hopes of
re-possessing the other Two; it seemed convenient to his Irish Bashaw, and the
Jesuitic Cabal, to make sure of a retreating Place, and that of Necessity must
be Ireland; which having formerly been given to the Pope, and by him
transferred to the King of Spain, must now be sold, or mortgaged to the French
Usurper; to facilitate whose Entry by removing all Obstacles, the present
Possessors must be put out of Doors, that so Livery and Seisin might be given,
in imitation of the due Form of Law. Hereupon Plots were invented; several
Protestant Gentlemen were committed to Prison, Indicted, and Tried for their
Lives; abundance of Commissions were issued, and the Army multiplied into many
Regiments of Horse and Foot; for whose Entertainment, there being no Fund of a
growing Revenue, the Goods of the Protestants were consigned to their
subsistence; which they did not pilfer by Night, but drove away whole Flocks
and Herds at Noonday; and in case of Resistance, securing their Prey by the
Murder of the Owners. Thus the Province of Munster was exposed to a Military
Execution: Conaught was entirely plundered; and had not the Gates of
Londonderry been opportunely shut, when a Regiment of Irish were ready to enter
it, all Vlster had been under the same Fate, and probably had been followed by
an Universal Massacre. But the surprising News of the Prince of Orange's
Adventure, and the total Exclusion of Popery and Arbitrary Government in
England, awakened the Protestants in Vlster to stand upon their Guard; and
animated them with an Assurance, That their Redemption was drawing nigh;
flattering themselves with a Confidence, That as they were under the Laws of
England, so they should be no less under their Protection. They firmly
believed, that the same methods would be taken in Ireland, which had been so
successfully practiced in England; every puff of a fair Wind, revived them with
a smiling expectation of Succor; they were eager to retrieve their drooping
Religion from the Jaws of Death; and ready to rally under a Protestant
Standard; their Numbers were very considerable, and their Courage great; but
they were naked and undisciplined, they wanted an Expert Leader; and no Aid
appeared to support them: The Deputy having too sure and quick Intelligence of
the Transactions in the Court of England, and the dilatory Proceedings there,
poured a mighty Army into the Bowels of Vlster, who rifling the deserted
Houses, seizing and carrying away all portable Goods, and exercising all
Cruelty on such as did not submit to their Protection, they marched (or rather
chased the affrighted People) without Interruption, till they received a slight
Check at Colrane, and were shamefully bafled at Londonderry. But all the Towns
and Forts through the Kingdom (except that sturdy place, and its neighbor
Eniskilling) being Garrisoned by Papists, no Arms nor Horses permitted to remain
with any Protestants, (whose enjoyment of their Lives was wholly precarious,
and reversible at the will of merciless men); all things concurred to advance
the long-hatch'd Design, which now began to ripen; and King James, with a
Rabble of French Reformers, intermixed with a sew Renegado-English and Scotch,
landed among his dearly-beloved Irish Catholics, where he remains under
Pupilage to the French; He the Reputed King, and Monsieur d' Avaux the
Protector.

I need not place any Remarks upon the supine Negligence and fatal Indifferency
demonstrated by England in their cold Concernment, and slow Motions toward the
Recovery of Ireland; it is obvious to every eye; and if any have been wilfully
accessory to the Ruin and Depopulation of so flourishing a Kingdom, everlasting
Vengeance will pursue them: I wish the good People of England may see in the
Mirror of our Misfortunes, that Scheme of Misery and Confusion which was
prepared for them, and which assuredly will be re-acted on their Theater, if
ever the French and Irish be permitted to tread the Stage. To undeceive that
giddy sort of men, who think to gather Grapes from Thistles; to enjoy the
Profession of the Protestant Religion under a Popish Ring, and the
Administration of Jesuits; to continue in Peace and Safety in this Kingdom, if
the other be torn from it; I offer the following Considerations; which, weighed
impartially, may help to convince all sorts of men, That it is not only the
Interest of England to preserve Ireland, but that it is necessary for their
self-preservation to use all imaginable Industry and Expedition to reduce it to
its former State and Condition.

I. The Advantage to the Kingdom of ENGLAND in General.
I Expect to be absolved from the Imputation of Flattery and Partiality, when I
take upon me to make this asseveration; That nothing out of England does, or
can rationally conduce more to the Honor, Wealth, and Prosperity of that
Kingdom, than the Addition and Conjunction of Ireland: A Country abounding with
all things that contribute to Pleasure and Comfort, and richly endowed with the
Blessings of Heaven and Earth; situated by Nature as a Postern-gate to
England; by which she may discharge all manner of Commodities which are
supernumerary or unnecessary, to the great encouragement of Navigation and
Trade; and through which an entrance is given for a continual supply of such
things as the One may stand in need of, and the other may conveniently spare.

I shall endeavor to make good this Assertion, by subdividing this
Consideration into the following particulars.

1. The Revenue. 2. The Fertility and Plenty. 3. The Number. 4. The Religion.
5. The Consanguinity and Affinity. 6. The Employments Ecclesiastical, Civil,
and Military.
I propose these as so many irrefragable Arguments, to convince the World, That
the Kingdom of Ireland has not only a Self-sufficiency within it to subsist
without dependency, and to grow rich by its own peculiar Traffic; but also,
that by being annexed to England, subjected to the Government, and incorporated
into its Religion and Laws; it extends the Dominion, strengthens the Hands, and
augments the Wealth of that happy and renowned Nation. First, let us take
notice of the Revenue.

I. The REVENVE.
The Revenue of Ireland was under a sensible declination from the commencement
of the late King's Reign, occasioned by the daily Decay of Trade, and that by
the discouragement given to Protestants, through whose hands almost the whole
Commerce and current Money was wont to circulate; and at length was so visibly
impaired, that in the year 1688. the Public Treasury was utterly exhausted;
and I have no reason to believe that it has since that time been recruited by
any considerable Imbursements, (for I suppose the French Money is in a Treasury
distinct, and issuable only at the discretion of the French Dictator, whose
Orders are not to open his Treasure, till they land in England:) Therefore I
deduce my Remarks from the latter end of the Reign of Charles the Second, about
which time the Public Revenue was managed by Commissioners appointed by the
King, by whose Diligence and Application it was notably improved; and it
consisted in diverse Branches, as, Crown-Rents. Quit-Rents. Customs and Excise.
Inland-Excise. Hearth-Money. Wine and Ale Licenses. Fines and Forfeitures.
First Fruits, etc. of the Clergy.
All which did amount, communibus Annis, to about Three Hundred and forty
thousand Pounds.

Out of this Fund was derived the Maintenance and Pay of an Army, consisting of
seven Regiments of Foot, three of Horse, and one of Dragoons: Exhibitions to
the Judges sedent, and itinerant, and to all other Officers of the Civil List:
a noble Allowance to the Chief Governor, a competent Salary to the Lord
Chancellor, and all the Officers of State: a large Provision for all other
Charges necessary, or contingent: and upon the Audit of the whole Receipts and
Disbursements, a very considerable sum remained, most of which was remitted
into England, some disposed of in Ireland, for Pensions, Secret Service, and
other Occasions, at the King's Will and Pleasure.

II. The Fertility, and Plenty.
Ireland does abound with an Exuberance of Plenty in all things conducing to a
pleasant, and comfortable Living. The Ground, without the Midwifery of humane
Art, brings forth Grass for the Cattle, and Herbs for the use of man in great
Abundance; but where the Husbandman has clubb'd his Invention and Labor, it
is rather luxuriant, rendering a mighty Increase of all sorts of Grain, very
sound, and very good Indeed, Nature has opened her Stores, and, like a kind
Mother, has liberally bestowed her Blessings on that Island; The Earth seems
to stand in Competition with the Water for the Pre-eminence: the one overloaded
with its own Product; the other, overstockt by its proper Inhabitants: the
infinite Store of Corn of all sorts, the pleasant Studds of Horses and Mares,
the numerous Herds of Cattle, the vast Flocks of Sheep (in most Places
exceeding those of England in their Size) is even to admiration: neither do I
brag, when I say, that the best Parts of Ireland are in every Respect (except
the Improvement) equal to the best Parts in England; and that the worst Parts
of it are not so bad and barren as the worst Parts of the other: Or when I
challenge England it self to show so vast a Tract of rich and excellent Land
lying together, as is to be seen from Carlingford all the way to Dublin, from
thence (excluding the Mountains of Wicklow) to Carlow; from thence through part
of Queens and Kings County, so cross the Shannon, and round by Longford to
Roscommon: in which vast Tract of Land, at least fourscore Miles square, there
is not so much barren Land, as is to be found in two Shires only in England
(and not far from London) Berkshire and Surrey. The Seas are plentifully stored
with Fish of all Kinds, and the Markets supplied with such Plenty and Variety,
as might satiate the Luxury and Prodigality of Lucullus: the Loughs are filled
with Pike, Breme, Perch, Roach, and Trouts; but the Fresh Rivers swarm with
stupendous Quantities. If men (as justly they may) shall become doubtful,
scrupulous, and incredulous, when I make mention of the extraordinary
Pilchard-Fishings in the South, and the Herring-Fishings in the North; my
Credit will certainly run a great Risque, and my Veracity be suspected, when I
relate the Wonders of the Deep, and come to speak of the Prodigious Fishings
for Salmon and Eels in the Rivers of Lough-foyl, and the Bann. If men will
startle at the Report of six thousand Barrels of Pilchards made in one year
upon the Coast of the County of Cork; or to hear, that in some Parts of
Conaught they take so great Draughts of them, that, not being provided of Salt
to cure them, they lay them in heaps, and manure the Land with them: that
(beside the plentiful Fishing of Herrings in and about the Bay of Dublin, the
Skerryes, Carlingford, and all the Northern Coast) they have usually made and
sent away in one year two thousand Tuns of Herrings from the single Fishing at
Dunfanaghan: then undoubtedly they will smile, and ridicule me, when I tell
them, That there is made commonly five hundred Tuns of Salmon in a year, in
Loghfoyl, and the Bann, and other Rivers in the County of Londonderry; that
besides the Royal Piscary of the Bann, there are between Colrane and Loghneagh
seventy Salmon-Fishings; that there are the same round about that Lough, which
is sixty Miles in Compass; that at the Leap of Colrane, ten Tuns of Salmon have
been taken at one Draught of a Net: That the last year at the Grebbin, twelve
Miles beyond Londonderry, two and thirty Hogsheads of Salmon were taken at
once, and for want of room in their Boats, a great part of them thrown again
into the River: That in the Eel-weres, in the River of Bann, fourscore thousand
Eels have been caught in one Night. But I have spoken modestly, and within
compass, and there are too many Witnesses (much against their wills) now in
England and Scotland, who can confirm the Truth of what I have declared. I am
loath to pass by the Salmon-Pound (commonly called the Cut) near Colrane,
because, as I conceive, such another thing is not in the World: It is a great
Trough, made like a Tanner's Vat, about fifty foot long, twenty foot wide, and
six deep; a Stream of the River of Bann runs through it, and at the Place where
the Water enters, a row of Stakes are placed very near together, like a Rack in
a Stable; at the other end of the Cut a parcel of sharp Spikes are clustered
together, very close at the Point, and wide at the Head, so that the Salmons
(who always swim against the Stream) and other Fish, may get in at pleasure,
but can neither return the way they went in, nor get out at the other end;
whereby it happens, that on Monday morning (there being a respite to Fishing
all Sunday, and none taken out of the Cut with their Loops) a Stranger would
be astonished to see an innumerable company of Fish riding on the backs of one
another, even to the top of the Water, and with great ease, and pleasant
Divertisement, taken up in Loops.

All these prodigious Quantities of Fish are but collected for the Use of
England; to whose Ports, or to whose Order, they are yearly consigned, and
distributed.

III. The NVMBER.
Having had no Business, or Employment, which might administer an Opportunity
to inspect the Catalogues and Returns of Parishes and Counties, or to view the
Poll-Books; it will not be possible for me to make any other than a conjectural
Calculation of the Number of Protestant Inhabitants in Ireland. But by a modest
Computation I may adventure to aver, That at the beginning of the Reign of the
Late King, there were in the City of Dublin, and the Four Provinces, above a
Million of British Protestants. I am confirmed in this Supposition by a sad
Reflection upon the Passages in the Year 1641. at which time the Number of the
Protestants was very inconsiderable in comparison with the Natives; and
possibly did not amount to the Half of what they were in 1681. yet even then
above two hundred thousand, naked and defenseless People, were massacred in
cold Blood, and barbarously murdered without Provocation, or Resistance. I
reckon, that when the late Revolution happened, there were two hundred thousand
men fit to carry Arms, bound to the Interest of England by the Obligations of
Religion, Love, Loyalty and Blood; who may be beneficial in their Service and
Aid, when it shall be required; though of late (by the apparent Judgment of
God) they have been terrified by them, on whom they always had an awe; routed by
such, whose Strength they d^^^ed; and dispossessed of their Estates, without
struggling for their Property.

IV. The RELIGION.
Among all the pressing Motives, that recommend the Care and Conservation of
Ireland, there is no one more cogent, than the Consideration of the Religion
there established by Law: which reasonably ought to interess all good
Christians in a feeling-Sympathy and Concernment for them; and thereby the
People of England have a fit Opportunity, at once equally to exert their Duty
to God, and Charity to their Brethren. It is true, the Protestant Religion was
not universally professed through the Kingdom, neither were all who were
distinguished by that Character, perfectly cemented; the Papists were numerous
in every County, (tho least of all in Vlster); yet Popery seemed to be rather
Hereditary than Elective; to be more the Result of Education, than Judgment;
insomuch, as it became like a Logical Property to the Natives, and Papist and
Irish man were Terms convertible: So great an Influence has Custom over all the
Faculties of Mind and Body; they put on Religion as a fashionable Garment, the
Dictate of the Priest warranting the mode; and thick Ignorance inflames their
Devotion. Nevertheless the Protestant Religion was predominant; Popery sneaked
to the Mountains, and squatted behind the Bushes; the Mass was not known, nor a
Friar seen, till by the Influence of the Late King, and the furious Zeal of his
Deputy, things were changed as it were in a moment, and all Commands Civil and
Military, committed to the Hands of Papists. But when, by the Blessing of God,
and the Assistance of England, that poor harassed Country shall be restored to
its former State and Condition, it will be a joyful Reflection for their
Brethren and Benefactors, to hear of so many Thousand Persons united with them
in the same Religion, as in all other Respects and Concernments.

V. The Consanguinity and Assinity.
The Inhabitants of Ireland, (excluding the Natives of the Land, who always
were, and ever will be Thorns in our Sides; and who, since the first Conquest
of them, were never able to accomplish that Design which was bequeathed from
Generation to Generation, till this late unhappy Juncture) do not derive their
Pedigree from Strangers; they are the legitimate Offspring of England and
Scotland; there is scarce a Man there of British Extraction, except such as by
very long continuance are degenerated into mere Irish, but in one of those
Kingdoms will Challenge a Father, Brother, or near Kinsman. They are not
estranged in their Language, Habit, Manners, or Customs; they retain the
natural Propensions disseminated from their respective Families, and own a
filial Reverence to their Countries, as to their lawful Parents (not their Step
mothers) who not being able to make a competent Provision for all their Issue
at home, have sent some of their Children abroad, to seek for their Livelihood
on the other side of the Ferry; where in their Manners and Humor, they bear an
exact Resemblance to that Original, whereof they are the Transcript; except
only in their profuse Hospitality, and luxurious Consumption of Meat and Drink
(to which, perhaps, they are inclined by the Constitution of the Air, or
disposed by the Genius of the Country, or tempted by the incredible Plenty and
Cheapness of all sorts of Provisions) yet in their Language they have gone
beyond their Teachers, having refined the English Tongue from the odd Tones,
and uncouth words used in several Counties distant from London; and reformed
the Scotch from the Clownish Dialect spoken by the vulgar People. So that the
People of England are bound in Conscience and common Reason, to regard the
English in Ireland, as Bone of their Bone, and Flesh of their Flesh; and the
Scots as naturalized and incorporated with them, to sympathize with them in
their Sufferings, to participate in their Adventures, and from the Principles
of Generosity, as well as the Impulse of Nature, and a prudential Foresight of
the same Calamities hovering over their Heads, to use their utmost Effort to
re-assure that Kingdom in its Appendage to England, and absolutely to eradicate
the Irish Papists and all French Intruders.

VI. The Employments, Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military.
Since England is bounded by the Sea, and cannot be enlarged by the Discovery
of any Newfound Land; since the Inhabitants are as fruitful as the Soil,
Prolific, and continually multiplying and increasing; since the Vigor and
Generosity of their Temper, spurs them on to Business and Activity; and that
the List of Places, Offices and Preferments in Church and State, do bear no
Proportion with the number of Competitors, Candidates, and Pretenders: It is an
unexpressible Benefit and Advantage, that they can so easily enlarge their
Quarters, and spread through a Kingdom in Polity Subordinate, but in natural
Fertility no way Inferior to that from whence they sprang. I think it very well
worth the Observation, That among all the Bishops, Deans, and Dignitaries in
the Church of Ireland, (in the first year of the late King) so very few were
born in that Kingdom, but almost all of them transplanted from England; so were
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief Baron, Attorney General, and many of the Judges
and Officers in the Civil List; by such also, was the Revenue managed. And for
the Army, it was perfectly a Detachment out of the several Shires in England.
In a word, there did Divines and Scholars get Preferment; Lawyers, Attorneys,
and others of the Long Robe, met with Practice and Promotion; Clerks,
Accountants, and Men of ingenious Education, were gratified with Employments;
the younger Sons of the English Nobility and Gentry, were honored with
Military Commands; and thousands of the meaner sort trained up in the
Discipline of War. All which must have met with a Check in their Fortunes, and
been subjected to a less generous course of Living, and remained as Shrubs in
their own Soil; while by this Transplantation they grow up to tall Trees, shoot
out their Branches, and bring forth abundant of Fruit.

The Advantage to the Trade of England.
Hitherto I have endeavored by a few short Hints, to represent the many
valuable Benefits and Advantages accruing to the Kingdom of England in general,
by the Conjunction and Preservation of Ireland. I shall now proceed to set down
how palpably and remarkably it does contribute to the Advancement of Trade,
which is the Glory, Strength, and Security of the English Nation; the Fountain
and Source of the Riches, Wealth, and Plenty, which render it the Envy and
Astonishment of all the Neighboring Kingdoms: and without which, it were
impossible to provide Sustenance for the innumerable Company of Inhabitants,
wherewith the Country is sufficiently furnished, and the Cities and Towns are
absolutely crowded. It is Trade that preserves the Body Pelitick in health, by
Recreation and Exercise; by Evacuation and Repletion, carrying off such Things
as are unnecessary and redundant, and bringing in a constant supply of
whatsoever is useful and profitable. It is Trade that ransacks the Indies,
joins remote Islands in an imaginary Contiguity with England, and makes the
whole World but a large Mart for Negotiation and Traffic. Trade is the Blood
that Circulates in the Veins and Arteries of the Commonwealth, and disperseth
the animal Spirits to all the Limbs and extreme parts of the Body.

This so necessary an Ingredient to the Honor and Felicity of England, has
been signally augmented and improved by the Trade of Ireland co-incident with
it, will suffer a mighty Detriment by the present Obstruction of Commerce, and
will as eminently gain by its Revival and Recovery. The Advantage to Trade
arising from Ireland is demonstrable by these Particulars.

1. The Situation. 2. The Exportation. 3. The Importation. 4. The Ingenuity of
the Inhabitants. 5. The Benefit to the King.
I. The Situation.
In the Description of Ireland I might expatiate in recounting the many
Benefits and Advantages which it enjoys in Common with her Neighbor Countries,
and the several Immunities which God and Nature have indulged to it in peculiar
above other Places; in its exemption from poisonous Insects, and noxious
Vermin, as Frogs, Toads, Snakes, and Adders, Neuts, Effs, and hurtful Spiders;
but above all, in the Freedom from Moles, which are the Epidemical Nuisance of
England, and are so sensibly injurious to Orchards, Gardens, Medows, and
Pastures; in a temperate and benign Air; in an infinite number of Fountains,
Springs, Loughs (or Lakes) and fresh Rivers; in an incredible store and variety
of Land and Sea-Fowls; (among which I would mention the incredible Number of
Woodcocks, and how the Parson of Clownish farms the Tyth of the Woodcocks
caught in his Parish at thirty Pounds per annum; where they are generally sold
at Twelve-Pence per dozen; the innumerable Flocks of Swans and Barnacles that
haunt the River of Loughfoyl, but that it would exclude the wonder due to the
rest.) But because these Privileges are inherent to the Soil, and not
communicable to the Use and Benefit of the Neighbors, I shall pass over the
further commemoration of those Matters, and apply my self to the Rehearsal of
such Particulars only, as render Ireland in its happy Situation a most
desirable Country, and highly advantageous in its Accession to the Crown of
England.

Possibly there is not a Country in the whole World so admirably accommodated
with convenient Bays, safe Harbors, large Havens, and useful Creeks; and that
not only in some Sides and Corners, but quite round the Island. To describe the
Harbors of Carlingford, Strangford, the Lough of Carricfergus, Donaghadee,
Loghlern, Raghlin, Portrush, Lough-foyl, Lough-swilly, Sheep-Haven, Castledow,
Killebeggs, Ballyshannon, Sligo, and Black-Sod in the North and West Parts;
Galway, Lymerick, Trallee, Dingle, Kilmar, the Great Bay of Bantry, (including
Bear Haven, and many others) Ship-Haven, Crook-Haven, Baltimore, Castle-Haven,
Castlemain, the matchless Haven of Kinsale, the noble River of Cork, Yoghal,
Dungarvan, Waterford, Slade, Wexford, Arclo, Dublin, etc. in the South and
Eastern Parts; beside almost innumerable Creeks, Ports, and commodious
Landing-Places, would take up more room than I have allowed to the discharge of
this brief Narration; my Purpose is only to mention them, referring the Account
of their Beauty, Strength, Security, and Convenience, to Historians and
Geographers. I shall only take notice, that as they are most advantageously
placed for the proper Trade of that Kingdom; so they are upon many Accounts a
secure Refuge and Safeguard to their Friends and Allies, which is briefly
demonstrated in this, that none of the Neighboring Countries can manage a
Trade into the South, North, or Western Seas, but they must be under great
Danger of Ireland, if they be Enemies to England, or be beholding to it if they
be in Amity; where upon every Turn they may meet with a safe Retreat from
Storms and Tempests, and a ready Protection from Pirates and Robbers; it being
set as a Watchtower in the Sea, within whose view all Ships must come that
sail and trade that way to any part of the World; an Island commodiously seated
for the Dominion of the Seas, so long as she is in one Interest with England.

It is beyond the Power of Expression to repeat the Advantages arising to the
English Trade by the relief and shelter of the Irish Harbors, where the
several Fleets bound for the Streights, and for the East or West Indies, or
returning from thence, meet with Refreshment and Security from all sorts of
Danger. This the Merchants find in their daily Voyages: This the Commanders of
the Kings Ships can evidence upon frequent Experience; but I shall produce only
one undeniable Instance, how highly and indespensably it imports the Safety, as
well as Trade of England, to preserve Ireland to themselves: That in the time
of King Charles II. when England was imbroyl'd in an unlucky War with the
States of Holland, not only a Fleet of Merchantmen, consisting of an hundred
Sail or thereabout, bound homeward from the West Indies and the Streights, but
also forty Men of War (under the Command of Sir Jeremy Smith) after that
unfortunate Business at Chatham, came all into the Harbor of Kinsale, where
they continued in that Safety and Security, which they could not promise to
themselves in any Harbor or Port of England.

2. The Exportation of Irish Commodities.
As Ireland is placed as an Out-guard to watch all Interlopers in the Trade of
England, so lately it was a Storehouse and Magazine to furnish it. It sent
over yearly vast quantities of Wool, shipped from the several Ports in Munster
and Lemster, which mightily supported the Staple in England, by the old and new
Draperies, and other woollen Manufactures wrought and made in the West
Country: whereby not only a numerous Train of Families were fed and
maintained, but an extraordinary addition was made to the Kings Revenue, by the
Importation of it, when raw and unwrought, into England, and the Exportation of
it, after it was wrought, into several Countries, to the great enriching of
Merchants and Adventurers.

The Islands and Plantations in America are in a manner wholly sustained by the
vast quantities of Beef, Pork, Butter, and other Provisions of the Product of
Ireland: from whence an unspeakable Benefit redounds to England by the vast
Cargoes of the Goods of the said Plantations returned thither, and the Great
Consumption of those Goods being shipped out of England into Ireland, than which
nothing more evidently tends to the enriching the Merchants who trade into
those Parts, or to the increase of Shipping, or encouragement to Navigation.

The mighty Quantities of Tallow, Hides, tanned Leather, Skins of several
sorts, Yarn, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Cony-Skins, and other Furrs, yearly shipped from
Ireland, and exported into England, supply that Kingdom with the said
Commodities at very reasonable Rates (which otherwise would prove excessive
dear) to the great convenience of the Inhabitants in general, and the
particular Advantage of the Merchants and such as trade in them.

The Cargoes of Salmon, Herrings, Pilchards, (and those the best and fairest to
be had in any Part of the World) Eels, and other Fish made up yearly in
Ireland, and transported into several Parts in Spain, to Venice, and all the
Ports in the Mediterranean Sea, would startle common Belief. I have heard from
faithful Relation, and I spoke of it before, that in the South of Ireland, they
have made in a year near Eight hundred Tuns of Pilchards: A Person of great
Quality, (whose Judgment and Credit no man will dispute) did aver to me, that
in one Season 16000. l. was paid for the Pilchards taken on the South side of
Cork, and the most of it by Sir John Frederic of London. That in one Port in
the North, called Dunfanaghan, they have made in one Season Two thousand Tuns
of Herrings. And I was told by a very honest and intelligent Person, (who in
the Reign of Charles the Second was Collector of the Port of Londonderry) that
in that one Place there was shipped off in one Season 450. Tuns of Salmon, 400.
Tuns of Herrings, and 80. Tuns of Eels: The Benefit and Profit of all which
accrues to the Merchants of England, on whose sole Account almost all the
forementioned Commodities are shipped off and sent away, to the great increase of
their Shipping, and the manifest encouragement of Navigation,

These things being undeniable, and perfectly true in matter of Fact, and which
I am constrained by the necessity of the Argument to mention over again, it is
evident beyond Contradiction, that the Trade of Ireland is of inestimable
Advantage to the Trade of England, highly contributing, if not wholly
subservient to it.

3. The Importation of English Commodities.
The great multitudes of Goods and Commodidities continually exported out of
Ireland into England, did not more apparently tend to the Advantage of Trade
there, than the continual Importation of all kinds of Wares and Merchandise
from thence. The People of Ireland did not deal like Niggards, or Rooks, to
vend and put off the Product of their own Country, and not be instrumental to
promote the Consumption of what their Neighbors had to spare; on the contrary
they maintained a constant Correspondence, and an universal Commerce, and
hugely advanced the Trade of England.

The Wool which they from time to time sent into England, they received again
(and perhaps with it much of the growth there) transformed into the old and the
new Drapery, and all sorts of Woollen Manufactures, and thereby doubly advanced
the English Trade, by the Outlet, and by the Return, by selling the one, and
buying the other

Silks wrought, and un-wrought; Gold and Silver Lace; Buttons; Ribbands, etc.
all sorts of Grocery, Spicery, Haberdashers and Milliners Ware; Beavers and
other fine Hats; Tobacco cut and dried, in Roll, and in Leaf; white Salt;
Coals; and many foreign Commodities, were daily and hourly brought into all the
Ports of Ireland, being purchased by the Merchants there from the Merchants of
London, Bristol, Chester, Leverpool, Plymouth, and other Towns and Cities in
England; the Quantities whereof must be prodigiously great, to supply not only
the Necessities, but the Vanity and Luxury of so populous and opulent a
Kingdom, (the Rate of whose Expenses was no way regulated by the instinct of
Thrift, or Parsimony) and consequently the Gains and Profit redounding to the
English Merchants must in reason bear some Proportion with the Vent and
Consumption; the estimate whereof in a few years is beyond Credit, if not past
Numeration.

I could appeal to particular Men by Name, whose Books and Accounts will
justify my Position, that England received incredible Advantage by their Trade
with Ireland, and their sensible disappointments in the present Cessation of
Trade from thence, do too unhappily confirm it; but I will not do that
prejudice to them, to discover the Secrets of their Dealing, or raise a Spirit
of Envy at their prosperous Proceedings: I honor them for their Ingenuity; I
applaud their Industry, and heartily wish them reinstated in their former
Course of Traffic, that all Men may be convinced by their Experiment, how
advantageously the Trade of Ireland co-operates to the Advancement of the Trade
of England.

4. The Ingenuity of the Inhabitants.
I am now brought to a hard Dilemma; I must either renounce the Country, from
whence I came, or retract my Assertion: For when I go about to illustrate the
Ingenuity of the Inhabitants, I confute my self, by a Discourse so void of it.
But there is no general Rule without some Exceptions; and I hope that my
particular Defects shall not be imputed as a derogation from the Credit of the
rest.

It is an ungrateful Employment to make Comparisons, and I do not in the least
intend any unkind Reflection upon the Common People of England, when I allege,
that the ordinary and vulgar sort of the British Inhabitants in Ireland are
much more Ingenious and quick, more docible, more intelligent in the Laws and
Customs of the Country; more active, sedulous and inquisitive; disposed to
handle the Sword as well as the Plough, and notably capable to serve upon
Juries, and to discharge the Duty incumbent on them at Assizes and Sessions.
But I shall only insist on that Qualification which is more proper and
pertinent to the Argument in hand, viz. their natural Disposition to Trade, and
an undefatigable Industry in promoting it, and all for the advantage of the
Trade of England. For the Petty Chapmen, Traders in small Towns, and Country
Dealers, are only Hawkers, Procurers, and Brokers for the greater Merchants in
Cities and big Towns; and they ordinarily make themselves Factors for the
Merchants in England; sending over to them the most Part of what they gather;
or bringing back from them the Commodities of England in return of what they
adventure, and gain upon their own Account. Thus I have observed the Chapmen in
a small Village (belonging to my self) with great Art and Ingenuity negotiating
with the Neighbors about them, making up many Tuns of Butter, and Tallow,
gathering great quantities of Yarn, Linen cloth, Salt, Hides, and Tanned
Leather; which soon after they sell to the Merchants in the next City or
Seaport, who either deal by Commission from the Merchants in England, or
export them on their own Account, but certainly bring home the Produce, in the
Wares and Merchandise of England, (and I know one particular Man, who in one
Town in one Season, made up Eleven hundred Tuns of Butter by Commission, and as
a Factor for some Merchants there) but which way soever it be, the Ingenuity
and Diligence of the Inhabitants of Ireland does indisputably advance the Trade
of England, and the whole Labor of the one centers in the Benefit of the other.

5. The Benefit to the King.
Though I propose the Kings Benefit in the last Place, yet it is not the least of
my Care and good Wishes; and I persuade my self that the Loyal and Loving
Subjects of England will on that very Consideration (if there were no other
Motives to incite them) account Ireland worth the keeping, and accordingly will
employ their Wealth, and exert their Courage and Strength for the speedy
Reduction and Restitution of it. To enforce this, I need produce no other
Arguments, than the repetition of what was before remonstrated; That the annual
Revenue of Ireland coming into the Treasury and the Kings Coffers, amounted to
Three hundred and forty thousand Pounds, out of which, beside the necessary
Exhibition; for supporting the State and safety of the Kingdom, a very
considerable Sum was yearly laid at the Kings Feet, therewith to gratify such
Servitors and Favorites in England, as the Revenue there would not reach to
supply. To which let me add, that though under Charles the Second, the
protestant Interest in Ireland received as little Encouragement as could be
expected under a Protestant King; yet thriving by their Pruning, taking deeper
Root by their being shaken, and growing more strong by their Depression; they
had, beyond all Doubt, added before this time a very valuable Augmentation to
the Public Revenue, by their Trade and Improvements, had not Popery nipt them,
and Arbitrary Power blasted them.

3. The danger of falling into the hands of the French.
Let us now reflect upon what has been said, and Re capitulate the skatter'd
Arguments hinted in this abrupt and immethodical Discourse. If neither the
sense of Shame, the Pursuit of Fame and Glory, the Influence of Brotherly
Charity, the Sympathy with Blood and Kindred, the Respect to Religion, the
Acquisition of Wealth, the Support of Trade, the Increase of the Public
Revenue, nor the irresistible motive of Self-Preservation, can prove
Inducements sufficient to dispose the People of England to a hearty,
affectionate, and vigorous espousing of the Protestant Cause in Ireland, by a
timely Prosecution of a War there, and rooting out the last Remains of Popery;
let us change the Scene, and suppose Ireland subdued by the present Invaders,
and become a Province to France, (which God of his infinite Mercy avert) then
without all peradventure these mischiefs will inevitably ensue.

1. The French King having an insatiable Thirst after the universal Monarchy of
Europe, and retaining an implacable Resolution to destroy all sorts of
Protestants, and utterly to root out that Pestilent Northern Heresy; abounding
in Wealth and Treasure, followed by mighty Armies, strengthened by a numerous
Fleet of Ships; as nothing in humane Probability can defeat his execrable
Designs of Aggrandising himself by the Ruin of his Neighbors, but the scarcity
of convenient Ports and Havens in any of his Dominions; so it must be his
Principal Aim and endeavor to be Master of Ireland; whereby he will be
sufficiently accommodated with excellent good Harbors, in which he may
securely place his Fleet, to extend his Sovereignty over the Seas, and
opportunely annoy his Enemies.

2. This being accomplished, not only the Revenue and Trade of Ireland will be
utterly lost, the Auxiliary Aid of two hundred thousand Protestants diverted
and taken away, and many thousands of them forced to depend upon the Charity of
England: the Trade to America, and all the Western Islands will not only be
intercepted, but in a short time those Countries be wholly conquered and
reduced to the Possession of the French, and annexed to his Dominion, and made
a Prey to glut his restless Ambition.

3. The French King will make Ireland a Magazine and Storehouse for the
victualling His Ships, and the Harbors as so many Docks to shelter them, where
his Fleet riding in safety, an Opportunity will be given him, not only to
ingross all manner of Trade, but that of England will be entirely interrupted,
if not infallibly destroyed; since no Ships can peep out from thence in their
Navigation toward the Streights, or to the Indies, but they must pass within
view of some Ports of Ireland, or very near them, and consequently must be
exposed to the Attacks of that rapacious Leviathan, or be necessitated to sail
in great Fleets, and very strong Convoys under Frigates and Men of War, to the
inestimable charge of the State, and detriment to the Merchants of England.

4. Let it be considered, that since Wool and VVoollen Manufactures are the
ancient Staple of England, and a main support to their trading into all Foreign
Countries, if it should so come to pass, that Ireland be alienated from it,
which abounds with that Commodity, and from whence it may be exported at far
cheaper Rates than can be afforded in England; how unspeakable a Prejudice will
it be to the Trade? How will it impoverish the People, and bring an unavoidable
ruin on many Towns and Families?

5. Tho it is to be hoped that the Power of France, with the Addition of
Ireland, shall never be able to make a Conquest of England; nevertheless by
such an unwelcom Neighborhood, it is more than probable the French King may
discompose the Peace and Quiet of Great Britain, when at any time of the year
he can transport an Army from Ireland, or land small Forces in North Wales in
six hours time, in South Wales in twelve, or in the space of four Hours in the
West of Scotland: And this not to be prevented by the English Fleet, or by all
the Art and Contrivance of Mankind.

The CONCLUSION.
I wish the People of England may see now in this their Day, what belongs to
their Peace, before it be hid from their Eyes; That they may not be deluded by
false Glosses, and sinister Interpretations of Public Acts, nor be cajoled by
jealous Misprisions and groundless Censures on private Councils: That they may
understand, and consider how much their safety and the Interest of the
Protestant Religion is concerned and involved in the Fate of Ireland; and that
if the Enemy chance to possess the Outworks, the City will be in great danger:
That they may not be abused by Chimerical Notions of Obeying without Reserve,
or being destroyed without Resistance: That they would rest contented with
obtaining their Desires, in being happy under the Establishment of a Protestant
King and Queen, and not hanker after a Change, or be bewitched to make a wanton
Experiment of Indulgence and Protection under a Popish Government.

FINIS.

