Horseflesh FOR THE OBSERVATOR.
GUSMAN, Chap. 4. Ver. 5. And this is the Reason why ye shall not believe Him,
for that he made Brass Screws to an Antipendium.
My Beloved,
YOU are not to be angry or displeased to see me read every Word of this my
Discourse, it being a fine, easy, lazy way, that we have not long since
brought into fashion, to save the labor of Conning. Mankind is by Nature
generally addicted to Idleness: So that the greatest part of the Worlds
Inhabitants, that complain of the Shortness of Life, hardly know what to do
with the third part of their Time. This is that which fills the Taverns,
Alehouses, and Coffee-houses; and this is that Feneant and Scorbutic Humor
that has infected Us, that we had rather loiter away our time over Tea, or
Turkish Liquor, than trouble our Studies, or exercise our Patiences, to get our
Sermons without-book. We had rather feed the People with Homilies, composed of
a few raptim Expressions, as hastily committed to Writing, than lose the sweet
and charming Society of our Admired GUIDE. O That Man, my Beloved, That Man,
That Man! He is the Man; Ho Anthropos. I Will tell you, my Beloved, I have a
Project in my Head; and if it don't take, it is your fault: If you will choose me
to be your Parson, I will undertake to read to you one of This Man's
Observators every Sunday, and Expound upon it. Never fear it, my Beloved, he
has and will write enough to serve Us as long as we live: to tell you the Truth,
he squitters Observators. There you shall hear the rarest Things! -- Things, my
Beloved! -- Such Things that put my Invention to a stand for Expression to
blazon their indelible Character. For, Do you admire Flash and Fury, as I well
know you do? There you shall have it. Do you admire the most confounded
Impertinence that was ever made public to the World? There you shall have it.
Would you know how to Govern the State? There you may find out the Knack. Would
you understand how to Govern the Church? There Is your Director and Guide.
Moreover, my Beloved, there you shall find great Discoveries, monstrous
Discoveries, Disclosures, almost past belief, of deep Secrets, profound
Mysteries, the hidden Arcana of Screws and Antipendiums. Screws and
Antipendiums! Jesus Maria, you will say! What are those? Why, my Beloved, they are
Screws and Antipendiums. The Egyptian Hieroglyphics, or the Cabala of the
Hebrews never contained such abstruse, close obscure Significations as are
wrapped up in those Words. And thus, according to custom, I am coming, with
much ado, to the Point. And a notable Point it is; a Point not to be spurned,
as the Boys do; but a Point of Reason, a Point of Reason not to be questioned,
a Point of Reason not to be doubted, a lasting Point, a fashionable Point; All
the Point Venize's and Point Lorrains in the World are nothing to this Point.
Well then, but what is this Point? Why the Point is this: And this is the
Reason why ye shall not believe him. What is the Reason? Why this is the
Reason; not a Woman's Reason, Because ye shall not believe him; but, Because he
made Brass Screws to an Antipendium. Not because he exceeded Judas in
Treachery, Julian the Apostate in Irreligion, Tiberius in Dissimulation, and
Beelzebub himself for Lying; but, O most Celestial Reason, never heard of
before! Because he made Brass Screws to the Antipendium.

So then, my Beloved, here are two things in my Text; A Man that is not to be
believed, and the Reason why. Ye shall not believe him; there is the Advice or
Admonition: Then follows the Reason in Order, For that he made Brass Screws to
an Antipendium. Thus ye find the Person in the Word Him: for do but decline the
Word, and ye have him presently; as for Example, Nominativo, He; Genitivo, Of
Him; Dativo, To Him; Accusativo, HIM. There he is, proper in the Accusative
Case: For this Him is accused to be that He that made the Brass Screws. Shall I
open the Words more particularly? Come on then. -- Ye, that is, all ye that
admire The Man, Ton Anthropon; Ye that believe that all he writes is other than
the mere (...) Chiens, or Dogs-brabling; other than the Impertinent Flashes of
Fury and Revenge, or else the Grateful Acknowledgments of Tavern-Adoration,
while he blesses himself to be the aged Thamuz of two or three Red-twisted
Clubs; All ye, I say, shall not, no not for your Ears, that is, as you tender
the loss of his Favor, which is not worth a Straw; as you tender the Lashes of
his Pen, that are not worth a Rush; All Ye, I say, shall not believe, that is,
Ye shall give no more credit, than a Roman Catholic would to a Heretic, tho
he speak never so true, tho he has been already believed by his Prince and
Chief Counselors; yet ye shall give no credit to Him, that is, to that Person,
whoever he be, that swears he has seen the Observator at Mass in the Queens
Chapel: for this Nettles him to the Quick; a Nest of Gad-bees is not more
terrible at Midsummer to a galled Horses Back. It makes him yerk, and kick, and
fling, and low and bellow like Jupiter's Mistress in the shape of a Heifer,
with Juno's amorous itch in her Tail. Now these are the Effects of touching the
Copyhold of our Admired Guide: but woe worth him that touched it; for the Law of
the Meads and Persians is gone forth, Ye shall not believe Him.

But notwithstanding this severe Edict, you will say, Why may not we believe him
if we please? He discovered the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and was
believed. He was also farther believed, notwithstanding the Address of
Thomson's Managers, and the great Lists your adored Conductor gave them, to the
Shame and Ignominy of those that sought to blemish his Reputation. Why then
shall not we believe him? Oh! my Beloved, there is a Reason for that, such a
Reason as all the Sorbonne Doctors could not have studied a better. Our
Conductor is a Person that has a Head not so big perhaps as an Elephant; but
had he had the Brains of an Elephant, a Camel, a Whale, and the Ethiopian
Hippopotamos, all united tagether in one Scull, he could not have found out a
more notable piece of substantial Reason, than he has done with that lesser
Pericranium of his, Because He made certain Brass Screws for an Antipendium.

Now, my Beloved, to make you understand these Words aright, I must go a
preposterous way to work, in regard I must set the Cart before the Horse, by a
certain Greek Figure called Hysteron Proteron; that is, I must tell ye what an
Antipendium is, what the Brass Screws are, then who made them, and upon what
account. I must confess, Our Conductor has made more noise in the World with
these Screws, than ever Vulcan and all his Cyclops made at the framing of
Achilles's Armor: Come into S -- 's Coffee-house, there was nothing but a
confused noise of Brass and Screws, and Screws, and Brass Screws. Antra Aetnaea
tonant, striduntque Cavernis
Stricturae Chalybum --
You would have sworn you had been in the Halting Deity's Workhouse, with his
Journey-men Brontes and Steropes, and Brawny Pyracmon. And what was all this
for, but to prove that there was a Reason why the certain He was not to be
believed? So that whatever was the proper Use of the Screws, Our so admired
Guide intended them for another Use, which was, to have trepanned the soft
Noddles of the Vulgar into a belief of his fabulous Contrivance.

But now leaving the Screws a while, let us return to the Antependium, alias
Antependulum, corruptly Antipendium, which derives its Being from two Latin
Words, Ante, Before; and Pendere, To hang: And these two Words copulating
together, have produced a kind of Mongrel Monstrosity, called Antependulum, or
Antependium, vulgarly Antipendium, that is to say, Something hanging before.
Now there are so many things that hang before, that I am afraid we shall be a
great while upon the scent, before we find out this proper Antipendium, for so
we will henceforth call it, for brevities sake. We find, in the Learned
Petronius Arbiter, that there are some Men that carry your Antipendiums in
their Breeches. These are, as the same Author says, your Lumborum solutorum
viri, the Impotent and the aged. A sort of People generally contemned by the
Female Sex, and therefore most commonly Cornuted; that is to say, because they
have only Antipendiums in their Breeches, they are forced to carry
Antestandiums in their Foreheads. Of these Antipendiums Iuvenal gives ye an
Account in these Words; Et quamvis tota palpetur nocte jacebit: And therefore
(says Petronius) the Persons who are so unfortunate, are In Capricorno
Erumnosi, quibus prae mala sua (sort) Cor^^a nascuntur.

For this Reason I shall cease to speak any more of these sort of Antipendiums.
Only, my Beloved, I shall give you this advice, That you keep your
Antipendiums out of harms way. There are some Persons (a thing too common now a
days) who are very careless of their Antipendiums: And what becomes of 'em
then? Why, many times they lose their Antipendiums, for want of Brass Screws,
that is to say, firm, sound, lasting Screws, not such rotten, foul, infected
Screws as they made use of. Therefore, say I, keep your Antipendiums out of
harms way.

There are another sort of Antipendiums, so called because they hang before all
the World. Of this kind was that same Crucified Thief that was stolen by night
from the Roman Soldier; but the Cross was presently supplied again by the chaste
and virtuous Ephesian Matron, with the Corpse of her five-days-deplored Husband.
Malo mortuum (quoth the chaste Matron) impendere, quam vivum occidere. The
Soldier (says the Text) nec deformis nec infacundus Iuvenis castae videbatur,
was neither deformed nor unpleasing Society to the Chaste Matron. And then
again, her Maid, the Companion of her Complaints, (hoping to come in for a
Share, as she did) came over her with an irresistible piece of Persuasion, --
Placito ne etiam pugnabis Amori? And so the good Lady yielded at last, for the
sake of the Soldiers Antipendulum, to surrender the long-bewailed, dear, dead
Corpse of her Hu^band, to be an Antipendium among Rogues and Thieves, rather
than the Kind Soldier, that had prolongued her days, should suffer. In the same
manner you shall observe several Antipendiums of this nature, upon the Roads of
England: particularly three between Istington and Hatfield, who may be also
called Antipendiums in time, because they were hanged before them that were
hanged after 'em. Thus Staley was an Antipendium to Coleman, Coleman an
Antipendium to Grove and Pickering. Then you might have beheld three more
Antipendiums, Hill, Green, and B^rry, who were Antipendiums in respect of
Whitebread and his Brethren. And lastly, Thompson and Farewell were another sort
of Antipendiums to Westminster Hall.

Well, my Beloved, it is pity that Man was not made as Momus would have had him
made, that is, with Windows in his Breast: For I am persuaded, could you see
into our dear Conductor's Heart, you would there discover a most violent
Antipathy against the Person Him in my Text, and a whole Rosarie of earnest
Wishes, that he might live to see Him made an Antipendium among the rest; nay,
you might see another Result of his Mind, that he would not spare for the
Expenses of half a dozen Half^^eets Salarie, for a pair of excellent Brass
Screws, to fasten Him to the Gib^t. And I give this Reason for what I say; For
that Person, who having an Enmity against another, cannot Coach it by his Door,
but he must lill out his Tongue at him, shows a vast heat of Malice and
passionate Fury in his Bowels, take it which way you please, either like one of
Lucan's Menippus's, or, according to the natural Custom of Birds and Beasts in
hot Weather. It Is an ill Sign that the same Maligning Person, sitting in the
same Church, at the same Service of God, over against the Maligned Him, should
be so unable to temper his Charity in the sight of God, that he could not
refrain from a Cough of Derision, like the Calling of Quails, or the Iugging of
Partridges, to waken his drowsy Friends to a particular notice of the
Rehearsal of the Ninth Commandment; as if the Timing of his Phlegmatic Hem --
Hems -- so particularly concerned his Opposite Him, that all the rest of the
Church were presently bound to look up, and stare, upon his Phthysical Alarms.
Whereas, in truth, the Breach of the Commandment lies upou our dear Conductor's
side, to accuse a Person about Screws and Antipendiums, that signify no more,
than if he had made the same noise, and barked with the same inveteracy,
against the Moon. Tell me, my Beloved, where this Man's Charity lies, in Podice
Canis, or in anxietate Asini?

But I come now to another sort of Antipendium, I mean the Playhouse Curtain,
that hangs before the Scenes. And this is sometimes a Comical, sometimes a
Tragical Antipendium. Now I am apt to believe, that our dear Conductor meant
his Conceit for a Comical Antipendium, as having a desire to oblige the World
with a little Mirth; to which purpose he made this Comical Romance of Screws
and Antipendiums, populo ut placerent quas ipse fecit fabulas. What ill luck it
was he wanted Intelligence to complete the Fable? 'Twas pity he had not heard
of the Smith's Wife in Distaff-lane, that was persuaded to environ her self
with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, and follow her Husband to the Alehouse,
like a St. George a Foot, or another Penthesilea: From whence he might have
framed another strange Story, of a Walking Antipendium, and have made three or
four Prognosticating Observators out of it.

Well, but you will say, This is not the Antipendium which our dear Conductor
meant -- However, do but hoise it up, and it presently presents you with a
Sight. First, Behold our dear Conductor sitting in an Elbow-Chair, between
Circe on the one side, and Medea on the other, who have each of them the
Command of two great Fats, as big as Rhenish-Wine Fats (You would think our
Conductor Sutler-General of England, between his two Camp-Mistresses of the
Field) These Fats contain a most pleasing and intoxicating Potion, between
Circean, Medean, and Whore of Babylonian, much of the same Brewing as Ovid
describes it, Nec Mora: misceri tosti jubet hordea grani
Mellaque, vimque meri, cum lacte coagula passo,
Quique sub hac lateant furtim dulcedine succos
Adjicit. --
About these Fats you shall see Multitudes of People pressing, some for their
Quarterns, some for their Half-quarterns, some for their Gills, which they have
no sooner drank off, but they fall into several sorts of Frenzies and
Ecstasies; some fall a Huzzaing, some curse the Whigs, others damn the
Dissenters, another swears all Men are Liars but the Observator, another rails
at Ignoramus Juries. And for the Observator himself, he seems to have taken a
large Dose; for he does nothing but rave against Aldersgate Street,
Throckmorton-street; tells ye a hundred Bedlam Stories of Screws and
Antipendiums, and Vintners Boys; the mere gerrae of a wounded Fancy. After
this, you shall see two Jesuits present him with an Instrument ready tuned;
upon which he falls a playing as if he were mad. Thereupon you shall presently
see the Pope his nown self descending in a Chair of State, screwed together
with Brass Screws, to hear the Music of his Lessons. He seems to be extremely
pleased, nods his Head and smiles, and so having given him thanks for assisting
Thompson, abusing Dr. Oats and Prance, up he soars again out of sight, and
then down drops a Shower of Guineys, and down drops the Antipendium, and so the
Show ends.

And thus we come to another sort of Antipendium, I mean, the Gaudy Bushes that
hang before your Entrances into the Oracle of the Bott^; a frequent Sign of the
Habitation of a certain Commander called a Captain. True it is, that formerly
Bacchus and Mars, the they were near of kin, yet they were two distinct
Persons. Mars was a God both by the Father and Mothers Side, but Bacchus only
by the Fathers Side. Juno was Mars's Mother; but Bacchus's Mother was no other
than Cadmus's Daughter, whose Name was Semele. Yet this Semele was akin to Juno
too, as being Great-grand-daughter to Juno's Sisters Great-Aunts
Cousin-^ermain. I refer ye for the rest to the Heralds Office. But now I think
on it, you may spare your selves that trouble. For, as you may read in Ovid's
Metamorphoses, or else in the most worthy Ribadeneira's Volume of Wonders, in
process of Time Mars and Bacchus were incorporated into one Person, called a
City-Captain. The Reason you shall find in Lucian's Council of the Gods. For
they, in deep Consultation among themselves, wisely considering the vain,
hotheaded, frantic, Hector-like, Humors of Mortals in their Wine, and what
prejudice the Sons of Semele received, by breaking their Chairs, slashing their
Hangings, mangling their Pictures, twisting their Silver Spoons, disfiguring
their Tankards, throwing their Pots down Stairs, and kicking the young Menades,
or Drawers, resolved, as I said before, to incorporate Bacchus and Mars,
Vintner and Captain, into one, to enable them the better to quiet the Quarrels
of such Hectorean Lapithe's as should presume to invade their Liberties and
Properties in their own peculiar Dominions.

These Antipendiums are of great consequence; for these are those Antipendiums
that direct the Poet to those Hippocrenes of Sack and Claret that inspire him
to write wanton Comedies, Tragic Raptures, and Pindarick Love-Verses. That
guide the Melancholy where they may drown their Cares; the Huzzaers, where to
Huzzah; the Plotters, where to Consult; the Men of Pleasure, where to Treat
their debonnair Misses; Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, where to roar and
swagger; and, in a word, where Men may dispatch all sorts of Business, settle
Religion, order the State, but more especially throw off the troublesome Clog of
their Estates, and gain the Appellation of Good Common-wealths-men, for
increasing the Public Revenue.

But now, my Beloved, I come to the Business, those Antipendiums of
Antipendiums, the Female Antipendiums, the Ladies Antipendiums, the Mothers
Antipendiums, the Daughters Antipendiums, the Mistresses Antipendiums, the
Maids Antipendiums; Antipendiums without, Antipendiums within. As for example;
there is first the Gold-fring'd and Silk-fring'd Antipendium, that brush the
City Freestone, and the Church-Pavement so clean, that Younger Prentices and
Sextons have little to do: The Gorgeous Antipendium, so ponderously Fringed and
Laced, 'twould almost sprain a Man's Wrist to move it; so wondrous weighty, that
many times they crack the Purse-strings that hoise 'em and loar 'em, tho as big
as ordinary Cables, while the gay Enchantress walks in her Circles of Gold and
Silver, and bewitches all the World. Now, Beloved, behind this Antipendium is
another Antipendium, and behind That, another: But then, Beloved, O then! What
then? -- Oh! how I stretch, and yawn, and gape to think on it! Then appears the
Antipendium indeed, the true, right, undeniable, Hyperbolical Antipendium, that
hangs before those Arva Muliebria, those Hortos Cupidinis, as the Learned
Apuleius has it; That Antipendium which if it be but Laced, Emperors will
stoop to raise it. This is that Antipendium which the Unlearned, the
Illiterate, the People of Long-lane and Wapping, call a Smock. But now how
highly, how infinitely is the Nation, the Whole Nation (for all Men, all Sects,
all Opinions are now concerned) how past all Retribution are they obliged to
our dear Conductor, for this fine, clean modest, neat, harmless, inoffensive
Word? The Ladies too are bound to give him eternal praise and honor. For now,
never no more, never in this World, shall a Smock be called a Smock, but an
Antipendium. Let the Word Smock be banished to the Skirts of the Suburbs, but
let the Word Antipendium be the Darling of the English Tongue. How many serious
Questions, which Manners, only Manners forbid before, may a Gentleman now ask
his Mistress concerning her Antipendium? A Lady may order her Servant to lay
her out a clean Antipendium, tho there were twenty Gentlemen in the Room.
Certainly if the Ladies and Gentlemen do not join together, and erect a
Monument to our dear Conductor, for making known to the World this sober,
maidenly, bashful, shamefaced, mannerly Word, they will be very ungrateful, and
never deserve to have such an Observator again. It Is a Word so modest, that the
very Quakers may use it. This is that Antipendium to which the desires of Rich
and Poor, Lords and Peasants, Young and Old, all tend, as to the Center of
their Happiness. For love of this Antipendium some Men hang, others drown,
others poison themselves. The Monks and Friars lick their Lips at it. The
Jesuit pulls off his apiece Cap to it, very reverendly: Even his Holiness
himself will not disdain to pay his Devotions to this Antipendium. Nay, more
than all this, our dear Conductor admired one of these Antipendiums in his
drooping Years; nor would he Court like a Common Mortal, but like another
Jupiter, deceived the Jealous Acrisius.

But now you will ask me, What Screws are most proper to fix this Antipendium?
Why, I must tell ye, your Golden and Silver Screws are very proper, and many
times prevail exceedingly: but as the Case may happen, many times your Brass
Screws, that is, your boisterous, ranting, tearing, confident Screws, of which
Epithets Brass is the general Emblem, and therefore for that Reason called
metonymically Brass Screws, are much more desirable; insomuch that there are
several Cleopatra's and Messalina's of the Age, that had rather have two such
Brass Screws, than two and forty Golden or Silver ones.

But here, my Beloved, let me give you a serious Caution. Sometimes it happens,
that by virtue of a certain Figure called Synechdoche, the Part is taken for
the Whole; that is, the Antipendium which covers, is taken for the Vacuum
covered. So then, my Beloved, if at any time you find the Antipendium more
displeasing to your sight, than the Vacuum which it conceals, I say, Beware
your Brass Screws. Have a care of such an Antipendium as Dejanira's was, that
burnt Hercules alive. For sometimes you shall meet with an Antipendium scalding
with such an Etnean Heat, as would even melt the Rhodian Colossus's Brass
Screw, were they in being. I must confess, my Beloved, we our selves, I mean
those of our Long Robe, have a strange fancy for these Antipendiums, insomuch
that you would swear, that a great part of the Tribe of Levi were turned
Gentlemen-Ushers. Which makes me admire that so many of our Sommer-Divines
should be so zealous for our dear Conductor, that would so fain once more
subject them to the cast-off Yoke of Antichrist, who will not allow them the
convenience of these Antipendiums, than which there is nothing in the World
more delightful to them. I could here run into a prodigious Discourse of the
Conveniences and Inconveniences of these Antipendiums; but it behooves me to
be guided by my Hourglass, which is the Measure of your Patience.

Well then, by way of Application, the Moral of all this, is, to show ye how
zealous our dear Conductor has been to raise and improve a company of Tales and
Romantic Stories of Screws and Antipendiums, not at all for the Public Good,
but all in the silly and shammaking Justification of his own Ill-Conduct, not
to call it worse; tho to the utter ruin of one of the Chiefest and most
Unblemished Evidences of that damned Conspiracy against the Life of his Sacred
Prince, and the Subversion of his Government. A most transcendent piece of
Loyalty, and most highly deserving the Fat of Venison among Boys and Prentices*
Alas! there is no body denies the Act of making the Brass Screws to a Popish
Chapel Antipendium, which hangs before the High Altar upon High days; but that
they were made without the Approbation and Knowledge of the Employers, is that
which our dear Conductor would fallaciously impose upon the World, to prove
that Cain's taking the Sacrament, was more acceptable to God than Abel's.

Oh, my Beloved, you blaspheme our dear Conductor: Can he speak an Untruth? --
Why not? -- For tho the Virgin Mary was so kind to St. Dominic, as to give him
a Visit from the Coelum Empyreum, and to bring him the Confirmation of his
Orders written with an Angels Pen, we do not hear that ever St. Michael brought
our dear Conductor any Patent from Heaven to be Truth-speaker General of
England. And therefore it is a Presumption and Arrogance in our dear Conductor
to pretend to be the only Utterer of Truth, unless he could prove his
Assertions by better Proofs than the Flams of Screws and Antipendiums. It Is
much he had never another Story of Screws and Antipendiums for Dr. Fletcher,
who swore much more to the purpose than Prance. Of which two Persons, when one
of their Oaths is enough to render our dear Conductor suspected, it is to me a
wonder how he can have the Effronterie to defend the Interest of the Church of
England; or the Church of England Men be so weak to own him for their Champion,
which is the greatest Scandal they now lie under. But it is observable* my
Beloved, that when our dear Conductor is pinched, he presently recoils under
the Protection of Loyalty, and cries out with a loud Voice Treason, Treason,
Lies, Rebellion, Covenants, Associations, etc. like a Dog that snarles between
his Masters Legs. But, my Beloved, our dear Conductor is to understand, that
there are Persons in the World that will not come to Sam's Coffee-house to
learn what Truth or Loyalty is, from such a State-Pragmaticus as his Worship.
If he would know what Loyalty is, we will tell him, for once, from a much more
Venerable Author than himself, writing to the present Dolphin of France: After
all that has been said, says he, we are to conclude, That if we would observe
the inviolable, the virtuous Fidelity of Subjects, it behooves us to be obliged
to our Lawful Prince by the same Ties that we are bound to God; that we
reverence Kings as His Lieutenants, and His Living Images, the Ministers of His
Justice, and the Organs of His Will. La Faussette, des Vertus Humaines, Tom. 1.
page 487. Let him deeply consider these Words, and make his best of 'em. It Is
to be supposed, when he has conn'd 'em well, he will better distinguish between
Loyalty to a Prince and his Government, and Compliance with a Parish-Ceremony,
and recant his Heathenish Assertion of removing the Dissent. In the mean while,
let not this Shimei of an Observator brandish his reproachful Pen against so
many thousands of People, that make so great a Figure in the Nation; Persons
that from the Peerage to the Tradesman share so large a Portion of the Kingdoms
Wealth, and therefore not to be reflected upon, without considerate Meditation,
and the Conviction of Legal Proofs. Reproach and Calumny will provoke the most
patient and innocent of Men: -- Vexat Censura Columbas. Therefore Machiavil
himself abhors Incendiaries and Calumniators, as the Pests of a Commonwealth.
He allows of Legal Accusation; but, says he, Calumnies are detestable, as not
requiring Proof and Testimony; whereas Accusations, must be legally and
judicially made apparent. Let our dear Conductor accuse as much as he can; but
let hm not revile, and tell idle Stories, and call his fraudulent and adulatory
Assertions Loyalty, as if he thought he could convince the Nation, by disputing
with himself. Which Admonition would he but observe, as the World would not be
so intollerably pestered with his loose Half-sheets, so he might have more
leisure to think of retiring to the other World, which he once promised to do,
but has most wickedly broke his Promise.

FINIS.

