The New World of English Words, or a General DICTIONARY Contaning ye: Terms
Etimologies -- Definitions of hard words, as they are derived from other
Languages* there proper significations through^out ye Arts and Sciences,
whether Liberal or Mecanick* by E. P. Printed for Nath: Brook at the Angel
in Cornhill 1658*


THE NEW WORLD OF ENGLISH WORDS: Or, a General DICTIONARY: Containing the
Interpretations of such hard words as are derived from other Languages; whether
Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, British,
Dutch, Saxon, etc. their Etymologies and perfect Definitions: Together with All
those Terms that relate to the Arts and Sciences; whether Theology,
Philosophy, Logic, Rhetoric, Grammar, Ethics, Law, Natural History, Magic,
Physic, Surgery, Anatomy, Chimistry, Botanicks, Mathematics, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Navigation,
Fortification, Dialling, Surveying, Music, Perspective, Architecture,
Heraldry, Curiosities, Mechanics, Staticks, Merchandise, Jewelling, Painting,
Graving, Husbandry, Horsemanship, Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, etc.

To which are added The significations of Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical
Fictions, Historical Relations, Geographical Descriptions of most Countries and
Cities of the World; especially of these three Nations wherein their chiefest
Antiquities, Battles, and other most Memorable Passages are mentioned; as also
all other Subjects that are useful, and appertain to our English Language.

A Work very necessary for Strangers, as well as our own Countrymen, for all
Persons that would rightly understand what they discourse, write, or read.

Collected and published by E. P.

For the greater honor of those Learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been
assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their Names are affixed in the next
Page.

Dedit Deus his quoque finem.

Virgil. London, Printed by E. Tyler, for Nath. Brook at the Sign of the Angel
in Cornhill, 1658.

The names of those learned Gentlemen and Artists, as also of those Arts and
Sciences, to which they contributed their assistance.
ANtiquity's, Elias Ashmole, Esquire Law Terms, Mr. Herne. Magic, Mr. Turner.
Physic, Dr. Sparks Surgery and Anatomy, Mr. Ed. Molins. Mr. Will. Molins.
Chimistry, Dr. Currer^ Herbary or Botanicks, Mr. Morgan* Mr. Coals.
Mathematics, Mr. Moore. Geometry, Dr. Wybard. Astrology, Mr. Lilly. Mr.
Booker.
Chyromancy, Physiogmony,
Mr. Sanders. Navigation, Mr. Wilsford. Fortification, Mr. Faulconberge. The
names of the Mathematical instruments. Mr. Greatorex. Surveying, Mr. Air Mr.
Blagrave.
Music, Dr^ Coleman. Architecture, Mr. Ed. Carter. Perspective, Mr^ W. Carter.
Heraldry, Mr. Knight. Mr. Nower. T. Rawlins, Esquire.
Jewelling, Mr. Gyffard. Painting, Mr. Walker. Mr. Hales.
Graving, Mr. Fathorn. Husbandry, Mr. Austen. Cookery, Mr. May. Horsmanship,
Mr. Green. Hawking and Hunting,
Mr. Gardener. Fishing, Mr. Taverner.
TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND IMPARTIAL SISTERS, THE TWO UNIVERSITIES.
Most Equal Sisters,
NEver did any Volume raise it self to that height of reputation, at once to
purchase every Reader for a friend or favorite: it is a known truth, and not
to be denied that our Language has in these later Ages been advanced to the
admiration, if not the emulation, of other Nations, and whatsoever unnatural
reproaches have been stuck upon her beauties by the petulancy of Critics, has
strangely, but chiefly, proceeded from the unworthy attempts of those that have
obtruded on this Age their transcriptions of Indexes, rather then Dictionaries,
as if our Language were narrower then the rest of the Worlds, or to be confined
to their shorthand Epitomes: A high miscarriage through which the learned and
unlearned have most unhappily suffered; certainly the Regalia of our Language
could not have been worse injured then by being vitiated and corrupted by such
spurious and imperfect Editions: for if the Grandeur of such an undertaking be
rightly considered, no ordinary industry will be required, next the consulting
with the Monuments of ancient Records and Manuscripts derived to us from
reverend Authors, there will be occasion to peruse the Works of our ancient
Poets, as Geffry Chaucer the greatest in his time, for the honor of our
Nation; as also some of our more Modern Poets, as Spencer Sidny, Draiton,
Daniel, with our Reformers of the Scene, Johnson, Shakesphear, Beaumont, and
Fletcher, and among the renowned Antiquaries, Cambden, Lambard, Spelman,
Seldom, and diverse others* There will also be exacted from him that undertakes
a task of this nature, a necessary knowledge of the Languages in which he is
certain to encounter with a multitude of Criticisms, nor must he be wanting in
his strictest search of most Dictionaries, that he may be able to distinguish
the terms, several derivations, differences, definitions, interpretations,
proper significations of the words of our Tongue, how borrowed, how mixed with
others, how with its own. Lastly, foreign Authors are to be made use of, and
amongst them, the Germans are reputed most expert in the Mechanical Arts.

Thus, ever Honored Sisters, you are not unacquainted what Siftings,
Anvelings, Traversings, there ought to be of Authors* so that he that
undertakes this Enterprise should first seriously perpend what difficulties he
is to pass through, how dangerous it is for him to fail in such a Design,
what a weight of disparagement he is likely to sink under: a Volume of this
nature being of no less concernment, then not only to inform young men in
their deficiencies of the right knowledge of words, either for writing or
discourse, but also to establish those of riper years in their prudentials as
an universally through-pac't Dictionary, and may serve for an Interpreter or
Arbiter of their Studies and humane Transactions; so that a work thus rightly
constituted may be said in some kind, to approach near to a Divine Skill, and
that the rather as it does in it self contain all those Idea's that concern
the Speech or Pen, such as are useful to drive on and enforce with full vigor
and strength, the affairs of mankind.

Illustrious Sisters, if we look upon the exemplary encouragements of some of
our Laureate Worthies, whose noble spirits have not suffered the ashes of
Antiquity to be raked out of her sacred Urnes, as at this time the admired
Works of Mr. Dodsworth and of Mr. Dugdale have informed the World. Some of
these Heroic Persons out of a farther zeal to preserve our Language from the
barbarismes and ruinous deformities of the times, to present her in her native
glories, from their own more prac^ical and experienced insights in some of the
Arts and Sciences, have contributed in what they were more particularly
excellent, to the building up of this Volume* Their names I have affixed to
their own learned endeavors, not only as I my self acknowledge their
opportune and incomparable assistances, but that the Bookseller so much obliged
to them for so unusual a courtesy, might express his humblest tenders of
gratitude; as also that you, most Noble Sisters, would be pleased to take
notice of this your learned Retinue* and that there are Benefactours still
surviving to celebrate your flourishing felicities.

I am not ignorant, that though I am thus fortified with the pregnant aid of
those exquisite Persons, to which my own inferior, though studious endeavors
are joined, that I shall nevertheless fall short of answering the curiosities
of some critical expectations. Mr. Minshaw that spent his life and estate in
scrutinizing into Languages, still remains obnoxious to the misconstructions
of many. But let such invading censurers well consider the infinity of
mechanical words, how every Art has its peculiar Terms, and then if they are
in their right wits, it will seem almost impossible to them, for one man though
a healthful person that has spent the best part of the leisure of his life, to
erect such a Pyramid* more especially if those difficulties are rightly
pondered that are to be waded through* the conduct of costs in that continued
converse that must be had with Artists, besides the great labor, with which
the most generous Forrainers that have gone about to manage such happy designs,
have been wasted and tired out; these considerations being ingeniously weighed
by the wiser sort of men, I hope the learned and charitable Critic will
intertain a favorable approbation of these labors, as he cannot find me
wanting, at least of a more than ordinary industry to complete this Work, both
in examining and right digestion of my own papers, as also for that tender care
that has been had of those happy contributions I received from others. Most
Reverenced Sisters, my greatest ambition is your affectionate esteem, which
having but obtained, I shall ever strive to employ the best strength of my life
and studies in your service; in the mean space I question not but I have
already done my Country so much good service as to have stripped away those
obsolete terms that have defaced our language, not degrading too much from its
primitive integrity, nor declining what with judge- I might insert.

To conclude, I have illustrated and refined it, instated it in its proper
majesty, rendered it admirably useful for all persons on all occasions, worthy
of the greatest masteries of Rhetoricians and the tongues of our Vernaculous
Orators: with a no less honorable submission have I prostrated these my
Endeavors at your Learned Feet.

EDW. PHILLIPS.

To the truly Noble, and Perfect Lover and Incourager of Arts and Sciences, Sir
WILLIAM PASTON Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
IT has not been the least of my care, that this present Work might be as
happy in the fortune of its address, as in the publicknesse of its design,
which is the General advancement of Learning and Arts; nor could it have been
more advantagiously fortified against the various and uncertain suffrages of
the World, then by being adopted into the Patronage of such a Person, whose
accomplishment in the Arts and Ingenuities renders him capable to judge of what
is written well or amiss in any of them; and that this attribute does belong
properly to your self, is evident to the World by more then a few instances.
Your admirable skill in Physic manifested in your frequent Cures of the most
desperate Diseases, and those happy receipts you have consecrated to the benefit
of mankind; Your exquisite knowledge in Husbandry and Horsemanship; Your deep
insight into the Mathematics, and the more delicate sort of the Mechanics, as
appears by your excellent choice of Jewels, and your rare fancy and invention
in Carvings, Turning, Paintings, and Annealings, in which the very Artists you
have employed have submitted to your politer judgment; Your diligent search
into the greatest curiosities of Nature; wherein how much you have exceeded all
others of our Nation that have been famous in their Collections, your Musaeum
abounding with an infinite variety of the most choice and admired Rarities, can
sufficiently testify: And indeed, What qualities less noble then these I have
mentioned, could spring from the virtuous inclinations of your youth, which for
many years was spent in useful travels (not so much to see fashions, as to
learn experience, and the true knowledge of men and manners) of which the
Learned Mr. Greaves makes an honorable mention in his Survey of the Pyramids
of Egypt? These virtues, together with the enlargednesse of your mind in making
your House the Center of Hospitality to Strangers and Ingenuous Persons, are no
less a true mark of the Nobleness of your Family, then the Supporters of your
Arms, a bearing which is very rare, and only peculiar to the most ancient
Houses.

Upon this foundation it is that I build my confidence; but to me a person
little meriting in my self the honor of your acceptance, my propitious Stars
have been assistant on this occasion, and have so brought it about, that not I,
but two Famous Universities and the greatest Artists of our time, should throw
this Work at your feet, and in so doing they have obliged me by a favor which
nothing can equal but the Honor of your receiving it from them by my hands. If
what is here more particularly contained of the more Noble Mechanic Arts, come
not up to that height as to satisfy the curiosity of your excellent judgment
in them, yet thus much our Volume may without arrogance pretend to, That there
is here a fairer way begun then ever, for the promoting of that most useful
part of Learning; especially since it could not intend that alone, but takes in
all the other parts beside: which all together with one consent, like the
needle tending toward the North, present themselves to wait upon, you, who
have so great an influence upon them, erecting a Monument to your fame, great
as the glory I aspire to in stiling my self,

Sir, Your most humble, and most devoted servant, EDW. PHILLIPS.

To the truly Noble and Acomplisht Gentlemen, Sir ROBERT BOLLES of Scampton, in
the County of Lincoln, Baronet, AND EDWARD HUSSY of Cathorp, in the County of
Lincoln, Esquire.
AT such a time chiefly it is, Most Honored Sirs, that a Nation may be truly
said to flourish, when those that are the most considerable in fortune and
outward splendor, are also the most conspicuous for Learning and inward Worth;
nor can the greatest Sciences and most noble Qualities be looked upon by any
with so true an esteem and value, as by those who have themselves attained the
highest perfection in them: and among the rest whom such qualifications make to
be reputed the Ornament of the Age, it had been impossible that the World
should be unacquainted with two such Eminent Persons as your selves; who, being
as inseparable in friendship and alliance as in the ^ffinity of your virtues,
could not, without injury to so happy an union, have been separated in this
address. Though decency will not permit me to speak over-high of this Work
wherewith I here present you; yet this I may say, That Fame has ushered it
into the World, with the attest of so many Worthy hands, that never yet in
English any Piece came forth with happier Auspices; to which there could have
been nothing wanting to Crown its fortune absolutely, but your most equal
receptions, for which it is prepared, with this return of gratitude, That
besides all those other Arts and Sciences, of which both of you are equal
favorers and promoters, you will also have the satisfaction to find a
considerable account of those accomplishments which are more especially
agreeable to each of your peculiar fancies; namely of that Divine and Seraphic
quality (which first brought order and civility into the World, which mollifies
the most barbarous and salv^ge natures, and calmes the unruly passions of the
Soul) of which one of you is so great a favourer, and so absolute a Master in
it, that your whole Retinue following your example, are able performers in
Music, and may as truly be called your Quire as your Family; As also (which
chiefly delights the other of you) that most manly and generous Exercise of
Hunting, the sport of greatest Kings and Princes in all Ages, by which the
youth of all Warlike Nations have been always spurred on to martial
Discipline, and the atcheivement of the most Heroic actions: Having therefore
so great a veneration to whatsoever is excellent and worthy of highest praise,
I could not omit to celebrate with my utmost endeavors, the owners of such
perfections; nor could any consideration have more absolutely charmed unto your
service, the

Humble admirer of your Virtues Edw. Phillips.

THE PREFACE, By way of Introduction to the Right Knowledge of our Language.
THe very Sum and Comprehension of all Learning in General, is chiefly
reducible into these two grand Heads, Words and Things; and though the latter
of these two be, by all men, not without just cause, acknowledged the more
solid and substantial part of Learning; yet since, on the other side, it cannot
be denied but that without Language (which is as it were the vehiculum or
conveyancer of all good Arts) things cannot well be expressed or published to
the World, it must be necessarily granted, that the one is little less
necessary, and an inseparable concomitant of the other; for let a Subject be
never so grave, never so useful, carrying in it never so clear and perfect a
demonstration, yet if it be not pertinently worded, and urged with a certain
power and efficacy to the understanding, but in a forced, tumultuous, or
disjoynted phrase, it will either not be understood, or so slightly and wit^
such indifference regarded, that it will come short of working that effect
which it promised to it self. And it is a thing mainly observable, that all
those ancient Authors that have written the best things, have left them to
posterity in the purest and most genuine Language. Among the Greeks, who have
better deserved of the World for the excellency of their Works, than Plato,
Xenophon, Thucydides? Who among the Latins have been more famous than Livie,
Cicero, Salust? nor have all these been less admired for the properness and
elegancy of their style, than for the nobleness of the things they delivered;
neither have there been wanting of our own Nation, especially in these later
Ages, those, who are not only justly esteemed to stand in competition with the
best of the Ancients for the verity and soundness of their matter, but, have
also refined our Language to that height, that, for elegance, for fluency, and
happiness of expression, I am persuaded it gives not place to any Modern
Language, spoken in Europe; scarcely to the Latin and Greek themselves. Now as
for that subtle distinction used by some, between a Language and a Speech, I
look upon it rather as an overcurious nicety, than any consideration of
serious weight or moment; nor can I be induced to believe otherwise but, That
whatever kind of sermocination is generally used in any Country, may very
properly be termed a Language; for if the commixture of a Language esteemed the
most ancient, with that of a bordering or invading Nation cause it to
degenerate into a Speech, even the Latin Tongue will hardly be exempted from
that denomination, since it is no hard matter to prove that even that also
descended from a Language yet more ancient than it self; forasmuch as that
Latin which was spoken immediately after the expulsion of the Roman Kings, when
the League was made between Rome and Carthage, was so altered in the time of
Polybius, which was 350 years after, that it was hardly to be understood; and
from the time of Romulus we must needs think it suffered a far greater change:
yet it was so far from being thought corrupted by this alteration, that it was
judged not to have come to its (...), or flourishing height of elegance, until
the Age wherein Cicero lived. And if the change which is introduced by time,
not only not deprave, but, refine a Language, much more will the alteration
that is made by the interspersion of foreign words, especially coming from the
more southerly and civil Climates, conduce to the sweetning and smoothing of
those harsh and rough accents which are peculiar to the most northerly
Countries. And besides, to find out the original and most unchanged Languages,
we must have recourse as far backward as the confusion of Babel, which was the
first nativity of Tongues; and so make a vain search for things which perhaps
are no where now extant.

True it is indeed, that Scaliger reckons up about 11 several Tongues (others
14) spoken in Europe, which have no affinity or intermixture one with another;
the chief whereof, not to mention the Greek and Latin, which are now no native
but acquired Languages, are the Teutonick or Dutch, the Slavonian, the
Cantabrian, the old British or Celtick; these are commonly called Mother
Tongues, and those which are any way compounded of any of these Mother Tongues,
or derived from them, some think fit to call Dialects, a^^hough notwithstanding
this composition or derivation, such a vast distance may be seen between them,
as renders them unintelligible to each other; whereas indeed a Dialect is but
the self same Language, spoken in several Provinces of the same Nation, with
some small difference; as the pronouncing of a vowel either broader or finer,
or some little variation of a word or syllable; in such a manner the people of
Sommersetshire speak differently from those of Middlsex, yet both may very well
be understood of each other; and so the people of Florence from those of Rome:
No otherwise in the Greek Language did the Dorick, Ionick, Attick, Aeolick,
Dialects differ from one another.

But, not to insist any longer upon so nice a point, my intention is, as an
Introduction to the particular scope and design of this Book, to speak
something in general of the Original of our English Tongue, of the basis or
foundation of it, of the reason of its several changes, and how far it
participates of other Languages, and of the peculiar Idiome or propriety
thereof.

That, what was originally spoken in this Nation, was the ancient British
Language, needs not to be doubted, nor is it improbable what some affirm, that
it was very near, if not altogether the same with, the Gallick, or Celtick,
since both these people were by the ancient Greeks called by one common name,
Celtae; besides, if we consider the solid arguments of Verstegan, and those
that have writ most judiciously, concerning the Original of the Britains,
nothing seems to me more consonant to truth, then that the Britains anciently
descended from the Gauls, and that Brutus rather a Gallick, then a Trojan
Prince, changed the name of Albion into that of Britain: but certain it is
that of this ancient British, there remains scarsely any track, or footstep in
the language spoken at this day in the main part of England, but has remained
entire from the Saxon Conquest to this very time in that part, which is
commonly called Cambro-Brittania, or Wales, to which (being a mountanous
Country, and strong for defense, and which only of all the rest of the Island
was left unconquered by the Saxons) a great number of the Native inhabitants
betook themselves by flight, preserving both their ancient race and speech,
which from the Country Wales, is now called Welsh. In the same manner the
Cantabrian, or ancient tongue of Spain, notwithstanding the frequent invasions
of that Country by the Carthaginians, Moors, Romans and Vandals, is yet
preserved in Biscay, Guipuscoa and Navarr^; and in the Mountains of Granata,
called Alpuxarras the Arabic is still retained, together with the offspring
of the Moors, that in times past possessed the greatest part of Spain; as also
in Armorica, or Brittany in France, the old Gallick is spoken at this day,
which very near resembling the Welsh, is a great argument of the ancient
affinity of these two tongues.

From this so total a subversion of the British Empire by the English-Saxons,
followed as total a subversion of the British language, and even of the very
name of Britain (which from the ancient habitation of the Saxons near the
Baltic Sea, was named Anglia, or England) a thing which was neither effected
by the Roman nor the Norman Conquest, for neither the Provincial Latin could
extinguish the Native British, nor the French brought in by King Williams
followers, the Saxon which was then in use, for it is observable that where the
Conquerours overpower the former inhabitants in multitude, their language also
by little and little prevails over that of the Country, otherwise it wastes and
spends it self till it be in a manner utterly lost, like a small quantity of
water thrown upon a heap of sand. Since therefore these Saxons were a people of
Germany, and their speech very little, if at all differing from the rest of the
Germans, it is hence evident that our language derives its Original from the
Dutch or Teutonick, which seems to be of greater Antiquity then any other
language now spoken in Europe, and to have continued the same without any
considerable alteration, and in the same Country where it was first planted,
through a long tract of many ages; for, not to urge the opinion of Goropius
Becanus, who affirms it to have been the first language of the world, and
spoken by Adam in Paradise; it is certainly the common consent of most
Authentic Writers, that the Dutch tongue still in use, and possessing a large
compass of ground, is no less ancient then the very first coming in of the
Teutones into Germany, under the conduct of Tuisco, which is no wonder, if we
consider that the Teutones, or Germans, being the very first people that ever
inhabited Germany, have continued in the possession of it to this very day
uncorrupted, unsubdued and (as their language, so themselves) unmixed with any
foreign Nation. Nor is the large extent of this language less considerable,
for as much as it is spoken throughout all Germany, Denmark, Norwey, Swethland,
Belgia, the Island of Thule, now called Iseland, and diverse of the Northern
Isles, besides those places into which it has spread it self by conquest, as
into Gallia by the Franck's, and by the Saxons into this Island, where it yet
remains in a very great measure.

And though our English tongue has of late ages entertained so great a number
of foreign words, that every age it seems to swerve more and more from what
it was originally; yet if we compare it diligently with the Dutch, we shall
soon find that almost all the chief material words, and those which are
oftnest used in the most familiar, and vulgar discourse, are all, either mere
Dutch, or palpably derived from the Dutch. For example, the most primitive and
uncompounded words, appellatives, the names of natural things, animals,
vegetals, as Earth, Heaven, Wind, Oak, Man, Bird, Stone, etc. words that imply
a relation, as Father, Brother, Son, Daughter; Pronouns, and Monosyllable
Verbs, as Mine, Thine, This, What, Love, Give, besides all our numerals,
particles, conjunctions, and the like.

Concerning these words it is very remarkable, that most of them consisting but
of one syllable; nevertheless, the things that are understood by them are as
significantly expressed, as the same things in other tongues are by words of
two, or more syllables; as the word Good is as proper as either (...) in Greek,
or Bonus in Latin, a matter of no small advantage: for if that sentence be
judged most praiseworthy that contains most matter in fewest words, why may
we not commend that word, which consisting of fewest syllables, is yet of as
great force as if it had more. No less considerable is the proper, and most
pertinent signification of some words which are produced by the coalition, or
clapping together of two of these monosyllables into one, as the word Wisdom,
which is compounded of these two words Wise, i. e. Grave, Sage, Prudent, and
the old Saxon word Dome, i. e. judgment, or sentence, since wisdom may most
properly be said to be the result of a Grave, and solid judgment.

By this that has been said it is evident, that the Saxon, or German tongue is
the groundwork upon which our language is founded, the mighty stream of
foreign words that has since Chaucers time broke in upon it, having not yet
washed away the root: only it lies somewhat obscured, and overshadow'd like a
Rock, or Fountain overgrown with bushes.

Whether this innovation of words deprave, or enrich our English tongue is a
consideration that admits of various censures, according to the different
fancies of men. Certainly as by an invasion of strangers, many of the old
inhabitants must needs be either slain, or forced to fly the Land; so it
happens in the introducing of strange ^ords, the old ones in whose room they
come must needs in time ^e forgotten, and grow obsolete; sometimes indeed, as
Mr. Cambden observes, there is a peculiar significancy in some of the old Saxon
words, as in stead of fertility they had wont to say Eordswela, which is as
much as the wealth, or riches of the earth, yet let us not bewail the loss of
them for this, for we shall find diverse Latin words, whose Etymology is as
remarkable, and founded upon, as much reason, as in the word intricate, which
(coming from Tricae i. e. those small threads about Chickens legs, that are an
encombrance to them in their going) signifies entangled; and it is worth the
taking notice, that although diverse Latin words cannot be explained, but by a
Periphrasis, as Insinuation is a winding ones self in by little and little, yet
there are others, both French and Latin, that are matched with Native words
equally significant, equally in use among us, as with the French Deny, we
parallel our gainsay, with the Latin resist our withstand, with Interior,
inward, and many more of this nature: So that by this means these forrainers
instead of detracting ought from our tongue, add copiousnesse and varity to it,
now whether they add, or take from the ornament of it, it is rather to be
referred to sense and fancy, then to be disputed by arguments. That they come
for the most part from a language, as civil as the Nation wherein it was first
spoken, I suppose is without controversy, and being of a soft and even sound,
nothing savouring of harshnesse, or barbarism, they must needs mollify the
tongue with which they incorporate, and to which, though of a different nature,
they are made fit and adapted by long use; in fine, let a man compare the best
English, now written, with that which was written three, or four ages ago, and
if he be not a doater upon antiquity, he will judge ours much more smooth, and
grateful to the ear: for my part that which some att^^bute to Spencer as his
greatest praise, namely his frequent use of obsolete expressions, I account the
greatest blemish to his Poem, otherwise most excellent, it being an equal vice
to adhere obstinately to old words, as fondly to affect new ones.

But not to dwell any longer upon their Apology, I shall now for the clearer
Method proceed to the division of them, there are not many Nations in Europe,
some of whose words we have not made bold with, as all of us together have
borrowed from the ancients in great abundance, some we take from the Italians,
as Abase, Abone, Abbord, Balustrade, Balcone, some from the Spanish, as
Abandon, Envelope, Disembogue, Chapin; many from the French, as Desire, Deny,
Command, Embellish, Embossement; among the ancient languages we have from the
Greek not a few, as those that end in (...), with us end in m. as (...)
Epigram, (...) Enthymem, those in (...) with us in t, as (...) Epithet, those
in (...), with us end in er, as (...) Astrologer, those in (...) with us in
ast, as (...) Paraphrast, those in (...) in is it, (...) Gymnosophist, those in
(...) in ick, as Dramatick, those in (...) in isk, as Basilisk, those in (...),
or (...) in aph, as Chirograph Paragraph, those in (...) in arch, as Monarch,
those in (...), in y, or ie, as Philosophy, Rhapsodie, those in (...), or (...)
in ism, as Syllogism, Sophism; also their verbs in (...), with us end in ize,
as (...) Cauterize; in imitation, of which some, out of a pretty Capricchio,
have given common words the same termination, as enfranchize, spiritualize,
wantonize. The next thing to be observed of Greek words is their manner of
composition, they are either compounded of these following prepositions, as (1)
(...), correspondent to the Latin Re, which in composition signifies again, as
Anaphora reductio, or a bringing back again, 2 (...), which, compounded with
another word, implies an opposition, as Antiperistasis, an opposing of any
quality against its contrary, 3 (...), both ways, or about, as Amphibious, i.
e. living upon either element, land, or water, 4 (...), which in composition
signifies a contrariety, as from (...), a hiding, Apocalypsis, a revealing, 5
(...), implies a dilating, or a dividing, as Dioeresis, a dividing of one
syllable into two, 6 (...), answering in composition to the Latin, De as
Cataphora, a carrying downward, 7 (...), in, or upon, as Epitaph, an
inscription upon any ones Tomb, 8 (...), or (...), out, as Ectype, a thing
taken out of another Copy, 9 (...), in, or inward, as Engastrimyth, one that
speaks inwardly, 10 (...), which implies a changing, as Metamorphosis, a
changing of shapes, 11 (...), which implies a comparison, as Parabola, a story
brought for a similitude, 12 (...), about, as Peripherie, a carrying about, 13
(...), before, as Prodromus, a forerunner, 14 (...), to, or toward, as
Prosthesis, an adding unto, 15 (...), under, as Hypogastrick, the lowermost
part of the belly, 16 (...), above, as Hyperphysical, that which is above
nature. Or else of other words, as (...), first, (...), many, (...), false, and
the privative (...), for example, Prototype, an Original, or first Copy,
Polygon, a figure that has many angles, or corners; Pseudomartyr, a false
witness, or conterfeit Martyr; Atrophy, a want of the nutritive faculty, these
are the most material, and all that are in use in our tongue.

But for the Latin words they will require a larger account to be given of
them; these are the main body of our Army of foreign words, these are so
numerous that they may well be thought to equal, if not exceed the number of
our ancient words; only, here is the difference, That these are the more
essential, those the more remote, and rather the superstructure then the
foundation. Of these Latin words there are many (as also some of the French,
and others before mentioned) that by long custom are so ingrafted, and
naturalized into our tongue, that now they are become free denizons, without
any difference, or distinction between them and the Native words, and are
familiarly understood by the common sort, and most unlearned of the people; as
nature, fortune, member, intend, inform, invent, and the like, others there are
which though frequently written, and used in common discourse by the politer
sort, and infranchized at least, if not naturalized, are not yet so very trite
as to be understood by all, since diverse ingenuous persons, addicted to the
reading of books, are nevertheless unacquainted with the Latin, and other
foreign languages, and so are at a loss when they meet with unusual words,
and some people if they spy but a hard word, are as much amazed as if they had
met with a Hobgoblin, and these are they, more especially, the cognizance
whereof is one part, though not the greatest, of this design, but that there
are in the book some words ordinary and trite enough, for I thought it better
in such a case as this, rather to exceed then to be too sparing, since an
exuberance is easilier cut off then a defect supplied; I had thought once to
have omitted this branch of our following work, as having been performed by
others before, and that not without some diligence, but I thought it not enough
to have added many more things then were yet ever thought on, but also to have
the quintessence of what ever was offered at before, in another cast and better
method, that it might be a complete work, and not wanting in any thing that
could be desired in a design so useful to the Nation; besides, that even of
these sorts of words there were many wanting before, which were requisite to be
inserted, many not so properly rendered as was convenient, diverse crammed in by
the head and shoulders without any distinction, but as if they had been as good
as the best; whereas in works of this nature men ought to fly all Pedantismes,
and not rashly to use all words alike, that are met with in every English
Writer, whether Authentic, or not, this is a bad example to the unadmonish't
Reader, and might encourage him to suck in barbarism as soon as Elegance, but
by long experience out of a continued course of reading the best Authors, and
conversation with the better sort of company to examine thoroughly what words
are natural, and ligitimate, and what spurious, and forc'st; nor is it proper
to quote an Author for a word that long custom has sufficiently authorized,
but either such as are grown out of use, or such as are used only upon special
occasions, or as terms of Art; and not upon the credit of every one neither,
nor to quote any modern, or trivial Author for words used by those more
ancient, or of greater credit: I do not deny indeed, but that there are many
words in this book (though fewer then in other books of this kind) which I
would not recommend to any for the purity, or reputation of them, but this I
had not done, but to please all humors, knowing that such kind of words are
written, and that the undistinguishing sort of Readers would take it very ill
if they were not explained, but withal I have set my mark upon them, that he
that studies a natural and unaffected style, may take notice of them to beware
of them, either in discourse, or writing; and if any of them may have chanced
to have escaped the Obelisck (as such a thing may happen in spite of
deligence) there can arise no other inconvenience from it, but an occasion to
exercise the choice and judgment of the Reader, especially being forewarned,
who if he have a fancy capable to judge of the harmony of words, and their
musical cadence, cannot but discern when a word falls naturally from the Latin
termination, when forced and torn from it, as Imbellick, which might indeed
come from Imbellicus, if any such word were, but how they can handsomely deduce
it from Imbellis, is hard to resolve, if this be bad imprescriptible is worse,
being derived, neither I nor any body else knows how, since Praescriptus is the
nearest they can go: there are also worth the pains of avoiding certain kind
of Mule-words propagated of a Latin Sire, and a Greek Dam, such as Acrilogie,
Aurigraphy, and others ejusdem farinae; but I have also met with some forged,
as I shrewdly suspect, by such as undertook to explain them; so monstrously
barbarous, and insufferable, that they are not worthy to be mentioned, nor once
thought on, yet that ye may guess at Hercules by his foot, one of them I shall
produce, which is Suicide, a word which I had rather should be derived from
Sus, a Sow, then from the Pronown Sui, unlesse*there be some mystery in it; as
if it were a Swinish part for a man to kill himself.

What cautions more to give for the avoiding of such gross words as these I
know not, only this in general, To be ever conversant in the best Authors, as
Sir Philip Sidny, Sir Thomas More, Sir Water Rawleigh, my Lord Verulam, Ben
Johnson, happy as well in his prose as verse, and for his instructions in well
writing excellent; nor is this present age utterly barren: not to mention our
late Romances, which for style are not quite to be rejected, neither are they
void of delight and some elegancies, only intermixed with a kind of grave
majestical, and serious folly.

Now for those words that are of a right stamp, and current among us, that they
may orderly be dinstinguish't by their Terminations, and not be known at
random, merely, and by chance; I shall show exactly how they are formed from
the Original Latin words, and reduce them into certain classes, or ranks, where
note that the Characteristick of a word always consists in the end, or
termination.

First, Our Adjectives are formed from the Latins, either by casting away the
Final us, as from Promptus Prompt, from Justus Just, or changing us into ed, as
Infatuatus, Infatuated, or into ous, as Obvius Obvious, sometimes into an, as
Plebeius, Plebeian, or by changing ilis into i will, as from Agilis comes Agile,
from facilis facile, ax into acious, as efficax efficacious, bilis into ble, as
tractabilis tractable, Docibilis Docible; alis into al, as Orientalis Oriental;
ans, or ens, into ant, or ent, as constans constant, eloquens eloquent, or into
our as inferior inferior, rius into ry, as contrarius contrary, Transitorius
Transitory.

Secondly, Noun substantives derived from adjectives, participles, verbs; or
otherwise; of which those that in Latin end in tas, with us end in tie, or ty,
as Imbecillitas, Imbecility, Probabilitas, Probability, antia into ance, or
ancy, as substantia substance, reluctantia reluctance, entia into ence, or
ency, as confidentia confidence, eminentia eminency, ura into ure, as
commissura commissure; udo into ude, as magnitudo magnitude, or into our, as
Author Author, words ending in tio, of which there are a great number, have n
added at the end, as separatio separation, repletio repletion, instructio
instruction, ambitio ambition, sometimes us, or um, is taken away from the
latter end, as Conventus a Convent, Argumentum an Argument, Articulus an
Article, Monstrum a Monster; to one, or other of these terminations, almost all
Nouns whatsoever be reduced.

Thirdly, For our Verbes, some there be that may most aptly, and with best ease
be formed from the indicative mood, present tence of the active voice, as from
Informo to Inform, and from contendo to contend, from praescribo to prescribe,
from comtemno to contemn, from alludo to allude: Some fall more kindly from
the infinitive mood, as from convincere to convince, from reducere to reduce,
because of the melting of the c. but there are other Verbs, such as from
Colligere Collect, from instruere instruct, from consulere consult, from
invenire invent, which cannot, without much constraint, be deduced either from
the Indicative, or Infinitive mood, but seem much more probably, by their near
resemblance, to be formable from the participle passive, as Collectus,
Instructus, Consultus, Inventus. In like manner may all those Verbs that come
from the first conjugation of the Latins (whereof a great multitude are of late
years grown in use) be formed, as to coacervate, to consummate, to aggravate,
etc. from Coacervatus, Consummatus, Aggravatus, rather then from the
Infinitive, coacervare, consummare, aggravare, for as much as the final t seems
to be the Characteristick letter; there are also sundry other Verbes that
appear to have been most anciently received, and most inured to our language,
which, belike, were had from the Latins at the second hand, we taking them from
the French, as they from the Lat. as chiefly those that end in y or ie: for
example, to signify, to glorify, to mollify, which we borrow from the
French, signifier, glorifier, mollifier, and they from the Latin, significare,
glorificare, mollificare; besides, those both Verbes, and Nouns which we borrow
from the French merely, as to refresh, to discourage, to discharge, to furnish,
to garnish, to refrain, despite, distress, hostage, menace, etc.

Fourthly, Concerning our Adverbs, there needs no more to be said but this,
that whereas in Latin they most commonly end in e, or er, we retain our old
termination ly, as for successive, we use successively, for diligenter,
diligently, these must be understood to be such only as are derived from Nown
Adjectives, for with the ordinary Adverbs of time, place, etc. our tongue
meddles not. As for those in tus, as divinitus, and in im, as confertim,
viritim, etc. we cannot express them by one word, except partim, i. partly.

Fifthly, and lastly, there are a sort of words and expressions, which we take
from the Latins, whole and entire without any diminution, or change, either in
the same nature as Cicero, and some of the Latin writers do from the Greeks (as
namely when they had not a significant word of their own, wherewith handsomely
to express what they intended) or else when a word falls not naturally into
our termination; as in the words elogium, and encomium: for the first indeed we
say indifferently, either an elogium, or an elogie, but with encomium we do not
yet make so bold as to say an encomie, and to render it in English would be too
tedious a circumloqution, As to say, a speech made in praise of an other man,
and therefore it is better to use the very word encomium; so Privado in
Spanish, and Inamorato in Italian, retain their own terminations with a better
grace then any change could bring them, Privad or Inamorat, not sounding so
agreeably to the ear; also by a certain odd, and strange construction we
oftentimes turn a Latin Verb, and sometimes a sentence into an English Noun;
especially with the help of an Article, as to give a been discessit, to sing
Lachrymae, such a one was charged with a non est inventus, and many more of
this nature, very acceptable to such as delight to have their writings and
discourses larded with old ends of Latin; this manner of expression comes
somewhat near that Grammar rule, where a whole clause comes before, or follows
a Verb, and many times denotes the beginning of some public form of words, of
this sort are the Latin names of diverse Writs, consisting of a tedious
sentence, which put me in mind of the Spaniard, whose long name made him to be
taken for a great company of men together.

I shall conclude this discourse of our Latin-derived words, with the manner of
their composition, as I did before, in my mention of the Greek words, and this
I do that the Reader may not be puzzled at the missing of every compound word,
so long as he knows of what words they are compounded; it is therefore to be
noted that they differ not in their composition from the Original Latin words;
being always joined with one of these following prepositions a, or ab, from,
or away, as Version being a turning, Aversion is a turning from, duction a
leading, abduction a leading away, ad to, wherein d is commonly changed into
the same Letter, that the word to which it joined begins with, as from
plication being compounded with ad, arises application an applying, not
adplication; de from, or of, as detruncation a cutting off, the rest are e, ex,
extra, in, dis, contra, ob, per, sub, supra and ultra. Seldom it is that
according to the manner of the Greeks, a Noun is joined in composition with a
Verb, or one Noun with another, only the word semi is often used, which, in
composition, implies as much as half, as semicircular being in the form of a
half Circle.

This is as much as needs to be said of foreign words, in respect of their
dependence upon our tongue, and their frequent use in speaking and writing; I
might in the next place proceed to as ample an account of the words of Art,
which I count the more curious part of the design, and that which was most
wanting; but in regard that to do this handsomely, would require a particular
discourse of the Arts, and the division of them, and because that a sufficient
account of the book is given elsewhere, I shall pass them over briefly.

The words which we use in most Arts, are taken from one, or other of those
languages above mentioned; in those which are commonly called the liberal Arts,
we borrow a very considerable number from the Greek; in Rhetoric all the
Tropes and Figures, as Synecdoche, Ironie, Metonymie, in Logic, Enthymeme,
Sorites, and the word Logic it self; in Physic Eupepsie, Dyscrasie, and the
names of most diseases; in Astronomy, Antipodes, Periscians, and the word
Astronomy it self, and so in diverse other Arts. In Astrology many from the
Arabicks, as the names of the most conspicuous Stars in each constellation,
viz. Aldebaran, Alnath, and some in Astronomy, as Nadir, Almicantarats. In
sundry of the Mathematical Arts, and the politer sort of Mechanics, we have
many words from the French and Italians, as in Architecture, and Fortification,
Pilaster, Foliage, Cupulo, Parapet, etc. all our Terms of Heraldry, we have
chiefly from the French, as Couchant, Saliant, Engrailled; and as also in
Jewelling, Inlaying, Painting, as Carrat, Naif, Boscage, Affinage, Marquetry,
etc. but for the Handycrafts, and several of those, which are called Arts
Serviles, they have their Terms peculiar only to themselves, etc. such as are
known to few but the several Professors, as the names of Tools and
Instruments, belonging to all kind of Manufactures, of which to the attaining
but of one tent^ part, the search of an age would scarce suffice, but very many
of the chiefest are to be found in this book. Of this nature also are the Terms
used by Seaman; as Abast, Afmost, Larboard, to spring a Leak; by Hunters and
Forresters; as Lappise, Foreloin, Bloudyhand, Dogdraw, etc. of both which last,
there are likewise not a few.

The last consideration of words is our proper names, which have hitherto been
wanting in English, and under these are comprehended both Mythology, History,
and Geography, to which may be added the explication of Hebrew, and Saxon names.

As for Orthography, it will not be requisite to say any more of it, then may
conduce to the Readers direction in the finding out of words, which is that we
many times use a single e, where the Latins use an oe, or an ae, as preparation
for praeparation, Amebean for Amoebaean; but if the ae, or oe be observed, it
is not amiss; some use either indifferently: in the same manner i is often used
for y, as Limphatick for Lymphatick, o for u, as secondine for secundine.

Thus I have, in as brief a Method as I could devise, run through the whole
Economy of our foreign words, and have ranged them all into their several
orders and distinctions; so that there is scarce any word, but may be reduced
to one, or other of them, for I thought it in vain to publish to the world a
Dictionary of hard Terms, if I did not withal lead men the way to the right
use of it, that they might inform themselves distinctly, and not sit down
contented with a confused notion of things. In this work, which, for the
generality of it, must stand the bront of many a curious inquisition; both for
the present, and future ages, I regard not my own fame equal to the renown and
glory of the Nation, which cannot but be much advanced by such like endeavors,
and as I am not conscious to my self to have been wanting in industry; so I
shall be ready without any difficulty to acknowledge what ever oversight I may
be fairly convinced of; Provided, I may escape such censures, as have any thing
of the Pedant in them; nor shall I think it enough to have come off fairly
here, without suddenly attempting other things of equal concernment with this
present design, which I commend to the judgment of the learned, the ingenuity
of those that are inclined to learning, and the fortune of that intertainment,
which the World shall think fit to give it.

Edward Phillips.

A Brief and Familar ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
LEarned and Courteous Reader, continual experience confirms that as Science
is first derived to us by notions, so it is made known to us by words: without
our right knowledge of the later it is impossible for us but that in our
discourse, writing, or reading, we must either be gravelled, or strangly to
seek; and though the knowledge of a precedent sentence in the turning over of
an Author cannot be denied sometimes to be a more then ordinary help: yet
without our more particular ingenuity, in respect of the various acceptance of
words, there will be required a recourse to the Dictionary, as we cannot
otherwise be advised or satisfied. Hence it has proceeded a M^xim from the
Learned, That he that is ignorant of words, shall never have his mind rightly
instated to judge of things; so, true it is, That every man's judgment for the
choosing of words ought like a finger in the Margent of a Book to point for the
wisest election, more especially where Etymologies are not added, and
Historical observations on antiquitated words are wanting.

Discreet Reader, not to insist on many particulars, I have endeavored
throughout this Work to be so far thy assistant, as that what others have
omitted in all their former undertakings I have inserted, A large Poetical, as
also a Geographicall Dictionary, the later not only for the most parts of the
World, but also diligently reflecting and giving useful descriptions of the
Antiquities of Cities, Towns, and other eminent Places of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, so that for a small expense Strangers as well as our own
Countrymen may travel in this Dictionary. To include all words, especially
those that relate to the Mechanics, is an impossible task.

Indeed as I have endeavored to wave obsolete terms which some make it their
business to pick up at any rate, so I hope I have not been wanting in useful
words, but have so completed this Volume, that he that has but a competent
knowledge of the Greek and Latin, the English will quickly surrender it self
to his interpretation. Some Critticks perhaps will expect the names of Authors
in the traverse of this Work to be often set down as single testimonies for
the fantasticalnesse of their own words; such an undertaking I look upon as no
less needless, then abusive and ridiculous.

Courteous Reader, I shall not trifle with such niceties and impertinencies as
one of our late Writers has done, taking notice of hard words promiscuously as
they are scattered in English Books. To use his own words. In the Turkish
History I met with Janissaries, Bashaes, Seraglios; in the French, in the
Spanish, in the Roman, Histories, in which he likewise instances particulars.
and so in other Subjects runs on to what purpose I know not, wasting so much
of his Readers time and patience, when he knows those words to be in his
Alphabet, which if persons are so learned as to find out A, B, C, they may
without his anticipating easily inform themselves of.

To pass by such vanities, the Saxon words, as in reference to our Laws,
cannot be accounted so obsolete as some would have them. For my own part, I
have made it my business with my greatest care and diligence to consult with
ancient Manuscripts; nor have I wanted in these scrutinizings the assistance of
Grand Persons. As touching some of our late Modern Authorizers of words. The
Vicount of St. Albans, Sir Kenelme Digby, Mr. Seldom, Dr. Brown, and others,
whatsoever Terms we have received from them, the Learned do acknowledge them
to be good Bullion stamped and well minted, so that as they have past the
censure of the present, they will command the test and honor of future Ages;
and if we do but seriously consider how our Language is inricht from foreign
words, brought home to our doors, from the Greek, Latin, French Orators and
Poets, even from such a distance, we cannot but have more enlarged and proper
respects to our own Native Laurels; it is our happiness that being a terror to
other nations, we are now free from invaders that formerly altered our Language,
otherwise our clothes should not be more varied then our Speech, as the tyranny
of Strangers if it were possible would apparel our very thoughts. Certainly it
is a higher prerogative for our Nations to have these foreign Languages as it
were only in the Landscape, that though we honor the smoothness of the
French, the neatness of the Italian, the gravity of the Spaniard, yet still we
remain so happy as to be our own Dictionary.

Not to dwell longer on this discourse, it is the expression of Mr. H. B. in
his endeavors tending this way, That a Dictionary for the English Tongue,
would require an Encyclopedie of knowledge, and the concurrence of many Learned
heads. Such an Encyclopedy I present thee Reader with from the Muses, as it was
delivered me from the forked top of their Parnassus; for I shall ever
acknowledge such peculiar aides as I received from several Learned Persons,
otherwise I can faithfully assert for the building up of this Volume, next to
the use of grand Dictionaries, I have only been beholding to the imperfect
remains of a Gentleman who long since begun this Work: First his sickness
impeding, and then impartial death cutting him short of finishing his Design,
the best Scholars that then perused his Labors, did with one voice render him
this honor; That his Collections were choice, That he had taken up nothing but
what was Authentic, and that the Learned themselves, in some respects, might
be obliged to him for his Studies.

To conclude, Courteous Reader, this Volume which the so many years industry of
my self and others has brought to such a perfection, is for thine, and the
general good, now at last, made public; I wish thee all happiness in thy
necessary search and use of it. Farewell.

COurteous Reader, faults are usual in the printing of General Tracts, but in
Dictionaries and Works of this kind, I am truly sensible that, as they will
seem more strange to thee, so they reflect more on the Authors credit; to
purchase thy more favorable construction, I have collected an Alphabetical
Index of the Capital Errata, which is placed at the end of the Book.

THE NEW WORLD Of English Words. Or, a General Dictionary.
Containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of
the Proper significations of hard English words, throughout the Arts and
Sciences, Liberal; and Mechanic, as also all other subjects, that are useful,
or appertain to the Language of our Nation.
A. A.
AAron, the son of Amram, and brother of Moses, he was the first High Priest of
the Jews, being chosen to that dignity by the budding of his Rod, the word
signifies in Hebr. a Teacher, or Mountain of fortitude. Aaron, a great Emperor
of the Saracens, who leading into Asia an Army of 300000. men, compelled
Nicephorus the Greek Emperor, to make peace with him, on Ignominions, and
dishonorable terms.
A. B.
Aba, a Tyrant of Hungaria, who being slain by his own subjects, and buried in
the next Church, not long after was dug out of the earth again, where being
found with his winding sheet, and other clothes uncorrupted, and unchanged,
and all his wounds cured, he was honored with a nobler burial, and his bones
translated to a Monastery, built by himself, and there interred. Abaction,
(Latin) a driving, or forcing away. Abaddon, an Hebrew word signifying a
destroyer, and used in the New Testament for the Devil. Abae, a Town of Phocis,
a Province in Greece, which was not destroyed by Philip of Macedon, because the
people were known never to have committed sacrilege. Abaea, a Town in the Bay
of Messena, wherein was the most ancient Oracle of Apollo, burnt at length by
the Army of Xerxes. Abagas Can, King of the Tartars, he, having recovered the
Dominion of the Turks, and taken Parvana Governor of Turcia, because he
betrayed it to the Sultan of Egypt, cut him in pieces, boiled him among his
other viands, and eat him. Abalus, an Isle in the German Ocean, in which it is
reported, that there are Hills from which does drop great store of Amber. To
Abandon, (Ital.) to forsake, also to resign one's self up wholly to any
prevailing passion. Abannition, (Lat.) a punishment inflicted by the Greeks
upon the committers of Manslaughter, namely the banishing them for a
twelve-moneths space. Abantia^, the Isle of (...) near Boeotia in the
Mediterranean Sea, so called from the Abantes, a people which coming out of
Thrace, inhabited there. Abarimon, a Country in Scythi^, hear the Mountain
Aemaus, the people are very salvage, and although their feet are ^everted, or
turned backward, yet they are exceeding swift. Abarstick, (old word)
insatiable. Abas, the son of Metanira, whom Ceres turned into a Lizard, because
he laughed at those divine rites, which his Mother instituted to her worship;
also the twelf King of the Argives, being the son of Lynceus by his wife
Hypermnestra, he was the Father of Proetus and Acrisius, and Grandfather of
Perseus, that freed Andromeda. To Abase (Ital.) to bring low. Abast (a term in
Navigation) when any thing is done, or placed toward the stern, in respect of
any that are toward the ^tem. To Abate, to make less, or diminish. Abatement,
a term in Heraldry, being an accidental mark annexed to Coat Armor, denoting a
stain in the bearer. Abatos, an Island in Egypt, in the Marshes of Memphis,
where King Osiris was buried. Abawed, (old word) daunted, ashamed. Abbae, a
word used in holy Scripture, and signifies in the Syriack tongue, Father.
Abbington, see Abington. To Abbord (Italian) to approach near the shore, also
to grapple with a ship. Abbot, a spiritual Governor over a religious house of
Monks. To Abbreviate (Lat.) to abridge, to make short. Abdals, a kind of
religious people among the Persians, who make profession of poverty, and lodge
in Churches, they derive their name from Abdala, father of Mahomet.
Abdalmatalis, the Grandfather of Mahomet, a Man of so rare a beauty, and
perfect composure, that he won the admiration and love of all the women that
saw him. Abdelmonus, a King of Africa, whose Father was a Potter; to whom,
while he was a young man, Aventumerth, a famous Astronomer, foretold that he
should obtain the Kingdom, and afterward assisted him in the compassing of the
design. Abdera, a Town of Thrace, where Democritus was born, the people whereof
were counted a foolish people. Abdevenam, the head of the twelf Mansion, a term
in Astrology. To Abdicate, (Lat.) to renounce, or refuse. Abdolonymus, a
certain Gardener of Sydon, by a long descent continuing of the blood Royal,
whom Alexander the Great, after he had taken that City, caused to be
proclaimed King thereof. Abdomen, in Anatomy, signifies all that part of the
belly, that contains the natural bowels, being composed of a skin, fat, eight
muscles, and the peritonaeum. Abducted, (Lat.) led away. Abecedary. belonging
to the A. B. C. To Abedge, (old word) to abide. Abel, the name of one of Adams
sons, and signifies in Hebrew vanity, also the name of a place, and signifies
in Hebrew mourning. Abent, (old word) a steep place, or hanging Hill. *
Abequitation, (Lat.) a riding away. Aberconwey, q. the mouth of Conwey, a Town
in Caernarvonshire, built upon the mouth of the River Conwey, by Edward the
first, out of the ruins of an old Town, called Caerhaen, i. ancient City, in
Latin Conovium. Aberfraw, a Town in the Isle of Anglesey, anciently a very
famous place, and the Royal seat of the Kings of Guineth, or North wales.
Abergevenny, or Abergenny, so called, because it is situate at the very meeting
of the Rivers Vsk, and Gebenny, or Gobanny, it is called in Latin Gobanium, and
is fortified with a very strong Castle, which has been the seat of many great
Lords and Earls. Aberration, (Lat.) a going astray. Abessed, (old word) cast
down, humbled. Abetting, (old word) a setting on, or encouraging. * To
Abgregate, (Lat.) to lead out of the flock. Abhorrency, (Latin) a loathing, or
hating. Abidst, (old word) suffered. Abia, the daughter of Hercules, and Nurse
to Hyllus, the son of Hercules by Deianira, she lived in a City called Ira,
which afterward she named by her own name, and built a Temple in it. Abject,
(Lat.) vile, or base. Abii, a people in Scythia, who live without any house,
and provide for nothing: Homer calls them the most just people. Abject,
(Lat.) vile, or base. Abigail, a Woman's name in the Old Testament, and
signifies in Hebrew a fathers joy. Ability, (Lat.) power, strength. Abington,
or Abbendon, a pleasant Town situate upon the River Isis in Bark-shire, and so
called as some say from one Abben, and Irish Heremite, or rather from an Abbay,
built here by Cissa, King of the West Saxons, whereas in old time it had been
called Sheovesham. Abintestate, (Lat.) without a will. Abit, (old word)
dwells. To Abjudicate, (Latin) to give away by judgment. To Abjure, (Lat.)
to forswear, also in Common Law it is to forsake the Realm for ever, when one
has committed felony, or to fly to the Church, or Sanctuary, or place
privileged for that purpose. Ablacted, (Lat.) weaned. Ablectick, (Lat.)
adorned, or garnished for sale, as ablectae aedes, Plant. Ablegation, (Lat.) a
sending away. Ablepsie, (Greek) blindness of the mind. Abligurie, (Lat.)
spending in belly cheer. Ablocated, (Latin) let out to hire. Ablution, (Latin)
washing away. Abnegation, (Latin) a stiff denying. Abnodation, (Latin) untying
of knots, also pruning of Trees. Abode, (Latin) a place of habitation.
Aboeocrites, a Captain of the Boeotians, who with a thousand of his men, was
slain near Chaeronea, in a fight against the Aetolians. Abogen, (Saxon) bowed.
Abolition, (Latin) an abrogating, or utterly destroying. Abomination, (Latin)
an abhorring, or detesting. To Abone (Ital.) to make ripe. Aboard, (a Term in
Navigation) within the ship. Aborigines, a people brought into Italy by
Chamexenus the Egyptian Saturn, and thought to have been the most ancient
people of Italy. Abortion, (Latin) the birth of a Child before its time.
Abradacarba, a spell in Cornelius Agrippa against Agnes. Abraiamins, a kind of
Enchanters among the Indians. To Abrase (Latin) to shave, or pare away.
Abravanus, a River in Galloway in Scotland, now called Rian. Abricot, (French)
a certain sort of plum, requiring much of the Sun's warmth to ripen it. To
Abridge, (French) to make short, to abreviate. Abrodiaetical, (Greek) feeding
deliciciously. Abrogation, (Latin) an abolishing. Abrotonum, (Greek) the name
of an Athenian woman, the mother of Themistocles, also the herb Southernwood.
Abrupt, (Latin) suddenly breaking off. Absalom, the son of David, an Hebrew
word signifying the father of peace. Abscession, (Latin) a going away.
Abscission, (Latin) a cutting away. Absconsion, (Latin) a hiding out of the
way. Absis, (a Term in Astronomy) is, when the Planets moving to their highest,
or their lowest places are at a stay. The high Absis is called the Apogaeum,
the low Absis the Perigaeum. Absolute, (Latin) perfect. Absolution, (Latin) a
pardoning. Absonant, (Latin) disagreeing, sounding from the purpose. To Absorb
(Latin) to sup up all. Absoris, a Town built by the Colchians, when they were
sent with Absyrtus in pursuit of Medea. Abstemious, (Latin) temperate, sober.
Abstention, (Latin) the keeping back of an Heir from the possession of his
land, a Term in law. Abstersive, (Latin) cleansing. Abstinence, (Latin)
temperance. Abstorted, (Latin) wrested by force. Abstract, (Latin) a small
book, or writing, taken out of a greater. To Abstrude, (Latin) to thrust away.
Abstruse, (Latin) dark, obscure. Absurd, (Lat.) foolish. To Abvolate, (Latin)
to fly away. Abus, the name of a great and famous River in Yorkshire, commonly
called Humber, whence Northumberland took its name. Abyss, (Greek) a
bottomless pit. Abyssini, a people in Aethiopia, in the subjection of Prester
John, who is called in the Ethiopian language Negasch Chauvarianni, i. e.
Apostolic Emperor, and is accounted one of the Chief Monarchs of the World.
A. C.
Acacalis, a Nymph by whom Apollo had two sons, Philarides and Philander.
Academia, a Woody place, about a mile from Athens, built by Academus, where
Plato was born and taught Philosophy, whence the word Academy is taken for any
public Shool, or University. Acadinus, a Fountain in Sicily, in which they
used to try the truth of an Oath, by writing the words of him that swore upon a
Table of wood, and if the wood did swim, they took the words for truth, but if
it sunk, they took it to be a false Oath. Acarnar, the bright Star of
Eridanus, vide Eridanus. Acastus, the son of Peleus, King of Thessaly, a famous
Hunter with Bow and Arrows, he married Hippolita, who loving Pelius, because he
yielded not to her love, accused him to her husband, for having offered
violence to her, wherefore Acastus threw him to be devoured of wild beasts,
but Mercury coming in the interim, freed Pelius with Vulcans sword, who
returning slew Acastus and Hippolita. Acatalepsie, (Greek) incomprehensibility,
impossibility to be comprehended. To Accelerate, (latin) to hasten. Accent,
(latin) due sound over any word, or letter. Acceptance, (latin) acceptance.
Acceptilation, (latin) a verbal acquittance between the Debtour and the
Creditour. Accessory, (latin) a Term in Common Law, signifying guilty of a
fellonious Act, not actually, but by participation, as by advice, concealment,
or the like. Accius Tullius, Prince of the Volsci, who with the help of
Coriolanus made War with the Romans. Accidental, (latin) happening by chance.
Acclamation, (latin) an applause, a crying out for joy. Acclivity, (latin) a
stopping place, a steep descent. Acco, an old woman, who beholding her face in
a glass, and seeing her beauty decayed, fell mad. Accollade (French) a
clipping about the neck, which was formerly the way of dubbing Knights. To
Accommodate, (latin) to fit, or to lend. To Accomplish, (French) to fulfill.
Accomptable, (French) liable to give an account. Accordable, (latin) easy to
be agreed on. Accort, (French) heedy, wary. To Accost, (French) to approach, to
draw near. Accoutred, (French) dress't, attired. To Accoy, (old word) to
assuage. Accretion, (latin) a growing, or sticking unto. To Accrue, (French) to
increase, to be added unto. To Accumb, (latin) to sit down at a Table.
Accumulation, (latin) a heaping together. Accurately, (latin) exactly.
Accusation, (latin) an accusing, or blaming. To Accustom, (Ital.) to be wont,
to use. Ace, that point in the dice where one only is expressed, ammez ace,
quasi ambos as, both an ace, or two aces. Acephalik, (Greek) having no head, or
beginning. Acephali^ts, (Greek) a sort of Heretics, whose first founder is
unknown. Acerbity, (latin) sharpness, or sournesse. Acerote, course brown
bread. Acersecomick, (Greek) one whose hair is never cut. To Acervate, (latin)
to heap up. Acetars, (latin) sallets of small herbs. Acetosity, (latin)
sharpness, or sournesse in taste. Achapt, (French) a law Term used in
contracts, or bargains, and signifies to buy. Achates, a stone of diverse
colors, resembling a lions skin. Achelous, the son of Oceanus and Terra, he
^ought a single Combat with Hercules for Deianira, he first changed himself
into a Serpent, then into a Bull, one of whose Horns Hercules cut, and
dedicated it to plenty the Companion of Fortune, but afterward Achetous giving
him Amalthea's Horn received his own again, also the name of a River in Epirus
rising from the Mountain Pindus, and is said to be the first River that broke
out, after the general Deluge. Acheron, the son of Ceres, without a father,
whom, when she had brought forth in a dark cave in Sicily, not daring to behold
the light he was sent to Tartarus, and there turned into a River over which the
Souls of men are carried, it is commonly taken for Hell. To Achieu, (French) to
perform. Achilles, the son of Peleus and Thesis, whom his mother while he was
an infant, dipped all over in the river Styx, so that he became invulnerable all
over, save in that part of his heel, by which she held him, he was put to the
Centaur Chiron, to be instructed in warlike affairs and music; and being grown
to age, his Mother hearing he should die in the Trojan wars put him into Woman's
apparel and hid him among the Daughters of Lycomede where he ravished Deidamia,
and begot Pyrrhus, being seduced from thence by the craft of Ulysses, he fought
against the Trojans, slew Hector, and performed many other great exploits in
that war. Acid, (Latin) sharp, biting. Acis, the son of Faunus, and the Nymph
Timethis, the comliest of all the Sicilian Shepherds, whom ^ Polypheme loved
but afterward killed him despising his love. To Ackele (old word) to cool.
Acolastick, (Greek) Riotous. Acolyte, (Greek) one that is forbidden to say
Divine service, yet may bring light, etc. Acontius, a young man of the Island of
Caea, who going to Delos to the Feast of Diana fell in love with Cydippe, but
not being able to come at her, writ his mind upon an Apple and threw it to her.
Aconite, a poisonous herb called Sibbardsbane. Acquists, (French) things
purchased or obtained. To Acquiesce, to rest or rely upon. Acquisition, (Latin)
a purchasing or obtaining. Acre such a quantity of Land as may be plowed in a
day by one yoke of Oxen. Acrilogie (Greek) bitter speaking. Acrimony, (Latin)
bitterness eagerness. Acrisius, the son of Abas King of Argos, and father of
Danae Jove's Paramour; he, having heard that he was to be killed by the hand of
him that should be born of her, shut her up in a brazen Towr, but Jupiter
descending in a shower of gold through the lights lay with her and begat
Perseus, who afterward cut off the Gorgons head, and coming with it to Arg^s
changed Acrisius into a stone. Acroamatick, (Greek) one that hearkens
attentively to any thing, also harmonious. Achronick, from the Greek (...) is
when a Star sets with the Sun and rises at Sun setting. Acronychal, (Greek) a
term used in Astronomy, the Achronycal rising of a Star is, when it rises at
the time of the Sunsetting. Acrostick, (Greek) a certain number of verses
which begin with the Letters of any ones name. Actifs, an order of Friars, that
feed on Roots, and wear tawny habits. Action, (Latin) a deed, also the right of
reckoning that which is due and owing to a man. Actisanes, a King of the
Aethiopians who beat Amasis tyrannizing over the Egyptians and deposing him,
reigned over them himself very justly, and made many severe Law's for the
governing of the Kingdom. Act, (Latin) a deed, also a Decree of Parliament or
Inferior Court. Actaeon, the son of Aristeus and A^tonoe, who going a hunting
and coming by chance to see Diana, as she was bathing her self in a Fountain,
was changed into a Heart, and torn in pieces by his own Dogg's whence.
Actaeoned, is often taken for hornified. Activity, (Latin) nimbleness,
stirringness, agility. Actium, a promontory of Epirus where Augustus having
overthrown Antonie and Cleopatra, built a City and called it Nicopolis. Actius
Naevius, a South-sayer, who in the presence of Tarquin cut a Whet-stone with a
Penknife. Acton Burnel, a Castle in Shropshire, famous for having had a Court
of Parliament called there in the time of Edward the First, it was so called as
belonging anciently to the Burnels, a family heretofore of great name and
antiquity. Actor, (Lat.) doer of any thing, also a Stage Player. Actual, (Lat.)
that which is dispatched by act and deed. Aculeate, (Lat.) carrying a sting. To
Acuminate (Lat.) to sharpen. Acupictor (Lat.) a worker of needle work. Acute,
(lat.) sharp-pointed also, sharp-witted. An Acute disease the Physicians call
that which by reason of its vehemence immediately grows to a hight and so
presently decays or kills: also an Acute-angle is when two lines do enclose less
than a square, thereby becoming more sharp. Acyrological, (Greek) speaking
improperly.
A D
Adacted (Lat.) driven by force. Adage, (Lat.) a vulgar saying. Adam, the name
of the first man signifying in (Heb.) red earth. Adjudication, (Lat.) an
adjudging or determining. Adamant, (Lat.) a precious stone, otherwise called a
Diamond. Adamantine, hard, inflexible, made of Adamant. To Adamate (Lat.) to
love tenderly. Adamites, a Sect of Heretics whose profession was to come into
their Synagogue stark naked both Men and Women. It was first instituted in
Bohemia about two hundred years ago. Adashed, (old word) ashamed. Adawed, (old
word) awaked. To Adcorporate (Lat.) to join body to body. To Addecimate, (Lat.)
to take Tithes. Adderbourn, a River in Wiltshire anciently called Nadder. An
Addice, a Coopers axe. To Addict, (Lat.) to give our self to any thing.
Additament, (Lat.) a Supply, a thing added. Addomestique, (French) made tame or
familiar. To Addoulez (French) to sweeten mollify or assuage. Address (French)
a dextrous carriage in the manageing of any business, also an application to
any person, Artamenes. Adelantado, (Spanish) The Deputy of a Province, for any
King or General. Adeling, an old Saxon word signifying a Kings son. Adelrad, or
Ethelred, (Sax.) Noble Advice, a proper name. Ademption, (Lat.) a taking away.
To Adent, (old word) to fasten or join. Adeption, (Lat.) a getting or
obtaining. To Adequate, (Latin) to make equal, to level. Ades, King of the
Molossians whose daughter Cara was ravished by Pirithous. To Adhere, (Lat.) to
stick fast, or cleave unto any thing. Adjacent, (Lat.) lying near unto,
bordering upon. Adiaphorie, (Greek) indifferent. To Adjourn (French) to warn
one to appear at the day appointed, also to put off a day. A word used in
Common Law. Adjument (Lat.) assistance. Adjunct, (Latin) a quality adhering to
any thing, as heat to fire, greenness to grass, etc. a term used in logic. To
Adjure, (Latin) to swear earnestly, also to put another to his oath. Adjutant,
(Lat.) ayding or assisting to another. To Adjust, (French) to make fit, to
state an account rightly. Adjutory, (Latin) helpful. Adle, (old word) empty,
shallow. Admetus, a King of Thessalie, whose herds Apollo was said to keep nine
years together, he was degraded of Divinity, for killing the Cyclops. To
Administer, (Latin) to dispose, to guide, to do service. Administration (Latin)
a Term in Law, the disposing of a man's goods or estate, that died intestate, or
without any Will. Admirable, (Lat.) full of wonder. An Admiral, (French) a
General at Sea. To Admit, (latin) to allow of. Admonition, (French) a giving
warning. Adnihilation, (latin) a bringing or reducing to nothing. Adolescency,
(latin) the age of youth. Adolph or Hadulph, (Sax.) happy help, a proper name.
Adon, or Adonai, an Hebrew word, signifying, Lord, or God. Adonis, the son of
Cinaras, and (King of Cyprus Myrrha) who hunting in the Italian woods, and
being killed by the tusk of a Boar, was afterward by Venus turned into a
Flowr. Adoption (lat.) the choosing of him, into ones family and inheritance,
who is not a natural son. Adorable (lat.) to be worshipped or adored, also being
attributed to a mortal, it signifies worthy of all honor and respect. Artam.
Adornation, (latin) decking, adorning. Adory, (Greek) ingloriousness, shame.
Adruming, (old word) churlish. Adrastia, the daughter of Jupiter, and Necessity
a sharp punisher of wickedness, otherwise called Nemesis, whom the Egyptian
Priests made to be Arbitress of all human affairs, and placed her above the
Moon. Adrian, a proper name, see Hadrian. Adrian, or Adriatique, Sea, the Sea
that parts Italy from Dalmatia. Advancement, (French) a raising or promoting.
Advantageous, in favor of another, Atramenes. Advectitions, (latin) that which
may be brought from another place. Advent, (latin) an arriving, whence
Advent-Sunday is that Sunday wherein there used to be a preparation in the
Church for the approaching Feast, and all suites in Law were remitted for that
time. Advenale, a Coat of defense, Chaucer. Adventitions, (latin) coming
unexpected or by chance. Adventure, (French) chance, luck. Adverse, (latin)
contrary, opposite, Adversant, Id. To Advertise (latin) to give advice. To
Advesperate, (latin) to wax night. To Advigilate, (latin) to watch diligently.
Adulation, (latin) flattery. Adult, (latin) to come to ones, full ripeess of
age. To Adulterate, (latin) to corrupt. To Adumbrate, (latin) to shadow.
Adumbration, signifies in Heraldrie a clear exemption of the substance of the
charge or thing born, in such sort that there remains nothing thereof to be
discovered, but the bare proportion of the outward lineaments. This is also
called Transparencie. Aduncous or Adunque, (latin) hooked. Advocate, (latin) a
Term in Law, he that defends another man's cause. Advouson, (French)
signifies in Common Law, a right, to present to a benefice. Adust, (latin)
burnt, parch't. Adynamous, (Greek) weak, impotent.
A E
Aeacus, the son of Jupiter by Aegina, he was said to be so just, that, when he
was dead, he was chosen one of the infernal Judges, with Minos and
Rhadamanthus. Aedone, the Wife of Zethus the Brother of Amphion, she slew her
son Itylus in the night thinking him to have been Amaneus the son of Amphion,
but afterward acknowledging her error, she desired to die, and was changed
into a Thistle. Aeeta, the King of Colchos the son of Sol by Persa the daughter
of Oceanus, he begat Medea, Absyrtus, and Calciope, to him Phryxus brought the
golden Fleece, which, with the help of Medea was won from him by Jason and the
Argonaut's and he deposed from his Kingdom. Aega, a Nymph, the Daughter of
Olenus and Nurse of Jupiter. Aegaeon the son of Titan and Terra, who at one
lift threw a hundred Rocks against Jupiter, but being overcome, was bound by
Neptune to a Rock in the Aegaean-Sea. Aegaeum, or the Agaeean-Sea is that Sea
which is vulgarly called the Archipelago. Aegeus, the son of Neptune, King of
Athens, who had by his Wife Aetha the daughter of Pitheus, a son named Theseus,
the greatest Hero of that time, whom he thinking to have been slain when he
returned from Crete threw himself into the Sea, and was by the Athenians made
one of the Sea-Gods. Aegiale, the Wife of Diomed, who by reason of her adultery
with Cyllebarus, was forsaken of her Husband who after the war of Troy went
into Italy. Aegilope, (Greek) a kind of disease in the eye called the lachrymal
fistule. Aegina, the daughter of Aesopus King of Boeotia, whom Juriter enjoyed
by turning himself into fire. Aegipanes, (Greek) certain woody Deities adored
by the Ancients, having feet like Goats. Aegisthus, the son of Thyestes and
Pelopeia his daughter, he slew Atreus by his fathers command, and afterward
killed Agamemnon at a banquet, by the help of his Wife Clytemnestra. Aegle, one
of the daughters of Hesperus, King of Italy, who with her sisters Arethusa and
Hesperethusa possessed most pleasant gardens in Africa, where there were golden
apples, kept by a watchful Dragon whom Hercules, sent by Euristheus, slew, and
took away the Apples. Aegles, the name of a great Wrastler who though he were
born dumb, being once to enter into the combat, and seeing a great deceit in
the lots, he, through a great desire of speaking, spoke distinctly and so
continued while he lived. Aegrimony or Aegritude (lat.) sickness of body or
mind. Aegyptus, the son of Belus, the brother of Danais. He having fifty
daughters, gave them in marriage to his brothers fifty sons, but they having
received instructions from their father Danaus, each one killed their Husband,
the first night of their marriage, except Hypermnestra who saved her Husband
Lynceus, who afterward driving out Danaus, possessed the Kingdom of Argos; also
a famous Country of Lybia, once a great Kingdom, now a Province under the
Turks dominion. Aeneas, the son of Anchises, and Venus, who after much wandering
came to Latium, overcame Turnus, married Lavinia the daughter of Latinus, and
reigned thirty years after his Father-in-law's death. Aeneator, (lat.) a
Trumpeter. Aenigmatical, (Greek) full of Aenigma's i. e. dark speeches or
riddles. Aeolipile, a kind of Instrument called the Hermetical bellows, whereby
it is experimented whether there be a vacuum in nature. Aeolus the son of
Jupiter, and Sergeste who was called the God of the winds. Aepalius, a King who
being restored by Hercules to his Kingdom, adopted Hyllus Hercules his elder
Son into the succession of his Kingdom. Aequanimity, (lat.) equalness of
spirit or temper. Equator, a great circle or line encompassing the Globe
equally distant from the Two poles. Aequilateral, consisting of equal sides.
Aequilibrity, (lat.) an equal poising or weighing. Aequiponderancy, (lat.) the
same as Aequilibrity. Era, a Term in Chronology signifying the beginning of a
great Empire, or some remarkable event, from which people compute the number of
years, as the Jews reckn'd from Abraham's journey out of Chaldea, or from their
deliverance out of Egypt, etc. the ancient Greeks from the first Olympiad, the
Christians from the birth of Christ. Aerial, (lat.) belonging to the air.
Aeromancy, (Greek) a foretelling of things, by some certain sign's in the air.
Aeruginous (lat.) rusty, cancred. Aerumnous, (lat.) full of troubles and
miseries. Aesacus, the son of Priamus, who being in love with a beautiful
Virgin called Hesperia, never left following her in the Woods, but she flying
from him was at length killed by the bite of a Serpent, he impatient of his
loss threw himself from a high Rock into the Sea, where Thetis taking
compassion on him, transformed him into a Dive-dapper. Aesculapius, the son of
Apollo and Coronis, he, being taught by Chiron the art of Physic, restored
Hippolitus the son of Theseus to life, who, because the had refused the
embraces of Phaedra his Mother-in-law, was by her means torn in pieces by wild
Horses, but Jupiter was so incens't at this cure that he slew Aesculapius with
a thunderbolt. Aesica, an ancient City of Cumberland (upon the River Esk) where
the Tribune of the Austures in old time kept watch and ward against the
Northern enemies. Aesia, a River in France now called Oyse. To Aestuate (lat.)
to burn; to rage like the Sea. To Aestivate, (lat.) to keep ones summer in a
place. Aethalis, the son of Mercury to whom it was granted, that he should
sometimes converse among the number of the dead. Aetherial, pertaining to the
sky. Aethiopia, a large Country of Africa, first called Aetheria, afterward
Aethiopia from Aethiops the son of Vulcan. Aethon, the name of one of the
Horses of the Sun, also the name of a man so given to fart, that he could not
abstain in the Capitoline Temple. Aethra, vide Hyades. Aetna, a Hill in
Sicilie, that always casts up flames of fire. Aetolia, a Country in Greece
bordering upon Epirus.
A F
Affability (lat.) courtesy in speech. Affair, (French) a business of
importance. Affectation, (lat.) an overcurious imitation. Affectionate, (lat.)
bearing a good affection to any one. Affe^rours, (a Term in law) signifying
those which are appointed in Court-leets upon Oath, to set Fines upon the heads
of those that, have committed crimes punishable by virtue of that Court.
Affiance (French) trust, confidence, also a betrothing. Affictious (lat.)
dissembled, counterfeited. Affidavit, (a Term in law:) to make Affidavit, is to
testify a thing upon Oath. Affinage, (French) a refining of metals. Affinity,
(lat.) likeness, also kindred by marriage. Affirmation (lat.) an absolute
maintaining or affirming. To Affix (lat.) to fasten unto. Affluence (lat.)
plenty. Afflux, a flowing upon or a flowing together. To Afforrest (a Term in
law) to lay waste a piece of ground and turn it into forest. Affray, (French)
fear, also tumult or assault. Affrication, (lat.) a rubbing against any thing.
Affront (French) wrong, or abuse. Affrontednesse, impudence, shamelessness.
Afgodnesse, (Sax.) impiety, ungodliness. Africa, the third part of the world,
so called from Afer, who peopled it with an army, it being before called Libya.
A. G.
AGa, a great Officer among the Turks, called the Captain of the Janissaries.
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus and Europa, King of Argos and Mycenae, he was
chosen General of the Greeks in the Trojan expedition, and after he came home,
slain by Aegystus at a banquet, vide Aegysthus. Agamist, (Gr.) a despiser of
marriage. Aganippe, a Fountain in Boeotia, sacred to Apollo, and the Muses.
Agari^, a Samarian root, that helps concoction, also a soft excrescence of the
Larix, or larch tree. Aghast, (old word) dismayed with fear. Agate, a precious
stone formerly found in Ganges, a River of Lycia. Agatha, a Woman's name,
signifying in Greek good. Agathonian, lascivious, so called from Agatho, a
minstrel full of ribaldry. Agathocles, a Tyrant of Sicily, whose father was a
Potter, he first gave himself to robbing, but afterward by his stoutnesse and
eloquence, he was advanced to the Kingdom, he made war with the Carthaginians,
but seeking to enlarge his Dominions, he was betrayed, and died for grief.
Agave, the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, she was married to Echion the
Theban. Age, the measure of man's life, from his birth to his death, a man, by
the Common Law, is liable to answer for any misdemeanour, at the fourteenth
year of his age, and to inherit at the 21th. Agelastic, (Greek) one that is
perpetually sad, one that never laugh's. Agemoglans, the Children of
Christians, who while they are young, are seized on by the Turkish Officers to
be made Janissaries, or for some other service of the Grand Signior, the word in
the Turkish language signifies untaught. Agent, (Lat.) a Factor, or dealer for
an other man. Agesilaus, a King of the Lacedaemonians, who overthrew
Tissap^ernes the Persian General, at the River Pactolus, and the Athenians and
Boeotians at Coronea; also a stout Athenian, and brother of Themistocles; he
being judged to be sacrificed at the Altar of the Sun, for killing Mardonius,
held his hand a good while in the fire without changing his countenance, and
affirmed that all the Athenians were such as himself, whereupon he was set
free. To Aggerate, (lat.) to heap up. To Agglomerate, (lat.) to roll up
together. To Agglutinate, (lat.) to glue together. To Aggrandize, to make
great, also to cry up, or augment the fame of any action. To Aggravate, (lat.)
the same, also to burden, also to make the worst of a thing in speaking of it.
To Aggregate, (lat.) to assemble together. Aggressour, (lat.) an assailer of
another, a beginner of a business. Agility, (lat.) nimblenesse. An Agiler, a
marker of men Chaucer. Agilt, (old word) committed. Aginatour, (lat.) a
retailer of small wares from Agina, that whereon the beam of a pair of Balances
hangs. Agiographer, (Gr.) see Hagrographer. Agipe, (old word) a Coat full of
plaites. Agis, a King of the Lacedaemonians, who made cruel wars with the
Athenians, and was at length killed in Prison by his own Contrymen. Agist,
(a Term in Common Law) signifying to take in, and feed the Cattle of strangers
in the K. Forest, and to gather money due for the same, to the Kings use.
Agitation, (lat.) a frequent motion, also a disturbance and inquietude of
mind. Artamenes. Aglais, one of the Graces. Aglais, the Daughter of Magacles,
she would daily devour ten pound of flesh, half a peck of bread, and four
Gallons of wine at a meal. Aglet, (French) the tag of a point, also a little
plate of metal. Agnail, a sore between the finger, or toe, and the nail.
Agnation, (lat.) kindred, or near relation by the fathers side. Agnes, a woman's
name, signifying in Greek chaste. Agnition, (lat.) an acknowledging. Agnodice,
a Virgin, who putting her self into man's apparel, grew famous in physic by the
instruction of Herophilus. Agnomination, (lat.) a surname, a name wherewith a
man is signalized for any famous act. Agnus Castus, an Herb which preserves
chastity. Agonalia, (latin) feasts, in which there were great wrestlings, and
other exercises of activity. Agony (Greek) anguish of mind. To Agonize,
(Greek) to play the Champion. Agonothert (Greek) a Master of the Revell's.
Agramed (old word) aggrieved. The Agrarian law, a law made by the Romans for
the distribution of lands among the common people. Agreeable, (French) suitable
to a man's Genius, or Inclination. To Agredge, (old word) to aggravate.
Agrestical (lat.) clownish, rude. Agriculture, (lat.) tillage, husbandry.
Agrippa, one that is born with his feet foremost, also the name of several
Kings. Agrise, (old word) afraid, astonished. Agrose, (old word) grieved.
Agroted, (old word) cloyed. To Agryse, (old word) to cause one to quake.
A. J.
Ajax, the son of Telamon, and Hesione daughter of Laomedon, he was one of the
stoutest of all the Greeks that went to the Trojan War, he fought with Hector,
and had a contest with Ulysses, for the arms of Achilles, but Ulysses having
gained them by his eloquence, Ajax run mad, and made a huge slaughter among a
flock of sheep, thinking Ulysses and Atrides to have been among them, also the
name of the son of Oileus King of the Locri, who for vitiating Cassandra in the
Temple of Pallas, was slain with Thunder by the Goddess, whose Priestesse she
was. Aid, (French) help, also a subsidy, or tax. Aidoneus, King of the
Molossi, he sent Theseus to prison, because he, and Pirithous would have taken
away his daughter Proserpina, not far from the River Acheron, which gave
occasion to the fable, to say that he descended into Hell to fetch away
Proserpina, the daughter of Dis. Ailesbury, a Town situate not far from the
River Tame in Buckingamshire, it was won by Cutwulph the Saxon, in the year
572. and has been famous in times past, by being the habitation of St. Edith,
the daughter of Frewald. Ailesford, a Town in Kent, not far from the River
Medway, it was heretofore named in the British tongue Saissenaeg-haibal, from
the great overthrow that was given by Vortimer the Britain, son of Vortigern
to Hengist, and his English Saxons in this place. Aine, besides, one of the
four Elements, it signifies a certain distinction in the Garb and countenance,
between one person and another. Ayry, a nest of Hawks. Akmanchester, i. e. the
City of Sick-folk, a name anciently given by the Saxons, to the City of Bath.
A. L.
Alabandic, a kind of a Rose with whitish leaves. Alabandine, a kind of blue,
and red stone, provoking to bleed. Alabaster, a kind of clear white Marble.
Alacrity, (lat.) cheerfulness. Alahab, (Arab.) the Scorpions heart. Alamae,
(Arab.) the left foot of Andromeda. Alan, a proper name, signifying in
Slavonish a Greyhound, others contract it from Aelian, i. Sun-bright. Alastor,
the name of one of the suns horses. Alata Castra, the City of Edenborough in
Scotland. Alay, (a Term in hunting) when fresh Dogs are sent into the cry.
Alazony, (Greek) vainglory. Alba Julia, the City of Westenbergh in Germany.
Alba, Regalis, a City in Hungary, now called Stolwistenbergh, where the Kings
use to be Anointed, and Crowned. Albania, a Country between Illyricum and
Macedonia, whose chief City is Dyrrachium, now called Durazzo, there is also
another Albania in the East, between Cholcos and Armenia, from whence the
people of the former Albania are said originally to spring; also the Kingdom of
Scotland was in ancient times called Albania. Albanus, a River in Armenia, also
a Lake in Italy, called Lago di Castle Gandolf, also the name of the first
British Martyr from the Lat. Albus, i. e. white. St. Albans, a Town in
Hertfordshire, so called from the British Martyr above mentioned, whereas
formerly it was called Verulam. Albe, a white Garment, which the Priests were
wont to wear. Albeito, (Arab.) the mouth of the Swan. Albert, a Saxon proper
name, signifying all bright. Albion, the ancient name of England, by reason of
the white Rocks upon the Seaside, or from Albion the son of Neptune, or from
Albina, one of Dioclesians 50 daughters. Albugineous, (lat.) belonging to the
white of the eye, or to any other white substance. Albutius, the name of a very
covetous man, who would beat his servants before they had committed a fault,
telling them that perhaps he should not be at leisure, when they had committed
any. Alcaic, verse, a certain kind of verse, so called from Alcaeus the first
Inventor, consisting of two dactyls, and two trochees. Alcakengi, a winter
Cherry. Alcander, a young Lacedemonian, who having put out one of Lycurgus his
eyes, yet being entertained by him as his near servant loved him afterward
with a great deal of respect. Alcathous, the son of Pelops, who being suspected
to have slain his brother Chrysippus fled to Megara, where killing a Lion that
had slain Euripus the son of Megareus, he was by Megareus made his son in law,
and succeeded him in the Kingdom. Alceste, the wife of Adonetus King of
Thessaly, who willingly offered her self up to die for her husband. Alchedi,
(Arab.) a Star in the goat. Alchenit, (Arab.) a Star in the right side of
Perseus. Alchobel, see Reception. Alchocodon, is an Arabian word, and signifies
the giver of years, and is placed that he has most essential dignity in the
place of the Hyleg, and with some aspect does behold that place. Alchorad,
(Arab.) a contrariety of the light of the Planets. Alchimy, (Greek) the art of
dissolving metals, to separate the pure from the impure. Alcippus, vide
Damocrita. A^cithoe, a Theban woman, who was turned into a Bat, for contemning
Bacchus his Org^es. Alcmena, vide Amphytryo. Al^maeon, the son of Amphiaraus
and Eriphite, he killed his mother for having betrayed Amphiaraus, and
afterward run mad; but being cured by Phlegias, he married his daughter
Olphaestbae^, giving her a Bracelet of his mothers, but afterward falling in
love with one of Achetous his daughters, called Callirhoe, he promised her the
Bracelet which he had given his former wife, on condition she would marry him,
but going to fetch it, he was slain by Temon and Axion, Alphesibaeas brothers.
Alconor, one of the 300. Argires, who fought against the Lacedaemonians, only
he, and Chromius being left alive, and all his enemies killed, excepting
Othryades. Alcoran, (Arab.) the book wherein the Turkish religion is delivered,
first written by Mahomet, the Turks great Prophet. Alcyon days, quiet times.
Alcyone, the daughter of Nephtune, the wife of Ceyx, who sailing to the Oracle,
was drowned by the way, and changed into a bird, called a King-fisher. Alduas
d^bis, a River dividing the Helvetians from the Sequani, called in French Leo
doux. Aldborrow, see Isurium. Aldingham, a Town in Lancashire, an ancient
Hereditament belonging to the family of the Haveringtons, or Harringtons, unto
whom it came from the Flemmings by the Cancefelds. Aldebaran, (Arab.) the south
eye of the Bull. Alderanainim, (Arab.) the right shoulder of Cepheus.
Alderanainim, vide Pap. Alectryomancy, (Greek) a certain kind of divination
among the ancients, which was done by a Cock. Alectorius, a precious stone of a
waterish color, found in the maw of an old Capon. Alectryon, a young man, who
kept the door, while Mars was familiar with Venus, but Mars incensed that he
was taken through his negligence, changed him into a Cock. Alegement, (French)
ease, releasment. Aleger, a Liquor made of sour Ale. Alembick, (lat.) a Still.
Alestake, (old word) a Maypole. Alexander, son of Philip, King of Macedon, he
overthrew the Persian Monarchy, took Babylon Susa, and Persepolis, and after he
had extended his Conquests as far as India, he returned to Babylon, and there
died, the word signifies in Greek helper of men. Alexandria, a Famous Port Town
of Egypt. Alexipharmac, (Greek) a Medecin against poison. Alferes, (Spanish)
an Ensign bearer. Alfred, (a Saxon word) signifying all peace. Alfreton, q.
Alfreds Town, a Town in Darbyshire, built by King Alfred, as some think, the
Lords whereof were called Barons de Alfreton, the second of whom built the
Abbay de Bello Capite, or Beauchief. Algareb, (Arab.) the Star in the right
wing of the Crow. Algarfe, (Arab.) the head of the fifteenth mansion. Algate,
(old word) if so be, notwithstanding, altogether. Algates, (old word) ever,
even now, for all that. Algebar, the left foot of Orion. Algebhe, (Arab.) the
head of the tenth mansion. Algenib. (Arab.) the right wing of Pegasus. Algebra,
a Syriac word, signifying the art of figurative numbers, or equation. Algid,
(Lat.) number with cold, chill. Algomeissa, (Arab.) the little Dog. Algon, (Arab.)
the head of Medusa. Algorithme, (a word compounded of Arabic and Spanish,) the
art of reckoning by Ciphers. Algrim, (old word) the same as Algebra. Alguze,
the left foot of Orion, an Arabic word. Alhabar, (Arab.) a Star in the mouth
of the great Dog. Alhibade, a rule on the backside of a Geometrical instrument
to take heights and depths. Alicante, one of the chief Towns of Valentia in
Spain, where there is plenty of Mulbery's, of which they make Alican^ wine.
Alice, (Germ.) a woman's name contracted from Adelize, i. noble. Alienation,
(Lat.) an estranging. Alifed, (Sax word) allowed. Aliment, (Lat.) nourishment.
Alimony, (Lat.) a pension allowed for subsistence, from a husband to his wife,
being parted from him. Alioth, (Arab.) a star in the tail of Helice, or the
Bear. All-a-bone, (old word) a made request. Allaborate, (Lat.) to labor much
about a thing. Allantoides, the tunicle that wraps, and covers the head,
buttocks feet, and more eminent parts of the birth. Allabanny, the same as
Albany, that part of Scotland, called the Highlands, so called either from
Albion, or from the British words, Ellan Ban, i. white Island. Allay, a
mitigation, or asswaging also the tempering of gold, or silver, with a baser
metal to augment the weight of it. Allective, (Lat.) alluring, inciting.
Allegation, (Lat.) a proving, an alleging. Allegory, (Greek) a mysterious
saying, wherein there is couched something that is different from the litteral
sense. Alleluja, (an Hebrew word) signifying, praise ye our Lord, also the name
of an Herb, called Wood Sorrel. An Alley (French) a narrow passage. All-good, a
pot Herb, otherwise called good Henry. All-heal, an Herb, otherwise called
clowns woundwort. Alliance, (French) an association, either by kindred, or by
Covenant. Alliency, (Lat.) an enticing unto. Alligation, (Lat.) a binding unto.
Allington, a Town in Hamtshire, situate upon the River Avon, anciently called
Allaun. Allision, (Latin) a dashing against any thing. Alliteration, (lat.) a
word used in Rhetoric, being a playing upon the same Letter. Allobroges, the
people of Savoy, and Dauphine in France. Allocamel, (Greek) a beast in the
Indies, having the head of a Mule, and the body of a Camel. Allocation, (lat.)
a placing toward. Allocations, the allowances of Officers under a Prince, or
great man. Alloquie, (lat.) a talking unto, or parlying with any one. Allodial,
lands (a Term in law) free lands for which no fines, or services are due.
Allome, a kind of mineral, being a salt sweat of the earth. Allot, to assign
to every one his proper patrimony. Allusion, (lat.) a speaking in reference to
another thing. An Almain, a German, also (a Term in Music) being a kind of
air, which has a slower time then either Corant, or Saraband, also Alma^
Rivets are a certain kind of Armor rivetted with braces of mail. Almanac, (a
German word) signifying as much as Calender, or a Prognostication by observing
the course of the stars. Almaner, (Arab.) the ^ight of a Planet in his
Epicycle. Almantica, (Arab.) see Zodiac. Alma^zor, (Arab.) Defender, it being
the name of diverse Princes, and great men among the Moors. Almicantarats,
(Arab.) a Term in Astronomy, being those lines which pass through the Meridian
parallel with the Horizon. Almner, a Kings, or Princes Officer that looks to the
distribution of Alms, or fragments of meat to the poor. Almond, a certain kind
of Thracian Nut so called. Almugia, (Arab.) the situation of Planets in the
Zodiac, so as to behold each other face to face. Almuten, of a house, is that
Planet, which has most dignities in the sign ascending, or descending from
the Cusp of any house, but Almuton of a figure is that Planet, which in
essential dignities, or accidental is most powerful in the whole Scheme of
Heaven. Alnath, (Astronomick) a star which is to be seen in the Horns of Aries.
Alnewick, a Town in Northumberland, situate upon the River Alne, famous for a
battle between William King of Scots, and the English under Henry the second,
it is fortified with a strong Castle, where Malcolm the third was slain when he
besieged it, it is also called Alanwick and Anwick. Aloes, Sea Housleek,
Bitterwort, an Herb whose juice congeals in a Gum very profitable in Physic,
also a Wood called Lignum vitae-Aloe, Zocatrina, is that which is brought out
of the Island Zocatara. Alogie, (Greek) a being irrational, or void of reason.
Alopecie, (Greek) a disease called the Scurf, or Foxes evil, wherein the hairs
fall off from the head by the roots. Alosha, a certain drink made of water and
honey, much used in Spain in hot weather. Alpha, the first of the Greek letters.
Alphabet, the order of letters, A.B.C. Alpharaiz (Arab.) the right shoulder of
Pegasus. Alpharez, (Arab.) the navel of Pegasus. Alpheta, (Arab.) the shining
star of the Crow. Alpheus, a famous River of Arcadia, which running a great way
into the Sea, meets at length with Arethusa, a River in Sicilie, nearunto
Siracuse. Alphitomancie, (Greek) a divination by tarly meal. Alphonsus, from
the Gottish word Helphuns, i. our help, the name of diverse great Kings of Spain
and Naples. Alphonsin-Tables, certain Astronomical calculations invented by
Alphonsus King of Aragon. Alphrad, the bright star in Hydra. Alps, great Hills
that divide France from Italy. Alrameck, (Arab.) a star in the constellation of
Boots. Aliacaba, (Arab.) the Pole Star, or the tail of cynosure. Alresford, a
Town in Hantshire; given by Kinew^lce the religious Saxon King to the Church at
Wenta. Alteration, (lat.) a changing. Altercation, (lat.) a contentious
dispute. Alternation, (lat.) a changing by turns. Althaea, see Meleager.
Altiloquent, (lat.) speaking loftily. Attitonant, (lat.) an Epithet anciently
given to Jupiter, and signifies thundering from on high. Altitude, (lat.)
height, also a Term in Astronomy, being the height of the sun, or any of the
stars from the Horizon. Altivolant, (lat.) soaring, or flying aloft. Alveary,
(lat.) a Hive of Bees. Alvea^ed, (lat.) channelled, or trenched from Alveus, a
channel. Alume, a certain astringent mineral, somewhat whitish and transparent.
Alumnation, (lat.) a fostering, or nourishing. Alutation, (lat.) a tanning, or
dressing of leather. Alytarch, (Greek) a keeper of rule and order in public
Games and Ceremonies.
A. M.
Amayne, a Term used by men of War incountring another ship, and bidding them
yield. Amalgaminge, an old word used by Chaucer, signifying a mixture of
Quicksilver, with other metals. (...), the Nurse of Jupiter, she fed him with
Goats milk, and he afterward as a reward gave her the horn of a Goat, which
had this faculty, that whatsoever she desired she should have it, whence
Amalthean horn has been taken for an emblem of plenty. Amand, (lat.) to send
one away. Amanuensis, (lat.) a secretary, one that writes for another.
Amaritude, (Lat.) bitterness. Amassement, (French) a crouding, or heaping of
several things together. Amate, to discourage. Amazons, certain warlike women
of Asia, that dwelt near the River Thermodoon, who burnt off their right paps,
and killed all their Male Children, that they might have no man among them,
their most renowned Queens were Mathesia, Orithya, Penthesilea, whom Achilles
slew, coming to help the Trojans, Menalippe and Hippolyta, whom Hercules
overcame, and gave Theseus to wife. Ambacti, among the ancient Gauls, were
those servants and dependants, which belonged to their chief Nobility. Ambage,
(Lat.) a far-fetch't circumstance of words. Amber, a hard yellow Gum, of which
they make beads and bracelets, some think it to be the Gum of Poplar Trees,
others the juice of a certain stone that grows like Corral. Ambergreece, a
sweet perfume, or Aromatic juice, which some hold to be a kind of bitumen,
rising from Fountains in the bottom of the Sea, and becoming hard by floating
upon the water. Amb^anum, the City of Amiens in Picardie. Ambidexter, (Lat.)
one that uses both hands alike, also (a Term in Common Law) signifying a Juror
that takes of both parties for the giving of his verdict. Ambient, (Lat.)
encircling, compassing round, an Epithete properly belonging to the air.
Ambifarious, (Lat.) that which has a twofold meaning. Ambiguous, (Lat.)
uncertain, doubtful. Ambilogy, (Lat.) an obscure saying, a dark speech.
Ambition, (Lat.) an excessive thirst of honor. Amblothridium, a Medicine
provoking travel before the time. Amblygone, (Greek) a Term in Geometry,
signifying a figure that has a blunt, or obtuse angle. Ambracia, a City of
Epirus, vulgarly called Lacta. Ambresbury, q. Ambrose, his Town, a Town
situate upon the River Avon in Wiltshire, built by Ambrose Aurelian, here
Alfritha King Edgars wife erected a stately Nunnery to expiate the murder of
her son in Law King Edward, in this Nunnery afterward Eleanor widow of K.
Henry the third, devoted her self to God. An Ambrey, a cup-board. Ambrose, the
name of an ancient Bishop of Milain, and one of the fathers, the word
signifies in Greek Divine, or immortal. Ambrosia, an Herb called Artimisia,
Wood sage, it is a word often used by the Poets to signify the meat of the
Gods. Ambulatory, (Lat.) a place to walk in. Amburbial, sacrifices were
certain, ancient sacrifices wherein the beast went about the City before he
was sacrificed. Ambuscado, (Spanish) an ambush, or men secretly so disposed as
to rush out upon an enemy unawares. Ambustion, (Lat.) a singing, or burning
round about. Amen, (a Syriack word) signifying* verily, or so be it, and
therefore it is used after every prayer. Amenity, (Lat.) delightfulness,
pleasure. Amenused, (old word) diminish't. Amercement* or Amerciament, (a Term
in Law) a penalty, or pecuniary punishment set upon the head of an Offender
against the King, or Lord in his Court. America, the fourth part of the world
discovered about the year 1492. by Americus Vesputius, a Florentine and
Christophorus Columbus; a Genoese. Amery, in (Lat.) Almaricus, a proper name,
from the German word Emeric. i. always rich and powerful. An Amesse, a
Priests hood, or Cap, which he wears in the Quire. Amethyst, (Gr.) a precious
stone, so called, because it is said to repress drunkness. Amiable, (Lat.)
lovely. Amicable, (Lat.) friendly. Amict, see Amesse. Amy, in (Fr.) Aim, i.
beloved, a name common, both for man and women from Amadeus, by which name many
of the Dukes of Savoy have been called. Amission, (Lat.) loss. Ammodite, a
creeping insect of a sandy color, and full of black spots. Ammoniac, a kind
of Gum, which is brought from Lybia, near the Temple of Ammon, also a kind of
Salt like Alum, which is found in Africa. Amnesty, (Greek) a burying in
silence, and Oblivion, all former injuries and damages. Amnios, the second
Tunicle that enwraps the birth, and covers it all over. Amoebean, (Greek)
Amoebean verses are those which answer one another. Amorist, a lover, an
amorous man. Amoroso, (Ital.) the same. Amort, (French) dead, whence, one that
is melancholy, or in a dumps, is said to be all Amort. Amortize, to kill, a
word used by Chaucer. Amotion, (Lat.) a removing out of the way. Ampelite, a
kind of pitchy, cleaving, and black earth, wherewith they use to anoint Vines
to kill the worms. Ampelusia, a promontory in Mauritania. Amphiaraus, the son
of Oileus, he was a great Prophet, who was desired by Adrastus, to go to the
War of Thebes, but he knowing he should not return, kept himself private, till
being betrayed by his wife Eriphile, who was bribed with a golden bracelet, he
was forced to go, but the first day he came to Thebes, he was swallowed up
alive by the earth. Amphibious, (Greek) living indifferently upon both
Elements, land and water. Amphibologie, (Greek) see Amphilogie. Amphictions,
(Greek) the Council of Greece, consisting of men chosen out of the twelve chief
Cities, for the making of laws, and deciding of all controversies: It was
instituted by Amphyction the son of Hellen, or as others say by Acrisius.
Amphion, the son of Jupiter and Ant^ope, who being married to Lycus, and after
vitiated by Epaphus, was imprisoned by Dirce Lycus's 2. wife, but being set at
liberty by Jupiter, she fled to the Hill Cytheron, where she brought forth
Twins, Zethus and Amphion, who to revenge their mothers injuries, tormented
Dirce by tying her to a wild Bull's tale, but Bacchus pitying her, changed her
to a Fountain, Amphion became so rare a Musician, that he was said to build the
Theban Walls, by playing upon Mercuries Harp. Amphiscians, (Greek) those people
that live under the Equator, where the shadow's are cast both ways, North and
South. Amphitheater, a place made for the acting of stage plays, and public
spectacles differing from a common Theater, as being more perfect, and built in
a full circle, the other only in a semicircle. Amphitrite, the daughter of
Nereus and Doris, the wife of Neptune, she sitting at the foot of Atlas, was
brought to him by a Dolphin, and made Queen of the Sea. Amphitryo, the son of
Alceus Prince of Thebes, who married Alcmena, daughter of Electryon and
Lysidice, upon that condition that he should revenge the death of her brothers
upon the Teleboans and Taphians, but while he was in the War, Jupiter coming to
her in the likeness of her husband, and lying with her, she brought forth
Twins, Hercules son to Jupiter, Iphiclus to Amphitryo. Amphiction, a King of
Athens, the son of Deucalion, he succeeded Cranaus in the Kingdom. Amphora, an
ancient measure of liquid things, the Italick Amphora contained five Gallons,
the Attick Amphora seven Gallons and a half. Ampliation, (Lat.) an enlargement,
also a deferring of judgment, till the cause be better examined, a word used
in Common Law. Amplification, (Lat.) a making large, or amplifying. Amplitude,
(Lat.) largeness, also a Title of Honor used among the Latins. Ampullous,
(Lat.) swelling like a bottle also puffed up with pride. Amputation, (Lat.) a
curtailing, a lopping off. Amsanctus, a place in the midst of Italy, where are
many waters full of Brimstone, which send forth a pestilent and noisome smell,
and are enclosed round about with Woods, which gave occasion to the Poets to
faign that the infernal Ghosts had their abode there. Amstelodamum, the chief
City of Holland, now called Amsterdam. Amulet, (Lat.) a kind of composition
somewhat like a Pomander to wear about one, which preserves from the plague,
poison, or enchantment. Amulius, King of the Latin's, he disposest his brother
Numitor of the Kingdom, and made a Vestal of his Niece Rhea Silvia, but she
being got with Child by Mars (as it was reported) brought forth Romulus and
Remus, who afterward reigned. Amycus King of the ^ebrycii, the son of Neptune
and Melie, who challenging all strangers to fight with him with whirlebats, was
at length slain by Pollux. Amymone, one of the fifty daughters of Danae, she
was ravished by Neptune, and brought forth Nauplius. Amyris, an inhabitant of
Sybaris, who foretelling the ruin of his Country fled away with all his
goods.
A N
Ana, a Greek adverb, used by Physicians in their bills to signify the like
quantity of each, also a kind of Indian beasts with long teeth, and sharp
nails. Anabaptists, a Sect of Heretics first begun in Germany, as some say, by
one Nicholas Stork, in the year 1521. their chief Tenet is that men ought not
be baptized, till they are able to render an account of their faith.
Anabathrum, (Greek) a place whereunto we ascend by steps. Anacardium, (Greek) a
kind of bean growing in Malaga. Anachorite, (Greek) a kind of religious
person that gives himself up to a religious life. Anacreon, a famous Lyrick
Poet of Teus in Jonia, who was choked with the husk of a raison. Anacrisis,
(Greek) question of the guilty, either by torment, or by interrogation.
Anachronisme, (Greek) a word used in Chronology, signifying a false collection
of time. Anadem, (Greek) a Garland. Anadesme, (Greek) a swath, a cloth, to tie
up wounds. Anadiplosis, (Greek) a figure in Rhetoric, i. e. when one verse
begins with the same word the last ended with. Anaetis, a Goddess among the
Lydians, to whom the chiefest Noble men used to Dedicate their daughters.
Anaglyphick (Greek) belonging to the art of Carving, or Embossing. Anagnostick,
(Greek) a Curate, or one that serves to read to another. Anagogical, (Greek)
skilled in deep matters, well read in mysterious learning. Anagram, (Greek) a
transposing the letters of any ones name, so as to make another word of it,
which art some say was invented by Lycophron. Anagraph, (Greek) a register, an
inventory. Analects, (Greek) scraps, which are gathered from the Table, also
Metaphorically taken for any collections. Analemme, (Greek) a Mathematical
instrument to find out the course, or elevation of the Sun, or any Planet.
Analogisme, (Greek) a logical argument from the cause to the effect. Analogy,
(Greek) proportion, correspondence. Analysis, (Greek) a resolution of doubtful
matters, also a distribution of the whole into parts. Ananias, (Hebr.) the
grace of the Lord a proper name. Anapaest, (Greek) a foot in a verse,
consisting of two short syllables and one long. Anaphora, (a Rhetorical figure)
being a repetition of the same sound, in the beginning of several sentences, or
verses, also the ascension of the signs, from the East by the daily course of
the firmament. Anapologetical, (Greek) having no excuse, without any Apology.
Anarchy, (Greek) a disorder in government, a being without rule, or Prince.
Anarand, a British proper name, corrupted from Honoratus, i. e. Honorable.
Anaretas, see Interfector. Anathema, (Greek) with e short, is a person solemnly
curs't, or devoted to destruction. Anathema, (Gr.) that which is offered to an
Idol. Anatocisme, (Greek) the yearly receipt of usury, when at the years end
the use is become principal. Anatomy, (Greek) the dissection of a body, for the
more exact discovery of all the inward parts. Anaxarete, a beautiful Virgin of
Salamis, who disdaining the love of Iphis, was the cause that he hanged himself
before the her door, and was afterward, for her hard heartedness turned into
a stone. Anaximander, a great Milesian Philosopher, the Successor of Thales.
Ancoeus, the son of Neptune, he being much given to Agriculture, and going to
drive a wild Boar out of a Vineyard he had planted, was slain by the Boar.
Ancaster, a Town, or long street in Lincolnshire, by Antoninus called
Crocolana, in which the memory of Antiquity is continued by the Roman Coins,
and Vaults under ground oftentimes discovered. Anchises, the son of Capys, he
was carried by his son Aeneas from the sack of Troy* but died in his journey
toward Italy. Anchoret, see Anachorite. Anchurus, the son of Midas, he after
Midas was warned by the Oracle to throw what he had most precious into a great
gap of the earth, about Celenon in Phrygia, and had thrown in his gold in vain,
her rode into the Abyss, which had swallowed many men, and afterward it
closed up. Ancus Martius, the fourth King of the Romans. Ancil, (Lat.) a kind
of shield, or buckler, made after the fashion of a decrescent Moon, the first
of this form was reported to fall from heaven into the hands of Pompilius,
Numa, in the time of a great plague, who by the instinct of the Goddess Egeria
caused eleven more to be made, and committed them to the keeping of the 12.
Salii. Ancona, the chief City of Picenum in Italy, first built by the
Sicilians. Andalusia, a Country in Spain, first called Baetica. Andradswald, a
Wood in Sussex, aciently 120 miles in length, memorable for the death of
Sigebert, King of the West Saxons, who having been deposed, was stabbed in this
place by a Swinheard. Andrago, (Lat.) a woman of manly countenance and
carriage. Andrastes, or Andate, a certain Goddess worshipped by the ancient
Britains, as the Goddess of victory. Andrew, (Greek) a proper name,
signifying manly. Androdamant, (Greek) a kind of precious stone. Androgyne,
(Greek) one of both Sexes, one that is both man and woman. Andromache, wife to
Hector, she was after his death married to Helenus the Prophet and son of
Priam. Andromeda, the daughter of Cepheus King of Aethiopia, she was for her
pride exposed to the cruelty of a Sea Monster, but delivered by Perseus.
Androna, (Greek) a place that was anciently made in ships, only for men to be
in. Anelate, a kind of a wood knife. Anemone, (Greek) a kind of flower, called
a wind flower. Anfractuosity, (Lat.) an intricate turning and winding. Angel,
in gold, is a piece of Coin that has an Angel stamp't upon it, and bears the
value of 10 shillings. Angelica, an Herb so called. Angelical, (Greek)
belonging to an Angel, i. a messenger, the Angels are also taken in holy
Scripture for those immortal spirits, which wait upon Almighty God in the
highest heavens, they are divided by Saint Paul, into nine several orders,
Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Principates,
Archangel, and Angel. Angelot, (French) a kind of small Cheese commonly made
in France. Angle, a corner, also a Term in Geometry, being the concurse of two
lines meeting together, so as that they do not make one line. Angles, also are
the most powerful houses; for a Planet therein has more power, and efficacy
then another (in any other house) that is but equally dignified. The Angles are
these, viz. The first house, or the East Angle, the tenth, or the South Angle,
the seventh house, or the West Angle, and the fourth, or the North Angle.
Anglia, a part of great Britain, now called England. Anglesey, an Island lying
over against Caernarvon in Wales, it was anciently the seat of the Druides, and
was called by the Britains, Ynis Dowil, and the land of Mon, in Latin Mona. It
was first attempted by Paulinus Swetonius, and afterward brought under the
Roman Empire by Julius Agricola, many ages after it was Conquered by the
Englishmen, and thence derived this name as it were the English-mens Island.
Anguineous, (Latin) pertaining to a snake. Anguish, (Latin Anguor, French
Angoisse) grief, agony. Angular, (Lat.) full of Angles, or Corners. Angus, a
County in the South-part of Scotland, called in Latin Angusia, anciently Aenia.
Angust, (Lat.) narrow. Anhelation, (lat.) a difficulty in fetching ones breath.
Anility, (lat.) feminine old age. Animadversion, (lat.) a lending ones
attention, as it were a turning ones mind that way, also a correcting. Animal,
(lat.) a creature endued with life and sense. Animalillio, (Spanish) a little
animal. Animosity, (lat.) stoutnesse, stomach, willfulness. Anlace, (old word)
a dudgeon, a half dagger. Annals, (lat.) Histories of passages acted from year
to year. Annandale, a County in the North part of Scotland, so called as it
were the Vale by the River Anan, it was in old time inhabited by a people
called Selgovae. Annarian law, a law among the Romans, concerning the age,
wherein a man might sue for, or exercise any public Office. Annates, (lat.)
first fruits paid out of spiritual benefices. Anne, (Hebr.) the proper name of
a woman, signifying gracious, full of mercy. Anneal, to paint upon glass.
Annexation, the uniting of lands, or other Rents of the Crown. Anselm, (Germ.)
defense of Authority, a proper name. Annibal, a great Captain of the
Carthaginians, and the son of Amilcar, he overthrew Sempronius at Trebia,
Flaminius at the Lake Thrasymene, and Paulus Aemylius, at Cannae, he was beaten
by Marcellus, and afterward at Zama, by Scipio Africanus, at last flying to
Prusia, King of Bythinia, he there poisoned himself. Annihilation, (latin) a
reducing to nothing. Anniversary, (lat.) down yearly, at a certain time, or
celebrated every year. Annon, a Carthagian that coveted to be a God, and taught
birds to sing Annon is a God. Anodynous, as much as to say pain-easing or
without pain. Anodynous Medicaments are such as are appropriated to give ease
by stupifying the senses, such are Soporifics, and Narcotics. Annotation,
(lat.) a nothing, or marking, an Exposition upon any writing. Annoy, to
trouble, hurt. Annueler, (old word) secular. Annuity, (lat.) a yearly Pension;
in Common Law, the difference between Annuity and Rent, is this, that Rent is
payable out of land; Annuity charges only the person of the Grantor. Annul,
(lat.) to make void, q. annihil. Annulet, (lat.) a little Ring, or any thing
made in the form of a Ring. Annunciation, (lat.) a telling, or declaring a
thing, as it were a doing, a message unto, also the day of the Virgin Marie,
which falls on the 25th. of March. Anoysance, or Nuisance, (French) a hurt, or
damage in law, it signifies a trespass upon a Neighbors ground, by stopping
up his water, or hindering his light. Anomalous, (Greek) unequal, uneven.
Anonymous, (Greek) namelesse, without a name. Anopsie, (Greek) privation of
sight. Anorexy, (Greek) one of the Symptoms of the stomach, being a want of
appetite. Antaeus, the son of Neptune and Terra, who fighting with Hercules
recovered strength as often as he touched his mothers earth, but at length
Hercules holding him up from the ground killed him. Antagonist, (Greek) an
adversary. Antalope, a Syrian Heart, swift of foot, and having long Horns.
Antarctick, (Greek) a word used in Astronomy, the Antarctick Pole, being the
Southern Pole, so called, because it is contrary to the Arctick Pole, and the
Antarctick Circle, contrary to the Arctick Circle. Antares, (Arab.) the
Scorpions heart, a Term in Astrology. Anteacts, (lat.) deeds, or actions done
in times past. Anteambulation, (lat.) a walking before. Antecedaneous, (lat.)
foregoing. Antecedent, (latin) the same also excelling, having a relative, also
a Term in Logic, the first proposition of a Syllogism. Antecessours
Forefathers, Acestors, as it were, Foregoers. Antecursor, (lat.) a forerunner.
Antedate, to date a Letter before the time. Antedeluvian, (lat.) being before
the flood. Anteloquie, (lat.) a Preface, also a Term among stage players,
signifying their turn, or cue. Antemeridian hour, (lat.) hour before-noon.
Antenor, a Trojan Prince, who coming into Italy with the Heneti, and
Paphlagones built Antenorea, since called Padua. Anteoccupation, (lat.) see
praeoccupation. Anteri^r, (lat.) foremost, on the foreside. Antevene, (lat.) to
prevent, to come before. Anthem, (Greek) a Divine song, wherein each verse is
sung by Churchmen in their courses. Anthologie, (Greek) a treating of flowrs,
also a florid discourse. Anthony, the proper name of a man, signifying in Greek
flourishing. Anthropomorphites, (Greek) a Sect of Heretics that began in
Egypt, in the year 395. their chief Tenet was, that God had a Corporeal shape.
Anthropopathy, (Greek) a being endued with the passions, or affections of men.
Anthropophagi, (Greek) men eaters. Antiaxiomatisme, (Greek) that, which is
against any known Axiom. Antichrist, (Greek) an opposer of Christ.
Antichthones, (Greek) a people that dwell on that part of the earth, which is
opposite to ours, going with their feet directly against ours. Anticipated,
(lat.) prevented. Anticlea, the daughter of Diocles, who being defloured by
Sisyphus, brought forth Ulysses. Antidicomarians, a sort of Heretics that were
against the Virgin Mary. Antidote, (Greek) a Medicine given to preserve one
against poison, or infection. Antigonus, one of Alexanders Captains, who
afterward became possessour of Asia. Antigraph, (Greek) a Copy, a Counterpane.
Antike work, a Term in painting, or Carving, it being a disorderly mixture of
diverse shapes of men, birds, flowr's, etc. Antilogie, (Greek) a contradicting,
or opposing. Antimony, a certain kind of stone inclining toward silver, and
found in silver Mines. Antinomians, (Greek) a Sect of people that hold legal*
services to be unprofitable, and that God sees no sin in children, this Sect
was begun somewhat above a hundred years ago, by one John Islebius a German.
Antioeci, those that dwell under half of the Meridian, and paralels of a like
distance from the Equator, but the one Northward, and the other Southward.
Antipagments, (lat.) garnishings in Posts or Doors wrought in Stone, or Timber.
Antipast, the first dish that is served up at a meal. Antipathy, (Greek) a
secret contrariety in nature, a contrariety of humors and inclinations.
Antiperistasis, (Greek) a philosophical word, signifying the strengthening, and
opposing of any quality against its contrary, as of cold against heat, or the
like. Antiphrasis, (Greek) a figurative speech, having a contrary meaning.
Antiphone, (Greek) see Anthem. Antipilanes, or Antepilani, (Lat.) a sort of
Soldiers in the fore part of the Roman Army. Antipodes, (Greek) see
Antichthones. Antiquate, (Lat.) to abolish, to abrogate. Antique, (Lat.) old,
out of fashion. Antisabbatarians, a sort of Heretics, who deny the Sabbath.
Antiscions, are degrees beholding one another equally distant from the two
Tropicks, and so much as a Planet shall want of either of the Tropicks, so much
on the other side the Tropic shall the Antiscion of the Planet fall, and shall
give virtue to any Star, or Planet that is in the same degree, or casts any
Aspect thereto. Antistrophe, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure, namely when several
Members of a sentence end all with the same word. Antithesis, (Greek) a figure
in Rhetoric, wherein one letter, or word is put for another. Antithesis,
(Greek) things opposed. Antitrinitarians, a Sect of Heretics, which deny the
Trinity, which comprehend under them, the Arians, Sabellians, and others.
Antitype, (Greek) an example like to the pattern. Antivestaeum, the utmost
promontory of Britain, lying upon the Western Ocean, it has been called in
former times by the British Bards Penring^aed, the Promontory of blood, by the
Welsh Historians Penwith, i. the Promontory on the left hand. Antonians, an
order of religious men, instituted by Saint Anthony, an Egyptian Monk, in the
year 1324. Antonomasia, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure, wherein instead of a
proper name, another name is put. Antrim, the name of a County in Ireland.
Antwerp, a famous City in Brabant, which was pulled down by the Duke of Alva,
but restored again by the the Duke of Parma. Anubis, a Heathen God, whom the
Egyptians worshipped for Mercury in the shape of a Dog. Anweald, (Sax.)
Authority. Anxiety, (Lat.) vexation, anguish, grief. Anyger, a River of
Thessaly, where the Centaures washed their wounds after they had been wounded
by Hercules, which caused the waters ever after to have an ill taste.
A O
Aonia, a part of Boeotia, where the Muses Well is, whence the Muses are called
Aonides. Aorist, (Greek) indefinite, also among the Greek Verbs there are two
tenses Aoristus primus, and Aoristus secundus. Aornus, a Lake in Italy, near
the River Po, whose waters are infected with a deadly noysomnesse: into this
Lake, the Poets feign that Phaeton fell being struck with thunder, and that his
sisters weeping for him were changed into poplars dropping Amber.
A P
Apamia, a Town of Bythinia, so called by Nicomed, the son of Prusia. Apatny,
(Greek) freeness from passion, or affection. Apelby, a Town in Westmorland,
anciently called Abballaba, memorable for its pleasant situation upon the
River Eden, and for its Antiquity, the Aurelian Maures keeping their station
there in the time of the Romans. Apelles, a famous painter of the Island Cous,
who having the picture of Venus unfinish't, no man durst undertake it after
him. Apennage, (French) a Childs portion, the Law of Apennages in France, is
that, which forbids the Kings younger sons to have partage with the Elder.
Apennine, a great Hill running through the midst of Italy. Apepsie, (Greek)
incoction, crudity of the stomach. Aphaeresis (Greek) the taking away of a
letter from the beginning of a word. Aphelium, a point wherein the Sun, or any
other Planet is most distant from the Earth. Aphetical, (Astrological Term)
belonging to the Planet, that is disposer of life in a Nativity. Aphorism,
(Greek) a brief select sentence, expressing the property of a thing. Aphrodite,
(Greek) the name of Venus, as being engendered of the froth of the Sea. Apina,
and Trica, two Towns of Apulia destroyed by Diomed, with so much ignominy, that
they became a proverb of contempt. Apis, King of Argos, the son of Jupiter, and
Niobe, he was otherwise called Osiris, and took to wife Isis, leaving the
Kingdom of Achaia to Aegialeus, he went into Egypt, and civilizing the people
reigned there. Apocalypse, (Greek) a revelation, or unfolding of a dark mystery,
a title given to the last book of the holy Scriptures, written by St. John in
the Isle of Patmos. Apocryphal, (Greek) doubted of, whose original is unknown.
Apodictical, (Greek) demonstrable, easy to be made plain. Apogaeum, (Greek) a
Term in Astronomy, being that point of Heaven, where the Sun, or any Planet is
farthest from the Center of the earth. Apograph, (Greek) a Copy taken from
another pattern. Apollo, the son of Jupiter and Latona, born in Delos, at one
birth with Diana, coming to age, he slew the Serpent Pytho, and afterward the
Cyclops, for which he was deprived of his Divinity, and kept the sheep of
Admetus, King of Thessaly, upon the banks of Amphrysus, he loved Daphne, who
flying from him was turned into a Lawrel-Tree, also he loved Hyacynthus, a boy
of a rare feature, whom killing by mischance, he turned into a flowr; he was
called the God of physic, of Music and Archery, and guided the Chariot of the
day. Apollyon, (Greek) a name in Scripture, attributed to the Devil, it
signifying, destroyer. Apologue, (Greek) a tale, a moral fable, such as that of
Menenius Agrippa, and those of Aesop. Apology, (Greek) a justifying answer, an
excuse, or defense. Apopheret, (Lat.) a present, a New years gift.
Apophlegmatisme, (Greek) a Medecin, to purge away phlegm, and waterish
humors. Apophtegme, (Greek) a short and witty sentence. Apoplexy, (Greek) a
taking away of sense and motion from the animal parts of the body: for which
reason the dead palsy is called by this name. Aporetick, (Greek) doubting.
Apostasy, (Greek) a revolting, a falling away, or defection from ones duty, or
first profession. Aposteme, (Greek) the gathering of corruption into any one
part of the body. Apostle, (Greek) a Messenger, a word most peculiarly
appropriate to the twelve Disciples of Christ, who were sent to preach the
Gospel. Apostrophe, (Greek) a figure, wherein there is a converting ones speech
from one party to another, a mark of the cutting off some Vowel at the end of a
word. Apotheke, (Greek) a shop, or store house, wherein any thing is laid up.
Apotomy, (Greek) a Mathematical word, a cutting off part of a line. Apozeme,
(Greek) a decoction, a Term used in Physic. Appal, to dismay, also to decay.
Appareil, (French) a preparation, a making ready, also the sum at the foot of
an account, which remains charged upon a house, or College. Apparitour, (Lat.)
one that summons people to appear at a Court. Appartment, (Ital.) a division,
or separation, also so much of a great house as is set apart for the
intertainment of one person, or one family. Appeach, to accuse one of any
crime. App^al, a word used in Common Law, and signifies to remove a cause from
an inferior Judge, to a Superior, also a suing within a year and a day, of
one, who is next of kin to a party that is murthred. Apellative, (Lat.) a Noun
Appellative, is a Term used in Grammar, signifying a name that is common to a
great many. Appellour, vid. Approver. Appendant, (Lat.) a Term used in Civil
Law, and in Logic, as when a field is apendant to a freehold, an adjunct to a
subject. Appendix, (Lat.) an Addition, a thing that depends upon another.
Appetency, (Lat.) earnest desire. Appeteth, desires, a word used by Chaucer.
Appian way, a highway leading from Rome through Campania, as far as
Brundusium, which Appius Claudius in his Consulship paved and walled. Applauds,
expressions of extraordinary praise and congratulation toward the performers of
great achievements. Artam. Application, (Lat.) the making an address to any
person, or the applying of one thing to another. Applombature, (Lat.) a
soldering with Lead. Appoast, (French) to subborn, to procure. Apposen, to
demand. Apposite, (Lat.) put to, also to the purpose. Appostile, (French) a
small addition to a discourse in writing, set down in the margent.
Apprehension, (Lat.) understanding, also according as it is used with
expressions, either of danger, or happiness, it denotes either fear, or joy.
Cassandra. Apprentice, skill, Chaucer. Appretiation, (Lat.) a high valueing, a
setting a high price upon a thing. Approbation, (Lat.) liking. Approperate,
(lat.) to hasten. Appropinquate, (lat.) to draw nigh. Appropriation, (lat.) a
taking to ones self, also a Term in law, a converting the profit of an
Ecclesiastical living to ones proper use, only maintaining a Vicar. Approver,
(Lat.) a Term in Law, one who confessing himself guilty of Felony, accuses
another, he is also called appellour. Appuyed, (French) stayed, supported.
Aprication, (Lat.) basking in the Sun. Aprize, (old word) adventure. Apsonus, a
City near the Euxin Sea, where Medea slew her brother Absyrtus. Ap-thanes, the
Superior sort of the Nobility of Scotland were anciently so called, the lower
sort Vnder-Thanes. Aptitude, (Lat.) fitness. Aptote, (Greek) a Term in
Grammar, being a Noun not declined with cases. Apulia, a Region in Italy,
vulgarly called Puglia, formerly called Iapygia from Iapyx the son of Daedalus.
A Q
Aqua Caelestis, a liquor which the Chemists call rectified wine. Aquarius, one
of the twelve signs in the Zodiac, whereinto the Sun enters in January.
Aquatile, (Lat.) that lives in the water. Aqueduct, (Lat.) a Conduit that
convey's wa^er by a pipe. Aqueous, (Lat.) waterish. Aquila, (Lat.) (an Eagle)
in Astronomy, it is one of the heavenly signs. Aquileia, a City in Italy,
which being besieged by Maximinus held out so stoutly, that when they wanted
ropes for the moving of their Engines, the women suffered their hair to be cut
to supply the want. Aquiliferous, (Lat.) an Epithete of the Roman standard,
that bears the picture of an Eagle upon it. Aquisgrane, a City in Gulick, now
called Aixcovit, built by Granus, as some suppose, the brother of Nero.
Aquitania, the third part of France, now called Guien. Aquite, (old word) to
match. Aquiter, (old word) a Needle case. Aquosity, (Lat.) waterishnesse.
A R
Arabesque, (French) a curious flourishing, or branched work in painting, or
Tapestry. Arabia, a Country in Asia, so called from Arabus the son of Apollo,
reaching from India to Egypt, it is divided into three parts, Arabia Petraea,
Arabia deserta, and Arabia foelix. Arable, (Lat.) plowable. Arace, (old word)
to deface. Araneous, (Lat.) full of Spiders webs. Arausia, the City of Orange
in France, now under the Princes of Nassau. Array, order, from the (French)
Arroy. Array, to apparel. Arbela, (Hebr.) a woman's name, signifying, God has
revenged. Arbitratour, (Lat.) an Umpire, a Commissioner, chosen by mutual
consent to decide controversies between party and party. Arblaster, a word used
by Chaucer, signifying a Cros-bow. Arborist, (Latin) he that has skill in
Trees. Arcadia, a Country of Peloponnesus, famous for shepherds, and for the
residence of Pan, the God of shepherds, it was first called Pelasgia, from
Pelasgus an ancient King, afterward Arcadia from Arcas, son of Jupiter and
Calisto, daughter of Lycaon, King of this Country. Arcade, (French) an Arch.
Arcane, (Lat.) mysterious, secret. Arch Dapifer, a chief sewer, one of the
prime Offices of the Empire, which belongs to the Count Palatine of the
Rhene. Arch Duke, a title belonging to the house of Austria. Archebald, see
E^chembold. Arches, or Court of Arches, the chief Consistory belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury for the debating of spiritual causes. Archetype,
(Greek) the first figure, or Original. Arch-flamin, Prince, or chief of the
Priests among the Heathens, by some called Pontifex Maximus, of whom Numa
Pompilius, was the first instituter. Archimandrite, the chief of a Hermitage.
Architectonick, belonging to the chief Overseer of buildings. Architecture, the
Art of building, containing under it all those Arts that conduce any thing to
the framing of a house, or Temple. Architrave, a word much used in
Architecture, the chapter of a Pillar, or chief beam in a building. Archive, a
place where ancient Records are kept. Archontes, (Greek) certain Governors
created in Athens, after Kingly Government was abolish't. Archonticks, certain
Heretics, so called from Archon the first of that Sect, which began in the
year 334. they denied the Resurrection, and held the world to be the work of
Princes. Archytas, a famous Mathematician, whom Horace mentions in one of his
Odes, he made a wooden Dove to fly by art. Arcitenent, (Lat.) carrying a Bow
and Arrow's. Arctation, (Lat.) a streightning. Arctick, as the Arctick Pole, or
Northern Pole, and the Arctick Circle, or Northern Circle, so called from the
Star Arctos, or the Bear. Arcturus, a constellation near the Northpole.
Arcuare, to bend, to make after the fashion of an Arch. Arcubalist, an Engine,
anciently used in war, which was to cast forth great stones. Ardenna, a great
Forest in Germany, reaching from the River Rhene, to the City of Turney,
which is 500 miles. There is another great Forest in Warwickshire, so called,
the word signifying in the ancient, and Gallick tongue a Wood. Ardour, (Lat)
heat, vehemence, burning desire. Arduity, (Lat.) steepness. Arefaction, (Lat.)
a drying. Arelatum, a City of France, in the Province of Narbon, now called
Arles, the seat of the Kings of Basilica, the last whereof called Boso, was
thrust into a Monastery by the Emperor Otho, for striking the Bishop.
Areopagites, certain Judges of a Council in Athens, instituted by Solon, they
were so called from Areopagos, a street in Athens, where they sat. Aret, (old
word) an account. Aretaphila, a woman's name, signifying in Greek a friend of
virtue. Arethusa, the daughter of Nereus, and Doris, the wife of Alpheus, she
was feigned to be a River of Sicily. Also a Fountain in Armenia, wherein nothing
can be made to sink. Argent, Silver, or Coin, also a Term in Heraldry, whereby
they express white. Argentina, a City in Germany, by the Rhine, first subdued
by Casar, afterward by Allila, who called it Stratsburgh, which name it
retains to this day. Argile, a County of the North part of Scotland, lying over
against the Coast of Ireland, and therefore called by the Natives Arguithil, i.
near the Irish, in Latin, Argathelia. Argiletas, a place near the Palace in
Rome, so called from Argos, Captain of the Argives, who having been entertained
by Euander, was at length slain, and buried there. Argillous, (Lat.) clayie, of
a clammy substance. Argoil, Clay, a word used by Chaucer. Argonautes, see
Jason. Argos, a City of Peloponesus, not far from Athens, where many famous
Kings reigned. Argus, the son of Actor, whom Juno set as a spy, over Io, being
turned into a Cow. Argute, (lat.) full of wit, subtle. Argyra, an Island in
India, full of Gold and silver. Also a Nymph, whom Selenius being in love with
died for grief, and was changed by Venus into a River. Ariadne, the daughter of
Minos and Pasiphae, see more of her in Theseus. Arided, (Arab.) a Term in
Astrology, the tail of the Swan. Aridity, (lat.) dryness, sterility. Aries,
(lat.) an Engine anciently used for the battering down of City walls, so called
from Aries a Ram, by reason of the likeness it had to that beast, also one of
the twelve signs. Arietation, (lat.) a butting, a battring with the Engine
Aries. Ariminum, an ancient Town of Flaminia in Italy, now called Rimini.
Ariobarzanes, one of Darius his Captains, who was slain by the Greeks.
Ariolation, (lat.) a sooth-saying. Arion, a famous Musician of the Isle of
Lesbos, he was in great favor with Periander Tyrant of Corinth, as he was
sailing from Italy, the Mariners conspired to kill him for his riches, but he
casting himself into the Sea, was carried by a Dolphin to Taenarus; a Town of
Laconia. Arist, (old word) he arose. Aristaeus, the son of Apollo and Ceres, he
was King of Arcadia, and found out the use of Bees, but because Euridice flying
from him, was slain by the bite of a Serpent, the Nymphs destroyed his Bees,
to appease, whom he having sacrificed four Oxen, and four Heifers, a multitude
of Bees sprung from the dead Oxen. Aristides, an Athenian, famous for Justice.
Aristocracy, (Greek) the Government of a Commonwealth, wherein the Nobles bear
chief sway. Arite, (old word) to Arest, or stay. Arithmetic, (Greek) the art
of numbering. Arithmancy, (Greek) a divination by numbers. Armada, (Span.) a
great Navy. Armagh, a County in Ireland. Armenia, a Country of Asia, divided
into the greater, and the lesser Arm^nia. Armiger, (lat.) a Squire, one that
bears a Knights Arms. Armilet, a little Bracelet for the arm. Arminians, a
Sect of Heretics instituted by Jacobus Arminius, in the year 1605. they hold
free grace, and universal redemption. Armipotent, (lat.) strong in arms,
powerful. Armoniack, or Gum Armonick, a certain Gum issuing from a plant,
called fennel Giant. Armorick, a Country in France, now called Britain.
Armory, a place where arms are laid up and kept. Armuzia, a Country on the
Borders of Carmania, along the River Andanis, where are many pleasant
Vineyards. Arobe, a Portugal measure of Sugar, containing 25 Bushels.
Aromatic, (lat.) Odoriferous, having a spicy smell. Arquebuze, a little Gun, a
Caleever. Arragon, a great Province of Spain, heretofore a Kingdom by it self.
Arraighn, to set at the Bar of Justice, to make guilty. Arran, a County in the
North-part of Scotland, anciently called Heglota, as being situate in the
River Cla^a, now called Cluid. Arrasse, a certain rich cloth, so called from
Arras, a Town of Artesia, where it was made. Arrearage, (French) a debt due
upon an old account. Arrendare, signifies in the practick of Scotland, to set
lands to any one for yearly Rent. Arreptitious, (lat,) suddenly caught, also
snatching away privily. Arrere, (old word) apart, aside. Arrest, (French) a
stay, a resting quiet in a place, also a putting a stop to proceedings, in
Common Law it signifies an execution served upon a man's goods, or person, also
a decree, or final sentence of a Court. Arretteth, lays blame, an old word
used by Chaucer. Arrians, a Sect of ancient Heretics instituted by one Arrius
a Lybian, about the year 315. they deny the son to be of the same substance
with God the father. Arride, (lat.) to manifest ones consent of a thing by
smiling. Arrogate, (lat.) to assume too much to ones self. Arsenal, (French) a
kind of Citadel, where Armor and Ammunition is laid up. Arse^ick, a mineral,
called Orpiment, in English Ra^s-bane. Arseversie, upside down, preposterous.
Arsmart, an Herb, otherwise called water pepper. Arson, (French) a saddle-bow.
Artaxerxes, the son of Xerxes, King of Persia, he had three sons by his wife,
and 112 by his Concubines, he made Darius his Successor, who rebelling from
his father, because he had taken from him his Concubine Aspasia, was slain with
50 of his brothers. Artemisia, Queen of Halicarnassus, and wife to Mausolus,
she built so stately a Sepulcher for her deceased husband, that it was held for
one of the seven wonders of the world, Artemisia is also the name of an Herb,
called Mugwort. Artemisian (month), the month of May. Arten, to constrain an
(old word) used by Chaucer. Arteries, (Lat.) those hollow membranous Vessels
like to veins, in which the most thin, and hottest part of the blood together
with the vital spirits pass through the body. Arteriotomy, (Greek) a cutting of
an Artery. Arthritical disease, the Gout from Arthritis, a Greek word which
signifies a joint. Arthur, a famous, warlike King of the Britains, who beat
the Saxons in diverse set battails, this word signifies in the British tongue
strong man. Articular, (Lat.) joynted. Articulate, (lat.) to joint, also make
Articles of agreement. Artificer, (Lat.) a workman. Artillery, great brass
Guns, Cannons. Artisan, or Artist, a master of his Art. Arval brothers, a
fraternity of Roman Priests, twelve in number, who besides their performance of
public sacrifices, were appointed Judges of Landmarks. Arvisian wine, a sort
of Greek wine from Arvis, now called Amista, in the Island Chios. Arundel, in
Latin Aruntina vallis, a Town in Sussex, so called as it were Arundale, i. a
dale lying upon the River Arun, it has a strong Castle, which Robert de
Belismo, keeping against King Henry the first, he thereupon forfeited his
estate, and was proscribed. Arundiferous, (Lat.) bringing forth Reeds.
Aruspicy, (Lat.) a certain kind of divination (anciently much in use among the
Romans) by looking into the bowels of beasts.
A S
Asabaracca, the Herb called Folefoot. Asbate, (old word) a buying. Asbestes, a
people of Lybia about Cyrene, where the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon was. Asbestos,
a kind of precious stone of an Iron color, which being once fired cannot be
quenched. Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, by Creusa the daughter of Priamus, he
reigned in Italy 30 years, and built Alba. Ascaunces, (old word) as though.
Ascendant, an Astrological Term, it being the point of the Ecliptic, which
rises at some determinate moment, when any one is born, it is also called the
Horoscope, it signifies also Metaphorically, a predominant, or powerful
influence over any one: Cleopatra. Ascertain, to assure. Ascetick, (Greek)
belonging to a Monk, or Monastery. Asclepiad, a verse consisting of four feet,
Spondee, Choriambus, and two Dactyls. Ascribe, (Lat.) to attribute, to impute.
Ashdown, or Assendown, which some interpret the Mount of Asses, a Town in
Essex, where a great battle was fought between Edward Iron-side, and Canutus
the Dane. Asia, one of those four parts, into which the whole world is divided,
it was so called from, Asia, wife, to Iapetus, and daughter of Oceanus, and
Thetis. Asinine, (Lat.) belonging to an Ass. Askaunce, (old word) if by
chance. Askaunt, (old word) as, to look askaunt, to look side-wayes. Asks,
(old word) ashes. Asmodeus, (Greek) a friend of carnality, the name of a
certain spirit. Asmotographers, (Greek) composers of lessons to any instrument.
Asopus, a River of Boeotia running by Thebes, which the Poets faign'd to have
been the father of Aegina, whom Jupiter deflowered. Asotus, (Greek) prodigal,
intemperate. Aspect, (Lat.) a sight, also ones countenance, or presence, also a
position of the stars, one toward another. Aspectable, (Lat) that may be seen,
or beheld. Asper, a certain kind of coin, bearing the value of a penny
farthing of our money. Asperation, (lat.) a making rough, or sharp. Asperity,
(lat.) roughness. Aspernate, (lat.) to despise, to scorn. Aspersion, (lat.) a
sprinkling, or bespattring, it is also taken Metaphorically, for a casting a
blemish upon other men's reputation. Asphaltites, a Lake in Judaea, where Sodom
and Gomorrha stood, having been full of brimstone, ever since it rained down
upon those Cities. Asphodil, the name of a certain flowr, otherwise called
Daffadil, or Narcissus. Aspick, a little venomous Serpent. Aspiration, (lat.) a
breathing, also a note over a Greek vowel, which has the force of an h.
Asp^rtation, (lat.) a carrying away. Assail, to set upon, to assault. Assart, a
Term in law, signifying an offense committed in a Forest by plucking up the
Woods by the roots, also to Assart, is to set in order, to make glades in a
Wood, to lop off the branches of a Tree, to clear a ground of shrubs. An
Ass^ssia^ (Ital.) a Robber, or Murderer that kills another for gain. Assay,
(French) to prove, to try; an Assayer of the King is an Officer of the Mint,
for the true trial of silver. Ass^ctation, (lat.) a following any one, an
adhering to another opinion. Ass^ntation, (lat.) a complying with another
opinion out of flattery, or dissimulation. Assert, (lat.) to affirm, to
maintain. Assesse, (Fr.) to set down a rate, to tax. Ass^^trix, (^at.) a
Midwife, a woman that is assistant to another. Assets, (French) a Term in
Common Law, signifying goods sufficient wherewith the Heir, o^ Executor may
discharge the Ancestors, or Testators Debts, or Legacies. Ass^verate, (lat.) to
affirm earnestly. A^sid^ous, (lat.) daily, observant, diligent. Assign,
(French) a term in law, he that is constituted by another, to do any business,
an assign indeed is he whom the person appoints, assign in law is he, whom the
law appoints. Assimilati^n, (lat.) a likening, a resembling. Assise, Order,
Chaucer. Assised, sure, firm, Idem. Assi^t, (lat.) to help. Assize, (French) a
Term in law, signifying a sitting of Justices upon their Commission, it is
taken also for a Writ, also a setting down the price of any commodity.
Association, (lat.) a being frequent in company with another. Assoyle, to
acquit, to pardon, also to answer, Chaucer. Assoylen, to declare; Idem.
Assuefaction, (lat.) an inuring, a bringing one to any thing by custom.
Assuetude, (lat.) use, custom. Assume, (lat.) to take to ones self. Assumpsit,
a voluntary promise, whereby a man takes upon him to perform any thing to
another. Assumption, (lat.) a taking to, also the minor proposition of a
syllogism. Astarites, a certain Chrystalline stone having in the midst of it
the resemblance of half a Moon. A^terisme, (Gr.) a constellation of stars.
Asterisk, (Greek) a little star, also a mark in writing, having the form of a
star. Asterius, the name of a certain King of Creet. A^terlagour, a word used
by Chaucer, signifying an Astrolabe. A^^ert, (old word) passed. A^thma, (Greek)
a certain disease, which causes difficulty of breathing. Astipulation, (lat.)
an agreement, an assent, also a witness. Astonish, (lat.) to dismay, to
stupifie. Astraea, the daughter of Jupiter and Themis, or as some say of
Astraeus and Aurora, she was, for her Justice, taken up into heaven, and placed
among the twelve signs. Astraeus, the son of Crius (one of the Titans) and
Eurybaea, he married Aurora, and begat the winds* and the stars. Astragal, a
word used in Architecture, as also in fortification, being a certain ring, or
circle about the neck of a Pillar, or a piece of Ordnance. Astr^ction, (lat.) a
binding to. Astriferous, (lat.) star-bearing. Astringent, (lat.) binding, or
making costive. A^troit, a precious stone, called in Latin Asteria, wherein
little streakes like the beams of a star appear. A^^rolabe, a Mathematical
instrument, to find the motions, and distances of stars, or to take any
heights and depths by. Astrology, (Greek) the art of foretelling things to
come, by the motions and distances of the stars. A^tromela, a City of the
Province of Narbon in France. Astronomy, (Greek) an art teaching the knowledge
of the courses of the stars. Asturia, a Province of Spain near Portugal, so
called from the River Astura, the Pyrenean Mountains are also called Asturias.
Astute, (lat.) subtle, witty, crafty. Astyages, the father of Mandana, and
Grandfather of Cyrus. Asyle, (Greek) a sanctuary, a place of refuge for
offenders. Asyndeton, (Greek) a Rhetorital figure, where comma's are put
instead of conjunction copulatives.
A T
Atalanta, the daughter of Schoeneus King of Scyrus, she being swift of foot,
it was proposed among her suitors, that he, who could outrun her, should have
her for his wife, but many of them being overcome, at length Hippomenes the son
of Megacles, who had received three golden Apples of Venus, that had been
gathered in the Hesperian Garden, let them fall in the midst of the Race, and
by that means arrived at the end before her, also the name of a great Huntresse
of Arcadia, who gave the first wound to the Caledonian Boar, and was afterward
married to Meleager. Achievement, (French) the performance of some great
exploit. Atchek^d, (old word) choked. Ateles, an Island famous for the
abundance of precious Ointments that grew there. Aterst, (old word) in earnest,
in deed. Athamas, the son of Aeolus, and King of Thebes, he had by his wife
Nephele, Phryxus, and Hell, who were so persecuted by Ino, the daughter of
Cadmus, whom their father married that they fled away upon the Golden Ram, but
Hell falling off into the Sea, gave the name to Hellespont, see Ino. Atheism,
(Greek) ungodliness, a being of no Religion. Athelney, or Athelingy, i. the
Isle of Nobles, a little Island made by the River Th^ne in Sommersetshire,
where King Alfred shrouded himself, when the Danes overran the Kingdom, as
Marius did anciently in the Lake of Minturnus. Athens, a famous City of
Greece, first called Cecropia from Cecrops, afterward Athenae from Athenaea,
or Minerva, who first found out the use of the Olive Tree. Athletical, (Greek)
belonging to wrestling. Athol, a County in the South-part of Scotland,
bordering upon Perth, and watered by the River Amund. Athos, a high Hill
between Macedon, and Thrace, which casts a shadow as far as the Isle of Lemnos,
upon the top of this Hill is a City, now called Monte Sancto. Athroted, (old
word) cloyed. Atlantic Islands, two Islands upon the Borders of Lybia,
formerly called the Fortunate Islands, or the Hesperides, where were said to be
the Elysian fields. Atlantick-Sea, a part of the Mediterranean-Sea, lying
Westward, it begins at the River Molucha, and finishes at the promontory
Ampelusia. Atlas, the son of Iapetus and Asia, daughter of Oceanus, who was
faign'd by the Poets to support heaven upon his shoulders, also a Mountain of
Mauritania, now called Anchisa, by others Montes Claros, into which the Poets
faign Atlas King of Mauritania, to have been turned. Atmosphaere, (Greek) that
same Region of the air, where vapors and exhalations are engendered. Atom,
(Greek) a mote in the sunbeams, also a word used in Philosophy, being the
smallest part of a body that can be imagined. Atonement, as it were, a making
at one, a reconcilement, or causing to agree. Atramental, (Lat.) belonging to
Ink. Atrate, (Lat.) made black, also one in mourning. Atrick, an Usher of a
Hall. Atrocity, (Lat.) fierceness. Atrophy, (Greek) a kind of consumption of
the body, which is caused by the meat, not turning into nourishment.
Attachment, (French) a laying hands on, in Common Law it signifies a laying
hold on by the force of a Writ, it differs from an Arrest, which lies on the
body, and from a distress which is upon land and goods, this being upon body
and goods. Attainder, (French) a Term in law, signifying the conviction of any
person of felony, or any Crime whereof he was not convicted before. Attaint,
tried, found out. Attamed, (old word) set on broch. Attaque, (French) an
assault, an encounter. Attemperate, (Lat.) to make fit. to mix a just
proportion. An Attendant, a servant. Attenes (old word) at once. Attentive,
(Lat.) diligently harkening. Attenuation, (Lat.) a making less. Atterly, (old
word) extremely. Attestation, (lat.) a proving by witnesses. Atthis, the
daughter of Cranaus, King of Athens, she died unmarried, and from her the
Country was called Attica, whereas it was formerly called Actica from Actaeus,
the first King thereof. Attick, neat, elegant, from Attica, or Athens, which
was the Nursery of Eloquence. An Attiring, a dressing, or apparelling, from
Tiara, a Persian Ornament for the head, also a Term in Heraldry. Attoure, (old
word) toward. Attournment, (French) a Term in Common Law, a turning Tenant to
a new Lord. Attraction, (Lat.) a drawing to, an allurement. Attraits, (French)
the same, also those charming qualities, which have power to draw the
affections of men. Artamenes. Attrebatii, the ancient name of those people that
inhabited that part of England, now called Bark-shire. Attrectation, (Lat.)
handling, also a wanton carriage toward a woman. Attribute, (Lat.) to give, to
impute. Attrition, (Lat.) a rubbing, or wearing against another thing.
Attwitte, (old word) to make blameworthy. Atwin, (old word) asunder.
A V
Available, profitable. Avaunt, (French) forward, also a Term of disdain, as
much as to say, away, out of my sight. Avarice, (Lat.) covetousness. Avaricum,
a Town of Gallia, Aquitanica, now called Bourges, by some Chasteauneuf.
Aubades, (French) songs, or instrumental music, sung, or played under any ones
Chamber-window in the morning, from Aube the morning. Auben^y, or Albeney, see
D'anbeney. Auctour, (Lat.) an increaser, also the same as Author. Aucupation,
(Lat.) fouling, also a greedy looking after gain. Audacity, (Lat.) boldness.
Audley, see Awdley. Audience, (Lat.) hearing, also a great concourse of people
coming to hear any Oration delivered in public. Auditor, (Lat.) a hearer, also
an Officer of the King, or any other great personage, appointed to hear, and
examine the accounts of all under Officers, and to make up a general book, which
shows the difference between their receipts and allowances. Audry, the name of
an English Saint, the first foundresse of Ely Church, some think it contracted
from the Saxon word, Ethelred. Avenant, agreeable. Avenage, (French) a certain
quantity of Oats, which a Landlord receives in stead of some other duties.
Avenio, a City of Gallia Narbonensis, which has been the seat of diverse
Popes, now called Avignon, this City has seven Palaces, seven Parishes, seven
Monasteries, seven Colleges, seven Inn's, and seven Gates. Aventinus, one of
the seven Hills of Rome. Avenue, (French) a Term in fortification, signifying
the space that is left for passage to and fro, in, and out a Camp, Garrison, or
Quarter. Aver, (old word) bribery. Aver, (French) affirm, to justify. Average,
from the old Latin word Averia, which signifies a beast; it being a service,
which a Tenant does unto the Lord by horse, or carriage of horse, and so the
Kings Averages are (...) Kings carriages by horse, or cart, it is also a
contribution that Merchants and others make, toward the losses of those, who
have their goods cast into the Sea for the safeguard of the ship. Averdupois,
(French) it signifies in Common Law, a weight of 16 Ounces, whereas Troy-weight
has but 12. also such Merchandises as are weighed by this weight. Averie, a
place where Oats, or Provender for the Kings horses was kept, or a Christian
name, signifying as much as given in wish from the Dutch Alberia. Averment, a
Term in law, when the Defendant offers to justify an exception pleaded in
abatement of the Plaintiffs act. Avernus, a Lake in Campania near Baiae, whose
vapors were so deadly, that birds were killed as they flew over, which made
the ancients think it to be a descent into Hell. Averpenny, money contributed
toward the Kings Averages. Averruncation, (Lat.) a Term in Husbandry, it being
a lopping off of superfluous branches. Averrun^us, a certain God among the
Romans, who was said to avert all evils, as Hercules among the Greeks, was
called Alexicacus. Aversion, (Lat.) a secret hatred without any apparent
reason, it may be taken in the same sense as Antipathy. Artamenes, also a
turning away. Aufidena, a City of Italy among the Caraceni, which is yet
standing. Augeas, King of Elis, the son of Sol and Nauphridame, he had a stable
which held 3000 Oxen, which Hercules cleansed by bringing in the River Alpheus,
but being denied his pay, he killed Augeas, and made his son Phileus King.
Augmentation, (Lat.) an increasing, the Court of augmentation, was a Court
erected by Henry the eighth, for the increase of the Revenues of the Crown, by
the suppression of Abbeys and religious houses. Augre, a Carpenters tool, a
wimble. Augrim, the same as Algorithme, skill in numbering. Augrimstones, stones
to cast account with. Augurie, (Lat.) South-saying, Divination by the voices,
or flying of birds. Augures-staff, a certain wand, which the Augures used to
hold in their hand, when they made their divinations. August, Royal,
Majestical, Illustrious, from Octavius Augustus, ^he second Roman Emperor,
after whom (...) the succeeding Roman Emperors, were honored with that Title,
also the name of the sixth month from March, otherwise called Sextilis.
Augustal's, (Lat.) feasts kept in honor of Augustus. Augustan Confession,
(Lat.) the confession of faith made by the Protestants at Auspurgg in Germany,
in the year 1530. Augustine, or Austin, the name of one of the fathers, who was
Bishop of Hippo, also a proper name of diverse men from Augustus, i. Majestical.
Augustine, or Austin Friars, an Order of Friars, of the institution of St.
Austin. Augu^tinians, a Sect of Heretics, otherwise called Sacramentaries, who
hold that Heaven Gates are not opened till the general Resurrection, they were
instituted by Andreas Car^lostadius, in the year 1524. afterward confirmed by
Augustine a Bohemian. Aviary, (Lat.) a great Cage, or place where birds are
kept. Avice, a woman's name, in Latin Hawisia, or Helwisa, contracted from
Hildevig, signifying in Saxon, Lady Defense. Avidity, (Lat.) covetousness,
greediness of gain. Aniso, (Spanish) an advertisement, or advice. Aulick,
(Lat.) belonging to the Court. Aulis, a Haven in Boeotia, where the Grecian
Princes met, and joined forces to go to the siege of Troy. Aulnegeor, (French)
an Officer of the King, who looks to the Assize of Woollen Cloth, made
throughout the land, and has two Seals ordained him for that purpose. Aumener,
(old word) a Cupboard. Aumer, (old word) Amber. Ancient demeasn, a Term in
Common Law, signifying a public Tribute by a Tenure, whereby all Mannours
belonging to the Crown, in the days of Edgar, or Saint Edward did hold.
Auntreth, (old word) makes adventure. Avocation, (Lat.) a calling away.
Avoirdupois, see Averdupois. Avouch, (French) to maintain, to justify.
Avowable, justifiable. Avowry, a Term in law, when one takes a distress for
Rent, and he, who is distrained sues a Replevy, now he that took the distress
justifying the act, is said to avow. Aurea Chers^nesus, a Peninsula of India,
by some called Melepa, by others Japan. Aureat, (lat.) Golden. Aurelia, a City
of Gallia Celtica, so called from Aurelius the Emperor, now called Orleance,
it is situate upon the bank of the River Loir. Aurenches, the name of an
ancient family, who were heretofore Barons of Folkstone in Kent, they are
styled in Latin, Records de Abrincis. Auricular, (lat.) belonging to the ear,
whence Auricular confession. Auriferous, (lat.) Gold-bearing, an Epithet
belonging to the River Tagus. Auriflamb, the holy Standard of France, which
used to be born in the Wars against Infidels, having on the top a purple
Ensign, it was lost in a battle against the Flemings. Auriga, a Constellation
in the firmament upon the Horns of Taurus. Aurigation* (lat.) the guiding of a
Chariot, or Coach. Aurigia, a Town of Hispania Boetica, now called Arion.
Aurigraphy, (Greek) a writing in Gold. Aurney, or Aurigney, contracted from
Alderney, an Island in the British Sea, anciently called Arica. Aurora, the
daughter of Hyperion and Thea, mother of Lucifer and the winds, she snatched
away Tithonus, the brother of Laomedon, whom, when he was old, she restored to
youth by the virtue of Herbs, and had Memnon by him. Aurum potabile, Gold made
liquid, and Medicinable. Auscultation, (lat.) a harkening unto, or obeying.
Auses, a people of Africa, among whom the Virgins used to combat in honor of
Minerva, those that were killed were accounted no maids, and she that fought
most valiantly was carried in a Triumphant Chariot, about the River Tritonis.
Ausones, a very ancient people of Italy, Neighbors to the Osci and Cir^eii,
being that part where now stands Beneventum, they were so called from Auson,
the son of Ulysses and Capso, who built Arunca thereabouts. Auspical, (lat.)
belonging to Sooth-saying. Auspitious, (lat.) lucky, happy, from Auspices
Soothsayers. Austere, (lat.) sour, crabbed, stern. Austral, (lat.) Southern.
Austrasia, that part which contains Brabant and Lorrain, it was anciently
reckoned a part of France, and was a Kingdom of it self, having Mets for its
chief seat, there being anciently in France four Kingdoms, Austrasie, Soissons,
Orleans, and Paris. Austria, a part of Germany by Danubius, anciently called
the upper ^annonia, in this Country is seated the imperial City of Vi^enna.
Austromancy, (Greek) a kind of divination by observing the South-winde.
Authentic, (Greek) allowed, approved by good Authors. Autoleon, a Captain of
the Crotoniates, making war against the Lo^ri, who always left a room void for
Ajax, as if he had been present himself, but Antoleon breaking into the empty
place, was wounded by Ajax his Ghost. Autoli^us, the son of Mercury and
Telauge, the daughter of Lucifer, he received this gift from his father, that
whatsoever he stole he might change it into what form soever he would to keep
himself from being deprehended, he ravished Anticlia, the daughter of Sisyphus,
who being with child was given to Laertes, and brought forth Ulysses.
Autology, (Greek) a speaking of, or to ones self. Autogeneal, (Greek)
self-begotten. Autocrasie, (Greek) self-subsistence. Automatous, (Greek) having
a motion within it self. Antonoe, the daughter of Cadmus, King of Thebes and
Hermione, she was married to Aristeus, and brought forth Actaeon. Autonomy,
(Greek) a living after ones own law. Autoptical, (Greek) self beholding.
Autremite, another attire, a word used by Chaucer. Autumnal, (Lat.) belonging
to Autumn, one of the four quarters of the year. Auturgie, (Greek) a
self-working. Avulsion, (Lat.) a pulling away from. Aux, (a Term in Astronomy)
the same as Absis, see Absis. A^xiliary, (Lat.) aiding, or assisting, as
auxiliary forces were such as were sent the Romans from other Countries, their
confederates, and ally's. A^xilium ad filium militem faciendum, etc. a Writ
directed to the Sheriff of every County, where the King, or other Lord has
Tenants, to leavy of them reasonable aid toward the Knighting of his eldest
son, or marrying of his eldest daughter. Award, judgment, arbitration. Awaite,
a watching circumspection, also a tarrying. Awaites, ambushments. Awdley end,
the name of a stately house in Essex, once an Abbey, afterward the dwelling
house of the Aldethelighe's, or Awdly's, an ancient family, it is now in the
possession of the Earls of Suffolk. Awhaped, (old word) amazed. Awhere, (old
word) desire. Awning, a sail made of Canvasse, which is spread over the ship
above the deck to keep away the sun. Awreketh, (old word) revengeth. Axillary,
(Lat.) belonging to the arm pit. Axinomancy, (Greek) a divination by hatchets.
Axiom, (Greek) a position in a sentence, a maxim in any art. Axicle, (Latin) a
little board, lath, or shingle. Axis, (Lat.) an Axel-tree, the Diameter of the
world. Axminster, or Axanminster, a Town in Cornwall, famous for the Tombs of
the Saxon Princes, slain at the battle of Brunaburg. Ay, (old word) an Egg.
Aid, the same as aid, help, succor, also a Term in law, signifying a subsidy,
lone, or tax due from subjects to their Sovereign, or from Tenants to their
Landlord. Aye, (old word) for ever. Azamoglans, those that are destined to be
Janizary's are so called, before they are enrolled in pay. Azebone, (Arab.) a
Term in Astrology, the head of the 16th. mansion. Azimeck, (Arab.) the star,
called the Virgins spike. Azemen, degrees in Astronomy, are those degrees,
which, when the native is infected with any inseparable disease, as blindness,
dumnesse, etc. or defective in any member, are supposed to ascend at his birth.
Azimuth, a Term in Astronomy, the Azimuth Circles are those, which meet in the
vertical point, and pass through all the degrees of the Horizon. Azure, a
sky-colour, a light blue, it is most properly termed Azure in blazon, or
Heraldry. Azyme, (Greek) unleavened, unmingled. Azymes, a solemn feast kept
for seven days, wherein it was not lawful to eat leavened bread.
B
BAal, an Assyrian word, signifying Jupiter, or Lord. Ba^el, or Babylon, so
called from the confusion of languages, which was there caused, it was
anciently the chief seat of the Assyrian Monarchs, being built by Nimrod, and
afterward walled by Semiramis, it is now called Bagadeth, or Bagda. Bablac, a
Town in Oxfordshire, situate upon the River Isis, where Sir R. Vere, Earl of
Oxford, Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland, being in great favor and
Authority with King Richard the second, was defeated by the Nobles, forced to
swim over the River, and to fly his Country. Babys, the brother of Marsyas, he
committing the like insolency as his brother, was also to have been flead by
Apollo, but that he was saved at the intercession of Pallas. Bacchanals, the
feast of Bacchus. Baccharach, or Bachrag wines are those, which we call Rhenish
wines, from Baccharag, a City situate upon the Rhine Bacchus, the inventour of
wine, he was the son of Jupiter and Semele, who desiring to lie with Jupiter in
all his glory was burnt up with Thunder, and Bacchus being cut out of her Womb,
was inserted into Jupiter's Thigh, until the birth were mature, he is also
called Dionysius, Liber Pater, and Osiris. Bacciferous, (Lat.) bearing Berries.
Bacheler, (French) an unmarried man, also a Bacheler of a Company, a Bacheler
of Arts, is he, who takes the first degree in the profession of any Art, or
Science, the second being licenciate, and the last Doctor, A Bacheler Knight,
vide Knight. Backberond, (Saxon) a Term in Common Law, signifying a Thief that
is taken with the manner, (being followed with huy and cry) with those things
he has stolen, whether it be money, or any thing else, it is by some taken
for an offender against Vert, or Venison in the Forest. Bactriana, a Provice
of Scythia, beyond Assyria. Badbury, a Town in Dorsetshire, where King Edward
the Elder put to flight his Cousin Aethelwald, who had conspired with the Danes
against him. Badge, the same as Arms, or Cognizance. Badger, a Carrier of
Corn, or like provision from one place, to transport it to another. Badinage,
(French) foolery, buffonry. Badonicus, the ancient name of a Hill in
Sommersetshire, now called Bannesdown-hill, where King Arthur defeated the
English Saxons in a great battle. Boetica, a part of Spain, formerly so called
from the River Boetis, now called Gnadalquivir. Bagatel, (French) a toy, a
trifle. Baggeth, (old word) disdaineth. Bail, (French) a Term in Common Law,
signifying the taking charge of one arrested upon action, either Civil, or
Criminal, under surety taken for his appearance at a day, and place certainly
assigned. See Main-prize. Baily, or Bailiffe, (French) a Magistrate appointed,
within a Province, or praecinct, to execute Justice, to maintain the peace, and
to preserve the people from wrongs and vexations, and is principal Deputy to
the King, or Supreme Lord, also the Officers of each hundred, and of Towns
Corporate are called Bailiffs, there are also Bailiffs of husbandry belonging
to private men, who are Lords of Mannours. Bailywick, the Jurisdiction of a
Baily. Bain, (French) a bath, or hot house. Bainards Castle, a house in London,
belonging at this day to the Earls of Pembrock, it was so called from William
Bainard, Lord of Dunmow, whose possession formerly it was. Baisemaines, (Fr.)
kissing of the hands, Complementing. Baiton Kaiton, the belly of the Whale, an
Arabic word. Baize, a fine sort of Freeze, from Baii, a City of Naples, where
it was first made. Balade, (French) a Ballet, or roundelay, also a Dance.
Balasse, a Saxon word, signifying Gravel, laid in the bottom of a ship, to keep
it upright. Balatron, (Ital.) a babbler, a prating knave. Balcone, (Ital.) a
bay-window. Baldwin, (Germ.) a proper name, signifying bold victor, and
answering to the Greek Thrasyn^achus. Bale, (French) a pack of Merchants wares.
Balefull, sorrowful, woeful. Balk, (Dutch) a ridge between two furrows. Ball,
(French) a dancing meeting. Balladin, (French) a dancer of Galliards. A
Balance, (French) a pair of Scales. Ballast, see Balasse. Balliol College, a
College in the University of Oxford, built by John Balliol of Bernards Castle,
in the Bishopric of Durham, and father of Balliol, King of Scots. Ballist,
(Lat.) an Engine to cast, or shoot stones. Ballon, (French) a Term in
Architecture, signifying the round Globe of a Pillar, also a great Ball.
Ballotation, a kind of casting lots, or making election by Balls. Ballustrad, a
Term in Architecture, signifying a jutting out of a window, or portal. Balm,
the juice, or Oil of a certain plant growing in Judaea, otherwise called
Balsamum, or Opobalsamum. Balmerinoch, an Abbey in Fife, a County of Scotland,
built by Queen Ermengard wife to King William. Balneary, (Lat.) a bathing
place. Balthazar, an Hebr. word, signifying without treasure, it was the name
of one of the wisemen, who came out of the East to worship our Savior. See
Sands his Travels 181. Baltia, an Island in the German Ocean, by Xenophon
called Lampsacenus, now Scandia, or Scandinavia, from this Island the Baltic
Sea derives its name, which Philemon calls Marimorusa, Hecataeus Amalchium.
Bambalio, a faint-hearted fellow. A Band, (French) a Company of foot Soldiers.
Bandie, (French) to follow a faction. Banditi, (Ital.) outlaws from Bando, a
Proclamation, because they are condemned by Proclamation, the Dutch call them
Nightinghals, and Free-booters. Bandle, an Irish measure of two foot in length.
A Bandog, a Mastive. Bandon, (French) free License, or liberty, also a company,
or Sect. Bandore, (Ital.) a kind of Musical instrument. Bane, poison,
destruction. Banes, (French) in Canon Law are Proclamations, but more
especially taken for the public proclaiming of Marriage in Churches.
Bangle-ear'd, having hanging ears like a Spaniel. Bangue, a pleasant drink used
in the Eastern Countries. A Banker, one who in foreign Countries delivers
foreign money for his own Countries Coin. Bankrout, or Bankrupt, a decoctor,
one that has consumed his estate. Bannavenna, or Bennaventa, a Town in
Northhamptonshire, anciently so called, now Wedon in the street, once the Royal
seat of Wolpher, King of the Mercians, and by his daughter Werbury, a holy
Virgin converted into a Monastery. Banner, (French) a Standard, or Ensign.
Banneret, or Knight Banneret, vide Knight. Banneroll, (French) a little Flagge,
or Streamer. Baptism, (Greek) a Sacrament used in the Church, for the
initation of children into the Christian Religion, it signifies a washing, or
dipping in water. Baptist, (Greek) a proper name, first given to St. John, who
was the first that baptized. Baptistery, (Greek) a Vessel to wash in, a Font to
baptize in. Barbara, the name of a holy woman, martyred under the Emperor
Maximian, the word signifies in Latin, strange, or unknown. Barbaria, the
chief part of Africa, which is divided into four Kingdoms, Morocco, Fesse,
Telessina, and Tunis. Barbarism, (Greek) a rudeness of behavior, a clownish
pronunciation of words. Barbe, a mask, or visard. Barbel, a kind of fish, a
little Sammon. Barbican, (French) a Term in architecture, and fortification, an
out-work in a building, a bulwark, a watch Towr. Barbitist, a Lutinist. Barce,
the chief City of Lybia. Bards, the ancient Poets among the Britains, and the
Gauls, Bardes also, or barbes, signify the trappings, or caparisons of
horses. Bardulph, (Germ.) from Bertulph. Bargaret, (old word) a Sonnet, or
Ballet. Barkary, a tan house, or house where they put barks of Trees. Bark, the
Forresters say a Fox barketh. Bark-fat, a Tanners tub. Bark-man, a Boat-man,
from Bark, a little ship, or boat. Barm, yest, the flowring, or over-decking of
Beer, also a lap. Barm-cloath, an Apron, Chaucer. Barn, or Bern, a Northern
word, signifying a child. Barnabas, the proper name of a man, signifying in
Hebrew a son of comfort. Baroco, a Term in Logic, being one of the moods of
the second figure of a Syllogism, wherein the first proposition is a universal
affirmative, the two second particular Negatives. Baron, (French) a title of
Honor, as much as Lord, Barons are of three sorts. First, by Dominion and
Jurisdiction, Barons of the King, whose Baronies were Capitales. Secondly,
Barons of the subjects holding not of the King, but by mes^alty. Thirdly, Lords
of Mannours. (...), a tax, or subsidy of aid, to be levied for the King ou^ of
the Precincts of Baronies. Bar, a Term in Common Law, is, when the Defendant
in any action pleads a Plea, which is a sufficient answer; also place where
causes are pleaded, also a Term in Blazo^, being composed of two equidistant
lines drawn overthwart the Escutcheon, and differs from the Fesse, in that it
is not confined to the Fesse-point. Barfee, a fee of twenty pence, which every
Prisoner acquitted of Felony pays to the Jailer. Barratour, (French) a Term
in Common Law, signifying a common wrangler, one that sets men at variance,
causing them to implead one another at the Bar of Justice. Barren signs are
Libra, Leo, Virgo. Barricado, (Spanish) a defense against an enemies assault,
made of empty barrels filled with earth. Barriers, (French) a certain martial
exercise (in Latin called palaestra) of armed men fighting with short swords,
within certain limits, or lists which sever them from the spectators.
Barrister, a pleader at the Barre^, those who after seven years study of the
Law are admitted to plead; and stand without the Bar, are called utter
Barristers, but a Sergeant, or Princes Attorney, or any of the King^ Council,
are admitted to plead within the Bar, and are called inner-Barristers.
Barsalona, or Barcellona, anciently called Barcino, or Colonia Faventia, the
chief City of Catalonia in Spain. Barter, from the Latin word vertere, to
truck, or change. Bartholomew, (Hebr.) a proper name, signifying the son of him
that makes the waters to mount. Bart^^, a place to keep Poultry in, from the
Dutch word baert to bring forth, and Ho^n a H^n. Bar^let, a Term in Heraldry,
the fourth part of a Bar. (...), (Spanish) the language of a Country of Spain,
called Bi^cay. Base, the bottom, or foundation of any thing, also the foot of a
pillar, also the deepest part in Music, being the foundation of the rest, also
a kind of fish, called a Sea-wolf. Base-Court, a Term in Law, any Court that
is not of Record, as Court Baron. Base estate, or base fee, is a holding at the
will of the Lord. Baselards, (old word) Daggers, Wood-knives. Basil, an Herb so
called, o^ a very fragrant smell, also a proper name signifying Royal, or
Kingly. Basilical, (Greek) Royal, Magnificent. Basilick vain, see vein.
Basilisk, (Greek) a kind of a Serpent, called a Cockatrice, also a long piece
of Ordnance, called in Italian Basilisco, also a star, called the Lions heart.
Basinet, a little basin. Basis, see Base. Baskervil, the name of a very eminent
family, descended from a Niece of Gunora, that famous Norman Lady, they had
their ancient seat at Erdsley, a Town in Herefordshire. Bassa, a Commander over
Soldiers among the Turks. Bastard, signifies in the Common Law, one begotten
out of Wedlock. Bastardise, to corrupt, to adulterate, to change out of its own
kind into a worse. Bastile, or Bastillion, (French) a fortress, or
fortification, the chief fortress of Paris, is called la Bastile, being also
the chief prison of the Kingdom of France. Bastinado, (Spanish) a banging with
a Cudgel. Bastion, (French) a Skonce, or Block-house, called also a Cullion
head. Baston, (French) a Bat, or Cudgel, it signifies also in the Statute Law,
one of the servants, or Officers, to the Warden of the Fleet, that attends
the Kings Court, for the taking of such men to Ward, as are committed by the
Court. Bastonado, see Bastinado. Batavia, a part of lower Germany, situate
upon the River Rhene, called Holland. Bath, a famous City in Sommersetshire,
so called from the hot Baths of Medicinal waters, which are there by Antoninus
called Aquae solis, by Ptolomy (...), some report them to have been found out
by Bleyden a Magician, others by Julius Caesar, others by an ancient British
King. Battail-field, a place near Shrewsbury, so called from the great battle
fought there between King Henry the fourth, and Edmund Mortimer, Earl of
March, where Sir Henry Piercy, called Hotsspur was slain. Battalion, (French)
the main battle of an Army. Battle-bridge, a place in Yorkshire, otherwise
called Stanford-bridge, where Harald King of England slew Harald Hardreak King
of Norwey. Battlements, the Turrets of houses built flat. Batt^logy, (Greek) a
vain repetition of words. Battus, a certain keeper of Mares, to whom Mercury
delivered several Oxen, which he had stolen from Apollo, keeping Admetus his
herds, and coming to him afterward in another s^ape, he corrupted him with
gifts to deliver the Oxen, but seeing his perfidiousnesse, he turned him into a
stone, called Index. Batune, a Term in Heraldry, and seems to be the fourth
part of a bend Sinister only, it touches not the chief, nor the base point.
Bavaria, a great Dukedom in Germany. Baubels, (old word) Jewels. Baucis, the
wife of Philemon, who entertained Jupiter and Mercury. See Philemon. Baud, a
brave, a Ruffian, from the French word Ribaud. Baudkin, a kind of tinsel, or
stuff that glisters like sparkles. Baudon, custody, a word used by Chaucer.
Baudrick, furniture, also a sword-girdle, also an old fashioned Jewel. Baulk,
(old word) to cross. Baulm, a certain Herb called Beewort. Bawsin, (old word)
big, gross. Bay, a stop for water, a road for ships, also a brown red
color, being the color of the Palm Tree, Chaucer also uses it for a stake.
Bay-window, a window that boundeth out in a round form.
B E
Beacon, from the Dutch word Bekennen to give notice, a light fastened upon a
high pole to give warning of an enemies approach. Beaconage, money paid for the
maintaining of Beacons. Beads, from the Dutch word beden to pray, a certain
number of prayers, at the end of which it is the custom to drop a bead.
Beadle, (from the Dutch word Bedel, a Crier) one that waits upon a Magistrate
with a white wand to make any Summons, an Officer, especially belonging to a
University, also an Officer of the Forest, that makes all manner of
garnishments for the Court of the Forest, and makes all manner of
Proclamations, as well within the Court of the Forest as without. A Beadroll,
(Saxon) a list of such as Priests use to pray for in the Church. Beakehead, in
Navigation, is that which is fastened to the stem of the ship, and is supported
with a knee which is fastened into the stem. Beam, in hunting, is that whereon
the starts of a Stags head grow. Bearesfoot, an Herb otherwise called Brank
Ursin, or Bears claw. Bearers, a term in Law signifying maintainers or
abettors; also a term in Heraldry, signifying those that have coat-armours,
distinguished from others by tincture and differences. Bear in, is when a ship
sails before, or with a large wind into a harbor, or channel, she is said to
bear in with the harbor or channel. Bear off, when a ship goes more room than
her course does lie, she is said to bear off from the land. Beasel or collet of
a ring, that wherein the stone is inchac't. Beastail, (French) all manner of
cattle or beasts, as oxen, sheep, etc. Beat, a term in hunting, a hare or cony
when they make a noise, are said to beat or tapp. Beatitude, (Lat.)
blessedness, happiness. Beatrix, (Lat.) a woman's name, she that makes happy.
Beavis, the proper name of a man, contracted from Bellovesus. Beauchamp, a name
of great honor and eminency from the time of King Henry the second, especially
since Cicily de Fortibus descended from the Earls de Ferrariis matched into
their Family of this name were anciently the Earls of Warwick, the Barons of
Kidderminster, and of Powick. Of late ages, the Title of Vicount Beauchamp,
has been conferred upon the Family of Seimours. In old Records it is written
de Bello Campo. Beaumont, the name of one of the greatest Families of the
Nation, descended from John County of Brene in France, who for his valor was
preferred to the kingdom of Jerusalem. Beaupleading, a term in Law, fair
pleading. Beau Sir, fair sir, a word used by Chaucer. Bec, a Phrygian word,
signifying bread, which was the first word pronounced by certain children, whom
Psammeticus the Egyptian King caused to be brought up in a forest, by which he
concluded the Phrygians to be the most ancient people. Becebick, medicaments,
such as are composed for the asswaging of a cough, as Lozenges, Licorice,
Pills, etc. Becomingnesse, neatness, handsomeness, Artamenes. Bid, the name
of a learned English Monk, who lived near Newcastle upon Tine; he had the title
given him of venerable Bede, as well in his life time, as since his death.
Beddeth, (a term in hunting) applied to a Roe when it lies down in any place.
Bedellium, a kind of gum. Bedlem, or Bethlem, (an Hebr. word, signifying a
house of bread) a place where mad people are kept. Bedoheer, (Sax.) a
bedfellow. Beemot, the flat key in music. Beesom, a broom. Beestings, quasi
breasting, the first milk after birth. Beet, a certain Garden herb. Beglerbeg,
a Supreme Commander under the Great Turk: there are but two who have this
command, the one is called Beglerbeg of Greece, the other of Natolia. Beguines,
an order of Religious women who are all old. Behight, (old word) promised.
Beknew, (old word) learnt out. Behiram, a Feast among the Turks, where they use
to pardon all injuries. Belamy, (French) fair friend. Belchier, (French) good
countenance. Belchose, (French) fair thing. Beleagre, to besiege, from the
Dutch Belegren, to sit near. Belgia, the Country of the Belgae, or
Low-countrymen, lying between the River Sequana, and the Rhene. It is divided
into 17 Provinces, also the people anciently inhabiting that part of England
now called Sommersetshire, Hantshire, and Wiltshire, were called Belgae, in
regard they came thither originally out of Gallia Belgica. Belides, the fifty
daughters of Danaus, who married the fifty sons of Aegyptus, who all killed
their husbands except one. Belizarius, Captain of the Emperor Justinians
armies, who overthrew the Persians in the East, the Vandals in Africa, the
Goths in Italy, and at last had his eyes put out by Justinian, and was forced
to beg his bread in a poor cottage. Bell, in the Chaldaean language signifies
the Sun who was worshipped under that name by the Caldaeans and Assyrians.
Bellatrice, (Lat.) a woman warrior. Bellatrix, the left shoulder of Orion.
Bellerophon, the son of Glaucus King of Epire, against whom Sthenobaea the wife
of Praetus King of Argos conspired, because he refused her inticements; but he
having overcome all difficulties, was commanded at last to kill the Chimaera,
which he did with the help of Neptune, who sent him a flying horse called
pegasus, which was afterward placed among the celestial Signs. Belleth, a term
in hunting, as when the Forresters say, a Roe Belleth. Bellipotent, (Lat.)
strong in arms, powerful in war. Belligeration, (Lat.) a waging war. Bellona,
who is also called Enyo, the Goddess of War, and sister of Mars, some think
her to be the same with Minerva. Bellow, the Foresters apply this word to the
Heart, and say, the Heart belloweth. Belluine, (Lat.) pertaining to beasts, of a
cruel bestial disposition. Bel-vedere, (Ital.) pleasant to behold, the name of
the Popes Palace in Rome. Belus, the second, or, as some say, the first King of
Assyria, who when he died, was worshipped as a god. Also the son of Epaphus and
Lybia, was called Belus Priscus, who married Isis, and had two sons, Aegyptus
and Danaus, Belus has also been taken for Jupiter, as Nimrod for Saturn.
Beelzebub, an Hebrew word, signifying the god of flies, and is used in Scripture
for the prince of the Devils. Bement, (old word) lamented. Bemes, (old word)
trumpets. Benacus, a lake in Lombardy, which is said to have golden sands.
Benan, a Star in the tail of Helm. Bend, used by Chaucer for a muffler, a
caul, a kercher. Also a term in Heraldry, being an ordinary extended between
two opposite points of the Escutcheon: viz. the dexter chief, and the sinister
base. Bendlet, is also a term in Heraldry, being a subdivision of the bend.
Benedictines, certain religious Monks instituted by St. Benedict. Benefice,
(Lat.) a spiritual promotion. Benes, (old word) bones. Benefactour, (Lat.) a
doer of good turns. Benet, the proper name of a man, contracted from
Benedictus. Beneplacitie, (Lat.) a well pleasing. Benevolence, (Lat.) good
will. Benevolent Planets, are Jupiter and Venus. Benjamin, an Hebr. name, the
son of the right hand, as also a gum. Benign, (Lat.) favorable. Benimmeth,
(old word) bereaveth. Benisons, (French) blessings. Bennavenna, see Bannavenna.
Benoni, an Hebr. name, signifying the son of sorrow. Bereft, (old word)
deprived of. Berenice, the daughter of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus and Arsinoe,
whom Ptolemaeus Lagus her brother married. She when her husband made an
Expedition, vowed to dedicate her hair to Venus if he returned safe, which
afterward not being to be found, Conon the Mathematician feigned to have been
translated to heaven and placed among the Stars. Beris, a high hill in America,
on the top of which some hold that many people were saved in the great Deluge.
Berkhamsted, a Town in Hertfortshire, where Frederick Abbot of St. Albans,
ministered an oath to William the Conqueror, in presence of Archbishop
Lanfranc, to observe inviolably the ancient laws of this Nation. Bern, the
chief City of Helvetia, or Swizzerland. Bernacles, a sort of birds which breed
out of the rotten wood of trees growing by the sea side, especially in the
North parts of Scotland, and the Islands thereabouts; They are also called
Claik-geese, and Soland-geese. Bernard, from the Dutch word Beornhart, i. e.
bears heart, the proper name of a learned Monk of Burgundy, who entered into
the Monastery of Cisteaux. Bernard College, a College in Oxford, re-edified
by Sir Thomas White, Citizen of London, and called by a new name, Trinity
College, as Durham College was repaired by Sir Thomas Pope, and dedicated to
St. John Baptist. Bernardines, an Order of Monks, instituted by Robert, Abbot
of the abovenamed Monastery, whereof St. Bernard was the chief: they were also
called Cistertian Monks. Bernet, a Town in Hertfordshire, famous for the great
battle fought between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, where Rich. Nevil
Earl of Warick was slain. Berry, a Saxon word, signifying a dwelling house, a
Lord of a Mannours seat. Berth, convenient room at sea to moor a ship in.
Bertha, a woman's name, signifying in the German tongue, bright or famous.
Berthinsec, or Birdinsec, a law in Scotland, whereby a man cannot be hanged for
stealing a sheep, or so much meat as he can carry upon his back in a sack, but
only scourged. Bertram, an herb called pellitory of Spain, also a proper name.
See Ferdinando. Berubium, a Town in Strathnahern in Scotland, now called
Vrehead. Besant, an ancient coin of Gold, otherwise called Bisantine, from
Byzantium: i. e. Constantinople, where it used to be coined. It is uncertain
what value it is of; some attribute to it the value of a Ducket. It is also a
term in Heraldry, by which they understand plates of Gold, containing 104 pound
and two ounces of Troy weight, in value 3750 pound ster. They were round and
smooth, without any representation on them. Besieging, is when a Planet is
placed between the bodies of the two malevolents. Besestein, or Bisestano, the
name of the chief Exchange or Marketplace in Constantinople. Besyen, trouble.
Bet, (old word) better, also quickly. Beat, (old word) help, boot. Beten, (old
word) to kindle. Bethlem, see Bedlem. Betle, or Betre, a kind of Indian plant,
called Bastard-pepper. Betonie, a medicinal plant, so called, having many
sovereign virtues. Betrassed, (old word) deceaved. Betreint, (old word)
sprinkled. Betroth, from the Dutch word Betrouwen, to make sure, to promise one
in marriage. Beverage, (French) a mingled drink. Bevy, a troop, a company. The
Forresters say, a Bevy of Roes. Bewreck, (old word) revenged. Bewryen, (old
word) bewrayed. Bezill, see Beasel. Bezoar, a precious stone, bred in the maw
of a Goat.
B I
Bialacoyl, (old word) fair welcoming. Biace, or Bias, (French) that which
makes the boule to run obliquely. Bibacity, (Lat.) the immoderate love of
drink. Bibliopolist, (Greek) a Bookseller. Bibliotheque, (Greek) a study of
books, a library. Bice, a certain blue color used by Painters. Bid, a boon,
(old word) to desire a request. Bid-ale, the setting up of one decayed in his
estate, by the liberality of friends invited or bid to a Feast. Bicipital,
(Lat.) having two heads. Bicorp^real, signs are those signs which represent
two bodies, or double bodied, as Gemini and Pisces. Biennial, (Lat.) of two
years continuance. Bifarious, (Lat.) twofold, or that may be taken two ways.
Biformed, (Lat.) having two shapes. Bifront, (Lat.) having two foreheads.
Bifur^ous, (Lat.) twoforked. Bigamy, (Greek) the marriage of two wives at the
same time, which according to Common law, hinders a man from taking holy
Orders, or one that is a prisoner from having the benefit of his Clergy. Bigat,
a certain silver coin among the Romans, from Bigia, a chariot drawn with two
horses, which was stamped upon it. Bigot, (French) a scrupulous superstitious
fellow, Bilanciis deferendis, a writ directed to a Corporation for the carrying
of weights to a Haven to weigh the wools that are licenc't to be transported.
Bylaws, Orders made in Court leets, or Court barons, by common assent, farther
than the public law binds. In Scotland they are called Birlaw, or Burlaw.
Bilbilis, an ancient City of Hispania Tarraconensis famous for the birth of
Martial the Latin Poet, now called by some Calatayn'd. Bilboa, or Bilbo, a City
of Biscay in Spain, where the best blades are made. The Bildge, or Buldge of a
ship, is the breadth of the flooce whereon the ship does rest when she is a
ground. Bilinguis, (Lat.) double-tongued; also a Common law term, signifying
the jury that passes between an Englishman and Alien, whereof part are
English, and part Strangers. Binarie, (Lat.) the number of two. Binarchy,
(Greek) a government, where two only bear sway. Bindeweed, a certain herb,
otherwise called With-wind. Binne, (old word) a manger, also a place to put
bread in. Bint, (old word) bound. Bipartite, (Lat.) divided into two parts.
Bipatent, (Lat.) open on both sides. Bipedal, (Lat.) two-foot long. Biquintile,
is an Aspect consisting of 141 degrees, thus C^aractered Bq. Brigandes, a kind
of wild Goose. Birlet, (old word) a Coife, or Hood. Bisexons, (Lat.) of both
Sexes. Bismare, (old word) curiosity. Bison, (French) a wild one, great-eyed,
and broad-fac't. Bisque, a fault at Tennis, also a compound dish. Bissextile,
Leap-year, which is every fourth year, wherein one day more then ordinary is
added to February, having commonly but 28 days, and that odd day they call
dies Intercalaris. Bisumbres, see Amphiscii. Biton, and Cleobis, the two sons
of Argia the Priestesse, who for want of horses drew their Mothers Chariot to
the Temple themselves, whereupon their Mother requesting of the Gods a reward
agreeable to their piety, they were both found dead the next morning.
Bitressed, see Betrassed. Bittazle, a close Cubbard, placed on the steerage
before the tiller, whereon the Compass does stand. Bits, two square pieces of
Timber, commonly placed abast the manger, in the loof of the ship. Bittour, a
bird so called, a kind of Heron, which they say has three stones. Bitume, a
kind of slimy clay, almost of the nature of brimstone, or pitch, also a kind
of liquor flowing out of mare mortuum that burns like Oil. Bituriges, a certain
people of Gallia aquitanica, whose Country is now called Berry, and their
chief City Bourges. Bizantin, see Besant.
B L
Black book of the Exchequer, a book which treats of all the ancient
Ordnances, and Orders of the Exchequer. Blacklow, a Hill in Warwickshire, upon
which Pierce Gaveston, whom King Edward the second raised from a base Estate to
be Earl of Cornwall was beheaded by the Nobles for his insolency. Blackmore
Forest, a Forest in Dorcetshire, called also the Forest of Whitehart from a
very beautiful Whitehart, which King Henry the third, going thither a hunting,
and taking great care to spare, was killed by T. de la Linde, which so incensed
the King, that he set a perpetual Fine upon the Land, which at this day is
called Whitehart silver. Black-rod, the Usher belonging to the Order of the
Garter, so called from the Black-rod he carries in his hand, he is also of the
Kings Chamber, and of the Lords House in Parliament. Black buried, gone to
Hell. A Blain, a blister. Blanch, (French) white, also the proper name of a
woman, frequent in England. Blandiloquence, (Lat.) a flattring, or speaking
fair. Blandishment, (French) a flattring, or soothing with fair speeches.
Blankers, white furniture. Blankmanger, (French) a kind of delicious meat made
of Rice, Almond milk, Capons brains, and other things. Blasco, an Island in the
mouth of the River Rhene, now called Languillade. Blase, (Greek Blasios) a
proper name, signifying sprouting forth. Blatant, barking, bawling.
Blateration, (Lat.) vain-babling. Blaze, (Dutch) to spread abroad. Blazon,
(French) the description of a Coat of Arms. Blay, or bleak, a kind of fish of
a whitish color. Ble, (old word) sight, view. Bleach, to whiten, to dry in the
sun. Blemishes, marks made by hunters, where the Deer has gone. Blend, to mix,
to mingle together. Blent, (old word) stayed, ceased, turned back. Blepharon,
(Greek) he that has great eyebrows. Blesiloquent, (Lat.) faltering in speech,
stammering. Blue-bottle, a kind of blue flowr, so called. Blue-mantle, the
name of an Office belonging to one of the Pursevants of Arms. Blight, an Herb,
called burnt-corn, or the black Chameleon Thistle. Blinkard, one that looks
ask^w, or with distorted eyes. Blinks, (a Term in hunting) boughs rent from
Trees, and cast overtwhart the way, where a Deer is likely to pass, thereby to
hinder his running, they are called in French Brisees. Blissome, to tup as the
Ram does the Ewe. Blite, an Herb, so called. Blithe, an old British word, that
signifies yielding milk, profitable, also Blithe, or Blithsome is used for
pleasant, or jovial. Blive, (old word) readily, fast. Blo, (old word) blue.
Blocks, in Navigation are those small wooden things, wherein the running ropes
do run. Blomary, the first forge in an Iron-Mill, through which the Iron does
pass after: It is melted out of the Mine. Bloom, to blossom. Blote, to smoke,
from the Dutch word, bloet, i. e. blood. Bloudy-hand, see Dogdraw. Bloud-wit,
an old Saxon word used in Charters of liberties anciently granted, signifying
an Amerciament for shedding of blood. Blunder, to keep a pudder, bestir ones
self. Blyn, (old word) to cease.
B O
Boa, a kind of diseases incident to children, which fills them full of red
pimples, which is called by Physicians Rubella, or the Measels. Boanerges,
(Hebr.) sons of Thunder. Boas, a kind of Serpent, which being nourish't with
Cows milk, grow's to a monstrous greatness, in so much as one of them having
been killed, there was found an Infant whole in its belly, Plin. Boatswain, a
Term of Navigation, the Subpilot, he that swayeth, or governs a boat, or
ship, under the chief Pilot. Boccone, (Ital.) a morsel, or bit, also poison.
Bockland, a Term in Law, land held by book, or charter. Bodotria, or Bederia,
the ancient name of a Town in Scotland, now called Edinburgh Frith, or the
Forth, and Frith. Boeotia, a Country in Greece, formerly called Ogygia, and
separated from Attica by the Hill Cytheron. Bohemia, a part of Germany beyond
the Danow, whose chief City is Prague. Boistous, (old word) halting, lame,
lowly. Bole-armoniack, a kind of earth, or soft crumbling-stone, which is found
in a part of Armenia, used by Painters to make a kind of faint red color.
Boline, a Term in Navigation, signifying the Coard in a ship, with which
Mariners use to draw the sail, that it may gather wind. Bollen, (old word)
swelled. Bollingbroke, a Castle in Lincolnshire, famous for being the
birthplace of King Henry the fourth, who was called Henry of Bolling-broke.
Bolmong, a medley of several Granes together, it is also called Masselin, or
Mongcorn. Boltsprit, a Term in Navigation, a mast at the head of a ship.
Bombasine, a stuff made of Bombast, or Cotton. Bombard, a kind of Gunne, or
piece of Ordnance. Bombilation, (Lat.) a humming of Bees. Bombycinous, made of
silk, from the Latin word Bom^yx, i. e. silk. Bona Patria, a Term of the
practick, or law in Scotland, and signifies the choosing of twelve men out of
any part of the Country to pass upon Assise, who are called Jurators.
Bonaght, a certain tax formerly exacted in Ireland, for the maintenance of the
Knights, called Bonaghty. Bonair, see debonair. Bona, a woman's name, signifying
in Latin, good. Bonasus, a wild beast, having the head of a bull, and the body
of a horse. Bonaventure, (Lat.) good luck, the proper name of a famous holy
Friar of St. Francis Order, and of diverse other Eminent men. Bonet, a kind of
a Cap. Bonewell, the name of a pretty Well, near Richards Castle in
Hereford-shire, so called, because it is always full of little fish bones, or
as some think of small Frog bones, although they be from time to time quite
drawn out of it. Bongrace, (French) good grace, handsome behavior, also a
kind of covering for Childrens foreheads, to keep them from the heat of the
Sun. Bonhommes, (French) an order of Friars, instituted by St. Francis de
Paula, they were also called Friar Minims, or Minorites. Boniface, (Lat.) quasi
well-doer, the proper name of several Popes, and diverse other eminent men.
Bonjour, a salutation used in French, being as much as good morrow with us.
Bonito, a kind of fish, so called from the French word, Bondir, to leap up.
Bonium, the ancient name of the Monastery of Bangor in Cheshire, where
Pelagius the Heretic was brought up. Boodeth, (old word) shows. Boolie, (old
word) beloved. Boon, (old word) a request. Boot of Bale, (old word) ease of
sorrow's. Boots, a North-star, near Charles wain, called also Bubulcus, or
Arctophylax, which the Poets feigned to have been Arcas the son of Calisto, who
was changed into a Bear, and placed also among the signs. Boracho, a Spanish
word, signifying a bottle made of a Pigg's skin, with the hair inward dress't
with rozen and Pitch. Borage, a kind of Herb good for the heart, and to expel
melancholy. Borax, or Borace, a hard, and shining mineral like green earth,
wherewith Goldsmiths use to soder Gold or Silver. It is also called
Chrysocolla. Borbonia, a Dukedom in France, which began from the line of
Philip de Valois. Bordel, (Ital.) a Brothel-house. Bordlanders, the demesns
that Lords keep in their hands for the maintenance of their board or table.
Borduce in Heraldry, is a circumference or tract of one metal, color or fur,
drawn about the arms, and it contains the first part of the field, Boreas, the
son of Astraeus, or as some say, of Strymon, he married Orithya the daughter of
Erichthonius, King of Athens, and begat Zetes and Calais. It is also the name
of the North wind. Borith, an herb which Fullers use for the taking of spots
out of cloth. Born, (old word) to burnish. Borough, see Bourrough. Borrell,
(old word) attire on the head. Borrow, (old word) a pledge, a surety.
Borysthenes, the greatest River in Scythia, next to Ister. Boscage, a place set
thick with trees, also a term in painting, a picture that represents much wood
or trees. Bosenham or Boseham, a pleasant Town in Sussex, where K. Harald lived
retired for his recreation, and lanching forth into the sea in a little Bark,
he was carried by contrary winds into Normandy, where being detained, he
assured the Kingdom of England to Duke William. Boss, (French) a stud or knob.
Bosphorus, the name of two seas, so called from the passage of Jupiter over
them in the shape of a Bull, when he stole away Europa, the one lies near
Constantinople, and is called Bosphorus Thracius, the other more northward, and
is called Bosphorus Cimmerius. Botachidae, a place of Tegea in Arcadia, from
Botachus the Nephew of Lycurgus. Botanicall, (Greek) belonging to herbs.
Botargo, a kind of Saucedge, from the Greek word Oa Taricha, salted eggs.
Bothna, or Buthna, a term used in the practick of Scotland, signifying a Park
where cattle are enclosed and fed. Botin, (French) a kind of boot or buskin.
Botolph, a proper name, signifying in the Saxon tongue helpful. Bottom, (old
word) a blossom or bud. Bovillae, a Town near Rome where Claudius was slain by
Milo. Bovillon, (French) a kind of boiled meat, made of several ingredients. A
Boulter, a seive to sift meal or flower. Boun, (old word) ready. Bourchier,
contracted into Bowcer, the name of a very great and ancient Family of this
Nation, styled in Latin, Records de burgo Chara, whose chief seat in ancient
times was Hausted, a Town in Essex. Bourd, (French) to jest. Bourges, (French)
a free Denison. Bourn, (Dutch) a head of a Spring, or Fountain; and those Towns
that end in bourn, as Sittinbourn, etc. are situated upon Bourns or Springs.
Bourrean, (French) an Executioner. Bourrough, from the Dutch word Burgh, a Town
incorporate, which is not a City, whence Bourrough, or Bourgomaster, is the
Bailiff, Mayor, or Chief Ruler of a Town or Borrow. Bourrough English, or
Burgh-English, a term in law, being a customary descent of land or tenements,
to the youngest son or brother. A Bourser or Bouser, (French) a Purse-bearer or
Treasurer of a College. Boute-feu, (French) an incendiary, a sower of strife
and sedition. A Bow, a Mathematical instrument to take heights. The Bow of a
Ship, the fore part of it, so called from the form. A Bowge of Court, a livery
of bread and drink, or other things of the Princes bounty over and above the
ordinary allowance. To bowlt a Cony, (term of hunting) to start her out of any
place where she lies. Boxa, a kind of drink made in Turkey of a seed somewhat
like mustard seed. Boy, or Booy of an anchor (Span.) that which being tied to
the Anchor swims upon the water to give notice where the Anchor lies.
B R
Brabantia, the Dukedom of Brabant, which is parted from Flanders by the River
Scheldt, it contains the Marchionate of the sacred Empire, the Dukedom of
Ars^hot, the Earledomes of Hochstrat and Macklin. Braccata Gallia, that part of
France which is called Province. Brace, that which fastens beams in building,
also a Cable of a ship, also a couple or pair, from the French brace, i. e. the
arms. Brachy-graphy, (Greek) the Art of writing in Characters or
short-writing. Brackmans or Bramans, a sect of Philosophers or Divines in
India, who live only upon herbs and fruits. Braggard or Braggadocio, a
bragging vainglorious fellow. Bragget, a drink made of honey, used in Wales,
it is derived from two Welsh words, Brag which signifies malt, and Gots a
honeycomb; it is also a word used in Architecture, signifying a stay cut out
of stone or timber to bear up the Corbel. Braid Albin, otherwise called
Albanie, the most Nothren Country of Scotland, commonly called the Highlands,
the highest part whereof is likewise called Drum Albin, or Brun Albin. Brake,
(Dutch) a snaffle for horses. Brancher, a young Hawk newly come out of the
neast. Brankursin, see Bearesfoot. Brand-iron, a trevet, an iron to set a pot
upon. Brandish, (French) to make to shine with a gentle moving. Branonium, the
ancient name of Wigornia or the City of Worcester. Brant, a bird called a
Bargander, or Soland-goose. Brassets, (French) armor for the arms. Brast,
(old word) to break. Brat, (old word) a ragge. Bravado, (Spanish) a daring, a
making show of an onset. Bravery, a going fine in cloths, also a compleatnesse
of behavior. Cleopatra. Bravy, (old word) a reward. Brawders, engraven work,
Brawl, a kind of dance, from the French word Bransler, to move gently up and
down. Brayd, (old word) to break out. Brayed, awoke, arose, also took. Breck,
(old word) a bruise. Bread, (old word) a breadth, also abroad. Bredgen, (old
word) to abridge to shorten. Breez, a fresh gale or wind blowing off the sea by
day. Breetch, (a term in Gunnery) the aftermost part of a gun. Breme, (old
word) furiously, also a kind of fish so called. Brennus, a Captain of the
Gauls who overthrew the Romans at the River Albia, and took Rome, but was
beaten out by Camillus, afterward he killed himself at Delphos. Brent, (old
word) burnt. Breve, that which we call a writ, is called in the practick of
Scotland, a Breve, the several forms whereof will be seen in their order.
Breviary, a compendious collection, also a kind of Masse-book. Breviloquence,
(Lat.) a short discourse, a speaking in brief. Brian, (French) a shrill voice.
Briarius, one of the Centimani, and brother to Gyes and Caeus, they were all
three the sons of Vranus and Terra, and were said each of them to have a
hundred hands Bricolls, certain Engines used in old time to batter the walls of
Towns or Castles. Bridgenorth, a Town in Shropshire, corruptedly so called, for
Burgmorf, i. e. the Town near the Forest of Morf; it was built by Achelfleda,
Lady of the Mercians, and walled by Robert de Belesm, Earl of Shrewsbury, who
keeping the Town against King Henry the second, was there besieged and taken. A
Brie, or Brieze, a kind of fly, called a horse fly, or Gad-fly. A Brief, or
Breve, or Writ, see Writ. Brigade, (French) a Term in Military Discipline, a
body of Soldiers, consisting of three squadrons. Brigandine, (French) an
ancient kind of Armor, with many plates and joints, like a Coat of Maile
(whence Brigand a foot Soldier so armed, or a highway Robber;) it signifies
also a kind of ship, or Pinnace. Brigantes, the ancient name of those people
that inhabited a great part of the North of England, as Yorkshire,
Richmond-shire, the Bishoprickrick of Durham, Lancashire, Cumberland, and
Westmorland. Brig-bote, or Brug-bote, (Dutch) a contribution made toward the
mending of Bridges, also an exemption from that Tribute by a Charter from the
King. Brigidians, an order of religious persons, instituted by a Princess of
Suetia, whose name was Brigidia, there was also an Irish woman famous for
sanctity, who was called St. Brigit, or Bride. Brimstone, a certain Mineral,
being the fat of the earth, decocted unto his hardness. Brionie, a plant,
called otherwise white Vine. Briseis, the daughter of Brises, she fell to
Achilles his share at the taking of Lyrnessus, and being afterward taken from
him by Agamemnon, was the cause of his defection from the Grecian Army for a
great while. Britannia, the name of this whole Island, containing England and
Scotland, it is so called from the ancient name Brith, i. painted and Tania,
which among the old Greeks signified a Region. Bristow, the name of a pleasant
City, standing partly in Sommerset-shire, partly in Gloster-shire, it is so
called as it were Brightstow, which in the Saxon signifies a bright, or
shining place, in British it was called Caer Oder Nant Badon, i. e. the City
Oder in the Vale of Badon, it was fortified by Robert Bishop of Constance,
against King William Rufus, with a Wall, which this day is in part standing.
Britomartis, a Cretan Nymph, the daughter of Jupiter and Charm, she was the
first Inventour of hun^^ng Nets, being pursued by Minos, she to aviod him,
threw her self into the Sea. Broach, a Term in hunting, the next start growing
above the Beamantler in a Stagg's head. Brocado, (Spanish) a kind of Cloth,
wrought, or mixed with Gold, or Silver. Broccarii, a word used in the Scots
practick, signifies in the Statutes of Gild. Mediators in any transaction, or
contract. Brochity, crookedness, especially of teeth. Brocket, a red Deer of
two years old, a spitter, or pricket. Brode-half-penny, a Toll, or Custom, for
setting up boards, or Tables in a Market, or Fair. Brond, (old word) fury.
Brontes, one of the Cyclops, the son of Coelus and Terra, and brother to Arpe
and Strerope, they had each of them only one eye, and that upon their
forehead. Brooklime, an Herb so called. Brooming, a bringing of a ship aground
to be trimmed, or made clean. Brotel, (old word) brickle. A Brouch, a Jewel.
Brow-antler, a Term among hunters, the first start that grows next to the head
of a stag, and next to that is the beam-antler. Browded, (old word)
imbroidered. Browk, (old word) to enjoy. Browse, to feed as beasts on shrubs,
or roots of trees. Bruges, a famous City in Flanders, encompass't with a fair
wall, and having above 60 Churches. Brumal, (Lat.) winterlike, belonging to the
shortest day of winter. Brundusium, a Town in Italy, through which Caesar
followed Pompey into Greece. Brusk, a Term used in Heraldry, signifying a kind
of tawney color, otherwise called Ten. Bryke, (old word) straight, narrow.
Brymme, when a Boar desires copulation, he is said to go to the brymme.
B U
Buccinate, (Lat.) to blow a Trumpet. Bucentoro, a stately Gally, or great
ship, wherein the Duke of Venice, and the Senate go yearly in Triumph, on
Ascension day, to espouse the Sea. Bucephalus, the horse of Alexander the
Great, he had the mark of a Bull's head upon his shoulder, being killed in the
battle, which Alexander fought against Porus, King of India, a City was built
in the place where he was buried, called Bucephala. Bucheldians, a Sect of
Heretics, which are reckoned among the several sorts of Anabaptists. Buck, a
Hare, or Cony, when they desire copulation are said to go to Buck. Buck-hurst,
the title of a Barony, belonging to the Sackviles, afterward Eearls of Dorset.
Buckingham, the chief Towns in Buckinghamshire, so called from its
fruitfulness in Beech-trees, which the Saxons called Bucken. Bucoliks, (Greek)
pastoral songs. Buda, the chief City of Hungary, now called Offen, not far
from the Banks of Danubius. Budaris, a City of Germany, belonging to the
Pals-grave, now called Heidelbergh. Budge, Lambs furre. Buffle, a wild Ox.
Bulbous, (Lat.) Bulbous plants, are those that have round roots. Buffoon,
(French) a Jester. Bulgaria, a country on this side Thrace. Bulimy, (Greek)
insatiable hunger. A Bull, a round Jewel, hollow within, also one of the Popes
briefs or Mandates. Bullion money, Gold, or Silver, in the Mass, or billet,
also the place where such Gold, or Silver is brought to be tried and changed
for the King. Bumbasin, see Bombasin. Bundles, a sort of Records of Chancery,
lying in the Office of the Roll's, as the Files of Bills, and Answers in
Chancery, the Files of Corpus cum causa, all Writs of Certiorare with their
Certificates, and diverse others. Buoy, see Boy. Buquan, a County in the
South-part of Scotland, the people whereof were anciently called Taizoli.
Burgedala, a famous City of France, now called Bourdeaux, where the Poet
Ausonius was born. Burel, fine^glasse. Burford, a Town in Oxfordshire, where
Cuthred King of the West Saxons vanquished Aethelbald, King of the Mercians,
and won his Banner whereon was painted the Golden Dragon. Burgage, is a Tenure,
whereby men of Cities and Borrows hold their Lands and Tenements of the King,
and other Lords for a certain yearly Rent. Burganet, (French) a kind of
Helmet. Burgeon, or Bourgeon, to grow big about, or gross. A Burgh, see
Bourrough. Burgh-grave, a title of Honor in Germany, signifying a Count of a
Castle, or Garrison. Burglary, (French) from Bourg, a Village and Larrecin
theft, according to the acceptance of Common Law, is defined a felonious
entering into another man's house, with an intent to steal somewhat, or to do
some fellonious act. Burgundia, a Country of France, the people whereof were
anciently called Sequani, and Hedui: It is now divided into lower Burgundy,
which is called Burgundia Regia, or the County of Burgundy, and into upper
Burgundy, which is called Burgundia Imperatoria, or the Duchy of Burgundy.
Burled, (old word) armed. Burlesque, (French) merry, drolish. Burlet, (French)
a coife. Burly-brand, (old word) a great sword, great fury. Burnet, the name of
a certain Herb, also a word used by Chauser, signifying woollen, also a hood,
or attire for the head. Burnish, (Ital.) to make bright to polish, also a word
used by hunters, when Hearts spread their Horns after they are new rubbed. A
Burnisher, a word used in graving, or etching, and signifies a thing which
they make use to smooth, and sweeten the work. Burshoulder, or Burrowholder,
see Headborough. Buscum ducis, one of the chief Towns of Brabant, now called
Hertogenbush. Bush, or holy water sprinkle, (a Term in hunting) the tail of a
Fox. Busiris, the son of Neptune, and Lybia the daughter of Epaphus, who for
his Tyranny was slain by Hercules, with his son Amphidamas, and Chalbis his
crier. A Buskin, a kind of boot, alse a Pump worn by Tragidians. Bustard, or
Bistard, a kind of great sluggish bird. Butes, the son of Amycus, King of the
Bebrycians, he being deposed, fled to Trepanum, and falling in love with
Lycaste a fair Curtesan, he begat Eryx. Buthus, a famous Wrestler, that used to
devour a whole ox in a day. Butlerage, of wines, a certain impost upon wines,
which the Kings Butler may exact out of every ship. Butten, a term among
hunters, the first part in putting up a Stags head. Buttington, a Town in
Montgomeryshire, wherein in old time the Danes taking up their winter quarters,
were driven out by Adhered Earl of the Mercians, in the year of our Lord, 894.
Buttresse, a word of Architecture, the prop whereon the but-end of the building
rests. Buttuck, a term in Navigation, the breadth of a ship right a stern
from the tuck upwards. Buxome or Bu^some, from the Dutch word Booghsaem,
pliant, flexible, also blithe or merry. Buzzar, a Marketplace among the
Persians. Buzzard, a kind of great Hawk or Kite.
B Y
Byblus, a Town of Phoenicia, where Adonis had a Temple built in honor of him.
Byg, (old word) to build. Byker, (old word) a fray. Byndon, a Town in
Dorcetshire, where in the year 614. Kinegilsus the Saxon King in a doubtful and
bloody battle overcame the Britains. Byram, a certain solemn Feast among the
Turks. Byrlaw or Burlaw, a term used in the practick of Scotland. Laws of
Burlaw are determined by consent of neighbors elected by common consent in the
Courts called Burlaw Courts. Byssine, (Lat.) made of silk. Bytrent, (old word)
catched about. Bywopen, (old word) made senseless. Byzantium, a City of
Thrace, built by the Spartans under the command of Pausanias. It was afterward
called Nova Roma: But Constantine the Great, making it the chief Seat of his
Empire, it was called Constantinople, and is at this day the chief Seat of the
Turkish Empire.
C A
CAb, an Hebr. measure of 3 pints. Cabades, a King of Persia, who succeeded
Perozes after he had vanquished him, and cut off his whole army. Cabala, an
Hebrew word, signifying receiving, also a science among the Jews, comprehending
the secret ways of expounding the Law, which were revealed by God to Moses.
Cabalin, fountain, see Hypocrene. Cabin, a cottage, also a little room in a
ship, called also Cabern. Cablish, (a term used by the writers of forest laws)
signifying Brushwood. Cabura, an odoriferous fountain of Mesopotamia, wherein
Juno was used to wash. Caburn, a small line made of yarn to bind the cabel of a
ship withal. Cacams, Doctors among the Jews. Cacafuego, a Spanish word
signifying shitefire. Cachexy, (Greek) a physical term, signifying an ill
disposition of the body. Cachinnations, (Lat.) a loud laughter. Cacique, a
certain King among the Indians. Cackrell, a kind of fish. Cacochimie, (Greek) a
physical word, signifying ill juice which is caused in the body through bad
nutriment, or ill digestion. Cacodemon, (Greek) an evil spirit. Cacosyntheton,
(Greek) a vicious composition of words. Cacozealous, (Greek) ill affected, or
badly imitating. Cacuminate, (Lat.) to form into a sharp top like a Pyramid.
Cacumination, (Lat.) a making sharp at the top. Cacus, a shepherd of Aventinium
in Italy, who stealing some of the oxen which Hercules Recaranus had taken from
Gorgon, drew them backward by the tail to his cave, that they might seem by
their footsteps to have gone an other way; but the theft being discovered,
Hercules slew him with his club, and recovered his oxen. Cadaverus, (Lat.) like
a carcass, full of dead carcases. Cadbury, a Town in Sommersetshire, which is
thought by some to have been that Cathbregion where K. Arthur overcame the
English Saxons in a memorable battle. Caddow, a chough or daw. Cade, or Cadd^e,
an Arabian word, signifying a Lord or Magistrate among the Eastern people.
Cadence, (Lat.) a just falling of the tone in a sentence, a descending of notes
in music. Cad^nt houses, are the third, sixth, eight, and twelfth, houses of a
scheme or figure. Cadet, (French) a younger brother, among Gentlemen. Cadier
Arthur, a high mountain in Brecknockshire, whose two tops resembling the form
of a chair, it is thence vulgarly called K. Arthurs Chair. Cadmus, the King of
the Phoenicians, the son of Agenor and brother of Europa, he brought the Greek
letters out of Phoenicia; he killed a serpent which had slain some of his
companions, sowing the teeth of it in the Earth, out of which there sprung up
armed men. He built Thebes, in the Country of Aonia, which was afterward
called Boeotia; but being driven thence with his wife Hermione, by Zethus and
Amphion, he was changed into a serpent. Cadrou, or Cadzou, a Barony in
Scotland, out of which was paid a yearly pension of 26 pounds 13 shillings and
4 pence to the Kings Exchequer. Caduce, the snaky staff which Apollo gave to
Mercury in recompense of his harp. This staff had such virtue, that with it he
could kill or make alive. It was also a rod among the Romans which was carried
by their Heralds in sign of peace; whence an Ambassador is called Caduceator.
Caecity, (Lat.) blindness. Caelibate, (Lat.) an unmarried state, a bachelors
life. Caenis, a Thessalian Virgin, who was ravished by Neptune, and being turned
into a man and called Caeneus, was made invulnerable: afterward fighting
against the Centaurs, was buried alive by a great weight of trees thrown upon
him. Caercaradoc, a hill in Shropshire, where Caratacus an ancient King of the
Brittans resolutely defended a stone Rampire against Ostorius Lieutenant of the
Romans. Caerdiff, a Town in Glamorganshire, fortified by Robert Fitz-Hamon,
whose Grandchild William Earl of Gloucester, was afterward besieged in the
Castle, and taken prisoner by Yvor-Bach, a British Mountaineir. In this
Castle, Robert Curthose, son of William the Conqueror, after he was bereft of
his eyes, lived till he was very old. Caerfuse or Caersu^e, a Town in
Montgomeryshire, anciently as they say, a very famous City. Caermarden, by
Ptolomy called Maridunum, the chief Town of Caermardenshire, the birthplace of
Merlin, the ancient British Prophet. Caernarvon, the chief Town of
Caernarvonshire, where the Princes of Wales anciently kept their Chancery,
Exchequer, and Courts of Justice; it was built by K. Edward the first, and the
birthplace of K. Edward the second, surnamed thence Edward of Caernarvon.
Caesar, a name attributed to the Emperors of Rome, from Julius Caesar the
first Emperor. Caeyx, see Halcyon. Cageole, (French) to prate to little
purpose, to canvas or dispute a business. Cainsham, a Town in Sommersetshire,
so called because it was built by Keina a devout British Virgin, of whom it
was believed by the vulgar, that she turned Serpents into stones, because the
highway thereabout is full of stones which wreath about resembling a Serpent.
Cairus or Alcairus, a great City of Egypt, formerly called Babylon Egyptia, it
was taken by the Turk Zelmi. Caishoberry, the name of a country Palace, or
great House near Watford in Hertfordshire; it was begun by Sir Richard Morisin
Knight (Ambassador to several great Princes, under K. Henry the eighth, and K.
Edward the sixth) and finished by Sir Charles Morisin, his son. It is now in the
possession of the Lady Capell Dowager. Caitive, wretched wicked from the French
Chetif, or the Italian Cattivo. Caitisned, chained, a word used by Chaucer.
Calabria, a fruitful Country of Italy, which now belongs to the kingdom of
Naples. Calamint, an herb so called. Calamist, a Piper upon a reed, from the
Latin word Calamus. Calamity, (Lat.) misery, but originally it signifies a
destruction of corn, from Calamus a stalk of corn. Calasticks, a physical word,
signifying purging ointments. Calatrava, a place in Spain, which gives
denomination to certain Knights, who are called Knights of Calatrave. Calcanth,
a Chemical word, being the same as Vitriol. Calcation, (Lat.) a treading, or
stamping. Calcedon, a word used by Lapidaries, being a certain forbe vein in a
Ruby, or Saphyre, differing from the rest of the stone, also the name of a
precious stone. Calchas, a Grecian south-sayer, the son of Thestor, who seeing
a Serpent devour ten Sparrow chickins, prophesied that Troy should be taken the
tenth year. Calcine, or Calcinate, (Lat.) a Chymicall Term, signifying to
reduce any thing into cinders, especially metals. Calcitrate, (Lat.) to kick,
or spurn. Calcule, (Lat.) an accounting, also a Ches-man, or Counter. Caleb, a
proper name, signifying in Hebr. hearty. Calcent, a great Mart-Town in India,
situate upon the Indian Sea. The Caledonian vvood, a great vvood in Scotland,
whence Scotland it self has been anciently called Caledonia, or Calydonia.
Calefaction, (Lat.) a heating, or warming. Calender, a Term used by
Linnen-drapers, signifying to set a gloss upon cloth. A Calender, (Lat.) an
Almanac. Calends, (Lat.) a word used among the Romans, for the Computation of
their months, and signifies the first day of every month, and if any number
be added, it stands for so many as precede the Calends. Calenture, a Spanish
word, signifying heat, also a burning feavour. Caletum, a Port Town in France,
called by Caesar Portus Iccius, by the Moderns Calis. Calidity, (Lat.) heat.
Caliduct, a kind of Furnace used by the ancients, to convey heat from one room
to another, through certain pipes. Caligation, (Lat.) dimnesse of sight.
Caligula, the fourth Emperor of Rome, so called from certain Military Buskins,
which he used to wear, named Caligae. Caliph, a Persian word, signifying King,
or Emperor, at first all the chief Princes of the Mahumetan Religion were
called Caliphs, as the Caliph of Egypt, etc. Calisto, one of Diana's Nymphs,
and daughter of Lycaon, King of Arcadia, she was got with Child by Jupiter, and
turned out of Diana's train. Calked, (old word) cast. Callidity, (Lat.)
subtilty. Calligraphy, (Greek) fair, or handsome writing. Calliope, the name of
one of the nine Muses, the mother of Orpheus, she was believed to be the
Inspiresse of Heroic verse. Callipolis, one of the Islands in the Aegoean Sea,
called Cyclades. Callirrhoe, the daughter of Phocus, King of Boeotia, she
complaining to her Contrymen against her thirty suitors, who had killed her
father, they fled to Hippote, a Town of Thebes, but being pursued by the
Boeotians, the Town was taken, and the murderers burnt to death. Calliver, a
kind of great Gun, or Arquebuse. Callot, an old Saxon word, signifying a le^d,
or wanton woman. Calour, (Lat.) warmth, also a heat of desire, or affection.
Calpe, a high hill in the uttermost part of Spain, which is faign'd to be one
of Hercules his pillars. Calsounds, a kind of linen drawers usually worn
among the Turks. Caltrope, (French) certain instruments used in War, being
great pricks of iron, apiece, to cast in an enemies way, when they would
break in on the contrary side. Calvinist, one of the opinion of Calvin, a
famous reformer. Calvity, (Lat.) baldness. Calumniatour, (Lat.) signifies in
Com-law, him, that in his accusation alleges faults never committed.
Camarina, a Lake in Sicily, which when the people dried up contrary to the
advice of the Oracle they were overcome by their enemies. Cambel, a famous
Castle in Argile in Scotland, from whence the great family of the Cambels
derive their name. Cambio, (Spanish) a Burse, or Exchange, whence comes
Cambsor, a Banker, or Mony-changer. Cambles, a King of the Lydians, of so
greedy an apetite, that one night he devoured his wife. Cambren, a British
word, signifying a crooked stick. Cambria, the Country of Wales, so called
from Camber, the son of Brutus. Cambridge, the chief Town of Cambridge-shire,
so called from a Bridge built over the River Came: In this Town has flourished
for many ages, a famous University, consisting of sixteen Colleges, it has
been anciently reported that this Academy was founded by Cantabar a Spaniard,
375 years before Christ, and repaired by Sebert, King of the East Angles, in
the year of our Lord 630. afterward it was defaced by the Danes under Sueno,
but being restored again by the Normans, it has stood unviolated by War to
this day. Camelot, a Town in the Shriefdom of Stirling in Scotland, which seems
to be the same with that, which was called Corta Damniorum. Cambyses, King of
Persia, the son of Cyrus, he added Egypt to his Dominions, he died of a wound,
which he gave himself as he was getting up to horse. Cameracum, a City of the
Low Countries, now called Cambray, where the linen cloth, we call Cambrick is
made. Camelion, a beast like a Lizard, that turns himself into all colors,
and lives by the air. Camelopardal, a kind of beast, half Camel, half Pardal,
or Panther. Camerade, (Spanish) a Cabin, or chamber-fellow. Camerated, Vaulted,
or Arched, a Term used in Architecture. Camisado, (Spanish) a sudden assault,
or surprisal. Cammock, a kind of Herb, that has a hard and big root. Camois,
a British word, signifying crooked. Camomil, an Herb of a fragrant smell, which
grows and spreads by being trampled on. Campain, (French) a plain field, also a
military word, signifying an armies expedition, or taking the field. Campania,
a Country of Italy in the Kingdom of Naples, called Terra del Lavoro, whose
chief City is Capua. Campernulphs, the ancient name of a great family of
Cornwall, Lords of the Town of Modbury, they are commonly called Champernouns,
in Latin Records de Campo Arnulphi. Campus lapideus, a field of Gallia
Narbonensis, where Hercules fought with Alcion and Bergion, the sons of
Neptune, but his darts failing him, Jupiter sent him down a shower of stones,
wherewith he killed the Giants. Campus Martius, a field near Rome, dedicated to
Mars, where the Romaus used to exercise, and the people assembled to give their
suffrages. Campus sceleratus, a place where the Vestal Nuns were punished, if
they admitted of any familiarity with men. Camulodunum, or Camoludunum, the
chief Town of Essex in England, vulgarly called Colchester, or rather Maldon.
Camulus, a name anciently attributed to Mars, the heathen God of War. Canace,
the daughter of Aeolus, she was got with child by her brother Macareus, whence
they use to call an Incestuous woman Canace. Canachus, a Fountain near Nauplia,
where Juno used to bath her self, that she might recover her Virginity.
Canacus, a high hill in Spain, on the top whereof is a Well, whose depth cannot
be ^ounded. Canariae, certain Islands in the Adriatic Sea, anciently called
the fortunate Islands, from thence it is that we have our Canary wines. Cancel,
(Lat.) to raze, to blot out from Cancelli Lattices, or crosse-bars. Canceline,
chamlet, a word used by Chaucer. Cancer, one of the 12 signs of the Zodiac,
into which the Sun enters in the Month of June, the word signifies in Latin a
Crab. Candia, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, anciently called Creet, where
Jupiter was born, and Minos reigned, it is at present in the power of the
Venetian. Candid, (Lat.) white, also innocent, sincere. Candida Casa, the
ancient name of a Town in Galloway in Scotland, vulgarly Whithern, the
Episcopal seat of Ninian, who first converted the Scottish Picts to
Christianity, it seems to be the same with Ptolomies Leucopibia. Candidates,
(Lat.) were those among the Romans, who use to stand for any place, or Office
of Dignity, and were clad in white Robes. Candiope, the daughter of Oenopian,
and sister to Theodotion, who going a hunting with her brother, and being drawn
into a Cave and ravished by him, brought forth Hippolagus. Cankdore, (old word)
a woeful case. Canibals, a people of India that feed upon man's flesh.
Canicula, a constellation in the Heavens called the little Dog. Canicular
days, certain days in July and August wherein Canis Major, or the Dog Star
rises with the Sun, and makes the weather extraordinary hot. Canitude, (Lat.)
whiteheadedness, hoariness. Cannae, a Town of Apulia, not far from the River
Anfidus where Hannibal overthrew Paulus Emilius, and Terentius Varro. Cannel
bone, the neckbone or windpipe, so called from its likeness to a gutter or
cannel. Canobus, see Canopus. Canon, (Greek) a rule to draw a straight line by,
also a law or decree of the Church, also one that injoyes a living in a
Cathedral Church. Canonium, the ancient name of a Town in Essex, now called
Chelmerford, or Chensford, standing upon the River Chelmer. Canonize, to
examine by rule, also to register for a Saint. Canopus, a City of Egypt, so
called from Canopus Amyctaeus, the master of Menelaus his ship, who was there
buried; also the bright star in Argo. Canorous, (Lat.) shrill, loud singing. A
Canow, an Indian boat. Cantabria, a Country of Hispania Tarracouensis, now
called Biscay, and Guipuscoa, bordering upon Asturia. Cantae, an ancient people
of Scotland, inhabiting that part which is now called Ross. Cantation, (lat.) a
singing, also an enchanting. Canterbury, the chief City of Kens, anciently
called in Latin Dorobernia, now Cantuaria. In the time of the Saxon Heptarchy,
it was the Royal Seat of the Kings of Kent. Cantharides, certain venomus green
flies, used in physic, and breeding on the tops of Ash and Olive Trees.
Canticle, (lat.) a song or ballad. Cantilene, (lat.) a tale or song. Cantium, a
County in England, vulgarly called Kent. Cantlow, the name of an honorable and
ancient Family in Cornwall, styled in Latin records, de Cantelupo. Canto,
(Ital.) part of a H^roick Poem. Canton, a corner, also one of the divisions of
the Country of Helvetia or Switzerland, also a term in Heraldry, signifying a
corner in an Escutcheon. Cantreds, a Welsh word, signifying the Hundreds into
which their Countries are divided. Cantyre, a promontory called by Ptolomy
Epidiorum, being a Province of the South part of Scotland separated from Argile
by the lake called Logh Fin; in Irish it signifies the lands-head To Canvase,
to sift a business, from canvas and cloth made of hemp, which is used in
seives. Canum or Cana, a law term of Scotland, signifying a duty paid to a
Superior or Lord of the land, especially to Bishops and Churchmen. Canzonet,
(Ital.) a song or sonnet. Capable, (French) able, or in a condition to do a
thing* or apt to receive an impression. Artamenes. Capacity, in Common law
signifies a right that a King or Clergyman has to purchase lands, and is
either natural by which he may purchase to him and his heirs, or politic, by
which he may purchase to him and his successors. Capaneus, see Euadne.
Cap-a-pe armed, armed from head to foot. Caparasson, (French) trappings or
furniture for a horse. Cape, (Spanish) a neck or promontory of land, shooting
it self into the Sea. To Caperate, (lat.) to frown. Capers, certain berries
growing in hot Countries, commonly used for sallads. Capias, a writ, of which
there be two sorts, the one before judgment, which is called Capias ad
respondendum, where an exigent is to be proclaimed 5 times, and if the party
appear not, he is to be outlawed. The other is called a writ of execution after
judgment, which is of diverse kinds, Capias ad faciendum, Capias pro fine,
Capias ut l^gatum, and inquiras de bonis and catallis: of which see a book
called Natura Brevium. Capillation, (lat.) hairinesse, or causing hair to grow.
Capirotade, a stewed meat, compounded of several sorts of meat minced.
Capistrate, (lat.) to muzzel with a headstall. Capital, (lat.) belonging to the
head, also deadly, worthy of death. Capitation, (lat.) pole money, or a tribute
paid by the head. Capite, a Tenure whereby a man holds lands immediately of
the King, either by Knights-service or Soccage. Capitol, an ancient citadel of
Rome, so called from a man's head that was found there when they dug to lay
the foundation. M. Manlius Capitolinus, a famous Roman Captain, so called
because he valiantly defended the Capitol against Brennus and the Gauls: but
afterward being suspected of affecting the kingship, he was condemned to be
thrown down headlong from the Capitol which he had saved. Capitulate, (lat.) to
make Articles of agreement, also to divide into chapters. Capnomancy, (Greek) a
divination by smoke. Capo, one of the three chief Officers among the Venetians.
Capouchins, an Order of Friars institued by Matthew Basci of Ancona, they were
so called from the coat or capouch which they used to wear. Cappadocia, a
country in Asia, which is parted from the great Armenia by the River Euphrates.
Capriccio, (Ital.) the rough draught or first invention of any thing.
Caprichious, fantastical, whimsical, from the Spanish word Capricho, a humor.
Capricorn, a Goat, also the name of one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac,
into which the Sun enters in the midst of Winter. Caprification, (lat.) a term
in Husbandry, the dressing of wild vines or fig trees. Caprifoile, a kind of
herb, otherwise called woodbine. Capriole, (French) a caper in dancing, also a
term in Horsemanship, called the Goatleap. Capstand or Capstern, a term in
Navigation, being an instrument in a ship to weigh Anchor, a win de-beam, or
draw-beam. Capsulary, (Lat.) belonging to a little chest or coffer. Captation,
(Lat.) an endeavoring to get favor or applause. Captious, (Lat.) apt to take
exceptions. Captivate, (Lat.) to take prisoner: it is also taken in an amorous
sense. Capuchin, vide Capouchin. Caracol, (French) spoken chiefly for
soldiers, to cast themselves into a round ring. Caradoc, an old British name,
signifying Dearly beloved. Caravan, (French) a convoy of soldiers for the
safety of Merchants that travel by land in the Eastern Countries. Caravell,
(French) a swift ship. Carbantorigum, the ancient name of a Town of Nidisdale
in Scotland, now called Caerlaverock, a place so impregnable, that it was
hardly taken by King Edward the first. It is now the Mansion of the Barons of
Maxwell. Carbine, one that serves on horseback with a petronell. Carbonado,
(Ital.) a rasher or collop of meat, a Gash in the flesh. Carbuncle, (Lat.) a
certain precious stone, also a botch, or plague sore. Carcanet, (French
Carquan) a rich chain or tablet for the neck. Carcedony, a kind of precious
stone, so called from a City anciently named Carcedon, now Carthage. Carcelage,
the fees of a prison. Carceral, (Lat.) belonging to a prison. Card, an
instrument to dress wool; also a Sea-map, which Mariners use for the better
steering of their course. There is also a sort of playing Cards which are used
for recreation. Cardiacal, (Greek) belonging to the heart, also Cordial.
Cardigan, the chief Town of Cardiganshire, called by the Bittains Abertivy, i.
The mouth of the River Tivy; it was fortified by Gilbert de Clare, and
afterward being treacherously yielded up, was rased to the ground by Rhese ap
Gruffin. Cardinal, (Lat.) belonging to a Hinge, also chief, principal, also an
Ecclesiastical dignity, instituted by Pope Paschal the First. Cardiognostick,
(Greek) a Knower of hearts, a prerogative only attributed to God. Cardoon,
(French) a dish of meat made of the stalk of an Artichoke. Carduus Benedictus,
an herb called Blessed Thistle. Careening, a Term in Navigation, a way of
trimming of a ship underwater. Carefox, quasi quatrefour, or a place parted
into four ways, a marketplace in Oxford so called. Carecks, (old word) marks.
Caresbroke, a Town in the Isle of Wight, contracted from Whitgaraburgh, i. the
Town of Whitgar, for to him it was given by the Lord Cerdic, the first English
Saxon that subdued the Island. Caresses, (French) cherishings, great expression
of friendship and indearment. Cleopatra. Cargazon, (Spanish) the Freight of a
ship. Caria, a Country of Asia the Less, between Lycia and Ionia. Carm,
(Latin) the keel of a ship. Carinthia, a Country joining on the South to the
Alps, being under the Duke of Austria. Carity, (Lat.) dearth, scarsity. Cark,
a quantity of wool, whereof 30 make a Sarpler. Carle, a clown, from the Saxon
word Ceorle. Carlisle, an ancient City in Cumberland, almost encompast with the
Rivers Eden, Peteril, and Cand, it was called by the Romans Luguballia, by the
ancient Britains Caerlnalid, Egfrid, King of Northumberland, made a deed of
gift of it to St. Cuthbert: this City being depopulated by the Danes, and lying
buried in Rubbish for 2000 years, began to flourish again in the time of
William Rufus, by whom it was first repaired. Carline Thistle, a certain plant,
by which Charles the great preserved his army from the Pestilence. Carlings,
Timbers which lie along a ship, from one beam to another. Carmania, a Country
of Asia the Greater. Carmasal, a Turkish ship. Carmelites, an order of Friars,
instituted at Carmelus in Syria, by Almericus, Bishop of Antioch, in the year
1122. Carmenta, an Arcadian Prophetess, the mother of Euander, so called,
because she was the first that gave the Oracle in Verse, she was also called
Nicostrata. Carminate, (Lat.) to card wool. Carmouth, a Town in Dorsetshire,
where the Danes obtained a great victory against King Egbert, in the year 831,
and afterward against Ethelwolph in the same place. Carnage, (French) the
season wherein flesh may be eaten, also a term in hunting, signifying the flesh
that is given to the dogs, after the chase. Carnality, (Lat.) Fleshlinesse.
Carnation, a kind of color resembling raw flesh. Carnaval, (French) a time of
dissoluteness, also the season, called Shrovetide. Carnificine, (Lat.) the
Executioners office, also a place of execution. Carnivorous, (Lat.)
Flesh-devouring. Carnogan, an old British word, signifying a kind of wodden
dish, a Piggin. Carnoose, the base ring in a great gun. Carnocity, (lat.)
corpulency, fullness of flesh. Carodunum, the chief City of Poland, called
Cracovia. Caroll, a Christmasse song, or hymn, sung at Christmasse, in honor
of our Saviors birth. Carove, a kind of fruit, also a root called St. John's
bread. Carouse, a lusty drinking, a drinking all out, from the dutch words,
Gar, altogether, and, ausz, out. Carpathus, an Island in the Mediterranean sea,
between Rhodes and Crete, now called Scarpanto. Carpocratians, a sort of
Heretics, that held a very dangerous opinion. The Carp stone, a triangular
stone, found in the chap of a Carp, white without, and yellow within. Carrack,
or Carrick, a great ship, from the Italian word, Carico, a burden. Carrat,
(French) a term used by mintmen, Goldsmiths, and Jewellers: in gold and silver
it signifies the third part of an ounce, in Jewels the 192d part. Carricta, or
Carrict, a province of the South part of Scotland, standing upon Dunbritain
Frith. Carriere, (French, a running of horses in their full speed; also a
circle where horses run. Cartel, (French) a challenge, or letter of defiance.
Carthage, the chief City of Africa, anciently called Carthedon: it was built by
Dido, and grew at length to that power and greatness, that it waged war with
the Romans, for a long while, with equal advantage. There is also a City of
Hispania Tarraconensis, formerly called Carthago Vetus, now Villa Franca.
Carthismandua, a famous British Lady, Queen of the Brigantes, who casting off
her husband Venusius, married Vellocatus his Harnesse-bearer, and crowned him
King, being countenanced by the Romans, and aided by their forces; yet Venusius
making war against her, drove her to great straights, and recovered the
Kingdom. Carthusians, an order of Monks, instituted by St. Bruno, a native of
Cullen 1101, who first led a Hermeticall life upon the Carthusian Mountains.
Cartilagineous, (latin) full of gristles. Carucata terrae, from the French
word Charrue, a Plough: it signifies in the ancient charters, as much land as
can be ploughed in a year by one Plough. In the ancient laws it is called Hilda
terrae, which we call a hide of land. Cartilagindous, (lat.) of a gristly
substance. Cartouch, (French) a word used in Architecture, signifying a roll,
with which they adorn the Cornish of a pillar, also a charge of powder and
shot, made ready in a paper, called also a Carthrage. Carvage, is to be quit,
if the King should tax his land by Carves. Carve of land, see Carrucata terrae.
Casemate, (Ital.) a term in fortification, a loop-hole in a wall to shoot out
at. Cashire, (French) to break up a company of soldiers. Caspian sea, a sea
between the Caspian and Hircanian Mountains. Cassandra, the daughter of Priam
and Hecuba, she being beloved of Apollo, received the gift of prophecy from
him at the sack of Troy, she was ravished in the Temple by Ajax Oileus, and
afterward in the dividing the spoil, she fell to Agamemnons lot. Cassation,
(lat.) a nulling or making void. Cassia, or Cassia fistula, a kind of Reed or
shrub, growning in Egypt, it is also called Canell, from the French word
Canelle. Cassia lignea, a sweet wood like to Cinnamon. Cassiope, or Cassiopea,
the daughter of Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, and mother of Andromeda, who for her
mothers pride, in boasting her self fairer than the Nereides, was exposed to
the fury of a sea monster, they were afterward placed both among the stars.
See Andromeda. Cassivellaunus, or Cassibellinus, an ancient King of the
Britains, under whose conduct they defended themselves with great courage
against the Romans for a long time, when they invaded this Island, but at last
he was constrained to surrender himself to Julius Caesar. Castaldie, a
Stewardship, from the Latin word Gastaldius. Castalia, a certain Nymph, as some
think, the daughter of Achelous, who flying from Apollo, was turned into a
Fountain near Parnassus, called the Castalian Fountain, by some the Caba^line
Fountain, sacred to the Muses. Castanetts, a certain sort of snappers, which
dancers tying about their fingers, keep time with them as they dance; they are
so called from their resemblance of a a Chestnut, called in Latin Castanea.
Castellain, an officer called the Constable of a Castle, which some think to be
the same with Gnastaldus, also in the Forest laws, it signifies an Officer of
the Forest. Castigate, (lat.) to punish, to chastize. Castlesteed, a word
anciently used for any Fortress or Bulwark. Castleward, an Imposition upon
such as dwell within a certain compass of any Castle, toward the maintenance
of such as watch and ward the Castle: it is taken also for the circuit it self,
which is inhabited by such as are subject to this service. Castor and P^llux,
the sons of Jupiter and Leda, whom he lay with in the shape of a Swan, they
being grown to age, freed the sea of Pirates, and were therefore counted gods
of the sea; they went with Jason to Colchos, and coming home, they recovered
their sister from Theseus, and won the Town Aphydna, wherein Castor died,
Pollux, who was born in the same Egg with Helena, and so became immortal,
desired of Jupiter that his brother might partake of immortality with him,
whereupon they were both reported to live and die by turns. Castrated, (Lat.)
gelded, cut away. Casual, (Lat.) accidental, happening by chance. Casu consimili,
a Writ of Entry granted where a Tenant in courtesy, or for Term of life does
Alienate in Fee, or in Tail. Casu proviso, a Writ of Entry granted by the
Statute of Glo^ester. Casuit, a writer of Cases of conscience. Casule, a kind
of vestment, in which the Priest says Mass, resembling the purple Robe of
derision, which was put upon our Savior. Catabaptist, (Greek) an enemy, or
abuser of the Sacrament of baptism. Catachresis, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
the using of another word, in stead of the proper word. Cataclysme, (Greek) an
inundation, or deluge. Catadrome, (Greek) an Engine like a Crane, which builders
use, also a Tiltyard, or place where horses run for prizes. Cataglottisme,
(Greek) a thrusting out the tongue in kissing. Catagraph, (Greek) the first
draught of a picture. Catalia, see Chattels. A Catalepsie, (Greek) occupation,
also a disease in the head, which causes a deprehension of the spirits.
Catalogue, (Greek) a roll of names. Catalonia, a Province in Spain.
Catamidiate, to put one to open shame, for some notorious offense. A Catamite,
(Lat.) an Ingle, a boy kept for Sodomy. Cataphora, (Greek) a kind of disease
in the head, which causes heaviness, and deep sleep. Cataplasme, (Greek) an
unctuous, and moist composition made of Meal and Herbs like a Pultis, but of a
thicker substance. Cataphrygians, a Sect of Heretics, who baptized their dead,
forbid second marriage, and had other erroneous opinions, they were broached by
Montanus and Apelles (who were of the Country of Phrygia) in the year 181.
Catapuce, an Herb called Spurge. Catapult, (Lat.) the same as Balista.
Catarract, (Greek) a great fall of waters from a high place, a flood-gate, a
post-cullis, also a disease in the eyes caused by a coagulation of phlegm,
between the Uveo^s Tunicle and the Christalline humor, hindering the egresse
and ingresse of the visual spirits. Catarractonium, or Caturactonium, the name
of a Town near Richmond, anciently very famous, so called from a great
waterfall near unto it, in the year 769. it was burnt by the Tyrant Beanred,
but afterward it flourish't again in the time of King Ethelred, who solemnised
his marriage with King Offa's daughter in this Town, it is now called
Catarrick-bridge. Catarrh, (Greek) a Rheum, a distillation of humors out of
the head into the mouth, or throat. Catastasis, (Greek) the third Act of a
Comedy, or Tragedy, wherein things are brought to a full perfection and
ripeness. Catastrophe, the conclusion of a business, also the last Act of a
Comedy, or Tragedy. Catechize, (Greek) to instruct, or inform. A Catechumen,
(Greek) one that is Catechized for the receiving of the Communion. Category,
(Greek) an accusation, also a Predicament, which is a Term in Logic. Catenate,
(Lat.) to chain. Caterlogh, or Carlogh, a Country of Ireland, joining on the
East to the County of Kilkenny. Cathanesse, or Cathnesse, a Province of the
South-part of Scotland, the people were called by Ptolomy, Catini. Cathaea, a
Country in India, where beauty is so much regarded, that they choose the
hansomest man for their King. Catharine, (Greek) pure, chaste, a proper name of
women. Catharians, a Sect of Heretics, who held themselves pure from sin,
rejected baptism, and denied original sin. Catharists, another sort of
Heretics, who were counted a branch of the Manichees. Catharticks, (Greek) the
general name in Physic for all purging Medicines. Cathay, a great Country
Eastward divided into 9 Realms under the great Cham. It was formerly called
Scythia, now Sinarum Regio; the chief City is Issedon. Cathedral, (Lat.)
belonging to a chair, also a Cathedral Church is the chief Church in a Bishops
See. Cathelaunum, or Catalaunum, a City of Champagne in France, now called
Chaalons, near unto which are Campi Cathelauni, those famous fields where
Attila the Hun was overthrown. Ca^ethus, a Mathematical Term, the Perpendicular
side of a right angled Triangle. Catholic, (Greek) general, universal,
defending the Christian faith, a Title attributed to the King of Spain.
Catholicon, a physical word, signifying a general purging Medicine. Cathorius,
a Term used in the practick of Scotland, signifying the value of 9 kine, it
being a penalty set upon him who breaks the Kings peace, to give to the King 22
Kine, and 3 Cathores, or for every Cathorius 9 Kine. Catini, an ancient people
of Scotland, see Cathanesse. Cato, the name of several famous men of Rome,
whereof the chief were Cato Porcius, Cato Censorius, and Cato Vticensis.
Catoptrick, (Greek) belonging to a kind of Optic glass, which is called
Catoptron. Catry, a place where Cates, or victuals are set. Cat, in Navigation
is a piece of Timber fastened aloft, right over the Hawse, to trise up the
Anchor from the Hawse to the fore-castle. Cattieuchlani, an ancient people of
this Island, inhabiting those parts, which are now called Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire, and Hertfordshire, they were as Camden believes, more anciently
called Cassii, and governed by Cassivellaunus. Cavalier, a brave man, a Knight,
or Gentleman, serving on hors-back from the Italian word Cavallo. Cavazion, a
Term in Art Architecture, being the hollowing, or underdigging of the earth for
cellerage, allowed to be the sixth part of the highth of the whole Fabric.
Caucasus, a high Hill, which parts India from Scythia, being part of the
mountain Taurus. Caveare, a certain kind of meat, which comes from the River
Volgha in Russia, made of the roes of several sorts of fish. Caveat, (Lat.) a
caution, or warning, also a Term in Civil Law, being a writing, which is
entered by an Executor to keep others from meddling in the administratorship.
Cavechin, or Cavesan, a false rein to lead a horse in. A Cavern, (Lat.) a Cave.
Cavillation, (Lat.) a mocking, or jesting, also a wrangling. Cavity, (Lat.)
hollownesse. Caulk a ship, to fill the holes and chinks with Ockam and Towe.
Cavon, a County of Ireland, called anciently East Breanny, lying to the West of
Louth. Caupes, or Calpes, a Scotch-Law Term, signifying any gift, which a man
gives in his own life time to his master, especially to the head, and chief of
the Clan for his maintenance and protection. Cauphe, a kind of drink among the
Turks, made of a brown Berry. Cauponate, (Lat.) to sell for gain, especially
wine, or victuals. Caurus, the name of the North-East wind, blowing commonly
out of the British Sea. Causal, (Lat.) causing, or expressing, the cause of
any thing. Causam nobis, a writ to a Mayor of a Town, who has denied seisin
to one, to whom the King has given a grant of Lands, or Tenements. Causation,
(Lat.) an excusing, or alleging of a cause. Causidick, (Lat.) a Lawyer, or
Pleader. Caustic, (Greek) searing, or burning, a word used in physic,
signifying that, which is applied to sear any part of the body. Cautele, (Lat.)
a wariness, or taking heed. Cautery, (Greek) an iron, which physicians use to
sear withal, also a hot ointment which has the same quality. Cauterize, to
sear. Cautionary, (Lat.) given in pledge, or pawn for the fulfilling of
Articles. Cautione admittenda, a writ against a Bishop, for holding an
excommunicate person in prison, notwithstanding that he offers caution to
obey the orders of the Church. Cayer, a quantity of paper, also a part of a
written book. Cazimi, (Arab.) or a Planet in the heart of the Sun, is when he
is not distant from the Sun 17 minutes.
C E
Cebratane, (French) a Trunk to shoot at Birds with clay pellets. Ceca, a
certain religious house in Corduba, whence they say Andar de Ceca en Meca, i.
e. to turn Turk. Cecity, (Lat) blindness. Cecrops, the first (or as some say
the second) King of Athens, he was an Egyptian born, and called by Eusebius
Diphyes, or Biformed, because he was the first, who civilized men's manners, and
instituted marriage in Athens. Cedent, (Lat.) giving place. Cedrosii, a certain
wild barbarous people that go clothed in the skin of wild beasts. Cefala, an
Island of Africa, found out by the Portugals, in the year 1500. being three
miles in length, and one in breadth. It has two Villages and one strong
Castle. In the year 1505 the Ilanders rebelled, but were quickly subdued by the
Portugall's, who killed the King; they had chosen among themselves, and set up
another King, as Deputy to the King of Portugal. Celaenae, a hill in Asia,
where Marsyas is said to have contended with Apollo for the mastery upon the
Fluit. Celandine, a kind of herb called in Latin Chelidonium. Celature, or
Caelature, (Lat.) a carving or engraving. Celebration, (Lat.) a solemnizing or
making famous. Celebrity, (Lat.) famousnesse. Celerity, (Lat.) swiftness,
expedition. Celestial, (Lat.) heavenly. Celestines, an Order of Friars,
instituted in the year 1215. by one Peter a Samnite, who was afterward chosen
Pope, and called Celestine the fifth. Cellarist, he that keeps the cellar, or
buttery in a Religious house. Celsitude, (Lat.) tallnesse, height, also a
term attributed to a Prince as a Title of honor. Celsity, the same. Celtae, a
people anciently inhabiting Gallia Comata, between the Rivers Garonne, and
Sein; they were so called from Celtus, the son of Polypheme. Celtiberia, a part
of Spain, anciently so called; now Arragonia. Celurca, the ancient name of a
Town in the Province of Angus in Scotland, now called Montros. Cemented, close
joined or united; from Cement a strong and cleaving mortar. Cemetery, see
Caemetery. Cenchris, a green, and venomus biting Serpent. Cenotaph, (Greek) a
hearse or empty tomb, erected in honor of a great person. Cense, (Lat.) a
mustering of an army, a cessing of people. Censer, a vessel wherein the Priest
burns incense at any sacrifice or religious rites. Censor, (lat.) an Officer
among the Romans, who was to cesse and value men's esta^es, also to judge of
discipline, and reform manners; whence comes to censure, i. e. to judge or
give sentence. Centaures, a people of Thessaly, who waged war with the
Lapithae, they descended as the Poets feign from Ixion, who falling in love
with Juno, lay with a cloud which was formed into her shape. They were thought
to be half men and half horses; because riding their horses to water, while
their horses held down their heads to drink, they seemed to those who beheld
them a far off, like a strange kind of monster, whose former part resembled a
man, the hinder part a horse. Centaury, a kind of herb, which some call
Feverfew. Centenary, (lat.) belonging to a hundred. Center, (lat.) that point
which is in the midst of every Circle or Globe. Centoculated, (lat.) having a
hundred eyes, an Epithet belonging to Argos, whom Juno set to watch Io.
Centinodie, an herb called knot-grasse, as it were having a hundred knots.
Centon, (lat.) a garment made up of several patches, a work composed of many
pieces. Central, situate in the center or middle. Centrie, a word contracted
from Sanctuary, a place of refuge for malefactors. Centumviri, certain men
among the Romans chosen out of the 35 Tribes to be Judges; who although they
were more in number than a hundred, yet for the easier naming of them, were
called Centumviri Centuple, (lat.) a hundredfold. Centurie, (lat.) the number
of a hundred, the space of a hundred years, a band of a hundred men, or the
like. Centurion, a Commander of a hundred men, a Captain. Cephalics, (Greek)
medicines properly applied to fractures of the head, but generally taken for
all medicines peculiar to the head. Cephalic vein, see vein. Cephalus, the son
of Eion, he married Procris, the daughter of Erichtheus King of Athens, and
being loved of Aurora, would not answer her love: one morning after he had been
a hunting with a dart which Procris gave him, and a dog called Lelaps, he sat
down and called upon Aura to refresh him; but his wife having followed him out
of jealousy, had hid her self in a bush. Cephalus perceiving the bush to move,
thought it had been a wild beast, and shot his wife, and afterward was turned
into a stone. Cepi Corpus, a return made by the Sheriff, that upon an exigent,
he has taken the body of a man. Ceramite, a kind of precious stone. Ceratine,
(lat.) made of wax, dissolueable. Cerberus, quasi creoborus or flesh devouring,
a three-headed dog, said to watch constantly at the gates of Hell, whom
Hercules overcame and carried away in a chain. Cerebrosity, (lat.) a being cock
brained, or brainsick. Cerdonists, a sect of Heretics, who held that there
were two contrary principles in the cause of every thing, a good God and a bad;
they were instituted by one Cerdo in the year 150. Ceremonies, rites of the
Church, from the ancient Latin word Cerus, which signifies holy, or else from
the Caerites, a people of Hetruria, who cheerfully entertained all the sacred
things of the Romans, which were brought to them by the Vestals when Rome was
taken by the Gauls: whereupon the Romans out of gratitude, ordered that all
things belonging to Religious Worship, should be called Ceremonies. Ceres, the
daughter of Saturn and Ops, by whom Jupiter had Proserpina, and being snatched
away by Pluto; Ceres wandered through the world to seek her, and came to the
Court of Eleusius King of Attica, whose son Triptolomus she made immortal; and
seating him in a Chariot drawn with winged Dragons through the air, she sent
him to teach mortals the use of corn, whence she was adored as the Godesse of
Agriculture. Cerinthians, a sort of Heretics, who held that Christ at his
second coming should give to his people all carnal delights and pleasures: they
had their original in the year 97 from one Cerinthus. Cerna, an Island in the
Aethiopick Sea, where the North Pole is not seen, by some thought to be the
same with Madagascar. Ceromatick, (Greek) anointed with oil. Cerones, a certain
people anciently inhabiting that part of Scotland which is now called
Assinshire. Cerote, (Greek) a kind of sear-cloth or plaster. A Certificate, a
writing made in any Court to give notice to another Court of any thing done
therein. Certification, of Assize of novel disse^sin, a Writ granted for the
examining of a matter passed by Assize before the Justices, and is called a
Certification of new disseisin. Certificando de recognitione stapulae, a Writ
directed to the Mayor, of the Staple, taken before him, in a case where the
party himself refuses to bring it in Certiorari, is a Writ issuing out of the
Chancery to an inferior Court, to call up the Records of a cause depending
there, upon complaint made by the bill, that the party*seeking the said Writ
has received hard dealing. Cervine, (Lat.) belonging to a heart, also of a
ta^ny or hart-colour. Ceruse, (Lat.) white-lead refined out of the Mine, used
by Chyrurgians for ointments; by painters for the painting of a white color.
Cesata, or Cesada, a City of Spain between Emerita, and Caesar-Augusta. To
Cespitate, (Lat.) to stumble. Cessation, (Lat.) a leaving off, a ceasing.
Cessavit, a Writ lying upon this general ground, where a man has neglected to
perform such service, or to pay such rents as he is tied to by his tenure. To
Cesse, (from the Lat. Censere) to leave off, to be idle, also to tax. Cession,
(Lat.) a yiedling or giving place. Cest, (Lat.) a marriage-girdle, which the
Bride uses to wear, and which is loosed by the Bridegroom the first night.
Cetaceous, (Lat.) belonging to a Whale. Ceus, an Island where all men above 60
years old, were commanded by the law to poison themselves, that there might be
no scarsity of provision for the rest.
C H
Cha, the leaf of a tree in China, which being infused into water, serves for
their ordinary drink. Chase, (French) a warren, also a term in the game at
tennis. Chafewax, an officer in Chancery, that fits the wax for the sealing of
Writs, and such other instruments as are thence to be sent out. Chaffare, a
buying and selling, from the Dutch word Kauffer a Buyer. Chaffinch, a kind of
bird, so called because it delights in chaff. Chagrin, (French) care,
heaviness, also a disease caused by melancholy. Chain, the decimal chain is
an instument used in surveying, made of round wire 16 foot in length. Chains,
is used by a figure called metonymie of the Adjunct, for captivity, and
sometimes in an amorous sense. Cleopat. Chalcedon, a City of Asia, near
Bosphorus Thracius, it was built by the Megarenses, who were called Caeci, or
blind, because they did not choose the other side where Constantinople stands.
Chalcographer, (Greek) an ingraver in brass. Chaldaea, a Country of Asia the
greater, bordering upon Arabia, their chief City is Babylon, and the people
have ever been famous for Astrology and Magic. Chaldron, a certain measure of
coals, containing 36 bushels. Chalice, a holy vessel wherewith they had wont
to sacrifice. Challenge, a Term in Common Law, signifying an exception against
persons, or things, as a prisoner may except against the partial impanelling of
a Jury, or against the insufficiency of the Jurors. Chalons* blankets, or
coverings. Chalybeate, (Lat.) of the temper, or quality of Steel. Chalybes, a
people of Asia the less, dwelling upon the banks of Thermodoon; Strabo calls
them Chaldaeans, they had great store of Iron and Steel Mines, whence some
think Chalybs comes to signify Steel. A Chamber, in gunnery, is a charge made
of brass, or iron, to put in at the breech of a Murderer. Chamberdekins,
Irish beggars. Chamberlain of a City, is the chief keeper of the public
treasury from Camera, or Chamber, the place where the Treasury is kept, there
be also two Officers of this name in the K. Exchequer. Chameleon, see Cameleon.
Chamelot, or Chamblet, a kind of watered stuff mixed with Camels hair. A
Chamfer, a word in Architecture, being an artificial gutter, or crevice made in
a pillar. Chamois, or Chamoy, a wild Goat, of whose skins they make Chamois
leather. Champernouns, see Campernulphs. Champerty, (French) signifies in
Common Law the maintenance of a man in his suit depending, on condition to have
part of the Land, or Goods, when they are recovered. Champion, (French) one
that fights in another behalf, the Kings Champion, is one who is to come
armed on hors-back upon the Kings Coronation day, and in the presence of the
Nobles to challenge any, who shall affirm the King not lawful Heir to the
Crown, by this Tenure the Dimmocks hold a manner at Scrivelby, in Lincolnshire.
Chananaea, the holy land* bounded on the East by Euphrates, and the River
Jordan, on the West by Egypt, on the South by Arabia, on the North by Libanus.
Chancellor, from the Latin word Cancelli, Latices, with which in former time
the judgment seats were compassed; it is a title of honor given unto him, who
is the chief man next unto the Prince for matter of justice in civil affairs,
having power to moderate, and temper the written Law, according to equity, also
the Chancellor of the Exchequer is a supreme Officer, appointed to moderate
the extreamities in Exchequer. Chancery, the Court of Equity and Conscience,
moderating the severity of other Courts that are more strictly tied to the
rigor of the Law, the Officers belonging to this Court, are the Lord
Chancelour, who is chief Judge, twelve masters of the Chancery, whereof the
master of the Roll's is chief, the Clerk of the Crown, the six Clerks, with
many others. Chanfron, the name of an Italian coin valuing about twenty pence.
A Chantepleur, (French) he that sings and weepeth together. A Chanter, he
that sings divine service in a Church, or Chapel. Chanticleer, (French) a
name often given to a Cock for its clear singing. Chaonia, the hilly part of
Epirus, which Helenus the son of Priamus, so named from his brother Chaon, whom
he there slew against his will, while he was a hunting. Chaos, (Greek) a
confused indigested heap. Chapin, (Spanish) a high Cork-heel'd shoe. Chaplain,
from Capella, a Chapel, he that depends upon the King, or other great person
for the instruction of him and his family. Chaplet, a wreath, or Garland for
the head, from the Latin word Caput. Chapter, in the common and Canon Law,
signifies a company of Clergymen met together in a Cathedral conventual, or
collegiate Church, and this company is a kind of head to rule, and govern the
Diocese in the vacation of the Bishopric, it is also a word of Architecture,
signifying the top, or head of a pillar. Character, (Greek) the print, or seal
of any thing, a Note in Chronology, also the name of printers several sorts of
Letters. Characteristick, belonging to a Character. Chardford, a Town in
Hantshire, heretofore called Cerdeford from Cerdick, that warlike English
Saxon, who obtained a great victory over the Saxons. Chare, a kind of fish,
which breeds most peculiarly in Winandermere in Lancashire. A Charge in Blazon,
is that thing whatsoever, that does occupy the field of an Escutcheon, as the
contained in the containing* Charientisme, (Greek) gracefulness, also a
Rhetorical figure, when we sweeten harsh expressions with softer terms.
Charing-crosse, a famous monument which stood not long since at the end of the
strand toward Westminster, it was erected by King Edward, the first in memory
of his Queen Eleanor, who accompanying him to the holy war, sucked the poison
out of his eye, when it had been wounded by a More with an envenomed sword,
this cross was utterly demolish't not many years since. Charlatenerie,
(French) a cousening, cheating, or cogging, from Carlatan, a Mountebank.
Charles, a proper name contracted from the Dutch words Gar, and Ethel,
signifying all Noble. Charles wain, certain stars near the North Pole.
Charms, certain verses, or expressions, which are thought to have a bewitching
power, also taken figuratively for surprising attractions and allurements.
Artamenes. A Charnel-house, a place where dead bones are laid. Charon, the son
of Erebus, and night, whom the Poets faign to be the ferryman of Hell, and to
carry the Souls of those that die over the stygian Lake in a Boat. Chart,
(Lat.) a paper, or parchment, or written deed. Charter House, a famous Hospital
in London, founded by Sir Waltermany of Henault, who served under King Edward
the third, in the French wars, this place was anciently a very noted Caemitery,
or place of burial. Charters, (French) written Evidences of things done between
party and party, also Letters Pattents wherein privileges are granted by the
King, to Towns and Corporations. Charterparty, (a Term in Merchandise) a
Covenant, or Agreement between a Merchant, and the Master of a ship.
Chartulary, a keeper of a Register roll, or Reckoning book. Charvil, or
Chervil, an Herb called in Latin Cerefolium. Charybdis, a Gulf in the Bay of
Sicily, near the Tauromitanian shore, which is feigned to have been a woman of
prodigious greediness, who for stealing Hercules his Oxen, was struck with
Thunder by Jupiter, and turned into this Gulf. Chasma, (Greek) a wide gap, or
opening of the earth. Chasteleyn, a word used by Chaucer, signifying a
Gentlewoman of a great house. Chasuble, (French) a kind of Cope, which the
Priest and his assistants wear at Mass. Chattels, (French) a Term in
Common Law, signifying all goods moveable, and immovable, but such as are in
the nature of a freehold, or a parcel thereof. Chattesworth, a stately house in
Darbyshire, built by Sir William Cavendish, or Candish. Chaumond, an ancient
and Noble family of Lancels in Cornwall, written in Latin Records, de Calvo
Monte. Chaud-melle, signifies in the practick of Scotland, a fault committed
in a sudden Tumult. A Chauncel, the most sacred part of a Temple, or Church, so
called from Cancelli, or Lattices, which separate that part from the rest of
the Church, the Greeks call it Adyton. Chance medley, signifies in Common Law
the casual slaying of a man. Chauncery, see Chancery. Chaworths, the name of a
very Noble family of Ailesbury in Buckinghamshire, they were so called as
descending from Cahors, a Town of Querce a Province of France, in Latin Records
they are styled de Cadurcis. Cheap-gild, a restitution made by the Hundred or
County for any wrong done by one that was in plegio. Checkie, a term in
Heraldry, as a bordure checkie is when the bordure consists of three panes of
checquer-work, wherein it differs from counter-pany, which never exceeds two
panes. Chief, a term in Common law, as lands holden in Chief; See Capite. Also
a term in Heraldry, being a line added to the upper or chief part of an
Escutcheon, and contains a third part thereof. Chiefpledge, the same as
Headborow, Constable, Tything-man. Chekel^ton, a stuff like motly. Chaucer.
Chelandri, a Goldfinch, a word used by Chaucer. Chelidon, a precious stone,
which they say is found in the belly of a Swallow. Chelidonie, an herb, so
called from the Greek word Chelidon, which signifies a Swallow. Chelmerford, a
Town in Essex, so called from the River Chelmer; it is commonly known by the
name of Chensford. In the reign of King Henry the first it belonged to Maurice
Bishop of London, who built here two bridges. Some think it to be the same with
that which was anciently called Canonium. Chelonophagi, a certain people
bordering upon Carmania, who feed only upon Tortoises, covering their houses
with the shells of them, being so large that one of them will serve to make a
ship. Chemnis, an Island which is driven to and fro by the wind, wherein there
is a Temple consecrated to Latona. Cherisaunce (old word) comfort. Chersonesus,
(Greek) a tract of land almost environed by the Sea, and joined to the
Continent by an Istthmus or narrow neck of land: it is called in Latin
Peninsula. Chert, or Cheort, (old word) love, jealousy. Chertes, merry people,
Chaucer. Cherubim, or Cherub, an Hebrew word signifying fullness of knowledge,
one of the nine orders of Angels. Cheslip, a kind of little vermin that lies
under tyles. Chest, (old word) subject. Chesten, (French) a chessnut. Chester,
see Westchester. Chestoul, poppie. To Cheve, (old word) to thrive. Cheveril
leather, a kind of soft tender leather, from the French word Chevereul, a wild
goat, of whose skin some say it is made, or else from the River Charwel in
Oxfordshire, which is famous for dressing of leather. Cheverons (French) the
strong rafters and cheifs that met at the top of the house, to hold up the
covering of the house; also a term in Heraldry, being one of the ordinaries of
an Escutcheon made in fashion of a triangle. Chevesal, a Gorget. Chaucer. To
Chevice, (old word) to redeem. Chevin, a certain fish having a great head, from
the French word Chef a head. Chevisaunce, a composition or agreement between
the debtour and creditour, from the French word Chever, to come to a head.
Chevronel, a term in Blazon, being a half Cheveron. Chibboll, a little onion.
Chichester, the name of a famous City of Sussex, formerly called Cissancester,
i. the City of Cissa, because it was built by Cissa King of the South Saxons.
It has a very stately Cathedral, and in the reign of William Rufus, the
Bishops See was translated from Selsey hither. Child-wit, a law-term,
signifying a power to take a fine of your bondwoman begotten with child
without your consent. Chiliade, (Greek) the number of a thousand. Chiliarch,
(Greek) a Commander of of a thousand men, a Colonel. Chiliasts, (Greek) a sect
of men who are also called Millenaries who hold that Christ shall come and
reign personally upon Earth with his Saints a thousand years. Chilo, the
Lacedemonian, one of the 7 Wisemen of Greece, whose sentences were very brief;
whence Chilonick signifies compendious. Chimaera, a Hill of Lycia, on the top
whereof were many Lions, in the midst fed Goats, and at the bottom were
Serpents, which Bellerophon made habitable. Whence the Poets feigned that
Bellerophon killed the Monster Chimaera, who had the head of a Lion, the belly
of a Goat, and the tail of a Dragon. Whence Chimaera's are taken for idle
conceits. Chimbe, the uttermost part of a barrel. Chaucer. A Chime of Bells, a
pleasant tune rung upon the Bells. Some say from the Latin word Cymbalum.
Chimin, (French) a law-term, signifying the Kings highway, where there is free
passage for him and his people. Chiminage, a toll for wayfarage or passage
thorough a Forest. China, a great Country in Asia, which is all under one
King, whom they call Lord of the World, and Son of Heaven. Chincherie,
niggardliness, a word used by Chaucer. Chione, the daughter of Deucalion and
wife of Paeonius the Epidaurian, she being got with child by Phoebus and
Mercury, brought forth twins, Autolycus to Mercury, Philammon to Phoebus.
Chios, an Island in the Aegean Sea, between Lesbos and Samos: It is 900
furlongs in circuit. Chiragrical, (Greek) having the gout in ones hands.
Chirking, (old word) a chattering noise. Chirographer, a law-term, signifying
him, who in the Common Pleas office, ingrosseth fines acknowledged in that
Court, into a perpetual Record; also he that gives a bill of his hand:
Chirograph signifying in Greek ones own hand writing. Chirologie, (Greek) a
talking by signs made with the hand. Chiromancy, (Greek) a divination, by
looking on the lines and marks of the hand. This art is also called Palmestry.
Chiron, the son of Saturn and Philyra, who by reason that Saturn lay with
Philyra in the shape of a horse, had his upper parts like a man, his lower
parts like a horse: he grew famous for physic, brought up Achilles and
Aesculapius, and at length was placed among the Stars, and called Sagittarius.
Chirrichote, a Spanish word used in derision toward the Frenchmen. Surgery,
(Greek) the Art of cureing wounds, vulgarly called Surgery. Chivalrie, (French)
horsemanship, valor; also a law-term, signifying a tenure of land by
Knights-service. Chivauchie, the same as Chivalrie. Chloris, the wife of
Zephyrus, she was called Flora, or the Goddess of Flowers: also the daughter
of Amphion and Niobe, who married Meleus, and brought forth Nestor. Chocolate,
a compounded Indian drink, whose chief ingredient is a fruit called Cocao.
Cholmondley, a Town in Cheshire, which gave name and habitation to the Noble
Family of the Cholmondley's or Cholmley's by contraction. Chorall, a law-term,
one that by virtue of the ancient orders of the Clergy was admitted to serve
God in the quire. Chord, a term in Geometry, being a right line subtending an
arch of a Circle. Choriambick, (Greek) a foot in Verse, consisting of 4
syllables, two long ones at each extreme, and two short ones in the middle.
Chorion, (Greek) the outermost tunicle that enwraps the Birth. Chorister,
(Greek) a singing-man of a quire. Chorographer, (Greek) a describer or
decipherer of Countries and Kingdoms. Chorus, a company of Singers in a quire,
also that which is sung or played in a Tragedy or Comedy, between every act.
Chrysmatory, (Greek) a vessel wherein they put the holy ointment (used by those
of the Roman Church in the Sacrament of Baptism) which is called Chrism.
Chrisome, (Greek) a white cloth put about a child newly christened, in token of
Baptism. Christian, a proper name of women, first derived from the profession
it self. Christianism, the profession of Christian Religion. Christopher,
(Greek) a proper name of men, signifying Christ*carrier. Chromatic, (Greek)
keeping its color, also pleasant, delightful, also a soft kind of music,
which by the Ancients was taxed of effeminacy. Chronical, (Greek) temporal. A
Chronicle, (Greek) a History of the times. Chronodix, (Greek) a certain kind of
Dial or Instrument, to show how the time passes away. A Chronogram, (Greek) a
verse wherein the figurative letters being joined together, make up the year of
our Lord. Chronography, (Greek) a writing of Annals. Chronology, (Greek) a
computation of years, whereby is shown the coherence of Histories. Chrysocol,
(Greek) a kind of green earth called Borax, wherewith Goldsmiths soder gold and
other metals together. Chrysolite, a kind of precious stone of a gold-colour.
Chrysopase, another sort of precious stone of a greenish color. Chrysopolis, a
Promontory of Asia, now called Scytary. Chrysostomus, signifying in Greek
golden mouth, it was the name of an ancient Bishop of Byzantium, famous for his
eloquence. Chrystalline heaven, it is the ninth heaven, mentioned Genesis 1. which
divides the water from the waters. Chyle, (Greek) a white substance or milky
juice, into which the nutriment is converted by the heat of the stomach, and
which being there brought to that pefection, passes thence away thorough
Mesaraic veins into the Liver. Chylification, the act or faculty of converting
nutriment into Chyle. Chemistry, the art of dissolving metals, and of
extracting the quintessence out of any thing. Chymere, a coat or jacket, also a
Heralds coat of arms.
C I
Cibarious, (Lat.) belonging to meat. Ciboire, (French) a cup or box, wherein
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is kept among the Roman Catholics. A
Cicatrice, (Lat.) a scar or mark which is left after a wound is healed up.
Cicely, a proper name of women, from the Latin word Caecilia, i. Greyeyd.
Cicero, the name of a most famous Orator and Philosopher among the Romans,
whence Ciceronical is used for eloquent. To Cicurate, (Lat.) to tame. Cid, from
the Arabic Caide, which signifies a Lord or great man. This word is used among
the Spaniards, for a valiant man or great Captain. Cierges, waxcandles, lamps.
Chaucer. Cilerie, a term in Architecture, signifying the draperie or leavage,
which is wrought upon the heads of pillars. Cilicia, a Country of Asia the
Less, now called Caramania or Turcomania. Cilicious, (Lat.) belonging to a
Cilice or haircloath. Cilinder, see Cylinder. Cimbick, (Lat.) a niggard or
peny-father. Cimbrians, a northern and warlick people, anciently inhabiting
that Country which is now called Denmark. Cimeliark, (Lat.) a Vestry, also a
place to put Jewels in. Cimice, a small red insect or worm. A Cimiter, see
Scymitar. Cimmerians, a northern people whose Country by reason of its distance
from the Sun, is always dark: whence Cimmerian darkness is taken for a very
thick obscurity. They live near a certain narrow sea, which from them is called
Bosph^rus Ci^imerius. There is also a people of Italy, so called, living
between Baiae and Cumae, encompassed about with high hills. Cinnamon, an Hebrew
word, signifying a kind of spice. Cincantenier, (French) a Commander of 50 men;
also the name of an Officer in Paris. Cincture, (Lat.) an encompassing with a
girdle. Ciniph, (Lat.) a gnat. Cinkefoile* an herb called five leaved-grasse.
Cinnaber, a red stone found in Mines, which is used for a Vermilion color.
Cinople, or Sinople, a kind of red-lead, from the City Sinope, whence it is
dug. Cinque Ports, five Havens which lie toward France on the East part of
England: namely, Hastings, Dover, Hith, Rumney, and Sandwich; the inhabitants
of these Ports have many privileges and immunities above others of the Commons
of that Country. Also they have an especial Governor* who is called
Lord-warden of the Cinque Ports, having all the authority that a Lord Admiral
has in places not exempted. A Cipher, from the Hebrew word Saphar, to number,
signifies any figure or number, especially that figure in form of an o. which
only serves to augment the value of a number, also a Character wherein secret
letters are written. Cipresse, a fine curled linen, of which Hoodes for women
are made. Circester, or Cirencester, an ancient City in Glocestershire, which
stands upon the River Corinus, or Churn, it was formerly called Corinium, and
Durocornovium, also Vrbs Passerum, in regard it was set on fire by sparrows, by
a stratageme of one Gurmundus; it was taken from the Britains by Ceaulin, King
of the West Saxons, also Cineglise was here defeated by Penda, King of the
Mercians. Circinate, (Lat.) to make a Circle with a pair of Compasses. Circk,
(Lat.) a place in Rome made circularly where the people sat and beheld those
plays, which are called circenses. A Circuit of action, a Term in Law,
signifying a longer course of proceeding then is needful, to recover the thing
sued for. Circuition, (Lat.) a fetching a compass, or going about. Circular,
(Lat.) round, in fashion of a circle. Circulation, (Lat.) an encompassing, a
fetching a round circle, also a subliming of waters by a Limbeck.
Circ^maggeration, (Lat.) a heaping round about. Circumambient, (Lat.)
incircling, or flowing about, an Epithet proper to the air. Circumambulation,
a walking about, also a far-fetch't discourse. Circumcelliones, certain
abominable Heretics, who to get themselves repute, laid violent hands upon
themselves. Circumcision, (lat.) a cutting about, a Ceremony used among the
Jews, namely a cutting off the fore-skins from their children as soon as they
were eight days old. Circumduction, (lat.) a leading about, a deceiving.
Circumference, (lat.) a line circularly drawn about the center. Circumferentor,
a Mathematical instrument, used by Geometricians and Surveyors, it is made of
wood, eight inches in length, and four broad, three quarters of an inch thick,
about the middle of the upper-side is a round hole, three inches and a half
about, and half an inch deep, in which is placed a C^rd, divided into 1^0 equal
parts, in which Card is drawn a Dyal, to know the hour of the Sun. Circumflex,
(lat.) bowed about, also a mark over a Vowel, whereby the most full Greek
accent is expressed. Circumfluous, or Circumfluent, (latin) flowing about.
Circumforaneous, (lat.) ^^itering about the Market, or Court. Circumfusion,
(lat.) a pouring about. Circumgyration, (lat.) a fetching a great circuit round
about. Circumjacent, (lat.) lying about. Circumincession, (lat.) a word used by
the Divines, to express the existence of the holy Trinity. Circumligation,
(lat.) a binding about. Circumlition, (lat.) a dawbing, or plaistering about.
Circumlocution, (lat.) a circuit of word^, or going about the bush.
Circumvection, (lat.) a carrying about. Circumplication, (lat,) a folding
about. Circumrotation, (lat.) a wheeling about. Circumscription, (lat.) a
writing about. Circumspection, (lat.) wariness, heedfulnesse. A Circumstance,
(lat.) a quality that accompanies any thing, as time, place. Circumstantibus,
a Law Term, those that stand about to make up the number of the Jurors: if any
impanell'd appear not, or appearing, be challenged by either party.
Circumvallation, (lat.) an enclosing, or trenching about. Circumvent, (lat.) to
overreach, to deceive. Circumvolate, (lat.) to fly about. Circumvolve, (lat.)
to roll about. Circumvolution, a rolling, wheeling, or turning about.
Circundate, (lat.) to encompasse about. Circunsonate, (lat.) to sound about, or
on every side. Cisalpine, Countries on this side the Alps. Cisbury, a Town in
Sussex* so called from C^ssa, the son of Aello, and second King of the South
Saxons, who with his brother Cimen, landed with great Forces at Cimonshore.
Cistercian Monks, see Bernardine Monks. Cistus, a certain bramble, called the
holy rose. Citation, (lat.) the alleging of any Text, also a Summons to
appear before any Court. Citherides, a name given to the Muses. Citriale, a
Cittern, a word used by Chaucer. Cittine color, the color of a Pomecitron, or
golden color. Citrull, a kind of Cucumber. Cittadell, a Castle, or Fortress
of a City. Civet, an Arabian word, it is a kind of Unctious substance, that
has a very sweet smell, and seems to be an excrement coming from some beast. A
Civick Crown, a reward anciently given by the Romans, to a deserving Citizen.
C L
Clack Wool, is to cut off the sheeps mark, which makes it to weigh less, and
to yield less custom. Claick-geese, see Bernacles. Claim, a Law Term, is a
challenge of interest in any thing that is out of ones possession, as Claim by
Charter, or descent, etc. Clamor, (lat.) noise. Clan, a tribe, or family in
Scotland, as Clan Mackduff, the family of Mackduff. Clancular, (lat.) privy,
secret. Clandestine, (lat.) the same. Clangour, (lat.) a shrill cry, or great
sound. Clap, a Term in Faulcnory, the nether part of a Hawks beak, is called
the Hawks clap. Clara, a proper name of women, signifying in Latin clear, or
bright. Clare, a Town of Suffolk, which gave name unto the ancient family of
the Clares, descended from Earl Gislebert the Norman, as also the Title of
Dukedom, unto Leonel Son to King Edward the 3d. who for the more full sound was
styled Duke of Clarence. Clarentieux, one of the Kings at arms. Claricord, or
Clericord, a kind of Musical instrument, somewhat like a Cymbal. Clarie, a
kind of Herb, so called. Clarigation, a Law Term, used by the ancient Romans,
being the same as reprizal with us, see more in reprizal. Clarion, a kind of
Trumpet. Clarissona^^, (lat.) clear-voic't, shrill-sounding. Clark, a
Clergyman, a Scholar, a Secretary, also a man employed in some great Office,
as Clark of the Crown in Chancery, Clark of the Crown in the Kings Bench, Clark
of the Ex^reats, Clark of the Pell, of the petty Bag* of the Kings Wardrop, of
the Kings silver, etc. which see in their several places. Clarmathan, signifies
in the practick of Scotland, the warranting of stolen Cattle, or goods. Class,
an order, a rank, or degree, also a Navy. Cla^dicate, to be lame. Clavecymbal,
or Claricymbal, a kind of instrument with wire-strings, by some taken for a
Harpsical, or Virginal. Claver, a kind of Herb, called Trefoil. Clavicular,
(lat.) belonging to a key. Clavis, (lat.) a key, also an exposition of hard
words. Clause, an Article, or conclusion, from the Latin word Claudere, because
it shuts up a sentence. Claustral, (lat.) belonging to a close place, retired,
or recluse. Clement, (lat.) a proper name, signifying mild, or gentle.
Clementines, a part of the Canon Law, or certain decretals collected by Pope
Clement. Cleopatra, a Queen of Egypt, first loved by Julius Caesar, afterward
married to Marck Antonie, who having killed himself she procured her own death,
by setting Asps to her naked breasts. Clep, a Scots Law Term, a form of claim,
petition, or libel, or certain solemn words used, especially in Criminal
causes. Clepen, (old word) they call. Clepsydrie, (Greek) an hour-glasse, which
measures out the time by the insensible flowing of water. Clergion, a Clark,
Chaucer. Clergy, the whole number of those that take upon them the Ministry,
also a Term, signifying an appeal, a Plea to an Indictment, heretofore only
Clergymen, but now all men have the benefit of their Ordinaries. Clerk, see
Clark. Cleromancy, (Greek) a divination by lots. The Clew of a sail, the lower
corner of a sail, which reaches down to the place where the sheates are made
fast to the sail. Clicket, a clapper of a door, Chaucer also uses it for a
key. Clicketting, a Term in hunting, a Fox when he desires copulation, is said
to go to his clicketting. Clientele, (lat.) a taking into ones protection, a
train of clients and followers. Cliff, a cleft Mountain, or broken Rock.
Climacterical, from the Greek word Climax, a scale, or ladder, every seventh,
and ninth year is counted a climacterical year: wherein, if any misfortune, or
sickness happen, it is accounted most dangerous, as likewise those years,
which are compounded of 7ths. and 9ths. up to the 63d. which is held most
dangerous of all. Climate, (Greek) a portion of the earth contained between two
parallel lines, in which space there is half an hours difference in the length
of the day. Clinick, (Greek) bedred. Clio, one of the nine Muses, who is said
to be the first inventour of History. Cloacal, full of filth and nastinesse,
from Cloaca a sink, or house of office. Cloelia, a Noble Virgin among the
Romans, who being left as a hostage with Pors^nna, King of the Hetrurians made
an escape, and swom over the River Tybris to her own party. Closet, a Term in
Heraldry, being half of the Bar, see Bar. Closh, an unlawful game forbidden
by the statute. Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the three Destinies, who spin
the thread of humane life, Clotho carries the thread, Lachesis spins, and
Atropos cuts it off. Cloudesbery, a plant which grows peculiarly upon
Pendlehill in Lancashire, so termed, as if it came out of the clouds. Clove, a
Law Term, the two and thirtieth part of a weight. Clun, a Castle in Shropshire,
built by the Fitz Alans, descended from Flaold the Norman, and defended by them
as Lords Marchers (and afterward Earls of Arundel) against the inroades of the
Welsh. Cluniack Monks, Monks of the Monastery of Cluyne in France. Clyster,
(Greek) a certain instrument whereby to convey any purging ingredient up into
the guts through the fundament. Clytemnestra, the daughter of Tyndarus, and
Leda, the wife of Agamemnon, she lived in Adultery with Aegystus, and with his
help killed her husband Agamemnon, but his son Orestes revenged his death upon
his mother and Aegysthus. Clytia, one of the daughters of Oceanus, who
discovering that Apollo lay with Le^cothoe, the daughter of Orchamus was
slighted by him, and pining her self away was turned into a flower, called a
Heliotrope. Clyto, a Title of Honor, anciently used in this Nation, and
peculiarly ascribed to the Kings sons, it comes from the Greek word (...), i.
e. glorious, or excellent, in the same sense was the Saxon word Aetheling used.
C N
Cnidus, a City of Caria, where Venus was worshipped in ancient times. It is
now called Cabocrio Cnossus, or Gnossus, a City of Crete, where Minas
anciently kept his Court. It was anciently called Ceratus, from a River of that
name, which ran hard by. Cnouts delf, otherwise called Steeds dike, a certain
Ditch, which Canute the Dane caused to be made between Ramsey and Whitlesey, to
abate the fury of the Sea thereabout, where in a great storm his sons and
servants had like to have been cast away, it was also called Swerdes delf,
because it was marked out with their swords.
C O
To Coacervate, (lat.) to heap together. Coaction, (lat.) a compelling or
constraining. Coadjutor, (lat.) a fellow laborer, an assistant or helper.
Coadunation, (lat.) an assembling or bringing together. Coaetaneous, (lat.) of
the same age. Coaeternal, (lat.) equal in eternity. Coagulation, (lat.) a
thickning or curdling together. Coalition, (lat.) a growing together, an
increasing. Coaptation, (lat.) a fitting together. Coarctation, (lat.) a
streightning, a pressing together. Coassation, (lat.) a joining together with
boards. Coaxation, (lat.) a noise of frogs, a croaking. Cobus, a River of
Colchis, that has golden sands, it rises out of the mountain Caucasus, and
gave original to the Fable of the golden Fleece. Coccinean, of a Crimson, or
Scarlet die. Coccium, an ancient Town of Lancashire, mentioned by the Emperor
Antoninus, and thought to be the same with that, which is now called Cockley.
Cockatrice, a kind of Serpent, which is also called a Basilisk, engendered as
some say from a Cock's Egg. Cocket, a Law Term, being a Seal appertaining to
the Custom House, also a scrowl delivered by the Officers of the Custom House
to Merchants, to VVarrant that their merchandise is Customed. Cockle, (Lat.) a
Shellfish, also a Weed called Corn-rose, darnel, or Field-nigella.
Cocle-stairs, a Term in Architecture, winding stairs. Cockney, a vulgar Term
given to one born and bred in the City, which comes as some think from the
River Thames, being in ancient time called Cockney. Cocles, (Lat.) a man born
with one eye, also the name of a valiant Roman, who alone fought against all
the forces of King Porsenna, upon a Bridge, until the Bridge it self was cut
down, whereupon he threw himself into the River armed, and swom over. Coction,
(lat.) a seething, also a digestion of the meat in the stomach. Cocytus, a
River of Hell, running out of the Stygian Lake. The Code, a volume of the Civil
Law, which contains diverse precepts of the Emperors. It comes from the Latin
word Codex. Codeta, certain Orchards about Tiber, wherein grow many shrubs like
horses tails. Codicil, a word used in the Civil Law, being a just sentence of
our Will, concerning that, which we would have done after our death, without
the appointing of an Executor, and is a kind of supplement to a Will.
Codiniack, (French) a kind of Marmalade made of Quinces. Codrus, a King of the
Athenians, who because the Oracle had foretold that the Peloponesians should
overcome, if they did not kill the Athenian King, he disguised himself like a
beggar, and voluntarily exposed himself to death for the safety of his
Country. Coeliacal Vein, see Vein. Coemeterie, (Greek) a Churchyard.
Coemption, (Lat.) a certain Ceremony used among the Romans, whereby the husband
and wife seemed to buy one another. Coequal, (lat.) equal one to another.
Coertion, (lat.) a withholding, or restraing. Coessential, (lat.) of the same
essence. Coexistent, (lat.) having a being together, or at the same time.
Coffa, see Cauphe. Cofferer of the Kings household, a principal Officer in the
Kings Court under the Controller, who has a special charge over the other
Officers of the household, and pays them their wages. Cogitation, (lat.) a
thinking, or meditating. Cognation, (lat.) kindred, or alliance. Cognizance,
(French) a badge in arms, also an acknowledging of a Fine, also a hearing a
thing judicially; moreover, a Cognizance of a Plea is a privilege that a
City, or Town has of the Kings Grant, to hold a Plea of all Contracts, and of
Lands, within the Precincts of the Franchise, and that when any man is
impleaded for any such thing at the Kings Court, the Mayor, or Bailiffs of such
Franchises may ask Cognizance of the Plea, that is, that the matter be
determined before them. Cognisee, is he, to whom a Fine is acknowledged.
Cognisour, is he, who acknowledges a Fine. Cognition, (lat.) a knowing, or
judging of a thing. Cognitionibus admittendis, a Writ directed to a Justice,
or any that has power to take a Fine, commanding him to certify it in the
Court of Common Pleas. Cognominate, (lat.) to give a surname to any one.
Coherence, (lat.) a sticking unto, an agreeing, or hanging together.
Cohibition, (lat.) a keeping back, or restraining. Cohobation, (lat.) a Term in
Chemistry, which signifies a pouring of the distilled liquor on its faeces, and
distilling it again. A Cohort, among the Romans, was the tenth part of a
legion, and contained five hundred Soldiers. Cohortation, (lat.) an exhorting,
or persuading. Coincident, (lat.) falling out together, happening at the same
time. Coins, corners of a wall, also pieces of wood wherewith Gunners mount
Ordnance. Coint, (old word) strange. Coition, (lat.) an assembling together,
also carnal copulation. Coition of the Moon is also when the Moon is in the
same sign and degree with the Sun. To Colaphize, (lat.) to cuff or buffet with
the fist. Colbrand, the Danish Giant who was overcome by Guy Earl of Warick.
Colchis, a country of Asia, near Pontus, where Aeaetes reigned, with whom the
Argonauts made war about the Golden Fleece. Collactaneous, (lat.) nursed
together, sucking at the same time. Collapsed, (lat.) fallen to decay, ruined.
Collateral, (lat.) equal with either side, Collateral relations or kindred, are
brothers or sisters children, or those that descend from them. Collateral
security is that security which is given over and above the deed it self.
Collation, (lat.) a joining or comparing together, also a Banquet; also
Collation of a benefice is the bestowing of a benefice by the Bishop who has
it in his own gift or patronage; whereas the institution into a benefice is
performed by the Bishop at the presentation of another who is Patron of the
place, or has a Patrons right. It is moreover a term used by Booksellers, and
signifies a looking upon the letters at the bottom of every page to see that
the book be perfect. Collative, a unanimous contribution of the people toward
any public work. To Collaud, (lat.) to join with others in the praise of any
one. A Colleague, (lat.) a fellow or copartner in any office. A Collection,
(lat.) a gathering or levy. Collection is when two principal significates do
not behold one another, but both of them cast several aspects to a more weighty
Planet than themselves, and they both receive him in some of their essential
dignities, then shall the Planet which thus collects both their lights, bring
the thing demanded to perfection. Collects things gathered out of other men's
Works, also certain select prayers in the Common Prayer book, with the Epistles
and Gospels for such and such days. College, (lat.) a place set apart for the
society and cohabitation of Students. Collerage, a pecuniary mulct in France
exacted for the collars worn by wine-drawing horses or men. Collet, the same as
Beazel of a ring. Collieth, a term in Faulconrie, when they say, the Hawk
collieth, and not beaketh. Colligate, (lat.) to fasten, or tie together.
Collimation, (lat.) an aiming at a mark. Colliquation, (lat.) a dissolving or
melting, Collision, (lat.) a crushing, or bruising together. Collistrigium, or
Collistridium, a word used in the practick of Scotland, and signifies a pillory
or stocks. Collocation, (lat.) a placing in order, a letting out to hire.
Collock, an old Saxon word, signifying a paile with one handle. To Collogue, to
flatter, from the Latin word Colloquium, a talking together. A Colonel, a
Commander in chief of a Regiment or Brigade, from the Latin word Columna a
pillar, because he is one of the chief props and pillars of an Army. Colloquy,
(lat.) a talking of two men together. Colluctation, (lat.) a struggling
together. Collusion, (lat.) a dealing* deceitfully; in Common Law it signifies
an action commenc't against another on purpose to defraud him. Collybist,
(Greek) a money-changer. Collyrie, (Greek) a term in Physic, signifying a
medicinable water for the eyes. Colobe, an ancient kind of short coat, reaching
to the knees. Coloieros, a certain religious Order among the Greeks. Colon,
(Greek) a mark or pause of a sentence not fully ended, also one of the three
great guts. Colony, (lat.) a company of men sent out of one country to inhabit
another. Coloquintida, a kind of wild gourd, used by Physicians in purging
medicines. Coloss, a statue of a vast bigness: the most famous Coloss in the
World was that of the Sun in the Port of Rhodes. Colostration, a term in
physic, being a disease in children, caused by sucking bad milk. Colpindach,
or Cowdach, a word used in the practick of Scotland, signifying a young cow or
heifer. Colran, a Country of Ireland, anciently called Krine, bordering south
upon Tir Oen. Colubraria, an Island of the Iberian sea, abounding with snakes,
from the Latin word Coluber, a snake. Coludum, the ancient name of a Town of
the Province of Merch in Scotland, called also Coldana by Ptolomy Colania, now
Coldingham, where there was a famous Monastery, the Nuns whereof with their
Prioresse Ebba, cut off their lips and noses to avoid the lustful violence of
the Danes. A Columbarg, (lat.) a Dove-house. Columbine, a kind of Flower so
called. Column, (lat.) a pillar. Columnae Herculis, or Hercules pillars, two
mountains in the West, the one in Europe called Calpe, the other in Africa
called Abyla, which Hercules separated the one from the other. Others say they
were two pillars of Brass in the Isles of Cades. Colures, two great circles in
the Globe of the World, which passing through the Poles and the 4 principal*
points of the Zodiac, cut themselves equally, and divide the Glob into equal
parts. Colus a beast of whitish color that has a head like a hog, and that
drinks in water thorough the nostrils. Coma Berenices, a figure like a triangle
in the tail of Leo. Comald, a strict Order of Friars instituted in Italy, in
the year 1012. by one Romoald of Ravenna. Combat, in the Common law signifies a
formal trial of a doubtful cause by the sword or bastons of two Champions,
wherein if the defendant can defend himself till the stars be seen in the
firmament, and demand judgment if he ought to fight any longer, then judgment
is to be given on the defendants side. Combination, (lat.) a joining together,
also a term in law, signifying the entering of two or more into a conspiracy to
perform any unlawful or mischeivous design. Combustible, (lat.) apt to take
fire, easily inflamed. Combustion, is when any Planet is not distant from the
Sun eight degrees and three minutes, either before or after his body, and a
Planet still remains under the Sun, until he is fully elongated 17 degrees.
Comedy, see Comaedie. Comessation, (lat.) revelling, inordinate eating and
drinking. Comestion, (lat.) a devouring or eating up. Comet, (Greek) a certain
Meteor called a blazing Star, being a hot and dry exhalation set on fire in the
upper Region and portending many strange events: of their several Sects, Vide
Plin. l. 2. c. 25. de Not. Comical, (Greek.) merry, facetious, pertaining to
Comedies. Comitatu Commisso, is a Writ, or Commission, whereby the Shriffe is
authorized to take upon him the sway of the County. Comitie, (lat.) courtesy,
gentleness, civility of behavior. Comitial, (lat.) belonging to a Convention,
or Assembly of people, which is called Comitium, also in Physic the Comitial
disease, signifying the falling sickness. Comma, (Greek) a point in a part of
a sentence, without any perfect sense. Commaculate, (lat.) to defile, or
pollute. Commandment, in Common Law, is taken either for the Commandment of the
King, when upon his mere motion he commands any thing to be done, or else for
the offense of him that wills another to transgress the Law. Commaterial,
(lat.) made of the same matter, or substance with another. Commaundry, was in
ancient time a Manor or chief Message by which lands belonging to the Priory
of St. John's in Jerusalem were holden in England. A Commeatur, (lat.) one that
passes as a messenger from one place to another. Commemoration, (lat.) a
mentioning or rehearsing the deeds of any one worthy of praise. To Commence,
(French) to begin, also a term in Common law, signifying to proceed in any
action or suite against any one, also to take a degree in the Universities.
Commendaces, (French) prayers for the dead, also verses or orations made in
praise of the dead. Commendam, a word used by Ecclesiastical Writers, whereby
is signified the intrusting of a Benefice which is void to the charge and care
of a sufficient Clergyman, until it can be conveniently supplied. Commendation,
(lat.) a praising or extolling. Commensal, (lat.) a companion at the Table, a
fellow Commoner. Commensuration, (Lat.) a measuring one thing with another. A
Commentary, (French) an explaining or exposition of a thing; it signifies also
metaphorically, a comprehending the depth of any misery. Commerce, (French) a
traffiquing or exchanging of wares. Commigration* (Lat.) a removing from one
place to another. Commination, (Lat.) a fierce and vehement threatening.
Comminution, (Lat.) bruising or breaking to pieces. Commiseration, (Lat.)
tender-heartednesse or compassion. Commissary, according to the acception of
the Can^nists, is he who exercises Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in places of
the Diocese so far distant from the chief City, that the Chancelour cannot
call the subjects to the Bishops principal Consistory without their great
molestation; also an Officer in war, is he who is to look to the distribution
of victuals, provided for the Army and Garrisons. Commission, (Lat.) a
delegation or mandate given for the warrant for the exercising of a
jurisdiction given by Letters pattents, or the public Seal. Commissure, (Lat.)
a word used in Architecture, being a close joining of planks or stone, or any
other material together. Committee, is he or they to whom the consideration or
ordering of any matter is referred, either by some Court, or consent of parties
to whom it belongs. Commixtion, (Lat.) a mingling together. Commodious,
(Lat.) profitable, gainful. Common, signifies in the Common law, that soil or
water whereof the use is common in a Town or Lordship. Commonality, (French)
the common people. Common Pleas, is one of the Courts in Westminster, but in
ancient time moveable. It was erected in Henry the thirds time, for the trying
of all civil causes, both real and personal. The chief Judge whereof is called
Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas: the rest of the Officers are Custos
brevium; four Exigenters, fourteen Filazers, a Clark of the warrants, a Clark
of the jurata writs, Clark of the Treasury, Clark of the Kings Silver, Clark of
the Essoynes, and Clark of the Outlawries. Commoration, (Lat.) a tarrying in a
place. C^mmotion, (Lat.) a tumult or uproar. Commotes, or Commoithes, a word
used by the Welsh, for a part of a shire, or a hundred, also a gathering made
upon the people of a hundred. Communication, (Lat.) an imparting one to
another. Community, or Communion, (Lat.) enjoying in common, or mutual
participation. Communition, (Lat.) a fortifying. Commutation, (Lat.) a changing
one thing for another. Commutative justice, is the justice of a contractor, or
his performing a covenant, in buying and selling, lending and borrowing, etc.
Comaedie, or Comedy, a Stage Play wherein are represented the actions of human
life. Compact, (Lat.) an agreement. Compaction, or Compage, (lat.) a fastening
or joining close together. In Philosophy the contracting of a substance by
having less parts, or by the more close sticking together of the parts, and it
is opposed to diffusion. Companage, (Ital.) the same as cates, all kind of
victuals eaten with bread. A Comparition, (lat.) an appearing to open view. A
Compass, a Mathematical Instrument wherewith to make a round Circle; also a
Mariners Compass, is a certain Instrument used by Seamen, for the better
guiding and directing them in their Navigation. Compassionate, (French) full of
tenderness and compassion. Compatible, (French) which can agree together.
Compatient, (lat.) suffering together. Compatriote, (lat.) one of the same
Country, a fellow-Citizen. Compeer, (lat.) Compar or Compater) a consort, or
fellow, also a Gossip, also in the Isle of Zant, those young men invited
together to Weddings, are called Compeers. Compel, (lat.) to force, to
constrain. Compellation, (lat.) a calling any one by their name, also a
mentioning with disgrace. Compendiousnesse, (lat.) shortness, brevity. A
Compendium, (lat.) an abridgement, also a gaining by thriftinesse.
Compensation, (lat.) a making recompense, a repaying a good, or bad turn.
Comperennitation, (lat.) a deferring, or putting off. Competency, (lat.)
sufficiency, or having enough. Competitour, (lat.) a rival, one that seeks
after the same thing another sues for. Compile, (French) to heap together.
Compital, (lat.) belonging to the Compita, or cross ways. Compitals, certain
feasts solemnized in those cross ways. Complacential, (lat.) mild in
behavior, of a courteous or affable nature. Artamenes. Complainant to a
Magistrate, making ones case known, suing for relief. Complaisance, (French)
the same as Complacence, an obliging carriage, an aptness to comply.
Cleopatra. Complement, (lat.) a filling up, also Ceremony in speech and
behavior, also a Geometrical Term, signifying those parts of a Quadrangle,
which being added to the Gnomon, and the Diagonal make up the whole. Complement
of an Angle, is so much as the Angle wants of ninty degrees. The Completes,
(Spanish) a piece of service said in the evening. Complex, (Lat.) compound,
containing several things together. Complexion, (lat.) the state and
constitution of the body. Complicate, (Lat.) to wrap, or fold up. A Complice,
differs from a partner in this, that a partner may be said to be a companion in
good, or evil, a complice in evil only. Comportment, (French) carriage, or
behavior. Composition, (Lat.) a setting together, also a work set forth in any
piece of learning, or art. Compotation, (Lat.) a drinking bout, or merry
meeting. Comprehension, (Lat.) a laying on, also understanding, or finding out
the depth of any mystery. Compressure, or Compression, (Lat.) a pressing
together. Comprise, (French) to contain, the same as comprehend. Comprobation,
(Lat.) a mutual allowing, or approving. Compromise, a Term in Law, being a
mutual promise of two, or more parties at difference to refer the ending of
their controversy to the judgment of Arbitrators. Compton, in the hole, a
Town in Warwickshire, which gave name and habitation to the ancient family of
the Comptons, advanced by Queen Elizabeth, to the Title of Barons. Compulsion,
(Lat.) a constraining, or forcing. Compunction, (Lat.) remorce, or trouble of
mind for any crime committed. Compurgation, (Lat.) a Term in Law, a justifying
by Oath the report, or Oath of another. Computation, (lat.) a reckoning, or
casting of account. De Computo reddendo, a Writ compelling a Bailiff,
Chamberlain, or receiver to give up their accounts. Comrade, the same as
Camerade. Comus, a certain God among the Heathen, that was the chief patron of
revellings and debauches. Conaught, or Connacht, a Province of Ireland, the
people whereof were anciently called Concani, or Gangani. Concamerate, (lat.) a
word of Architecture, to make a vaulted roof to Arch. Concatenate, (lat.) to
chain together. Concavity, (lat.) hollownesse. Concealers, a Term in
Common Law, signifying by Antiphrasis, or contrary speaking, such men as find
out concealed Lands, which are privily kept from the King, or the State by
common persons, who have nothing to show for them. Concede, (lat.) to yield, or
grant. Consent, (lat.) a Harmony, or agreement in Music. Concentricks, (lat.)
Spears, or Circles, having the one common Center. Conceptacle, (lat.) a
capacious hollownesse, that which is apt to contain, or receive any thing.
Conception, (latin) a conceiving with Child, also a bringing forth any fancy,
or conceit. Concern, (lat.) to regard, to belong unto. Concertation, (lat.) a
striving together. Concession, (lat.) a granting, or yielding. Concidence,
(lat.) a falling together, a a making a Cadence at the same time. Conciliate,
(lat.) to make to agree, to bring together. Concinnate, (lat.) apt, fit,
proper. Concional, (lat.) belonging to a speech made in public. Concise,
(lat.) short consisting of few words. Concitation, (lat.) a stirring up, or
provoking. Conclamation, (lat.) a great noise, or shouting of much people.
Concl^ve, (lat.) a Closet, or inner Chamber, also an Assembly of the Cardinals,
met to consult about any affair of the Church. A Conclusion, (lat.) a shutting
up, or ending of a business. Concoction, (lat.) a seething, or boiling, a
digestion of the meat in the stomach. Concomitant, (lat.) bearing any one
company. Concord, (lat.) agreement, in Common Law, it is defined to be an
agreement, between parties that intend the levying of a Fine of Lands one to
another, in what manner the Land shall pass, also a perfect Tone in Music, as
an eighth, or a third, etc. Concorporation, (lat.) a mixing of bodies together
into one. Concourse, (lat.) a meeting together of people. Concrete, (lat.)
joined, or grown together, also a Logical Term, signifying an accident joined
with any subject, whereas abstract is the accident alone. Concretion, (lat.) a
growing together. Concubinage, (French) fornication, also a Term in Common Law,
signifying an exception against her that sueth for her Dowry, alleging that
she is not wife, but Concubine to the party, in whose Lands she seeks to be
endowed. Conculcate, (lat.) to stamp upon, or tread under foot. Concupiscence,
(lat.) a vehement desire of any thing, but more particularly a lustful, or
venereal appetite. The Concupiscible faculty, the sensual part of the Soul,
which only seeks after pleasures and lusts. Concurrence, (lat.) a meeting
together, also an agreeing. Concussion, (lat.) a jumbling together, also
extorsion by terrifying. Concussionary, an Officer, or Magistrate that by false
show of Authority extorts gifts, and bribes from men. Cond, (a Term in
Navigation) to lead, or direct a ship, which way she shall go. Condensation,
(lat.) a making thick. Condereum, the ancient name of a Town, in the Bishopric
of Durham, where in old time the left wing of the Astures kept their station,
it is now called Chester upon the Street. Conders, are those men that stand
upon the high places, near the Seacoast, at the time of Herring-fishing, to
make signs with bough's* in their hands unto the fishers, which way the
Herrings pass, which they easily discern by the blue color, which they make
in the wate^. Condescension, (lat.) a yielding unto, or complying with.
Condict, (lat.) an appointment, or composition. Condign, (lat.) worthy,
according to merit. Condement, (lat.) seasoning. A Condisciple, (lat.) a
School-fellow, or fellow Student. Condited, (lat.) seasoned. Condition, (lat.)
nature, disposition, also estate, or fortune. In Common Law it signifies a
rate, manner, or Law, annexed to men's Acts, staying, or suspending the same,
and making them uncertain, whether they shall take effect, or no. Condolence,
(lat.) a grieving with another. Condonation, (lat.) a pardoning, or forgiving.
Conducible, (lat.) profitable, also to be hired. Conduct, (French) a guiding,
also a management of any affair. Artamenes. Conductour, (lat.) a leader, or
guider. Condylome, (Greek) an excrescence of flesh. Cone, a Geometrical figure,
circularly flat at the bottom, and sharpning by degrees, till it end in a
point at the top, also a Pine Apple. Confabulation, (lat.) a discoursing, or
talking together. Confar^eation, (lat.) a certain Ceremony with a Cake,
anciently used at marriages. Conf^ction* (lat.) a finishing, a mingling of
diverse things together, a making of Conserves. A Confident, (lat.) one that is
employed in matters of secrecy and trust. Configulation, (lat.) a making of
earthen ware. Configuration, (lat.) a likeness, or resemblance of figures.
Confines, (French) Marches, or Borders of a Country. Confirmation, (lat.) a
making sure, also a Law Term, signifying a strengthening of an estate formerly
had, and yet voidable, though not presently void. Confiscation, (lat.) a Law
Term, a bring-away a man's goods, as forfeited to the public Treasury, from
Fiscus a Pannyer, or Hamper, a place where the Kings Treasure uses to be kept.
Conflagration, (lat.) a great consuming, or destroying with fire. Confluence,
(lat.) a meeting of diverse waters in one, also a great concourse of people.
Confluxibility, (lat.) an aptness to flow together, or to be mingled one with
another. Confoederate, (lat.) joined together in a league by Oath. Conformable,
(lat.) agreeable, suitable. Confront, (French) to bring face to face, also to
compare together. Conge, (French) leave, Conge d'Estire, signifies in the
Common Law, the Kings permission to a Dean, or Chapter to choose a Bishop, or to
an Abbey, to choose their Abbot. Congenerous, (lat.) of the same sort, of the
same stock. Congeniality, (lat.) a resemblance of Genius and fancy.
Congelation, (lat.) a freesing, or congealing. Congersbury, a Town in
Somersetshire, so named from one Congar, who lived there an Eremite, whom
Capgrave an old Writer affirms to have been the Emperors son of
Constantinople. Congiary, a gift of a Prince, or great man to the people.
Conglobation, (lat.) a gathering round into a Globe. Conglomeration, (lat.) a
rolling up into a heap, a winding into a bottom. Conglutination, (lat.) a
fastening together with Glue. Congratulation, (Lat.) a rejoicing with any one
for his good fortune. Congregation, (lat.) an assembling, or gathering of
people together. Congresse, (lat.) a coming together, also an incountring.
Congruence, or Congruity, (lat.) agreeableness. Conical, having the figure of
a Cone. Conjectural, (lat.) that may be conjectured, or guess't at. Conjugal,
(latin) pertaining to marriage, belonging to man and wife. Conjugates, a Term
in Logic, signifying things of the same rank, order, or original. Conjugation,
(lat.) a deriving of things under the same order, a coupling of verbs with
their moods, and tenses under the same theme. Conjunction, (lat.) a joining
together, also a Grammatical word, one of the eight parts of speech.
Conjuration, (lat.) a conspiracy, or plot, also a compact, or bargaining with
the Devil, or evil Spirits, to know any secret, or effect any purpose. Conizee,
and Conizour, see Cognisee, and Cognisour. Connacht, see Conaught. Connascency,
(lat.) a being born together, a springing together. Conne, to learn without
book, from the Dutch word Kennen, to know, or learn. Connen, (old word) can.
Connection, (lat) a knitting, or joining together. Coninesborough, a Castle in
Yorkshire, where Hengist, after he had been vanquished by Aurelius Ambrose,
rallied his forces, but being again utterly defeated, he was beheaded.
Connivence, (lat.) a faigning not to see, a winking at a fault. Connubial,
(lat.) belonging to wedlock, or marriage. Conovium, the ancient name of a
City, which flourish't in old time in Caernarvon-shire, and took its name from
the River Conovius, now called Conwey. Conq^^ssation, (Lat.) a shaking
together, a dashing in pieces. Conquest, a Term used in the practick of
Scotland, and differs from heritage in this, that ^eritage signifies Lands and
Goods pertaining to any person, as general Successor to his father, or any
other predecessor. Conquest signifies those which any one possesses by his
own private Title, or by gift, or by any other single contract. Conquestion,
(lat.) a complaining together. Conradus, (Germ.) Able counsel; the name of
several German Emperors. Consanguinity, (lat.) nearness in blood, kindred.
Consarcination, (lat.) a patching or sowing of several pieces together.
Conscention, (lat.) a climbing or mounting. Conscious, (lat.) inwardly guilty,
privy to ones self of any fault or error. Conscription, (lat.) a registering,
or inrolling. Consecration, (lat.) a setting apart to the service of any one.
Consectary, (lat.) that which follows from the demonstration of an argument.
Consecution, (lat.) an immediate following. Month of consecution is a term in
Astrology, signifying the space between each conjunction of the Moon with the
Sun. Consequence, (lat.) that which follows of necessity, also a business of
consequence is a business of weight and moment. Consequent, (lat.) following,
also being taken substantively it signifies the last proposition of an
enthymeme, the first being called an antecedent. Conservation, (lat.) a keeping
or preserving. Conservator of the peace, signifies in Common law, him that
has a special charge by virtue of his office, to see the Kings peace kept.
Conservator of the truce and safe conducts, was an officer appointed in every
Port of the Sea, to inquire of all offenses done against the Kings truce and
safe conducts upon the main-sea, out of the Countries and out of the Franchises
of the Cinque Ports. Conserves, (French) fruits conserved or condited.
Considerable, of no mean degree, of more than ordinary quality. Cleopatra.
Consideration, (lat.) an advising or taking heed; also a term in Common law,
signifying the material part of a contract, without which no contract stands
or binds. Consideration is either expressed, as when a man bargaineth to give
a certain sum for any thing, or else implied as when the law inforceth a
consideration. Consignation, (lat.) a signing of a bill with ones own hand.
Consimilarity, (lat.) a likeness or agreeing together. Consistence, (lat.) a
being or settling. Consistent, an epithet belonging to dry bodies, and opposed
to Fluid. Consistory, (lat.) an assembly of Prelates, a Council-house of
Ecclesiastical persons. Consition, (lat.) a planting together. Consolation,
(lat.) a comforting, or putting in good heart. Consolidation, (lat.) a
sodering, strengthening, or making solid; also a term in Common law, signifying
a joining of two benefices into one, and in the Civil law, a uniting of
possession, occupation, or profit, with the property. Consomniation, (lat.) a
sleeping or dreaming together. Consonant, (lat.) sounding together, or
agreeing; also substantively taken, it signifies a letter which has no sound
of it self, but as it is joined with a vowel. Consort, (lat.) a fellow,
companion, or mate, also a set or company of Musicians. Consound, (lat.
Consolidum) an herb otherwise called Backwort or Cumfry. Conspersion, (lat.) a
bedewing or sprinkling. Conspicuous, (lat.) clear, manifest. Conspiracy, (lat.)
a plotting or secret consultation; but in Common law it is always taken in the
evil part, and signifies an agreement of such as bind themselves by covenant
or other alliance, that each of them shall assist the other maliciously to
indite, or falsely to move and maintain pleas; also such as cause children
within age to appeal men of felony, and such as receive men in the Countries,
with liveries and fees to maintain their malicious enterprises. Conspiratione,
a Writ that lies against Conspiratours. Conspurcation, (Lat.) a defiling,
fouling, or polluting. Consputation, (Lat.) a spitting upon. Constable, quasi
comes stabuli, or Master of the Kings horse, or as others say, derived from the
Dutch word Konnin-Stable, i. e. prop and stay of the King. This word is
diversely taken in Common law, either for the Constable of England, a place
formerly of great Dignity, or for an office belonging heretofore to the Lords
of certain Mannours, and at length there came to be ordained others of an
inferior rank, as Constables of Hundreds, or Franchises who were appointed for
the conservation of the peace, and called high Constables; and under these the
Constables of every Town or Parish, who are called pety-constables. Constant,
(Lat.) standing firm to ones duty or principles. Constantinople, see Byzantium.
Constantinus, the son of Constantius and Helena, he was the first Roman
Emperor that profess't Christianity, and for his great deeds, was called
Constantine the Great. Constellation, (Lat.) a company of Stars embodied
together and representing some figure. Consternation, (Lat.) amazement, or
astonishment. Constipation, (Lat.) a close embodying together. Constitution,
(Lat.) an appointing or ordaining; also constitution of the body, the state and
complexion of the body. Constraint, (French) a forcing or compelling.
Constriction, (Lat.) the same, also a binding together. Construction, (Lat.) a
placing or setting together; also a term in Grammar, signifying the right
placing of words or sentences. Constupration, (Lat.) a ravishing or deflowring
a Virgin. Consubstantial, (Lat.) of the same Essence with another. Consuete, or
Consuetudinal, (Lat.) usual or accustomed. Consuetudinibus and servitiis, a
Writ that lies against a Tenant who deforceth his Lord of the rent or service
due unto him. Consul, from the Latin word Consulere, to give counsel; it was a
place of highest dignity among the Romans, brought in after the expulsion of
their Kings, and at this present day the chief Governors of diverse Cities, are
called Consuls. Consultation, (Lat.) a taking counsel, also the name of a Writ,
whereby a cause being formerly removed by prohibition from the Ecclesiastical
Court to the Kings Court, is returned thither again. Consummation, (lat.) a
fulfilling or finishing, also a making up an account. Consumption, (lat.) a
falling away, or consuming, also a disease which dries and wastes the body.
Contabulation, (lat.) a fastening of planks or boards together. Contaction,
(lat.) a touching of two things together. Contagion, (lat.) infection, the
spreading of a disease. Contamination, (lat.) a polluting or defiling by touch.
Conteke, (old word) strife or contention. Contemeration, (lat.) a deflowring.
Contemplatives, certain Friars of St. Mary Magdalens Order, who wear black
upper garments, and white underneath. Contemplation, (lat.) a deep considering.
Contemporal, or Contemporary, (lat.) of the same time with another.
Contemptible, or Contemptuous, (lat.) worthy of disesteem and scorn.
Contenement, a term in law, being the freehold land which lies to a man's house
or tenement. Contention, (lat.) a striving. Contermination, (lat.) a bordering
upon, or lying near. Conterpleted, (old word) controlled. Contesseration,
(lat.) a entering into league or amity with strangers. Contestation, (lat.) a
calling to witness. Context, or Contexture, (lat.) a weaving together, also
the style or form of a process or discourse. Contignation, in Architecture
signifies the floor-work. Contiguity, (lat.) a nearness or close touching.
Continent, (lat.) temperate, containing ones self from any thing; also
substantively taken it signifies the firm or main land. Contingency, (lat.) a
happening by chance. Continual claim, a term in Common law, signifying a claim
made from time to time within every year and day, to land or any other thing,
which at present we cannot attain without danger. Continuance, seems to
signify in Common law, the same as prorogation in the Civil law, as
continuance until the next Assizes when it chances that a Record cannot be
found. Continuation, or Continuity, (lat.) a lengthning, or going on with any
thing, a holding out entire. Contorsion, (lat.) a pulling awry, a wresting.
Contrabanded, prohibited, from the Italian word Bando, a Proclamation, as
contrabanded goods, are goods forbidden by Proclaimation to be imported.
Contract, (lat.) a bargaining or making a match, as contract of marriage; in
Common law it is a covenant or agreement with lawful consideration or clause.
Contractation, or Contratation, (lat. and Span.) a contract or bargaining.
Contraction, (lat.) a drawing together. Contradiction, (lat.) a gainsaying.
Contra formam collationis, a Writ against an Abbot for him that has given
lands to an Abbey, and finds that the Abbot has made a feoffment thereof.
Contra formam feoffamenti, a Writ for the Heir of a Tenant infeoffed in certain
lands by Charter of feoffment, by a Lord to do certain services to his Court,
and afterward is distrained for more than is contained in the Charter.
C^ntramure, a term in Architecture or fortification, signifying an out-wall
built about the wall of a City, a counter-scarfe. Contrasto, (Spanish)
contention or strife. Contr^ctation, (lat.) a wanton handling of a woman.
Contribution, (lat.) a joint giving of money or supplies toward any business
of importance. Contributione facienda, a Writ that lies in case more are bound
to one thing, yet the whole burden is put upon one. Contristation, (lat.) a
making sad. Contrition, (lat.) remorce or penitence. Controller, an officer who
keeps a Roll of other officers accounts. Controller of the Hamper, an officer
in Chancery, who takes all things sealed from the Clark of the Hamper enclosed
in leather bags, and takes a special charge of them. Controller of the pipe, an
officer in the Exchequer, who writes summons to the Sheriffs to levy the debts
of the pipe. Controller of the Pell, an officer of the Exchequer who keeps a
controlment of the Pell of receipts and goings out. To Controve, (old word) to
devise. Controversy, (lat.) contention in dispute. Contumacy, (lat.)
stubbornness, rebellion. Contumely, (lat.) injury, reviling. Contumulation,
(lat.) an intombing together. Contusion, (lat.) a bruising, or beating in
pieces. Convalescency, (lat.) an increasing in health or strength. To Convene,
(lat.) to warn into any Assembly. Convenience, (lat.) fitness, or meetnesse.
Convent, or Covent, a great Assembly of people, also a Society of Religious men
dwelling together in a house. Conventicle, (lat.) a private Assembly.
Conventual, (lat.) belonging to a company of religious persons. Conventual
Church a Parish Church. Conversation, (lat.) a keeping company, or being
familiar with any. Conversion, (lat.) a changing from one state to another,
especially from bad to good. Convexity, (lat.) the outside of a globous body
which is hollow. Conviction, (lat.) in Common law, is the proving a man guilty
by the verdict of a jury, or when a man that is outlawed appears and
confesses. Convivial, (lat.) belonging to a feast. Convocation, (lat.) a
calling, or assembling together, convocation house, the house where the Clergy
assemble, to consult about Ecclesiastical affairs. Convoy, (French) a guide, or
conduct. Convulsion, (lat.) a violent pulling together, also a disease wherein
the sinews are shrunk up, and drawn together. Cooperate, (lat.) to bear another
company in the same work. Coote, a kind of bird, otherwise called a Moorhen.
Copal, a kind of white Rosin brought from the Indies, which they use for a
perfume. Cope, a Cloak, also a vestment, that Bishops were wont to wear.
Coparceners, or parceners, signify in Common Law, such as have equal share in
the inheritance of their ancestors. Copia libelli deliberanda, a Writ that
lies in a case where a man cannot get the Copy of a Libel, at the hands of a
Judge Ecclesiastical. Copyhold, signifies in Common Law, a Tenure for which
the Tenant has nothing, but the Copy of the Rolls made by the Steward of his
Lords Court, this is also called a base Tenure, or Tenure in Villenage.
Copious, (lat.) plentiful. Copise, from the French Couper, to cut down, a
little Wood, which consists of underwoods that are to be cut down before they
grow to be great Trees. Copperas, a kind of mineral, otherwise called vitriol,
being mixed of humors, strained by drops into small holes. Copthall, the name
of a stately house, belonging in ancient times to the Fitzauchers, and
afterward very much beautified by Sir Thomas Heneage. Copulation, (lat.) a
joining, or coupling together. Coquettery, (French) a prattling like a a Gossip.
Coquination, (lat.) a dressing, or Cooking of meat. Cor Scorpii, the heart of
the Scorpion. Coraage, in Common Law, is a certain extraordinary imposition
upon certain measures of Corn, which is upon some unusual occasion. Coral, a
certain Maritime plant growing under water, which when it is taken out,
petrifies, and becomes red. Coralline, a kind of plant, called Sea-mosse, or
Coral-mosse. Coralyse, chafe, or dross of Corn. Corban, an Hebrew word,
signifying a a gift dedicated to God. Corbel, or Corbet, a Term in
Architecture, signifying a shouldering piece in Timberwork, a jutting out like
a bragget. Corbets, the name of a very ancient family in Shropshire, who about
the coming in of the Normans, held diverse Lordships by the service of Roger
Mountgomery. Corciousnesse, (old word) corpulency. Corck, or Orchall, a kind
of blue color, used in painting. Cordage, the tackle of a ship, a word used in
Navigation, also stuff to make ropes on. Cordelier, a Gray Friar of the Order
of St. Francis, so called because he wears a cord full of knots about his
middle. Cordial, (latin) comfortable to the heart. Cordon, an old English word,
signifying reward, in like manner also the French word Guerdon is used by us.
Cordovan leather, leather made of Goat Skins, so called from Corduba, a City
of Andaluzia in Spain, where the best sort of that kind of leather is made.
Cordwainer, or Cordiner, (French) a shoemaker. Corinaeus, one of the
companions of Brutus, whence Cornwall is said to have taken its denomination,
being in old time called Corinaea, it is fabulously reported of him that he
fought with a Giant, called Gogmagog, and threw him down a steep Rock. Corinth,
a City of Achaia in Greece, in ancient time called Ephyre, which after it had
been destroyed, was restored by Corinthus, the son of Marathon, or as some say
of Pelops, and by him called Corinth. Corinthian order, a Term in Architecture,
signifying an adornment of Pillars, after the Corinthian manner, there being
five orders of pillars in Architecture, Dorick, Ionick, Tuscan, Corinthian, and
Composite. Coritani, a people anciently inhabiting that part of this Island,
which contains Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, Lincolnshire,
Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire. Cork, a County of Ireland, in old time reputed
a Kingdom, the people whereof were anciently called Vodiae and Coriondi.
Cormorant, a Sea Raven, Metaphorically taken for a glutton. Cornage, is in
Common Law a certain Tenure, whereby in the North, men used to hold their
Lands, which was to blow a horn when any invasion of a Northern enemy was
perceived. Cornalin, a kind of precious stone, which some think to be the same
with Corneol. Cornavii, the name of a certain people, who in ancient times
possessed that part of this Island, containing those Counties which are at
present called Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shrop-shire,
Cheshire. Corn-flowr, a kind of flowr, called blue-bottle. Cornelian, the same
as Corneol, a kind of precious stone, also Cornelian Law, was a Law made by
Cornelius Sylla, that any who would follow him in, should be capable of Office
before they had attained their full years. Cornelius, (lat.) a proper name of
men, from Cornu, a horn. Cornel, an old word, signifying a corner, also the
forepart of a house. Corneol, a kind of precious stone, apt to be engraven,
and therefore much used for the making of seals: It is also called a Sardy, or
Onyx. Corneous, (lat.) of a horny substance. Cornet, (French) a kind of black
Taffata, which Doctors of Physic, or Law used to wear on the collar of their
robes as an Ensign, or badge of their degree, also the Ensign of a Troup of
horse, so called because it was used to be made of that kind of Taffata.
Cornice, a Term in Architecture, signifying the crests, or flourishing work at
the upper end of a pillar, it is also called a frize. Cornigerous, (lat.)
wearing horns, an Epithet of Bacchus. Cornil-tree, a Tree called a Horn-tree,
because its branches are hard like a horn. Cornimuse, (lat.) a kind of musical
ininstrument, which some take for a kind of Bag-pipe. Cornix, see Cornalin, and
Corneol. Cornucopy, a horn which Jupiter gave to Amalthea, whereby she enjoyed
plenty of all things, it is Metaphorically taken for plenty. Cornuted, (lat.)
horned. Corody, from the Latin word Corrodo, it signifies in Common Law, a
sum of money, or allowance of meat and drink, toward the maintenance of any
of the Kings servants out of an Abbey, or religious house, whereof the King is
the founder. Corodio habendo, a Writ for the exacting a Corody out of an Abbey,
or religious house. Corollary, an advantage above the ordinary measure, also a
gift bestowed on the people at public feasts. Corona, by the Greeks called
Halo, that is to say a clear Circle appearing in a Cloud about the Sun, or any
other bright Star, but especially about the Moon, also a celestial
constellation upon the shoulder of Boots. Coronal Suture, this is by
Chirurgons called the foremost seam of the skull, passing from one bone of the
Temples to the other. Coronation, (lat.) a Crowning. Coroner, an ancient
Officer belonging to the Crown, and Commonwealth of England, his Office, is to
enquire of every man that is slain, or comes to an untimely end, and what
Corn, Cattle, or freehold, the Felon had at the time of the fact committed, and
to seize them to the use of the King, or State, there are four of these
Officers in every County. Coronet, a little Crown, or Chaplet. Corporal, (lat.)
belonging to the body, also a Commander, or band of ten Soldiers, also the
fine linen wherein the Sacrament is put. Corporation, (lat.) in the Civil Law,
signifies a body politic, authorized by the Kings Charter, to have a Common
Seal, one, or more head Officers, and Members able by their common consent to
grant, or receive in Law any thing within the compass of their Charter.
Corporature, (lat.) the form, or constitution of the body. Corporeal, (lat.) of
a bodily substance. Corporeity, or Corporeature (lat.) Philosophic Term,
Corporeature, bodily substance. Corpse, (Fr.) a carcass, or dead body. Corpse du
guard, (French) a Term in Military Discipline, signifying a Company of
Soldiers set to watch. Corpulency, (lat.) fullness of body. Corpus Christi, a
College in Oxford, built by Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester. Corpus cum
causa, a Writ issuing out of Chancery to remove, both the body and the record
touching the cause of any man lying in execution upon a judgment for debt into
the Kings Bench. Corr, a certain measure containing two quarts. Corrade, (lat.)
to scrape together, to extort. Correction, (lat.) an amending, also a
chastising. Correctour of the Staple, a Clerk belonging to the Staple, that
records the bargains of Merchants there made. Correlatives, (lat.) a Term in
Logic, signifying things that have mutual relation one to another, as Master
and servant, father and son, etc. Correption, (lat.) a snatching suddenly away.
Correspondency, (lat.) a holding mutual Commerce and familiarity, an
answerablenesse, or proportion of one thing to another. Corridor, a Term in
fortification, otherwise called Cortina, or Curtain. Corrigible, (lat.) easy
to be corrected, or made better by correction. Corrival, a competitour, one
that makes suit in the same business. Corroboration, (lat.) a strengthening or
making firm. To Corrode, (lat.) to gnaw, to fret. Corrosive, (lat.) having a
gnawing or fretting quality; it is spoken of those things which are used in
physic, to gnaw or eat into any part of the body. Corrugation, (lat.) a
contracting together, a drawing into wrinkles. Corruption, (lat.) a tainting or
depraving. Corruption of the blood, signifies in law an infection of the
blood, growing to the estate and issue of a man tainted with treason, whereby
he loses all to the Prince, and both he and his heirs are made ignoble.
Corsary, (French) a Courrier. Corse praesent, law-term, the body of a beast or
some such like offering, given to the Priest out of a dead man's goods. It is
also called a Mortuary. Corslet, (Ital.) the same as Cuirasse in French, armor
for the back and breast. Corsure, or Courser (old word) a Broaker. Corstopitum,
the ancient name of a Town in Northumberland, mentioned by Antonine. Some think
it to be the same with Ptolemies Curiae Ottadinorum, now called Corbridge.
Corticated, (lat.) covered with a bark or rind. Corven, (old word) carved.
Corvine, (lat.) belonging to a Crow or Raven. Corviser, see Cordwainer.
Coruscation, (lat.) lightning, a flashing or glimmering of light. Corybantes,
the Priests of Cybele, who used to celebrate the Feasts of Cybele with dancing
and ringing of Cymbals; they were thought to be the same with the Curetes and
Idaei Dactyli. Coscinomancy, (Greek) a divination by a seive. Cosenage, a Writ
that lies where the father of the Great grandfather is seized in his demesu as
of fee at the day of his death, of certain lands and tenements, and he dying, a
stranger enters and intrudeth. Then shall his heir have this Writ of
Cosenage. Cosh, or Cotterel, (old word) a Cottage. Cosham, a Town in Wiltshire,
in ancient times the Mansion house of King Ethelred. Cosier, (old word) a
Botcher, called also a Sowter. Cosmical, (Greek) belonging to the World.
Cosmical rising of a Star, is a term used in Astronomy, signifying a Star
rising at the same time with the Sun. Cosmography, (Greek) a description of the
World, with the Climates and Circles marked upon the Globe and in Maps.
Cosmometry, (Greek) a measuring of the World by degrees and minutes, being a
part of Geography or Cosmography. Cost, a term in Blazon, being the fourth part
of the Bend or half the Gartier. Costive, (from the Latin word Constipatus,)
having the belly bound. Costmary, an herb called Balsamine, or Alecoast.
Costrel, (old word) a wine-pot. Cote, a kind of refuse or clotted wool, also a
cottage or sheepfold. Coteswold, (old word) a company of sheepcotes, and sheep
feeding on hills. A Cottager, signifies in Law he that dwells in a Cottage
or house without land, or at most having but 4 acers belonging to it. Cotterel,
see Cosh. Cotton, a kind of stuff, otherwise called Frize or Bombasin.
Couchant, (French) lying or squatting close to the ground, a word often used in
Heraldry to express that posture. Covenable, or Convenable, (old word)
suitable or convenient. Covenant, (French) a bargain, pact, or agreement, also
Covenant in Law is that which the Law intends to be made though in words it
be not expressed, also the name of a Writ that lies for the breach of any.
Covent, see C^nvent. Coventry, a famous City in Warwickshire, so called from a
Covent of Monks that was anciently there. The first Lord of this City is said
to be one Leofric, who imposing heavy taxes upon the Citizens, remitted them at
last at the earnest intercession of his wife Godiva, upon condition she would
ride naked thorough the chief street of the City, which she performed, but so
covered with her long hair, that no body could discern her. Covercle, or
Coverkill, (old word) a lid or cover. Covert, (French) an ombrage or shady
place for Deer or other beasts. Coverture, in Common law is the condition of a
married woman, who by the Laws of England, is under Covertbaron, and so
disabled to make any bargain without her husbands consent. Coughton, a place in
Warwickshire, the principle Mansion of the Throgmortons, a very ancient Family.
Covie, (French) a term in fouling, signifying a nest or brood of Partridges.
Covin, fraud, from the Latin word Convenire, it signifies in Common law, a
deceitful agreement between two or more, to the prejudice of another. Coulant,
(French) flowing or gliding along. Couldray, (French) a hazel grove. Coule, a
vessel to carry water in, also a roab which Friars use to wear, called in Latin
Cucullus. Coulter, (Lat.) a plough-sheare. Council with a c. (lat. Concilium)
an assembly of Counselors. Count, (French) an Earl, also a Law Term coming
from the Latin word Computatio, and signifies the Original declaration in a
process chiefly in real actions. Countercomponed, a Term in Armory, as a
bordure countercomponed is a bordure compounded of two colors counterly
placed. Counteurs, or Conteurs, are those which a man sets to speak for him
in Court as Advocates, whereas Plaideurs speak as Counselors at law for one,
who is present himself. Countenance, (French) the face, or visage, also
estimation, or credit, also a Term in Law, signifying the favor that is showed
to poor men that will swear, they have nothing whereof they may make fine.
Counter, a Trades-mans chest, where he puts his cash, or money, also a prison
in London, where men are put for debt, from the French word Compter, or from
the Dutch word Cantor, a secluded place, also Counters are certain little
things to cast account with. Counterfeit, (French) to feign. Countermaund,
(French) a revocation of a former command. Countermure, a word in
fortification, a Wall, or Bank opposite to the Town Wall. Counterpain, one of
the Copies of a pair of deeds, or indentures, so that one party may keep one
part, and the other the other. Counterplea, signifies in Common Law, that,
which the demandant alleges against a Tenant in courtesy, or in dowr, who
prays in aid of the King, or him, who has the reversion for his better
defense. Counterpoint, opposition, also a Term in Music, being a composing of
parts together by setting points one against another, also a Term in
Needle Work, called backstitch, or quilt-stitch. Counter-round, a Term in
Military Discipline, signifying a certain number of Officers going to visit the
Rounds, or the Sentinels. Counter-scarf, (a Term in fortification) that side of
the moat, which is opposite to the Fortress. Counter-tail, or Counter-tally,
one of the two tallies, or pieces of wood, whereon any thing is scored, whereof
one party keeps one piece, and the other the other piece. Countervail, (French)
to be of equal price. County, or Shire, a certain portion, or circuit of the
Realm, into which the whole land is divided. County Court, a Court held every
month by the Sheriff, or his Deputy the under Sheriff. Coup, (old word) a
piece cut off, or cut out. Coupant, (French) cutting, or lopping. Couple-close,
a Term in Blazon, being the fourth part of a Cheveron. Courfine, (old word)
fine heart. Courser, (French) a horse of service. Court, the house (where) a
King has his present residence, also a place where justice is judicially
ministered, from the Latin curia, or from the Greek (...), i. e. a Lord.
Courtbaron, a Court that every Lord of a Manor has within his own precincts.
Court of requests, a Court of Equiry of the same nature with the Chancery,
only this Court instead of a Subpoena uses a privy seal. Courtesy of
England, is a certain Tenure, whereby a man marrying a woman seized of Land in
Fee-simple, or Fee-tail general, if he have a child by her, which comes alive
into the world, though she and the child die immediately, yet if she were in
possession he shall hold the land during his life, and is called Tenant per
legem Angliae, or the courtesy of England. Courtilage in Common Law, is a
Garden, or piece of void ground lying near a message from Curtis, a mansion
house, and legere to gather. Courtisan, (French) a Court-lady, it is also
commonly taken for a strumpet. Courtlasse, or Coutelasse, a short sword. Couth,
quasi K^nnouth, knew, from the Saxon word Ken, to know. Coutheutlaugh, (Saxon)
he that receives, cherishes, or hides an outlaw. Cowde, (old word) a
gobbet. Cowre, to kneel, to fall down for fear from the Italian word Covare.
Cowneer, the hollow arching part in the ship stern. Coy, or Coyen, (old word)
nice dainty, also to quiet, to flatter.
C R
Crabbat, (French) handsome, comely, also substantively taken, it signifies a
a Gorget for women, or a kind of riding band for men. Crach, a crib, or rack
for beasts. Crabs eye, a stone found in a Crab, which resembles an eye.
Cranage, money paid for the use of a Crane to draw up wares. Crank, (old word)
lusty, blithe, jovial. Crank-sided, when a ship will bear but small sail, a Term
in Navigation. Crany, (lat.) the skull. Crapulent, (lat.) glutted with meat,
having taken a surfeit. Crasie, sick, distempered, from the Greek word, crasis,
temperature. Crask, (old word) fat. Crasse, (lat.) thick, heavy, dull, lumpish.
Crassitude, (lat.) thickness, grossness. Crater, is a sign in Heaven, called
the bottom of the pitcher in Virgo, it rises about the sixteenth of the
Calends of March. Creance, (French) trust, confidence, credit. Creansour, Law
Term, a creditour. Creast-tile, a roof tile, which is made to lay upon the
ridge of a house. Crebrous, (lat.) often, usual. Credible, (lat.) that may be
believed. Credit, trust, belief, also esteem. Creditour, (lat.) he that
lends, or trusts out money. Credulity, (lat.) aptness to believe. Creed, a
set form containing the artiticles of Christian religion. Creek, from the Dutch
word Kreaken, to make a noise, a part of a Haven where any thing is landed, or
disburthened from the Sea. Crenelle, a Term in Heraldry, being a line dented
like the notch in the horn of a bow. Creon, the son of Menatius King of Thebes,
he was brother to Jocasta, the wife of Laius, and mother of Oedipus, who
unfolded the riddle of Sphinx, and married Jocasta, not knowing her to be his
mother, and by her had Eteocles and Polynices, who succeeded in the Kingdom,
and were to reign by turns every other year, but they having killed one another
in civil Wars, Creon regained the Kingdom, but behaving himself with much
cruelty, he was overcome by Theseus, and slain. Crepitation, (lat.) a creaking
noise. Crepuscul, (lat.) the dawning of the day. Cressant, (French) the figure
of a half Moon, a term in Heraldry. Cresses, a kind of plant called in Latin
Nasturtium. Cresset, (old word) a Lantern, a Beacon. Crest, (French) a part of
a helmet, also the upper part of a Scutchion in armo^y. Crestmarine, an herb
called Rock-samphire. Crete, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, heretofore
called Hecatompolis by the Greeks, because it had a hundred Cities* it is now
called Candie, and is a great part of it in the possession of the Turks.
Cretism, or Creticism, (Greek) a forging of lies, falsehood or perfidiousnesse.
Crevequeurs, the name of an ancient Family in Kent, who built Leeds Castle in
that County: they are styled in ancient Records de crepito cord. Crevet, or
Cruset, from the French word Creux, hollow, a Goldsmiths melting pot. Creusa,
the daughter of Priamus and Hecuba, and wife of Aeneas, by whom he had
Ascanius; she following her husband out of Troy when it was set on fire, was
not minded by him till he came out of the City, by reason that he led his son
in his hand, and carried his father on his shoulders through the flames, but
going back to seek her, he could never hear what was become of her. Criminal,
(lat.) guilty, blameworthy. Cleop. Crined, having hairs, from the Latin word
Crinis; it is a word used in Heraldry. Crinisus, a River of Sicily, near to the
City Segesta, of which it is related, that when the Trojan Virgins were to be
exposed to the fury of a Monster, whom Neptune sent to destroy the Country
because of Laomedons perfidiousnesse, Hippotes a noble Trojan committed his
daughter Hegesta to the wide Sea, and she being by fortune carried into Sicily,
Crinisus fell in love with her, and turning himself into a Bear, ravished her,
whereupon she became with child and brought forth Ac^^tes, who was afterward
King of Sicily. Criplings, (a term in building) short spars on the side of a
house. Crisis, (Greek) a judgment or discerning into any thing; also a term in
Physic denoting the sudden change in a disease, tending either to recovery or
death. Sir Crispins Lance, an awle, from Crispin who was the Patron of the
Shoomakers. Crisped, (lat.) frisled, curled. Crithology, (Greek) a gathering in
of the first fruits of corn. Critical, (Greek) of a nice judgment, apt to
censure. Also Critical days in a disease, are those days wherein a disease
comes to its Crisis, and they are the odd days as the third, fifth, seventh,
and so on; but the most critical are counted the fourteenth. The Crisis in
acute diseases is judged by the Moon, but in Chronick diseases, the Crisis is
judged by the Sun Criticisme, (Greek) a playing the Critic, a learning which
consists in the curious and nice examining of Authors. Cro, or Croy, signifies
in the Scotch Acts of Parliament, a satisfaction which the Judge is to pay unto
the nearest of kin to a man that is slain, in case he minister not justice as
he should do. Croce, (old word) a Shepherds staff, or crook. Crocolana, the
ancient name of a Town in Lincolnshire, now called Ancaster. Crocute, a certain
beast imitating the voice of a man, and engendered of a Hyaena and a Lioness,
it comes from the Ethiopian word Crocottas. Croesus, a King of the Lydians,
who abounded in riches; he was overcome in war by Cyrus, and put upon a pile to
be burnt, and calling out Solon, Solon, Cyrus demanding the reason, he
acquainted him how that Solon having formerly been asked of him who was the
happiest man, told him none could be happy till his death, and that the
greatest riches could not keep a man from misery; whereupon he was freed and
made one of Cyrus his Counselors. Croft, from the old word Creaft, i. e.
handy-craft, a little Close joining to a house, it being looked to with more
than ordinary care. Croisada, a Bull of the Pope, granting the sign, the badge
of the Cross, in an expedition of Christians against Infidels. Croises,
Pilgrims, also Knights of the Order of St. John in Jerusalem, created for the
defense of Pilgrims; they were both so called from the sign of the Cross which
they used to wear on their garments. Crome, or Corm, (old word) a crow of iron,
from the Dutch word Kromb, crooked. Crool, (old word) to mutter. Crosier, a
Bishops staff, from the old word Croce, a Shepherds crook, or for that it bears
the figure of a Cross. Crosstaff, a Mathematical Instrument, wherewith the
Altitude of any thing is taken. Crostrees, those cross pieces of timber which
are set on the head of the mast of a Ship. Crotchet, a measure in music being
half a Minim, and a Minim is once down or up, it signifies also a humor or
whimsy. Crotells, or Croteying (term in hunting) the ordure of a Hare. Crouch,
(old word) Cross, whence to Crouch, i. e. to bless. Crow, is a celestial
constellation, and sits upon Hydra's tail, she has her Mansion in the
austeral parts. Crowland, a Town in Lincolnshire, which is reported to have
been heretofore mightily haunted with spirits, until such time as devout
Guthlac lived there a Hermites life, to whose memory Aethelbald King of the
Mercians built a famous Monastery. Crown, of the several sorts of Crowns, as
Triumphal, Civic, Gramineal, Mural, and the like. See Aulus Gellius cap. 8.
Crown is also metaphorically taken for glory, honor, dignity. Clark of the
Crown in Chancery, an Officer that attends the Lord Chancellor for special
matters of State, as Commissions of Lieutenancies, Justices, or such like, with
their writs of association and dedimus potestatem for taking of oaths; also all
general pardons, writs of Parliament, writs of special executions, etc. Clark
of the Crown-office in the Kings Bench, is he who frames, reads, and records,
all Indictments against Traitors, Felons, and all other offenders there
arraigned. Collens^earth, a kind of color used in painting. Cruciate, (lat.)
to afflict, to torment. Crucify, (lat.) to fasten or nail to a Cross. A
Crucifix, an Image which represents the crucifying of Christ. Cruditie, (lat.)
rawnesse, ill digestion of the stomach. Cruet, or Crewet, a viol or
narrow-mouthed glass to keep oil or the like in. Cruife, a word used in the
practick of Scotland for a hogs-stye, it is also called Creffera. Crurall,
(lat.) belonging to the thighs. Crusible, a pot wherein Chemists melt their
metals. Crussell, (old word) grisle. Crustaceous, (lat.) crusted or covered
with a hard shell. Crutchet Friars, the same as crouched or crossed Friars.
Cruzada, see Croisada. Cruzado, a Portugal Crown of Gold. Cryptology, (Greek) a
speaking in secret, a whispering. Crystal, a very bright and transparent kind
of Mineral, which looks like Ice, or the clearest sort of glass. Crystalline
Humor, a white splendid and shining humor, nor flat nor round, seated in the
center of the eye, and is the first instrument of sight.
C U
Cubbridge head, a division made across the forecastle and half-deck with
boords, which in other places is called the Bulk-head. Cube, a Geometrical
figure, being a solid body every way, comprehending six equal sides. Cubebes, a
certain kind of Indian fruit. Cubicular, (lat.) belonging to a Bedchamber.
Cubite, a kind of measure, reaching from the elbow to the end of the little
finger. Cuchaneale, a little worm bred in the fruit of the Holy-oke, of which
is made a certain costly grain wherewith they dye Skarlet or Crimson color.
Some say it comes from the Latin word coccinus, Skarlet. Cu^ullated, (lat.)
having on a Monks coule. Cucurbite, (lat.) a Gourd, also a Cuping-glasse, being
a deep hollow glass which Physicians apply to the body to draw out blood.
Cucuye, a strange kind of bird in Hispaniola, having eyes under the wings,
which in the night time shine very bright. Cudweed, a certain herb whose leaves
are so soft, that they are used for cotton; it is also called Cotton-weed. Cue,
an item given to Stage Players when any of them are to begin to speak. Cuerpo,
(Spanish) a body, also a corporation; to walk in cuerpo, is to go without a
cloak. Cui ante devortium, a writ, that a woman divorced from her husband has
power to recover her lands from him to whom her husband did alienate them
during the marriage. Cui in vita, a writ of entry that a widow has against
him, to whom her husband did alienate her lands in his life time. Cuinage, the
making up of Tin into such a fashion as makes it fit for carriage. Cuirassier,
(French) he that is armed with a Cuirase or Corslet, which is a kind of armor
for the breast and back. Culdeis, quasi ^ultores Dei, a sort of religious people
that were anciently in Scotland and Ireland. Culerage, (French) lechery, also
an herb called Water-pepper, or Arse-smart. Culinary, (lat.) belonging to the
kitchen. Cullers, in Latin ^ves rejiculae, sheep that are chosen out and
separated from those that are good for meat. Cullion-head, the same as Bastion,
a Skonce or Block-house. Cullis, from Colare to strain, the juice of boiled
meat strained thorough a strainer. Cullot, from Cullus the tail, a cushion to
ride post with. Culm, from Culmen the top, smoke or soot. Culminate, (lat.) to
get up to the top. Culrach, or Colrach, signifies in the practick of Scotland,
a pledge or cautioner which is left for the repledgeing of a man from one Court
to another. Culpable, (lat.) guilty, faulty, peccant. Cultivation, (lat.) a
manuring or tilling. Culture, (lat.) the same. Culver, (old word) a pigeon or
dove. Culverine, quasi Colubrine, a piece of Ordnance so called. Culvertaile, a
term in Architecture, a fastening of boards with artificial joints. Cumble,
(French) full heaped measure. Cumae, a City by the Sea side in Italy near
Puzzoli. Cumfrey, a kind of herb otherwise called Consound. Cumulation, (lat.)
a heaping up together. Cunctation, (lat.) prolonging of time, delaying.
Cuneglasus, the name of a cruel Tyrant who succeeded Vortiporus in his
government of the Britains of Wales and Cornwale. Cunicle, (lat.) a Mine or
Hole under ground. Cunobelinus, an ancient King of the Trinobantes, a people of
the Eastern parts of Britain, he succeeded Mandubratius in the kingdom.
Cantey, signifies the same as the ordinary Jury or trial by the Country.
Cupidity, (lat.) covetous or lustful desire. Cupping-glasse, see Cucurbite.
Cupulo, (lat.) a term in Architecture, a high arch in a building. C^rebulli,
tanned leather, a word used by Cha^cer. Curfew, a law made by William the
Conqueror, that every one should put out their fire and light, at the ringing
of the eight a clock-bell, which was called Couvrir le feu, i. e. cover the
fire. Curia Ottadinorum, an ancient Town of Northumberland. See Corstopitum.
Curialitas Scotiae is equivalent to that which we call Courtesy of England.
Curlew, a kind of foul so called. Curranto, (French,) a running French Dance,
also a musical Air of a more than ordinary swift time. Curricurre, a kind of
East Indian Barge. Curriedow, a curry-favour, or flatterer. Current, a running
stream from Currere to run. Cursiter, a Clerk belonging to the Chancery who
makes original writs for the Shier which is allotted him. Curvetta, or
Corvetta, (Ital.) a prauncing of a horse of service, from the Latin Curvus,
crook'd, because they bend in their feet. Curvity, (lat.) crookedness.
Curules, (lat.) those of the Roman Senators, which were carried to Court in
Chariots. Curulis Sella, an ivory seat, which was placed in the Roman Consuls
Chariot. Cusco, the chief City of that part of the new world, which contains
Brasilia and Peru. Cuspidate, (lat.) to make sharp at the end from Cuspis a
point. Cuspe, the entrance of any house, or first beginning, which is the line
whereon the figure and degree of the Zodiac is placed, as you find it in the
Table of Houses. Custode admittendo, a Writ for the removing, or admitting of
Guardians. Custody, (lat.) safe-hold. Custom, both in Common and Civil Law,
signifies a Law, or Rite not written, which being established by long use and
the consent of our Ancestors has been, and is daily practiced. Custos
brevium, a Clerk belonging to the Court of Common Pleas, whose Office is to
receive and keep all the Writs, and put them upon files, every return by it
self, and at the end of every Term to receive of the prothonotaries, all the
Records of nisi prius, called the postea. Custos Rotulorum, is he that has the
custody of the Rolls, or Records of the Sessions of peace, and of the
Commission it self, he is thought to be the same with Custos placitorum
Coronae. Custos spiritualium, or of the spiritualities, he that exercises
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of any Diocese, during the Vacancy of the Sea,
which by the Canon Law belongs to the Dean and Chapter. Cuthbert, (Sax.) famous
knowledge, a proper name. Cuticle, (lat.) signifies in Anatomy, the Membrane,
or thin skin which covers the thicker skin all over the body, and is called
in Greek Epidermis. Cutter of the Tallies, an Officer in the Exchecquer, that
provideth wood for the Tallies, and cutting the sum paid upon them, casts
the same into the Court to be written upon. Cuttle-fish, a certain kind of
fish, called in Latin Sepia, which throwing a black juice like ink into the
water, becomes hid in that obscurity, and so escapes the fisher. Cutilia, a
Lake in the Reatine grounds in Italy, where there is a woody Island, which
continually moves up and down. Cutwater, a Term in Navigation, the sharpness
of the ship before.
C Y
Cyamba, a City in Asia, where they use Coral instead of money, and have great
store of Aloes, and all kind of Spices. Cybele, the daughter of Coelus and
Terra, and the wife of Saturn, she is otherwise called Ops, Rhea, Vesta, Magna
Matter, or Grandmother of the Gods, also ^indymene and Berecynthia. Cyclades,
50 Islands in the Aegean Sea, called by the Italians Isole dell Archipelago.
Cycle, (Greek) a Term in Astronomy, Cycle of the Sun is the revolution of 28
years, Cycle of the Moon the revolution of 19 years, in which time both of
their motions recur to the same point. Cyclopaedie, (Greek) the whole Circle of
Arts and Sciences. Cycl^ps, the sons of Neptune and Amphitrite, or as
Apollodorus Atheniensis says of Coelus and Terra, they were the servants of
Vulcan, and made Thunderbolts for Jupiter, having each of them one great eye
in their forehead, their names were Bronte, Serope and Pyracmon, whom
Apollodorus calls Harp, others say they were a very ancient people of Sicily
of a very Gyantly stature. Cycnus, the son of Mars, who was killed in a Combat
with Hercules, whom Mars to revenge his sons death resolved to fight with, but
before they came to blows, Jupiter parted them with a clap of Thunder, there
was another Cycnus, the son of Neptune, who being invulnerable fought with
Achilles, and could not be killed, till Achilles throwing him upon the ground,
kneeled upon his neck and stiffled him. Cydippe, see Acontius. Cygnus, vide
Swan. Cylinder, (Greek) a Geometrical body, being long, flat at both ends, and
equally round from one end to the other, also a rolling stone to smooth Garden
allies, being just of that figure, in the art of Gunnery it signifies that part
of the bore of a piece, which remains empty when the piece is laden. Cymace,
from the Greek word Cyma, a wave, it is a Term in Architecture, signifying
carved work, which resembles waves. Cymbal, a Musical instrument, made of
plates of brass, resembling a kind of boat, called Cymba. Cymraecan language,
the Welsh, or old British language. Cynanthrophy, (lat.) a kind of Frenzy,
or disease, which possesses a man with a conceit that he is turned into a
Dog. Cynegeticks, (Greek) books treating of the art of hunting. Cynical,
(Greek) crabbed, severe, from a certain Sect of Philosophers, who were called
Cynicks. Cynosure, (Greek) a constellation of stars near the North Pole, called
Vrsa Minor, by which the sailors are directed in their course. Cynthius, a name
attributed to Apollo, as Cynthia to Diana, from Cynthus a Hill in Delos, where
Latona brought them forth, being Twins. Cyprian, (Greek) a proper name of men,
from Cypria one of the names of Venus. Cyprus, an Island in the Carpathian Sea,
which was anciently dedicated to Venus, it is now under the Turks Dominion.
Cyrenaica, a Country of Africa, called also Pentapolitana, because it
contained these five Cities, Beronice, Arsinoe, Ptolemais, Apollonia and
Cyrene. Cyrus, the son of Cambyses and Mandana, he was King of Persia,
overthrew the Assyrian Monarchy, conquered all Asia, but was at length overcome
and slain by Thomyris, Queen of Scythia, who causing his head to be cut off,
and cast into a tub of blood, cried out, now satisfy thy self with blood,
after which thou have always thirsted. Cystick, (Greek) belonging to the bag
of Gall, which is called Cystis, Cystick vein signifies in Anatomy a branch of
the Port vein, which ascends up to the neck of the Gall, and there divides
it self. Cyzicus, an Island in the Propontis, joined to the continent with two
bridges, having a City in it of the same name.
D
DAae, a people of that part of Scythia, which is called Nomades, mentioned by
Virgil in his eight book of Aeneids. Dabuze, a kind of weapon carried before
the Grand Signor, in the nature of our Mace. Dacia, a Country of Scythia
Europaea, which at this day is divided into Transylvania, Zypserland, the seven
Camps, Ruscia, Servia, and Bulgaria. Dactyle, (Greek) the fruit of the
Palm Tree, a Date, also a foot in verse, consisting of one long syllable, and
two short, also a finger. Dactylogy, (Greek) a discoursing by signs made with
the finger. Daedalus, a famous Artist, who made the famous Labyrinth in Crete,
into which he was shut up himself with his son Icarus, for having made a
wooden Heifer, in which Pasiphae was enjoyed by Jupiter in the shape of a
Bull, but he making artificial wings for himself and his son, flew out of Crete
into Sardinia, but Icarus soaring too high, melted the wax and fell into the
sea. Daemoniack, (Greek) possessed with a Devil, or evil spirit. Doemonologie,
(Greek) a discourse of Angels, Spirits, or Devils. Daff, (old word) a Coward,
or a Dastard. Daffadill, a kind of flowr, otherwise called Narcissus. A Dagg,
a Pistol, so called from the Dacians, who first used them. Dagswain, a rough,
or course mantle. D' alanson, the name of an ancient and Noble Family in
Lincolnshire, commonly called by contraction Dallison. Dalmatian Dap, a flour,
otherwise called a Tulip, because it was brought from Tulippa, a Promontory of
Dalmatia, which is a part of Illyricum, a Country of Greece. Dalmatick, a
kind of vestment worn by the Priests, so called also from Dalmatia, where it
was first made. Dalrendini, the ancient name of a certain people of Scotland,
so called from Renda an Irish Captain, who conquered those parts. Damascus, the
chief City of Syria, whence we have our best sort of Pruines, which are called
Damask Pruines, or Damasines. Damage, a Term in Common Law, any hurt, or
hinderan^e that a man takes in his estate, also a part of that the Jurors are
to enquire of passing for the Plaintiff, in a civil action. Damage fesant, in
Common Law, is, when a strangers beasts are in another man's ground, and there
feed without License of the Tenant, spoiling the Grass, or Corn, in which case
the Tenant may impound them. Dammask, a kind of fine stuff, first made in the
City of Damascus. Damnation, (lat.) a condemning, or giving sentence.
Damocrita, a Roman Matron, whose husband Alcippus being banished, and she
forbid to follow him, and her daughters prohibited marriage that his race might
be extinct, she in revenge when the chief women of the City were met in a
house to sacrifice, set fire on the house, and when she saw people run to their
aid, she first killed her daughters, then her self. Danae, the daughter of
Acrisius, King of Argos, see Acrisius. Danaus, the son of Belus, and brother of
Aegyptus, he was King of Argos, and from him the Greeks were called Danai.
Dancett, is much like indented, but differs from it, in regard the lines are
deeper and wider. Dandelion, a kind of plant, vulgarly called Pissebeds.
Dandruff, a kind of scruff or small scales, sticking to the skin of the head,
which look like brann. Daneguilt, from Dane and gelt, which signifies money; It
was a tribute anciently laid upon our Ancestors by the Danes, of 12 pence for
every hide of land thorough the Realm. Dangwallet, Excessive, quasi making the
wallet to dangle down. Dania, a Country of Europe, almost environed with the
northern Ocean, bordering upon Saxony, and is now called Denmark. Daniel,
(Hebr.) judgment of God. Danisme, (Greek) Usury. Dank, moist, from the Dutch
word Dampight. Danmonii, the ancient name of a people in old time inhabiting
that part of this Island now called Cornwall and Devonshire. Dantiscum, a famous
Mart Town in Poland called Dantz^^k. Danwort, a kind of plant called
dwarf-elder, in French Hieble from Hybla a mountain of Sicily, where it
chiefly grows. Danubius, or Ister, the greatest River in Europe, which rising
from the mountain Arnoba, runs through many Countries. It is now called the
Danow. Daphne, the daughter of Peneus, she flying from Apollo who became in
love with her for her beauty, was turned into a Laurel-tree. Daphnomancy,
(Greek) a divination by Laurels. Dapper, fine, neat, spruice, from an old Latin
word Toper, i. e. swift, or the Duch word Dapfer, stout, agil, or else from
Dapifer, which signifies in Latin a sewer, or he that serves up the first dish
at a Feast. Darby, the chief Town of Darbyshire, so called by contraction form
Derwentby, because it stands upon the River Derwent; the Town was won in old
time by Ethelfleda that victorious Lady of the Mercians, from the Danes, of
whom she made a very great slaughter. Darcy's, or de Adrecy's, the name of an
ancient Family of Barons in Lincolnshire, descended from Norman de Adrecy, or
Darcy de Nocton, who lived in great favor and esteem with Henry the third.
Dardanus, the son of Jupiter, and Electra, who having killed his brother
Jasius, fled to Samothrace, afterward he went into Asia, where he built
Dardanum or Troy. Darick, a kind of ancient coin bearing the value of two
shillings, which had upon it the Image of Darius. Darius, a King of Persia;
there were several of that name, whereof the last was Darius Codomannus, who
was overcome by Alexander the Great. Darnel, cockle-weed, from the Dutch word
Deren, to hurt. Darrein, from the French word Dernier, i. e. last, as Darrein,
presentment, last presentment. Darreighn, (old word) an attempt. Dartos one of
the membranes that involve the stones. Darford or Darenford, a Town in Kent, so
called from the River Daren, where K. Edward the third built a Nunnery, which
was afterward converted into a Royal Palace. Datary, an office in Rome, for the
collation of Ecclesiastical Benefices. Date, the fruit of Palm Tree, also the
day of the month or year, wherein any Letter is written. Datism, (Greek) an
often rehearsal of the same thing by a heaping of synonyma's together, from
Datis a Satrape of Greece, the Dative Case, the third of the 6 Cases in
Grammar, used in actions of giving or attributing. Davenport, or by contraction
Damport, a Town in Cheshire, which gave name to an ancient Family so called.
David, (Hebr.) beloved. Daunsette, a term in Heraldry, being almost the same
with a line indented, but only it is deeper and wider. Dantry, the name of a
very ancient Fami^y in Sussex, styled in Latin Records de Alta ripa. Day,
signifies in law, a day in bank before ordinary Judges, wherein the party
should appear and plead; as for the Astronomical and Political distinction of
days and the parts thereof, see Macrobius and Censorinus.
D E
Dea bona, or Good Goddess, a name attributed by the old Heathen to the Earth,
whom they worshipped as a Goddess; she was also called Ops Fatua, and Fauna,
the Poets feign that being drunk with a wine made of Myrtle-berries, called
Myrtidanum, she was whipped to death by her husband Faunus with Myrtle twiges.
Dea viri-placa, a certain Goddess aamong the ancient Romans, in whose Chapel
man and wife, after they had fallen out, were reconciled again. Deacon, (from
the Greek Diaconus, a minister or servant) is an officer of the Church that is
appointed to distribute alms to the poor. Deadpledge, land or movables pawned
for money, which is to be the Creditours for ever, if the money be not repaid
at the time agreed on; it is also called Mortgage. Deadwater, the eddy water at
the stern of a ship. Dean, an Ecclesiastical Magistrate that has power over
ten Canons, and those which have a jurisdiction assigned them by the Bishop
over other Ministers and Parishes near adjoining, are called Deans rural.
Deauration, (lat.) a gilding over. Debaucherie, or Desbo^cherie, (French) riot,
disorderly revelling. Debellation, (lat.) a overcoming in war or duel. De been
esse, a term used in Common law, as when a Defendants deposition is only
allowed of for the present, but after more full examination, is either to stand
or fall. Debet, and solet, a Writ of right, which has those words in it as
formal words not to be omitted when a man sueth for a thing now first of all
denied him, and which has been enjoyed by his Ancestors, as suit to a Mill, or
common of Pasture, or the like. Debilitation, (lat.) a making weak or feeble.
Debito, a Writ which lies where a man owes money upon obligation, or bargain
for any thing sold. Debonairity, (French) courtesy, mildness, also
sprightlinesse. Debosherie, or deboistnesse, see Debaucherie. Decade, (Greek)
the number of ten. Decadency, (lat.) a declining or falling down. Decagon,
(Greek) a term in Fortification and Geometry, signifying a figure of ten
Angles. Decalogue, (Greek) the ten Commandments imparted to the Jews from God
by Moses. Decameron, (Greek) a book of Fables, written by Boccace, so called
because it is divided into ten parts or books. Decapit^^ion, (lat.) a
beheading. Decapolis, a Country of Syria, so called because it contained 10
Cities. December, one of the 12 months so called as being the tenth from
March. Decempedal, (lat.) ten foot long. Decemtales, a law-term, being a supply
of ten men empannelled upon a Jury, and not appearing, which are to be like in
reputation to those that were empanneld. Decemvirates, (lat.) the Decemvir^
which were ten Noble men among the Romans, chosen to govern the Commonwealth
in place of the two Consuls, until the laws were fully established. Decennial,
(lat.) lasting, or being of the age of 10 years. Deception, (lat.) deceit,
fraud, or beguiling. Deceptione, a Writ that lies against him, that
deceitfully does any thing in the name of another for him that receives damage
thereby. Decerption, (lat.) a cropping off, or pulling away. Decertation,
(lat.) a striving for any thing. Decession, (lat.) a going away, or departing.
Decies tantum, a Writ that lies against a juror that takes money for the
giving of his verdict, wherein there is recoverable ten times so much as he
took. The Decimal chain, a certain Mathematical Instrument for the measuring of
land, which is to be divided into ten equal parts, each of which contains
about 19 in length. Decimation, (lat.) a gathering tithes, also a punishing
every tenth man by lot. De decimis solvendis, etc. a Writ which formerly lay
against those that had farmed the Priors aliens lands of the King. Deciners, or
Doziners, such as were wont to have the check of ten Friburgs for the
maintenance of the peace, the limits of whose jurisdiction was called Decenna.
Decision, (lat.) a determining of any business or controversy. The Deck of a
Ship, the floor of planks on which the Ordnance is placed. Declamation, (lat.)
a crying out against any thing, also an Oration made only for exercise.
Declaration, (lat.) a showing forth, also in Common law it is the showing in
writing the grief of the Demandant or Plaintiff against the Tenent or
Defendant, wherein he supposes to have received wrong. Declension, or
Declination, (lat.) a declining or bowing down; also in Grammar, it signifies
the varying of Cases and Tenses in Nounes and Verbs. In Astrology, the
declination of a Planet is his distance from the equator, and as he declines
from thence, either northward or southward, so is his declination nominated
either north or south. Declinator, a Mathematical Instrument, to take the
declinations of the Planets. Declivity, (lat.) a bending downwards, a
steepness. Decollation, (lat.) a beheading. Decoction, (lat.) a boiling away;
it is applied chiefly to medicinable things, as herbs, roots, etc. Deconate,
vide Faces. Decoration, (lat.) an adorning or decking. Decortication, (lat.) a
pulling off the outward rind or bark. Decorum, (lat.) good grace, order,
decency. Decrees, or Decretals, a volume of the Canon law, composed by Gratian
a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict. Decrement, (lat.) a decreasing. Decrepit,
(lat.) weak and impotent with age. Decress^nt, (lat.) the waining or decreasing
Moon. Decrustation, (lat.) a taking away the uppermost rind or crust of any
thing. Decum^ence, (lat.) a lying down. Decumbiture, is when a man is so
violently taken with a disease, that he is forced to take his bed; and it is
properly taken from the first lying down of the diseased, and from this the
Crisis is to be gathered. Decuple, (lat.) tenfold. Decurion, (lat.) the chief
of a Decuria, which signifies a Band of ten soldiers, or a company of ten
Senators; also an Alderman or Burgess of a City. Decussation, (lat.) a cutting
acrosse, or in the form of a figure of ten. Decussion, (lat.) a shaking off.
Dedecoration, (lat.) a disgracing or dishonouring. Dedentition, (lat.) a
shedding of teeth. Dedignation, (lat.) a disdaining. Dedimus potestatem, a Writ
whereby commission is given to a private man for the speeding of some act
appertaining to a Judge, it is called by the Civilians, delegation. Dedition,
(lat.) a rendering up, Deeds, signify in Common law writings that contain the
effect of a contract between man and man, which the Civilians call literarum
obligatio. Deep seeline, a small line with which Seamen sound in deep waters to
find ground. Defaillance, (French) a failing or defect. Defatigation, (lat.) a
making weary. Defaulking, (French) an abating, or cutting off: It is called in
Latin defalcation. Defeasance, or defeisance, signifies in Common law, a
condition annexed to an act, obligation, or recognisance, which being
performed, the act, etc. is made void. Defecation, (lat.) a refining or
cleansing from the dregs Defection, (lat.) a failing, also a revolting or
falling away. Defeisance, or Defeasance. Defendant, is in Common law, he that
is sued in an action personal, as Tenant is he who is sued in an action real.
Defendimus, a word used in Enfeofment or Donation, binding the Donour and his
heirs to defend the Donee. Defendour of the Faith, a Title heretofore proper to
the King of England, as Most Christian to the King of France, Catholic to the
King of Spain. It was first given by Pope Leo the tenth. Defensative, a term in
Physic, a Medicine which diverts the humors from the place affected.
Deficiency, (lat.) a want or failing. Definition, (lat.) an explication or
unfolding of the essence of a thing by its genus and difference. Deflection,
(lat.) a turning away, also a bending down. Defloration, (lat.) a ravishing, or
deflowring. Defluxion, (lat.) a flowing downward, also in physic it is taken
for a falling down of humors to any part of the body. Deformity, (lat.)
ugglinesse. Deforsour, in Common Law, is one that casts another out of
possession by force, whereas Disseisour is he that does it without force.
Defray, to make free, also to pay another charges, from the Dutch word
freshen. Defunct, (lat.) dead. Degenerate, (lat.) to fall from a more noble to
a baser kind, to go aside from the virtues of ones Ancestors. Deglutination,
(lat.) an unglueing. Deglutition, (lat.) a greedy devouring, in physic it is
taken for a power of the animal faculty, which makes us swallow our meat and
drink with an appetite. Degradation, (lat.) a casting out from any Dignity, or
Office. Degree, (French) a step, or stair, or by Metaphor any state, or
condition, which is as it were an ascending, or descending from one step to
another, in Astronomy it is the 30th. part of any of the twelve signs, in
physic and chemistry it is the intensnesse, or remissness of the hot, or cold
quality of any thing. Dehortation, (lat.) a dissuading. Deianira, the daughter
of Oeneus, King of Etolia, she was first espoused to Ache^^us, afterward to
Hercules, and being to pass over the River Evenus, Nessus the Centaure offered
his service to carry her over, but as soon as he was on the farther side, he
attempted to ravish her, whereupon Hercules shot at him with a poisoned arrow;
Nessus perceiving he had received his deaths wound, he to be revenged presented
Deianira with a shirt dipped in his own blood, telling her, that if her husband
wore it, it would draw his affections from all other women, which she believing
gave it to Hercules, but the shirt sticking to his body so burnt his flesh that
to avoid the torment, he threw himself into a flaming pyle, and Deianira for
grief slew her self. Dejeration, (lat.) a taking a solemn oath. Deifie, (lat.)
to make a God of one. Deipho^us, the son of Priamus and Hecuba, who caused
Paris to be slain by treachery and married his wife Helena. Deipnosophists,
(Greek) a company of wisemen discoursing at supper. Deis, (old word) a seat.
Deity, (lat.) Divinity, or Godhead. Delamere, a Forest in Cheshire, whereof
the Dawns of Vskinton were, by the gift of Ranulph the first Earl of Chester,
made Forresters by Hereditary succession; in this Forest Aedelfleda the
Mercian Lady built a Town called Eadelbury, i. e. the happy Town, which now
being nothing but a heap of rubbish, is called the Chamber in the Forest.
Delatour, (lat.) an accuser, or informer. A Delegate, (lat.) he that executes
judgment in the place of a Civil, or Ecclesiastical Judge. Deletion, (lat.) a
blotting out. Delgovitia, the name of an ancient Town in Yorkshire, which
stood as some think in that place where now Wighton is. Delibation, (lat.) a
sacrificing, also a tasting. Deliberation, (lat.) a consulting, or debating.
Delict, (lat.) an offense, or crime. Delineation, (lat.) a drawing the first
draught of a Picture. A Delinquent, (lat.) one that has committed an offense,
or crime. Deliration, (lat.) a doting, or being besides ones senses. Delos, an
Island in the Aegean Sea, the chiefest of the Cyclades, where Apollo and Diana
were born, whence they were called the Delian Twins. Delph, is an abatement
placed in the middle of an Escocheon, proper to him that revoketh his own
challenge, and eats his own words. Delphos, a Town of Phocis in Greece,
famous for the Temple and Oracle of Apollo. Deltoton, (Greek) a constellation
of stars, resembling the figure of a Greek delta. Delusion, (lat.) a deceiving,
or beguiling. Deluge, (French) an inundation, or overflowing of waters. Demand,
in Common Law, is opposite to plaint, for in pursuit of civil actions, if they
be real actions, the pursuer is called demandant, if personal, plaintiff.
Demeasne, or Demain, (French) by the Civilians called Dominicum, is that land,
which a man holds originally of himself, whereas feodum are those, which he
holds by the benefit of a Superior. Demetrius, the name of several famous
Kings in Asia, who succeeded Alexander, the word signifies belonging to Ceres,
who in Greek is called Demeter. Demi, (lat.) joined with another word,
signifies half as Demi-God, etc. Demin, (old word) a Judge. Demise, (lat.) to
farm, or let. Demission, (lat.) a casting down, or abasement. Democracy,
(Greek) a Government wherein the Magistrates are chosen from among the people,
and by the people. Democritus, a famous Philosopher born at Abdera, he thought
the world to be composed of Atoms, and that he might the better contemplate
upon natural causes, and not be taken off with any outward objects, he put out
his eyes with a burning basin, his father was a man of so great riches, that he
feasted Xerxes and all his Army. Demolition, (lat.) a casting down, or
ruinating. Demonachation, (French) an expelling from the Monkish order, also a
forsaking of the same. Demoniack, see Daemoniack. Demonstration, (lat.) a
showing, or making plain. Demoph^n, the son of Theseus and Phaedra, he was
driven by Tempest upon the shore of Thrace, and married Phillis, the daughter
of Lycurgus, but Theseus dying, he took the government of Athens upon him, and
forgetting Phillis, she for grief hanged her self upon an Almond-tree.
Demosthenes, a famous Orator among the Greeks, who was banished by Philip of
Macedon, and at last poisoned himself to avoid the fury of Antipater. Demur,
signifies in Common Law a kind of pause upon any point of difficulty.
Denariata terrae, the fourth part of an Acre of Land, it is also called
farding-deal, or a farundel of Land. Denary, (lat.) the number of 10. also the
same as Deneer. Denbigh, the chief Town of Denbighshire, called by the Britains
Cled Fryn-yn Rosse, i. e. a rough Hill in Rosse, for so that part of Wales was
anciently named. Deneer, a kind of Coper Coin, which values about the tenth
part of a penny. Denelage, the Law of the Danes, by which a third part of
England was governed before the Conquest. Denis, a proper name, contracted from
Dionysius, which some fetch from Dios nous, i. e. Divine mind, the chief of
this name was St. Denis, the great Saint of France, it is also a woman's name
contracted from Diana. Deneck, (Arab.) the tail of the Swan. Deneck elected,
(Arab.) the tail of the Lion. Deneck Alihedi, (Arab.) the bowing of the back,
or doubling of the tail of the Goat. Denizon, quasi Danes son, or from the
French word donaison, an endowing, and signifies in Common Law an Alien that
is Infranchised by the Princes Charter, whereby he is made capable of any
Office, or of purchasing Land, but it comes short of Naturalization, because a
stranger naturalised may inherit by descent. Dennington, a Castle in
Bark-shire, built by Sir Richard de Aberbury, it was once the Residence of the
Poet Chaucer, afterward of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. Denomination,
(lat.) a giving a name, from any occasion. Dense, thick, opposed to rare by the
Philosopher, and that body is said to be dense, where the substance is more,
and the quantity less. Density, (lat.) thickness. Dent, a Term in Blazon, as
a bordure dent, or indented is, when the line of which the border is made is
indented in, and out like the teeth of a saw. Dentifrice, (lat) a certain
powder made up into a consistence, wherewith to rub the teeth. Dentisscalp,
(lat.) a tooth-picker, or tooth-scraper. Dentition, (lat.) a putting forth, or
breeding of teeth. Denudation, (lat.) a making bare, or naked. Denuntiation,
(lat.) a proclaiming, or denouncing. De^dand, a thing devoted, and consecrated
to the service of God, to expiate some eminent hurt, or mischief it has done.
De Deoneranda pro rato portionis, a Writ that lies where a man is distrained
for Rent that ought to be paid by others, proportionably with himself.
Deosculation, (lat.) a kissing with eagerness. Departer, a Term in Law,
signifying, he that pleading one thing at first in bar of an action, and
being replied thereunto, does in his rejoinder, show another matter contrary to
his first plea; also departers of Gold or Silver, are those that purify, and
part those metals from the courser sort: they are also called parters and
finers. Departure in despite of the Court, is when the Tenet or Defendant
appears to the action brought against him, and has a day over in the same
term and does not appear but makes default; it is called a departure in spite
of the Court. Depauperation, (lat.) a making poor. Depeculation, (lat.) a
public theevery, or stealing from the Commonwealth. Depend, (lat.) to stay or
rely upon. Depford, a famous shipdock in Kent, where the ships for the Kings
Navy use to be built. It was anciently called West-Greenwich, and at the
Conquest of England was given to Cislebert Mammignot, one of William the
Conquerours Soldiers. Depilation, (lat.) a making bare of hairs, a making
bald. Deploration, (lat.) a mourning for, or bewailing. Deplume, (lat.) to
strip off feathers. Deponent, in Grammar, signifies a Verb which has a
passive termination, and an active signification; also in Common law it is he
who deposes or lays down any matter upon oath. Depopulation, (lat.) a
spoiling or unpeopling of any Country. Deportation, (lat.) a carrying away.
Deportment, (French) carriage, comportment or behavior. Depositum, (lat.) a
pledge in feoffee or trust. Depravation, (lat.) a spoiling, corrupting, or
making naught. Depraedation, (lat.) a preying upon, a taking away by force.
Deprecation, (lat.) a diverting Gods judgments by prayer, a praying against
any calamity. Deprehension, (lat.) a catching, or taking unawares. Depression,
(lat.) a pressing downward, also an humbling. Deprivation, (lat.) a bereaving
or taking away. Depromption, (lat.) a bringing out. Depudication, (lat.) a
vitiating or corrupting. Depulsion, (lat.) a driving from. Deputy, a
Lieutenant, one that governs in the place of another. Dequace, (old word) to
dash. Deradiation, (lat.) a casting forth of ray's or beams. Dear, (old word)
to hurt. Dereliction, (lat.) an utter forsaking. Derein, from the French word
Desranger, or the Norman word Desrene, signifies the proof of an action which
a man affirms that he has done, and his adversary denies. Derham, in the
Saxon tongue Deorham, a Town in Glostershire, where Ceaulin the Saxon King slew
3 Princes of the Britains, Commeail, Condidan, and Fariemeiol, and utterly
subdued the Nation. Deric, a proper name of a man, it being a word contracted
from Theoderic. Derision, (lat.) a scorning or laughing at. Derivation, (lat.)
a drawing or taking, it is used in Grammar for the deriving of any word from
its original; also in Physic it is taken for a drawing of the humor from one
part of the body to another. Dertmouth, a Port Town in Devonshire, which in
former times Mounsieur de Castle a French Pirate going about to invade, was by
the Country people intercepted and slain. Derogation, (lat.) a lessening or
detracting from the worth of any thing, or any person. Deruncination, (lat.) a
taking away weeds, or any thing that molesteth. Derbices, a people of Asia,
inhabiting near the mountain Caucasus, who strangle their kindred as soon as
they arrive at the age of 70 years, and eat their flesh, inviting their
neighbors to the Feast. And this they hold to be the most noble kind of
burial. Derceto, the name of a certain Goddess anciently worshipped at
Askalon, her forepart representing the shape of a woman, her hinder part the
shape of a fish. Dercyllidas, a famous Lacedemonian Commander, who succeeded
Thymbron, he took Larissa, Amaxitos, and Colona, and gained diverse victories
over the Persians. Dervises, an Order of religious persons among the Turks.
Descalsas, (Spanish) a sort of Friars in Spain that go barelegged. Descant,
called in Latin frequentamentum vocis, in French fredon, is a term in Music,
signifying the answering of quick notes in one part, unto a slower measure in
the other parti Descent, (lat.) a coming down, also a deriving ones pedigree.
Description, (lat.) a setting forth the nature or property of any thing.
Descry, from the French word cry or clamor, to discover afar off. Desection,
(lat.) a cutting or mowing down. Desert, a Wilderness or solitary place, from
the Latin word deserere, to forsake, but with the accent in the last syllable,
it signifies merit from the French word deservir. Desertion, (lat.) a
forsaking or abandoning. Desiccation, (lat.) a drying up. Desidery, from the
Latin desiderium, desire or lust. It is a word used by Chaucer. Designation, or
Design, (Lat. and French) a purposing or contriving. Designers, see Deciners.
Desidious, (lat.) negligent, lazy, sluggish. Desipience, (lat.) foolishness,
indiscretion; also in Physic it is taken for the dotage of a sick person.
Desist, (lat.) to leave off, to cease. Deslavy, leacherous beastly, a word used
by Chaucer. Desmonia, a County in Ireland, anciently inhabited by the Vellabri
and Iberni; It is vulgarly called Desmond. Desolation, (lat.) a loneliness or
lying waste. Despection, (lat.) a casting ones eyes downward. Desperation,
(lat.) a despairing or giving over. Despicable, (lat.) liable to contempt, or
to be despised. Despoliation, (lat.) a robbing or spoiling. Despondency, (lat.)
a dejection of spirit, or despairing. Desponsation, (lat.) a betrothing, a
giving in marriage. Despote, (Greek) a great Title heretofore among the Greeks,
being as much as chief Lord or Governor of a Country. Despotical dominion, the
power of a Master over his servant. Despumation, (lat.) a taking off the scum
or froth. Destination, (lat.) an appointing or ordaining as it were by destiny.
Destiny, Fate; the three Destinies, the three fatal Sisters. See Atropos.
Destitution, (lat.) an utter forsaking or deserting. Destruction, (lat.) a
destroying, or undoing. Desuetude, (lat.) a desisting from any custom or use.
Desultorious, (lat.) given to vaulting. Detection, (lat.) a revealing, or
laying open. Detention, (lat.) a detaining or withholding. Deterioration,
(lat.) a making worse. Determination, (lat.) a purposing or intending.
Deterred, (lat.) frighted, discouraged. Detestation, (lat.) a detesting or
abhorring. Detinue, (French) a Writ that lies against him who having goods or
chattels delivered him to keep, refuses to deliver them again. Detorsion,
(lat.) a wresting away. Detraction, (lat.) a drawing away, also a slandering.
Detriment, (lat.) hurt or damage. Detrition, (lat.) a wearing away. Detrusion,
(lat.) a thrusting a way. Detruncation, (lat.) a cutting off a limb or branch.
Devastation, (lat.) a laying waste. Devastaverunt bona testatoris, a Writ lying
against Executors for paying of Legacies without specialties before the debt
upon the said specialties be due. Deucaledonians, a certain people inhabiting
in old times the Western parts of Scotland; They were vulgarly called Picts.
Deucalion, the son of Prometheus, he with his wife Pyrrha the daughter of
Epimetheus, were saved in the universal Deluge, being carried in a ship to the
top of Pernassus and consulting the Oracle of Themis what way they should take
to restore mankind, and being told they should throw the bones of their first
mother behind them, they took stones out of the earth, and cast them behind
them. Those which Deucalion cast became men, and those whic Pyrrha cast became
women. Divest, (lat.) signifies in Common Law to deprive of a possession.
Devils-bit, a kind of plant whose root looks as if it were, and is feigned to
have been, bitten by the Devil out of envy, because of the many excellent
virtues and properties it has, wherewith mankind is benefitted. Developed,
(French) unfolded. Deviation, (lat.) a turning aside out of the way.
Devirgination, (lat.) a deflouring, or depriving of Virginity. Devise, in
Common Law, is, where a man in his will bequeaths his goods, or his lands, to
another after his decease, and he, to whom the lands, or goods are bequeathed,
is called the devisee, devise also signifies a Motto, or conceit in a Coat of
Arms, or Picture, and is also called an Imprese. Deumo, an Idol adored by the
East Indians of Calicut. Devoir, (French) duty, Devoirs of Caleis, were the
customs due to the King for Merchandise brought to, or carried thence when our
staple was there. Devolution, (lat.) a rolling down, a falling from one to
another. Devote, (lat.) vowed or consecrate to God. Devotion, (lat.) a vowing,
or consecrating; also piety, religiousnesse. Deusan, any kind of hard fruit
that lasteth*long, so called from durare, to last. Deuteronomy, (Greek) a Book
written by Moses, signifying the second Law, being the fifth Book in the Holy
Scriptures. Dew, is generated of a most thin cold vapor, only exhaled so high
by the Sun as to keep it up in the air; but when he withdrawes himself from our
Hemisphear, it falls down again in round drops, and is by the coldness of
the air congealed resolved into water. Dewlap, called in Latin paleare, the
skin which hangs down under the throat of an ox. Dexterity, (lat.)
nimblenesse, readiness, agility. Dexter aspect, is contrary to the succession
of the Signs. Dexter point, a term in Heraldry, being that place in an
Escutch^on that has its beginning near the right corner, in the chief thereof.
D I
Diabetical, (Greek) a term in Physic signifying troubled with the Diabetes,
which is a disease wherein a man's water runs from him without any stay.
Diabolical, (Greek) devilish. Diacatholicon, a certain Medicine or physical
Composition. Diachylon, a Plaster composed of juices whose office is to soften
and concoct. Diaconal, (Greek) belonging to a Servant, Minister, or Deacon.
Diadem, (Greek) a wreathed hatband, also a Kings Crown. Diaeresis, (Greek) a
figure whereby one syllable is divided into two. Diagnostic, (Greek) thoroughly
knowing or discerning in Physic. Diagnostic signs of a disease, are those
signs which at present are apparent. Diagonal, (Greek) a term in Geometry,
signifying a line in a quadrangle which passes from one corner to another.
Diagram, (Greek) a Geometrical figure, also a certain form described in
demonstrative sciences, also a proportion of measures in Music distinguished
by Notes. Diagraphical, (Greek) belonging to to the art of painting, or
graving. Dialect, (Greek) a propriety of speech, or difference of pronunciation
peculiar to each several Country, as in Greece heretofore there were the
Attick, Dorick, Ionick, and Aeolick Dialects, or Idiom's; it is also the art of
Logic. Diallel lines, (Greek) lines running cross, and cutting one another.
Dialogisme, (Greek) a figure wherein a man reasons, and discourses with
himself as it were with another. Dialogue, (Greek) a written discourse wherein
two parties are brought in talking together. Diameter, (Greek) a Geometrical
word, signifying a straight line drawn through the middle, or Center of any
figure. Diamond, a sort of precious stone, called also Adamant, so hard, that
it is not to be softened by any thing but Goats blood, it comes from the Greek
word Adamas, untamable. Diana, the daughter of Jupiter and Latona, brought
forth at one birth with Apollo, she, that she might keep her Virginity fled
into the Woods, and addicted her self wholly to hunting, whereupon she was
called the Goddess of the Woods. Diapasme, (Greek) a Pomander, or perfume made
of dry powders, which is used upon several occasions. Diapason, (Greek) an
eight, or the most perfect concord in Music. Diaper, a kind of linen cloth,
which is wrought with flourishes, and diverse sorts of figures. Diaperd, a
bordure in Heraldry is properly said to be Diapred, where it is fretted all
over, and has something quick or dead appearing within the frets. Diapering,
in painting, is an overrunning your work after it is quite finished with
branches, or other work. Diaphanous, (Greek) transparent, or that may be seen
through, or pierced through by the Sun beams. Diaphony, (Greek) a harsh sound,
a sound which makes a discord. Diaphoretick, (Greek) easily piercing through,
a word used in physic, and signifies a Medicine that discusses any humor by
concoction, or transpiration. Diaphragme, (Greek) a fence, or hedge, in Anatomy
it signifies a skin, or muscle which passes overthwart the body, seperating
the breast, or middle region from the stomach, or lower region. Diarrhaea,
(Greek) a flux of the belly without any inflammation of the Entrails.
Diastole, (Greek) a figure whereby a syllable short by nature is made long,
also in physic, it is taken for that motion of the pulses, which dilates the
heart and the arteries, being contrary to Systole, which contracts them.
Diarie, a Diurnal, or Day-book, wherein the passages of every day are written.
Diatesseron, (Greek) one of the chief Chords in Music, called a fourth, also a
plaster that consists but of four ingredients. Diatribe, (Greek) a place
where Orato^ns, or Disputations are held. Dibble, a two forked instrument,
wherewith they set Herbs in a Garden. Dicacity, (lat.) a taunting, or mocking.
Dicearch, (Greek) a just Governor, or Prince. Dication, or Dedication, (lat.)
a promising, devoting, or consecrating. Dichotomy, (Greek) a cutting in two
pieces, a dividing a speech, or discourse into two parts. Dicker, a quantity of
leather, containing ten Hides. Dictate, (lat.) to tell any one what they are to
write. Dickins, a contraction from Devilkins, or little Devils. Dictator,
(lat.) a great Commander among the Romans, who had the chief authority for the
time being, both in war and peace; he was never chosen but upon some great
occasion, and his command was to last but half a year. Dictionary, (lat.)
called in Greek a Lexicon, a Book wherein hard words and names are mentioned
and unfolded. Dictum, the ancient name of a City in Caernarvonshire, now called
Diganway. Dictynna, a name attributed to Diana, who flying from Minos, she cast
her self into certain nets which are called Dictya. Didapper, a kind of bird,
so called from the Greek word Diadyptein, to duck under water. Dido, the
daughter of Belus, King of the Tyrians, she was married to Sichaeus Priest of
Hercules, whom Pygmalion slew that he might obtain his riches; but she
gathering all the wealth she could together, fled into Africa, and there built
a City which was first called Byrsa, afterward Carthage, and refusing to marry
Iarbas King of Getulia, because he went about to force her by war, she killed
her self. Others say, it was because falling in love with Aeneas who was driven
by tempest on her coast, he refused to marry her. Didram, an ancient coin
valueing fifteen pence. Diem clausit extremum, a Writ that lies for the Heir
of him that holds land of the Crown, either by Knights service, or in Soccage
and dies. It is directed to the Eschetour to inquire of what estate he was
seized, and who is next Heir; and this inquisition is to be returned into the
Chancery. Dies datus, a respite given to the Tenent or Defendant before the
Court. Diennial, (lat.) of two years continuance. Diespiter, quasi diei pater,
a name attributed to Jupiter; he is also called Lucetius, from Lux the light.
Diet, in Greek diaita, from dais a banquet, signifies a general convention of
the German Peers to consult of the affairs of the Empire. Dieta rationabilis, a
reasonable days journey; a word used in the Civil Law. Dietetical, (Greek)
belonging to a limited and proportionable diet. Diffamation, (lat.) a
disgracing, a blemishing any ones good name. Diffarreation, (lat.) a solemnity
anciently used among the Romans in the divorcement of man and wife.
Differences, in Heraldry are extraordinary additions whereby bearers of the
same Coat Armor, are distinguished each from others. Difficulty, (lat.)
uneasinesse, hardness. Diffidence, (lat.) doubtfulnesse, mistrustfulnesse.
Diffluence, (lat.) a flowing asunder, or several ways. Diffusion, (lat.) a
scattering or shedding abroad. Diffusion in Philosophy is the dilating of a
substance into more parts. Digamma, (Greek) the Aeolic letter among the Greeks,
like unto our letter F. Digestion, (lat.) a disposing, also a concocting of the
meat in the stomach. Digests, in French Pandectes, a volume of the Civil Law;
so called because the legal precepts therein contained are so excellently
disposed and digested. Dight, (old word) ready, adorned. Digit, a Character
which expresses a figure in Arithmatick, as a V. the figure of five, also the
parts of an eclipse. Digitation, (lat.) a pointing with the fingers, also an
expressing the form of the fingers. Digladiation, (lat.) a fighting, or
disputing the matter with swords. Digne, from the Latin word dignus, neat,
gentle, worthy. It is a word used by Chaucer. Dignity, (lat.) honor,
reputation, advancement. Essential Dignities of the Planets are when Planets
are in their own houses, exaltations, tripticities, and faces, how these are
assigned to every Planet, see in Mr. Lillies Introduc. Fo. 104. Dignosce,
(lat.) to know, or discern one from another. Digression, (lat.) a wandering out
of the way, a going from the matter in hand. Dijudication, (lat.) a deciding a
difference between two. Dike-grave, one that oversees the dikes and banks of
the Low Countries, that keeps the banks from Inundation of the Sea.
Dilaceration, (lat.) a rending or tearing asunder. Dilaniation, (lat.) a
butchering or tearing in pieces. Dilapidation, (lat.) a taking away or ridding
of stones, also a wasting. Dilatation, (lat.) a widening or laying at full
length. Dilatatory, a Surgeons Instrument to widen any part that is too much
closed. Dilection, (lat.) a tender affection or love. Dilemma, (Greek) is
called a horned syllogism, wherein both propositions are so framed, that
neither can well be denied. Dilling, a child born when the Parents are old.
Dilstone, otherwise called Divelstone, because it stands upon the River
Divelesburn, a Town in Northumberland where King Oswald slew Cedwalla the
British Tyrant. Dilucidation, (lat.) a making clear or plain. Dilution, (lat.)
a purging or washing away; also wine dilute signifies wine that is mingled
with water. Diluvial, (lat.) belonging to a Flood or Deluge. Dimention, (lat.)
the just measure or proportion of any figure. In Geometry length breadth, and
depth, are called the three dimensions. Dimetae, the ancient name of the people
inhabiting that part of Wales which contains those Countries now called
Caermardenshire, Pembrokshire, and Cardiganshire. Dimication, (lat.)
skirmishing or fightng. Dimidiation, (lat.) a dividing in the midst, a cutting
into two halves. Dimocks* an ancient Family in Cheshire. See Grand Sergeanty.
Diminutive, (lat.) little, small; in Grammar it is taken substantively for a
word whose termination implies a littleness in respect of another thing that
is bigger, as from tabula a table, comes tabella a little table or tablet. In
Heraldry it is a blemishing or defacing of some particular point of the
Escocheon by the imposition of some stain and color thereon. In Architecture
it signifies the lessening of a pillar by little and little, from the base to
the top. Dioces, from the Greek word dioecesis a governing, signifies the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of a Bishop. Diogenes, a famous Philosopher, who
lived in a tub which he rolled up and down from place to place; he was for his
churlish disposition and clownish conversation called the Cynic. Diomedes, the
son of Tydeus, and Deiphile, and King of Aetolia, he was accounted one of the
chiefest Hero's at the wars of Troy; he brought away Rhesus his horses and the
Palladium, he wounded Mars and Venus, fought with Hector and Aeneas, whom his
mother Venus protected; at length being ashamed to return home because of the
whorish pranks of his wife Aegiale, he went into Apulia and had that Kingdom
given him by Daunus. There was also another Diomed King of Thrace, who used to
feed his horses with man's flesh; but at last Hercules overcoming him, gave him
to be devoured by his own horses. Dioptic art, that part of perspective which
belongs to Astronomy, and by instruments searches out the distance of the Sun
and other Stars, comprehending Nenitercapedines of Sun, Moon, and Stars.
Dioptrical, (Greek) belonging to a Dioptra or Geometrical Quadrat. Diphthong,
(Greek) two vowels clapped together into one Diple, a mark in the margent, to
show where a fault is to be corrected. Dipsas, a kind of Serpent whose biting
brings a deadly thirst. Diptote, signifies in Grammar a Nown that has but two
Cases. Dirce, see Amphion. Dire, (lat.) cruel, fell, unmerciful. Directory,
(lat.) that which directs, or puts in the right way. Direction, a Planet
is said direct, when it moves in its natural course according to the direction
of the Signs. Diremption, (lat.) a setting apart. Direption, (lat.) a
snatching, or taking by force. Dirge, from the Latin word dirigere, prayers, or
divine-service offered to God for the soul of the dead. Diribitory, from the
old Latin word diribere, to distribute or divide, a place where soldiers are
mustered and receive pay. Diruption, (lat.) a bursting asunder. Disalt, to
disable. Disard, a doltish fellow from the French word disard, loquacious, or
the Dutch word dwaesaerd, i. e. a man of a stupid wit. Disastre, (French) ill
luck, derived from the evil influence of the Stars. Descent, in Common Law is
an order whereby Lands are derived unto any man from his Ancestors.
Disceptation, (lat.) a contentious disputing. Discern, (lat.) to perceive, to
know one thing from another. Discerption, (lat.) a tearing in pieces.
Descession, (lat.) a departing. Hair Discheveled, (French) loosely scattered
out of order. Discinct, (lat.) ungirded, also careless. Discipline, (lat.) a
teaching or instructing. Disciplinants, an Order of Religious men that scourge
themselves. Disclamer, in Common Law is an express denial or refusal in
standing out against any action. Discoloure, (lat.) of diverse colors.
Discomfiture, (French) a total routing or vanquishing an enemy. Disconsolate,
(lat.) comfortless. Discontinuance, or Discontinuity, (lat.) an interruption
or breaking off; also in Common Law discontinuance of possession is this, that
a man may not enter upon his own land being alienated, but must bring his Writ,
and seek to recover possession by Law. Discordance, (lat.) a disagreement,
jarring, or being out of tune; for in Music those Notes are called discords
which make harsh and unpleasing sounds, as seconds, fourths, sevenths, etc.
Discrepance, (lat.) a differing or varying one from another. Discretion, (lat.)
a separating or distinguishing; also wisdom, prudence, because it teaches us
how to make a right distinction of things. Discrimination, (lat.) a putting a
difference between one thing and another. Discumbence, (lat.) a sitting or
lying down to eat, it being a custom among the Ancients to lie down upon the
ground and eat. Discure, to discover, a word used by Chaucer. Discursion,
(lat.) a running to and fro. Discussion, (lat.) a shaking off, or into pieces;
also a searching narrowly into a business. To Disembogue, (Spanish) to come
out of the mouth of a River or Haven. Disfranchize, to exclude* out of the
number of Citizens or free-Denisons. Disgrading, a depriving a Clergyman of
his orders, who being delivered to his ordinary, cannot purge himself of the
crime whereof he was convicted by the Jury. Disgregation, (lat.) a scattering,
or separating. Disguise, (French) to put into another guise or form. Disgust,
(lat.) to distaste. Disherit, or Disinherit, (French) to put out of possession.
Disjunction, (lat.) a severing or disjoyning. Dislocation, (lat.) a putting out
of its right place. Dislodge, a term in hunting, applied to a Buck, when you
first raise him Disloyalty, (French) unfaithfulness, perfidiousnesse.
Dismantle, (French) to take off a cloak or mantle, but by metaphor, it is taken
for to beat down the walls of a Fortress. Dism^s, (French) tithes, or the
tenth part of all the fruits being consecrate to God, and consequently to be
paid unto those who take upon them holy Orders. Dismission, (lat.) a sending
away. Dispansion, (lat.) a spreading both ways. Disparagement, (Ital.) a
disgracing, or undervalueing; In Common Law it is used for the marrying of an
Heir or Heiresse under their degree, or against decency. Some derive it from
the Latin words dispar and ago, it being as it were a doing that which is
disagreable. Disparates, (lat.) a term in Logic, signifying things which are
different from one another, but not contrary. Disparity, (lat.) unevenness, or
diversity. Disparpled, or Disperpled, loosely scattered, or shooting it self
into diverse parts, a term used in Heraldry. Dispaupered, signifies in Common
Law deprived of the privilege of forma pauperis. Dispend, (lat.) to spend or
lay out money. Dispensation, (lat.) a distributing or dealing; also a
performing the office of a Dispenser or Steward. Dispersion, (lat.) a
scattering into several parts. Dispert, to find out the difference of the
diameters of metals between the breetch and the mouth of a piece of Ordnance.
Dispicience, (lat.) a looking diligently, a considering. Displicence, (lat.) a
displeasing. Displosion, (lat.) a bursting in two, also the shooting off a gun.
Dispoliation, (lat.) a spoiling, rifling, or robbing. Dispone, (old word) to
dispose. Disposition, (lat.) a placing or disposing of things; also the natural
inclination of the mind, also the constitution of the body. Dispossession,
(lat.) a depriving any one of their possession. Disproportion, (lat.)
inequality. Dispurveyed, (French) bare, indigent, unprovided. Disputation,
(lat.) a disputing or contesting in words about any doubtful subject.
Disquamation, (lat.) a taking off the scales or bark of any thing.
Disquisition, (lat.) a narrow search after any thing. Disrationare, in French
disrener, to prove any thing by Battle, Writ or Assize. Dissasina, (French)
dispossession, see Sasina. Dissection, (lat.) a cutting asunder or in pieces.
Disseisin, in Common law, is an unlawful dispossessing of a man of his lands or
goods. Dissemination, (lat.) a sowing or scattering up and down. Dissentaneous,
(lat.) discording, disagreeing. Disse^tory, (old word) a kind of Still.
Disservice, a disclaiming any ones service, a doing an ill office. Dissidence,
(lat.) a disagreeing, or falling out. Dissilience, (lat.) a leaping or bounding
up and down, a falling asunder. Dissimilar, (lat.) unlike; in Anatomy the
dissimilar parts of the body, are those which are compounded of several similar
parts, as a hand being compounded of flesh nerves and bones, is called a
dissimilar or organic part. Dissimulation, (lat.) a counterfeiting, or
dissembling. Dissheveled, see Dischevelled. Dissipation, (lat.) a scatering or
dispersing. Dissociation, (lat.) a separating or putting asunder. Dissolution,
(lat.) a dissolving, a melting, or destroying; also dissoluteness, debauchery,
or licenciousnesse of life: also contrary to Annexation. Dissonance, (lat.) a
difference in sound, also a disagreement. Dissuasion, (lat.) a persuading
against any thing. Dissyllable, (Greek) a word consisting of two syllables.
Distance, (lat.) a being afar off. Painting in Distemper, or size, is a kind of
painting which has been ancientlier in use than that which is in oil'd
colors. Distention, (lat.) a drawing out, or stretching to the full length.
Distick, (Greek) a couple of Verses ending in the same rhyme or measure.
Distillation, (lat.) a dropping down, or distilling in a Limbeck. Distinction,
(lat.) a putting a difference between one thing and another. A Logical
distinction is when a word having several significations, may be taken either
way. Distortion, (lat.) a pulling awry, or wringing several ways. Distraction,
(lat.) a drawing several ways, also perplexity or madness. Distress, or
distraining, (in Latin, Distriction,) is a streightning, wringing, or
affliction. In Common Law it signifies a compulsion to appear in Court, or to
pay a debt or duty denied. Distribution, (lat.) a dividing amongst many.
Distributive, is an epithet to justice, whereby is signified the justice of an
Arbitrator, who being trusted and performing his trust, is said to give every
man his own. Districation, a ridding out of trouble, from the latin words dis a
preposition, and Tricae small threads about chickens legs, which hinder them
from going; but metaphorically any kind of encumbrance. Districtus, the circuit
or territory within which a man may be compelled to appear. Distringas, a Writ
directed to the Sheriff to distrain one for a debt to the King, or for his
appearance at a day. Disturbance, or Disturbation, (lat.) a causing trouble, or
unquietness. Disunited, (lat.) disjoined or severed. Dithyramb, (Greek) a kind
of Hymn anciently sung in honor of Bacchus, also any kind of lusty or jovial
Song. Dition, (lat.) a Dominion, Jurisdiction, or Territory. Dittany, or
Ditander, in Latin Dictamnum, an herb growing abundantly in Dicte, a Promontory
of Creet, in English it is called Garden-pepper. Ditty, a Song which has the
words composed to a tune. Divan, a great solemn Council or Court of Justice
among the Turks and Persians. Divarication, (lat.) a striding wide.
Diventilation, (lat.) a winnowing, or tossing to and fro. Diverberation, (lat.)
a violent beating. Diversified, (lat.) varied. Diversity, (lat.) variety.
Diverticle, (lat.) a by-way, also a device or shift. Divertisment, (French)
recreation or pastime. Dividend, in Arithmetic, is the number which is to be
divided, also the share which is equally divided among the Fellows of a
College. Also Dividends in the Exchequer seem to be one part of an Indenture.
Dividual, (lat.) easy or apt to be divided. Divinaile. (old word) a riddle.
Divination, (lat.) a presageing of things to come. Divine, (lat.) heavenly,
also it is taken substantively for a professor of Theology, whom Chaucer calls
a divinistre. Divisibility, Philosophic, it signifies a capacity in a thing to
be divided. Division, (lat.) a dividing or cutting into two parts. Divitiacus,
a King of the Gauls, who as some say, was King of the Britains. Divorce in
Common law, is a separation between two married together, not only from bed
and board, but from the bond of wedlock. Divour, see Dyvour. Diuretical,
(Greek) that which provokes urine. Diurnal, (lat.) belonging to the day; It is
also used substantively for a Pamphlet, wherein the passages of every day are
recorded. Diuturnity, (lat.) lastingnesse, or long continuance. Divulgation,
(lat.) a making known abroad. Divulsion, (lat.) a pulling violently asunder.
Dizain, (French) the number ten, also a kind of French Coin of about the value
of a penny, also a song consisting of twelve Stanza's.
D O
Dobeler, a great dish, or platter. Dobuni, ancient people of the Britains,
who inhabited those parts, which are now called Oxfordshire, and Glostershire.
Doced, or Douced, a Musical instrument, otherwise called a Dulcimer. Docility,
Docibility, (lat.) aptness to learn that which is taught. Docke, a place where
ships are built, or laid up from the Greek word Cocheion a receptacle, also a
kind of Herb, called in Latin Lapathum. Docket, a Brief in writing. Doctoral,
(lat.) belonging to a Doctor, i. e. Teacher, or one that has taken the highest
degree in Divinity, Physic, or Civil Law. Document, (lat.) a teaching, or
instructing. Dodded, (old word) in Latin Decornutus, unhorned, also lopped as a
Tree, having the branches cut off. Dodder, a certain weed winding about Herbs.
Dodecaedrie, (Greek) a Geometrical figure of 12 sides. Dodecagon, (Greek) a
Geometrical figure of 12 Angles. Dodecatemorie, (Greek) an Astronomical Term,
being one of the 12 parts, into which the Zodiac is divided. Dodkin, a kind
of small piece of money, which some think to be of the same value as our
farthing. Dodona, a City of Chaonia, a Country of Greece, near to which there
was a Temple and Oracle of Jupiter, within a Wood, sacred to the same Deity, of
which Wood it was feigned that the Trees were vocal, and returned the answers of
the Oracle, also the name of a Fountain, whose water had a property, both to
quench and kindle fire. Dotrantal, (lat.) of the weight, or measure of nine
ounces. Dog-dayes, see Canicular days. Dogdraw, (a Term used in Forest law,)
is when any man is found drawing after a Deer by the scent of a hound, which he
leads in his hand, being one of the four circumstances, wherein a Forrester
may arrest the body of an offender against Vert, or Venison in the Forest, the
other three being Stablestand, Back berond, and Bloudy-hand. Doge of Venice, is
the supreme Magistrate, or Duke of Venice. Dogger, a kind of ship. Dogmatist,
(Greek) one that brings in any new Sect, or opinion. Dolation, (lat.) a
making smooth, or plain. Dole, (lat.) deceit, fraud, also grief, also a
distributing, or dealing of Alms, or gifts. Dollar, a Dutch Coin of the value
of four shillings. Dolling, (old word) warming. Dolorous, (lat.) painful, or
sorrowful. Dolphin, a kind of fish, so called as some say from the Delphi,
who were the first finders of it, also the title of the eldest son of the King
of France, from Daulphin a Province of France; also a constellation beautified
with nine bright stars, according to the number of the Muses. Dolt, a sot, or
blockhead, from the Dutch word Doll. Dolven, buried from the old word Delve, to
dig. Dolyman, a kind of Turkish Garment. Domable, (lat.) tameable. Dome,
(Ital.) a Townhouse, or chief meeting place of a City. Domestic, (lat.)
tame, belonging to a family, or household. Domicil, (lat.) a dwelling house, or
place of habitation. Domination, (lat.) a ruling, or lording over others,
dominations are also one of the nine orders of Angels. Dominical letter, the
red Letter in the Calender, wherewith Sunday, or the Lords day is marked.
Dominicans, an Order of Friars, instituted by St. Dominick a Spaniard about the
year 1206. Domino, a kind of hood worn by Canons, also a mourning vail for
women. Domition, or Domiture, (lat.) a taming. Domo reparanda, a Writ that
lies against one whose house going to decay may endanger his Neighbors house
by falling. Donary, (lat) a gift, or present. Donatists, a Sect of Heretics,
whereof the more rigid sort are called Circumcellians, they held the son to be
less then the father, and the holy Ghost less then the son, and affirmed the
true Church to be only in Africa, they were instituted by Donatus, Bishop of
Carthage, in the year 358. the more moderate sort were called Rogatists.
Donative, (lat.) apt to give, it is substantively taken for a benefice merely
given by a Patron to any man, also a Princes gift. A Dondon, (old word) a short
fat woman. Donee, in Common Law, is he to whom Lands are given as Donour, is
he, who gives them. Donegal, see Tyrconel. Dooms-day-book, a book made in the
time of Edward the Confessor, some say, of William the Conqueror, wherein all
the ancient demeans of England were registered with the names of all those that
possessed them. Dooms-man, a Judge from the Saxon word Doom, a Judgment, or
sentence. Dorcas, the proper name of a woman, the word signifies a Deer.
Dorado, (Span.) gilded over. Dorchester, the chief Town in Dorcetshire, it was
in old time called Durnovaria, i. e. the River passage, it was miserably
harrass't by Sueno the Dane, and afterward by Hush the Norman, but flourish't
again in King Edwards days; there is also another Town of this name in
Oxfordshire, by Leland, called Hydropolis. Dour signifying in the ancient
British tongue, water. Dorick, dialect, see Dialect. Dorick, Music, a kind
of grave and solemn Music, also Dorick work in Architecture, see Corinthian.
Doris, the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, she being married to Nereus, brought
forth a great number of Sea-nymphs, called Nereides. Dormant, in Heraldry
signifies lying in a sleeping posture, also in Law a writing Dormant is, that,
which has a blank to put in the name of any one, also a Dormant-tree is a
great beam, which lies cross the house which some call a Summer. Dormers,
window's made in the roof of a house. Dorothy, a woman's name, signifying in
Greek the gift of God. Dorp, or Thorp, a Country Town, or Village. Dorrie, a
kind of fish, so called because the sides of it shine like Gold, it is called
in Latin Faber. Dorter, or Dormitorie, a place where many sleep together, also
a place where people are buried. Dose, (Greek) a Term in Physic, being the
quantity of a potion, or Medecin which is prescribed by a Physician to his
patient. A Dosel, or Dorsel, from the Latin word dorsum, a rich Canopie under
which Princes sit, also the Curtain of a Chair of State. Doted, (lat.)
endowed, having a jointure. Dotkin, or Dodkin, the eighth part of a stiver, or
French shilling. Dottrel, a kind of bird so called. Double plea, is that
wherein the Defendant alleges two several matters in bar of the action.
Doubles, in Greek diplomata, Letters Patents. Doubleth, a Term in hunting, when
a Hare keeps in plain fields, and chaseth about to deceive the hounds, it is
said she doubleth. Doublet, a precious stone, consisting of two pieces joined
together. Doublings, a Term used in Heraldry, for the linings of Roabs, Mantles
of state, or other Garments. Dovane, (French) Custom, or Impost. Dover, see
Dubris. Dovetail, a joint used by Carpenters, denominated from that kind of
figure. Dousabel, (French) sweet and fair, a woman's name answering to the Greek
Glycerium. Douset, or Doulcet, a kind of Custard, from the Latin word dulcis.
Dowager, a title applied to the widows of Princes and great persons. Downs,
hilly plains, also a part of the Sea lying near the sands, from the Saxon word
Dune, a hill, the same word signifying in Dutch a sand-bank. Dowry, in
Common Law, signifies that which a wife has with her husband in marriage, it
is also taken for that portion which she brings with her, which is called in
Latin Maritagium or Dos, the former is called Donatio. Dowsets, the stones of a
Stag, so termed in hunting, also the same as Dousets. Dowtremere, fair wearing,
a word used by Chaucer. Doxie, a she Beggar or Trull. Doxology, (Greek) a Verse
or Song of praise, anciently instituted in the Church which was to be recited
in Divine-service after the Prayers and Psalms.
D R
Drabler, in Navigation, is a piece added to the bonnet, when there is need of
more sail. Draco's Laws, certain rigid and severe Laws made anciently in Athens
by one Draco; whence all severe punishments for trivial offenses are called
Draco's Laws. Dragant, or Traga^ant, a certain gum distilling from an herb of
the same name, in English called Goates-thorn. Dragons Head, called in the
Greek (...), a node or place in the Eccliptick line, which the Moon cutteth and
ascendes from the aust'ral part of the node into the Septentrional, it has no
aspect to any Planet, but it may be aspected by them; its motion is according
to the motion of the Sun. Dragons tail, called in Greek (...), is a node
opposite to the Dragons Head in the Eccliptick line, which the M^on cutteth and
descends from the Septentrional part of the node, unto the Aust'ral.
Dragons-wort, a certain herb, otherwise called Serpentary, or vipers Bugloss.
Dragonstone, a certain precious Stone called in Greek Draconitis. Drags, pieces
of wood so joined together, as floating upon the water they may bear a burload
of wood or other wares down the River. Draiton, a Town in Shropshire near
which, a very bloody field was fought between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster. Dram, or Drachme, (Greek) the eighth part of an ounce. Dramatic,
(Greek) a sort of Poetry, wherein are lively representations of things, acted
by persons upon a Stage, as Comedies and Tragedies. Drap de Berry, a kind of
thick cloth made in the Country of Berry in France. Drapery, a term in
painting, being a work wherein cloths are represented. See Cilerie. Draught, a
first Copy, from the Latin word tractus. Drawelatchets, a sort of nightly
thieves, so termed in diverse Statutes, they are also called Robertsmen.
Drawing, a term used by Painters, signifying an exact observance of the
distances and proportions of that which you would imitate or fancy. It
comprehends Pictures by the life; Stories, Optics, Landskips, etc. It is by
some called Designing. Dreint, (old word) drowned. Dretch, (old word) to dream,
to tarry. Dry exchange, a term which is given to Usury. D^iffeild, a Town in
Yorkshire, famous for the Tomb of the learned Alfred King of Northumberland,
and for the Mounts which he raised about it. Drift of the Forest, a driving of
cattle, or a view of what cattle are in the Forest; also a boat is said to go
adrift when it has no body to row or steer it. Drift is also taken for
counsel or policy, from the Dutch word dr^iven, i. e. to act. Drill, a
Stone-cutters tool wherewith he bores holes in Marble, also a Baboon.
Drogoman, or Truchman, in Greek Dragomenos, a word used by the Turks for an
Interpreter. Droit, signifies in common Law a double right, the right of
possession, and the right of the Lord. Drolery, (French) a merry facetious way
of speaking or writing. Dromedary, a kind of Camel with two bunches on its
back, it is called in Greek Dromas for its swiftness. Dronklew, (old word)
given to drink. Dropacist, a puller off of hair. Drouy, (old word) troubled.
Dru, (Sax.) subtle, a proper name, called in Latin Drogo, or Drugo. Drugge, a
Medicin, from the Dutch word Droogh, i. e. dry, because all Medicines vehemently
dry the body. Druides, certain learned men or Priests anciently in great esteem
among the Galls; they were so called from the Greek word Drys a wood, because
they loved to inhabit among the woods. Drury, (old word) sobriety, modesty.
Drusilla, the poper name of diverse famous women. Dryads, certain Nimphs, called
Nimphs of the wood, from the Greek word Drys an Oak.
D U
Duall, (lat.) of, or belonging to two. To Dub a Knight, to confer the Order of
Knighthood upon any one, from the French word a douber, to arm complete.
Dubious, (lat.) uncertain, doubtful. Dublin, the chief City of Ireland, situate
in the Province of Leimster, it was anciently called Bala cleigh, i. a Town
upon Hurdles. Some say it was built by Harold King of Norway, (when he
conquered Ireland) from whom descended in a direct line Griffith ap Conan,
borne at Dublin, in the reign of Tyrlough. This City was bravely defended by
the English against Asculph Prince of the Dublinians, and Gottred King of the
Isles, and in the time of King Henry the second, was given to a Colony of
Bristowmen. Dubris, the ancient name of a Port-Town in Kent, now called Dover,
having a very fair and strong Castle, built as some say by Julius Caesar, and
afterward fortified by King Arviragus against the Romans. Ducal, (lat.)
belonging to a Duke. Duces tecum, a Writ summoning one to appear in Chancery,
and to bring with him some evidence which that Court would view. Ducket, a
certain golden coin, valueing about 6 shillings, first coined in Rome in the
year of the City 547. having the Image or arms of a Duke or supreme Magistrate
stamped upon it. Ductile, (lat.) easy to be drawn out, and beaten into a thin
plate; a word most commonly applied to metals. Duction, (lat.) a leading.
Duel, (lat.) a single Combat between two, from duo* i. two, and bellum, i.
war. Duellona, see Bellona. Duilius, a great Commander among the Romans, who
overcame the Carthaginians in a great Sea Fight, and was the first that
triumphed after a naval Victory. Dul^arnon, a proportion found out by
Pythagoras, for which happy invention, he sacrified an Ox to the gods in
thankfulness, which sacrifice he called Dulcarnon. Dulcimer, a kind of Musical
Instrument, otherwise called a Sambuc. Dulcisonant, (lat.) sweetly sounding.
Dulcitude, (lat.) sweetness. Dulc^ration, (lat.) a making sweet. Dulocrasy,
(Greek) a government where slaves and servants domineer. Dumosity, (lat.)
fullness of briars and brambles. To Dun, a word vulgarly used signifying to come
often to importune the payment of any debt. Dunbar, a Town of Lothien or Lauden
in Scotland, where of late years a total defeat was given to the Scotch army
under the command of Lesly, by Crumwell General of the English Forces. Dundee,
a Town of Angus, a Province of Scotland, called in Latin Taodunum, by others
Alectum. Duni pacis* See knots of peace. Dunstan, (Sax.) Most high. Duodecimo,
a book is said to be in Duodecimo, when it is of twelve leaves in a sheet.
Duplicity, (lat.) a being double or twofold. Duplicate, a second letter patent
granted by the Lord Chancelour, in a case wherein he had formerly done the
same, and was therefore thought void. Duplication, (lat.) a doubling, also a
word used in Law, signifying an allegation brought in to weaken the reply of
the pleader. Dura matter, (lat.) a term in Anatomy, signifying the outward skin
that infolds the brain. Duration, (lat.) a long continuing or lasting. Dures,
in Common Law, is a plea used by way of exception by him who being cast into
prison, or hardly used by any, is constrained to seal a bond to him during his
restraint. Durham, the chief City of the Bishopric of Durham, built by Bishop
Aldwin, with the help of Vthred Earl of Northumberland. Here the Monks of
Lindis-farm sheltred themselves when they fled with the body of St. Cuthbert
from the fury of the Danes. It was anciently called Dunholm and Dunelmum.
Durham College, see Bernard College. Durity, (lat.) hardness. Durnovaria, see
Dorchester. Durotriges, an ancient people among the Britains, inhabiting that
part which is now called Dorcetshire. Duskie, obscure, dark, from the Greek
word dascios, shady. Duchy Court, a Court wherein all matters belonging to
the Duchy of Lancaster are decided by the decree of the Chancelour of that
Court. Duumvirate, a certain Magistracy anciently in Rome. Dwale, a kind of
herb called sleeping nightshade. Dwyned, (old word) consumed.
D Y
Dyna, a kind of East India coin, valueing about 30 shillings. Dynastie,
(Greek) Supreme Government or Authority. Dyrrachium, a City of Macedon, lying
upon the Adriatic Sea, now called Durazzo. Dyscracy, (Greek) a distemper of
the body proceeding from an unequal mixture of the first qualities. Dysentery,
(Greek) a disease called the Bloody Flux. Dyspathy, (Greek) evil passion or
affection. Dyspepsie, (Greek) ill digestion of the meat in the stomach.
E
EAd, or Eadith, (Sax.) a proper name of women, signifying happiness. It is
written in Latin Auda, and by some Idonea. Eaglestone, a certain precious Stone
found in the nests of Eagles, in Greek called Aetites. Eadelman, or Adelman, a
Saxon word, signifying a Noble man. Eadgar, (Sax.) happy power. Eadulph, (Sax.)
happy help. Eadwin, (Sax.) happy Victor. Ealderman, or Alderman, the same as
Eadelman. Ealred, (Sax.) all counsel: a proper name. Ean, to bring forth
young, from the Greek word Odinein. To Ear the ground, to till or plough the
ground, from the Latin word Arare. Earing, a part of the bolt-rope which a^ all
four quarters of the sail is left open. Earl, (Sax.) a Noble man, from Ehre,
i. Honor, and Edel, i. Noble. Easell, is a word used in painting, being that
frame upon which the Artist places his cloth either higher or lower as he
pleases. Easement, in Common law, is a service which one neighbor has of
another by charter or prescription, as a passage thorough his ground, or the
like. The Civilians call it servitus praedii. Easter, the time of the
celebration of Christ's Resurrection, contracted from the Dutch word
Aufferstand, i. e. Resurrection, or from Eoster, an ancient Goddess of the
Saxons, whose Feast they kept about the same time, namely, about April, which
was thence called Eoster-monath. It is also called Pasca, from the Hebrew, word
Pasach, to pass over, because about this time, the Jews celebrated the Feast
of the Passover. Easterlings, people inhabiting the East part of Germany, also
Easterling money, is that which we call Sterling, or Current money, from a
certain coin which Richard the first caused to be coined in those parts, being
held in great request for its purity. Eastmeath, a County of Ireland, in the
Province of Mead, it is divided into 18. Baronies.
E B
Eben-tree, a certain tree which grows in India, and Aethiopia, it has neither
leaves nor fruit, and the wood of it is black and very hard, serving for many
uses. Ebionites, a certain Sect of Heretics who denied the Divinity of Christ,
and rejected all the Gospels but St. Mathews; they were instituted by one Ebion
in the year 71. Ebissa, a certain Captain of the Saxons, who with Octha, came
to aid Hengist against the Britains. Eboracum, the second City of England,
commonly called York. Ptolomy calls it Brigantium, from the Brigants, an
ancient people of that Country; but it was called Eboracum, or Eburacum, from
Ebrank, a certain King of the Britains, or as others say, from the River Ure.
Ebrack, the Hebrew tongue; a word used by Chaucer. Ebriety, or Ebriosity,
(lat.) drunkenness. Ebulo, the same as Ybel. Ebullition, (lat.) a bubling or
boiling up. Eburnean, (lat.) made of Ivory. Eccentrick Orb, in Astronomy, is
that which moves at unequal distance from the Center. Ecclesiastical, (Greek)
belonging to the Church. Echen, (old word) they increase, also they help.
Echidne, a Queen of Scythia, who by Hercules had three Children at a birth,
whereof one of them named Scytha, who only was able to bend his fathers bow,
succeeded in the Kingdom, and from him it was named Scythia. Echo, a Nymph that
lived near the River Cephisus, she dying for the love of Narcissus, was feigned
by the Poets to be changed into that voice, which is reflected back in Caves
and hollow places. Eclipse, (Greek) a want, or defect, an Eclipse of the Sun is
a depriving us of its light, by the interposition of the Moons body, between
that and us, whereas the Eclipse of the Moon is caused, by the interposition of
the earth. Ecliptic line, a line running through the midst of the Zodiac and
12 signs, it is so called because the Eclipses happen under that line.
Eclogue, or Eglogue, as pastoral Poem, or speech between two Sheapherds.
Ecstasie, (Greek) a figure wherein a syllable is made long contrary to its
proper nature, also a trance, or sudden rapture of spirit. Ectype, (Greek) a
thing drawn from another Copy.
E D
Edacity, (lat.) a greedy eating, or devouring. Eddie, the turning round in a
stream. Edelfleda, or Elfleda, the wife of Ethelred, King of the Mercians, who
after her husbands death, governed that Kingdom for eight years with great
prudence and moderation. Edentate, (lat.) to make toothlesse. Edgehill, a Hill
in Warwickshire, where the first pitched field was fought, between the forces
of King Charles the first, and the Parliament of England. Edict, (lat.) a
Proclamation, or public Ordinance. Edification, (lat.) building, also it is
Metaphorically taken for instruction. Edifice* (lat.) a house, or building.
Edil, or Eadile, (lat.) an Officer in Rome, who was appointed to oversee the
building of Temples and private houses. Edinton, (called in old time
Eathandune) a Town in Wiltshire, where King Alfred overthrew the Danes in a
memorable battle, here also William de Edinton, Bishop of Winchester, erected a
College for an Order of men, called bon hommes, i. e. good men. Edition,
(lat.) a setting forth of any thing, but commonly it is taken for the
impression of a book. Edmund, the proper name of a man signifying in the Saxon
tongue happy peace. St. Edmundsbury, a Town in Suffolk, anciently called
Bederick's gueord, i. e. the Court, or Mansion House of Bederick, and seems to
have been the same Town with that, which Antonine calls Villa Faustini. It
derived its present name from King Edmund, who was cruelly put to death by the
Danes, and his body translated hither, a stately Church being also erected to
his memory, which being demolished by Suenus the Dane, was built anew by his
son Canutus to expiate his fathers sacrilege. Education, (lat.) a bringing up,
or instructing. Edward, a proper name, signifying in the Saxon tongue happy
keeper.
E F
Effable, (lat.) to be expressed, or uttered. Effect, (Lat.) the doing, or
finishing of a thing. Efficacy, (lat.) virtue, ability, also force, urgency in
speech. Efficient, (lat.) causing to come to pass, it is a word chiefly
applied to one of the four causes treated of in Logic. Effiction, (lat.) a
forming, or expressing a thing. Effigies, (lat.) the form, or representation of
any thing. Efflagitation, (lat.) an earnest requesting, or importuning.
Effl^rescence, (lat.) a sprouting, or budding forth. Effluence, Effluvium, or
Efflux, (lat.) a flowing forth. Effoemination, (lat.) a making soft, nice, or
womanish. Efforts, (French) violent Assays, strong impressions. Effroenation,
(lat.) unbridlednesse, or rashness. Effronterie, see Affrontednesse. Effusion,
(lat.) a pouring out, or wasting. Eft, (old word) again. Eftsoons, (old word)
quickly.
E G.
Egbert, a proper name, signifying in the Saxon tongue ever bright and famous.
Egestion, (lat.) a voiding, or conveying forth. Eggement, (old word)
procurement. Eglantine, a certain herb, so called from the Dutch Eghel, i. e. a
Hedgehog, because it is full of prickles. It is also called sweet Bryar.
Eglogue, see Eclogue. Egregious, (lat.) excellent. Egremont, a Castle in
Cumberland, which William de Mes^hines held by Knights service of King Henry
the first. Egression, or Egresse, (lat.) a going forth. Egrimony, see
Aegrimony.
E J
Ejaculation, (lat.) a casting forth, also by Metaphor a spiritual trance.
Ejection, (lat.) a casting out. The Eight (anciently called Alney, i. e. the
Island) a place in Glocestershire, where a single Combat was fought between
Edmund King of the English, and Canutus King of the Danes, to decide their
right to the Kingdom. Eirenarchie, (Greek) the Office of Constable, or Justice
of Peace. Ejulation, (lat.) a yelling, or pitiful crying out. Ejuration,
(lat.) a renouncing, a yielding up ones place.
E L.
Ela, the highest note in the scale of Music, or Gam ut. Elaborate, (lat.)
done with exactness and pains. An Elaboratory, or Labratory, (lat.) a place to
work in, properly a Chemists workhouse, or shop. Elapidation, (lat.) a taking
away stones. Elapsion, (lat.) a slipping out. Elated, (lat.) lifted up,
exalted, proud. Eld, (old word) age, Eldership. Ele, (old word) help. Eleanor,
a proper name of women deduced from Helena. Elecampane, in Latin, Enula
Campana, a certain Herb called Horseheal. Election, (lat.) a choosing, or
setting apart. Elections, are times elected, for the doing any manner of work
by the secret operations of the Heavens, by the nature of the signs, planets,
and aspects of the Moon. Electors, certain Princes belonging to the Roman
Empire. Electrum, a kind of precious Gum, called Amber, distilling from Poplar
Trees, into which the Poets fain the sisters of Phaeton to have been turned.
Electuarie, a certain confection, or Medicinable composition made of the most
select drugs. Eleemosynary, (Greek) an Almner, or giver of Alms. Elegancy,
(lat.) gallantnesse in speech, or apparel. Elegy, (Greek) a kind of mournful
verse, or Funeral song. Elegit, a Writ, for the recovery of goods, or lands,
toward the payment of any debt. Elements, those pure unmix't bodies, which are
principles of all things, an Element is defined by the Philosophers, to be a
body not composed of any former bodies, and of which all former bodies are
composed; also the rudiments of any Art, also the single letters of the
Alphabet. Elench, (Greek) a subtle, or argumentary reproof. Elenge, (old word)
strange. Elephancie, or Elephantiacy, (Greek) a kind of disease, called a
leprosy. Elevation, (lat.) an exalting, or lifting up. Eleyson, see Kyre
Eleyson. Elf, a fairy, it seems to be corrupted from the Greek word Ephialtes.
Elguze, the left shoulder of Orion. Elibation, see Delibation. Elicitation,
(lat.) a drawing out, an enticing. Eligible, (lat.) apt to be elected, or
chosen. Elimation, (lat.) a filing off. Elimination, (lat.) a throwing over the
threshold, a casting out of doors. Eliquament, (lat.) a fat juice which is
squeezed out of any kind of flesh. Elizabeth, (Hebr.) quiet rest of the Lord,
a proper name of women. Elision, (lat.) a hitting against. Elixation, (lat.) a
seething. Elixir, in (Arab.) signifies strength, it is commonly taken for the
quintessence of any thing, the Philosophers stone. Elizabeth, the proper name
of a woman, from the Hebrew words Eli, and Shavang* i. e. the Oath of God. Elk,
a kind of strong swift beast, derived from the Greek word Alce, i. e.
strength. Ellis, a proper name, corruptly for Elias, Hebr. Lord God. Elmet, a
certain Territory, or little Region about Leeds in Yorkshire, anciently so
called, which Eadwin the son of Ealla King of Northumberland Conquered from
Cereticus the British King, in the year 620. Elocution, (lat.) proper speech,
handsome utterance. Elogie, (lat.) a Testimony given in commendation of any
one. Eloinment, (French) or Elongation, (lat.) a removing a great way off.
Elopement in Law, is, when a married woman leaves her husband, and dwells with
an Adulterer. Eloquence, (lat.) neatness, power and perswasivenesse in speech.
Elucidation, (lat.) a making bright, clear, or plain. Elvish, (old word)
froward. Elutheria, (Greek) certain feasts celebrated by the ancient Heathens.
Elysian fields, certain pleasant places, into which the Heathens held that the
Souls of men passed after death.
E M
Emaceration, (lat.) a making lean. Emaciating, the same. Emaculation, (lat.) a
taking away of spots. Emanation, (lat.) a flowing from. Emancipation, (lat.)
has the same reference to Children, as Manumission to servants, according to
the Civil Law, namely a legal, setting them free from the power of their
fathers, before the Magistrate. Emanuel, (Hebr.) God with us. Emanuensis,
(lat.) he that writes, or does business for another man, a Secretary.
Emargination, (lat.) a term in Surgery, signifying a clensing wounds, or
soars of the scruf that lies about the brims. Emasculation, (lat.) a taking
away the force of manhood. Embargo, (Span.) a stop, or arrest upon ships.
Emberweek, in Latin Cineralia, the week before Lent, wherein by the ancient
institution of the Church people were to fast, and the Bishop used to sprinkle
ashes upon their heads; saying, Remember, O man, that thou art ashes, and to
ashes shall thou return. Imber, signifying in the Saxon tongue ashes, whence
our word embers comes, some say ember week, is derived from the Greek word
Hemerai, i. days. Embellish, (French) to deck, or beautify. Embezel, to
steal, from the Italian word Invaligiare, i. to put in a sack. Emblem, (Greek)
a curious inlaying in wood, or other material, also an expressing a moral
sentence by way of device, or picture. Emblements, in Common Law, signify the
profits of Land, which has been sowed. Embolism, (Greek) a casting in, it is
commonly used for the casting in of the day, which is added to Leap year.
Embolned, (old word) swelled. Embossement, or Emboucheur, (French) a putting
into the mouth. Embost, a Term in hunting when a Deer is so hard chac't, that
she foams at the mouth, it comes from the Spanish word Dosembocar, and is
metaphorically taken for any kind of weariness. Embracer, in Common Law, is
he that when a matter is in trial, comes for reward to the bar, being no
Lawyer, and speaks in favor of one of the parties. Embrocation, (Ital.) a
bathing any part of the body in a liquor, falling from aloft. Embryon, (Greek)
the imperfect feature of a Child, unshap't in the mothers womb. Embushment,
see Embossement. Embuscade, an Ambushment, or secret lying in wait. Eme, (old
word) an Aunt. Emendation, (lat.) a correcting or mending. Emerald, (Span.) a
certain precious stone of a green color, called in Latin Smaragdus. Emergent,
(lat.) rising up above water, appearing from underneath any thing. An Emergent
occasion is taken for a business of great consequence. Emetical, (Greek) a term
in Medicine, belonging to those things which purge the body by vomit.
Emication, (lat.) a shining out. Emigration, (lat.) a passing out of any place.
Emildon, a Town in Northumberland, where J. Duns called Scotus was born, who
for his obscure way of writing was styled the subtle Doctor. Eminence, (lat.)
an excelling, an appearing above others. Emissary, (lat.) one sent abroad to
spy or give intelligence. Emission, a throwing or sending out. Emme, the
proper name of a woman: some will have it to be the same with Amie, others
contract it from Elgiva which signifies Helpgiver. Emmot, a little insect
called a Pismire. Emollient, (lat.) softning, molifying, or asswaging.
Emolument, (lat.) profit or benefit. Emotion, (lat.) a moving out, a stirring
up, also trouble of mind. Cleop. Empaire, (French) to diminish, to make worse,
from the praeposition in, and pire, worse. Empannel, from the French word
pan, or pannea^, i. a skin, signifies to enter the names of the Jury into a
parchment or roll, which are summond to appear for the public service.
Emparlance, (French) in the Common Law, is a petition in Court of a day of
respite. It is called in the Civil Law, petitio induciarum. Emphatical, (Greek)
uttered with a grace or emphasis, which is a significant or intent expression
of ones mind. Emphyteutick, (Greek) set out to be improved, let out to farm.
Empirick, (Greek) a Physician which cures by receipts taken upon trust.
Emplastration, (lat.) an applying a plaster, a dawbing, also a graffing.
Emporetical, (Greek) belonging to an Emporium, i. e. a Mart Town, or place for
Faires and Markets. Emprimed, a term in hunting, signifying a Hearts forsaking
the herd. Emption, (lat.) a buying. Empyraeal, (Greek) fiery, Empyraeal Heaven,
the highest Heaven, or Seat of the Blessed. Emucid, (lat.) moldy. Emulation,
(lat.) envy, or striving to exceed. Emulgent, (lat.) stroaking, Emulgent vein,
one of the branches of that hollow vein which goes to the reins, and by which
the reins do separate the urine from the blood, and attract it. Emulsion,
(lat.) a stroaking, also in physic, it is a kind of Medicine made into a
certain cream. Emunctories, (lat.) certain kernelly places in the body by which
the principal parts void their excrements or superfluities.
E N
Enach, in the practick of Scotland, is a satisfaction for any crime or fault.
Enaluron, a term in Heraldry, is when a bordure is charged with any kinds of
Birds. Enamell, to vary with little spots, from the French word Maille, a spot.
Enargy, (Greek) cleernesse or evidence. Encaustick, (Greek) varnished, or
wrought with fire. Enchace, (French) to set in Gold. Enchant, (French) to
conjure, or invoke the Devil with certain strange words or verses. Encheson, a
Law French word, signifying the cause why any thing is done. Encheiridion,
(lat.) a small Book that one may clasp in ones hand. Enclitick, (Greek)
enclining. An Enclitick conjunction in Grammar is that which casts back the
accent to the foregoing syllable. Encombrance, (French) a hindrance.
Encomiastick, (Greek) belonging to an Encomium or speech made in praise of
another. Encrochment, in Common Law, is a pressing too far upon ones neighbors
ground. Encyclopaedie, see Cyclopaedie. Endammage (French) to hurt, to
damnifie. Enditement, in Common Law, is a Bill of accusation for some offense
exhibited against any one, and by a Jury presented unto an Officer, or Court
that has power to punish, in the Civil Law it is called Accusation. Endive, a
kind of herb, so called. Endorse, a term in Heraldry, being the fourth part of
a Pallet, see Pallet. Endorsed, see Indorsed. Endowment, in Law, signifies the
bestowing or assuring of a dowr, also a sending maintenance to a Vicar when the
benefice is appropriated. Endromick, a long Irish Robe. Endymion, a certain
Shepherd whom the Poets feign to have fallen in love with the Moon, and that
being cast into a perpetual sleep upon the top of Latmus Hill, she every night
stoopt down to steal a kiss from him. Eneya, in the practick of Scotland, is
the principal part of the Heritage which goes to the eldest son, called in
French l'aisne. Energy, (Greek) force or efficacy. Enervation, (lat.) a
weakening. Enfeildchace, a place in Middlesex, where yet are to be seen the
ruins of an old house, the dwelling place heretofore of the Magnavills Earls
of Essex, from whom this Chase descended to the Bohuns Earls of Hereford and
Essex. Enfranchisment, (French) the incorporating of any man into a society or
body politic. Engastrimuch, (Greek) on that speaks out of the belly.
Engelbert, (Germ.) bright Angel, a proper name. Englecery, is taken
contradistinct to Francigena, which word used to comprehend every alien that
was murdered, upon which there was a mulct laid upon the Country where it was
done, unless Englecery was proved; that is to say, that it was an English man
who was slain. Engonasin, (Greek) the name of one of the heavenly
constellations, by which figur was represented Hercules kneeling. In Latin it
is called Ingeniculum or Nixus. Eng^scope, (Greek) a certain Instrument whereby
the proportion of the smallest things may be discerned. Enhauncement, (French)
a raising the price of any thing. Enigmatical, see Aenigmatical. Eniff
Alpherary, (Ar.) the yawning of Pegasus. Enoch's pillars, two pillars erected
by Enoch the son of Seth, the one of brick, the other of stone, whereupon were
engraven the whole Art of Astronomy. Enneade, (Greek) the number nine.
Enneagon, (Greek) a Geometrical figure of nine Angles. Enodation, (lat.) an
unknotting, a making plain. Enormity, from the Latin word Norma, a rule and the
praeposition E. It signifies irregularity, unmeasurablenesse. Enquest, in
Common law, is the trial of causes both civil and criminal by the Jury.
Ensconce, to entrench, from the Dutch word Schantse, a military Fortress.
Ensiferous (lat.) carrying a sword, sword-bearing. Ensign, (French) an
Escutcheon wherein are painted the Trophies of Honor or Armory of a Family;
also a military Banner. Enstall, from the Greek word Enstellein, i. to adorn,
signifies to put upon a Throne, to endow with a Robe of honor. Entaile, in
Common law, signifies fee tail, fee entailed, or abridged. Entangle, quasi
inter angulos ducere, to ensnare, to embroile. Enteched, (old word) defiled.
Entelechie, (Greek) an inward soul, or power to move and act. Entendment,
(French) signifies in Law the true meaning or sense of a word or sentence.
Enterfeire, (French) to hit one against another, to clash, or skirmish.
Enterplead, in Common Law, is the discurssing of a point accidentally happening
before the principal cause have an end. In the Civil Law it is called cognitio
praejudicialis. Enthusiasts, see Enthysiasts. Enthymem, (Greek) an imperfect
Syllogism wherein the Major or Minor proposition is to be understood.
Enthysiasts, (Greek) a certain Sect of people which pretended to the Spirit and
Revelations. Entire entrance, signifies in Common law a sole possession in one
man, whereas several tenancy is a joint or common possession. Entire
pertransient, is in Heraldry a line which crosses the middle of the shield,
and runs diametrically the longest way of her position. Entire perngents, are
lines that run the longest way of the sheilds position, without touching the
Center. Entity, (lat.) the having a being. Entoire, a term in Blazon, when a
bordure is charged with sorts of inanimate things, except leaves, fruits, and
flowers. Entoxication, a poisoning, from the Hebrew word Toch, i. poison.
Entrals, bowels, from the Greek word Entera. Entreague, (Span.) a making good
again. It is also taken for a Story, which after many entangled passages is
brought to a calm end. Entreat, (old word) to handle. Entry, in Common Law,
signifies a taking possession of Lands or Tenements. Entriked, (old word)
deceived. Entrusion, in Common Law, signifies a violent entrance into Lands or
Tenements void of possession by him that has no right unto them. Entrusion de
guard, a Writ that lies where the infant within age enters into his Lands and
holds his Lord out. Entweyssel, a fair house in Lancashire, which gave name
and habitation to an ancient so called. Enucleation, (lat.) a taking out the
kernel, also the expounding of any difficult matter. Envelope, (Span.) to
infold or inwrap. Environ, to compass about, from the French word Environ, i.
about. Enumeration, (lat.) a numbering or counting. Enunciation, (lat.) an
uttering or pronouncing; in Logic it is taken for a proposition which simply
affirms or denies.
E P
Epact, the number by which the year of the Sun, or solar year, exceeds the
year of the Moon, or lunar year, being the number 11. Epaminondas, a great
Captain of the Thebans, who much weakened the strength of the Lacedaemonians by
many great victories which he gained over them: he died of a wound which he
received at the battle of Mantinea. Epanalepsis, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
wherein the same word is often times repeated. Epatrides, (Greek) certain Noble
men among the Athenians. Eparch, (Greek) the chief Governor of a Province.
Epenthesis, (Greek) a certain figure, wherein a letter or syllable is put
between any word. Epha, an Hebrew measure containing 9 Gallons. Epheby, (Greek)
a young man between the age of 14. and 25. Ephemerides, (Greek) Journals or
Books wherein daily actions are registered, also Astronomical calculations.
Ephesus, the chief City of Ionia in Asia the Less, famous for the Magnificent
Temple of Diana, built by one Ephesus the son of Caister, who gave name to the
City. Ephialtes, (Greek) a kind of disease called the Nightmare, or Elf.
Ephippiated, (Greek) saddled. Ephod, a kind of breast plate or priestly garment,
worn by the ancient Priests of the Jews. Ephori, (Greek) certain Magistrates
among the ancient Lacedaemonians. Epicedie, (Greek) a certain mournful Song,
which used to be sung before the corpse at a Funeral. Epicoene, (lat.) one of
both Sexes, a word of the Epicoene Gender in Grammar is a word declined with
both Genders, Masculine, and Faeminine. Epicurean, of the Sect of Epicurus, a
famous Philosopheer, who held pleasure and absence of pain to be the chiefest
good. Epicycle, (Greek) a term used in Astronomy, signifying a lesser orb,
whose center is in the circumference of a greater, whereby the irregular motion
of some Planet is solved. Epick poesy, (Greek) is that which is written in
Heroic Verse, and is taken contradistinct to lyric. Epidemical, (Greek)
Epidemie or Epidemical disease, a disease universally catching. Epigastrick,
(Greek) belonging to the Epigastrium or outward part of the belly, which
reaches from the stomach to the navel. Epiglottis, (Greek) the weasel of the
throat, the little tongue which closes the larinx. Epigrams, (Greek) short
Poems upon several kinds of subjects. Epigraph, (Greek) an Inscription.
Epileptic, (Greek) troubled with a certain disease called the Epilepsie, which
is a convulsion of the whole body, whereby the sense and understanding is very
much depraved. Epilogue, (Greek) a conclusion, also a speech made at the end of
a Play. Epiphany, (Greek) an appearing bright or shining; also the Feast
celebrated on the 12 day from Christ's Nativity, which was the day whereon the
Star appeared in the East, which conducted the Wise men Episcopal, (Greek)
belonging to a Bishop or Overseer. Epistolary, belonging to a Letter or
Epistle, which comes from the Greek word Epistellein, to send. Epistyle,
(Greek) a term of Architecture, signifying the Chapter of a pillar or
Architrave. Epitaph, (Greek) that which is inscribed upon a Tomb or Sepulcher.
Epitasis, (Greek) the buisie part of a Comedy, before things are brought to
their full state and vigor. Epithalamy, (Greek) a Nuptial Song, or Poem which
uses to be recited at Weddings in praise of the Bride, and Bridegroom*
Epithemetical, (Greek) belonging to an Epithem or liquid Medicine outwardly
applied to the body by a piece of Cotton or Scarlet. Epithet, (Greek) a word
expressing the nature or quality of another word to which it is joined.
Epitoge, (Greek) a garment worn loose over another. Epitome, (Greek) a making
short or abridging. Epoch, (Greek) a certain retention of time in a Chronology,
taken from the beginning of some Empire. Epode, (Greek) a kind of lyric Poesy,
wherein the first Verse is longer than the second. Epulary, (lat.) belonging to
a Banquet.
E Q
Equator, see Equator. Equestrian, (lat.) belonging to Horseman, Cavalier, or
Knight, who is called in Latin Eques Auratus. Equilateral, (lat.) See
Aequilateral. Equinoctial line, see Equator. Equipage, (French) a furnishing,
or setting forth. Equiparates, or Aequiparates, (lat.) things compared or made
equal, a term in Logic. Equipollence, or Aequipollence, (lat.) a being of
equal force or value. Equipped, (French) set forth, or accoutred. Equivalent,
or Aequivalent, (lat.) being of equal worth or value. Equivocal, or Aequivocal,
(lat.) (a Logical term) having a double signification, or whose sense and
meaning may be taken either way. Equorean, (lat.) belonging to the Sea. Equus,
a Constellation in Heaven.
E R
Eradication, (lat.) a destroying or pulling up by the roots. Erased, (lat.)
scraped, or torn out; in Heraldry the member of any beast which seems torn from
the body, is called Erased. Erasmuss, (Greek) Amiable. A proper name.
Erastians, a sort of Heretics, founded by one Erastus a Physician. Erato, the
name of one of the 9 Muses. Erchembald, (Germ.) a bold or speedy learner. A
proper name answerable to the Greek Dasypodius. Erebus, an infernal Deity, whom
the Poets feign to be the father of night: It is metaphorically taken for Hell.
Erection, (lat.) a raising or making to stand up-right. Eremitical, (Greek)
belonging to a desert, or leading a Hermites life. Ereption, (lat.) a
snatching, or taking away by violence. Erichthonius, a King of the Athenians,
and the son of Vulcan, who desirous to lie with Minerva, and she resisting him,
he spilt his seed upon the earth in the contest, out of which sprung
Erichthonius with Dragons feet, which deformity to hide he invented the use of
the Chariot. Eridanus, a River in Italy, otherwise called Padus, vulgarly Po,
made a Constellation. Erigone, the daughter of Icarius, who hanging her self
for grief of her fathers death, was placed among the heavenly signs, and called
Virgo. Erimanthian, belonging to Erimanthus, a Mountain in Arcadia. Eriphile,
the wife of Amphiaraus, and sister of Adrastus, who having received a Bracelet
of Polynices, betrayed her husband to the Theban wars, where he was destroyed.
Eristical, full of strife, from the Greek word Eris contention. Ermine, a
little beast, whose fur is very costly, Ermines is a word used in Heraldry,
signifying white powdered with black. Ermine-street, see Ikenild. Erminois, a
Term in Blazon, or Armory, signifying a fur wherein black and yellow are mixed.
Ernes, (old word) promises. Ernest (Germ.) severe, it seems contracted from
Ariovistus mentioned by Caesar. Erogation, (lat.) a liberal bestowing. Eros,
the servant of Mark Antony, who killed himself, because he would not see his
master fall. Erosion, (lat.) a gnawing, or eating away. Erostratus, one, who to
make himself famous, set fire on the Temple of Diana. Errant, a Justice which
rides the Circuit, from the Latin word Errare, or the old word Ern, i. e. a
journey. Errata, (lat.) faults escaped in printing. Er^hines, certain
Medecines, which purge away phlegm sticking about the membranes of the brain,
through the nose. Erroneous, (lat.) subject to errors. Erubesc^ncy, (lat.) a
being ashamed, or blushing. Eructation, (lat.) a belching forth. Erudition,
(lat.) an instructing, or bringing up in learning. Eruncation, (lat.) a taking
away of weeds. Eruption, (lat.) a breaking forth with violence. Erwhile, a
while ago, lately. Eryngus, a kind of Thistle, so called. Erysipely, (Greek) a
disease called St. Anthonies fire, causing blisters, being bred of Choleric
blood. Erythraean Sea, the Arabian Gulf, not the Red Sea as some have supposed.
Eryx, the son of Buras and Venus, he was a man of great strength, and was
killed by Hercules, at a fight called whirlebat.
E S
Esaias, the name of a Prophet among the Jews, the word signifying in Hebrew,
reward of the Lord. Escal, (lat.) fit for food. Escambio, a License granted for
the making of a Bill of exchange to a man over-sea. Escheat, in Common Law,
signifies lands that fall to a Lord within his Manor, by forfiture, or the
death of his Tenant without Heirs, it comes from the French word Escheoir, to
fall. Escotcheon, (French) a shield, or Coat of Arms, from Escu, a Buckler.
Escuage, (French) a Tenure of Land, whereby a Tenant is bound to follow his
Lord into the Wars at his own charges. Esculent, see Escal. Escurial, a famous
Monastery built by Philip the second of Spain, and dedicated to the Jerome
Friars, it is situate near to a Village of the same name not far from Madrid.
Esnecy, the right of choosing first, in a divided inheritance belonging to the
eldest Copartner. Eson, or Aeson, the father of Jason, and the brother of
Pelias King of Thessaly, he had his youth restored unto him by Medea, at the
request of Jason. Esples, in Latin Expleta, the full profit, that land yields.
Esquier, in French Escuier, in Latin Scutifer, was anciently he that bore the
Arms of a Knight. Espringold, a certain warlike Engine, for the casting up of
great stones. Esquiline, one of the seven Hills, upon which Rome was built.
Essay, (French) a trial, also a preamble. The Essay of a Deer, in hunting is
the breast, or brisket of a Deer, in French la hampe. Essedary, (lat.) one that
fights in an Essed, or warlike Chariot. Essenes, certain Philosophers among the
ancient Jews, who separated themselves from the rest of the people, and led a
kind of Monastical life. Essential, (lat.) having a perfect essence, or being.
Essential debilities, are when the Planets are in their detriment fall, or
peregrines. See the Table in Lillies introduction, f. 104. Essoine, in
Common Law, is an excuse alleged for one that is summoned to appear at any
Court, it is called by the Civilians Excusatio. Clerk of the Essoins, an
Officer of the Common Pleas, who keeps the Essoins Rolls, delivers them to
every Officer, and receives them again when they are written. Establishment of
Dowr, is the assurance of Dowr, made to the wife, by the husband, or his
friends, about the time of marriage. Estandard, the standing measure of the
King, or Commonwealth, to the scantling whereof all measures throughout the
Land are to be framed, also an Ensign in War. Estimation, or Aestimation,
(lat.) valueing, or esteeming. Estopel, in Common Law, is an impediment of an
action, growing from a man's own fact, that might have had his action tried, it
comes from the French word Estouper, to stop. Estovers, in Common Law,
signifies that sustenance, which a man accused of felony is to have out of his
Lands, or Goods, during his imprisonment, it comes from the French word
Estover, to foster. Estreat, in French Estraict, in Latin Extractum, the Copy
of an Original writing. Estreie, in Latin Extrahura, signifies in Common Law,
a beast not wild, found within any Lordship, and not owned by any man.
E^trepement, from the Spanish word Estropear, to set upon the wrack, signifies
in Common Law, spoil made by the Tenant for term of life, upon any Lands, or
Woods, to the prejudice of him in Reversion, also a drawing out the heart of
the Land, by plowing it continually. Estuate, see to Aestuate. Esuriti^n,
(lat.) a being a hungry.
E T
Etching, is a kind of graving with Aqua fortis, which eats into the Copper.
Eternize, (French) to make eternal. Etesian winds, (Latin Etesiae) certain
mild Easterly winds. Etheling, see Adeling. Ethelbert, (Sax.) nobly bright, or
renowned, hence the Heirs apparent of the Crown were surnamed Etheling, i. e.
Nobly born. Ethelstane, (Sax.) noble Jewel. Ethelward, (Sax.) noble keeper.
Ethelwold, (Sax.) noble Governor. Ethelwolph, (Sax.) noble helper, proper
names. Etherial, see Aetherial. Ethics, Books treating of Moral Philosophy,
from the Greek word Ethos, manners, or morality. Ethiopia, see Aethiopia.
Ethnic, (Greek) belonging to the Heathens, or Gentiles. Ethologie, (Gr.) a
discourse of manners. Etocetum, the name of a Town, situate in the Military
Highway, commonly called Watling-street, mentioned by the Emperor Antoninus,
as the second Roman Station from Manvessedum, or Mancester, in Warwickshire.
Etymological, (Greek) belonging to Etymology, which is a true derivation of
words from their first Original.
E V
Evacuation, (lat.) an emptying. Evade, (lat.) to escape. Evagation, (lat.) a
wandering abroad. Evagination, (lat.) a drawing out of a sheath. Evan, the same,
as Ivon, see John. Evangelisme, (Greek) a bringing glad tidings, a preaching
the Gospel. Evanid, (lat.) soon decaying. Evaporation, (lat.) a sending
outvapours. Evasion, (lat.) a making an escape. Eucharist, (Greek) a giving
thanks, also the Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ. Eucrasie, (Greek)
a good temperature of the body. Eve, the wife of Adam, from the Hebrew word
Chavah, to live. Eve, and Treve, in the practick of Scotland, are such
servants, whose Predecessors have been servants to any man, and his
predecessors. Eveck, a kind of beast like a wild Goat. Evection, (lat.) a
lifting up, or carrying forth. Event, (lat.) issue, or success. Eventeration,
(lat.) a taking out the belly of any thing. Eventilation, (lat.) a winnowing,
or sifting, by Metaphor a strict examining of a business. Everard, (Germ. well
reported) a proper name answering to the Greek Eudoxus, others write it
Eberard, i. e. excellent towardness. Eversion, (lat.) an utter overthrowing.
Evestigation, (lat.) an earnest seeking after. Eugeny, (Greek) Gentility,
Nobleness of blood. Eviction, (lat.) a vanquishing, a convincement by
argument, or law. Evidence, (lat.) testimony, in Common Law, it is used for any
proof, either of men, or instrument. Eviration, (lat.) an unmanning, a
yielding. Evisceration, (lat.) a taking out the bowels, or guts. Evitation,
(lat.) a shunning. Eulogie, (Greek) a praising, or speaking well. Eunuch,
(Greek) a man that is utterly disabled for the use of women, and herein differs
from Castratus, in that a Castrate is only gelded, but an Eunuch totally
deprived of his Genitals. Eunomians, a sort of Heretics, who held that faith
was only acceptable without works. Evocation, (lat.) a calling out. Eupatorie,
a kind of Herb, called Liverwort. Euphemisme, (Greek) a setting forth any ones
good fame. Euphonie, (Greek) a graceful sound, a smooth running of words.
Euphorbium, a certain Gum distilling from a plant, called Gum-thistle, of which
Iuba, King of Lybia is said to have been the first inventour. Euphrosyna, the
name of one of the three Graces, the other two being Aglaia and Thalia.
Euridice, the wife of Orpheus, who flying from Aristheus his Embraces, was
stung by a Serpent, and died, and being by the Harmony of Orpheus delivered
from the Deep, she was snatched back again, because he looked back upon her
before she was arrived upon earth. Euripe, a narrow passage between Attica, and
Euboea, now called Golpho de Negroponte, which Ebbes and flows seven times a
day. It is Metaphorically taken for any narrow passage. Europe, one of the four
parts of the world separated from Asia, by the River Tanais, it was so called
from Europa, the daughter of Agenor, King of Phoenicia, whom Jupiter carried
away in the shape of a Bull. Eurythmy, (Greek) a Term in Architecture, being
the exact proportion of the Rooms in a building. Eutaxie, (Greek) a handsome
ordering, or disposing of things. Eusebius, (Greek) pious, or godly, a proper
name. Eustace, a proper name, from the Greek Eustathius, or Eustachius, i. e.
standing firm. Euterpe, the name of the nine Muses. Euthymie, (Greek)
quietnesnesse, and tranquillity of mind. Eutrapely, (Greek) courtesy,
urbanity. Eutropius, (Greek) well manner'd, a proper name. Eutychians, a Sect
of Heretics, instituted by Eutiches in the year 443. their chief Tenet was,
that there was but one nature in Christ. Evulsion, (lat.) a violent pulling up.
E X
Exacination, (lat.) a taking out the stone, or kernel out of any fruit.
Exaggeration, (lat.) an increasing, or heaping up together, also the same as
aggravation. Exagitation, (lat.) a stirring up. Exalted, being joined as an
Epithete to another word, is as much as sublime, great, excellent, as exalted
virtue. Cassandra. Exanguious, (lat.) bloudlesse. Exanimation, (lat.) a
depriving of life, also a dismaying. Exanthems, (Greek) certain Wheals in a
man's body, called the small Pox, or Measles. Exantlation, (lat.) an overcoming
with much labor and difficulty. Exaration, (lat.) a plowing up, also a
writing, or engraving. Exarch, (Greek) a great Officer, heretofore under the
Constantinople Emperors, who governed the affairs of Italy, and was called
the Exarch of Ravenna, where his chief residence was. Exarticulation, (lat.) a
putting out of joint. Exasperation, (lat.) a making sharp, a provoking to
anger. Exaturation, (lat.) a satiating. Exauctoration, (lat.) a depriving one
of any office, or benefit. Excandesceny, (lat.) a being inflamed with anger, or
rage. Excavation, (lat.) a making hollow. Excelsity, (lat.) highness,
loftiness. Excentrik, see Eccentrick. Excerption, (lat.) a culling, or
choosing out. Excess, (lat.) an exceeding or superfluity. Excester, (i. the
City standing upon the River Ex,) the chief City of Devonshire, it is called in
Latin Exonia by Antonine Isca Danmoniorum; it was fortified by King Athelstane
who drove the Britains quite out of it; also it is famous for the birth of
Joseph Iscanus the most excellent Poet of his age. Exchequer, the Court to
which are brought all the Revenues belonging to the Crown. Excitation, (lat.) a
stirring up. Exclusion, (lat.) a barring or shutting out. Excogitation, (lat.)
an inventing. Excommunication, (lat.) is a punishment inflicted by the Church
upon offenders, being a secluding them from the Sacrament, and other spiritual
privileges. Excoriation, (lat.) a fleaing or pulling off the skin. Excreation,
(lat.) a spiting out. Excrementitious, (lat.) belonging or full of excrements,
i. dregs or ordure. Excrescence, (lat.) an unusual growing out, or swelling.
Excretion, (lat.) a purging of excrementitious humors, a sifting or casting
out. Excruciation, (lat.) a tormenting, or putting to pain. Excuriation, (lat.)
a throwing out of the Court. Excursion, (lat.) a roving or running out.
Excusation, (lat.) an excusing or freeing from blame. Excussion, (lat.) a
shaking off. Execration, (lat.) a cursing or detesting. Execution, (lat.) in
Common Law, signifies the last performance of an Act, as of a fine, or of a
judgment. Executione facienda, a Writ commanding the execution of a judgment.
Executor, (lat.) one that performs any action. In Law it is taken for him
that is left by will to dispose of the deceased parties estate.
Exemplification, (lat.) a drawing out of an example, transcript, or draught,
out of an Original Record. Exemption, (lat.) a taking out or freeing.
Exenteration, (lat.) a taking out the bowels or guts. Exequies, (lat.) Funeral
Rites, or Solemnities. Exercitation, (lat.) often exercising; also a kind of
critical commenting upon Authors. Exflorous, (lat.) that has flowers growing
out of it. Exhalation, (lat.) a hot and dry fume drawn up by the heat of the
Sun, by which fiery Meteors are ingendered: Also a blowing or breathing out.
Exhausted, (lat.) drawn quite out, wasted. Exhibition, (lat.) a showing or
presenting, also an allowment to any one toward their maintenance.
Exhilaration, (lat.) a making merry or joyful. Exiccation, (lat.) a drying up.
Exigendary, or Exigenter, an Officer of the Court of Common Pleas. Exigent,
(lat.) a Writ that lies where the defendant in an action personal cannot be
found, nor any thing within the County to be distreined: It is directed to the
Sheriff to call five County-dayes under pain of outlawry. It is metaphorically
taken for a straightness or necessity. Exiguity, (lat.) slenderness or
smalnesse. Exilition, (lat.) a leaping out. Exility, (lat.) the same as
Exiguity. Eximious, (lat.) excellent, famous. Exinanition, (lat.) a making void
or empty. Existence, (lat.) a being. Existimation, (lat.) a thinking or
judging. Exit, is commonly taken for the going out of any person in a Play,
from the Latin Exire, to go out. Exitial, (lat.) bringing danger, or
destruction. Exodos, (Greek) a going out, the Title of the second Book in the
old Testament. Exolete, (lat.) stale, grown out of use. Exoneration, (lat.) an
unloading. Exoptation, (lat.) an earnest wishing. Exorable, (lat.) that may be
entreated. Exorbitancy, (lat.) a thing done out of measure, square or rule.
Exorcism, (Greek) a restraining the power of the Devil by prays or
conjuration. Exordium, (lat.) a beginning or preamble to an Oration or
Discourse. Exornation, (lat.) a dressing, or adorning. Exosseous, (lat.) having
no bones. Exoster, (lat.) a Petard, or Engine to blow open a gate. Exotic,
(Greek) strange or foreign. Expansion, (lat.) an opening or spreading abroad.
Ex part latis, a Writ that lies for a Bailiff, who having auditors assigned
to hear his accounts, cannot obtain reasonable allowance. Expatiation, (lat.) a
walking at large, or at full liberty. Expectant fee, in Common Law, signifies
land given to a man and to the heirs of his hody, it being the same with
fee-taile, and contrary to fee-simple. Expectation, (lat.) a tarrying or
looking for, Expeditate, (lat.) signifies in the Forest Law, to cut out the
balls of the dogs feet, for the preservation of the Kings Game. Expedient,
(lat.) fit or convenient. Expedition, (lat.) quick dispatch, also a setting
forth upon a journey, war, or any other business. Expel, (lat.) to drive out.
Expense, (lat.) cost or charges. Experience, or Experiment, (lat.) proof,
trial, or practice. Expiation, (lat.) a pacifying God by prayer for any offense
committed, or a making amends for any fault, by the doing of some good deed
Expiration, (lat.) a giving up the ghost. Explanation, (lat.) a making plain or
manifest. Explement, or Expletion, (lat.) a filling up of any place or room.
Explication, (lat.) an unfolding or explaining. Explicit, (lat.) unfolded.
Exploit, (French) a valiant act. Exploration, (lat.) a spying, a diligent
searching out. Explosion, (lat.) an exploding, a sleighting, or hissing off
from the Stage. Expolition, (lat.) a making bright, or polishing. Exposition,
(lat.) an expounding or interpreting. Expostulation, (lat.) a reasoning the
case, or complaining about an injury received. Expression, (lat.) an uttering
or pronouncing, it is ofttimes also taken for the thing expressed.
Exprobration, (lat.) an upbraiding, or calling a thing to mind to any ones
reproach. Expugnation, (lat.) a winning by force. Expuition, (lat.) a spitting
out. Expulsion, (lat.) a driving out by force. Expumication, (lat.) a making
sleek, or smooth, with a pumice-stone. Expunge, (lat.) to blot out, to abolish.
Exquisite, (lat.) performed to the height, exact. Extant, (lat.) having a
being, set forth to view, appearing above others. Extemporary, (lat.) done ex
tempore, i. e. immediately, forthwith. Extension, (lat.) a stretching out, or
enlarging. Extent, in Common Law, is a Commission to the Sheriff, to seize and
value the Lands and Tenements of one who being bound by the Statute, has
forfeited his bond. Extenuation, (lat.) a making small, also an undervalueing.
Extercoration, (lat.) a cleansing, or carrying forth of dung. Etermination,
(lat.) a throwing out or banishing. External, or Exterior, (lat.) outward.
Extersion, (lat.) a wiping out. Extimulation, (lat.) a moving or exciting.
Extinct, (lat.) put out, quenched. Exstinguishment, in Common Law is a part of
consolidation, as when a man has a yearly rent out of any lands, and
afterward purchases the whole lands, both the rent and the property are
consolidated into one possession, and therefore the rent is said to be
extinguished. Extirpation, (lat.) an utter destroying or rooting out.
Extorsion, (lat.) an exacting, or injurious taking away, especially of money,
as it is usually taken in Common Law. Extraction, (lat.) a drawing out, also
the same as Estreat, also a descending from such or such a Family.
Extrajudical, that which is done out of Court. Extramundane, (lat.) being
without the World, as extramundane spaces, between one world and another. Dr.
Charlton. Extraneous, quasi exterraneous, (lat.) one of a strange land.
Extravagant, (lat.) idle, of a wandering mind. Clerk of the Extreats, an Officer
belonging to the Exchequer, who receives the extreates out of the
Remembrancers Office, and writes them out to be levied for the King. See
Estreats. Extrication, (lat.) see Districation. Extrinsecal, (lat.) outward.
Extrusion, (lat.) a thrusting out. Extuberation, (lat.) a swelling or bunching
up. Extumescence, (lat.) the same. Ex^berancy, (lat.) an overflowing or
abounding. Exuccous, (lat.) juicelesse. Exudation, (lat.) a sweating out.
Exulati^n, (lat.) a being exild or banished. Exulceration, (lat.) a blistring,
or turning to an Ulcer. Exultation, (lat.) a triumphing for joy. Exundation,
(lat.) an overflowing. Euperation, (lat.) an excelling or surpassing. Exustion,
(lat.) a burning.
E Y
Eyebite, to fascinate or bewitch by a certain evil influence from the eye.
Eyebright, or Euphrasia, an herb so called, very good for the eyes. Air, the
Court of Justices Itinerant, from the French word Err, a journey; also Air of
the Forest, the judicature which used anciently to be held every three years,
by the Justices of the Forest journeying up and down to that purpose. Eyth, or
Eth, (old word) easy.
E Z
Ezechias, a proper name, signifying in Hebrew, strength of the Lord. Ezechiel,
the name of a Prophet among the Jews; the word signifies in Hebrew, seeing the
Lord.
F A
FAbian, a proper name, from Fabius. The chief of this name was Fabianus Bishop
of Rome, martyred under the Emperor Decius. Fabius, a famous Captain of the
Romans, who for the great overthrow he gave to Hannibals Army, was surnamed
Maximus. Fabrication, (lat.) a making of a Fabric or Building. Fabulous,
(lat.) full of Fables, or invented Tales. Facade, (French) the outside, or
forefront of a house. Faces, Decury, or Deconate, from the Greek word Deka,
signifying ten, because in every Sign there are three Faces, every Face
consisting of ten degrees. They are called Faces for that they are equivalent
to Signs, Forms, and shapes, by reason they show the nature and inclination of
the Planets in them as in their own houses. Facetious, (lat.) wittily merry, or
pleasant. Facility, (lat.) easiness. Facinorous, (lat.) belonging to high or
wicked designs. Factitious, (lat.) made like another, counterfeited. Factor,
(lat.) an Agent for a Merchant beyond Sea. Faculty, (lat.) the power or ability
of performing any action, as the Animal, Vital, and Natural Faculties in the
body of man. In Common Law it signifies a privilege granted to a man by
indulgence or dispensation, to do that which by the Law he cannot do. It is
also used sometimes for a Mystery or Profession. Facundity, (lat.) Eloquence.
Faint pleader, a false manner of pleading, to the deceit of a third party. Fair
pleading, a Writ upon the Statute of Malborow, whereby it is provided that no
fines shall be taken of any man for not pleading fairly, or to the purpose.
Fairie, a Goblin or Phantasm, from the Dutch word Varelick, i fearful Faith,
the Christian name of diverse women, the signification commonly known. Faitours,
idle-livers, from the French word Faitardise, a sleepy disease. Fall, is an
essential debility, and it happens when a Planet is opposite to his exaltation,
whereby he is debilitated and very weak. Falcation, (lat) a mowing. Falchon, a
short sword bending like a hook, from the Latin word Falx. Falcidian Law, a Law
made by the Romans in the time of the Consul Falcidius, which treated of the
right each Roman Citizen had in the disposal of his goods. Falcon, a great gun,
next to the Minion. Falernian wine, wine growing in Falernus, a field of
Campania in Italy. Fall off, in Navigation is when a ship does not keep so near
the wind as we appoint. Fallacious, (lat.) full of deceit or craft. Falouque,
(French) a boat or barge, by some called a brigantine. Falsification, (lat.) a
speaking falsities, or untruths. Famagosta, the chief City of the Isle of
Cyprus. Famigeration, (lat.) a divulging, or reporting abroad. Familiar, (lat.)
acquainted, also substantively, for a Spirit, or Devil. Family of love, a Sect
or Heresy broached by Henry Nicholas. Their chief Tenet is, That Christ is
already come in glory to judge. Fanatic, (lat.) frantic, inspired, having
vain apparitions. Fane, from the Greek word Phaino, a a weathercock; it is
sometimes taken for a Temple. Fannel, (French) a kind of ornament, anciently
worn by Priests. Fanus, a certain Deity, representing the year, anciently
worshipped by the Heathens. Farandman, in the practick of Scotland a Pilgrim or
Stranger. Farced, (lat.) stuffed. Fardingdeal, or Farundel of land, the fourth
part of an acre. Farendon, a famous Market Town with a strong Castle in
Barkshire, remarkable besides for the Fort raised by Robert Earl of Gloucester,
against K. Stephen, who notwithstanding won it by desperate assaults. Farlie
things, yearly things. Farraginous, (lat.) belonging to a farrago, or mixture
of several grains together, which they call a maslin. Farreation, (lat.) a
ceremony anciently performed at Marriages. Farrow, to bring forth, from the
Latin word parere, it is spoken of sows. Farsang, otherwise called Parasang, a
Persian word, signifying a league, which is 3 English miles. Fascicular, (lat.)
made into a fascicle which is a bundle or fardel. Fascination, (lat.) an
eyebiting, or bewitching by the eye, or by the force of imagination. Fasciate,
(lat.) to bind, from fascia a swath. Fastidious, (lat.) breeding a loathing.
Fastigation, (lat.) a making or growing sharp at the top like a pyramid.
Fastuosity, (lat.) insufferable pride. Fatality, (lat.) unavoidable necessity,
or that which is appointed by Fate, which is the order of affairs from all
eternity. Fatidical, (lat.) foretelling that which is to come. Fatigation,
(lat.) wearisomenesse. Fatigue, (French) the same. Fatuity, (lat.)
sottishness, stupidity. Faunus, the son of Saturn, civilized men's manners,
built Temples, and made Laws, and was one of the ancientest Kings of Italy.
Favonian, belonging to Favonius or the West wind. Faust, (lat.) lucky. Fautor,
(lat.) a cherisher or favourer.
F E
Fealty, from the French word feaulte, i. fidelity, an oath taken at the
admittance of every Tenant, to be true to the Lord of whom he holds his land.
Feasible, (French) easy to be done. Febricitation, (lat.) a falling sick of an
Ague or Fever. February, so called of Numa Pompilius, a februis expiatoriis,
or sacrifices for purging of souls; for the second day of this month a Feast
was kept, and sacrifice was offered to Pluto for the souls of their Ancestors.
Februation, (lat.) a praying for the souls of any. Fecial, or Fae^ial, (lat.) a
Herald or Ambassador of war, among the ancient Romans there were 20 in number,
the principal of whom, was called pater patratus. Feculent, or Faeculent,
(lat.) full of dregs. Fee, in Latin feud^m, is taken in Common Law for all
those lands which are held by perpetual right. Fee ferm, in Common Law, is land
held of another, to himself and his heirs for ever for a certain yearly rent.
Fee simple, or absolute, is land whereof we are seized with these general
words; To us, and our heirs for ever. Fee tail, or condi^ional, has this
limitation; To us, and the heirs of our body. Field, is the whole surface of a
shield overspread with some metal, color or fur, and comprehends in it the
charge. A term in Heraldry. Felicity, (lat.) happiness. Fellon, a blister or
wheal on the body, from the Latin word, fell, choler. Felo de se, a
self-murderer. Felony, in Common Law, is any offense which is next to petty
treason, as murder, theft, rapes, burning of houses, etc. Fencemonth, the month
wherein Deer begin to fawn, which is about midsummer, wherein it is unlawful to
hunt in the Forest. Fends, things hung over a ships side to keep another ship
from rubbing against it. Fennel, a kind of herb so called. Fenugreec, an herb
which has been found growing in great abundance, in several parts of Greece.
Feodary, or Feudatary, an officer belonging to the Court of Wards and Liveries,
who is to be present with the Escheatour at the finding of any office, and also
to survay and value the land of the Ward. Feofment, in Common Law, is the gift
or grant of any Honors, Castles, Manors, etc. unto another in fee simple, by
delivery of seisin, either by word or writing. Foeminine, (lat.) belonging to
the Femal Sex. Foeneration, (lat.) a putting out money to use. Feracity, (lat.)
fruitfulness. Feral, (lat.) dangerous or deadly. Feral Signs, are Leo, and the
last part of Scorpio. Fercost, (Ital.) a kind of ship or boat. Fere, (old word)
a companion. Ferdfare, an acquitment of a man to go into the wars. Ferdinando,
a proper name of men, called by the Spaniards Hernando, by the Italians
Ferando, by the French Ferrant. Some think it derived from the Saxon words Fred
rand, i. pure peace. Others think that the Spaniards have for the sweeter sound
drawn it from Bertrand, i. fair and pure. Ferdwit, an acquitment of a murderer
in the army. Feretrius, Jupiter so called a ferendis spoliis, i. from spoils
taken in war. Feriation, (lat.) a keeping holiday, a ceasing from work,
idleness. Ferine, (lat.) brutish, beastly, wild. Ferit, (Ital.) a blow.
Ferity, (lat.) salvagnesse, brutishness. Ferm, or Farm, a house, or land, or
both, taken by Indenture of Lease, or Lease Paroll. Fermanagh, a County of
Ireland in the Province of Vlster, the people whereof were anciently called
Erdini. Fermentation, (lat.) a swelling with ferment or leaven, also a working;
it is a word much used in Chemistry. Ferocity, (lat.) fierceness. Feronia, an
ancient heathen Goddess, a Goddess of the Woods. Ferret, from Forare, to
pierce, or Furari, to steal; a little beast called in Latin Viverra. Ferry, a
passage over the water, from the Greek word Phero, to carry. Ferruginous,
(lat.) like rust of iron, of an iron color. Ferrumination, (lat.) a soldering
together of metals, a word used in Chemistry. Fertility, (lat.) fruitfulness.
Fervent, or Fervid, (lat.) hot, by metaphor, eager, or vehement. Ferula, an
herb called in English Fennel Giant. Ferular, (lat.) a kind of chastising
instrument, called also a Palmer. Fesspoint, a term in Heraldry, being a line
going thorough the midst of the Escutcheon, called the girdle of honor, it
comes from the Latin word fascia. Festination, (lat.) a hastening, or making
speed. Festivity, (lat.) mirth, rejoicing, solemnity. Festucous, (lat.) having
a tender sprig or branch. Foetid, (lat.) smelling ill or stinking. Fetise, (old
word) handsome. Fetters, is ofttimes used figuratively in Poems and Romances,
for Captivity or thraldom, especially in an amorous sense. Cleopat. Fend, Feed,
or Feid, a combination of one Family against another, being inflamed with
hatred or revenge. Feverfow, an herb called Mothwort, in Latin Febrifuga,
because it is good against a fever. Feversham, a flourishing Town in Kent,
where King Althestane assembled the Nobles and learned men of his Kingdom to
make Laws, and where King Stephen founded an Abbey for the Monks of Clugny, in
which he himself, Maude his wife, and Eustach his son, were entombed. Fewmetts,
a term in Hunting, the dung of a Deer.
F I
Fiants, the dung of a Badger, or Fox, and all Vermin. Fibrous, (lat.) full of
Fibers, which are the small strings, or threads which hang about the roots of
any plant, also little strings about the Veins, and Muscles of a body.
Fibulation, (lat.) a buttoning, or joining together. Fictile, (lat.) made of
earth. Fiction, (lat.) a feigning, or inventing. Fictitious, (lat.) feined,
invented. Fidicula, the falling vulture. Fidelity, (lat.) faithfulness.
Fidejussor, (lat.) a pledge, or surety. Fidius, an ancient heathen God, said to
be the son of Jupiter, he is called the God of faithfulness. Fiduciary, (lat.)
trusty, also a Feoffee in trust. Fierabras, (French) fierce at arms. Fieri
facias, a judicial Writ that lies for him that has recovered in an action of
debt, or damages. Fife, a County of Scotland, shooting far into the East,
between two arms of the Sea, Forth and Tau. Fifteenth, a certain tribute, which
used to be levied by Parliament, and imposed upon every City, or Borough,
through the Realm. Figment, (lat.) a fiction, or feigned tale. Figurative,
(lat.) spoken by a figure. Filaceous, (lat.) made of thread, or flax, also full
of filaments, which are the small threads, or strings, about the Roots of
Plants. Filanders, a sort of little Worms, which breed in Hawks, also Nets for
wild beasts. Filazers, (French) certain Officers belonging to the
Common Pleas, who make out all Original Processes, real, personal and mixed.
Filctale, a kind of entertainment, made by Bailiffs for those of their
hundreds, for their gain, it is also called Sothale. File, in Latin Filacium, a
thread, or wire, whereon Writs, or other Exhibits in Courts are fastened, also
in Heraldry, it is one of the modern ways of differencing Coat-Armours.
Filial, (lat.) relating to a son. A Fillet* in Heraldrie, is made, or
constituted, by adding one line to the chief, underneath it, the content
whereof is the fourth part of the chief. Film, a membrain, or thin skin
enwrapping the brain, and several other parts of the body, and also the infant
in the womb, of which there are three sorts, Chorion, Amnios, and Allantois.
Filtration, (lat.) a straining through a course cloth. Fimashing, the ordure
of all sort of Deer. Final, (lat.) having an end, brought to an end. Financer,
a receiver, or teller in the Exchequer, from the French word Finance, wealth,
or treasure. Fine, a mulct, or penalty, also a formal conveyance of Land, by
acknowledging a perfect agreement before a Judge. Fine capiendo pro terris, a
Writ that lies for him, who being committed to prison, obtains favor for a
sum of money. Fine force, a French word, signifying absolute constraint.
Finite (Philos.) limited, bounded. Finours of gold, or silver, are those that
purify those metals by fire from the dross. Fire-boote, an allowance to
maintain competent fire for the use of the Tenant. Firedrake* a fiery meteor,
engendered of a hot exhalation inflamed between two Clouds. Firma, in the
practick of Scotland, is the duty, which the Tenant pays to his Landlord.
Firmament, (from the Latin Firmus, i. e. solid.) the starry Heaven, it is
turned about the Chrystalline Heaven, being both of an uniform motion, and
finish their course in 250000 years, which motion appears not, but by the
observation of sundry ages. For 430 years before Christ's time, the first star
in Aries was in the vernal intersection, which still keeps that name, though
now removed almost 29 degrees, so that in more then two thousand years the
fixed stars have not traveled from West to East, so much as one whole sign of
the Zodiac. Firmus, a Roman Emperor of that vast strength, that bearing
himself up from any place with his arms, and bearing an Anvil upon his breast,
he could endure the smiths beating upon it for a long time. First fruits, the
profits of every spiritual living for one year, in ancient time given to the
Pope, afterward to the Prince. Fiscal, (lat.) belonging to a fisque, i. e. a
Treasury, or Exchequer. Fishing, or Splicing, a Term used in Masts, Cables, or
in any Timber, cut like wedges at one end, and fastened together. Fissure,
(lat.) a cleft, or division. Fistulary, (lat.) belonging to a pipe, or to a
disease called Fistula, which is a kind of Ulcer eating into the body with a
long narrow passage. Fitched, (from the Lat. Figere) a Term in Blazon, as a
Cross Fitched, i. e. sharp at the end. Fitz, (Fr. Fills) a word commonly added
to the sirnames of several great families of this Nation, descended from the
Norman race as Fitz-Herbert, Fitz-Walter, i. e. the son of Herbert, or the son
of Walter, it being answerable to Ben in Hebr. Bar in Chaldee, and Ap in Welsh.
Fixation, (lat.) a fixing, also a Term in Chemistry, signifying a fixing of
bodies, so as to make them endure the fire. Fizgigg, a kind of dart, wherewith
Mariners strike fishes as they swim.
F L
Flabellation, (lat.) a fanning with a Flable, or fan. Flaccid, (lat.)
drooping, or flagging. Flagellantes, a sort of Heretics, which went up and
down scourging themselves, and begging Alms, they were so called from
Flagellam a scourge. Flagitation, (lat.) an earnest begging. Flagitious, (lat.
heinous, wicked. Flagrancie, (lat.) a lightsome burning, also a vehement
desire. Fluj^let, (French) a certain Musical instrument, being a kind of Pipe,
or Fluite, but somewhat less. Flamins, certain Roman Priests, instituted by
Pompilius Numa, so called from the Filamines, or Coifes, which they wore upon
their heads. Flammeous, (lat.) flaming, or flame colored. Flanch, a term in
Heraldry, being an Ordinary formed of an Arch-line, beginning from the corner
of the chief, and compassing with a swelling embossement toward the Nombril of
the Escotcheon. Flandria, the Country in Flanders in Gallia Belgica, being one
of those ten Provinces, remaining in the King of Spains Dominion. Flasque, a
term in Blazon, being an ordinary consisting of one Archline drawn somewhat
distant from the corner of the chief, and swelling by degrees toward the midst
of the Escutcheon. Flatulent, or Flatuous, (lat.) windy. Fledwit, a Saxon word,
signifying in Common Law, an Outlawed fugitive, coming to the peace, and
discharged from amerciament. Fleet, a prison in London, so called because it
stands upon the River Fleta, or Fleet. Flemeswit, or Fle^enwit, from the Saxon
Flezen, to fly away, signifies in Common Law, a liberty to challenge the
cattle or amerciament of ones man a fugitive. Flexanimous, (lat.) having a
flexible or easy mind. Flexibility, (lat.) easiness to bend. Flexion, (lat.)
a bending. Flint, the name of a Castle in Flintshire, begun by King Henry the
second, and finished by King Edward the first. Here King Richard the second
being circumvented, was delivered into the hands of Henry of Lancaster Duke of
Hereford, who shortly after claimed the Crown. Flo^^ify, (lat.) to esteem
lightly, or at a low rate. Floddon, the name of a Hill near Brampton in
Northumberland, memorable for the battle fought there between Thomas Howard
Earl of Surrey, and James the fourth King of Scotland, who was vanquished and
slain. Flora, a Goddess among the Romans, called the Goddess of Flowers. Some
report her to have been a famous Strumpet, who when she died, left a great sum
of money to the Commonwealth, desiring that her memory might be celebrated
with yearly Feasts which were called Floralia. Floramor, a flower called the
flower of love, passevelours, or purple velvet flower. Florein, a kind of coin,
valueing about 3 shillings of our money. Florence, (lat. flourishing) a proper
name of women, also the chief City of Tuscany in Italy is so called. Florences,
a kind of cloth brought over from Florence. Florey blew, a kind of blew color
used in painting or limning. Florid, (lat.) flowrishing, or adorned with
flowers. Flosculous, (lat) sprouting or blooming with Flowers. Flotes, certain
pieces of timber joined together with rafters overthwart, which serve to convey
burdens down a River with the stream. Flotson, or Flotzam, goods that being
lost by shipwreck lie floating upon the sea, which, with jetson, i. e. goods
cast out of the ship, being in danger of wreck, and beaten on shore; lagam or
ligam, those which lie at the botton of the sea, and Shares, i. goods divided
among many, are all given to the Lord Admiral. Flouke of an anchor, that part
which takes hold on the ground. Fluctuation, (lat.) a rising or swelling of
waves, a tossing to and fro, also a wavering in opinion. Fluctivagant, (lat.)
tossed on the sea, wandering on the waves. Fluent, (lat.) flowing. Fluidity,
(lat.) aptness to flow. Fluminous, or Fluvial, (lat.) pertaining to Rivers, or
full of Rivers. Fluores, the Mineralists call such kind of stones as coming out
of Mines, are like unto precious stones. Flush fore and aft, decks in ships
laid level from stem to stern. Fluxibility, (lat.) aptness to flow. Fuxion or
Flux, (lat.) a flowing, also a loosnesse of the body. Fly, that part of the
Compass where the 32 points of the winds are described.
F O
Focillation, (lat.) a refreshing. Foder, or Fodrum, from the Dutch word
Vo^den, to feed, a course kind of meat for cattle, also a prerogative that a
Prince has to be provided of corn for his horses toward any Expedition. Also
Fodder is taken for 2000 pound weight of lead. Foeculent, (lat.) full of dregs.
Foecundity, (lat.) fruitfulness. Foedity, (lat.) filthiness. Foeminine,
(lat.) of the Female Sex. Foeneration, (lat.) a practicing of usury. Foine,
(French) to prick. Foines, a kind of Fur, which is black at the top, taken from
a little beast of the same name. Foison, (French) abundance. Foist, a Pinnace,
or little Ship. Folgherers, (old word) followers. Foliage, branched work.
Foliatanes, a certain religious Order of men, who lived only upon leaves.
Folio, a book is said to be in Folio, when it is of a large volume, consisting
of sheets only once doubled, or making but two leaves a piece. Folkland,
(Saxon) coppy-hold land. Folkmoot, from the Saxon words folk, i. people, and
Gemettan, to meet, signifies either the County Court, or the Sheriffs turn.
Follicle, (lat.) a little bladder or purse. Fomentation, (lat.) a cherishing,
in physic it signifies the applying of warm or dry things to the body. Fons
solis, a Fountain in Lybia, near the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, which is at
midnight hot as boiling water. Foothote, (old word) straightway. Foraminous,
(lat.) full of holes. Foraneous, (lat.) pertaining to a Court or Marketplace.
Forbarr, to deprive for ever. Force, in Common Law, signifies unlawful
violence. Forcible entry, is a violent actual entry into any house or land.
Forcipated, (lat.) bending, or hooked. Fordoe, (old word) to kill. Foregoers,
purveyours going before the King or Queen in progress. Foreign matter, a matter
tryable in another Country. Foreign opposer, an Officer of the Exchequer, to
whom all Sheriffs and Bailiffs do repair to be opposed of their green wax.
Forejudger, in common Law, is a judgment whereby a man is put by the thing in
question. Foreland, or Forenesse, an ancient word used for a promontory which
jutteth out foremost. Foreloin, in hunting, is when a hound going before the
rest of the cry, meets chase and goes away with it. Forest, (q. Feresta, i. a
station of wild beasts) is defined to be a safe harbor or abiding place for
Deer, or any sort of beasts that are wild and delight in woods. Forestaller, or
Regrater, one that buys ware, before it comes to the Market, and sells it again
at a higher price. Forfare, (old word) forlorn. Forfeiture, in Latin,
forisfactum, or forisfactura, signifies the transgressing of a penal Law, or
the effect of it. Forelorn, lost, from the Dutch word Verloren, whence
Forlorn-hope, a party of Soldiers put upon the most desperate service, in some
old English Writers, Forleten signifies the same. Forletten, (old word)
abandoned. Formality, (lat.) outward show, preciseness. Formation, (lat.)
forming or fashioning. Forms, or seateth, a term in hunting, applied to a
Hare when it squats in any place. Formidable, (lat.) to be feared. Form^sity,
(lat.) beauty, fairness. Formulary, (lat.) belonging to a form; also used in
the substantive, for a president, or proceeding in Law. Fornication, (lat.)
whoredom. Forenesse, see Foreland. Forses, (Gr. Catadupae) waterfalls.
Forslegl^n, (old word) slain. Forspreak, (old word) an advocate. Fortitude,
(lat.) valor, or stoutnesse of mind. Fortlet, signifies in Common Law, a
(...) Fort or place of some strength. Fortuitous, (lat.) accidental, or coming
by chance. Fortuny, a kind of Tourneament or running a tilt on horseback with
Lances, a sport much used here in old times. Forwelked (old word) dried.
Forwyned, (old word) withered. Fosset, a little long Coffer or Chest, from the
Latin word fossa, a ditch. Fosseway, a highway, dug out and made passable.
See Ikenild. Fossion, (lat.) a digging. A Foster, contract for a Forrester.
Fother, or Foder, a twenty hundred pound weight. Fotheringhay, a Castle in
Northamptonshire, kept by William Earl of Aumart, against King Henry the
third, when the Nobles of England revolted. Fotion, (lat.) a cherishing.
Fougade, (French) a kind of firework. Foulk, a proper name, from the Dutch word
Volg, i. Noble. Founes, (old word) devises. Fourche, (in French a fork)
signifies in Common Law a delaying, or putting off an action. Fontegeld,
signifies in the Forest law, an amerciament for not cutting out the balls of
great Dogs feet in the Forest; it comes from the Dutch word Fusz, and Gelten
to loosen. Fownder, is when a ship by an extraordinary leak becomes full, or
half full of water. Fox stones, an Herb so called from the likeness of the
Root.
F R
Fracid, (lat.) rotten ripe. Fraction, (lat.) a breaking, also a dissension
among parties, in Arithmetic it is taken for a number having two
denominations. Fragility, (lat.) aptness to break, brittlenesse. Fragment,
(lat.) a broken part, or piece of any thing. Fragrancie, (lat.) an
odorousnesse, or sweetness of smell. Fraisheur, (French) freshness,
coolness, liveliness. Franck, a French Coin, of about the value of two
shillings. Franchise, in French, signifies liberty, it is taken in Common Law
for a privilege, or exemption from ordinary Jurisdiction, also an immunity
from tribute. Franci, a certain people, anciently inhabiting a part of Germany,
who entered into Gallia, under the conduct of Pharamond, and conquered a great
part of the Kingdom, whence it came afterward to be called France. Francis, a
proper name of men, or women, from the German word Franck, i. e. free, not
servile; answerable to the Greek Eleutherius, and the Latin Liberius.
Franciscans, an order of Friars, instituted by St. Francis, in the year 1198.
they were enjoined chastity, obedience, poverty, and many other strict rules of
life and conversation. Frank almoine, (French) signifies in Common Law, such
Lands and Tenements as are bestowed upon those people that give themselves up
wholly to the service of God for pure alms. Franck bank, such Copyhold lands
as the wife, being espoused a Virgin has after her husbands decease, for his
dowr. Frank fee, that which is in the hand of the King, or Lord of a Manor,
being ancient demesne of the Crown, whereas that which is in the hand of the
Tenants is ancient demesne only. Frank ferm, is land, wherein the nature of
Fee is changed by Feoffement, out of Knights service for certain yearly
services. Frank law, is taken for a free enjoyment of all those privileges,
which the Law permits to a man not found guilty of any heinous offense. Frank
marriage, a Tenure in tail special, whereby a man has Land with a woman to
her, and the Heirs of his body without doing any service, but fealty to the
Donour. Frank pledge, a pledge, or surety for freemen. Frank ford, a famous
City upon the River Maenus, being the chiefest Mart-Town in Germany.
Fra^c^^ia, a Country in the East part of Germany, called Frankenland.
F^antick, Phrenetick, (Greek) mad. Fraternity, (lat.) a brotherhood, also a
company of men entered into a firm bond of society, or friendship. Fratricelli,
a sort of Heretics, instituted by one Hermannus in the year 1304. they
preached Community among Christians, and that it was unlawful for them to be
Governors one over another. Fratricide, (lat.) the killing of ones brother.
Fratruels, (lat.) brothers Children. Fraudation, (lat.) a defrauding, or
depriving. Fra^dulency, (lat.) deceitfullnesse, craftiness. Frea, the same as
Friga. Frederick, (^erm.) rich peace, of this name there have been three
Emperors of Germany, for Frederick we commonly use Frery and Fery. Frediswid,
(Sax.) very free, a woman's proper name. Free^ooter, a Soldier that makes
inroades into an enemies Country, for Cattle, or any other commodity from the
enemies Country, it comes from the Dutch words Frey, i. e. free, and beut, i.
e. prey, the Italians call them Banditi. Free Chapel, a Chapel founded within
a Parish, over and above the mother Church, unto which it is free for the
Parishioners to come, or not to come. Freedstol, (i. e. the stool of Peace) a
certain Chair of stone, erected by King Athelitan, in honor of John de
Beverly, Archbishop of York, to which Offenders used to fly for sanctuary.
Free-h^ld, free Tenure, or Land, which a man holds in Fee-tail, or at the
least for term of life. Free Warren, (in Latin Libera Warrena) the power of
granting, or denying License to any to hunt, or chase in such, or such Lands.
Fremund, (Sax.) free peace, a proper name. Frendl^sse-man, in the Saxon tongue,
signifies an outlaw. Freob^rgh, or Fridburgh, the same, in the Saxon tongue,
as Franck-pledge in French, a surety for the peace, or good behavior. Frery, a
proper name of a man, contracted from Frederick, which signifies in Saxon
tongue rich peace. Frescades, (French) cool refreshments against the heat of
the summer. To walk in Fresco, (Ital.) to take the fresh air, also to drink in
Fresco, to drink fresh liquor. Fresh disseisin, in Common Law, is that
d^ss^isin that a man may seek to defeat of his own power, without the help of
the King, or his Judges. Fresh force, a force done within fou^^y days. Fresh
shot, is when any great River comes into the Sea, so that it is fresh water for
a mile, or two. Fresh suit, is such an earnest following of an Offendour as
never cease from the time of the offense committed until he be apprehended.
Fretrots, a sort of Heretics, not much different from those which are called
Adamites. Friars minors, Augustines Preachers and Carmelites, (which are the
four principa^ orders) see in their proper places, to these also belonging
Friars observants, Conventuales, ^apuchins. Fric^sse, (French) a kind of fried
meat. Frication, (Latin) a rubbing, or chafing. Friga, a certain Goddess,
anciently worshipped by the Saxons, under the form of an Hermaphrodite.
Frigate, in Spanish Fragata, a spial ship. Frigefaction, (lat.) a making cold.
Frigeratorie, (lat.) a place to make, or keep things cool. Frigidity, (lat.)
coldness. Friperer, (French) in Latin Interpolator, one that cleanses old
Apparel to sell again. Frisia, one of the seven United Provinces, called
Friezland. Frithsoken, a surety, or defense from the Saxon words Frid, i. e.
peace, and Socen, i. e. to seek. Fritiniency, (lat.) the chirping of a swallow.
Frivolous, (lat.) vain of little worth. Frize, a Term in Architecture, the
garnishing of the upper end of a pillar. Frondosity, (Latin) a flourishing with
green leaves, being just under the architrave. Frontal, (lat.) belonging to the
forehead, also used substantively for an attire of the forehead, called also a
frontlet. Frontispiece, (lat.) the forefront of a house, also a picture placet
before any book. Frontiers, the borders, or limits of any place. Frontiniack, a
kind of sweet luscious French wine. Frontstall, a part of a horses bridle.
Frote, (old word) to rub. The Frounce, a disease in a hawks tongues called in
French Barbillon. Fructify, (lat.) to bring forth fruit. Frugality, (lat.)
thriftinesse, sparingnesse in expenses. A Fruggin, a Fork to stir about the
fuel in an Oven, from the French word Fourgon, an Oven Fork. Fruitery, (French)
a place for fruit. Frutiges, (lat.) branched work, or the representation of
fruit in Sculpture, or painting. Frumenty, pottage made of wheat, from the
Latin word Frumentum, i. e. wheat. Frustration, (lat.) a making vain, a
deceiving; In Astrology, it is used when a light Planet would come to a
Conjunction with one more heavy, and before it does accomplish it, the more
weighty Planet is joined with another. Frustulent (lat.) full of Frusta, or
small pieces. Frutication, (lat.) a sprouting, or shooting forth of young
branches. Fryth, (old word) wood.
F U
Fucation, (lat.) a mending the complexion by drugs, or artificial colors.
Fugacity, (lat.) aptness to fly way. Fugalia, (lat.) certain feasts celebrated
by the ancient Romans in remembrance of the expulsion of Kings out of Rome.
Fugation, (lat.) a putting to flight. Fugne, (French) a Term in Music, when
two parts answer one the other in the same point. Fugitive goods, the goods of
a fugitive, or him that flies away for felony, which are forfeit to the King,
or State. Fuir, or Fuer en feit, is when a man does corporally fly; Fuer en
ley, is, when being called in the County, he appears not until he be
outlawed. Fulbert, (Sax.) full bright, a proper name. Fulgidity, or Fulgency,
(lat.) glistringnesse, or brightness. Fulguration, (lat.) a lightning, or
flashing of fire in the Clouds, which precedes the Thunder. Fulfremed, (Saxon)
perfect. Fulians, certain Monks of the Order of St. Bernard. Fuliginous,
(Latin) sooty, or full of smoke. Fullonical, (lat.) pertaining to a Fuller, or
scourer of cloth. Fulmination, (lat.) a striking with lightning, also
metaphorically taken for threatening. Fulvid, (lat.) of a kind of dusky color.
Fumets, by the hunters used for the ordure of an Heart. F^midity, (lat.)
smoakinesse. Fumigation, (lat.) a perfuming with the smoke of sweet wood.
Fumitory, a kind of Herb, called in Spanish Palomilla. Funambulatour, (lat.) a
Dancer on the Ropes. Function, (lat.) the performance, or exercise of any duty,
or office. Funditour, (lat.) a slinger, or darter. Funebrous, (lat.) sad,
mournful, relating to Funerals. Funestation, (lat.) a polluting with a dead
body. Fungosity, (lat.) spunginesse, or a being thin, and full of holes like a
Mushrom. Funnel, an instrument very small at one end to convey liquors into any
narrow-mouthed vessel. Furacity, (lat.) an inclination to steal or pilfer.
Furbish, (French) to polish or make bright. Furcation, (lat.) a putting into
the fashion of a fork. Furies, feigned by the Poets to be the three daughters
of Acheron, and night, Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone, whose office was to
torment the minds of transgressors, they possessed Orestes for a while, but
afterward being appeased they were called Eumenides. Furibund, (lat.) mad, or
raging. Furina, a Goddess among the Romans, who was held to be the patroness
of thieves. Furlong, a certain measure containing 20 poles in length, being the
eighth part of a mile. It is also taken for a perch or the eighth part of an
acre of land. Furnivalls, an ancient Family, Lords of Fernham in
Buckinghamshire, who hold their Lands by this Tenure, namely to find the King
upon his Coronation day, a glove for his right hand, and to support his right
arm while he holds his Scepter. Furole, (French) a kind of little Meteor
appearing in the night, by some called St. Hermes fire. Furs, which are of
several sorts, as Sables, Lucerns, Genets, Foines, Martens, Minivers, Fitch,
Shankes, Calabre. See in their proper places. Furring, (in Navigation) is a
ripping off the first planks of a ship, and putting other timbers upon the
first, and so putting on the planks upon the timbers which they call plank upon
plank. Furtive, (lat.) given to stealing, or done by stealth. Fusibility,
(lat.) aptness, or easiness to be melted. Fusil, (lat.) a spindle, also a term
in Heraldry, being the resemblance of a spindle in a Coat of Arms. Fusion,
(lat.) a melting. Fustian, in Latin Xylinum, a kind of stuff made of the down
of a certain fruit growing in the upper part of Egypt. Futility, (lat.)
vanity, lightness. Futtocks, those compassing timbers which are scarfed upon
the ground timbers and give breadth to a ship. Future, (lat.) that which is to
come.
F Y
Fire levin, (old word) lightning.
G A
GAbala, a Town of Syria Cava, which is now called Gibel or M^rgad. Gabardine,
a kind of rough Cassock, like an Irish mantle. Gabberies, (French) mockeries,
gibings, wily deceits. Gabel, (French) any kind of tribute or impost. Gabion,
a kind of fortification made of baskets filled with dirt. Gable end of a house,
a term in Architecture, signifying the top of a house. Some take it for the
fore part or frontispiece, called also Delicia. Gabrantovici, the name of an
ancient people of Britain, who inhabited some part of Yorkshire. Gabriel, the
name of the Angel that appeared to the Virgin Mary, signifying in Hebrew strong
with God. Gabrosentum, an ancient frontier station of the Romans, kept by the
second Band of the Thracians; it is thought to have stood in that part of the
Bishopric of Durham and Northumberland, where (...) Newcastle and Gateshead
stand. Gaddefly, a certain Insect which stings cattle, called also a Brie.
Gades, two Islands lying westward beyond the Streights, by some called Hercules
his Pillars. Gage, in Common Law signifies a pawn or surety, also to gage
deliverance, or to wage deliverance, signifies to put in surety. Gage a ship,
to stick a nail into a pole, and put it down by the rudder, thereby to know
how much water the ship draws. Gaging rod, an instrument to measure any vessel
of liquid stuff. Gaiety, (French) cheerfulness, gallantry. Cleopatra. Some say
it is derived from the Latin word Gaudeo, to rejoice. Gainage, in Common Law,
is Land held of the baser kind of sokemen or villeines. Gainesborough, a Town
in Lincolnshire, where anciently the Danish ships lay at rode, and where Suene
Tiugskege a Danish Tyrant after he had miserably harrassed the Country, was
stabbed by an unknown man. Galactite, (Greek) a kind of precious stone, so
called because it is white as milk. Galanthis, the servant maid of Alcmena, who
for deluding Juno, that sought to hinder the birth of Hercules, was turned into
a Weasel. Galathea, a Sea Nymph, the Daughter of Nereus and Doris, who being
beloved of Polypheme, and prefering Acis before him, Polypheme killed his rival
with a great stone which he plucked out of a rock: whereupon Acis was turned
into a River of the same name. Galatia, a region of Asia the Less, called also
Gallogrecia. Galaxy, (Greek) a broad white circle in the sky, which is made by
the light reflected from a great company of little Stars. It is called the
milky way. Galbanum, a kind of gum, issuing out of a plant called Sagapane, or
Fennel Giant. Gale, when the wind blows gently, so that a ship may bear her
top-sailes a trip, it is called a loom gall; when it is much wind, a fresh or
stiff gale. Galege, or Galage, (in French Galloches) a kind of outward shoe,
worn in dirty weather, which has been anciently in use among the Gauls from
whence the word is derived. Galena, the ancient name of a Town in Oxfordshire,
now called Wallingford. Galenus, a famous Physician of Pergamus, who
flourished* in the time of the Emperor Commodus, and writ many excellent
Volumes. Galeon, or Gallion, (French) a great Ship of war. Galeote, (French) a
small Gally; also one that rows in a Gally. Galgacus, the name of a valiant
Britain, who led an army against the Romans. Galilaea, a Region of Syria lying
north of Judea. Galingale, the aromatical root of the rush Cypress, called
Acorus. Gallantry, (French) compleatnesse, accomplishment, or a bold confident
way of courtship. Artam. Gallego, (Span.) an inhabitant of Galatia. Gallia, a
great Country of Europe anciently inhabited by the Gauls, now called France.
Galliard, (French) lusty, also substantively taken for a kind of dance.
Galliardise (French) lustiness, livelyness. Gallie-foist, see Foist.
Galliegaskines, or Galligascoines, a kind of breeches, first in use among the
inhabitants of that part of France which is called Gascoine. Gallimafry, a kind
of meat made up of several sorts of meats minced together. It was so called
either because it was allotted to the Gally-slaves, or else because it was
invented by the Gauls. Galloches, see Galege. Gallon, (Spanish) a measure
containing two quarts. Ga^loway, a County of Scotland, the people whereof were
anciently called Novanti; also a County of Ireland in the Province of C^naught.
Galloon, a kind of Lace. Gallulate, (lat.) to begin to have a great voice.
Gallus, a River in Phrygia, of which when the Priests of Cybele drank, they
were agitated with divine fury, whence they were called Galli; also the name of
a young man who suffering Sol to discover the adultery of Mars and Venus, was
by Mars turned into a cock. Galnes, in the practick of Scotland, signifies any
kind of satisfaction for slaughter. Gamahez, in Arabic, signifies certain
figures or images of things wrought exactly by nature. Gamaliel, (Hebr.) Gods
reward. Gambado, a thing made of leather for a man to put his legs into when
he rides. Gamboles, certain games, or tricks which are in use about Christmasse
time, from the Italian word Gamba, a leg. Gammot, an incision-knife. Gamut, the
first note in the scale of Music. Ganch, to put men to death as they do in
Turkey, by letting them fall from a high place upon sharp hooks. Ganges, a very
great River rising out of the Scythian Mountains, and running thorough the
midst of India. Gangflower, a certain Flower which flourishes in Procession
or Rogation-week, by some called Rogation-flower. Gangiators, or Gaugeators,
signifies in the practick of Scotland, those that examine weights and measures,
mark cloth, etc. Gangraen, (lat.) a spreading sore, an eating ulcer which
mortifies the member by reason of the greatness of the exhalation. Gang-week,
the next week but one before Whitsunday, in which solemn prayer and procession,
used to be enjoined by the Church as a preparation to the Feast of the
Ascension. It is also called Rogation-week. Gantlet, or Gauntlet, (French) a
certain Military glove. To run the Gantlope, a punishment used among soldiers,
the offender being to run with his back naked through the whole Regiment, and
to receive a lash from every soldier. It comes from Gant, a Town in Flanders,
where it was invented, and the Dutch word Lope, which signifies running.
Ganymed, the son of Tros, whom for his excellent form, Jupiter fell in love
with, and causing him to be brought up to Heaven upon an Eagles back, made him
his Cup Bearer instead of He^e the daughter of Juno. Also it is metaphorically
taken for an ingle or boy hired to commit Sodomy. Garamantes, a people of
Lybia, so called from Garamas their King, the son of Apollo. Garb, a sheaf of
Corn, from the French word gerbe, a bundle; also handsomness, graceful
carriage, from the Italian word Garbo, also a sharp piquant relish in wine or
beer. Garbel, or Garboord, a plank next to the keel of a ship. Garble, to
purify, to sort out the bad from the good, an expression borrowed from
Grocers, who are said to garble their Spices, i. e. to purify them from the
dross and dirt. Garboile, (French) tumult or trouble. Garcifer, in the practick
of Scotland, signifies a boy that serves in the Mill. Guard, in Common Law is
taken for a custody or care of defense, as the education of children under age,
or the like. Gardein, in Common Law, is he that has the charge or custody of
any person or thing, especially he that has the education of children, and the
government of their estates, until they come to 20 years of age; also that has
the charge of idiots, or frantic persons during their lunacy, he is called by
the Civilians Tutor or Curator. Gardein of the Spirituality, is he to whom the
spiritual jurisdiction of any Diocese is committed during the vacancy of the Sea. Garderobe, a kind of herb so called; also the same as Wardrop. Gardmanger,
(French) a storehouse or sellar for meat. Gare, a kind of very course wool.
Gargarism, (Greek) the bubling of any liquor in the throat, to wash the throat
and mouth. Gargarus, the top of the Mountain Ida. Gargantua, the name of a
great Giant or Monster, from the Spanish word Garganta, a throat. Garner, see
Granary. Garnet, a tackle to hoise goods into a Ship. Garnishment, (French)
signifies in Common Law, the issuing forth a Writ of scire facias against the
Plaintiff, for an action of Detinue of charters brought against the Defendant;
also a fee which prisoners give their keepers at their admittance into prison.
Garnison, (French) preparation or furniture. Garret, a proper name. See
Gerrard. Garrison, (French) a Town or Strong hold fortified and kept by
soldiers. Garrulity, (lat.) much tatling, or prateing. Garter, the chief of
the three Kings at arms, also half a bend in Blazon. See Bend. Gasehound, a
certain sort of dogs of an excellent hunting kind, being the same with that
which among the old Greeks was called Agasaeus. G^stenesse, (old word) terror.
Gastrimyth, (Greek) one that speaks inwardly, as it were out of his belly.
Gastroepiploic vein, see vein. Gaude, (old word) a toy or trifle. To Gaude,
(old word) to mock, to scoff at. Gaudy days, certain Festival days observed
in Colleges or the Innes of Court. Gavelet, an ancient kind of cessavit used
in Kent, whereby the tenant in Gavelkind shall forfeit all his Lands and
Tenements, to the Lord of whom they are holden, if he withdraw his due rents
and services. Gavelkind, from the three Saxon words, Gife, Eal, Cyn, i. e.
given to all the kind, signifies in Common Law, an equal division of the
fathers Lands among all the Children, or of the Lands of a brother deceased
among his brethren, if he have no issue of his own. Gaunt, in Latin Gandavum,
the chief City of Flanders, which is said to have 20 Islands, and 48 Bridges
within the Walls. Gawdy-dayes, see Gaudy-dayes. Gawen, see Waldwin. Gawgeours,
the same as Gangeatours, they are also called Gagers. A Gazehound* a certain
hound, so called from the Greek word Agazomai, because of its admirable
quickness of sight. Gazet, (French) a certain Venetian Coin, also a brief
general relation of the Occurrences, or Affairs of Christendom. Gazul and
Subit, two Egyptian weeds of which being burnt to ashes, they make the finest
sort of glasses, which are called Venice glasses, because they are made at
Venice.
G E
Geat, a sort of precious stone, otherwise called black Amber, and thought by
some to be the same with Gagates, whence it is derived. Gebalena, a Country
bordering upon Eleutheropolis. Gebaltark, the streights, vulgarly called the
streights of Gibralter, it comes from the Arabian word Gebal a Mountain, and
Tareck the son of Abdalla, who brought his Army over those streights. Gehenna,
a certain Valley, where the Israelites sacrificed to Moloch, Metaphorically
taken for Hell. Geld, (Saxon) money, or tribute, it is also called Gild, or
Guild. Geldable, one of the three parts, into which Suffolk is divided, the
other two being St. Edmund's liberty, and St. Audrey's liberty. Geldria, the
Duchy of Gelderland, in the Low Countries. Gelicide, (lat.) frost. Gelidity,
(lat.) icynesse, coldness. Gelo, a young boy of Sicily, who sitting upon the
threshold of a School, and making an outcry after a Wolf that had snatched his
book out of his hand, the master and Scholars making a sudden tumult, were all
killed by the fall of the School-house. Gelones, a certain people of Scythia,
who paint their faces that they may appear the more terrible in war. Geloum, a
certain Lake in Sicily, near which there are two Fountains of that nature, that
the waters of one make women fruitful, the other barren. Gem, or Gemme, a
Jewel, or precious stone, also a bud, or blossom. Gemination, (lat.) a
doubling. Geminels, (lat.) Twins, also one of the twelve signs in the Zodiac,
into which the Poets faign that Castor and Pollux, the sons of Tyndarus and
Leda were changed, is called Gemini. Gemites, a kind of precious stone.
Gemmerie, a Cabinet to keep Jewels in, a Jewel house. Gemote, a Court belonging
to a hundred. Gemmosity, (lat.) an abounding with Jewels, also a sprouting
forth of blossoms. Gemony, a place in Rome, where malefactors were cast
headlong into the River Tiber. A Gemow-ring, a kind of double Ring, linked
with two, or more links. Gendarme, (French) a horseman completely armed.
Gencaleathud, (Sax.) approached. Genealogy, (Greek) a Description of ones
family, descent, or lineage. Generation, (lat.) an engendring, or begetting.
Generosity, (lat.) nobleness of mind, or of blood. Genesis, (Greek) the same
as generation from the Latin, also the Title of the first book of Moses,
because it treats of the beginning, or generation of the world. Genethliaques,
(Greek) books, which treat of the foretelling of men's fortunes by the
calculation of their Nativities. Genets, a kind of fur, which is taken from a
beast of the same name. Geneva, a fair Imperial Town upon the Lake Leman in
Savoy, next to the Borders of Swizzerland. Genial, (lat.) festival, joyful,
helpful to generation. Geniculation, (lat.) a joynting. Genital, (lat.) apt to
engender, or beget, also Genitals are taken substantively for the Members of
Generation. A Geniting, a kind of Apple, which is first ripe of any others.
Genitive case in Grammar is the second of the six Cases, and is commonly known
by the sign of Genius, (lat.) the good, or evil spirit attending on every man,
or proper to each several place, also a man's nature, fancy, or inclination.
Genoa, the chief City of Liguria in Italy famous for Traffic, called also
Genes. Gensericus, a King of the Vandals, he took Carthage, spoiled the
Temples, and made stables of them for his horses. Gent, (old word) proper,
handsome. Gentian, an Herb found out, as some say by Gen^ius, King of Illyrium.
Gentilesse, (French) Gentility, Nobleness, or Gallantry. Cleopat. Gentilisme,
(lat.) Heathenisme, or the belief of the Gentiles. Gentilitial, (lat.)
pertaining to kindred, or ancestors. Gentil, a kind of insect, called a
Maggot. Genua, see Genoa. Genuflexion, (lat.) a kneeling, or bending of the
knee. Genuine, (lat.) natural, or proper. Genus, (lat.) a kind, a stock, or
lineage, also one of the five Predicables in Logic, being that which contains
under it, the species, or lesser considerations, also a Gender. Geodoesia,
(Greek) the art of measuring of Land. Geography, (Greek) the exact description
of all the Regions, and Countries of the earth. Geomanty, (Greek) a kind of
divination, by certain Circles made on the earth. Geometry, (Greek) the
measuring of the earth, but it is commonly taken for the art of measuring in
general. Geoponical, (Greek) belonging to tilling, or manuring the ground.
George, a proper name, signifying in Greek husbandman, the chief of this name
was George of Cappadocia, a Tribune under ^ioclesian, who killed a mighty
Serpent in Africa, to whom a Virgin was cast to have been devoured, he is
thought to be the same with St. George the Champion. Georgians, a people
inhabiting Albania, now called Georgia, professing themselves Christians,
though differing in many points from us, and honoring St. George as their
chief Patron, also a Sect of Heretics; instituted at Delft by David George,
whose Doctrine was, that both the Law and the Gospel were unprofitable for
salvation. Georgicks, (Greek) books that treat of husbandry, and tillage.
Geornlick, (Sax.) willingly. Gerah, an Hebrew measure, being the 20th. part of
a shekle. Gerard, (Sax.) all towardness, a proper name, for Gerard we
frequently use Garret. Gerfalcon, a kind of bird, which is between a Vultur
and a Hawke. Germander, an Herb called English Treacle. Germanity, (lat.) a
brotherhood, sisterhood, or very near relation. Germination, (lat.) a budding
forth. Gertrude, the proper name of a woman from the Saxon words Ger, and
Trude, i e. all truth. Gervase, a proper name of men, from the German word
Gerfast, i. e. all fast, firm, or sure, answering to the Latin word Constans,
others contract it from the Greek Gerousios, i. e. ancient, or honorable, the
chief of this name was a famous Matyr, who suffered under Nero at Millain.
Gerunds, in Grammar are certain parts of a Verb, so called from bearing a
double signification, both active and passive. Geryon, a certain King of the
Spanish Islands, called Baleares, who is feigned by the Poets to have had three
bodies, and to have been killed by Hercules. Gesamund, (Sax.) assembled.
Gestation, (lat.) a carrying. Gesticulation, (lat.) a making signs by gestures,
or motions of the body, also a kind of Morris dancing. Gestion, (lat.) a
doing, or carriage of any business. Gests, (lat.) great actions, or exploits
performed. Getealed, (Sax.) numbered. Gethild, (Sax.) patience. Getulians, a
certain barbarous people, who were the first inhabitants of Aphrica. Geules, a
Term in Heraldry, signifying a red, or Vermilion color. Gewgaws, or Gugaws,
trifles for children to play with, derived as some think from the Latin word
gaudere, to rejoice.
G H
Gheus, an ignominious Term, heretofore given to the Protestants in Flanders,
the word signifying as much as beggar.
G I
Gibbosity, (lat.) a bunching out, but more especially taken for a bunching in
the back. Gibe, (old word) to mock, from the French word gaber. Gibellines, see
Guelphs. Gibraltar, see Gebaltarch. Gibsere, a pouch, a word used by Chaucer.
Gideon, or Gedeon, (Hebr.) a Breaker or Destroyer. Gifta, (Sax.) Marriage.
Gifu, (Sax.) Grace. Gigantick, big-bodied, Gyant-like. Gigantomachy, (Greek)
the ancient war of the Giants against Heaven, often mentioned by the Poets.
Giglet, or Giglot, a wanton woman or strumpet. Chaucer. Gigot, (French) a kind
of minced meat. Gilbert, a proper name of men, signifying in the German tongue
Gold-like bright, answering the Lat. Aurelius, or Aurelian: others write
Gislebert, i. bright pledge. Gilbertines, a certain religious Order instituted
by one Gilbert, who for his great holiness was Canonized for a Saint. Gild,
see Geld. Giles, a proper name of men, contracted from Aegidious, which some
derive from the Greek word Aigidion, i. a little kid. Others derive Giles from
Julius, as Gilian from Juliana. Gillet, a woman's name contracted in like manner
from Aegidia. Gillingham, a Forest in Dorsetshire, where Edmund Ironside
overthrew the Danes in a great pitch field. Gilthead, a kind of fish, so called
from its golden color. Gimlet, a piercer to pierce any barrel of liquor
withal. Gimmal, see Gemmow-ring. Gingreat, to chirp like a bird. Ginne, a
snare, contracted as some think from Engine. Gippius, a certain Roman, who using
to feign himself asleep, while his wife lay with other men; one time he started
up and cried, non omnibus dormio, I sleep not to all men; whence it became a
Proverb. Gippon, (French) a kind of short cassock, or coat. Gips, a kind of
chalk or mortar. Girl, a term in Hunting, being a Roebuck of two years.
Gironne, a certain term in Heraldry. Girthol, in the practick of Scotland,
signifies a Sanctuary. Girvii, a people in times past inhabiting the Fenny
parts of Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, etc. the word signifying Fen-dwellers.
Gisarms, a kind of weapon with two pikes, which some call Bisarmes. Giste,
(French) a Couch or resting place, also a writing which contains the names of
the Towns or Houses where a King or Prince intends to lie in his progress.
Gite, (old word) a gown.
G L
Glaciation, (lat.) a freezing. Gladiatour, (lat.) a Swordman or Fencer, from
the Latin word gladius, a sword. Gladin, or Gladiole, a certain herb whose leaf
resembles a sword. Gladuse, (British) the proper name of diverse women, from
Claudia. Glandage, (French) mastage, or the season of feeding hogs with mast.
Glandulous, (lat.) full of kernels, from the Latin word glans a kernel.
Glanoventa, an ancient Town of Northumberland, garrisoned by the first Cohort
of the Morini, so called because it stood upon the bank of the River Venta, now
called Wantsbeck. Glastenbury, a famous Abbey founded by Joseph of Arimathaea,
near unto which in Wiral Park grows a Hawthron, which is reported to put
forth leaves and blossoms upon Christmasse Day, as fresh as in May, also in
the Churchyard there grew a Wallnut-tree, which as some have affirmed, did not
put forth his leaves until St. Barnabies Feast. Glaucitation, (lat.) a crying
like a whelp. Glaucus, the son of Hippolochus, he assisted Priamus in the
Trojan war, and taking Diomeds brazen arms for his own which were of Gold, he
was killed by Ajax* and his body being carried into Lycia by the winds, was
changed into a River; Also the name of a fisher, who tasting of a certain herb,
leapt into the Sea and was made a Sea-god. Glayve, (old word) a kind of crooked
sword or bill. Glaze, to vernish. Glebeland, land belonging to a Parsonage,
from gleba, a clod or turf. Glede, (old word) a hot ember or coal, also a
puttock or kite. Glee, joy or mirth, from the Dutch word glooren, to recreate.
Gleire, (old word) white. Glimmering, a glancing or trembling light. Globosity,
(lat.) a being round like a bowl or globe. Globous, (lat.) round like a globe.
Globe, vide Sphere. Gloucester, the chief City of Glocestershire, it was called
by the Saxons Glevecester, in Latin Glevum, by the Britains Caer-Glove, i.
fair City: It is also called by some Claudia-Cestria, from the Emperor
Claudius, who as it is fabulously reported, married his daughter Genissa to
Arviragus the British King. Gloucester Hall, a place for Students in Oxford,
built by John Lord Gifferd of Brimesfeild. Glome, (old word) a bottom of
thread. Glomeration, (lat.) a rolling or gathering into a round lump. Gloomy,
(old word) dusky or dark. Gl^se, (old word) to flatter. Glossator, or
G^^ssographer, he that makes a Gloss or Comment to interpret the hard meaning
of words or things. Glutination, (lat.) a joining together with glue.
Glycerium, a Curtesan of Thespia, who gave the picture of Cupid which she had
of Praxiteles, as a legacy to the Thespians. Glyster, see Clyster.
G N
Gnarity, (lat.) knowingnesse, experience. Gnarr, or Gnurre, a hard knot in
wood, also a churl. Gnathonichal, playing the Gnatho, i. e. a parasite or
deceitful fellow. Gnatsnapper, a certain Bird called a figgeater, in Latin
Ficedula. Gnavity, (lat.) a being industrious, active, or vigorous, in any
business. Gnew, (old word) gnawed. Gnoff, (old word) a churl or fool.
Gnomonick, (Greek) belonging to a gnomon, or pin of a Dial. Gnostics, from the
Greek word gnosis, knowledge, a sect of Heretics, instituted by one Carpocras
in the year 125, they assumed to themselves a great degree of knowledge, denied
the day of Judgment, and held two Supreme Deities, one good, the other bad.
Gnurre, see Gnarre.
G O
Gobonated, a term in Heraldry, as a bordure gobonated is when it is divided
into two colors, in such sort, as if it were cut into small gobbets. Go to
God, signifies in Common Law, to be dismissed the Court. Godard, a proper name
of men, signifying in the German tongue, Godly disposition. Godfrey, another
proper name signifying Gods peace. Godwin, (Germ.) victorious in God. Goetie,
(^reek) Witchcraft, Diabolical Magic. Gofish, (old word) sottish. Gog and
Magog, signifying in the Hebrew tongue, covered or uncovered, are taken in
Scripture for certain Nations that shall persecute the Church. To be Agog, to
be eagerly bent upon a thing, also to be puffed up with pride. Golden number the
full course of the Moon, which is performed in 19 years. See Cycle. Golden
Fleece, small grains of Gold which are found by Rivers and Brooks, and
gathered up by the help of sheep-skinnes with the wool on, of these Grains
there were great plenty upon the Cholchian shore, which gave occasion to the
Fable of Jason and his Argonauts. G^ldfoile, leaf Gold. Goldknops, a flower
called Crow-foot. Golgotha, a place hard by Mount Sion, full of malefactors
bones: It signifies in the Syrian tongue a place of dead men's s^ulls.
Golierdies, (old word) ravenously mouthed. Golp, (Spanish) a slash or blow.
Goman, (Saxon) a married man. Gomer, an Hebrew measure containing almost a
gallon and a pint over. Gondola, or Gondolot, a kind of boat much used at
Venice. Gonfennon, (old word) a little flag. Gonorrhaea, (Greek) a disease
called the running of the reins. Good abearing, or Good behavior,
signinifieth in Common Law, an exact carriage of a subject toward the King and
his liege people. Goodmanchester, a Town in Huntingtonshire, so abounding in
tillage, that Kings in times past, coming that way, were received in country
fashion with 180 ploughs. Goods escheat, goods confiscate. Goosewing, in
Navigation* is a fitting up the sail, so as that the ship may go before a wind
or quarter winds with a fair fresh gale. Gorbelly, one who is all panch or
belly. Gorcrow, a Raven. G^rdieus, a Mountain of Armenia, where the Ark of Noah
was said to rest. Gordius, a King of Phrygia, who being raised from the plough
to the Throne, hung up the furniture of his oxen in the Temple, as a memorial,
which being tied in a very intricate knot, and the Monarchy of the World being
promised to him that could untie it, Alexander the Great after he had long
tried in vain, at length cut it in two with his sword, whence the Gordian knot
came to be a proverb, being taken for any thing which is difficult to be
expounded. Gore, a term in Blazon, and consists of two Arch lines drawn from
the sinister chief and bottom of the Escutcheon, and meeting in a sharp angle
in the fesspoint. Gorgious, gallant, sumptuous, some think from the Greek word
Gargairo, i. e. to shine. Gorgons, the three daughters of Phorcys Medusa,
Sthenio, and Euriale, with Medusa Perseus fought, and cutting off her head,
turned it into a stone. Also particularly taken for the head of Medusa in
Astrology. Gorlois, a Prince of Cornwall, whose wife Other Pendragon fell in
love with, and enjoying her by the means of his Magical delusions, he begat
King Arthur. Gormandize, (French) to play the gourmand, i. a glutton or great
devourer. Some derive it from the Latin words gulose mandere* i. to eat
greedily. Gormoncester, a Town in Huntingtonshire, the same with G^odmanchester
above mentioned, it was called Gormoncester, from Gormon, the Dane, unto whom,
after an agreement of peace, King Alfred granted this Town with the adjoining
Territories, it is thought to have been the same Town with that which was
called in old times Durosiponte. Gospel, a Saxon word, signifying good saying,
or Gods word; it is commonly taken for one of the four Evangelists in the New
Testament. Gossehauke, quasi Grossehauke, a kind of Hawk called in Greek
Asterias, because of its spots, which are like little Stars. Gossip, one that
undertakes for a child in Baptism, the word signifies in the Saxon tongue,
spiritually of kin. Gossomor, or Gossymear, (Saxon) a kind of thin Cobweb-like
exhalation, which hovers abroad in the air in hot weather. Gothia, a Country of
Europe, bordering upon Denmark and Norway* the people are called Gothi, or
Goths, who in former times overrun the greatest part of Europe. Goule, (old
word) Usury, from the Latin Gula, i. the throat. Gourd, a kind of plant,
somewhat like a coucumber, also used by Chaucer for a bottel. Gowtes, a word
used in Sommersetshire, common sewes or sinks that run under ground. Gowreth,
(old word) stareth.
G R
Gracchus Sempronius, a great Captain of the Romans, who subdued the
Celtiberians a people of Spain, and repaired their chief City Illurcis, calling
it by his own name Gracchuris: he had two sons by his wife Cornelia, Caius and
Tiberius, who were both slain in a popular sedition, seeking to re-establish
the Agrarian Laws. Graces, the three daughters of Jupiter and Venus, Aglaia,
Euphrosyne, and Thalia, the Goddesses of Elegance, and handsome conversation.
Grace, a proper name of diverse women, the signification well known. Gracility,
(lat.) slenderness. Gradation, (lat.) an ascending by degrees. Gradual, that
part of the Mass, which uses to be sung between the Epistle and Gospel. Also by
degrees. Graduate, (lat.) he that has taken a degree at the University.
Graecia, a famous Country of Europe, the Nurse of learning, and of all the
arts; its chief Regions are Attica, Boeotia, Phocis Achaia, etc. Graeae, the
three daughters of Phocys, who had but one eye and one tooth among them, which
they used by turns, they helped Perseus to overcome their sisters the Gorgons.
Graffer, is used in some of the statutes, for a Notary, or Scrivener, from the
French word Greffier. A Graie, a beast called a Brock, or Badger. Grains of
Paradise, a certain plant, otherwise called Cardamomum. Gramercy, from the
French, Grandmerci, i. e. great thanks, an expression of giving thanks.
Gramineous, or Gramineal, (lat.) grassie, or made of grass. Gramineal Crown,
see Crown. Grammatical, (Greek) belonging to the art of Grammar, i. e. the
Method of attaining to any language by certain Rules. Granadil, (Span.) a
Diminutive of Granado, which signifies a Pomegranate, also a certain Engine
like a Pomegranate, which is to be shot out of a piece of Ordinance. Granary,
(lat.) a place to lay Corn in. Grandevity, (lat.) ancientnesse, seniority of
years. Grand distress, in Common Law, is a distress taken of all the Lands,
or Goods that a man has within the County, or Baylywick. Grandezza, or
Grandeur, (Spanish and French) greatness of state, or of spirit. Cleopatra.
Grandiloquence, or Grandiloquie, (lat.) Majesty, or height of style.
Grandimoniensers, a religious order, erected in the year 1076. by one Stephen
of Avern. Grandinous, (lat.) belonging to hail. Grandity, (lat.) greatness.
Grand Sergeanty, a certain kind of service, whereby the Lords of Scrivelby, in
Cheshire held their Land, which was to come well armed and mounted into the
Kings presence upon the day of his Coronation, and by public Proclamation to
offer himself to maintain the Kings right by open Combat, against whosoever
should dare to oppose it, this Tenure belonged by Hereditary succession to the
Family of the Dimmocks. Grange, from the Latin word Grana, a building which
has barnes, stables, stalls and all other places necessary for Husbandry.
Granicus, a River in Bithynia, famous for the great battle between Alexander
and Darius, wherein above 600000 Persians were slain and taken. Granito,
(Ital.) a kind of speckled marble found in diverse places of Italy. Graniferous,
(lat.) bearing kernels, or grains. Grantcester, see Gron. Granule, (lat.) a
little grain. Graphical, (Greek) curiously described or wrought. Graplings,
crooked irons that hold ships together, they are called also Grapnels.
Grassation, (lat.) a spoiling, or laying waste. Gratiae expectativae, certain
Bulls whereby the Pope used to grant out Mandates of Ecclesiastical livings.
Gratianople, a City of Narbon in France. Gratianus, the name of a Roman
Emperor surnamed Funarius, he was perfidiously slain by Andragathius, one of
his Captains in Lions in France. Gratification, (lat.) a rewarding, or making
amends. Gratis, (lat.) freely, for nothing. Gratuity, (lat.) a free reward.
Gratulation, (lat.) a rejoicing in another behalf, also a thanking. A Grave,
see Greve. Grave a ship, to make her lie dry a ground, and to burn off the
filth with stubble. Graveolence, (lat.) a smelling rank, or strong. Graver, a
small piece of steel used in graving, formed Lozenge, or Diamond square, there
are different sorts of graving, see Sele-graving. Gravidity, (lat.) a being
with Child. Gravity, (lat.) heaviness, or weight, being applied to bodies,
also gravenesse, or soberness in behavior. Grant, in Common Law, is a gift
in writing, of such a thing as cannot be passed in word only. Grease, (a Term
of hunting) the fat of a Boar, or Hare, the fat of a Boar has an addition,
and is called Bevygreace. Greach-breach, see Grith-breach. Greaves, (French)
Armor for the legs. Grecisme, (Greek) a speaking after the Idiom of the
Greek tongue. Gree, willingness, from the French word Gre, or the Latin
Gratum. Green cloth, the name of a Court of Justice that used to fit in the
Coumpting-house of the Kings Court. Green hew, a Term used in the Forrest-laws,
signifying every thing that grows green within the Forest, it is also called
Vert. Greenwich, (q. Green Creek) a Town in Kent, where in old times there lay
at Rode a great Fleet of the Danes under Thurkill their Captain, who put to a
cruel death Ealpheg Archbishop of Canterbury; this place is also famous for a
Royal Palace, built by Humphry Duke of Gloucester, and by him named Placence, he
also built here upon a high Hill, a pleasant Town famous in Spanish fables.
Greese, a staire, or step, from the Latin word Gressus. Gregal, (lat.)
belonging to a flock. Gregory, a proper name of men, signifying in Greek
watchful, answering to the Latin Vigilius. Gregorian, a kind of Cap, also
Gregorian account, a correction of the Calender by Pope Gregory the 13th.
making the year to consist of 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, and 12 seconds,
whereas before according to the Julian account, it consisted of 365 days, and
6 hours. Gresham College, a fair house in the City of London, once the
habitation of Sir Thomas Gresham, who constituted it a College, and endowed it
with Revenues for the maintaining of Professors of Divinity, Law, Physic,
Astronomy, Geometry, and Music; the said Sir Thomas Gresham built also that
stately Fabric, commonly called the Royal Exchange. Greve, or Grave, a word of
authority among the Low Dutch, signifying as much as Lord, or Governor.
Griff-graff, (French) by hook, or by crook. Griffith, see Gryffith. A Grigge, a
young Eele. Grilliade, (French) a kind of meat broyled. Grimbald, or Grimoald,
a proper name of men, signifying in the German tongue power over anger. A Griph,
(old word) a riddle. Grishild, (Germ.) the proper name of diverse women,
signifying Gray Lady, in Latin Gesia. A Grit, a kind of fish, otherwise called
a Grample fish. Grith-breach, or Gich-breach, a breach of peace. Grith,
signifying in the Saxon tongue peace. Grobianisme, (French) slovenly behavior.
Grommets, in Navigation, are little rings made fast to the upper side of the
yard, to which the caskets. Groening, the chief Town of West Frizeland, from
the Dutch word Groen, i. e. Green, because it is seated in a Green place.
Gromel, or Gromil, a kind of Herb, called also Pearl plant. Gron, a Saxon
word, signifying a fenny place, whence some derive Grandcester, a Town in
Cambridge-shire. Groop, (old word) a pissing place. Grosvenour, i. e. great
Hunter, the name of a Noble family of Cheshire, commonly contracted into
Gravenour. Grot, (Ital.) a Cave. Grotesch, (Ital.) a kind of mixed, or confused
piece of painting, or sculpture, antic work; hence it is taken for any rude
misshapen thing. Grovelling, quasi Ground-lying, a lying prone, or with ones
face downward upon the ground. To Ground a ship, to bring her on the ground to
be trimmed. Ground Pine, a kind of Herb which creeps upon the ground, and has
a resemblance to the Pine Tree. Groundswell, a certain Herb, called in Latin
Senecio, because it quickly decays. Grouppade, (French) a Term in horsmanship,
being a lofty kind of management, and higher then an ordinary Curvet. A Growm,
an ensign to stretch woollen Cloth with, after it is woven. To grown, the
Forresters say a Buck growneth. Grum^sity, (lat.) a curdling of any liquid
substance into a thick mass, or clod. Gryffen, a certain animal feathered like
a foul, and having four feet as a beast, some derive it from the Hebrew word
Garaph, i. e. to snatch. Gryph, see Griph. Gryffith, an old British name,
signifying strong-faithed.
G U
Guadalquivir, a River of Andaluzia in Spain, anciently called Baetis.
Guadiana, a River of Portugal, now called Ana, which runs fourteen miles under
ground, whence they boast of a bridge whereon 10000 Cattle may feed. Guaiacum,
a certain drying wood, which is good against the venereal disease. Guastald, he
that has the custody of the Kings mansion houses, Castelein being he, who
only has the custody of Castles and Fortresses. Guastaliens, a religious
order of men and women, begun in the year 1537. by the Countess of Guastala. A
Gubbin, (old word) a fragment. Gubernation, (lat.) a governing, or ruling.
Gudgeons, rudder irons to ships. Guelphs and Gibellines, two great factions in
Italy. Guenliana, a valiant Lady, the wife of Gruffin, Prince of Wales, she
valiantly assailing Maurice of London, who invaded those parts, was with her
son Morgan slain in the battle. Guerdon, (French) a reward, some derive it
from the Greek word Cerdos, i. e. gain. Gugaws, see Gewgaws. Guidage, money
paid for safe conduct, through a strange Territory. Guidon, a Cornet of
Argolatiers that serve on hors-back with Petronels. Guilford, Sax. Geglford) a
Town in Surrey, the Royal Mansion in times past of the English Saxon Kings, who
had 75 Hages, i. e. houses wherein remained 175 men, here Elfrid the son of
King Ethelred was most barbarously betrayed by Goodwin, Earl of Kent, who
contrary to his faithful promise delivered him into the hands of Harold the
Dane, and by a cruel decimation slew almost all his men that came with him out
of Normandy. Guinethia, or Guineth, that part of Wales commonly called
South Wales, it is also called Venedotia. Guild, a society incorporate, from
the Dutch word Geld, i. e. money. Guld, a kind of weed growing among Corn,
called in Latin Maneleta, whence came the Law of Maneleta, ordained by King
Kenneth of Scotland; which was, that if any one suffered his land to be overrun
with weeds, he should forfeit an Ox. Gules, see Geules. Gule of August, the
first day of August, otherwise called Lammas day, in old Almanacks St. Peter ad
Vincula, it comes from the French word Gueul, i. e. a throat, because on that
day, a certain maid having a disease in her throat, was cured by kissing the
Chains, that St. Peter had been bound with at Rome. Gulf, or Gulf, a straight
passage between two Seas, it comes from the Greek word Colpos. Gulo^ity, (lat.)
gluttony. Gultwit, an old Saxon word, signifying an amends for trespass.
Gummilda, the wife of Asmond, King of Denmark, she killed her self for grief,
that her husband had been slain in battle. Gunora, a Famous Norman Lady, who
flourished in Shropshire and Cheshire, and held the Hamlet of Lanton in chief,
as of the honor of Mountgomery, by the service of giving to the King a
Barb'd-headed, whenever he should come into those parts to hunt in Cornedon
Chase. Gunwale, a piece of Timber in a ship, which reaches from the half deck
to the fore-castle on either side. Gurgitation, (lat.) an ingulphing, or
swallowing up. Gurnard, a kind of fish, so called. Gusset, an abatement in
Heraldry, formed of a Travers line drawn from the dexter chief, and descending
perpendicularly to the extreme base parts, or contrariwise. Gust, in
Navigation, is a sudden wind, also taken by some for a stranger, or guest.
Guttural, (lat.) belonging to the throat. Guzes, in Heraldry, signifies the
ball of the eye. Guy, a proper name of men, in Latin Guido, from the French
word Guide, i. e. a leader, or directour. Guy, a certain rope used in a ship,
to keep any thing from swinging in too fast.
G Y
Gy, (old word) a guide. Gibbositie, a bunchbacked, the Moons 3. parts full of
light. Gyges, a certain Lydian, to whom Candaules the King, having shown his
wife naked, she animated him to kill the King, which he did by the help of a
Ring, which made him invisible, and afterward marrying her, he made himself
King. Gymnasiarch, (Greek) the chief governor of a Gymnase, which is a place
for all manner of exercise, both of mind and body. Gymnosophists, (Greek) a
Sect of Philosophers among the Indians, who went naked, living in deserts, and
feeding upon Herbs. Gyndes, a River, (not far from Euphrates) which Cyrus
besieging Babylon, cut into 46 several Channels. Gypsation, (lat.) a
plaistering with Mortar. Gyration, (lat.) a fetching a compass, from Gyre, a
great circle. Gyron, in Heraldry, signifies a quarter, or half a Cube
described by a Diagonal line. Gysarme, the same as Gisarme.
H A
HAbberdasher, one that sells a great many several wares, from the Dutch words,
habt jhr das, i. e. have you that. Habeas Corpus, a Writ, which a man Indicted
before Justices of Peace, and laid in prison, may have out of the Kings bench,
to remove himself thither at his own charges. Haberdepois, see Averdupoise.
Habergeon, a diminutive of Haubert, see Haubert. Habilement, (French)
clothing, also armor. Hability, (lat.) an aptness, or capacity. Habit,
(lat.) custom, or use, also the attire, or clothing of the body. Habitation,
or Habitacle, (lat.) a dwelling, a place of residence. Habitual, (lat.) grown
to a habit, or custom. Habitude, (lat.) the same as habit. Hables, (French) a
haven, or port. Hachee, or Hach, (French) a certain French dish made of sliced
meat. Hadock, a kind of fish, called a Codfish. Hadrian, the name of a great
Roman Emperor, who was so called from the City Hadria, whence he deduced his
original, the word is derived by Gesner, from the Greek word (...), i. e.
gross, or wealthy. Hadrianople, (Greek) a City of Macedon in Greece. Haemon,
a young man of Thebes, who loving Antigone, the daughter of Oedipus and
Jocasta, hearing that she was put to death by Creon, he killed himself over her
Tomb. Haemorrhagie, (Greek) a violent bursting out of blood. Haemorrhoides,
(Greek) a certain disease, called in English the Piles. Haemus, a great
Mountain dividing Thessaly from Thrace, at the foot of which are the fields of
Tempe; it was so called from Haemus the son of Boreas, and Orithya. Haerede
abducto, a Writ that lies for him, who having the Wardship of his Tenant under
age, has him conveyed away from him by another. Haeresie, (Greek) a division
in the Church, caused by some erroneous opinion, contrary to the fundamental
points of religion. Haesitation, (lat.) a sticking at any thing, a doubting.
Haga, a word used in some old Writs, for a house. Hagard, (French) untamed,
unruly, also a Hagard Hawk is taken for a wild Hawk. Hagiographer, (Greek) a
writer of holy things. Haggase, a kind of pudding made of Hogs flesh. Haie,
from the French word Hay, a kind of Net to catch Conies, which is commonly
pitch'tunder hedges. Hail, a word of salutation, from the Saxon word Heal, i.
e. health. Hair, is when a Masculine and Diurnal Planet in the day time the
earth, or a Feminine nocturnal Planet in the night time under the earth.
Haimhaldatio Catallorum, signifies in the practick of Scotland, a seeking
restitution for goods wrongfully taken away. Haketon, a Jacket without sleeves.
Chaucer. Halbert, a kind of weapon, called in Spanish Halabarda. Halcyon, a
bird, called a King-fisher, which builds its Nest, and breeds upon the
Seashore, about the winter ^ol^tice, for the space of fourteen days, wherein
the weather uses to be very calm, whence by Metaphor peaceable and quiet
times, are called Halcyon days, the Poets feign that Halcyon the wife of
Caeyx, was turned into this bird. See Alcyon. Haledon, a place in
Northumberland, where Oswald King of that County, in a great pitched field
against the British King Cedwall, having erected a cross unto Christ, obtained
the victory, and afterward became a devout Christian. This place was in old
times called Heavenfeild. Half-merk, or Noble, a piece of coin valueing 6
shillings 8 pence. Half-seal, is taken for the sealing of Commissions unto
delegates, appointed by an appeal in Ecclesiastical or Maritime causes.
Halicarnassus, the chief City of Caria, where the famous Tomb of Mausolus was
built by Queen Artemisia. Halidome, (Saxon) holy judgment, whence, By my
Halidome used anciently to be a great oath among country people. Halieuticks,
(Greek) books treating of the Art of fishing. Halifax, signifying in old
English holy hair, a Town in Yorkshire, so called from a Maids head, that had
been cut off by a Priest of that place, which being hung upon a yew-tree as a
holy matter, was had in great veneration by the people, who gathering of the
sprigs of the tree, took it for her hair. Halinitre, (Greek) a kind of Mineral
commonly called Saltpeter. Hall a Ship, to call to her to know whence she is,
and whither bound. Hallage, (French) a fee due for clothes brought for sale to
Blackwell Hall, or to the Lord of a Market, for commodities vended there.
Hallelujah, see Allelujah. H^llucination, (lat.) error or blindness of
judgment. Halm, from the Hebrew word, halam, to shake the stalk of corn, from
the ear to the root. Halsier, a term in Navigation, he that draws the Halser or
Cable wherewith boats are towed along some Channel. Halo, (Greek) a circle
about the Moon, and others of the Stars. Halonesus, an Island in the Aegean
Sea, which was defended by women, when all the men were slain. To make Halt,
(French) to make a stop, a term of War. Hallyattes, a King of Lydia, and father
to Croesus, who was overcome by Cyrus. Halymote, see Healgemote. Hamadryades,
(Greek) wood-nimphs. Hamburg, the chief City of Lower Saxony, so called from
Jupiter Hamon, there worshipped. Hames, two crooked pieces of wood which
encompasse a horse-collar, from the Ham of the leg which is crooked, or the
Latin word hamus, a hook. Hamkin, a kind of pudding. Hamling of dogs, see
expeditating. Hamlet, a dwelling house, a diminutive, from the Dutch word Ham,
i. home Hammocks, hanging beds used in ships. Hampton Court, a Palace belonging
to the Kings of England, standing in Middlesex upon the River Thames, it was
built in a very costly and magnificent manner by Cardinal Wolsey, and finished
by King Henry the eighth. Hankwit, or Hangwit, (Sax.) a theif escaped out of
custody. Hannibal, a great Captain of the Carthaginians, who having long made
war with the Romans, was beaten by Scipio, and in the end poisoned himself, the
word signifies in the Punic tongue Gracious Lord. Hanno, a Carthaginian, who
seeking to make himself master of Carthage, was at length taken and had his
eyes put out. Hannonia, or Haynault, one of the 17 Provinces of the Low
Countries. Hanselines, upper sloppes. Chaucer. Hanse-towns, certain Towns in
Germany, as Hambourg, Magdenbourg, Lubeck, etc. being the principal seats of
the Dutch Merchants. Hans signifying in the French tongue, a Society or
Corporation of Merchants. Hansel, (Dutch) the first money that is bestowed with
a Tradesman in a morning Hans-en-kelder, a Dutch word, signifying Jack in the
Cellar; it is commonly taken for a child in the mothers belly. Hansiatick,
belonging to the Hanse Towns. Hanten, (old word) they use, or accustom.
Haphertlet, a kind of course cover^ed for a bed. Haquebut, (French) the same as
Harquebuse. Haracana, or Herocane, a violent whirlwind or tempest, which
happens once in 9 years. Some say it comes from the Spanish word Arancar, to
pull up by the roots. Harald, or Herald, (French) quasi herus altus, i.
high-master, is an Officer whose employment is to denounce war, or proclaim
peace, to judge and examine Gentlemen's Arms, to marshal the Solemnities at a
Princes Coronation, and such like. Harangue, (French) a Speech or Oration.
Harase, (French) to tire out, to weary, to disquiet. Harbinger, from the Dutch
words her benghen, i. hither keep, an officer in a Princes Court, that alotteth
those of the household their lodgings in time of progress; but vulgarly taken
for any one that goes before, and provideth lodgeing. Harbor, a Heart is said
to Harbor when it goes to rest. Harelip, a lip cloven like a Hares lip.
Harepipe, a snare made of a piece of elder or cane to catch a Hare with.
Hariant, or Hauriant, in Heraldry, is when a fish is represented standing
upright. Hariolation, (lat.) a southsaying. Harlot, or Arletta, Concubine to
Robert Duke of N^rmandy, and mother to William the Conqueror, in disgrace of
whom all whores came to be called Harlots. Harman, a proper name of men,
signifying in Dutch the General of an Army, answerable to the Greek
Polemarchus. Harmodius, and Aristogeiton, two famous conspiratours against
Hipparchus the Tyrant of Athens. Harmonia, the daughter of Mars and Venus, and
the wife of Cadmus, to her is attributed by some, the first invention of
Musical Harmony. Harmonides, a Trojan whom Minerva inspired with all kind of
manufacture. Harmonical, or Harmonious, full of Harmony, i. musical consent or
agreement. Harold, see Harald. Harpalice, the daughter of Lycurgus, she was a
great huntresse, and hearing that her father was taken prisoner by the Getans,
rescued him by force of arms. Harp, the name of the Fauchion wherewith Mercury
slew Argos and P^rseus Medusa. Harping-Irons, certain Irons to strike great
fish withal, being at one end like a barbed arrow, and having at the other end
a cord. Harpings, the breadth of a ship at the bow. Harpocrates, an Image used
in the ceremonies of Serapis and Isis, made with one hand upon his mouth, and
called by the Egyptians, the god of silence. Harpyes, the three daughters of
Pontus and Terra, Aello, Celaeno, and Ocypete, they were part women, and part
birds, having claws like vultures. Homer says, that upon Celaeno, whom he
calls Podarges, Zephyrus begat Balius, and Xanthus, the horses of Achilles.
Heart, in the Forest Laws, is a Stag of 5 years old, if having been hunted by
the King or Queen, he escape alive, he is called a Heart royal. Hart-hall, a
place for Students in the University of Oxford, built by Water Stapleton Bishop
of Exceter, together with Exceter College, in the time of King Edward the
second, who in imitation of him, built Oriall College and St. Mary Hall.
Hatches of a ship, are trap-doors to let things down into the hold; they are
also called scutles. Hauberk, or Haubert, (French) a coat of maile. Havelock, a
certain Danish foundling of the Royal blood, who as it is reported, was fosterd
by one Grime a Merchant, and from a skullen in the Kings kitchen, was for his
valor and conduct in Military affairs, promoted to the ma^riage of the Kings
daughter. Havering, a Town in Essex, an ancient retiring place of the Kings of
England, so called from the fabulous conceit of a ring delivered by a Pilgrim,
as sent from St. John Baptist, to King Edward the Confessor. Haunt, a term in
hunting, the walk of a Deer, or the place of his ordinary passage, in French
Enceinte. Hauriant, see Hariant. Hauselines, or Hanselines, (old word) breeches
or slops. Haw, a hedge, from the French word Hay, also an old word, signifying
black, also a disease in the eye. Haward, or Hayward, a keeper of the common
Heard of the Town, who is to look that they neither break nor crop hedges, from
the French words Hay, a hedge, and Guard, custody. Hawise, a proper name of
women. See Avice. Hawkers, certain deceitful people, that go up and down from
place to place, buying and selling old brass or pewter which ought to be
uttered in open market. Hawlkes, (old word) corners. Hawten, (old word)
insolent. Hawthorn, white thorn, from Haegdoren. Haeg in Dutch signifying
white. Hazard, or Hasard, the ace of the dice, metaphorically any doubtful
event. Hay, a Town in Brecknockshire, called in British Trekethle, i. a Town
in a Grove of Hazel-trees, it was formerly a very flourishing place till ruined
and depopulated by that arch rebel Owen Glendowerdwy. Hayboot, signifies in
common Law, a permission to take thorns to make or repair hedges. Hayn, (old
word) hatred.
H E
Headborow, the chief of the frank pledge, the same as Constable, or
Tithingman, from heord, i. head, and borhe, i. pledge. Heafling, (Sax.) a
captive. Heafod, (Sax.) a head. Healgemote, or Halymote, a Saxon word,
signifying a Court Baron, or meeting of the Tenants in one Hall. Hearse, an
empty Tomb, erected for the honor of the dead, from the Greek word Arsis, a
lifting up. Hebdoma^e, (Greek) the number 7. a week which consists of 7 days.
Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, and daughter of Juno, without a father, she was for
her beauty preferred by Jupiter to be his Cup^bearer, but one time falling
down, and discovering her secret parts to the gods, she was removed from her
place. Hebetude, (lat.) bluntness, dullness. Hebrews, a name given to the
Israelites, because they spoke the ancient Hebrew Language, which continued in
the Family of Heber, after the division of tongues. Hebrides, certain Islands
in the Deu^aledonian Sea, called also Ebudae, and the Western Islands, they are
44 in number, but the chief of them are Levissa, Eusta, Mula, and Ila. Hebrus,
a River of Thrace, where the head of Orpheus was thrown, after his body had
been torn in pieces by the Bacchides. Hecalius, a name attributed to Jupiter by
Theseus, from Hecale an old woman who had devoted her life to Jupiter, for his
safe return. Hecate, the daughter of Jupiter and Latona, and the sister of
Apollo. Some think her to be the same with Diana, or the Moon, also the name of
a famous Inchantresse of Thrace. Hecatomb, (Greek) a sacrifice wherein a
hundred beasts were offered at one time. Hecatompolis, an Epithet of the Island
of Crete, which is said to have had a hundred Cities in it. Hecatompylae, the
name of a City of Egypt, otherwise called Egyptian Thebes. Heck, the name of
an Engine to take fish withal, from the Dutch word hecken, i. to pick, or heck a
bramble. Heckled, (old word) wrapped. Hecktick fever, a fever which is
habitual, and which inflames the solid parts of the body, it comes from the
Greek word Hexis, a habit. Hector, the son of Priam and Hecuba, he was
accounted the stoutest of all the Trojans, slew Protesilaus and Patroclus, but
was at length slain himself by Achilles, the word signifies Defender. Hecuba,
the daughter of Dyamas, the wife of Priam King of Troy, it is feigned of her,
that after the taking of Troy she was turned into a bitch. Hederal Crown, a
Crown of Ivy, from the Latin word Hedera. Here and Hace, (old word) hoarse and
harsh. Hegesistratus, an Ephesian, who was the builder of the City Elea in
Asia. Hegira, the Epoch or computation of time among the Turks. Heinfare or
H^nfare, (old word) a departing of a servant from his master, from Hine and
fare, passage. Heir of blood, in Common Law, is he who succeeds by right of
blood in any man's Lands or Tenements in fee, but heir of Inheritance is he that
cannot be defeated of his inheritance upon any displeasure. Heirloom,
signifies all implements of a house, which having belonged to the house for
certain descents, accrue to the heir with the house it self. Loom signifying a
frame to weave in. Height, a virtue in writing or speaking, wherein the
expressions are neither too inflate, nor too creeping, but observing a decent
majesty between both. Helchesaites, a sect of Heretics, who held it no sin to
deny Christ in times of persecution; their first Teacher was one Helchesaus.
Helchysm, the dross and scum of silver. Hele, (old word) to cover. Helena, the
daughter of Jupiter and Laeda, she was married to Menelaus, and brought forth
Hermione, afterward being stole away by Paris, and being demanded of Priamus
by the Greeks, the Trojans refused to send her back, which was the occasion of
a very great war, and of the destruction of Troy. The word signifies in Greek
pitiful. Heliacal rising of a Star, is when a Star which was at first hid by
the light of the Sun, afterward appears; from the Greek word Helios, i. the
Sun. Heliades, the daughters of the Sun, and sisters of Phaeton, who wept
themselves into Poplar-trees for the death of their brother, and their tears
became Amber; their names were Phaaethusa, Lampelusa, and Lampetia. Heliconian,
belonging to Helicon, a hill of Phocis, sacred to Apollo and the Muses.
Helioscopie, (Greek) the furthest point of the Suns course in his ascension or
descention. Heliotrope, (Greek) the name of a plant commonly called Turnsole,
also a kind of precious stone. Hell, the daughter of Athamas King of Thebes,
she with her brother Phryxus, crossing over the Pontick Sea upon a golden Ram,
being frighted with the danger, fell into the sea, from which accident, that
sea was ever after called Hellespont. Hellebore* the name of a certain plant,
called also Melampodium, which is good against madness. Hellenistical,
belonging to Greece or the Greek Language, from Hellas, the ancient name of
that Country. Helm, signifies in Navigation a piece of wood fastened to the
rudder in a ship or boat, also the helm of State is metaphorically taken for
the chief place in the government of a Nation. Helmed in stark stowers, (old
word) defended in sharp assaults. Heluation, (lat.) a playing the glutton, a
greedy devouring. Helve, (old word) a handle of anything. Helvetia, a Country
environed by the Alps and the Hill Jura, the Rivers Rhene, and Rhone, it is now
called Swizzerland. Hemerology, (Greek) a Calender, or Book wherein are
registered the passages of every day. Hemicranie, (Greek) a disease in the head
called the Meagrim. Hemicycle, (Greek) a half circle. Hemingstone, a Town in
Suffolk, which one Baldwin le Pettour held of the King, per Saltum, sufflatum,
and Bumbulum seu Pettum, i. e. by this Tenure, that on every Christmasse Day
before the King, he should dance, puff up his cheeks, and fart. Hemisphere
(Greek) half the compass of the heavens, or so much as is visible above the
Horison. Hemlock, a certain plant, called in Latin Cicuta, whose juice being
poison used to be given to capital offenders. Henares, a River in Spain, near
to which stands a Town called Alcala di Henares. Henbane, in Greek Hyoscyamus,
an herb which is counted rank poison. Henchman, or Heinsman, a German word,
signifying a domestic servant. It is taken among us for a page of honor.
Hend, (old word) neat, fine, gentle. Hengston hill, a hill in Cornwall, where
the British Danmonii calling the Danes to assist them to drive the English out
of Devonshire, were by King Egbert ^otally defeated and ruined. Hengwit, see
Hankwit. Hengest, the name of him who led the first English men into this Isle,
the word signifies in the Saxon Horseman. Heniochus, vide Auriga. Henry, the
name of seven Emperors of Germany, eight Kings of England, four Kings of
France, four Kings of Castile: the word comes from the German Einric, i. rich
and powerful, or Herric, i. rich Lord, or else is contracted from Honoricus.
Hent, (old word) to catch. Hepatical, (Greek) belonging to the Liver.
Hephaestian mountains, certain burning mountains in Lycia. Heptahedrical,
(Greek) having seven sides. Heptagonal, (Greek) belonging to a Heptagon or
figure of seven angles. Heptarchy, (Greek) a sevenfold government, or
government of seven men, as that of the Saxon Kings here in England. Heraclea,
a City of Narbon in France, now called St. Gilles. Heraclitus, the name of a
famous Ephesian Philosopher who used to weep as often as he thought upon the
misery of the World. Herald, see Harald. Herawdes, (old word) feats of
activity. Herbage, signifies in Common Law, the fruit of the earth provided by
nature for the cattle, also the liberty that a man has to feed his cattle in
another man's ground, or in the Forest. Herbert, a proper name of men,
signifying in Dutch, famous Lord. Herbigage, or Herborow, (old word) lodging.
Herbalist, or Herbary, (lat.) one that has knowledge in the nature and
temperaments of herbs. Herbenger, see Harbenger. Herbert, a proper name,
signifying in Dutch bright Lord. Herbipolis, a City of Germany, now called
Wirtzberg. Herbosity, (lat.) plenty of herbs. Herbulent, (lat.) grassy, full of
herbs. Hercinia, a great Wood in Germany, sixty days journeys in length, and
nine in breadth. Herculean, belonging to Hercules, the chief of which name was
Hercules the son of Jupiter and Alcmena, he being hated by Juno because he was
born of a Concubine, was by her engaged in 12 very dangerous enterprises, which
are called Hercules his 12 labors, all which he overcame to his great renown;
whence every great atcheivment came to be called a Herculean labor. He is said
to have built two pillars on Mount Calpe, and Mount Avila, as the utmost bounds
of the Western World, with the inscription of Nil ultra, and at this day those
places are called Hercules pillars. This name Hercules signifies in Greek,
Glory or Illumination of the Air. Here de Caesar, a certain Epoch or Account,
from which the Saracens and Arabians used to compute their number of years, as
we do from the year of our Lord. It was also used in Spain for a great while,
the word signifies as much as the Monarcy of Caesar. Hereditary, or
Haereditary, (lat.) coming by Inheritance. Hereditaments, signify in Common
Law, all such things as descend to a man and his heirs by way of Inheritance,
and fall not within the compass of an Executor as Chattels do. Hereford, the
chief City of Herefordshire, anciently called Tresawith, from the Beech-trees
growing thereabout. It was built as some say by King Edward the Elder, in that
tract of the Country called of old Ereinuc or Archenfeild, out of the ruins of
the ancient Ariconium; the fame of this City was augmented by the Martyrdom of
Ethelbert King of East England, who going to woo the daughter of Offa King of
the Mercians, was here forelaid and murdered by the procurement of Quendred
Offa's wife. Heremitage, or Ermitage, (French) a solitary place, a dwelling for
Hermites, i. persons that devote themselves to a religious solitude. Heresy,
see Haeresie. Heresiarch, or Haeresiarch, (Greek) the principal Author of any
Heresy or Sect. Heretog, or Hertogh, a Leader of an Army, or a Duke, from the
Saxon words Here an Army, and Toga, to draw out. Herility, (lat.) Masterly
Authority. Heriot, or Hariot, has formerly been used to signify a tribute
given by a Tenant to the Lord of the Manor for his better preparation toward
war; Here in the Saxon tongue signifying an Army; but now it is taken for the
best chattel that a Tenant has at the hour of his death, which is due unto the
Lord by custom. Herlaxton, a Town in Lincolnshire, near which was ploughed up a
brazen vessel, wherein a Golden Helmet beset with precious Stones (which was
given as a present to Catherine of Spain, wife to King Henry the eighth) was
found. Herman, see Harman. Hermaphrodite, (Greek) a word compounded of Hermes,
i. Mercury and Aphrodite, i. Venus, and signifies one of both Sexes, Man and
Woman. See the story of Hermaphroditus and Salmacis, elegantly described in the
fourth Book of Ovids Metamorphosis. Hermetical, (Greek) belonging to Mercury
the messenger of the gods, who is called in Greek Hermes, or to Hermes
Trismegistus, the great Egyptian Philosopher. Hermione, the daughter of
Menelaus, she was betrothed by her father, after the end of the Trojan war, to
Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, which Orestes (to whom she had been before
espoused by her Grandfather Tyndarus) taking ill, he slew Pirrhus in the Temple
of Apollo. Hermitage, Hermit, see Heremitage. Hermotimus, a certain man of
Clazomena, whose Soul used to leave his body, and wander up and down, bringing
him news of things that were done a great way off, his body lying in the mean
while as it were asleep, but at length his enemies finding his body, burnt it,
so that his Soul had no habitation left to return to. Hernious, (lat.) bursten
bellied. Herod, surnamed Antipater, a King of the Jews, created by the Roman
Senate, he destroyed the Temple, built by Zorobabel, and erected another more
magnificient in its place, he put his wife Maria^ne to death, and his two sons,
Aristobulus and Alexander. Heroic, or Heroical, (Greek) noble, lofty, becoming
a Hero, whence Heroic Poem, is a Poem treating of Heroic actions, or persons.
Heroine, a woman of a noble spirit, and excellent virtues. A Heron, a kind of
bird, called in Latin Ardea, ab ardendo, because its dung burns whatsoever it
touches. Herophila, the name of the Erythraean Sibil, who having asked Tarquin
a very great price for her three books of Prophesies, and being refused it, she
burnt 2. and afterward received as much for that one that was left, as she
demanded for all the three. Herostratus, one that to purchase himself fame,
burnt the Temple of Diana. Hersilia, the wife of Romulus, who after her death
was worshipped by the name of Hora, or the goddess of youth. Hertford, i. e.
the Ford of Hearts, the chief Town of Hertford-shire, having a Castle upon the
River Lea, built as some say, by King Edward the Elder, and augmented by
Gislebert de Clare, who was Earl of this Town in King Henry the seconds days,
Bid treating of the Synod that was held here in the year 670. calls it
Herudford, i. e. Redford. Herthus, a goddess worshipped by the ancient Saxons,
in the same nature as Tellus by the Latins, some think the word earth to be
thence derived. Hesione, the daughter of Laomedon, King of Troy, whom Hercules,
having freed her from a great Whale, gave in marriage to his friend Telamon,
after he had ransack't Troy, because her father Laomedon performed not his
promise to him. Hesperus, the son of Japetus, and brother of Atlas, who flying
from his Country, went and inhabited in Italy, whence that Country came to be
called Hesp^ria, he had three daughters, Aegle, Arethusa, and Hesperethusa,
called the Hesperides, who lived in the Hesperian Garden, whose Trees bare
golden Apples, that were kept by a watchful Dragon, whom Hercules slew; it is
also feigned of Hesperus, that after his death he was changed into the Evening
Star. Hests, (old word) commands, or decrees. Hete, (old word) a vow, offer, or
promise. Heteroclite, in Grammar, is taken for a Nown, that has a different
way of declining from other Nouns. Heterodox, (Greek) being of another opinion,
or judgment, then what is generally received. Heterogeneal, (Greek) being of
another or different kind. Heteroscians, (Greek) people that live between the
Equator and the Tropicks, whose shadows still incline more one way then
another. Hetruria, a Country of Italy, otherwise called Tuscia, or Tuscanie,
the people whereof were in ancient times much given to sooth-saying; it
reaches from Macra to Tyber. Heveningham, a Town in Suffolk, which gave name
and residence to an ancient family, commonly contracted into Henningham. Hew,
(old word) color. Hewmond, (old word) shining. Hexagonal, (Greek) belonging to
a Geometrical figure, having six angles, or corners. Hexameter verse, (Greek) a
verse consisting of six feet, it is otherwise called a Heroic verse, because
it is used in Heroic Poems. Hexaptote, (Greek) a Noune declined with six
cases. Hexastick, (Greek) a Stanza, consisting of six verses. Heydelberg, a
City of Germany, so called from the Dutch words Heyd, i. e. sweet Broom, and
Berg, i. e. a Hill.
H I
Hiation, (lat.) an opening asunder, or gaping. Hibernia, a fair Island, lying
on the Western part of Britain; it is now called Ireland. Hibride, a Mongrel,
or a Creature of a mixed generation; it comes from the Greek word (...),
disgrace. Hichel, or Hatchel, an instrument to kemb Hemp, or Flax withal.
Hickway, a certain bird, otherwise called a wood pecker, or wryneck, in Greek
Jynx. Hidage, a certain Tax, which upon extraordinary occasions used to be paid
for every hide of Land. Hide of Land, from the Dutch word Heyd, i. e. a wide
field, also Heath and Broom, signifies in Law, such a quantity of Land as may
be plough'd with one plough in a year, which according to some men's accounts is
about a hundred Acres, eight Hides, being a Knights fee. Hide and Gain, arable
Land, or the same as gainage. Hidel, a kind of sanctuary, or hiding place.
Hierarchy, (Greek) a spiritual government, also the holy order of Angels,
which consists of nine degrees, Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones, Dominations,
Principalities, Powrs, Virtues, Arch-Angles, and Angels. Hieratick paper, fine
paper, dedicated to religious uses. Hieroglyphics, certain Mysterious
Characters, or Images, used among the ancient Egyptians, whereby holy
sentences were expressed. Hierograms, (Greek) sacred writings. Hierome, or
Hieronymus, the name of one of the ancient fathers, the word signifying in
Greek holy name, there was also a Tyrant of Sicily, so called, who contrary to
the advice of his father Hiero, taking part with Hannibal against the Romans,
was at length slain by them. Hieronymians, a certain order of Monks, instituted
by St. Hierome, there were also certain Hermites so called, whose order was
founded in the year 1365. by one Granel of Florence. Hierosolyme, the famous
City of Judaea, vulgarly called Jerusalem. Higham, a Town in Suffolk, which
gave name and residence to an ancient family so called. Hight, (old word)
named. Hilarion, a certain Hermit of Syria, famous for many great miracles.
Hilarity, (lat.) cheerfulness, or mirth. Hildebert, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Dutch famous Lord. Himple, an old Saxon word, signifying to halt,
or go lame. Hin, a certain Hebrew measure, containing 12 Sextaries, or Logins,
a Login being a certain measure, which contains about the quantity of six
Egg-shells. Hine, or Hind, is commonly used for a servant at husbandry.
Hippace, a kind of Cheese made of Mares milk. Hipparchus, a Tyrant of Athens,
who succeeded Pisistratus, and having deflowered a Virgin, Harmodius and
Aristogeiton conspired against him, and slew him, also the master of horse, a
chief Officer among the Athenians, was called Hipparchus. Hippe, the daughter
of Chiron, she was a great huntresse upon Mount Peleus, and being got with
Child, was changed into a Mare. Hippiades, (Greek) images representing women
on hors-back. Hippocentaurs, see Centaurs. Hippocrates, a famous Physician of
the Island of Coos, he lived 104 years, and was had in great honor by
Artaxerxes, King of Persia. Hippocren, a Fountain of Boeotia, sacred to the
Muses. Hippodame, see Pelops. Hippodrom, (Greek) a place for tilting, or
hors-racing. Hippogryph, (Greek) a beast represented to the fancy, being half a
horse, and half a griffin. Hippolyta, a Queen of the Amazons, whom Hercules
gave to Theseus for his wife. Hippolytus, the son of Theseus and Hippolyte, he
addicted himself wholly to hunting, but being accused of adultery by Phoedra
his mother in Law, because he had denied her, when she solicited him to lie
with her, he fled away and was torn in piec^s by the wild horses that drew his
Chariot, afterward his limbs being gathered up, and he restored to life by
Aesculapius, at the request of Diana, he went into Italy and was called
Virbius, and built a City, which from his wives name was called Ancia.
Hippomachie, (Greek) a fighting on hors-back. Hippomanes, the son of Megareus
and Merope, who winning the Race from Atalanta, the daughter of Sichaeneus, by
throwing golden Apples in her way, he obtained her for his wife, but because he
could not abstain from lying with his wife in the Temple of Cybele, he was
turned into a Lion, and she into a Lioness. Hippon, the name of a City of
Africa, whereof St. Austin was Bishop. Hippona, an ancient goddess, who was
worshipped as the goddess of Hors-coursing, and her image used to be placed in
stables. Hipp^nax, an Ephesian Poet, who writ so sharply against some that
painted him ridiculously, that he caused them to hang themselves. Hippotades,
the surname of Aeolus, King of the winds. Hipsicratea, the wife of Mithridates,
King of Pontus, who loved her husband so much, that she followed him in all
dangers and extremities. Hircine, (lat.) belonging to a Goat. Hirculation,
(lat.) a certain disease in a Vine, which causes it to bear no fruit. Hircus,
the left shoulder of Auriga. Hirsute, (lat.) rough, bristly, full of hair.
Hispalis, a famous City of Spain, situate upon the River Boetis; it is now
called Sevil. Hispania, the Kingdom of Spain, anciently divided into Boetica,
now called Granada. Lusitania, now called Portugal and Tarraconensis, which
contains the Kingdom of Arragon, and part of Castile. Hispid, (lat.) having
rough hairs, or bristles. Historiographer, (Greek) a Writer of Histories, a
Historian. Historiologie, (Greek) a historical discourse. Histrionical, (lat.)
belonging to a Histrio, or stage player. Hithe, a little Haven to land wares
out of boats.
H L
Hlaford, or Laford, (Saxon) a Lord. Hleafdian, or Leafdian, (Sax.) a Lady.
H O
Hoane, a Saxon word, signifying a fine whetstone. Hobbie, a kind of Hawk,
called in Latin Alaudarius, also a little Irish Nag. Hoblers, certain Irish
Knights, which used to serve upon Hobbies. Hock, and Hocks, an old English
phrase, signifying mire and dirt. Hocktide, a certain festival time, celebrated
about Candlemasse, for the death of Hardiknute, the last King of the Danes; it
is also called Blazetide, in Latin Fugalia. Hocus-pocus, a made word,
signifying a Jugler, a shewer of tricks by Legier de Main, or sleight of hand.
A Hodge-poge, or Hotch-pot, a Hachee, or flesh cut to pieces, and sodden
together with Herbs, also a Law-term, signifying a commixtion, or putting
together of land for the better division of it. Hodget, a Persian Priest.
Hodiernal, (lat.) belonging to the present day, or time. Hoghenhine, in
Common Law, is he that comes to a house Guest-wise, and lies there the third
night, after which he is accounted one of the family. Hogoo, a word vulgarly
used for a high savor, or taste, it comes from the French word Hautgoust.
Hogshead, a measure o^ wine, containing the fourth part of a Tun. A Hogsteer, a
wild Boar of three years old. Hoker, (Sax.) peevishness. Holland, one of the
three parts, into which Lincolnshire is divided, from which the Earl of
Holland deriveth his Title, the other two are called Kest^ven, and Lindsey.
Holm, a certain Tree, called otherwise a Hollie-tree, also the same as Halm.
Holocaust, (Greek) a burnt-offering, or sacrifice laid whole on the Altar.
Holour, (old word) a whore-monger. Holsatia, quasi Holt Sassia, i. e. woody
Germany. Holtz, signifying in Dutch, wood, it is a Country of Germany vulgarly
called Holstein. Homage, the Oath that a Vassal, or Tenant swears to his
Lord, also the Jury of a Court Baron, consisting of such as owe Homage to the
Lord of the Fee, from the Greek word Omoo, i. e. to swear. Homer, a famous
Greek Poet, called at first Melesigenes, because he was born by the River
Melete, he writ a Poem concerning the wars of Troy, which was called Ilias, and
another of the Travels of Ulysses, called Odysseis. He is called by some the
Moeonian Prophet. Homesoken, or Hamsoken, an immunity from an amerciament, for
entering into houses violently, and without License; it comes from the Dutch
words Heym, a house, and Suchen, to seek. Homicide, (lat.) Manslaughter, or
Murder. Homily, (Greek) a Speech, or Sermon. Homoeomerie, (Greek) a likeness
of parts. Homogeneal, (Greek) being of the same kind. Homologie, (Greek) a
confessing, or agreeing. Homonymous, (Greek) things of several kinds, having
the same denomination, a Term in Logic. Honie-suckle, a kind of flowr,
otherwise called a wood-binde. Honi s^it qui mal y Pense, a common French
Motto, signifying in English, blame be to him, who thinks ill. Honor, in
Common Law, is taken for the more noble sort of Seigneuries. Honour-point, in
Heraldry, is the upper part of an Escutcheon, when the breadth thereof is
divided into three equal parts. Honorary, (lat.) done, or conferred upon any
one in token of honor. Honorius, the name of one of the Roman Emperors, the
son of Theodosius the first, who divided the Empire between his two sons,
assigning to Arcadius the Eastern part, to Theodosius the Western part.
Honymoon, an expression commonly applied to new married people, who loving
violently at first, soon cool in their affection. Hope-Castle, a Castle in
Flimtshire, to which King Edward the first retired, when the Welsh-men set upon
him unawares; it is near Caergurle Castle. Hophas, a River that flows by
Haliartus, a City of Boeotia, formerly called Isomantus. Hoplochrysme, (Greek)
(...) of weapons with the weapon-(...)* Hoqueton, (French) a (...) of short
Coat without sleeves. Horae, or the hours, they were feigned by the Poets to be
certain goddesses, the daughters of Jupiter and Themis, their names, see in
Hyginus. Horary, (lat.) hourly. Horatius Cocles, a famous Roman, who fighting
against P^rsenna, King of the Hetrurians, defended a bridge himself against all
the enemies forces, until the bridge was cut down, and after that he leapt
into Tyber, and swomme to his own people, also Horatius Flaccus, a famous
Lyrick Poet of Venusium, who was in high favor with Augustus and Mecaenas:
whence Horatio is a proper name frequent now adays, derived as some think from
the Greek (...), i. e. of good eyesight. Hord, (Lat.) a Cow great with Calf.
Horizontal, (Greek) belonging to the Horizon, i. e. that Circle which divides
the upper Hemisphear, or so much of the Heavens as we can see round about us
from the lower Hemisphear, or so much of the Heavens as is hid from our sight.
A Hornet, a kind of insect, called in Latin Crabro, which uses to infest
horses and other creatures, and is engendered of the carcases of dead horses.
Horngeld, a Tax within the Forest to be paid for horned beasts; it comes from
horn, and the Dutch word Gelden, i. e. to pay. Horodix, (Greek) a kind of
Dial, or instrument to show how the hours pass a^way. Horological, (Gr.)
belonging to a Horologe, i. e. an Hour-glasse, Clock, or Dial. Horoscope,
(Greek) a diligent marking of hours, also so much of the firmament as rises
every hour from the East, also the Ascendent of ones Nativity, or a diligent
marking of the time of a Childs birth. Horridity, or Horror, (lat.)
frightfulness, dreadfulnesse, a quaking for fear. Horseheal, a kind of Herb,
otherwise called Elicampane. Hortation, (lat.) an exhorting, or persuading to
any thing. Hor^ensius, an eloquent Roman, whose daughter Hortensia; so pleaded
her cause before the Triumvirs; M. Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus; that the
great Tax was taken off, which they had laid upon the people. Hortyard, a
Garden-yard, happily the same with Orchard. Hosanna, an Hebrew word signifying,
Save I beseech thee, being a solemn acclamation used by the Jews in their
Feasts of Tabernacles. Hospitallers, certain Knights of an Order so called,
because they had the care of Hospitals, i. houses erected for the relief of
Pilgrims, and poor or impotent people. Hostage, (French) a pledge left in war
for performance of Covenants. Hosteler, in Latin hospes or hostellarius, a
keeper of an Hostery or Inn, an Host. Hostility, (lat.) hatred or enmity.
Hotchpot, see Hodgepodge. Hoten, (old word) they promise. Housage, a fee that a
Carryer or any one pays for setting up any stuff in a house. House in
Astrology, is the twelf part of the Zodiac being divided into twelve equal
parts. Housebote, Estovers out of the Lords wood, to uphold a tenement or
house, from house and the Dutch word bote, a making good. See Estovers. Houton,
(old word) hollow. The Howld of a ship, the room betwixt the keilson and lower
decks. The Hownds, the holes of the checks fastened to the head of the masts.
Howsel, to administer the Sacrament to one that lies on his deathbed.
House-in, is when a ship after she is past the breadth of her bearing, is
brought in narrow to her upper works.
H U
Hubba, the name of a Danish Captain, who in old times invaded this Island. Hue
and Cry, in Common Law, is a pursuit of one having committed felony by the
highway, by describing the party, and giving notice to several Constables from
one Town to another. Hugh, the proper name of a man, signifying comfort. Others
derive it from the Dutch word Hougen, to cut. Huguenots, a name which used to
be given in derision to those of the reformed Religion in France, from a gate
in Tours called Hugon. Others derive it from these words Huc nos venimus,
Hither we are come, wherewith they begin their protestation. Huik, or Huke, a
kind of mantle used in Spain and Germany. Hulk, a kind of great and broad ship,
from the Greek word Olcas. Hull, a Town in Yorkshire, situate upon the River
Hull, anciently called Kingston (q. Kings Town) upon Hull. It being built by
King Edward the first, and beautified with fair buildings by Michael de la Pool
Earl of Suffolk. This Town is very well accomodated for Ships and Merchandise.
Hull, in Navigation, is taken for the body of a ship without masts, sails, or
yards. Hulling, is when a ship at sea has taken in all her sails in calm
weather. Hulstred, (old word) hidden. Humanity, (lat.) the nature and condition
of man, also gentleness, mildness. Humane, or courteous Signs, are Gemini,
Virgo, Libra, Aquarius. Humber, a great River (or rather an arm of the sea) in
Yorkshire. Humectation, (lat.) a moistning. Humidity, (lat.) moistness.
Humiliates, a certain religious Order of men, so called from Humiliare, (lat.)
to humble or bring low, because they led very strict or mortified lives: they
were instituted in the year 1166. Humorist, (lat.) one that is fantastic, or
full of humors. Humor, (lat.) moisture, also a man's fancy or disposition.
The four predominate humors in a man's body, are blood, choler, phlegm, and
melancholy. Humfrey, or Humfred, the proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch
Houspeace. Hundred, a part of a Shire consisting of ten tithings, each tithing
consisting of ten households, called in Latin Decennae. Hundreders, men
empanelled of a Jury upon any controversy of land, dwelling within the Hundred
where the land lies. Hundrelagh, the Hundred Court, from which all the
officers of the Kings Forest were freed. Hungaria, the Kingdom of Hungary
divided into two parts by the River Danubius, it was anciently called Pannonia.
Hunnes, a people of Scythia, who in the time of the Emperor Valentinian
overrun all Italy and Gallia, but at last overcome by the prayers of Pope Leo,
they retired themselves into Hungary. Huntington, the chief Town of
Huntintonshire, in the public seal called Huntersdune, i. the hill of
Hunters, alluding to which name Leland calls it in Latin Venantodunum: near
unto the bridge is to be seen yet the plot of a Castle built by K. Edward the
Elder, in the year 917, and by K. Henry the second demolished, to put an end to
the contention which the Scottish men and the St. Lizes had so often had about
it. Hurlebats, or Whirlebats, used among the ancients, called in Latin Caestus.
Hurlers, certain great stones in Cornwall, which the people thereabout persuade
themselves to have been in times past men transformed into stones for
profaning the Sabbath Day, with hurling of the Ball. Hurleth, (old word)
makes a noise. Huscarles, a name given in ancient times to those that were
gatherers of the Danish tribute. Husfastene, in some of the Statutes is taken
for him that holds house and land. Hustings, the principal and highest Court
of London, it comes from the French word Haulser, i. to lift up.
H Y
Hyacynthus, a youth who being beloved of Apollo, and playing with him at a
play called Discus, Zephyrus who was slighted by Hyacinthus, blew the Discus
thrown by Apollo, full upon Hyacinthus his head, and killed him, which
mischance Apollo lamenting, turned him into a flower called a Jacinth, vulgarly
Crowtoes. There is also a precious stone called a Hyacinth or Jacinth, being of
a waterish color. Hyades, the seven daughters of Atlas, by his wife Aethra,
they were called Ambrosia, Eudoxa, Pasithoe, Corone, Plexauris, Pytho, and
Tyche, who lamenting their brother Hyas devoured by a Lion, were taken up into
Heaven by Jupiter and changed into Stars. Hyaline, (Greek) of a color like
glass. Hybernall, (lat.) belonging to the winter-season. Hybla, a mountain of
Sicily, famous for its Bees, and for the abundance of Time which grew there.
Hybreas, a famous Orator, born in Nylassus, a City of Caria, who was advanced
to be chief Governor of that City under Euthydamus Prince of Caria, but when
Labienus came against that Country, he so incensed him by saying he was
Emperor of Caria, that he destroyed the City. Hydra, a monstrous Serpent bred
in the Lake of Lerna; it was feigned to have a hundred heads, and was at last
slain by Hercules: also a celestial constellation. Hydragogy, (Greek) a
conveying of water by furrows and trenches from one place to another.
Hydragogues are medicines that are prepared to draw forth the water from any
Hydropical parts. Hydrargyrous, (Greek) belonging to Quicksilver. Hydraulicks,
(Greek) certain waterworks, whereby music is made by the running of waters.
Hydrography, (Greek) a description of waters. Hydromancy, (Greek) a kind of
divination by waters. Hydromel, (Greek) a kind of drink made of honey, by some
called Metheglin. Hydrophoby, (Greek) a certain disease caused by melancholy,
which causes in those that are affected with it, an extreme dread of waters.
Hydropick, (Greek) troubled with a certain disease called the Dropsy. Hyemal,
(lat.) bleak or winterly. Hyena, (lat.) a beast like a wolf, which some say,
changes Sex often, and counterfeiteth the voice of a man. Hyl^s, the son of
Theodamas King of Maeonia, whom Hercules took away by force, and carried him
with him in the Expedition to Colchos; but Hercules going on shore about Mysia,
sent him for water to the River Ascanius, and the Nimphs of the River being in
love with him, pulled him in, so that Hercules long expected him, and hearing
no news of him, left the Argonauts and wandered up and down the Wood for a long
time in quest of him. Hyleg, is that Planet or place in Heaven whereby being
directed by his or its digression, we judge of the life or state of any person.
Hyllus, the son of Hercules by Deianira, he being driven out of his City by
Eurystheus, fled to Athens, and there built a Temple to Misericordia the
Goddess of Pity. Hymen, or Hymenaeus, son of Bacchus and Venus, he was the
first that instituted Marriage, and therefore by some called the god of
Marriage, he has that name from a thin skin (called in Greek hymen) which is
within the secret parts of a woman, and is said to be a note of Virginity.
Hymn, (Greek) a spiritual Song, or Psalm sung to the praise of God. Hypallage,
(Greek) a certain figure wherein the order of words is contrary to the meaning
of them in construction. Hyperbolical, (Greek) spoken by way of Hyperbole, i. a
figure wherein an expression goes beyond truth, either by way of excess or
diminution. Hyperboreans, a certain Northern people; some say, dwelling under
the North Pole; others say they are a people of Scythia. Hyperion, the son of
Caelus, and brother of Saturn, he is thought by some to be the first that found
out the motion of the Stars, and is oftimes mentioned in Poetry for the same
with the Sun. Hypermeter, (Greek) a Verse that has a syllable above its
ordinary measure. Hypermnestra, one of the 50 daughters of Danaus, they being
commanded to kill their Husbands, the 50 sons of Aegyptus, she only of all the
sisters saved her Husband Lynceus, who afterward killed Danaus. Hyperphysical,
(Greek) supernatural. Hypocondriacal, (Greek) subject to melancholy, because
under the hypocondria or sides of the upper part of the belly, lie the Liver
and Spleen which are the seat of melancholy. Hypocritical, (Greek) belonging to
a Hypocrite, i. e. a dissembler, or one that makes a false show of Piety or
Holiness. Hypogastrick, (Greek) belonging to the Hypogastrium or lower part of
the belly. Hypoge, (Greek) a cellar or place under ground. Hypostatical,
(Greek) belonging to a Hypostasis or Personal subsistence. Hypothenusal line, a
term in Geometry, it is that side of a right-angled triangle which is subtended
or opposite to the right angle. Hypothetical, (Greek) belonging to a
Hypothesis, i. e. a supposition, also a Hypothetical Syllogism in Logic, is
that which begins with a conditional conjunction. Hypsicratea, see
Hipsicratea. Hypsiphile, the daughter of Thous and Queen of Lemnos, she
entertained Jason in his voyage to Colchos, and had twins by him; she was
banished out of Lemnos for saving her father, when all the men of the Island
were killed by the women, and was entertained by Lycurgus King of Nemea.
Hyrcania, a Country of Asia, bordering southward upon Armenia. Hyreus, a
Countryman of Boe^tia, who desiring of Jupiter, Mercury, and Neptune, whom he
had entertained at his house, that he might have a son and not marry, the three
Deities made water upon the dung of an Ox which had been newly offered, out of
which when the tenth month was almost expired, was borne Orion. Hyrse, a kind
of plant, otherwise called Millet. Hysterical, (Greek) as hysterical passion, a
certain disease in women commonly called Fits of the Mother. Hysteron Proteron,
(Greek) a preposterous manner of speaking or writing, expressing that first
which should be last. Hyttenia, a part of Attica, formerly called Tetrapolis,
because it had four chief Cities Probalynthus, Oenoe, Tricorythus, and
Marathon.
I A
IAcchus, one of the names of Bacchus, from the Greek word Iacchein, to cry
out, because his preistesses the Bacchae used in the celebration of his Orgies
to make strange and unusual noises. Jacynth, the name of a certain precious
stone of a bluish color, also a flower called Hyacinthus, see Hyacynthus.
Jacob, (Hebr.) a supplanter, or beguiler. Jacobins, certain Friars of the Order
of St. Dominick. Jacobites, a sort of Heretics instituted in the year 530. by
one Jacobus Syrus, they used circumcision, and acknowledge but one nature in
Christ. Jacobs staff, a certain Geometrical instrument so called, also a staff
that Pilgrims use to walk with to James Compostella. Jactancy, (lat.) a
boasting. Jaculation, (lat.) a shooting, or darting. Jambes, (French) the
side-posts of a door. Jambeux, (French) armor for the legs. Iambick, (lat.)
the foot of a verse, consisting of two syllables, one short and one long.
Jamblichus, a famous Pythagorean Philosopher of Chalcis, a City of Syria, he
was the Disciple of Porphyrius. James, the proper name of a man, contracted
from Jacob, in Spanish Jago, in French Jaques. Jampnorum, a certain Law-term
used in Fines, signifying certain Acres of Furze. Janissaries, Turkish foot
Soldiers, which are of the Guard to the Grand Signior. Jane, the Christian
name of diverse women, mollified, as some think, from Joan. Jannock, a kind of
Oaten bread, much used in the North of England. Jansenisme, the opinion of
Cornelius Jansenus, Bishop of Tire, he was a great opposer of universal
redemption. Janthe, a certain Virgin, the daughter of Telessa, who the first
day of her marriage was transformed into a man. Janus, the name of an ancient
King of Italy, who entertained Saturn (when he was banished out of Creet, by
his son Jupiter) and of him learned husbandry, and the use of the Vine, he
built a City called Janiculum, from which all Italy was also called Janicula,
he is pictured with two faces, and from him the first month of the year is
called January. Iapetus, the son of Titan and Terra, he married the Nymph Aria,
and begat Prometheus and Epimethe^s. Japygia, a Country upon the Borders of
Italy, called also Calabria, and Magna Graecia, the narrowest entrance of it
reaches from Tarentum to Brundusium. Iarbas, a King of Getulia. See Dido.
Jargon, the same as Gibbrish, or Pedlars French. Jarre of Oil, an earthen
pitcher, containing twenty Gallons, also the Order of Knights of the Jarre, was
instituted by Don Garcia, King of Navarre, who riding one day on hunting, and
entering into a Cave, he saw an Altar with the image of the Virgin Marie, and a
Pitcher of Lillies, at which sight being moved with devotion, he founded this
order. Iarrock, a kind of Cork. Iasion, or Ias^us, the son of Jupiter and
Electra, to him Ceres brought forth Pluto, who was the first that brought men
the use of money. Iasmin, or Iesemin, a kind of flowr, so called. Jason, the
son of Aeson, King of Thessaly, he was sent by his Uncle Pelias to Colchos, to
fetch the Golden Fleece, and having overcome the Dragon, and Brazen-footed
Bull, that were set to guard it, by the help of Medea, who was in love with
him, he brought her away with him, and married her, but afterward falling in
love with Creusa, the daughter of Creon, he left Medea, who in anger burnt
Creusa, and her Palace together. Jasper, a precious stone of a green color,
also the proper name of a man, in Latin Gasparus. Iaveline, (Ital.) a kind of
Dart, or Lance. Iberia, the ancient name of Spain. Ibexe, or Evick, a kind of
a mountanous Goat, in Greek called Aegoreros, in Latin Capricornus. Ibis, a
certain Lybian bird feeding upon Serpents, formerly worshipped in Egypt, which
with its long bill first taught the use of Glisters.
I C
Icarius, the son of Oebalus, he being slain by the Sheapherds of Athens, whom
he had made drunk, and being discovered by his Dog Maer^, his daughter Erigone
hanged her self for grief, and was afterward translated among the heavenly
signs, and was called Virgo, the Dog also pined away and died, and was
translated among the signs. Icarus, the son of Daedalus, who flying too near
the Sun with his waxen wings which his father had made for him, melted them,
and fell into the Sea, which from thence was called the Icarian Sea. Iceni, a
certain people, anciently inhabiting those Provinces, which are now called
Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgshire, and Huntingtonshire. Ichdien, a Motto, or
device, heretofore belonging to the arms of the Princes of Wales, it signifies
in the old Saxon, I serve. Ichneun^on, (Greek) an Indian Rat. Ichnography,
(Greek) a Description, or Platform of any thing in writing, according to which
example it is to be made. Ichthyologie, (Greek) a Description of fishes.
Ichthyophagi, a certain people, who feed altogether upon fish, which they catch
with Nets, made of the bark of a Palm Tree, and build their houses with the
bones of fish. Icleped (old word) called, or named. Icond, (old word) learned.
Iconoclastes, (Greek) a breaker, or demolisher of images, a surname attributed
to several of the Greek Emperors, who were zealous against the worshipping of
images in Churches, from Icon an image, and clazein to break. Icorven. (old
word) cut, or carved. Ictericall, (Greek) troubled with the overflowing of the
gall, a disease vulgarly called the Jaunders, or the Jaundice, from the French
word Iaulne, i. e. yellow, because it makes the skin to appear of a yellow
color.
I D
Ida, a Mountain of Troas, where Paris gave Judgment for Venus, about the
golden apple, against Juno and Pallas; whence Venus is called the Idalian
Queen. Idas, the son of Neptune, he seeing Marpesia, the daughter of Mars,
dancing in a wood, which was sacred to Diana, carried her away by force, his
father Neptune having given him very swift horses, whereat Mars was so enraged
that he threw himself into the River Lyco^ma, but Apollo meeting Idas, and
fighting with him for Marpesia, Jupiter sent Mercury to part them, and Marpesia
being left to her own freedom, which of them she would choose made choice of
Idas. Idea, the form of any thing represented to the imagination. Identity,
(lat.) a made Term, much used in Logic, and signifying as it were the
samenesse of any thing. Ides of a month, are eight days in every month, as
in March, May, July, and October, from the fifteenth to the eight, being
reckoned backward in other months from the thirteenth to the sixth, it comes
from the old Latin word Iduo, to divide. Idiom, (Greek) the peculiar phrase of
any language. Idiopathie, (Greek) a peculiar passion. Idiosyncrasie, (Greek)
the proper, or natural temper of any thing. Idiotical, (Greek) private, also
belonging to an Idiote, i. e. one born of so weak an understanding, that the
King by his prerogative, has the government and disposal of his Lands and
substance, and to that purpose, a Writ de Idiota Inquirendo is to be directed
to the Sheriff, to examine the party suspected of Idiocie, or Idiotisme.
Idolatry, (Greek) the worshipping of false gods, but most properly an offering
of Divine honors to any Idols, pictures, or images. Idomeneus, the son of
Deucalion Grandchilde of Mino^, King of Creet, he returning from the Wars of
Troy, and going about to offer up his son, who was the first that met him upon
Land, according to the vow he made to sacrifice whomsoever he met first* he was
driven out of the Kingdom by his subjects, and arriving in the Country of
Calabria, he built the City of Salentinum. Idoneous, (lat.) fit, convenient.
Idyl, (Greek) a kind of Eclogue, or Pastoral Poem, such as was written by
Theocritus, Moschus, and others.
I E
Jearecapstern, an Engine used in great ships to hoise the yards and sayls
withal. Ieat, see Geat. Iejunation, (lat.) fasting. Iejunity, (lat.)
hungrynesse, also barrenness, shallowness of judgment, or style.
Ienticulation, (lat.) a breaking ones fast. Ieofail, in Common Law, is when a
pleading, or issue, is so badly pleaded, or joined that it will be error if
they proceed, it is contracted from the French words, I'ay failli, i. e. I have
failed. Ieopardy, danger, or hazard, it comes from the French words, jeu, i. e.
play, and perte, i. e. loss. Jeremy* a proper name, signifying in Hebrew,
High of the Lord. Iesuati, an order of Monks, so called from their having the
name of Jesus often in their mouths, they were begun at Sen^, in the year 1365.
by Francis Vincent, and John Columbanus. Jesuits, those of the Society of
Jesu, a certain religious Order instituted by St. Ignatius Loyola, they had to
the three vows of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, the vow of Mission annexed,
which bound them to go whithersoever the Roman Bishop should send them for the
propagation of the Faith, and to execute whatsoever he should command them.
Jesus College, a College in Oxford, built not long since by Hugh Price Doctor
of the Laws. Jet, (old word) a device. Jetson, the same as Flotson. Jews-eares,
a kind of mushrome or excrescence about the root of the Elder-tree. Jewsstone,
a kind of stone called also a Marchesite.
I F
Ifere, (old word) together. Ifretten, (old word) devoured.
I G
Ignaro, (Ital.) a foolish ignorant fellow. Ignifluous, (lat.) running or
flowing with fire. Ignify, (lat.) to set on fire, to cause to burn. Ignipotent,
(lat.) powerful in fire. Ignis ^atuus, (lat.) a kind of slight exhalation set
on fire in the night time, which ofttimes causes men to wander out of their
way. It is metaphorically taken for some trivial humor or fancy, wherewith
men of shallow understandings are apt to be seduced. Ignition, (lat.) a setting
on fire. Ignivomus, (lat.) fire spitting, or vomiting out flames of fire, an
Epithet proper to Aetna, and some other mountains of the like nature. Ignoble,
(lat.) of an obscure birth, or of a base spirit. Ignominious, (lat.)
dishonorable, full of shame or reproach. Ignoramus, is a word used by the
grand Inquest empanelled in the inquisition of causes criminal and public,
when they mislike their evidence as defective, or too weak to make good the
presentment, which word being written upon the Bill, all farther inquiry upon
that party is stopped. It is also taken substantively for a foolish and
ignorant person. Ignoscible, (lat.) fit to be pardoned or forgiven. J H S, a
certain character whereby has anciently been expressed Jesus, the proper name
of our Savior, the middle letter being taken for a Greek E, but more likely
the three initial letters of these words Jesus Hominum Salvator, i. Jesus the
Savior of man, have been commonly used for brevities sake.
I K
Ikenild street, one of the 4 famous ways, that the Romans anciently made in
England: It takes its name from the Iceni, (so the people inhabiting Norfolk,
Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, are called) the other three ways were termed
Fosse, Erminstreet, and Watlingstreet.
I L
Ilcester, contracted from Ivelcester, a Town in Somersetshire, it was
assaulted by Robert Mowbray, when the Nobles of England conspired against King
William Rufus, to set up his brother Robert Duke of Normandy in the Royal
Throne. Ilia, the daughter of Numitor, King of the Albanes, who by her Uncle
Amulius was made a Vestal, but being got with child, she brought forth twins,
Romulus and Remus, of whom Mars was reported to have been the father. Iliades,
(Greek) the Title of a famous ancient Poem writ by Homer concerning the
destruction of Troy, which was formerly called Ilium, from Ilus one of the
Kings thereof, who enlarged it, after it had been built by Dardanus the son of
Jupiter. Iliacal, (Greek) belonging to the Ilia or small guts. Iliac passion, a
certain dangerous disease caused by the wind getting into those guts. Ilioneus,
the son of Phorbas a Trojan, he went with Aeneas into Italy, and being famous
for his Eloquence, was sent on all his Embassages. Illaborate, (lat.)
unlaboured, or done without pains. Illachrymable, (lat.) pitiless, [also
unpittied. Illaqueation, (lat.) an entangling or ensnaring. Illation, (lat.) a
conclusion or inference. Illatration, (lat.) a barking at any one. Illecebrous,
(lat.) alluring, charming, or enticing. Illegitimate, (lat.) Bastard of a base
birth, unlawfully begotten. Illepid, (lat.) dull and unpleasant in
conversation. Illiberal, (lat.) niggardly, without generosity. Illicite, (lat.)
unwarrantable, or unlawful. Illigation, (lat.) a binding or wrapping within.
Illimitate, (lat.) unbounded, having no limits or bounds. Illiterate, (lat.)
unlearned. Illucidation, (lat.) a giving light, also an explaining or making
clear. Illumination, (lat.) the same. Illusion, (lat.) a deceiving, a mocking.
Illustration, (lat.) a making clear, a setting forth. Illustrious, (lat.)
Noble, Famous, Renowned. Ilus, a Trojan, who when the Temple of Pallas was
burning, ran into the midst of the flames and recovered the Palladium, which
because no mortal eye was permitted to behold, he was struck blind, but
afterward the Goddess being appeased, his sight was restored. Illyricum, a
Country of Europe, so called from Illirius the son of Polyphemus; it is now
known by the name of Slavonia.
I M
Imagery, (French) painted or carved work of Images. Imagination, (lat.) a
feigning or phancying, also the faculty it self likewise called the Fancy.
Imaus, a great mountain dividing Scythia, into two parts, whereof one part is
called Scythia within Imaus, and the other Scythia without Imaus. Imb^rgo,
(Span.) a word used among Merchants, signifying an arrest or stop of ships or
merchandises upon any occasion. Imbarke, (Ital.) to go aboard a ship, a term
used in Navigation. Imbecility, (lat.) weakness. Imbellick, (lat.) unwarlick,
cowardly. Imbellish, (French) to ador^, to beautify. Imberbirk, (lat.) without
a beard, beardless. Imber-week, see Ember. Imbibition, (lat.) a greedy
receiving or drinking in of any liquid substance. Imborduring, a term in
Heraldry, when the field and circumference of the field are both of one metal,
color, or fur. Imbossed work, from the Dutch word Inbossieren, to carve or
grave, is work made with bunches or knobs in stone or metal. Imbossement, the
manner of that work. Imbrication, (lat.) a making square, or bending like a
gutter-tile, also a covering with tile, from Imbrex, a gutter-tile. Imbrocado,
(Spanish) cloth of Gold or Silver. Imbroyle, (French) to put into a combustion,
to set together by the ears. Imbuition, (lat.) a thorough moistning, also a
seasoning, also a staining; whence comes our word Embrue. Imitation, (lat.) a
following or doing like another. Immaculate, (lat.) unspotted, undefiled.
Immanity, (lat.) salvagenesse, wildness, cruelty; Also such a hugeness as
renders a thing unmanageable. Immansuete, (lat.) untractable, untame.
Immarcescence, (lat.) unfadingness, incorruptibleness; hence the participial
Immarcessible. Immaturity, (lat.) unripenesse. Immediate, (lat.) next, or
presently following. Immedicable, (lat.) unhealable, incureable. Immemorable,
(lat.) unworthy of mention, unremarkeable. Immensity, (lat.) unmeasurableness,
hugeness, exceeding largeness. Immersion, (lat.) a dipping, ducking, or
plunging in. Immigration, (lat.) a going to dwell, a passing into. Imminent,
(lat.) ready to fall, hanging over. Imminution, (lat.) a diminishing, or
lessning. Immission, (lat.) a putting in, a planting into. Immobility, (lat.)
unmoveableness, a being not to be removed. Immoderate, (lat.) unmeasurable,
intemperate. Immolation, (lat.) an offering up to God, a sacrificing.
Immorigerous, (lat.) rude, uncivil, disobedient. Immortality, (lat.) a living
for ever, everlastingness. Immortalize, (lat.) to make immortal. Immunity,
(lat.) exemption from any office, freedom, privilege. Immure, (lat.) to
enclose, to shut up between two walls. Immutability, (lat.) constancy,
unchangeableness. Impacted, (lat.) driven in. Impair, see Empaire. Impale,
(Ital.) to spit upon a stake; also to crown or adorn; also to fence about with
pales: It is a term sometimes used in Heraldry. Imparity, or Imparility, (lat.)
inequality, unevenness. Imparlance, see Emparlance. Impassible, (lat.) not
moved with any affection, but more especially, cold in the passion of love.
Cleop. Impe, a term in Falconry, signifies to insert a feather into the wing
of a Hawk, instead of one which was broken. It comes from the Saxon word imp or
himp, i. to graff or inoculate, and is metaphorically taken for to fill up any
vacancies. It is taken also for a kind of graffing used by Gardeners. Impeach,
or appeach, (French.) to hinder; also to accuse one as guilty of the same crime
whereof he which impeacheth is accused; it comes originally from the Latin
word impedire. Impeachment of waste, in Common Law, ^s a restraint from
committing of waste upon Lands or Tenements. Impeccability, (lat.) an
impossibility of sinning or offending; it is a term proper to Scool-Divinity.
Impedition, or Impediment, (lat.) a hindering. Impel, (lat.) to thrust on.
Impendent, (lat.) hanging over head, also ready to fall upon. Impenetrable,
(lat.) unpierceable, not to be pierced. Impenitent, (lat.) unrepentant, not
repenting. Impen^ous, (lat.) having no feathers. Imperative Mood, in Grammar,
is that Mood which implies a commanding. Imperceptible, (lat.) not to be taken
notice of, unperceiveable. Imperial, (lat.) belonging to an Imperatour, i. e. a
Commander or Emperor. Imperil, (from the Lat. periculum) to bring into danger.
Imperious, (lat.) given to domineer or insult, of a commanding spirit.
Imperforable, (lat.) not to be bored thorough, a Decompositum, or word
compounded of two praepositions and a verb. Impersonal, (lat.) a term used in
Gramar, and signifies that word whether pronoun or verb which has but one
termination for all the three persons, or at least which wants a termination
for one of them. Impertinence, (lat.) a thing not belonging to the purpose.
Impervestigable, (lat.) not to be found out by strict inquiry or search.
Impervious, (lat.) through which there is no passage. Impetiginous, (lat.)
scabby, or troubled with an itching distemper. Impetrate, (lat.) to obtain by
earnest request or entreaty, whence the participial Impetrable. Impetuosity,
(lat.) a driving forward with great force and violence. Impiation, (lat.) a
defiling. Impiety, (lat.) wickedness, a being void of piety. Impignoration,
(lat.) a putting to pawn. Impigrity, (lat.) a being free from sloth;
quickness, activity. Impinge, (lat.) to run against any thing, also to drive
fast into, as a nail into a board; whence the Participle Impacted, above
mentioned. Impinguation, (lat.) a fatning, or making fat. Implacability, (lat.)
an unreconcileablenesse, a disposition not to be appeased. Implantation, (lat.)
a planting or fastening into. Implead, in Common Law, is to sue or commence a
suit. Implement, (lat.) a filling up of any vacancy, also things necessary
about a house, or belonging to a trade, are called Implements. Implication,
(lat.) a folding or wrapping within, an entangling, also a necessary
consequence, and in this last sense we use the word to imply, which is hence
derived. Implicit, (lat.) folded, or entangled together, also implicit faith,
is taken in a translate sense, for such a belief as is altogether upheld by the
judgment, and authority of a great company agreeing together. Imploration,
(lat.) an humble petitioning, a desiring any thing with great submission.
Implume, (lat.) bare, without feathers. Impolite, (lat.) rough, and unpolish't.
Imporcation, (lat.) a making a Balk, or ridge in the ploughing of land.
Imporous, (lat.) having no pores, a word proper only to Philosophy.
Importance, (French) moment, weight consequence, a carrying in it some great
matter from the Latin words, in the preposition, and portare to carry.
Importunate, (lat.) troublesome, or wearying with too often, or unseasonable
requests. Imposition, (lat.) an imposing, or laying a strict injunction, also
the same as Impost Imposititious names, (latin) original names. Impositour,
(lat.) one that belongs to a Printing House, and imposes the pages into a
form for the press. Impossibility, (lat.) that which cannot be done. Impost,
(French) a tribute, or tax, but more especially we use it for the tax received
by the Prince for such merchandises as are brought into any haven from other
Nations, whereas Custom is for wares shipped out of the land. Impostour,
(lat.) a seller of false wares, also any kind of deceiver, or jugler.
Impostume, a word commonly, but corruptly used for Aposteme, (Greek) which is a
gathering together of evil humors into any one part of the body. Impotency,
(lat.) an unablenesse, or want of strength, it is many times taken for an
unap^nesse to generation. Impoundage, a confining, or putting into a pound.
Impregnation, (lat.) a making fruitful, a filling, or causing to swell.
Imprecation, (lat.) a cursing, or calling down some mischief upon another
head. Impregnable, (lat.) not to be won, or taken by force. Imprese, the same
as devise, it comes from the Italian word Imprendere, to undertake.
Impression, (lat.) an imprinting, stamping, or making a mark. Impressed money, is
money paid to Soldiers before hand. Imprimings, beginnings, from the Latin
Imprimis, i. e. first of all, a word used in the beginnings of Inventories, or
Catalogues of goods. Improbation, (lat.) a disallowing, or not approving.
Improbability, (lat.) a matter which can not be proved, an unlikelinesse.
Improbity, (lat.) dishonesty, wickedness. Improcerity, (lat.) a lowness, want
of tallness, or stature. Improcreability, (lat.) a barrenness, or unaptnesse
to procreate. Improperation, (lat.) a making haste, also an upbraiding any one
with a fault. Impropriation, (lat.) see appropriation. Improvidence, (lat.)
carelesensse, or forgetfulness to provide, want of foresight. Improvement, an
advancing of profits, a thriving, a benefiting in any kind of profession.
Imprudence, (lat.) want of discretion, or understanding. Impudence, (lat.)
overboldnesse, shamelessness. Impugnation, (lat.) a contradicting, or
resisting. Impuissance, (French) weakness, distress, want of outward
supports. Impulsion, (lat.) a driving forward, a thrusting on, also a
constraining. Impunity, (lat.) a going unpunished, an exemption from
punishment. Impurity, (lat.) uncleanness. Imputation, (lat.) a laying to ones
charge. Imputrescence, (lat.) a keeping from putrefaction, or rotting an
uncorruptiblenesse.
I N
Inaccessible, (lat.) not to be come at. Inachus, the most ancient King of the
Argives, the son of Oceanus and Thetys and the brother of Aesopus, concerning
his daughter Jo, see beneath in Jo, from this King Inachus the chief River of
Argia took its denomination. Inaffability, (lat.) discurtesie, unpleasantnesse
in conversation. Inaffectation, (lat.) carelesseness, freeness from vainglory.
Inambulation, (lat.) a walking from place to place. Inamiable, (lat.) unlovely,
unpleasant. Inamissible, (lat.) not to be lost. Inamorato, (Ital.) a lover.
Inaniloquution, (lat.) an i^dle or vain speaking, from inanis, empty, and
loqui, to speak. Inanimate, (lat.) having no life, without a soul. Inanity,
(lat.) emptiness, or a being void of air, or any other body. It is a
Philosophical term used by Dr. Charlton. Inarable, (lat.) not to be plonghed.
Inargentation, (lat.) a silvering over, a covering with silver. Inaudible,
(lat.) not to be heard. Inauguration, (lat.) an asking counsel of Augures or
Soothsayers, also the conferring of honors or preferment upon any one, also a
consecrating. Inaurated, (lat.) covered with Gold, gilded over. Inauspicious,
(lat.) unlucky, ill-boding. Inborow, and Outborow, in ancient times, was the
office of him that was to allow free liberty of Ingress and Egress to those
that traveled between the two Realms of England and Scotland. This office
belonged in King Henry the thirds time, to Patrick Earl of Dunbar.
Incalescence, (lat.) a growing warm or lusty, a taking heat. Incandescence,
(lat.) a being inflamed with wroth, a growing angry. Incanescence, (lat.) a
growing gray headed, a waxing hoary. Incantation, (lat.) an enchanting or
charming. Incapacity, (lat.) an uncapableness, or being unfit. Incarceration,
(lat.) a putting in prison. Incarnadin color, (French) a flesh color, or the
color of a Damask Rose. Incarnation, (lat.) a making flesh to grow, or a being
made of flesh. Incastellated, (French) narrow-heeled. Incendiary, (lat.) one
that puts things into a flame or combustion, a sower of division or strife.
Incense, (lat.) to inflame or stir up anger. Incensory, (French) a censing-pan,
or Church-vessel, wherein they use to burn incense, being a kind of rich
Perfume or Gum, distilling from a Tree of the same name, and is also called
Frankincense. Incentive, (lat.) a stirring up, or provokement, a motive.
Incentor, (lat.) the same as Incendiary, also Incentor, Accentor, and
Succentor, are three sorts of Singers in parts. Inception, (lat.) a beginning
or undertaking of any business: whence Inceptour, he that has newly taken his
degree in the University. Incern, (lat.) to sift, to examine strictly.
Incessant, (lat.) continual, without ceasing. Incestuous, (lat.) unchaste,
committing incest, which is an untying of the Virgin Zone, or Cestus; but it is
commonly taken for a defiling one that is near in blood or kindred. Inchoation,
(lat.) a beginning of any work. Incident, (lat.) happening to, or falling out of
necessity: It is also substantively taken in Common Law, for a thing
necessarily depending upon another, as more principal; as a Court Baron is so
incident to a Manor that it cannot be separated. Incineration, (lat.) a
reducing to ashes or cinders. Incision, (lat.) a cutting deep into any thing, a
making a gash. Incisure, (lat.) the cut or gash it self. Incitation, (lat.) a
stirring up, or provoking. Inclamitation, (lat.) an often calling upon.
Inclemency, (lat.) rigor, sharpness, a being without pity or compassion.
Inclination, (lat.) a bending or leaning toward, a disposition to any thing. It
is also taken in an amorous sense. Artam. Inclusion, (lat.) an enclosing, a
shutting in. Inclusive, (lat.) containing. Incoacted, (lat.) uncompelled.
Incogitancy, (lat.) a not thinking or minding, rashness, inconsiderateness.
Incohible, (lat.) unrestrainable, not to be restrained. Incolumity, (lat.) a
being free from danger, safeness. Incomity, (lat.) unsociableness, want of
civility in conversation. Incommensurable, (lat.) holding not the same
proportion, or not to be measured with another thing. Incommodious, (lat.)
unprofitable, or unfit. Incommunicable, (lat.) not to be made common or
imparted to another. Incompact, (lat.) not close fastened or joined together.
Incomparable, (lat.) without compare, not to be compared with. Incompatible,
(lat.) not agreeing one with another, not enduring to be joined together.
Incompensable, (lat.) incapable of being recompensed. Incompossible, (lat.)
affirming what another denies. A term proper only to Logic. Incomprehensible,
(lat.) not to be taken hold of, not to be conceived by the mind. Inconcinnity,
(lat.) ungracefulness, a being ill disposed, or placed out of order.
Incongealable, (lat.) not to be congealed or frozen. Incongruity, (lat.) a
disagreeableness, an unfitness. Inconsideration, (lat.) rashness,
unadvisedness. Inconsolable, (lat.) not to be cheared or comforted.
Incon^tancy, (lat.) unstableness, fickleness. Incontinency, (lat.) a not
abstaining from unlawful desires. Incorporation, (lat.) a mixing together into
one body or substance. Incorporeal, (lat.) being bodiless or without a body.
Incorrigibility, (lat.) a being past correction. Incorruptible, (lat.) never
consuming or decaying, free from corruption. Incrassation, (lat.) a thickning,
a making gross. Increate, (lat.) not made, uncreated. Incredibility, (lat.) a
being not to be believed. Incredulity, (lat.) a not believing, a want of
belief. Increment, (lat.) an increasing, or growing big. Increpation, (lat.) a
chiding, or finding fault with. Incressant, resembling the Moon not come to the
full, a term in Heraldry. Incrustation, (lat.) a making or becomeing hard on
the outside like a crust, a rough-casting, or pargetting. Incubation, (lat.) a
lying down, a sitting over, or brooding. Incubus, (lat.) a certain disease
called the nightmare, which is caused by the ascending of raw humors up into
the brain, and obstructing the animal spirits; it oppresses people in their
sleep, and causes them to imagine that some great weight is lying upon them.
There is also mention made in some Stories of certain spirits, that having
taken upon them humane shapes, have mixed in carnal copulation with mortal
persons, the male spirit is called Incubus, the female Succubus. Inculcation,
(lat.) an often repeating and insisting upon the same thing, that it may the
more deeply be imprinted in ones mind. Inculpable, (lat.) unreproveable, not to
be blamed. Incumbent, (lat.) lying or leaning upon, also it is substantively
taken for him that is preferred to any spiritual living, and is in possession
of it. Encumbrance, see Encumbrance. Incurable, (lat.) not to be cured of any
disease or malady. Incur, (lat.) to run upon. Incursion, (lat.) a running into,
a hitting against, also a making an inroad. Incurvation, (lat.) a crooking or
bending. Incussion, (lat.) a violent shaking, or dashing against any thing.
Incusation, (lat) a blaming or accusing. Indacus, a servant to the Emperor
Leo, so swift of foot, that he could outrun any horse. Indagation, (lat.) a
diligent searching. Inde, (French) a certain Mineral wherewith they use to paint
or die of a blew color, called also Indico, because it is brought out of
India. It is of two sorts, English Inde, and Inde Baunias. Indecent, (lat.)
unbecoming, unfitting. Indeclinable, (lat.) not to be declined, or shunned, also
in Grammar that Noun is said to be indeclinable, which varies not Cases.
Indecorum, (lat.) an unseemlinesse, an unhandsome carriage. Indefatigable,
(lat.) not to be wearied or tired. Indefinite, (lat.) not limited, undefined,
undetermined. Indelible, (lat.) not to be cancelled, razed or blotted out.
Indemnity, (lat.) a freeness from damage, loss, or danger. Indenture, a writing
containing some contract between two or more, (from the French word Endenter)
it being indented or jagged on the top. Independency, (lat.) a not depending
upon another, absoluteness of ones self; but it is commonly taken for that
profession or sect of men who manage all things belonging to Church Discipline
within their own Congregations, and allow not of a dependence upon a national
Church. Indeprecable, (lat.) not to be persuaded or entreated. Indesinent,
(lat.) incessant, without ceasing. Indeterminate, (lat.) not determined or
decided, but left indifferent. Index, (lat.) a token or mark to show or direct,
the Table of a Book. India, a famous and vast Country, lying very far toward
the East, and extremely abounding in riches. It is denominated from the River
Indus. America or the New World is also called the West Indies. Indian mouse, a
little beast called in Greek Ichneumon, which creeping in at the mouths of
Crocodiles, eats up their entrails, and kills them. Indication, (lat.) a
showing or making manifest; also a term in Physic, signifying the right way
which prescribes what is to be done in relation to the restoring of health.
Indicative mood, in Grammar is that mood which barely affirms and no more.
Indicavit, the name of a writ, by which the patron of a Church may remove a
suit commenced against his Clerk, from the Court Christian, to the Kings Court.
Indico, the same as Inde. Indiction, (lat.) a certain computation of time,
which came in place of the Olympiads, every Indiction is the space of 15 years,
by which compute all public writings were dated at Rome; it signifies also a
tribute, or tax. Indifference, (lat.) a careless, general, and unconcerned
affection. Cassandra. Indigence, (lat.) need, penury, or want. Indigenous,
(lat.) an indweller, or native of any Country. Indigestion, (lat.) cruditie,
want of digestion or concoction in the stomach. Indigitation, (lat.) a pointing
at, or showing with the finger. Indignation, (lat.) a being angry with.
Indignity, (lat.) unworthiness, unworthy dealing. Indiligence, (lat.) want of
diligence, sloth. Indiscretion, (lat.) want of discretion or prudence.
Indiscriminate, (lat.) where no separaration or difference is made.
Indissoluble, (lat.) not to be dissolved, untied, or taken asunder. Indistinct,
(lat.) not distinguished or known one from another. Indictment, see Enditement.
Inditiation, (lat.) a giving a mark or sign. Individual, (lat.) not to be
divided or separated, an individual, or individuum in Philosophy is taken for a
small particle or body, so minute, that it cannot be divided, and is by some
called an Atome: also in Logic it signifies that which cannot be divided into
more of the same name or nature, and is by somd called Singular. Indivisible,
(lat.) not to be divided. Indivisum, (lat.) in Common Law, is that which two
hold in common without partion or dividing. Indocility, or Indocibility, (lat.)
an unaptnesse to be taught or learn. Indoctrination, (lat.) an instructing or
teaching. Indolency, (lat.) a being without pain. Indomable, (lat.) not to be
tamed. Indorcement, in Common Law is a condition written upon the other side of
an obligation or conveyance, from the Italian word Endossare. Ind^bitation,
(lat.) a not doubting, a yielding for certain. Inducement, (French) a
persuasion, or drawing on. Induciary, (lat.) belonging to a league or truce.
Induction, (lat.) a leading into, a drawing on or enticing, also in Logic, it
is taken for a kind of argumentation or Imperfect Syllogism, wherein the
species is collected out of the Individuals, the Genus out of the species, and
the whole out of the parts. Indulcation, or Indulciation, (lat.) a sweetning, a
making sweet. Indulgence, (lat.) a gentleness in suffering, a favoring, a
pardoning; it is also taken for the form of some special act of grace, granted
by the Pope to diverse persons, upon some special occasions, which some call an
Indult. Indument, (lat.) a clothing, or garment. Induration, (lat.) a making
hard. Indusiated, (lat.) clothed with a garment called Indusium, i. e. a shirt
or smock. Industry, (lat.) pains, labor, diligence: some derive it from
induere and s^rnere^: it being as Minshew says, as it were a certain
structure, wherewith the mind is endued. Inebriation, (lat.) a making drunk.
Ineched, (old word) put in. Ineffable, (lat.) unspeakable, not to be uttered.
Ineffugible, (lat.) unavoidable, not to be shunned. Inelaborate, (lat.) not
labourd, or taken pains for. Ineluctable, (lat.) not to be overcome by
wrestling, or taking great pains. Innerrable, (lat.) not to be declared or
related. Ineptitude, (lat.) unaptnesse, also fondness. vainness. Inequality,
(lat.) unequalnesse, unevenness. Inequitable, (lat.) not to be rid through.
Inertitude, (lat.) laziness, slothfulness. Inescutcheon, a term in Heraldry,
being an Ordinary formed of a threefold line, representing the shape of the
Escutcheon. Inestimable, or Inaestimable, (lat.) which cannot be rated, of too
high a price to be valued. Inevitable, (lat.) not to be shuned or avoided.
Inexaturated, (lat.) not to be filled or satisfied, of an unsatiable appetite.
Inexhaustible, or Inexhaurible, (lat.) not to be drawn out or emptied.
Inexorable, (lat.) not to be persuaded or entreated. Inexpiable, (lat.) not to
be purged or cleansed from sin, never to be satisfied for. Inexpleble, (lat.)
not to be filled. Inexplicable, (lat.) not to be unfolded or explained.
Inexpugnable, (lat.) not to be taken or won by force. Inextinguible, (lat.) not
to be put out or quenched. Inextirpable, (lat.) not to be rooted out, whose
stock or lineage can never be utterly destroyed. Inextricable, (lat.) not to be
wound out, or disentangled. Inexuperable, (lat.) not to be overcome, or
surpassed. Infallible, (lat.) not to be deceaved, never failing. Infancy,
(lat.) the first age of man, which is from the first year till the seventh.
Infandous, (lat.) not to be spoken, monstrously wicked and heinous.
Infangtheft, a word used in the practic of Scotland, signifying a liberty to
sit and decide upon any theft committed within a man's own jurisdiction, by his
own servant; Out-fangtheft being the like liberty, when a theft is committed by
a stranger. Infantes and Infantas of Spain, all the Sons and Daughters of the
King of Spain, are so called, (...), or by way of eminence, except the Eldest,
who are called Principe, and Princesa. Infanterie, (Ital.) the Foot Souldierie
of an army. Infanticide, (lat.) Infant-killing, a murdering of Children or
Infants. Infatigable, see Indefatigable. Infatuation, (lat.) a besoting, a
making foolish. Infaust, or Infaustous, (lat.) unluckly, unfortunate.
Infelicity, (lat.) unhappiness. To Infeof, a Law Term, to grant in Fee.
Inferial, (lat.) belonging to Funerals. Inferior, (lat,) lower, of a meaner
degree. Inferior, Planets are those which are placed below the Globe of the
Sun. Infernal, (lat.) belonging to the deep, or hell. To Infer, (lat.) to bring
in, to conclude from something gone before. Infertil, (lat.) barren,
unfruitful. Infestation, (lat.) a troubling, molesting, or disturbing.
Infestive, (lat.) without sport, joy, or solemnity. Infibulation, (lat.) a
buttoning or buckling in. Inficiation, (lat.) a denying. Infidelity, (lat.)
untrustinesse, unfaithfulness. Infimous, (lat.) lowermost, meanest.
Infinitive, (lat.) having no end or measure, the Ifinitive Mood in Grammar, is
that Mood which has neither number nor person, as other moods. Infirmary, an
Hospital or Spittle for sick folks. Infirmity, (lat.) weakness
indisposednesse* To Infix, (lat.) to fasten in. Inflammation, (lat.) an
inflaming, a swelling or burning with heat. Inflate, (lat.) swelling, or puffed
up with wind; hence an inflate expression, is an expression swelling with big
words, but to little purpose. Inflexible, (lat.) not to be bowed or bended, and
by metaphor unruly: it is also taken in an amorous sense, when a Lady is not to
be moved by the most earnest importunity of her servant. Artam. Infliction,
(lat.) a laying a punishment upon. Influence, (lat.) a flowing in, also the
power which celestial bodies have over earthly things. Influx, (lat.) a flowing
in. Infacundity, (lat.) unfruitfulnesse, barrenness. Information, (lat.) an
informing, telling, nor making known. Informatus non sum, a formal answer, made
by an Atturny, that is commanded by the Court to say what he thinks good in
defense of his Client, whereby he is deemed to leave his Client undefended, and
so judgment passes for the adverse party. Informers, certain Officers
belonging to the Kings bench, who complain of those that offend against any
penal statutes; they are also called Promoters, and by the Civilians,
Delatores. Informity, (lat.) unhandsomenesse, uglynesse, a being out of shape
or form. Infrangible, (lat.) not to be broken or discouraged. Infriction, or
Infrication, (lat.) a rubbing or cha^ing in. To Infringe, (lat.) to break to
pieces, also to indamage or diminish. Infucation, (lat.) a laying on of drugs,
or artificial colors upon the face. Infuscation, (lat.) a making dark or
dusky. Infusi^n, (lat.) a pouring, in, it is used in Physic, for a steeping of
roots or leaves, or any kind of medicine, in some liquid substance for a
certain time, till the chiefest of their virtue be drawn out. Ingannation,
(Ital.) a deceaving. Ingemination, (lat.) a doubling, also a repeating the same
word over again. Ingenerable, (lat.) not to be begotten or produced.
Ingeniculation, (lat.) a bending of the knee, a kneeling. Ingeniosity, or
Ingenuity, (lat.) ingeniousnesse, wittynesse, also Ingenuity is taken for a
free condition or state of life, also a liberal or free nature. Ingestion,
(lat.) a carrying or conveying in. Ingle, see Ca^amite. Inglorious, (lat.)
without glory, obscure. Ingot, a little wedge, or mass, of gold, from the
French word Lingot, because it something resembles a tongue. Ingrailed, from
the Latin, Ingredior, a term in Heraldry, as a bordure ingrailed, is when the
line, of which the bordure is made, crooks inward toward the field. Ingrate,
(lat.) displeasing, not accepted, also unthankful, whence Ingratitude,
unthankfulness. Ingredient, (lat.) is taken, in Physic, for one of the
simples, put into a compounded medecin. Ingree, (old word) in good part.
Ingression, (lat.) an entering or walking into, also a beginning, Ingressu,
(lat.) a writ of entry, whereby a man seeks entry into Lands or Tenements.
Ingrosser, in Common law signifies one thnt buys up corn growing, or dead
victual to sell again. Ingurgitation, (lat.) a greedy swallowing, or
gluttonous devouring, as it were a craming a bottomless pit. Ingustable,
(lat.) untastable, not to be tasted. Inhabitable, (lat.) not to be dwelt in, or
inhabited, but the praeposition in, has not the same force in the word
Inhabitant, this signifying a dweller, or one that lives in this or that place.
Inhalation, (lat.) a breathing in, a breathing upon. Inhesion, or Inhaesion,
(lat.) a sticking close, a cleaving unto. Inheritance, in Common law, is a
perpetuity of lands or tenements, to a man and his heirs. Inhibition, (lat.) a
forbiding, in Common law, it is taken, for a writ, forbidding a Judge to
proceed farther in the cause depending before him, but inhibition is a writ
issuing out of a higher Court, Christian to an inferior, whereas prohibition
issues out of the Kings, to a Court Christian, or to an inferior temporal
Court. Inhonestation, (lat.) a shaming or disgracing, a making dishonest.
Iahospitality, or Inhospitability, (lat.) a not affording intertainment, a
churlishness to strangers, also an unfitness for intertainment. Inhumanity,
(lat.) cruelty, barbarousnesse, as it were a putting off, and devesting ones
self of human nature. Inhumation, (lat.) a burying, or putting into the ground.
Inideous, (lat.) unfit. Injection, (lat.) a casting in, it signifies in
Physic, particularly, a conveying of any liquid substance, into any part of
the body, by glister or Syringe, or the like. Inimitable, (lat.) not to be
followed or imitated. Iniquity, (lat.) want of equity, corruption, injustice.
Iniswen, the white Island, a name which in ancient times was attributed to this
Island of Britain. Initiation, (lat.) an entrance, or admittance into any
Faculty or Art. Injucundity, (lat.) unpleasantnesse. Injunction, (lat.) an
injoyning, or commandment, as it were a joining or fastening a command upon
any one, also a decree out of Chancery, to give possession to the plaintiff for
want of appearance in the defendent, or to stay a proceeding in a Court, upon
suggestion made, that the rigor of the law is against equity. Injurious, (Lat.
from in and jus) wrongful, as it were against right and law. An Inkling of a
matter, a small rumor or report, as it were a tinckling, or little sound, or,
as others say, from Inclinare, because by it the ear is somewhat inclined.
Inlagary, in Common law, is a restitution or restoring of one outlawed, to the
benefit or estate of a subject; the word Inlawgh signifying in the Saxon
tongue, one that is in franco^plegio, that is, under a certain law; and in
Decenna, for till a man be 12 years of age, he is not accounted under law.
Inlay, see Marquetry. Inmates, signify in Common law, those that are admitted
for their money, to dwell jointly with another man in his house, passing in and
out by one door, and not being able to maintain themselves. Innatable, or
Innable, (lat.) not to be swimed in. Innate, (lat.) naturally inbred.
Innavigable, (lat.) not to be sailed in, unpassable for any ship or boat. Innes
of Chancery, eight houses appointed for young Students in the elements of law,
namely, Thavies Inn, anciently the mansion house of J. Thavie, Armourer of
London. 2. Furnivalls Inn, once the mansion of Sr. Rich. Furnival, afterward
of the Talbots, Earls of Shrewsbury. 3. Bernards Inn, once belonging to J.
Macworth, Dean of the Cathedral of Lincoln, and in the holding of Lionel
Bernard. 4. Staple Inn, once belonging to the English Merchants of the Staple.
5. Cliffords Inn, once the dwelling house of Malcolm de hersey, afterward of
the Cliffords, Earls of Cumberland, of whom it is now rented. 6. Clements Inn,
once a Message belonging to the Parish Church of St. Clement Danes. 7. New
Inn, once the dwelling house of Sr. J. Tyncaulxe, it has been also called our
Lady's Inn. 8. Lions Inn, once a dwelling house, known by the name of the
Black Lion. Innes of Court, 4 houses or Celledges, for the intertainment of
Students of the law, namly, the two Temples, Inner and Middle, which were
anciently the habitations of the Templars, or Knights of Jerusalem, (to which
was added the outward Temple, which is now called Essex House) Lincoln's Inn,
built by Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, for his own dwelling house, and Grais
Inn, anciently the manor house of Baron Gray, in the time of Edward the
third. Innitent, (lat.) endeavoring, leaning, or insisting upon. Innocents
day, the 28 of December, wherein Mass used to be said, for the souls of the
Innocent Children slain by Herod, it is also called Childermas day. Innocuous,
(lat.) doing no hurt, harmless. Innominable, (lat.) not to be named.
Innovation, (lat.) a making new, also a bringing in of new customs or opinions.
Innoxious, (lat.) safe, dangerless, wherein there is no hurt. Innubilous,
(lat.) cloudlesse, not overcast. Innuendo, a Law term, used in pleadings, to
declare a thing or person that was mentioned before obscurely. Innumerable,
(lat.) not to be numbered. Innutrition, (lat.) a nourishing inwardly. Ino, the
daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, and nurse to Bacchus, she was second wife to
Athamas, King of Thebes, and for causing Phryxus and Hell, whom he had by his
first wife Nephel^, to be banished, she was punished by Juno, who possessed her
husband, with such a raving madness, that he took her for a lioness, and
forced her with her son Melicerta, to cast her self into the sea, where, by the
compassion of the gods, they were changed into sea Deities. Inobservable,
(lat.) not to be observed, unworthy of observation. Inocciduous, (lat.) never
falling, setting, or going down. Inoculation, (lat.) a graffing, or inserting a
bud or kernel into the bud of another tree. Inodoration, (lat.) a making to
swell, a perfuming. Inopacous, (lat.) not dark, or shadowed. Inopinate, (lat.)
not thought of, or expected. Inoptable, (lat.) not to be wished. Inorganical,
(lat.) wanting Organs, or Instruments of motion or operation. Inquietude,
(lat.) restlessenesse, want of repose, or quiet of mind. Cleop. Inquiline,
(lat.) a native, he that dweleth where he was born, from in and Colo. i. to
dwell. Inquination, (lat.) a making foul, a polluting or defiling. Inquirendo,
an authority given to a person, to inquire into something for the Kings
advantage. Inquisition, (lat.) a searching into, or inquiring after; also the
name of a grand council, instituted by Ferdinand, the Catholic King of Spain,
who having subdued the Empire of the Moors in that kingdom, ordered, that no
Moors should be suffered to stay in Spain, but such as should be baptized; and
for inquiry into those matters: this Council was erected, and called the Sacred
Council of the inquisition, whereof the Archbishop of Toledo, or the
Archbishop of Sevil was President, assisted by 12 other Councillors.
Inrolement, a registering or recording any lawful act in the Roules of the
Chancerie. Insanity, (lat.) unsoundnesse of body or mind. Insative, (lat.)
unsown, unplanted, growing voluntarily. Insaturable, (lat.) not to be filled,
or satified. Inscious, or inscient, (lat.) unknowing, ignorant. Inscription,
(lat.) a title or name, writ or engraven over any thing. Inscrutable, (lat.)
not to be found out by searching, hidden, mysterious. Insculption, (lat.) a
carving, or engraving. Insecable, (lat.) not to be cut. An Insect, (lat.) the
smallest sort of Animal, as a Fly, Be, or Ant, some think them to be so
called, because they have a kind of division, or section, between the head and
the belly. Insectation, (lat.) a railing against, as it were a following and
prosecuting with evil language. Insectile, (lat.) not to be cut. Insection,
(lat.) a cutting into. Insemination, (lat.) a sowing into. Insensate, (lat.)
mad, foolish, void of sense. Insensible, (lat.) not to be perceived, also not
having any sense, also the same as impassible. Artam. Insertion, (lat.) an
engraffing, a planting into. Insic^ation, (lat.) a drying. Insident, (lat*)
sitting upon, also settling. Insidiation, (lat.) a laying ambush, a waiting to
ensnare. Insimulation, (lat.) an accusing. Insinuation, (lat.) a winding ones
self in by little and little, a getting into favor by degrees, as it were a
going into the bosom. Insipid, (lat.) having no taste or relish, unsavory.
Insipience, (lat.) foolishness, want of knowledge or discretion. Insist,
(lat.) to stay upon, to urge. Insition, (lat.) a cutting into, a graffing.
Insolation, (lat.) a laying in the Sun, a bleaching. Insolency, (lat.) pride,
arrogance, as it were an unwonted behavior, or doing contrary to common
custom. Insoluble, (lat.) See Indissoluble. Insomnious, (lat.) wanting sleep,
also apt to dream. Inspection, (lat.) a looking narrowly into. Insperable,
(lat.) not to be hoped. Inspersion, (lat.) a sprinkling upon. Inspiration,
(lat.) an inspiring or breathing into. Inspissation, (lat.) a thickning or
making thick. Instability, (lat.) unsteadfastness, inconstancy. Instancy,
(lat.) a being near at hand, also earnestness or urgency. Instauration, (lat.)
a renewing or repairing. Instigation, (lat.) a stirring or pricking on, a
provoking. Instillation, (lat.) an instilling, or causing to drop by little and
little. Instimulation, (lat.) the same as Instigation. Instinct, (lat.) a
natural inward motion, or prompting. Institutes, (lat.) ordinances, precepts,
or commandments, and particularly certain books of the Civil Law, collected by
Justinian. Institution, (lat.) an ordaining or appointing. Ins^bid, (lat.)
hasty, inconsiderate, rash. Insubria, a Country of Italy, anciently called
Gallia Cisalpina, now Lumbardy, from the Lumbards, a people of Pannonia which
conquered it. Insular, (lat.) belonging to an Island, or Island-like.
Insulsity, (lat.) unsavoriness, unpleasantness, also folly, bluntness of wit.
Insultation, (lat.) a leaping on, also a boasting or insulting. Insuperable,
(lat.) not to be vanquished or overcome. (...), (lat.) not to be born or
endured. Insurrection, (lat.) a rising against. Intabulation, (lat.) a laying
on of boards or planks. Intactible, (lat.) not to be touched. Intakers, a sort
of thieves so called, because they receive such things as the outparters bring
to them. Intamination, (lat.) a defiling or polluting. Intangible, (lat.) the
same as Intactible. Integral, whole, in Arithmetic integral numbers are
opposed to fractions. Integration, (lat.) a making whole, or restoring.
Integrity, (lat.) sincerity, uprightness, as it were soundness, and intireness
of mind. Integument, (lat.) a covering, a garment to cover with. Intellectual,
(lat.) belonging to the Intellect, i. e. the faculty or act it self of
understanding. Intelligence, (lat.) knowledge, understanding, wisdom.
Intemperance, (lat.) inordinatness of life, a want of temperance to contain a
man's desires and lusts. Intempestivity, (lat.) unseasonableness, a doing a
thing out of due season and order. Intenebration, (lat.) a darkning or
obscuring. Inteneration, (lat.) a making tender, a softning. Intense, (lat.)
stretched to the utmost, contrary to remiss, as intensely cold, i. cold in a
high degree, remissely cold, i. cold in a low degree. Intent, or Intentive,
(lat.) seriously bent upon a business. Intentation, (lat.) a threatening, as it
were a trying o^ endeavoring against. Interc^lation, (lat.) an interserting or
putting between; it is particularly applied to the putting in of a day into the
month of February in Bissextile or Leap-year. Intercession, (lat.) a praying
or mediating in the behalf of another, as it were a stepping between to keep
off harm or danger. Intercident, (lat.) falling between as an intercidental
day, an extraordinary critical day, which being caused by the violence of the
disease, falls between the ordinary critical days. Intercision, (lat.) a
cutting between or in the midst. Interclusion, (lat.) a shutting between, or a
stopping up the passage between one thing and another. Intercolumniation,
(lat.) the distane be-two Columns or Pillars, also some kind of work placed
between them. It is a term used in Architecture. Intercostal, (lat.) being
between the ribs, as those veins and muscles which run along in those parts,
are called in Anatomy, the intercostal veins and muscles. Intercurrent, (lat.)
running or passing between, whence the substantive intercourse commonly used.
Intercutaneous, (lat.) being between the skin and the flesh. Interdict, or
Interdiction, (lat.) a forbidding or debarring one the use of any thing. In
Common and Canon Law, interdiction is particularly taken for an Ecclesiastical
censure prohibiting the use of Divine rites to the person condemned, also such
persons whom all men are forbidden to receive into their house, are said to be
interdicted of fire and water. Interduct, (lat.) a leading between, also a
sp^ce left between full periods in writing or printing. Interemption, (lat.) a
killing or violent depriving of life. Interequitation, (lat.) a riding between.
Interest* a Verb impersonal in Latin signifies, it concerns or belongs unto;
but we commonly use it substantively for a concernment, right, or
appertainment, al^o usury, the use of money lent, being as it were the right of
him that lends. Interfaction, (lat.) an interrupting or disturbing any one by
speaking in the midst of their discourse. Interfecti^n, (lat.) a killing.
Interfectour, an interficient or destroying Planet, and which is placed in the
eighth house (in a Nativity) either five degrees before the cusp of the house,
or 25 after. Secondly, the Lord of the eighth house. Thirdly the Planet that is
joined to the Lord of the eighth house. Fourthly the Planet that disposes of
the Lord of the eighth house when he is not therein. Interfeer, (Frence) to hit
one leg against another, also to exchange blows. Interfluent, or Interfluous,
(lat.) flowing between. Interrogatories, in Common Law, are questions demanded
of witnesses brought in. Interjacent, (lat.) lying between. Interjection,
(lat.) a casting between: It is commonly used for one of the eight parts of
Speech in Grammar, expressing some sudden passion of the mind. Interim, an
Adverb signifying in Latin, in the mean while; but we commonly use it
substantively for the time passing between. Interior, (lat.) inward, being on
the inside. Interition, (lat.) a perishing or decaying. Interloquution, (lat.)
a speaking or discoursing between. Interlopers, in Common Law, are those that
without legal authority, intercept the trade of a company, as it were
Interleapers. Interlucation, (lat.) a letting in of light between, by the
cutting away of boughs, a term in Gardening. Interlude, (lat.) a kind of
Stage Play, that which is sung or represented between the several Acts.
Interlunary, (lat.) belonging to the Interlunium, or space between the old and
new Moon. Intermeation, (lat.) a passing between. Intermedian, or Intermeate,
(lat.) being in the middle, or lying between. Intermeteth, (old word) medleth.
Intermication, (lat.) a shining between, or in the midst. Intermission, (lat.)
a putting between, also a deferring or leaving off for a while. Intermissions,
a term in Architecture, the spaces between the wall and the pillars, or between
pillars and pillars. Intermixtion, (lat.) a mingling between or amongst.
Intermural space, (lat.) a space between two walls. Internal, (lat.) inward.
Internecion, (lat.) a making a universal slaughter, or utter destroying.
Internigration, (lat.) a mingling of black. Internuntiation, (lat.) a going or
sending of a message between several parties. Interpellation, (lat.) an
interrupting or disturbing. Interplication, (lat.) a folding between.
Interpolation, (lat.) a fixing or inserting between. Interposition, (lat.) an
interposing or putting between. Interpretation, (lat.) an interpreting,
expounding, or explaining. Interpunction, (lat.) a distinguishing by making
points or pricks between. Interreign, in Latin Interreguum, the space between
the death of one Prince or Ruler, and the succession or election of another;
whence Interrex, he that rules or bears sway during that space.
Interrogation, (lat.) an asking or demanding a question. Interruption, (lat.) a
troubling or disturbing any one in the midst of a business. Interscription,
(lat.) an interlining, a writing between two lines. Intersecants in Heraldry,
are pertransient lines which cross one another. Intersection, (lat.) a cutting
in the midst. Intersertion, (lat.) a graffing, or putting in between.
Intersonant, (lat.) sounding between or in the midst. Interspersion, (lat.) a
sprinkling or scattering between. Interspiration, (lat.) a breathing between.
Interstitial, (lat.) having an interstice or space between. Intertexture,
(lat.) a weaving between. Interval, (lat.) a distance or space either of place
or time. Intervenient, (lat.) coming between. Intervert, (lat.) to turn upside
down, also to beguile, or deceitfully to take away a thing committed to any
ones trust. Intervigilation, (lat.) a watching between whiles. Intestable,
(lat.) incapable by the Law to make any Will, or be taken for a witness.
Intestine, (lat.) inward, lying within the entrails. Inthronization, (lat.) a
placing upon a Throne or Seat of Majesty. Intimation, (lat.) a signifying, or
secret declaring. Intimidation, (lat.) a making timorous or fearful.
Intinction, (lat.) a dying, a dipping into any colored liquor. Entire, (lat.)
whole or sound. Intitulation, (lat.) an intiteling, an adding a title unto any
thing. Intolerable, (lat.) not to be born, or endured. Intonation, (lat.) a
thundering or making a terrible noise. Intoxication, (lat.) a poisoning or
envenoming. Intractable, (lat.) not to be managed or trained, unmanageable.
Intrado, (Spanish) an entrance, also a yearly revenue. Intraneous, (lat.)
inward. Intricacy, or Intrique, (lat. and Fr.) an intanglednesse, encumbrance,
or winding like a labyrinth. Intrinsecal, (lat.) inward or secret.
Introduction, (lat.) a leading in, also a beginning or preface to any
discourse. Introgression, (lat.) a going in. Intromission, (lat.) a sending
inward. Introruption, (lat.) a breaking in, a rushing in by violence.
Introversion, (lat.) a turning upside down, also a turning ones thoughts
within, a looking a word used in practical Divinity. Intrusion, (lat.) a
wrongful or unmannerly thrusting in. Intuition, (lat.) a clear seeing into, a
distinct beholding. Intumescence, (lat.) a swelling, or rising up into a heap.
Intumulation, (lat.) a throwing a heap upon, a burying. Invagination, (lat.) a
putting into a sheath or scabbard. Invalid, (lat.) of no force, strength, or
value. Invasion, (lat.) an assailing, or setting upon another right or
dominions. Invecked, from the Latin Invehere, a term in Blazon* as a bordure
Invecked, is when the line of which the bordure is made inverts its points not
toward the field, but into it self. Invection, (lat.) a carrying in, or
against. Invective, (lat.) railing, sharp, bitter in expressions, as it were
violently carried on against any one. Inveigle, to allure, or entice, from the
Dutch word avanglen, i. to cast alluring eyes. Invellop, see Envelope.
Inventory, (lat.) a certain writing wherein is contained a Catalogue, or
reckoning up of the Goods and Chattels of a deceased party, which are to be
prized, or valued by sufficient men, and exhibited to the Ordinary. Inversion,
(lat.) a turning the inside out, a changing the order of things, or words.
Invest, (lat.) to give possession, which used to be done by delivering the
Tenant a rod, and administering him an Oath, also to instal with any honor, or
dignity. Investigation, (lat.) a making diligent search, or inquiry.
Investiture, (lat.) a giving possession, an endowing with honor. Inveterate,
(lat.) grown old, rooted, and settled by long custom. Invigilation, (lat.) a
careful watching, a diligent over-seeing. Invigorate, to inspire vigor, life,
and spirit. Invincible, (lat.) not to be conquered, or overcome. Inviolable,
(lat.) not to be violated, or broken. Inviron, (French) to encompasse.
Invisible, (lat.) not to be seen, or discerned. Invitation, (lat.) an inviting,
bidding, or calling unto. Inumbration, (lat.) a casting a shadow upon.
Inunction, (lat.) an anointing thoroughly. Inundation, (lat.) an overflowing
with water. Invocation, (lat.) an invoking, or calling upon. Involation, (lat.)
a flying into, or a flying upon. Involve, (lat.) to wrap, or fold in, to
entangle, or overwhelm. Involuntarie, (lat.) unwilling. Inurbanitie, (lat.)
incivility, want of courtesy, or affability. Inure, or Enure, to accustom,
also in Common Law, it signifies to take effect, or be available. Inusitate,
(lat.) not accustomed, unwonted. Inutility, (lat.) unprofitablenesse.
Invulnerable, (lat.) not to be wounded.
J O
Io, the daughter of Inachus, King of the Argives, she being beloved of Jupiter
was transformed into a Cow, that she might not be known of Juno, who
nevertheless suspecting, caused her to be watch't by Argus, who had many eyes,
but Argus being slain by Mercury, Juno sent a Gadfly to sting her, which made
her run up and down restless, till at length she arrived at Egypt, where
being restored to her former shape, she was married to Osiris, and called Isis.
Joab, (Hebr.) Fatherhood. Joachim, an Hebrew proper name, signifying
preparation of the Lord. Joan, a proper name of women, answerable to that of
John in men, it was the name of several great Queens, as those of Aragon and
Naples. Joannitiques, a certain order of Monks, that wear the figure of a
Chalice upon their breasts. Job, (Hebr.) sighing, or sorrowing. Joblin,
(French) a sot, or gull. Jocasta, the daughter of Creon, King of Thebes, and
the wife of Laius, after whose death she was married unknowingly to her son
Oedipus, to whom she brought forth Eteocles and Polynices, who slaying one
another in a contest about the Kingdom, she killed her self for grief.
Joculatory, or Jocous, (lat.) jesting, sportive, done or spoken in jest.
Jocund, in (Latin Jucundus) cheerful, pleasant, or joyful, from Jocus, i. a
jest. John, a proper name, signifying in Hebrew gracious, there have been
diverse great Kings, and other famous men of this name, as Kings of England,
Scotland, Spain, and Portugal, 23 Popes of Rome, also Joannes Hircanus, a
famous Captain of the Jews, who conquered Samaria, Idumaea, and a great part of
Syria; Joannes Acutus, or Hackwood, an Englishman, who performed several great
martial exploits in Italy, under the Dukes of Milain; Joannes Guttenberg, a
German, who invented the Art of printing, this name was anciently pronounced
Juon. Joinder, in Common Law, is the coupling of two in a suite one against
another. Joyning-issue, a Term in Common Law, the referring a point of a matter
depending in suite, to the trial of the Jury. Joynt-Tenants, in Common Law, are
those that hold Lands, or Tenements by one Title, or without partition.
Jointure, a Term in Law, being a Covenant, whereby a husband assures unto his
wife in respect of marriage lands, or Tenements for Term of her life, or
otherwise. Jolaus, the Nephew of Hercules, he drove his Unkles Chariot, when he
fought against Cycnus the son of Mars, afterward when he grew old, he was
restored to youth by the prayers of Hercules. Jollitrin, (Fr.) a youngster, or
young Gallant. Jonas, a proper name, signifying in Hebrew a Dove. Jonathan,
another Hebrew name, signifying the gift of God. Joncade, (French) a certain
kind of spoon meat. Ionia, a Country of Asia the less, having twelve great
Cities, whereof Miletus and Ephesus were the chief, the inhabitants of this
Country descended anciently from the Greeks, whence their language was called
the Ionick Dialect. Ionick Order in Architecture, see Corinthian. Jopaean, a
certain expression, used in Hymns, or songs of rejoicing. Jopa^, an African
King, who was one of those that sought to have married Dido, he was a great
Musician, and sung in verse, of the course of the Moon, and the motion of the
Stars. Jordan, (Hebr.) the River of judgment. Joscelin, the proper name of a
man, in Latin Justulus, being a diminutive from Jost, in Latin Justus, or
Jodocus, the chief of this name was Joscelin of Lovan, son to Godfrey, Duke of
Brabant. Joseph, (Hebr.) increase of the Lord. Josias, (Hebr.) fire of the
Lord. Josuah, (Hebr.) the Lord Savior. Jot, a little, or very small matter,
from the Greek letter Iota, or the Hebrew Jod. Jotacisme, (Greek) a running
much upon the letter Iota, or I, also a bad pronunciation of the same letter.
Jouketh, a Term in Faulconry, they say the Hawk Jouketh, and not sleeps.
Journal, (French) a book of every days passages, also so much land as may be
plough'd in a day by one team of oxen. Journee, (French) a days journey, also
an expedition of war, a day of battle. Joyce, the proper name of a woman, in
Latin Jocosa, i. merry, pleasant. Joys of the Planets, are when they are in
those houses where they are most powerfully and strong, as Saturn joyeth in
Scorpio.
I P
Iphianassa, Iphinoe, and Lysippe, the daughters of Proetus, King of Argos, who
for despising the goddess Juno, and equalling their own beauties to hers, were
struck with such a Frenzy, that they imagined themselves transformed to
Cowes, but Melampus being sent for, and offered for the cure of them half the
Kingdom, and which of the daughters he liked best, soon brought them to their
former estate, and married Iphianassa. Iphiclus, the son of Amphitryo by
Alckmena, he was born at the same time with Hercules, who was begot by Jupiter.
Iphicrates, a Captain of the Athenians, famous for many great victories.
Iphigenia, the daughter of Agamemnon, and Clytemnestra, she was adjudged to be
sacrificed to Diana, because that goddess being incensed against Agamemnon for
killing one of her hearts, kept the Navy of the Greeks by contrary winds from
their intended course, but after that Ulysses had by craft obtained her of her
mother, and all things in a readiness for the sacrifice, Diana accepted of a
Heart, so that Iphigenia was set free and sent to Taurica, where she was made
Over-seer of the rites of that goddess, (which were performed by the
sacrificing of men) by Thoas the King of that place, who was afterward slain
by Orestes, who was designed to be offered for a sacrifice. Iphimedia, the wife
of Aloeus, who being ravished by Neptune, brought forth Twins, Othus and
Ephialtes, who grew every month nine fingers in tallness, till they came to be
of a very vast stature, they helped the Giants against the Gods, and were at
length slain by the Arrows of Apollo and Diana. Iphinoe, see Iphianassa. Iphis,
a young man of a great beauty, who fell in love with Anaxarete, see Anaxarete.
Iphis, is also the name of a Cretan Virgin the daughter of Lygdus and
Theletusa, she was by her mothers prayers to the goddess Isis changed into a
man, least Lygdus finding himself deceived should be incensed, for he going to
travel, and giving a strict charge to Theletusa, whom he left with Child, that
if she brought forth a Female Child, she should put her out from her, he was
made to believe that it was a Boy, and as soon as his supposed Son came of age,
he provided him a wife named Janthe, for whom as it happened, Iphis proved a real
husband. Ipswich, the chief Town of Suffolk, it was sacked by the Danes in the
year 991. this Town is famous for the birth of Cardinal W^lsey, who was a
Butcher's son of this place, and who began to build here a very magnificent
College* here is yet to be seen the ruins of the old Town, which was called
Gipwich.
I R
Iracundious, (lat.) of an angry disposition, inclinable to anger. Irascible,
(lat.) capable of anger, irascible faculty is that faculty of the Soul from
whence anger and passion is stirred up, and kindled in men. Irchenfield, or
Archenfield, that part of Herefordshire, where the City of Hereford now
stands, and where the old Town of Ariconium stood in ancient times. Irene,
the mother of Constantine the 7th. she reigned at Constantinople jointly with
her son called a Council at Nice, consisting of above 300 Bishops, wherein the
setting up of images in churches was confirmed by a decree, being expelled from
the Empire by her son, who reigned alone for* seven years, she at length took
him by craft, put out his eyes, and cast him into prison where he died. Iris,
the daughter of Thaumas, feigned by the Poets to have been the messenger of the
gods, there is a kind of watery Meteor, so called in Greek, appearing in the
Clouds of diverse colors, which we call the Rainbow. Irmunsul, or Ermisul, a
certain God worshipped by the ancient Britains, and thought to be the same
with Mercury. Ironical, (Greek) spoken in mockery, or by that figure called
Irony, which is a speaking contrary to what a man means by way of bitter
gibing, or scoffing. Irradiation, (lat.) an enlightening, or casting beams upon.
Irrational, (lat.) unreasonable. Irrecordable, (lat.) not to be remembered.
Irrecuperable, (lat.) never to be recovered, unrecoverable. Irredivivous,
(lat.) not to be revived. Irrefragable, (lat.) unbreakable, also undeniable,
not to be confuted. Irregularity, (lat.) disorderlinesse, as it were a being
without rule, also an incapacity of taking holy orders, as being maimed, or
very deformed, base-born, or guilty of any heinous crime, a Term in Canon Law.
Irreligious, (lat.) having no Religion, or piety toward God. Irremeable,
(lat.) through which there is no passing back, or returning. Irremediable,
(lat.) not to be remedied, or helped. Irremissible, (lat.) not to be remitted,
or pardoned. Irremunerable, (lat.) not to be rewarded. Irreparable, (lat.) not
to be restored, or repaired. Irreprehensible, (lat.) not to be reprehended, or
blamed. Irresolute, (lat.) unresolved, doubting* or wavering. Irrevocable,
(lat.) not to be revoked, or called back. Irrigation, (lat.) a watering of
Gardens and Meadows out of some neighboring River. Irrision, (lat.) a laughing
at, a scoffing, or flouting. Irritation, (lat.) a provoking, or stirring up.
Irrite, (lat.) void, of no effect. Irrogation, (lat.) an imposing upon.
Irroration, (lat.) a bedewing, or besprinkling. Irruent, (lat.) rushing, or
running violently upon. Irrugation, (lat.) a wrinkling, a contracting into
wrinkles. Irruption, (lat.) a breaking violently in. Irus, a poor man of
Ithaca, who was a continual messenger between Penelope and those that came to
court her in her husbands absence, for which Ulysses, when he came home, killed
him with his fist.
I S
Isaac, (Hebrew) laughter, as Gelasius in Greek. Isaca, or Isca, a river in
England, vulgarly called Ex, from whence the City Exon, or Exeter, is
denominated. Isagogical, (Greek) belonging to Isagogue, (i. e.) an Introduction
or beginning. Isca Danmoniorum, see Excester. Isca Silurum, the name of a Town
in Monmouthshire, commonly called Caerleon. Iscariot, the surname of Judas,
that betrayed our Savior, from the Hebrew, Isch Carioth. Ischiatic, (Greek
from Iscrias the hip) troubled with a pain in the hip, which pain is commonly
called the Sciatica, or hip gout. Isicle, q. Iceseekle, from the dutch word
Iskekel, a tappe of ice, a drop of water frozen. Isis, a goddess, worshipped
by the Egyptians, she was at first called Io, and was the daughter of Inachus,
King of Argos, see Io. Isis, the river Ouse, in Wiltshire, which meeting with
Thames, is called Thamisis. Islip, a Town in Oxfordshire, anciently called
Gistlipe, famous for being the birthplace of King Edward the Confessor.
Ismaelite, one descended from Ismael, the son of Abraham, by his Concubin Agar.
Isonomy, (Greek) an equality. Isoceles Triangle, (in Geometry) is that which
has two equal sides, and two equal opposite Angles. Isota de Nugarolis, a
Virgin of Verona, the daughter of Antonius de Nugarolis, she was very famous
for Philosophy, Philology, and Poetry. Isped, (old word) dispatched. Israel,
(Hebrew) prevailing in the Lord. Issue, in Common law, signifies either
children begotten between a man and his wife, or the profits of lands, or the
profits growing from a fine, or a matter depending in suit, whereupon the
parties join. Isthme, (Greek) a narrow neck of land, lying between two seas,
the most famous Isthmus, is that of Greece, whereupon Corinth stands; from
thence were denominated the Isthmian Games, instituted by Theseus, in honor of
Neptune. Istria, a Country of Italy, joining to Illyricum. Isurium Brigantum,
the name of an ancient City in Yorkshire, so called from the River Ure running
by it: It was many ages since, rased to the ground, but out of the ruins of it
was built a Town, now called Ealdburgh or Aldborow.
I T
Italia, or Italy, one of the most famous Countries of Europe, so called from
Italus, otherwise called Atlas, an ancient King thereof, who had two daughters,
Electra, whom he married to Camboblasco, King of the Janigenae, and Roma, whom
he made Queen of the Aborigenes, she is said to have laid the foundation of the
City Rome, which was afterward finished by Romulus, others derive Italy from
the Greek word Italos, an Ox, because that Country abounded with Oxen, it was
anciently called Hesperia, from Hesperus, the brother of Atlas. To Italianize,
a made word, signifying to speak or do like an Italian. Iteration, (lat.) a
saying or doing the same thing over again, a repeating. Ithaca, an Island in
the Ionian sea, where Ulysses was born, it is full of Goats, but no Hare can
live there. Itinerary, (lat.) belonging to a journey, also substantially used
for a Calender of miles, or a note-book, wherein are set down the passages of a
journey. Itylus, the son of Zethus and Aedon, see Aedon. Itys, the son of
Tereus, King of Thrace, by Progne, the daughter of Pandion, King of Athens, he
was slain by his mother, and set before Tereus, to eat at a banquet, (because
he had deflowred her sister Philomel, who after her hands and tongue were cut
off, wrought the relation of it with her needle) but Tereus discovering in the
midst of the banquet, the slaughter of Itys, by seeing the head of the child,
he pursued Progne and her sister, with his sword drawn, who running from him,
Progne was changed into a swallow, Philomell, into a Nighingale, and Itys into
a Pheasant.
J U
Juba, a King of Mauritania, he was a constant friend to Pompey's party, he
overthrew Curio, and all his forces sent into Africa, by Caesar: when Pompey
was overcome, he joined his forces with Scipio, and dyed fighting with
Petreius. Jubarb, q. barba jovis, because of its perpetual greenness, a kind
of plant, otherwise called Housleek. Jubeb* fruit or Jujubes, (Arab. zufalzef)
a kind of Pruan, used much in Physic, and sold by Apothecaries; it was a fruit
known among the Seres, a people of Scythia, and therefore called in Latin
Sericum. Jubilation, (lat.) a solemn rejoicing, a shouting for joy. A year of
Jubilee, a great festival, or time of rejoicing, celebrated every 50th year by
the Jews, in remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt, it came at length to
be solemnized among the Christians, being first instituted by Pope Boniface,
the eighth in the year 1300, who ordained it to be kept every hundred years, it
comes from the Hebrew word Jocel, rejoicing. Jucundity, (lat.) pleasantness.
Judea, a Country of Syria, in Asia the greater, bordering eastward upon the
dead sea, it is also called Chananaea, or the land of Promise. Judaisme, (lat.)
the faith or religion of the Jews. Judicatory, (lat.) a place of Judgment or
hearing of causes. Judicial, or Judiciary. (lat.) belonging to a cause, trial,
or judgment. Judith, (Hebr.) praising, a proper name of women. Ivetot, a Town
of lower Normandy in France, which has in former times been governed by a
titular King; whence a man of a great Title, and a small inheritance, is in
derision called a King of Ivetot. Jugal, (lat.) belonging to a yoke. Jugament,
(lat.) a yoaking or coupling. Jugular, or Jugularie, (lat.) belonging to the
throat, whence the jugular veins are those veins which ascend along the sides
of the neck, to the bottom of the head. Jugulation, (lat.) a cutting the throat
of any one, a killing. Jugurth, the son of Manostabales, brother of Micipsa,
King of Numidia; whom his Uncle, dying, constituted heir of his kingdom,
together with his two sons, Adherbal and Hiemsal, but Jugurth, that he might
possess the Kingdom to himself, slew them both: whereupon the Romans made war
upon him for a long time, wherein at length being overthrown by Marius, he fled
to Bocchus, King of Mauritania, by whom he was betrayed to Sylla, and being
brought to Rome, dyed in prison. Jujubes, see Jubeb fruit. To Juke, to perch
or roost as a Hawk. Julep, a kind of physical medecin, to open the inward
parts, and prepare for purgation, being a decoction mingled with sirrups, or
sweetened with sugar. Jullaber, a certain hillock in Kent, so called from one
Jullaber, a Giant, or as some say, a Witch, who was here enterred, but Cambden
rather thinks it so named from Laberius Durus, a Captain of Julius Caesar's, who
was here slain. Julian, surnamed the Apostate, because that being brought up in
the Christian religion, he fell back to Heathenisme: he was the son of
Constantius, and by his valor came to be made Roman Emperor, he prohibited to
the Christians all kind of learning, that through their ignorance, they might
become incapable to defend their religion: at last, in an expedition against
the Persians, being mortally wounded, he cried out, vicisti Galilaee, Thou have
overcome, O Galilaean, meaning Christ; and soon after dyed: also, a proper name
of women, contracted Juliana, some write it Gilian. Julian account, see
Gregorian account. Julio, a kind of Italian coin, made by Pope Julius, valuing
about six pence of our money. Julius Caesar, the first of the Roman Emperors,
he subdued France, Spain, Britain, the Low Countries, and the greatest part of
Germany, afterward he entered into a civil war with Pompey, whom he utterly
defeated at the battle of Pharsalia, and his two sons, Cneus and Sextus
Pompeius in Spain; and having reigned three years in Rome, as absolute
Emperor, he was at length slain in the Senate house, by Brutus and Cassius,
the word signifies in Greek softhaired. Julius, the surname of Ascanius, the
son of Aeneas, and his first wife Creusa, he came along with his father into
Italy, and built the City Alba in the place, where he found the white Sow with
the 30 Pigs: also the son of Ascanius, who stood in competition for the kingdom
of Alba, with Silvius Posthumus the son of Aeneas by his second wife Lavinia;
the word signifies in Greek, the soft down appearing on the chin of a young
man, before he comes to have a perfect beard. July, the name of the fifth
month from March, which was heretofore accounted the first month of the year,
it was so named from Julius Caesar, being in former time called Quintilis.
Jumentarious, (lat.) belonging to a horse, or any kind of laboring beast,
called in Latin jumentum. Juncture, (lat.) a joining together, also a joint,
also juncture of time, the very nick or moment of time. June, the fourth month
of the year from March the first. Some say it was so called from Juno, as it
were junonian month. Others from Junius Brutus, who begun his Consulship in
that month: it is called in Greek Hecatombaeon, from the Hecatombs or
Sacrifices of a hundred Oxen which used to be offered to Jupiter in this
month. Junke, in Navigation, is any piece of an old cable. Juno, the daughter
of Saturn and Ops, and both wife and sister to Jupiter, to whom she brought
forth Vulcan and Mars, and a daughter called Hebe, whom she conceived by eating
of green Lettice: she is called Juno a juvando, i. from giving help, also
Lucina, from causing men to see the light of the World, being said to be
present at the birth of all children that come into the World, and to sit
crosse-legged when any miscarry. She is also called Sospita a Sospitando, i. e.
keeping in safety. Juno's tears, a kind of plant otherwise called Vervain.
Junto, or Junta, (Span.) a meeting together of men to ^it in council. Ivory,
(French) the Elephants tooth being the finest and whitest kind of bone, of
which boxes and several sorts of things are made. Jupiter, the son of Saturn by
his wife Ops, born at the same birth with Juno, and hid in the mountain Ida in
Creet, where he was bred up by the Curetes unknown to his father Saturn, who
intending to devour all his male children, his wife Ops gave him a great stone
wrapped up in swaddling clouts, to eat instead of his son Jupiter, who coming to
age and understanding his fathers designs against him, conspired against him,
and cast him out of his dominions, and divided the government of the World
between himself and his two brothers; the Heavens he reserved to himself, to
Neptune he gave the Empire of the Sea, and to Pluto the lower Regions of the
Earth. Jupiter Belus, the second King of Babylon, or as some say the first, he
was the son of Nimrod, called also Saturn. Juration, (lat.) a swearing, or
taking an oath. Jurats, (French) certain officers otherwise called Eschevins,
or Sheriffs. Jurden, or Jordon, a kind of Urinal or Chamberpot, also Jordan is
the name of a River dividing Perea from the rest of Judaea. Juridical, (lat.)
belonging to the Law, judicial, or which will bear an action. Jury, (in lat.
Jurati) signifies in Common Law, a company consisting of 24 or 12 men
empanelled, and sworn to deliver a truth upon such evidence as shall be
delivered them touching the matter in question, there being three sorts of
trials, either by Assize or Jury, by Battle, or by Parliament. In every general
Assize, there is both a Grand Jury consisting of 24 substantial men, chosen
indifferently out of the whole County, and others called Petit Juries,
consisting of 12, to whom are referred such things concerning life and death,
as the Grand Jury have approved of. Jurisdiction, (lat.) authority to make or
execute Laws. Also it is used for any kind of power or authority. A Jurist, a
Lawyer. Jurisprudence, (lat.) knowledge or skill in the Laws. Jurn, or
Journchoppers, the regraters or changers of yarn. Juror, one of the twelve men
in a Jury. Jury-mast, is one made at sea in case of necessity, by fastening
several pieces together. Jussel, a minutal from jus, signifying a dish made of
several meats minced together. Jussulent, (lat.) full of broth or pottage.
Justes, (French) tikings or combats on horseback with Spears and Lances.
Justice, or Justicer, (French) an officer deputed by the King or Commonwealth,
to act by way of judgment. Justice of the Kings Bench, is the capital or chief
Justice of England, he is a Lord by his office, which is most especially to
hear and determine all pleas of the Crown, that is such as concern offenses
committed against the Crown, Dignity, and Peace, of the King; as Treasons,
Mayhems, and the like. Justice of Common pleas, is he who hears and determines
all causes at the Common Law, that is, all civil causes between common persons,
as well personal as real. He is also a Lord by his office. Justice of the
Forest, or Justice in air of the Forest, is he that has the hearing and
determining of all offenses within the Kings Forest committed against Venison
or Vert, and is also a Lord by his office. Justices of Assizes, such as were
wont by special commission to be sent into this or that County to take Assizes
for the ease of the subjects. Justices of oyer and terminer, are Justices
deputed upon some special and extraordinary occasions, to hear and determine
causes. Justices in air, those that were wont to be sent with commissions into
diverse Counties, to hear such causes as were termed the Pleas of the Crown, and
were for the ^ase of the subjects who must have come to the Kings Bench, if the
cause were too high for the County Court, from the French word Err, a journey.
Justices of Goal delivery, are such as are sent with commission to hear and
determine all causes appertaining to such as for any offense are cast into
Goal. Justices of Nisi prius, the same now adays with Justices of Assizes.
Justices of trial baston, or trayl baston, were certain Justices appointed by
Edward the first to make inquisition through the Realm, upon all Officers, as
Mayors, Sheriffs, Escheatours, etc. touching extortion, briberies, intrusion
into other men's lands, and Barratours that used to take money for beating of
men, and they had power either to punish by death, or to exact a ransom. This
term comes from two French words, treille an arbor or form, and baston a staff
or pole, to note that the Justices employed in this commission, had authority
to proceed without any solemn Judgment Seat, but wheresoever they could
apprehend the malefactors. Justices of peace, are such as are appointed by the
Kings commission to attend the peace in the County where they dwell, whereof
such whose commission begins Quorum vos unum esse volumus, are called Justices
of the Quorum. Justicies, a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the dispatch of
justice in some especial cause wherewith of his own authority he cannot deal in
his County Court* Justiciable, (French) subject to Law, under authority.
Justicians, a certain religious Order instituted in the year 1412 in the Abbey
of St. Justine at Padua, by one Lewise Balus a Venetian. Justification, (lat.)
a clearing, justifying, or making good; in Common Law it is a showing a good
reason why a man did such a thing as he is called to answer. Justinianus, a
name by which two of the Roman Emperors were called. The first was famous for
causing the Civil Law to be reduced into the Pandects and the Code; whence
Students of the Civil Law are called Justinianists: the second for the great
wars he had with the Saracens and Bulgarians. Justinopolis, a City of Istria,
built upon the Sea side by the Emperor Justine: it is now called Cabo d'
Istria. Jutties of houses, are certain parts of a building, which jut or stand
out farther than the rest. Juturna, the daughter of Daunus, and sister of
Turnus King of the Rutuli, she was by Jupiter in recompense of the loss of her
maidenhead immortalized, and made Nymph of the River Numicus. Juvenility,
(lat.) youthfulness, lustiness, or vigor. Juventas, the Goddess of Youth,
the same with Hebe. Juverna, an ancient name of Ireland.
I W
Iwimpled, (old word) muffled.
I X
Ixion, the son of Phlegyas, he having slain his son in law Erioneus, after he
had long wandered up and down, and could not be absolved either by gods or men;
at length Jupiter pitying him, took him up into Heaven and expiated him; but he
after his purgation remaining among the gods, fell in love with Juno and
solicited her to unchastity, which she making known to Jove, he formed a cloud
in the shape of Juno, and Ixion thinking it to have been the goddess, begat a
race of Centaurs, and being soon after sent down to the earth, he boasted every
where that he lay with Juno, for which being struck down to Hell with a
Thunderbolt, he was condemned to be always rolled on a wheel.
K A
KAb, or Cab, an Hebrew measure containing three pints of our measure. Kalends,
see Calends. Karena, the twentieth part of a drop, a term used in Chimistry.
Karobe, or Carobe, a kind of fruit, also an herb called St. John's bread, also a
very small weight used by Goldsmiths, being the 24 part of a grain. Karos or
Caros, a certain disease in the head which causes much drowsiness. Katharine,
see Catharine.
K E
Keel, the lowest and first timber laid in a ship, the botton of a ship, also a
vessel to cool new beer or ale in. Keen or Kene, (old word) sharp, some think
it comes from the Greek word a cone, a whetstone. Keeper of the great Seal of
England, is he under whose hands pass all Charters, Commissions, and grants of
the King, strengthened by the Great or Broad Seal, without which they are of no
effect. He is a Lord by his office, and one of the Kings privy Council. Keeper
of the privy Seal, is also a Lord by his office, and one of the privy Council;
under his hands pass all Charters signed by the King, before they come to the
Broad Seal. Keeper of the Forest, is he who has the principal government of
all things belonging to the Forest: he is also called chief Warden of the
Forest. Kele, (old word) to cool. Kemeling, (old word) a Brewers vessel.
Within Ken, within sight or view, a term in Navigation, and comes from the
Saxon word Kenne, i. e. to know or discover. Kenchester, a Town in
Herefordshire, built as some think out of the ruins of old Ariconium. Kenhelm,
the proper name of a man, signifying in Saxon, defense of his kindred.
Kenneleth, (applied to a Fox) when he is in his hole. A term in hunting.
Kenodoxy, or Cenodoxy, (Greek) vainglory. Kenotaph, see Cenotaph. Kerchief,
(French Co^vrechef) a kind of linnin dress which women use to wear upon their
heads. Kerck, or Kirk, (old word) a Church. Kern, an old British word,
signifying a horn. Kern, a kind of light-armed foot soldier among the Irish;
we use it also for an ordinary Country farmer, also to Kern, signifies to
powder or to salt. Kernel, (lat. Kernellare) an old word, signifying to
embattle a house. Kerry, a County of Ireland in the Province of Mounster. Kers,
or Cresses, a kind of plant so called. Kersie, (French) a kind of cloth or
stuff much used. Kesar, a word which the Britains used instead of Caesar, and
is taken in the same sense at this day, when they say, King nor Kesar.
Kesteven, see Holland. Key of a River or Haven, a place where ships ride, and
are as it were locked in. Some deduce it a quiescendo, i. from resting, or from
the old Latin Casare, i. to restrain. Keynard, (old word) a micher.
K I
Kichel, (old word) a kind of cake, the same which is called in Latin Libum.
Kilderkin, (in Dutch Kindek^n) a kind of liquid measure, being the eighth part
of a hogshead, it contains about eleven or twelve gallons. Kiles, from the
Dutch word keghel an Isicle, certain pins to play withal, commonly called
Nine-pins. Kildare, two Counties of Ireland in the Province of Leimster.
Kilkenny, two Counties of Ireland in the Province of Leimster. Kinburgh, (Sax.)
strength and defense of kindred, a proper name of women. King, (from the Dutch
word koning, i. to know, because he ought to be the most knowing of men, or
from Konnen, to be powerful) the supreme Ruler of a Nation. King of Harolds, or
King of Arms, he is called Garter, and is the same with Pater patratus, among
the Romans. See in Harald. Kingsbench, the Court or Judgment Seat where the
King was wont to sit in his own person, and therefore it was moveable with the
Court or Kings household, and was called Curia domini Regis, or Aula Regia.
Kings Silver, that money which is due to the King in the Court of Common Pleas,
in respect of a license there granted to any man for passing of a fine. Clark
of the Kings Silver, is an officer of the Common pleas, unto whom every fine is
brought, after it has been with the custos Brevium, and by whom the effect of
the Writ of covenant is entered into a paper book. Kingston upon Thames, a Town
in Surry, so called because Athelstane, Edwin, and Etheldred, were here Crowned
Kings in the open Marketplace. Kintal, see Quintal.
K N
Knap of ground, a little rising hillock. Knave, (Sax. Canapa) signifies
originally a Lacquey or Waiting-man, and comes originally from the Hebrew word
Gnavadh, to serve. Knees, in Navigation, are certain crooked pieces of timber
used in Ships to fasten the beams unto the sides. Knight, (Sax. Cnicht) has
been taken originally for a soldier or horseman in war; those that were wont
to accompany and wait upon the Emperor in the wars, were called in Dutch
Knechts, i. e. servitours or lusty young men. It is also taken for a client or
vassal, but more especially one that holds his land by serving his Lord on
horseback; it is now grown to be a Title of great Dignity and Honor. Of
Knight-hoods there are many sorts, but the most usual in this Nation are these.
Knight Bachelour, the lowest, but ancientest Order of Knighthood, and comes
from the Germans, among whom it was an ancient custom, that as soon as the
State judged any of their young men fit to manage arms and weapons, and
allowed him sufficient for martial exercises, then in the very assembly and
council, either one of the Princes, the father, or son of the kinsfolk of the
young man, did furnish him with a shield and a javelin, as the Romans did the
toga virilis, or Virile gown, to those whom they thought capable of public
employment, and thenceforth from a part of a private house, he was accounted a
member of the Commonwealth. It was also an ancient ceremony to honor men with
the Girdle of Knighthood, which he who received, was solemnly to go to Church,
and offerring his sword upon the Altar, to vow himself to the service of God;
afterward it came to be usual for Kings to send their sons to the neighbor
Princes, to receive Knighthood at their hands; Then it was also that besides
the Sword and Girdle, Gilt-Spurs were also added for more ornament, whence in
Latin they are called Equi^es aurati; the word Bachelours some derive from the
French Baschevaliers, as it were Knights of the lowest degree; others from
Batailler to battle or fight: they are also simply and without any addition
called Knights. Knight Banneret, from the Dutch word Bannerherr, Lord or Master
of the Banner, is a Knight made in the field, with the ceremonies of cutting
the point of his Standard, and making it as it were a Banner, and is allowed to
display his arms in the Kings army. This Dignity was given at first by the
Kings of England and France, to such Gentlemen as valiantly carried themselves
in two Royal Battles, or to such as had ten vassals and means to maintain a
Troop of Horses at their own charge. Some say the first original of it was from
Edward the third. Knight Baronet, is a new distinct Order erected by King
James, who for certain disbursements toward the Plantation in Vlster, created
diverse into this Dignity, and made it hereditary by his Letters Patents to be
seen in the Rolls, whereas before that time there were Baronets who were not
Knights, and these Knight Baronets were to have precedence in all Writings,
Sessions, and Salutations, before all Knights of the Bath, and Knights
Bachelours, and Bannerets, except those created under the Kings Standard in an
Army Royal, the King being personally present, and the King was not to create
any person into that degree of Baronet within the Kingdom of England, above the
number of two hundred. Knight of the Bath, an Order of Knights created within
the lists of the Bath, and girded with a sword in the Ceremonies of their
Creation, these Knights were wont to be created with a great many religious
solemnities, which usually belong to Hermites, and other holy Orders. Knights
of the Carpet, are another sort of Knights made out of the field, and are so
called, because in receiving their order they commonly kneel upon a Carpet.
Knights of the Garter, an order of Knighthood, instituted by King Edward the
3d. some say upon occasion of good success in a skirmish, wherein the Kings
Garter was used for a token, others affirm that the King after his great
successes abroad and at home, dancing one night with the Queen and other
Ladies, took up a Garter that happened to fall from one of them, whereat some of
the Lords smiling, the King said that ere long he would make that Garter to be
of high reputation, and shortly after he erected this order of the blue Garter,
which consists of 26 martial Nobles, whereof the King of England used to be the
chief, and the rest be either of the Realm, or Princes of other Countries,
there are also depending upon this order 26 poor Knights, who have no other
sustenance, but the allowance of this house, and are also called poor Knights
of Windsor, the site of this College being the Castle of Windsor, with the
Chapel of St. George, the Officers belonging to this Order, are, the Prelate
of the Garter, which Office belongs to the Bishop of Winchester, the
Chancelour of the Garter, the Register of the Garter, who was always Dean of
Windsor, the principal King of Arms, called Garter, and the Usher of the
Garter, which Office belonged to the Usher of the Princes Chamber, called
Black-rod. Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, an Order of
Knighthood erected in the year 1120. and had their first foundation and abode
in Jerusalem, afterward they had their residence at Rhodes, whence they were
expelled by Solomon, and ever since their chief seat has been at Malta, where
they have done great exploits against the Turk, there was one general Prior
that had the government of the whole Order in England, and Scotland but toward
the end of Harry the eights reign, they were suppressed in England for adhering
to the Pope. Knights of the Temple, or Knights Templars, an Order of Knighthood
erected by Pope Gelasius, about the year of our Lord 1117. these Knights in the
beginning dwelling not far from the Sepulcher of Christ, entertained Christian
strangers and Pilgrims charitably, and in their Armor led them through the
holy land, to view such things as there were to be seen, and to defend them
from the Infidels, but because at the last they abounded in many Vices, and
many of them fell away from Christianity to the Saracens, the whole Order was
suppressed by Pope Clement the fifth, and their substance given to the Knights
of Rhodes, and other Religious Orders. Knights of the Shire, two Knights, or
other Gentlemen of worth, that are chosen by the freeholders of every County,
that can dispend forty shillings per annum, and be resident in the Shire;
formerly none but Knights were chosen to that Office ( Milites gladio cincti,
for so runs the Tenor of the Writ) when every one that had a Knights fee
was constrained to be a Knight, but now custom allows that Esquires may be
chosen, so that they be resident in the County. Knight Marshal, an Officer of
the Kings house, who has the Jurisdiction and Cognizance of any transgression;
as also of all Contracts made within the Kings house and verge. Knights of
Calatrava in Spain, an Order created by Alonzo, the ninth King of Spain,
conferred upon certain Cavallero's, who went in Devotion to succor Calatrava
against the Moors, their badge was a red cross on the left side of their
breast. Knights of the Jar, see Jar. Knights fee, so much inheritance as is
sufficient to maintain a Knight with convenient Revenue, which was in ancient
time about 800 Acres, it is also taken for the Rent that a Knight pays for his
fee to the Lord of whom he holds. Knights service, or Chevalry, a certain
ancient Tenure of Lands, by which a man was obliged to bear Arms in defense of
his Country. Knighten Guild, a certain Guild, or Company in London, consisting
of 19 Knights, it was founded by King Edgar, who gave them a portion of void
ground, lying without the City, now called Portsoken Ward. Knipperdollings, a
certain Sect of Heretics, who lived in Germany, about the time of John of
Leyden, they were so called from one Knipperdolling, who was the first founder
of that Sect. Knolls of Peace, certain Mounts cast up by man's hand, in the
Sherifdom of Sterling in Scotland, called in Latin Duni Pacis.
K U
Kunigunda, or Cunigunda, the wife of Henry the second, Duke of Bavaria, and
Emperor of Germany, she to free her self from the aspersion of inchastity that
was cast upon her, caused certain Plough-shares to be heated red hot, and
placed at a little distance one from the other, and went over them blindfold
without receiving any harm, whereby she cleared her self from all suspicion,
the like was reported of Edward the Confessors wife, and this trial afterward
became oftentimes in use upon such like occasions, and was called the trial of
fire Ordeal.
K Y
Kyle, a County in the South part of Scotland, by Bid, called Campus Cyel, i.
e. the field Ciel; this with other Territories Eadbert King of Northumberland
annexed to his Kingdom. Kyrie Eleison, a form of solemn invocation, used in
the Liturgy, or Service book, and signifies in the Greek tongue, Lord have
mercy upon us.
L A
LAbarum, (Greek) a military streamer, or flag, also a Church Banner, or
Ensign. Labda, the daughter of Amphion of the Race of the Bacchidae, she being
lame and despised by the rest of the Bacchidae married Aetion, to whom she
brought forth Cypselus, so called from a certain Corn measure, wherein his
mother hid him from the ten men, whom the Corinthians by a public decree
ordained to kill him, because it had been foretold by the Oracle that a son of
Labda should invade the Tyranny of Corinth. Labdacisme, see Lambdacisme.
Labdanum, or Ladanum, a kind of sweet Gum, taken from the leaves of a
certain small shrub, called Cistus Ledon. Labefaction, (lat.) an enfeebling, or
making weak. Labels, Ribbands hanging down upon Garlands, or Crowns, made of
flowrs, also little pieces of parchment cut out longwayes, and hanging upon
Indentures, or other kind of writings, also in Heraldry they are those lines,
which hang down from the file in an Escutcheon. Labeons, (lat.) blaber-lipped
persons. Labienus, one of Caesar's Captains, who did very famous actions under
him in Gallia, but when the Civil wars broke out, fled from him to Pompey's
party. Labile, (lat.) slippery, apt to slip, or fall. Laborariis, the name of a
Writ that lies against such as having not wherewith to live, do refuse to
serve. Labori^sity, (lat.) laboriousnesse, painfulnesse. Labor, a ship is said
to Labor in the Sea, when she rowles and tumbles very much, either a Hull, or
under Sail. Labyrinth, (Greek) a Maze, or place made with so many turnings and
windings that a man once entered in, cannot find the way out, whereof the two
most famous were, that built by Miris King of Egypt, and that which Daedalus
built for Minos, King of Crete, it is also by Metaphor used for any kind of
intanglement, or intricate business. Lacca, a kind of red Gum, issuing from
certain Trees in Arabia. Laceration, (lat.) a tearing, or dismembring. Lacert,
(Latin) from Lacerta, a Lizard (from Lacertus) the brawny part of the arm.
Lacession, (lat.) a stirring up, or provoking. Laches, in Common Law,
signifies negligence, from the French word Lasche, i. careless, or slothful,
or Lascher, to loosen. Lachesis, the name of one of the Destinies. Lacken, (old
word) contemned, also extenuated. Lachrymation, (lat.) a weeping, or shedding
tears. Laconisme, (Greek) a speaking briefly, or after the manner of the
Lacedaemonians. Lactary, (lat.) a Dairy house, or place where they keep Milk, or
make Cheese. Lacteal, or Lacteous, (lat.) milky, milk white, or made of milk.
Lactucina, a certain goddess among the Romans, see Matura. Lacunation, (lat.)
a making holes. Ladanum, or Laudanum, see Labdanum. Ladas, a Page of Alexander
the Great, he ran so swift that the print of his foot could not be discerned in
the sand. Ladon, a River of Arcadia, where Syriax was turned into a Reed.
Laghslite, a Saxon word from Lah Law, and Slite a breach, signifying a Mulct
for breach of the Law. Lagophthalmie, (Greek) a disease in the eyes, which
causes one to sleep like a Hare with the eyelids open. Lai^al, (lat.)
belonging to Laymen, or such as have not to do in the Ministerial function.
Laines, courses, or ranks laid in the building of stone, or brick-walls, a Term
in Masonry. Laire, (a Term in hunting) the place where a Deer harbors by day.
Lais, a woman of Sicily, who going to dwell at Corinth, became a very famous
strumpet, and exacted excessive rates for the prostitution of her body,
afterward removing to Thessaly, she was in such high request among the men of
Th^ssaly, that the women out of envy killed her in the Temple of Venus, it was
by her instigation that Alexander the Great caused Persep^lis to be burnt.
Laius, the son of Labdacus, King of Thebes, and the father of Oedipus, see
Jocasta, or Oedipus. Lake, a kind of red color, used in painting. Lambith, q.
Lomehith, i. e. a Lomy, or Clayish rode, a Town in Surry, famous for a stately
Palace, belonging to the Archbishops of Canterbury, first built by Archbishop
Baldwin, in the year 1183. in this place Hardy-Canute, the Danish King of
England, giving up himself wholly to luxurious banquettings, and costly
intertainments expired suddenly, in the midst of his debauchery, and excessive
Cups. Lambdacisme, (Greek) a pronouncing the letter L. which is called in Greek
Lambda, with greater force then it should be. Lamdoides, the hindermost seam of
the skull. Lambert, the proper name of a man, signifying in Saxon fair Lamb, or
as others will have it, Far famous. Lambition, (lat.) a licking, a lapping with
the tongue, also a going over a thing with a soft touch. Lamiae, (lat.) certain
Female spirits, or apparitions by some called fairies, there was also one
Lamia, a Concubine of Demetrius, to whom the Thebans built a Temple, under the
name of Lamia Venus. Lammas day, the first of August, so called, as some say,
because the Priests, on this day, were wont to gather their Tithe-Lambs, others
take it from the Saxon word Laffmess, i. Breadmass, it being kept as a feast of
Thanksgiving for the first fruits of the Corn, it is also called Gule, or Yule
of August, see Gule of August. Lampadios, a constellation in the head of
Taurus* Lampasse, vulgarly called the Lampreys, a disease in the mouth of a
Horse, so named, because it is cured by burning with a Lamp, or a hot Iron.
Lampetia, see Neaera. Lampoon, a kind of Drolling Poem, or Pamphlet, wherein
any person of the present age, is mentioned with reproach, or scurrility.
Lamprey, or Suck-st^ne, a kind of fish, called in Latin Muraena. Lampsacus, a
Town upon the Hellespont, near the Coast of Asia. Lanarious, or Laneous, (lat.)
belonging to, or made of wool. Lancaster, or Loncaster, (i. a Town situate upon
the River Lone) the chief Town of Lancashire, which some think to be the same
with the ancient Town Longovicum. Lancelot, the proper name of a man,
signifying in Spanish a Lance, or Spear, of this name was one of King Arthurs
Knights of the round Table. Lancepesado, see Launcepesado. Lanch, to put a
float a ship, or boat, that lies aground. Lanciferous, (lat.) bearing a Lance.
Landcape, an end of Land, or continent, which stretches it self out into the
Landgraviate, a Country belonging to Sea. to a Landgrave, which in the Dutch
tongue is as much as Count, or Earl of a Province, or piece of Land given by
the Emperor. Landlcck't, a term in Navigation, is when a man sees land round
about him out of a ship or boat. Landloper, (Dutch) a vagabond, that runs up
and down the Country. Landscape, see Lantskip. Landto, just so far off at Sea,
as a man can see the land. Landturn, the same off the land by night, as a breiz
is off the sea by day. Langrel, (a term in Gunnery) a loose shot, which when it
is put into the piece, flies out at length when it is discharged. Langued,
tongued, a term in Blazon or Heraldry, from the French word langue, a tongue.
Langid, (lat.) weak, faint, languishing. Languour, (lat.) a drooping, decaying,
languishing. Laniation, (lat.) a butchering, or tearing to pieces. Laniferous,
(lat.) bearing cotton or wool. Lank, (old word) slender or weak. Lanner, or
Lanneret, a kind of Hawk, called in French Faulcon Lanier. Lantgrave, see
Landgrave. Lantskip, Landscape, or Paisage, a description of Land as far as may
be seen above the Horison, by hills, valleys, cities, woods, rivers, etc. in a
mixed picture which contains both persons, and the description of a Country, or
any part of a Country; the persons are called the Argument, the Landscape the
Parergon or By-work. Lanuginous, (lat.) covered with Lanuge, which is a soft
thin down or cotten-like substance, which grows upon some kinds of fruit,
also that which appears upon the chins of young men before they come to have
perfect beards. Laoco^^, the son of Priamus and Hecuba, and Priest to Apollo,
he was the first that dissuaded the Trojans from receiving the great horse into
the walls, and struck his Spear so hard against it, that the sound of the arms
was heard within; whereupon it has been affirmed, that for his despising the
gift of Minerva, there came immediately two great Serpents, and first devoured
his two children, afterward himself. Laodamia, the daughter of Bellerophon and
Ach^mone, she brought forth Sarpedon King of Lycia to Jupiter, who was
inamoured of her; at length having displeased Diana, the goddess shot her with
her own arrows. Laodicea, a City in Asia the Less, which became very wealthy
by the great gifts of diverse rich Citizens, as Jeronymus, (who died worth two
thousand talents) Zeno the Orator, and his son Polemo, whom Augustus advanced
to be a King. Laodoche, the wife of Protesilaus, she died embracing the dead
body of her husband slain by Hector. Laodocus, the son of Antenor, in his shape
Minerva came into the Army of the Trojans, and persuaded Pandarus by shooting
at Menelaus to break the league. Laomedon, a King of the Trojans, he was the
son of Ilus, and the father of Priamus, to divert a great pestilence which was
sent upon the City, because he had defrauded Neptune and Apollo of the wages he
had promised them for building the City walls, he was constrained to expose his
daughter Hesione to be devoured by a Sea Monster, promising Hercules to give
him his horses which were of sacred race, on condition he would undertake to
free his daughter, which he having performed, and Laomedon going back from his
word, Hercules made war against him, and took the City, slew Laomedon, took
Priamus captive, and gave Hesione to Telamon, who was the first man that
skalled the walls. Lapicide, (lat.) a stone-cutter, a hewer of stones out of
the quarry. Lapidary, (lat.) one that pollisheth or works in stones, a
jeweller. Lapidation, (lat.) a stoning or putting to death with stones hurled
or slung. Lapidescence, (lat.) a waxing hard like stone, or of a stony
substance. Lapithae, a people of Thessalie, inhabiting the mountains Pindus and
Othrys, they were governed by Pirithous, had great conflicts with the Centaurs,
and were the first that invented bridles and saddles. Lappewing, a kind of
bird, so called from the often clapping of its wings; it is also called a Houp,
and in French Lapouin. Lappise, is when Greyhounds open their mouths in their
course, or Hounds in the liam or string, a term in Hunting. Lapse, (lat.) a
slip or fall; It is also when an original Patron departs from the right of
presenting to a void. Benefice, by neglecting to present within 6 months unto
the ordinary. Laqueary, (lat.) the roof of a chamber vaulted. Lara, the name of
one of the Nimphs called Naiades, the daughter of the River Almon: she was
delivered to Mercury to be carried to Hell for revealing to Juno the love of
Jupiter to the Nymph Juturna the sister of Turnus; but Mercury falling in love
with her by the way, lay with her, and begat twins called Lares or
Household-gods, who are also named Penates. Larboard, a term in Navigation, the
left side of a boat or ship. Larcenie, (from the French word Larrecin, i.
theft) a word used in Common Law, and is either great larcenie, namely, when
the things stolen exceed the value of 12 pence, or petit larcenie, when the
things stolen exceed not such a value. The Larch-tree, a tree so called from
Larissa, a City of Thessalie where it was first known. It has leaves like the
Pine Tree, and bears a kind of drug called Agaricum, which is of an
exhilarating nature. Lareow, (Sax.) a Master. Lares, see Lara. Largess,
(French) a free gift bestowed upon any one; also liberality. Largitional, an
officer that oversees the bestowing of gifts. Lari^s, the greatest Lake in
Italy, vulgarly called Lago di Como, containing 60 miles from North to South.
Larvated, (lat.) masqued or visarded for the representing some Gobling or
dreadful Spirit. Lascivious, (lat.) of a wanton carriage, loose or effoeminate
in behavior. Lask, a disease called in Greek Diarrhaea, causing an immoderate
looseness of the belly, and comes from the Latin word Laxitas, i. looseness.
Lassitude, (lat.) an extreme weariness. Lastage, or Lestage, a custom
challenged in Markets or Faires for carrying of things, also the ballast of a
ship; it comes from the Saxon word Last, which signifies a certain kind of
weight, also a burden in general. Latebrous, (lat.) full of Latebrae, i. dens,
or hiding-holes. Latent, (lat.) lying hid. Lateral, (lat.) belonging to the
sides of any thing. Lateranus, a Patrician of Rome, so called because he used
to skulk and hide himself, for the taking of his ease and pleasure; he being
designed Consul was slain by the command of Nero, and many Ages after his
houses being very large and stately* were given by the Emperor Constantine to
the Pope, and ever since it has been called the Laterane Palace. Latericious,
(lat.) made of brick or tile. Latible, (lat.) a hiding or lurking place.
Laticlave* or cloak of the broad nail, a kind of broad purple garment, which
used to be a badge of the Senatorian Order: a cloak of the narrow nail was of
the Equestrian or Knightly Order. Latifolious, (lat.) having broad leaves.
Latimer, the name of a Town and Barony in Bucchinghamshire, as also of several
great Families in this Nation. This word, according as Cambden observes,
signifying as much as Truchman, or Interpreter. Latinity, (lat.) an incorrupt
speaking or pronouncing of the Latin tongue. Latinus, an ancient King of Italy,
the son of Fa^nus and Marita, he married his daughter Lavinia whom he had by
Amat^ sister of Faunus King of the Rutuli, to Aeneas when he came into Italy;
whereupon Turnus to whom she had formerly been betrothed, waged war against his
Rival, and was slain in single combat. Lation, (lat.) a bearing or carrying.
Latitancy, or Latitation, (lat.) a lurking or lying hid. Latitat, the name of a
Writ, whereby all men in personal actions are called originally to the Kings
Bench, because a man is supposed latitare, i. to lie hid. Latitude* (lat.)
breadth or wideness, in Astronomy the latitude of a star is, the Arch of a
great Circle made by the Poles of the Ecliptic, intercepted between the star
and the Ecliptic. The latitude of a place is the Arch of the Meridian
intercepted between the Equinoctial and the Zenith of the place given. Latomy,
(Greek) a Quarry or place whence they hew out stones for building. Latona* the
daughter of Caeus, one of the Titans, she was got with child by Jupiter, which
thing so incensed Juno, that she sent the Serpent Pytho to slay her; whereupon
she fled to her sister Asteria, where she was delivered of twins, Apollo and
Diana; but Diana being first brought forth, she immediately served her mother
instead of a Midwife, and helped to bring her to bed of her brother Apollo, who
as soon as he was come to age, killed the Serpent Pytho; Apollo and Diana being
commonly taken for the Sun and Moon, are called Latonian Lights. Latration,
(lat.) a barking. Latrie, (Greek) Divine-worship or service of God.
Latrocination, (lat.) a committing of robbery, or heinous theft. Lavacre,
(lat.) a washing vessel, also a conduit. Lavatory, (lat.) the same. Lavatrine,
(lat.) a square stone in a kitchen with a hole in it for the water to pass
through, a sink. Laudable, (lat.) worthy of praise or commendation. Lauds,
(lat.) commendations or praises, also certain Psalms of David, beginning with
these words Laudate dominum, which use to be recited by the Roman Catholics
between the Nocturns and the Hours, which are certain other prayers or psalms
so called. Laudanum, or Ladanum, see Labdanum. Lauden, or Lothien, a Country in
the south part of Scotland, anciently inhabited by the Picts. Lavedan, an
iron-grey Gennet, so called because it is bred on Lavedon, one of the Pyrenean
Mountains, whereon the best horses of France are bred. Lavender, a kind of
plant, otherwise called spiknard, in Latin Lavendula. Laver, or Ewer, or vessel
to wash in, from the Latin word Lavare, i. to wash. Laverd, or Loverd, (old
word) Lord. Laverna, a certain goddess worshipped by the ancient Romans,
accounted the Patroness of Thieves, who were thence called Laverniones; to her
they built a Temple called Lavernium, from whence one of the gates of Rome near
which it stood, was called Por a Lavernalis. Lavinia, the wife of Aeneas, from
whose name the City Lavinium had its denomination. See more in Latinus, and
Tyrrheus. Lancelot, a Chirurgians Instrument used in letting blood, otherwise
called a Fleam, and in Italian Lancetta; also a proper name. See Lancelot.
Launcepesado, or Lancepresado, (French) the lowest officer in a Foot-company,
or he that commands over a maniple, which is a Band of 10 soldiers. Laund, or
Lawn in a Park, (Ital.) plain untilled ground. Lavolta, (Ital.) a course held
in sailing, also a kind of dance. Laureat, (lat.) crowned with Laurel, or the
bay tree, which used to be worn by Conquerours in token of Triumph, also
laureated letters, were letters wrapped up in Laurel or Bay Leaves, which the
Roman Captains were wont to send unto the Senate, to give them notice of their
Victories. This plant is said to be proof against thunder and lig^tning.
Laurells, by a figure called Metonymy, is ofttimes used for Triumph or Victory.
Cleop. St. Laurence, the name of a famous Martyr, who being a Deacon and
Questor of the Roman church, and being commanded by Valerian the Prefect of the
City to produce the Treasures of the Church which Sextus committed to his
charge, he assembled together the poor, the lame, and the sick, and told the
officers those were the Treasures of the Church; whereupon the Prefect thinking
he was deluded, commanded he should be broiled upon a Gridiron, and Laurence as
soon as he was almost ready to give up the ghost, said to the Prefect standing
by, now turn me on the other side, this is broiled enough. This name is derived
from the Latin word Laurus, i. a Laurel or Bay Tree. Acca Laurentia, the wife
of Faustulus, Shepherd of Amulius King of the Latins, she took Romulus and
Remus (the grandchildren of Numitor, whom his brother Amulius had expelled the
Kingdom) and nursed them up secretly as her own, they being brought to her by
her husband Faustulus, who found them sucking of a Wolf at the root of a
Fig Tree from thence called Ruminalis, upon the banks of Tyber, into which they
had been cast by the command of Amulius. Others say that the story of their
being fostered by a Wolf arises from hence, namely that this woman from the
gain she made by the prostitution of her body, was called Lupa, who dying very
rich, had divine honors given her by the people of Rome, and festival days
kept, which were called Laurentalia; and from her other name Lupa those houses
of intertainment are called Lupanaria. Lauri^erous, (lat.) bearing Laurel, or
Bays. L^^sus, the son of Numitor, and brother of Rhea Silvia, he was slain by
his Uncle Amulius, after his father had been banished the Kingdom, also the son
of Mezentius, King of the Hetrurians, was so called, whom Aeneas slew, as he
went about to rescue his father, he was a famous hunter of wild beasts. Law of
Arms, a Law that gives precepts how rightly to proclaim war, to make and
observe leagues, to set upon the enemy, to punish offenders in the camp, etc.
Law of Marque, Mart, or reprisal, is that whereby men take the goods of that
people of whom they have received wrong, and cannot get ordinary Justice, when
ever they can catch them within their own Territories, or limits. Law Merchant,
a special Law, proper to Merchants, and differing from the Common Law of
England. Law day, a Leet, or County Court. Lawing of Dogs, see Expeditate.
Lawless man, the same as outlaw. Lawn, see Laund. A Lax, a kind of fish
without ^ones. Laxation, (lat.) a loosening, easing, or setting free. Laxity,
(lat.) looseness. Lay, (French) a song. Lazaret, (Ital.) an Hospital, a
spittle for Lazers, or Lepers. Lazarus, (Hebr.) Lords help. Lazule, a kind of
Azure, or bluish stone, much used in Physic.
L E
Leach, (old word) a Physician. A league, a certain proportion of ground in
length only, consisting of about two, or three miles, it is called in Latin
Leuco, from the Greek word Leucos, i. e. white, because formerly the end of
every league used to be noted with a white stone, whence ad primum aut secundum
lapidem ab urbe, at the first, or second stone from the City, was as much as
to say, one, or two leagues from the City. League is also derived from the
Latin word Ligare, and signifies an agreement, Pact, or Covenant. Leafdian, or
Hleafdian, (Sax.) a Lady. Leam, a line to hold a Dog in, it is also called a
Leash. Leander, a noble youth of Abydos, a Town in Asia, situated upon the
shore of the Hellespont, he being in love with Hero, one of Venus Nuns, who
dwelt in Sestos, a Town of the opposite bank, used to swim over to her in the
night time, which having done several times without danger, at length in his
passage over, he was orewhelmed by a storm, and drowned in the Hellespont.
Learchus, the son of Athamas, King of Th^bes, and Ino, the daughter of Cadmus,
he was slain by his father, who in a raging madness, took him for a Lions
whelp, whereupon Ino fled with her other son Melicerta* and both of them cast
themselves into the Sea, and were changed into Sea gods, and called by the
Greeks Leucothea and Paloemon, by the Latins Matuta and Portumnus. Lease, a
word used in Common Law, and signifies a demising, or letting of Lands, or
Tenements, or right of a Rent, unto another for term of years, or of life, or
for a Rent reserved, if it be in writing it is called a Lease by indenture, if
by word of mouth, a Lease Parole, the party that lets the Lease, is called
the Leassour, the party that takes it, the Leassee, being derived from the
French word Laisser, i. to leave, or permit. Leash, see L^am. Leasungs, or
Leasings, (Sax.) lies. Leaveret, (French) Diminutive, a young Hare.
Lecanomancy, (Greek) a divining by water in a Basin. Lectern, a kind of Desk
used in Churches. Lectistern, (lat.) the setting out, and adorning of a bed for
a Compotation, or Banquet, a custom used by the ancients at their solemn
feasts, who also used to rear the images of their Gods upon the Pillow's.
Lecturer, or Lectour, (lat.) a public Professor, a Reader of Lectures, i. e.
certain portions of an Author, or Science read in the public Schools. Leda,
the wife of Thestius, and the daughter of Tyndarus, King of Laconia, she being
got with Child by Jupiter, (who to deceive her transformed himself into a
Swan) brought forth two Eggs, out of one of which was born Pollux and Helena,
out of the other Castor and Clytemnestra. Ledors, (French) reproaches, reviling
Terms. Leed, or Lide, an old word, signifying the month of March, whence
Cow-hides are called Lide pills. Leeds, a Castle in Kent, which Barth^lomew
Lord Baldismer fortified against King Edward the second, who had freely given
it him, whereupon he lost his life; also a place in Yorkshire, where Oswy King
of Northumberland overthrew Penda the Mercian. The Leer of a Deer, a Term among
Hunters, the place wherein he lies to dry himself, after he has been wet by
the dew. Leero, see Lyrick. Leet, (Sax.) a Law-day whence Court Leet, is a
Court, or Jurisdiction, containing the third part of a S^ire, and comprehending
three, or four wapen-takes, or hundreds, the Leets were called by the Romans
Fasti, wherein the Praet^r might lawfully keep Court, and administer Justice,
which was not done without the speaking of these three words, Do, Di^o, Addico,
i. e. I give, viz. way to actions and suites. I speak, viz. the Law. I Judge,
viz. matters and men. Legality, (lat.) lawfulness, an observing of the Law.
Legatary, (lat.) one to whom a Legacy is bequeathed. Legation, (lat.) the
sending of a message, or embassage. Legate, (lat.) an Orator, or Ambassador
to any Prince. Legend, or Legendary, (French) the Title of a book, containing
the lives of the Saints; also words graven about the edge of a piece of Coin.
Legeolium, the ancient name of a Town in Yorkshire, vulgarly called
Castleford, where in old times the Citizens of York slew many of King Ethelreds
army. Legerdemain, (French as it were, light of hand) cousenage, or juggling
tricks. Legion, (lat.) a Company of Soldiers, among the ancient Romans,
consisting of three, or four thousand foot, and three, or four hundred horse,
afterward being increased to six thousand foot, and six hundred horse, every
ordinary foot Legion consisting of ten Cohorts, every Cohort of three Maniples,
every Maniple of two Centuries, and each Century of a 100 men, likewise every
horse Legion contained six Turmae, or Troops, every Troup ten Decuries, and
every Dec^ry ten men; also there are in every Legion four Orders of Soldiers,
the Triari^, the Principes, the Hastati, or Spearmen, the Velites, or
light-armed. Legionary, (lat.) belonging to a Legion. Legislative, (lat.)
having authority to make, or give Laws. Legislatour, (lat.) a Lawgiver.
Legist, (lat.) a Lawyer. Legitimate, (lat.) lawful, done according to Law and
right. Leguminous, (lat.) belonging to pulse. Leicester, the chief City of
Leicestershire, called also Legeocester, Leogora, and Leg^cestria, this City
was besieged by King Henry the third, (when Earl Robert rebelled against him)
and the Wall round about it utterly demolish't. Leinster, a Province in
Ireland, containing these following Counties, Kilkenny, Caerbogh, Queens
County, Kings County, Kildare, Weshford, Dublin. Leman, a Concubine, or
Catamite, ( Pullus Jovis Latin) some say it comes from the French word L^
mignon, or Leyman, as it were ly by man. Lemannus, the Lake Leman, upon which
stands the City of Geneva. Lemnos, an Island in the Aegean Sea, famous for the
fall of Vulcan, who by reason of his deformity, being thrown down from heaven,
as soon as he was born, happened to light in this place, whence he was called the
Lemnian God, this Island was originally known by the name of Hipsipylaea, from
a daughter of Thoas of that name, who was Queen thereof. Lemster, a Town of
Herefordshire, so called q. Leonminster, from a Lion that appeared to a certain
religious man as some have fabled, others more probably derive it from a Church
of Nuns built by Merwalck, a King of the ^ercians; for those which we call
Nuns, the ancient Britains termed Leans, some there are that derive it from
Line, whereof the best sort grows there, this Town is now adays very famous
for Wool, which is called Lemster Ore; it was defaced by W. de Breosa, Lord of
Brecknock, when he revolted from King John. Lemures, (lat.) certain spirits, or
apparitions, vulgarly called Hobgoblins. Lenity, (lat.) mildness, softness,
gentleness. Lenitive, or Lenient, (lat.) softning, of an asswaging or
pacifying power. Lenitude, (lat.) the same as Lenity. Lennox, a County in the
south part of Scotland, so called from the River Levin, which Ptolomy calls
Letanonius. Lenonian, (lat.) belonging to a Pander or Band. Lentigenous, (lat.)
belonging to Lentills which are a kind of round and flat pulse growing in hot
Countries, also full of little pimples or freckles resembling Lentills.
Lentisk, (lat.) a kind of tree called the Mastick-tree, from which there is
taken a Gum of very great virtue. Lentitude, (lat.) slacknesse, slownesse, or
negligence. Lentour, (lat.) stiffnesse, or clammynesse. Lent-season, (in Lat.
Quadragesima) a Fast of forty days, instituted by the Church, and first
appointed to be kept in England by Ercombert a King of Kent. It comes from the
Dutch word Lent, i. Spring, because it ever happens to be about the beginning
of the Spring time, or as others say, from length, because about this time the
days begin to lengthen. Leo, the name of several Roman Emperors reigning at
Constantinople; also the name of several Popes of Rome, also one of the 12
Signs. Leocorion, a Monument erected by the Athenians, in honor of Leo the
son of Orpheus, who when no body else would permit their daughters to be
sacrificed to the gods to divert a great pestilence which then raged in the
City, willingly consented to the offering up of his three daughters, Pasithea,
Theope, and Eubule. Leodegar, or Ledger, a German proper name, signifying a
gatherer of the people. Leodium, a famous City of Germany, anciently called
Ebur number Augusta, and is said to have been built by Ambioriges, a King of
Germany, who also called it Legia, from the cutting off of a Roman Legion in a
valley near unto it; at this day it is named Luttich or Liege. Leofstan, i.
most beloved, a Saxon name Leofwin, i. Winlove. Leoh, (Sax.) light. Leonard,
the proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch popular disposition as Lipsius
will have it; but as others say, Lion-like disposition, answering to the Greek
name Thymoleon. Leonidas, a famous Captain and King of the Lacedaemonians, who
defending the Streights of Thermopylae against the whole Army of Xerxes, was
himself slain, together with all his men. Leonine, (lat.) belonging to, or like
a Lion. Leopard, or Libberd, a certain African beast, otherwise called a
Panther: this beast is all over full of streakes or little spots, and is
begotten between a Pard and a Lioness. Leopold, q. Leodpold, the proper name
of a man, signifying in Dutch Defender of the people, being in imitation of the
Greek names Demochares, i. gracious to the people, and Demophilus, i. a lover
of the people, and Laodamus, i. tamer of the people: the chief of this name was
Leopoldus Archduke of Austria. Leorning ^night, (Sax.) a disciple or scholar.
Lepid, (lat.) neat, jocund, pleasant in speech, or behavior. Leporine, (lat.)
belonging to a Hare. Leprosy, (Greek) a kind of disease which causes a white
scurfe to run all over the body; it is also termed Elephantiasis, from the
roughness of an Elephants skin, which it resembles. Lerna, a Lake near the
City of Argos, where the Serpent Hydra was slain by Hercules. Lesbos, an Island
in the Aegaean Sea, which in old time obtained the Empire of all Troas. It is
now called Metelin, from the chief City thereof Mitylene, the rest were
Er^ssos, Ant^ssa, Portus, Methymna. Lesinage, (Ital) thriftinesse,
sparingnesse, good husbandry, from Lesina which signifies a Cobblers aule.
Lesion, or Laesion, (lat.) a hurting or endamaging. Lessee and L^ss^r, see
Lease. L^sses, the dung of a Boar. Lessian diet, a moderate temperate diet,
from Lessius a famous modern Physician, who wrote diverse rules for the keeping
of an exact and temperate diet. Lestage, see Lastage. Lestrigones, or
Lae^trigones, a certain barbarous people, and of a vast Giant-like stature,
that anciently inhabited Formiae a City of Campania, and were said to live upon
Human flesh, their King Antiphates opposed Ulysses with all his might when he
landed on that coast, and tore one of his companions in pieces with his teeth.
Letanie, (Greek) the Book of Divine-service used in Churches, from Liteuo, or
Lissomai, i. to pray and supplicate. Lethality, (lat.) deadliness or
mortality. Lethargick, (Greek) sick of a Lethargy, i. e. a disease which
causes an excessive drowsiness and sleepiness. Lethean, (lat.) forgetful,
from Lethe a River of Hell, which the Poets feign to be of that nature that the
water of it being drunk, causes oblivion or forgetfulness. Lethiferous,
(lat.) bringing death, deadly. Letifical, or Laetifical, (lat.) making glad or
joyful. Letter missive, (lat.) an Epistle or Letter sent from one party to
another, from the Latin word Mittere, i. to send. Letters of Attorney, writings
whereby an Attorney or any friend made choice of for that purpose, is appointed
to do a lawful act in another stead, from which warrants of Atturny differ in
this, that besides being sealed and delivered before sufficient witness, they
must also be acknowledged before a Justice or Sergeant. Letters of Mart, or
Marque, are Letters which authorize any one to take by force of arms those
goods which are due by the Law of Marque. See Law of Marque. Letters Patents,
are writings sealed open with the Broad-Seal of England, whereby a man is
authorized to do or enjoy any thing which of himself he could not, from the
Latin word patere, i. to lie open. Lettice, a Christian name of several women,
from the Latin Laetitia, i. joyfulnesse, mirth. Lettice, a kind of plant called
in Latin Lactuca, because in women that eat of it, it breeds milk. Levament,
or Levation, (lat.) an enlightening, easing, comforting, also a lifting up or
causing to rise. Levant and Couchant, (French) terms used in Common Law, when
the beasts or cattle of a stranger come into another man's ground, and there
have remained a good space, i. rising and lying down. Levant is also taken for
the Eastern Countries. Levari facias, the name of a Writ directed to the
Sheriff, for the levying of a sum of money upon the lands of him that has
forfeited his Recognisance. Leucophlegmatick, (Greek) troubled with a disease
called Leucophlegmaty, i. a Dropsy caused by the abounding of white phlegm.
Leucothea, see Ino. Leucothoe, the daughter of Orchamus King of the
Babylonians, with whom Apollo being in love, transformed himself into the shape
of Eurynome her mother, and pretending private business with her, he
reassumed his former shape, and won her by fair speeches to consent to his
desires; whereupon Clytia, who was in love with Apollo, growing extremely
envious, declared the whole business to Orchamus, who in a great fury caused
his daughter to be buried alive, whose death Apollo grieving at, transformed
her into the Frankincense-tree, and Clytia seeing her self contemned of Apollo,
pined her self away, and was turned into a Marygold. Leuctra, a Town in
Boeotia, where the Thebans under Epaminondas gave the Lacedaemonians so total an
overthrow, that they could never after recover themselves. Level-Coil, (French)
is, when he that has lost the game sits out, and gives another his place, as
it were lever le cul, i. to lift up or remove the buttock; it is also called
Hitchbuttock. Levy, (French) signifies in Common Law, to erect or sit up,
also to tax or gather money. Leviathan, an Hebrew word, signifying a Whale, or
as some think a water-serpent of a vast bigness. Levigation, or Laevigation,
(lat.) a making plain or smooth. Levitical, belonging to the Tribe of Levi, or
to the Priestly office, which in the time of the Law, was the peculiar
inheritance of that Tribe. Levity, (lat.) lightness. Lewis, the chief Town of
Sussex, famous for the great pitched battle fought between King Henry the third,
and the Barons of England. Lewis, the proper name of a man, contracted from
L^dowic. Lewlin, or Lewellin, the proper name of a man, signifying in the old
British tongue Lion^like, and is equivalent to the Latin name Leontius, and
Leoninus. Lexicon, (Greek) a Vocabulary, or Dictionary. Lex talionis, (lat.) a
law which recompenceth exactly one good or ill turn for another. Leyerwit,
Lotherwit, (Sax.) a liberty to take amends of him that defiles ones bondwoman
without license.
L H
Lhan, in the British tongue, signifies a Church, as Lhan Badern Vaur, the
Church of great Pattern; Lhan Stuphadon, the Church of St. Stephens.
L I
Libation, or Libament, (lat.) an offering up or sacrificing to God the first
taste of any thing that is eat or drunk. Libb, (old word) to geld, from the
Greek word thlibein, i. to press. Libell, (lat.) a little book, also a
scandalous or invective writing, secretly cast abroad or published by stealth;
also an original declaration of any action in the Civil Law. Liberate, the name
of a warrant issuing out of the Chancery, to the Treasurer, Chamberlaines, and
Barons of the Exchequer, for the payment of any annual pension, or other sums
granted under the Broad-Seal. Liberation, (lat.) a freeing, or delivering.
Liber Pater, a name attributed to Bacchus the god of wine. Libertas, (lat.) a
privilege held by grant or prescription, whereby men enjoy some benefit or
favor beyond the ordinary subject, also the name of a goddess among the
ancient Romans, who had a Temple built unto her upon the hill Aventinus.
Libertatibus allocandis, a Writ that lies for a Citizen or Burgess of a City,
who refusing or deferring to allow his privilege, is impleaded before the
Kings Justices. Libertinism (lat.) the state and condition of a Libertine, i.
e. one born or made free, a freeman; also Libertinism, or Libertinage, is taken
for sensuality, licentiousness, a dissolute life and conversation. Libethra, a
Town seated upon the mountain Olympus, of which it was foretold by the Oracle,
that all the inhabitants should be destroyed by a Sow, when the Sun should
behold Orpheus his bones, which was thus verified; A great multitude of people
being gathered together to hear a Shepherd sing in the way which leads from
Dion to Olympus, a large Urn containing Orpheus his bones, which stood in that
place, was overturned and his bones laid open to view, and the very same day, a
great violent stream called Sys (which in Greek signifies a Sow) overflowing,
destroyed the whole Town with all the people in it. Libethra is also the name
of a Fountain of Magnesia, sacred to the Muses who are thence called
Libethrides. Libidinous, (lat.) sensual, incontinent, full of lustful desires.
Libitina, an ancient goddess worshipped by the Romans, who was the Patroness of
Funerals, Sepulchers, and all things belonging to the dead. Libral, (lat.)
belonging to a weight or measure called Libra, which is also the name of one of
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac into which the Sun entering, causes the vernal
Equinoctial. Library, (lat.) a studdy, or place where Books are kept.
Libration, (lat.) a weighing, or ballancing. Librata terrae, see Farding deal
of land. Libya, the fourth part of the World, commonly called Africa. License
to arise, in Common Law, is a liberty given by the Court to a tenant that is
essoynd de malo lecti in a real action, after he has been viewed by Knights
thereunto appointed, until which time, if the Demandant can prove that he has
been seen out of his chamber, or walking up and down his grounds, he shall be
adjudged to be deceitfully essoyned. Licentiate, (lat.) one that has full
license or authority to practice in any Art; the same with him that we commonly
call Bachelour of Divinity, or of Physic, or of Civil Law, and in Common Law a
Barrister. Licentious, (lat.) loose, disorderly, unruly. Lichas, a boy that
waited upon Hercules, by him Deianira sent the shirt that was dipped in the
Centaurs blood, which Hercules having put on, and perceiving the venom to
seize upon his body, he in a fury took Lichas by the hair of the head and flung
him into the Sea, where he was immediately changed into a Rock. Lichfield, a
Town in Staffordshire, by Bid called Licidfield, i. the field of dead bodies,
from a great number of people, who as some say were martyred here in the time
of Dioclesian. Lich-fowles, ominous, or ill-boding birds, as the Night-raven,
and Lich-owle, commonly called the Scritch-owle, the word Lich, signifying in
the Saxon language a Carcass, or dead body. Licitation, (lat.) a cheapning, a
setting out to sale, also an enhauncing of a price. Licite, (lat.) lawful,
allowable. Lictorian, (lat.) belonging to the Lictors, who were certain
Officers among the ancient Romans twelve in number, who carried the Axes and
bundles of rods before the Magistrate, they are now taken for the same as we
commonly call Sergeants. Liddesdale, a Country in the South part of Scotland,
so called as it were a dale by the River Lidde. Lide, see Leed. Lieftenant,
(French) as it were holding the place, one that executes any place, Office, or
employment in another stead, or absence. Lief, or Leof, (Sax.) rather.
Lief-hebber, (Sax.) a Lover. Liege, (French) in Common Law is taken ^ither for
the Liegelord, or he that acknowledges Liegeancie, or Fealty to his Liege
Lord. Liegeancie, or Ligeance, (French) such a duty, or fealty as no man may
owe, or bear to more then one Lord, also Ligeance is used for the Territory, or
Dominions of the Liege Lord. Lierwit, see Leyerwit. Lifts, in Navigation, are
certain ropes, which serve to top the yard arms of all yards to make the ends
of them hang higher, or lower, or even as we li^t. Ligament, or Ligature,
(lat.) a band, or string to tie with; in Anatomy it is taken for the string
wherewith the joints of bones and gristles are fastened and knit together.
Ligation, (lat.) the act it self of tying, or binding. Ligne, (French) to
couple as Dogs with bitches. Lignation, (lat.) a providing for, or going to
fetch wood. Lignean, or Ligneous, (lat.) wooden, made of wood. Lignum vitae,
the wood, commonly called Aloes, by the Arabians Calambuco. Liguria, a hilly
Country of Italy, reaching from the Ap^nnine to the Tuscan Sea. Ligurion,
(lat.) a glutton, or devourer. Liguration, (lat.) a ravenous devouring. Lilie,
(lat.) a kind of specious flowr, otherwise the rose of Juno. Lilith, the name
of a certain she Devil which the Jews imagined to be a destroyer of children.
Lilybaeum, a Promontory in Sicily, having a Town of the same name upon it.
Limaceous, (lat.) belonging unto, or like a Snail, slimy. Limation, (lat.) a
filing, or pollishing. Limbers, or Limber-holes, (a Term in Navigation) certain
little square holes cut in the bottom of the ground Timbers, and hooks next to
the Keel to let water pass to the well of the Pump. Limbus Patrum, (lat.) a
place where the Saints deceased are said to reside until the day of Judgment,
being as it were the skirts, or confines of Hell. Lim^narch, (Greek) the
Governor of a Port. Limitation, (lat.) a stinting, or setting of bounds.
Limitation of Assise, is a certain time set down by Statute, within which a man
must allege himself, or his Ancestors to have been seized of Lands sued for
by a Writ of Assize. Limning, a kind of Painting, which is done in water
colors, and also differs from the other sort of painting in the preparing of
the colors. Lim^sity, (lat.) muddinesse, fullness of mud. Limpid, (lat.) pure,
clear, transparent. A Limpin, a kind of fish, otherwise called a muscle.
Linament, (lat.) linen thread, also a tent, or lint for a wound. Lincoln, the
chief City of Lincolnshire, anciently called Lindum, and by the Britains
Lindecoit, by Bid Lindecollina civitas, from the old British L^in, as Cambden
is of opinion, which signifies a Lake, it being situate near a Lake, and upon
a hill, in this City Vortimer, the scourge of the Saxons ended his days.
Lincoln College, a College in Oxford, founded by Richard Fleming, Bishop of
Lincoln. Lindsey, see Holland. Lincolns Inn, one of the Inns of Court,
heretofore the house of Sir Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, now a place for
Students of the Law. Lineament, (lat.) the feature, or proportion of any thing
drawn out only in lines. Linear, (lat.) belonging to a line. Ling, a kind of
small shrub, otherwise called Heath, in Latin Erix. Lingel, a little tongue, or
thong. Lingot, see Ingot. Linguacity, (lat.) a being full of tongue, or much
given to talk. Linguist, one that is skillful in tongues, or languages.
Linigerous, (lat.) bearing Flax, or Hemp. Liniment, (lat.) an oynting, or
daubbing over. Linsie-woolsey, a kind of mixed cloth, part linen, part
woollen. Lintels, (French) the head pieces over a door, also the same as
Lentils, i. a kind of pulse. Linus, the son of Apollo, and Psammas, the
daughter of Crotopus, King of Argos, by whom Apollo being entertained as he
came from slaying the Serpent Pytho, lay privately with Psammas, who proving
with Child brought forth Linus, who having committed some offense, and hiding
himself among certain bushes, was found out and torn in pieces by the Dogs,
also the son of Apollo and Terpsich^re, one of the nine Muses, he proved a very
famous Musician, taught Thamyras, Orpheus, and Hercules, by whom, as some say,
he was knocked on the head, because he laughed at him for playing unhandsomely.
Linx, (lat.) a kind of spotted beast, otherwise called an Ounce. Lionel, the
proper name of a man, in Latin Leonellus, i. little Lion. Lions paw, a kind of
Herb, called in Greek Leontopodium. Lipothymie, (Greek) a distemper, which
causes a fainting, or swouning by reason of sudden decay, or oppression of the
vital spirits. Lippitude, (lat.) a waterishnesse of the eyes, a looking
bloud-shot, or blear-eyed. Liptote, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure, wherein more
is understood then is expressed. Liquation, or Liquefaction, (lat.) a melting,
dissolving, or making Liquid, i. moist or of a watery substance. Liquids,
(lat.) are those four Consonants, which do as it were melt in the
pronunciation, namely L.M.N.R* the rest are called mutes. Liquidation, (lat.) a
making moist. Lisard, or Lizard, (French, from the Latin Lacerta) a certain
beast, so called because it has feet like the brawne, or sinews of a man's
arms, or thighs, also the Lizard point, the utmost Southwest point of Cornwall.
Litanie, see Letanie. Litation, (lat.) a sacrificing. Literature, (lat.)
knowledge in letters, learning. Lithargie, or Litargie, (Greek) the foam that
rises from silver, or lead, when they are tried. Lither, (old word) lazy, or
sluggish. Lithoglyphick, (Greek) a graver, or cutter in stones. Lithomancie,
(lat.) a Divination, the casting of pebble stones. Lithotomie, (Greek) a
cutting of stones, a quarry whence stones are dug. Litigation, (lat.) a
contending, or wrangling. Litigious, (lat.) full of strife, contentious.
Litispendence, (lat.) the hanging of a suit, till it be decided. L^tmose blue,
a kind of blue color, used in painting and limning. Litoral, or Litorean,
(lat.) belonging to the shor^ seaside, or side of a river. Liturgy, (Greek)
signifies in general any public Office, but particularly Divine service, or
the function of a Minister. Liverie, (French) the Cognizance, device, or badge,
which a Nobleman, or Gentleman gives to his servants and followers, also
Livery of seisin is a Ceremony used in Common Law, being a delivery of
possession of Lands, or Tenements, or other things unto another, also a Writ,
which lies for the Heir to obtain the possession, and seizin of his Lands at
the Kings hands. Lividity, or Livor, (lat.) a kind of leaden or dead bluish
color in the body, caused by a stroke ar blow given; also metaphorically taken
for spite or envy. Lixiviated, (lat.) washed with lie made of ashes. Lizard,
see Lisard.
L O
Loach, or Lohoch, (French) a kind of Confection or Electuary that is to be
licked, or suffered to melt in the mouth without chewing; it is an Arabic
word, and signifies in the Latin Linctus, i. a licking. Lobbe, or Lobling, a
kind of great north Seafish. Local, in Common Law, is as much as tied or
annexed to a place. Location, (lat.) a placing, or setting in place, also a
letting out to hire. Lockers, little cupbords which are made by the ships
sides, to put in shot, by the pieces. Lococessi^n, (lat.) a yiedling or giving
place. Locomotion, (lat.) a moving out of a place, or from place to place.
Locrians, or Locri, a people of Locris in Greece inhabiting on either side of
the Hill Parnassus. Locris is also a City of that part of Italy called Magna
Graecia, built by those Locrians that followed Ajax Oileus to Troy. Loculament,
(lat.) a little place distinct, or apart by it self. Locuplete, (lat.)
abounding with riches, wealthy. Locust, (lat.) a kind of winged Insect,
commonly taken for a Grasshopper; but others think it to be the same with that
which the Frenchmen call Cigale. Locution, (lat.) a speaking or saying.
Lodemanage, the hire of a Pilot for conducting of a ship from one place to
another, from the Dutch word loot, i. lead. Lodesman, a Guide or Pilot, from
the same word loot; whence he is also called Lootsman. Lodestar, the Cynosure
or North-Star which guides Mariners. Lodestone, as it were a leading-stone,
because by it Mariners are guided and directed in their voyages: It is of a
rusty-iron color, and has the virtue to attract or draw iron to it, whereby
many admirable secrets are performed. Lodeworkes and Stremeworks, certain
works in the Stannery in Cornwall; these are performed in the higher grounds
by* making deep wells which they call shafts, those in the lower grounds by
digging of trenches and diverting the course of the Rivers. Lodge, a Buck is by
the Forresters said to lodge, when he goes to his rest. Log, the name of an
Hebrew measure, and thought by some to be of the same quantity with Sextarius
A^ticus. Logarithmes, (Greek) are certain borrowed numbers which differ among
themselves by Arithmetical proportion as the numbers which borrow them differ
by Geometrical proportion. Log-line, a term in Navigation, being a small line
with a little piece of board at the end, with a little lead to it, to keep it
edge-long in the water, the use of which is, by seeing how many fathom this
runs in a minute, to give a judgment how many leagues the ship will run in a
watch. Logician, (Greek) one that has skill in Logic, i. the art of disputing
probably in any argument. Logist, (Greek) one skilled in the Logistick Art, i.
the Art of reckoning or casting account; also Logists were certain Officers
among the Athenians ten in number, to whom all such as had ended their
Magistracy gave an account within 30 days of all those affairs whereof they
had had the administration, they also kept an account of the moneys, and of all
matters belonging to the public Revenue. Logographers, (Greek) those that
write pleas in the Law, or books of account, Lawyers Clerks. Logomachy, (Greek)
a verbal strife, a contention in words. Lohoch, see Loach. Lollards, a Sect of
Heretics that abounded here in England in the days of Edward the third, and
Henry the fifth; so called from one Gualter Lollard a German the first Author
of them: or as others say, from lolium, because they were accounted as darnel
or cockle growing among wheat. Lombard, or Lombar, a Bank for usury or pawns,
from the Longobardi, or Lombards, a people inhabiting the hithermost part of
Italy, formerly called Insubria, much addicted to usury, whence ofttimes
Usurers are called Lombardeers. Lome, (old word) clay or mortar. London, the
chief City of England, situate in Middlesex, so called as Cambden conjectureth,
either from Lhun (which in the British tongue signifies a Grove) or Lhong, (
i. a ship) and Dinas, i. a City, so that it may seem to have been anciently
termed Lhundinas, i. a City thick of trees, or Lhongdinas, i. a City of Ships,
from whence the Latins derive the word Londinum. It was called Augusta, and
Troja Nova, being first founded by Brutus, who sprang of the Trojan race, and
repaired by King Lud, and thence called Caerlud, or Luds-town. Longaevity,
(lat) length of age, long life. Longanimity, (lat.) as it were length of mind,
long-suffering, patience, forbearance. Longinquity, (lat) far distance, or
length of place. Longitude, (lat.) the length of any thing, also the Longitude
of a Region, City, or Cape, is the distance of it East, numbered in the
Equinoctial by Meridians, from the first general and fixed Meridian. The
Longitude of a star, is the arch of the Ecliptic intercepted between the
beginning of Aries, and the circle of the stars Latitude. Long-Meg, the name of
a stone 15 foot high, erected near Salkeld in Cumberland, next which are 77
more erected in a circular manner, which the country people call the Daughters
of Long-Meg. Long-primer, one of the sorts of Characters used by Printers. The
Loof, of a Ship, is that part aloft of a Ship, that lies before the ches-trees,
as far as the bulk-head of the castle. A Ship Loomes a great or a small sail, a
term used in Navigation, and signifies as much as a Ship seems a great or a
little Ship. Lootsman, see Lodesman. Loover, a place made open (to let out the
smoke) on the top of a house, from the French word l'overt, open. Lopum, a
great Desert in the Country of Bactria, in which it is reported that certain
evil spirits do abide, by which strangers that pass that way being called by
their names, and following the voice, perish miserably. Loquacity, (lat.)
talkativenesse, or a being given to much babbling. Loquabre, a Country in the
North part of Scotland, so called, q. the mouth of the Lake. Lorament, (lat.)
that which is composed of thongs of leather. Loray-law, an article found in the
memorials of the chamber of account in France, which ordains, that if a
combat be once accepted, and afterward taken up, by consent of the Lord of the
Fee, each of the parties is to pay two shillings six pence, but if it be
performed, the party vanquished forfeits 112 shillings. Lordane, or Lourdane, a
dull heavy fellow, a lazy lubber, it being a proverbial word taken from the
tyranny of the Danes over the English, who were forced to labor and till the
ground for them, while they sat idle and ate the fruits of their labors.
Lore, (Sax.) learning or skill. Loricated, (lat) armed with mail. Lorimers,
(French) the name of a Trade and Company in London, that makes bits, spurs, and
all kind of small iron-work, and is by some derived from the Latin word Lorum.
Loriot, (French) a Bird called a Witwall, Woodpecker, or Greenfinch. Lorn, the
name of a County in the south part of Scotland. Lorty's, a great and ancient
Family of Sommersetshire, styled in Latin records, de Vrtiaco. Losenger, a
flatterer, a word used by Chaucer. Lotharius, the son of Ludovicus Pius,
Emperor of Germany, and King of France, he succeeded his father in the Empire;
but his brothers Charles and Lodowic, not contented with their portions, and
raising an army against their brother, a great battle was fought at Fontenay,
in the borders of France, where Lotharius was put to flight, but at last they
came to an agreement, and Lotharius after he had reigned about 15 years betook
himself to the Prumiensian Monastery. There were also several Kings of France
and Dukes of Lorrain of his name. Lothbrook, (i. Leatherbreech) a certain Dane,
whose daughters were so skilful at needle work, that the Danes bare in their
Ensign a Raven of their working, with such an opinion of good success, that
they imagined it would never be won. Lotherwit, see Leyerwit. Lotion, (lat.) a
washing or cleansing with water, also in Physic it is used for the taking away
of any superfluous quality out of any medicament, or the bringing on of a new
one. Lotis, or Lotus, the daughter of Neptune, she fleeing from Priapus (who
made an attempt upon her chastity) and invoking the help of the gods, was
turned into the Lote-tree. Lotophagi, a certain people of Africa, dwelling near
the Syrtes, so called because they feed much upon the Lote-tree, which is a
tree of that nature, that when the companions of Ulysses being cast upon the
coast of Africa had tasted of the fruit of it, they could hardly be got from
thence to return into their own Country, whence the word is proverbially used
for those that are forgetful of their Parents, Country and Kindred. Lovell's,
an ancient Family in Northamptonshire, styled in Latin records, de Lupello.
Loverd, or Laverd, (old word) a Lord. Lourdain, see Lordane. Louvre, a stately
Palace in Paris, and the chief seat of the Kings of France, built by Francis
the first, and augmented with a long stately Gallery by Henry the fourth.
Lowbell, as it were loud bell, a certain bell hung about the neck of a weather.
Lozenge, a little square cake made of preserved herbs, in the form of a Rhomb
or a quarrel of Glass.
L U
Lua, a certain goddess among the ancient Romans, she was the goddess of all
lustrations and purging from sin. Lubricity, (lat.) slipperinesse. Lucernes, a
kind of rich Fur, taken from a beast of the same name, breeding in Russia and
those Northerly Countries. Lucia, a Christian name of diverse women, signifying
in Latin Lightsome. Lucida Laucis, a Star in 9 degrees 45 minutes of Scorpio.
Lucidity, (lat.) brightness, shiningnesse. Lucifer, (lat.) as it were
lightbearing, the morning Star called in Greek Phosphorus. Lucina, a name
attributed to Juno, as she is the Patroness of Childbirth, or as some say to
Diana or the Moon. Lucius, the praenomen of diverse famous men among the Romans;
as Lucius Sylla, Lucius Antonius Commodus the Emperor, Lucius Septimius
Severus, and many others. The first of this name is likely to have been so
called from being born in the dawn or first shining of the day. Lucre, (lat.)
gain or profit, whence Lucration a gaining or winning. Lucretia, the daughter
of Lucretius Tricipitinus Prefect of Rome, and the wife of Tarquinius
Collatinus, she being ravished by Sextus the son of Tarquinius Superbus King of
the Romans, slew her self, which was the cause of banishing both Tarquin and
Kingly Government from Rome which was afterward ruled by Consuls chosen anew
every year, and this act of Lucretia has ever since been so famed, that every
chaste woman is proverbially called a Lucrece. Luctation, (lat.) a striving or
wrestling. Luctatius Catulus, a famous Captain of the Romans, who with 300
ships overcame 600 of the Carthaginians, and made an end of the war.
Lucubration, (lat.) a studying or working by candlelight. Luculency, (lat.)
clearness, brightness, fullness of light. Lucullus, a famous Roman, being a
man of great eloquence, and ingenuity, he having been successeful in the wars
against Mithridates, heaped up a mighty mass of riches, after the war was
ended, gave himself up wholly to ease and delicacy, living in more state and
splendour than any of that Age, besides afterward beginning to grow mad, he was
given in charge to his brother Marcus. Ludibrious, (lat.) shameful, or
reproachful. Ludicrous, (lat.) belonging to sport, recreation, or mockery.
Ludification, (lat.) a mocking or deceiving. Ludlow, a Town in Shropshire, in
Old times called Dinan, afterward Lystwysoc, i. the Princes Palace, it has a
fair Castle built by Roger Montgomery, which was besieged by King Stephen, who
valiantly rescued Henry son to the King of Scots, who was about to have been
pulled into the Castle with an iron hook. Ludovicus Pius, the son of Charles
the Great (who was created Emperor by Pope Leo) he succeeded his father in the
Empire and Kingdom of France, also Ludovicus has been the name of several
other Emperors and Kings of France, this name according to Helmoldus Nigellus
is derived from the Dutch words Hludo Wiggh, i. e. famous Warrier. Lugdunum,
the chief City of Gallia Celtica, vulgarly called Lions, built by Munatius
Plancus, a Roman Governor. Lugubrous, (lat.) mournful, heavy, sorrowful.
Luition, (lat.) a making satisfaction for any offense, also a paying a ransom*
Luke, (Hebr.) rising, or lifting up. Lumbar, see Lombar. Luminaries, (in Lat.
Luminaria) lights, lamps, also conspicuous stars, as the sun and moon, also the
feast of Christ's Nativity, commonly called Christmas, was by the ancient
Western Church, called Luminaria. Luminous, (lat.) full of light. Lunaeburgum,
a great City of Germany, built by Julius Caesar, vulgarly called Lunemburgh.
Lunar, belonging to the Planet of the Moon, called in Latin Luna. Lunatic,
(lat.) troubled with a Lunacy, i. a kind of madness, which happens at certain
times of the Moon. Lunes for Hawks, leashes, or long lines to call them.
Lungis, (French) a tall slim man that has no making to his height. Lupercal,
a place about Rome, where anciently certain feasts were celebrated to Pan,
which were called Lupercalia, from Lupa a she-wolf, which gave Romulus suck, or
as some say, a Harlot of that name which nursed him. Lupines, (lat.) a kind of
little flat round pulse, almost like a small bean. Lurcation, (lat.) a greedy
eating, or playing the glutton, derived originally from Lura, a great leathern
bottle. Lure for Hawks, a certain leathern device, whereby with a little piece
of flesh, they call a Hawk from a good distance off, it comes from the Dutch
word Laeden, i. e. to invite. Lurid, (lat.) pale, wan, of a sallow color.
Luscitation, (lat.) a being dim-sighted, or pore-blind. Lushborough, a base
Coin brought over from beyond Sea, in the days of King Edward the third.
Lusion, (lat.) a playing, or gaming. Lusitania, the third part of Spain,
according to the ancient division; it is now called Portugal, and is a Kingdom
by it self. A Lusk, a slug, or sloathfull fellow, from the French word lasche.
Lust of a ship, a Term in Navigation, when a ship out of her own mold, and
making has an inclination more to one side then another. Lustration, (lat.) a
going about, also a purging by sacrifice. Luster, (French) a shining, also from
the Latin word lustrum, it signifies a Den of wild beasts, also the space of
five years, by which space the Romans were wont to compute the time.
Lutheranisme, the doctrine and judgment of Martin Luther, who being first a
Monk of the Order of St. Augustine forsook the Church of Rome, and writ against
the errors of it. Luteous, (lat.) muddy, or of a muddy color. Lutulent, (lat.)
miry, or dirty. Lutzenburgum, or Lutzenburgh, a Duchy in the low Countries,
adjoining to Liege and Namur, being one of the 17 Provinces, and having a chief
City of the same name. Luxation, (lat.) a putting out of joint, a making
loose. Luxuriant, or Luxurious (lat.) riotous, given to excess, or debauchery.
L Y
Lycanthropy, (Greek) a kind of melancoly, or phrenzy, which causes those
that are po^sest therewith to think themselves turned into Wolves, and to fly
the company of men. Ly^aon, the son of Pelasgus, and King of Arcadia, who when
Jupiter came into Arcadia in the likeness of a mortal man, resolved to try
whether he were a God, or no, as men reported him to be, and killing one of
those, whom the King of the Molossi had left with him for pledges, he caused
him to be dressed, and part roasted, to be set before Jupiter, whereat he being
highly provoked turned Lycaon into a Wolf, and burnt his Palace with Thunder,
others say it was for sprinkling with the blood of an Infant, an Altar which he
had erected to Jupiter upon the Mountain Lycaeus, a hill of Arcadia. Lycaonia,
a Country of Asia the less, near Phrygia, and reaching as far as the Mountain
Taurus; also Arcadia was heretofore so called from Lycaon, the King thereof.
Lyceum, the name of a School, which Cicero erected at his Manor of Tusculum,
calling it so after the name of Aristotle's School, near Athens. Lycomedes, a
King of the Island Scyrus, by whom Achilles being entertained before he went to
the Trojan War, and conversing with his daughters in woman's apparel, he got one
of them called Deidamia with Child, and begat Pyrrhus. Lycurgus, the son of
Polydectes, and King of Sparta, after the death of his brother Eunomus, but he
soon resigned up the Crown to Charilaus his brothers son, and having made
wholesome laws for the good of the Commonwealth, which were confirmed by the
approbation of the Delphic Oracle, he afterward retired himself to Cyrrha,
where at length he slew himself, and had a Temple built him, and Divine honors
given bim by the Lacedaemonians: also the name of a King of Thrace, who
proceeded so violently against Bacchus, that he forced him to retire himself to
Naxus, and would have caused all the Vines in his Kingdom to be rooted up, that
no sacrifice might be made to him, but ere he had effected his design he fell
mad, and cut off his own legs. Lycus, a King of Boeotia, who married Antiope,
the daughter of Nycteus, but she being got with Child by Jupiter in the form
of a Satyr, he put her away and married Dirce. See more in Dirce, and Amphyon;
also a King of Lybia, who using to sacrifice his Guests, had intended the same
thing toward Diomede, but Callirroe the daughter of Lycus, falling in love
with him delivered him out of Chains, and being afterward neglected by him,
hanged her self for grief. Lydia, a Christian name of diverse women, from the
Country so called. Lydia, a Kingdom of Asia the less, so called from Lydus,
the son of Atys, who perceiving the people grow too numerous for the Country,
resolved to send out one of his sons, to whose lot it should fall, to plant a
Colony in some other place, so that it falling to Tyrrenus his lot, he went out
with a great multitude of Lydians, and choosing out a part of Italy, which
lies upon the Seaside, he called it from his own name Tyrrhenum, his brother
Lydus tarrying at home succeeded his father Atys in the Kingdom, and called it
from his own name Lydia, whereas before it was called Maeonia. Lydford Law, a
certain Law, whereby they first hang a man, and afterward indite him.
Lymphatick, (lat.) mad, distracted, as it were by seeing the likeness of a
Nymph in the water, from Lympha, i. water. Lynceus, the son of Apareus, and one
of the Argonauts, he was reported to be so quick-sighted, that he could see
through stone walls even to the very deep it self, and that he could discern
the Moon in her last quarter, and the first, the very same day, in the sign of
Aries; whence a sharp-sighted man is proverbially called a Lynceus, also
Lynceus and Idas were two brothers, who fought with Castor and Pollux, about
the two daughters of Leucippus, Castor fell by the hand of Lynceus, Lynceus by
the hand of Pollux, Idas going about to slay Pollux, was struck with Thunder
from Heaven. Lyncus, a King of Scythia, who going about to kill Triptolemus his
Guest as he lay asleep, that he might gain to himself the glory of inventing
the use of Corn, was changed by Ceres into a beast, called Lynx, or Ounce.
Lyndus, a City of Rhodes, famous for the solemn sacrifices, which in old time
were performed there to Hercules. Lyra, one of the celestial A^^orismes, which
the Poets feigned to be Arions Harp. Lyrick, verses, or songs, songs composed
to the Lyre, or Harp, whence we say vulgarly, playing Leero-way on the Viol,
which is corruptly used for Lyra-way, i. e. Harp-way. Lysander, a Captain of
the Lecedaemonians, who overcame the Athenians under the command of Conon in a
very great battle. Lysidice, the daughter of Pelops, she was married to
Electryon, and brought forth Alckmena the mother of Hercules. Lysimachus, the
son of Agathocles, and one of the chief Captains of Alexander the Great, he was
thrown to a Lion to be devoured by Alexanders command, for hearing Call^^thenes
the Philosopher after he was in Chains, but he wrapping his Garment about his
hands, thrust them into the Lions mouth, and pulling out his tongue killed him;
after Alexanders death he had the Government of Thrace. Lysippe, see
Iphianassa. Lysius, one of the sirnames of Bacchus, to whom under that name the
Boeotians consecrated a Temple, because by his help they overcame the
Thracians, by whom they had been set upon before and beaten.
M A
MAbel, the Christian name of diverse women, in Latin Mabilia, from Amabilis, i.
lovely. Mac, an Irish word, signifying as much as son in English, or fitz in
Welsh. Macareus, the son of Aeolus, who got his sister Canace with child, which
Aeolus coming to discover by hearing the child cry, sent Canace a sword
privately, bidding her do with it as she deserved best, whereupon she killed
her self, and Macareus fleeing to Delphos, was made a Priest of Apollo.
Macaleb, a kind of Pomander or bastard Coral whose berries are black and
shining and serve for Bracelets. Macaronique, (French) a confused huddle of
diverse things jumbled together. Macarons, (Ital.) lumps of boiled paste,
strewed over with sugar or spice, a dish much used by the Italians; but here
they are commonly compounded of Almonds, Sugar, Rose Water, and Musk.
Macedonia, a large Country of Europe, heretofore famous for being governed by
two great Kings, Philip of Macedon, and Alexander the Great, it was anciently
called Aemathia and Aemonia, now Romelli. Macegrefs, those that buy and sell
stolen flesh. Macellarious, (lat) belonging to a shambles. Maceration, (lat.)
a mortifying, or bringing low, also a steeping in liquor. Machaon, a famous
Physician, the son of Aesculapius and Arsin^e, he was slain at the wars of Troy
by Euripilus. Machiavilian, belonging unto Machiavill, a famous Historian and
Politician of Florence, whence it is commonly used for subtle or well verst in
State Policy. Machination, (lat.) a plotting, contriving, or devising, from
Machina, an Engine or Instrument of war, but used also for a device or
invention. Macilent, (lat.) thin, lean, fallen of ones flesh. Mackerell, or
Maquerell, (French) a kind of fish, so called from the great company of spots
it has, in Latin Scombrus; it is also used for a pander or procurer.
Macritude, (lat.) leanness. Macrobii, a certain people of Aethiopia, so called
from the long life they live. Macrocosme, (Greek) the greater, being taken
contradistinct to the Microcosme or lesser, world, which is man. Macrology,
(lat.) a figure among Rhetoricians, being a speech containing more words than
are just necessary. Mactation, (lat.) a killing or committing slaughter.
Maculation, (lat.) a staining or defiling with spots. Madefaction, (lat.) a
moistning or wetting. Madidity, or Madour, (lat.) moistness or wetness. Madder,
a kind of plant, with whose root being of a red color, they use to dye wool.
Madoc, an ancient British name, from Mad, i. good. Madrigal, (Ital.) a kind of
Song. Maeonia, see Lydia. Maeotis, a Lake in the North part of Scythia, near
the mouth of the River Phasis. It is called by the Italians Mar della Tana, and
Mar Bianco, by the Scythians, Garpaluc. Magazine, (French) a Storehouse where
Arms and Ammunition of War are put, as it were Mansio Gazae. Magdalen, (Hebr.)
Majestical, the Christian name of diverse women. Magdalen College, a College
in Oxford, built, together with a Hall near adjoining to it, by William
Wain^let Bishop of Winchester. Magdaleon, (lat.) a kind of long plaster like a
rowler, called also a Langate. Magdeburgum, or Magdeburg, as it were
Maidenburg, from the Dutch word Magd, i. a Maid, the chief City of Saxony, in
Germany, heretofore called Parthenopolis, from Venus Parthenia, who was there
worshipped. Magician, (lat.) one that professes the Art Magic, which was the
same among the Persians, as Philosophy among the Grecians, i. e. the study of
the more occult and mysterious Arts; whence the 3 Wisemen of the East were
called Magi, but among the vulgar, the word simply taken, is used in the same
signification as Diabolical Magic, i. e. Sorcery or Witchcraft. Magisterial,
(lat.) pertaining to Magistery, or Mastership, done by or like a Master; in
Physic a pill or plaster, etc. prepared after the best manner is called
Magisterial. Magistracy, (lat.) the office of a Magistrate or chief Ruler.
Magna charta, the great Charter containing a number of Laws ordained in the
nineth year of Henry the third, and confirmed by Edward the first, containing
the sum of all the written Laws of England. Magnality, a greatness to be
admired at, being a made word, from the Lat. Magnalia, i. e. great and
wonderful things. Magnanimity, (lat.) greatness of mind, courage, stoutnesse.
Magnes, a youth of Smyrna, the most beautiful of his age, and excellent in
music and poetry, for which he was in high esteem with Gyges King of Lydia,
who because the Parents of Magnes spoiled his cloths, and cut off his hair,
made war upon the Country, overcame them, and brought away Magnes in Triumph to
Sardes. Magnetic, (lat.) belonging to the Magnete or Lodestone. See Lodestone.
Magnificence, (lat.) as it were a making great, sumptuousness, stateliness, a
carrying things on at a great height. Magnificat, the Song of the Virgin Mary,
so called because it begins with these words, Magnificat anima mea, etc.
Magnifico, (Ital.) the title of a Noble man of Venus, also the Governors of
Academies in Germany, are called Magnifici. Magniloquence, (lat.) a lofty
speaking, a talking of high things. Magnitude, (lat.) greatness, ampleness,
largeness. Mago, the first that increased the wealth of Carthage, before the
first Punick war he aided the Romans in the war of Tarentum with 120 ships.
Magog, see Gog and Magog. Magonel, according to Chaucer, is an instrument to
cast stones with. Mahim, or Maim, (in Latin Mahemium) is the hurting or taking
away of any member by the wrongful act of another, whereby the party so hurt is
made unable to fight, it comes from the old French word Mehaighn, and is called
by the Canonists, Mutilatio membri. Mahumetanisme, the Religion and Law of the
Turks, founded by Mahomet the first Emperor of the Saracens, there was also of
this name a great Emperor of the Turks, who overthrew the Greek Empire, took
twelve Kingdoms, and two hundred Cities from the Christians, whereof the chief
were Constantinople, the Island Chalcis, Scodra, Trapezuntium, and Hydruntum,
in Italy, but at the siedge of Belgrade, or as some say of Taurinum, he was
overthrown, and put to flight. Maia, one of the seven Pleiades, on whom Jupiter
begat Mercury, she was the daughter of Atlas and Pleione. Maid Marrian, or
Morion, a boy dressed in woman's apparel to dance the Morisco, or M^rrisdance.
Maidenhair, a kind of plant, called in Latin Adiantum, or Capillus veneris.
Maidenhead, a Town in Bark-shire, so called from a Maids head that was had in
great reverence, being one of those 11000. who returning from Rome with their
Leader Vrsula, were taken by Attila, and martyred at Colein in Germany.
Maidstone, a pleasant Town in Kent, situate upon the River Medway, and
therefore anciently called Medweg-ston, and thought to be the same with the old
Town Vagniacae. Maim, see Mahim. Mainour, Manor, or Meinour, (from the French
word Maniere) signifies in Common Law, an apprehending of one that has
stolen any thing, and is followed with Hue and Cry, with the manner, that is,
having the thing. Mainprise, (from the French words main, i. a hand, and prins,
i. taken) signifies in Common Law, the receiving a man into friendly custody,
that otherwise might be committed to prison, giving security for his forth
coming at a day assigned; those that do thus undertake for any, are called
Mainpernours, he that is taken into custody Mainpernable. Maint, (Saxon)
mingled. Maintenance, in Common Law, is, upholding of a cause depending in
suite between others, either by lending of money, or making of friends for
either party. Majo, a County of Ireland, in the Province of Conaught. Major,
signifies in Latin greater, but with us it is commonly taken sometimes for a
Praetor or Governor of a City, sometimes for a Military officer; also in
Logic the first part of a Syllogism is called the Major or the proposition,
the second the Minor or the assumption. Majoration, (lat.) a making greater.
Maisnilwarings, and by contraction Manwarings, the name of a great and ancient
Family in Cheshire. Master of the Rolls, is an assistant unto the Lord
Chancelour of England in the high Court of Chancery, and in his absence hears
causes and gives orders. Masters of the Chancery, are assistants to the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal in matters of judgment; of these there are 12 in
number, whereof the chief is the Master of the Rolls. Masters of the Court of
Wards and Liveries, the principal officer of that Court, named and assigned by
the King to whose custody the Seal of the Court is committed. Master of the
Horse, is he that has the rule and charge of the Kings stable. Make, in Common
Law, signifies, to perform or execute, as, to make his Law, is to perform that
Law which he has formerly bound himself unto, that is, to clear himself of an
action, commenced against him by his Oath, and the Oaths of his Neighbors;
also to make ones beard, (an old phrase) to deceive. Malachias, (Hebr.) my
messenger. Malachite, (Greek) a kind of precious stone, so called.
Malacissation, a kneading, a making soft. Malacy, (Greek) a calm on the Sea,
also a longing of women with child. Malady, (French) a disease, sickness, or
infirmity. Malaga, a City and Port-Town of Andalusia, whence we have that sort
of wine, which is called Malago Sack; it is said to have been so called,
because Cava the daughter of Count Julian, after that, her being ravished by
King Roderigo had been the occasion of the loss of Spain to the Moors, threw
her self from a high Tower, crying out, Malaca, i. here is the evil. Malanders,
a certain disease in a horse, from the Italians Mal andare, i. to go ill.
Malapert, saucy, impudent, as it were Male partus, i. ill brought forth.
Maldisant, (French) a backbiter, an evil speaker. Maldon, a Town in Essex,
anciently called Camalodunum from Camulus, whom the old Britains worshiped
here for Mars, the God of war; this Town being made a Colony of the Romans, was
sacked by Queen Bunduca, or Boadicia. A Male, a kind of sack, or budget from
the Greek word Malloi fleece, because they used to be made of sheepskins.
Malecontent, (lat.) discontented, evil content. Malediction, (lat.) an evil
speaking, or cursing. Malefactor, (lat.) an evil doer, an offender. Malefice,
(lat.) an evil act, a shrewd turn. Maletent, a Toll of forty shillings for
every sack of Wool, Anno 29. Edw. 1.* it is also called Maletot, from the
French Maletoste. Malevolence, (lat.) ill will. Malignity, (lat.) spite,
malice, grudge. Malevolent Planets, Saturn and Sagitarius. M^lison, (French) a
curse. Mallard, (French) a wild Drake. Malleable, (lat.) to be wrought, or
beaten out with a Mallet, or Hammer. M^lkin, or M^ukin, a Beesom to make clean
an Oven with, it is also called a Scovel. Malliverie's, the name of an ancient
family in Yorkshire, styled in Latin Records Mali Leporarii. Mallow's, a kind
of plant of a softning, or loosening quality, called in Latin Malva. Malmesie,
a sort of wine, which is brought out of Arvisium, in the Island of Chio,
vulgarly called Marvisia, or Malvisia. Malmesbury, a Town in Wiltshire, first
built by Mulmutius, a King of the Britains, and by him named Caer Baldon,
afterward from one Maidulph an Irish-Scot, who here led a Hermites life, it
was called Maidulphsburgh, and so by contraction Malmsbury. Malta, a rocky and
barren Island, sixty miles distant from Sicilie, called in the New Testament
Melita, this Island was given by Charles the fifth, to the Knights of Rhodes,
who have ever since been called Knights of Malta. Mamalukes, a certain Order of
Soldiers, who fought lightly armed on horsback, and were the chief military
support of the last Empire of Egypt. Mamitus, the thirteenth King of the
Assyrians, he trained up his subjects in military discipline, and was a terror
to the Egyptians, and many other Nations. Mammeated, (lat.) having paps, or
teates. Mammet, a puppet, from the Greek word Mamme, as it were a little
Mother, or Nurse. Mammillary Processes, (lat.) a Term in Anatomy, certain bones
in the temples, representing the teates in a Cows Udder. Mammocks, fragments,
or pieces. Mammon, the God of wealth, the word signifying in the Syriack tongue
riches, or wealth, and is derived from the Hebrew word Hamon, i. plenty, having
M. Hemantick added at the beginning. Mammooda, a kind of East-Indian Coin,
valuing about a shilling. Manation, (lat.) a passing away, a flowing. Manage,
in Italian Maneggiare, to govern, to rule, to handle. Manasses, (Hebr.) not
forgotten. Manbote, (Sax.) a pecuniary compensation for killing of a man.
Manchester, a pleasant Town in Lancashire, which anciently belonging to the
Kings of Northumberland, and having been destroyed in the Danish war, King Edw.
the Elder, sent an Army of Mercians into Northumberland, to re-edifie this
City; some say, because the inhabitants behaved themselves valiantly against
the Danes, it was called Manchester, as it were the City of men, others derive
it from Main, i. a stone, because it stands upon a stony Hill; it was
anciently called Mancunium. Manchet, (from the French word Main, i. e. the
hand) the finest, and the smallest sort of wheaten bread, called in Latin panis
Capituli, in Greek Collyris. Manch present, (old word) a bribe. Mancipation,
(lat.) an ancient manner of selling before witnesses, wherein diverse Ceremonies
were used; it is also used in the same sense as Emancipation. Manciple, (lat.)
a Steward, or Caterer, but chiefly one that buys the common provisions in a
College, or Hospital. Mancuse, a kind of Coin, valuing about thirty of the
ancient pence, each of which contains three pence of our money, some hold a
Manca, or Mancus of Gold, to be as much as a Mark of silver. Mandatarie, (lat.)
one that comes in to a Benefice by a Mandamus. A Mandate, (lat.) a Commandment,
or charge, also in Common Law, it is a Judicial Command of the King, or his
Justices, to have any thing done for the dispatch of Justice. Mandevils, an
ancient family in Essex, styled in Latin Records de Magna Villa. Mandible,
(lat.) from M^ndibulum) a jaw, (from the participiate Mandibilis) eatable.
Mandilion, or Mandilian, (French) a kind of military garment, a loose Cassock.
Mandonius and Indibilis, two famous Spanish Captains, who having assisted
Scipio, and the Romans against the Carthaginians began afterward to revolt,
but because of the memory of their former good service they were dismissed.
Mandrake, a kind of plant, so called from the Greek word Mandra, i. a Cave,
because it grows near unto Den's and in shady places, it bears a fruit
called Mandrake, Apples of a cold and soporiferous quality, it is also called
by some Anthropomorphos, because its root being divaricated, something
resembles the shape of a man. Manducation, (lat.) a chewing. Mandy thursday,
as it were dies Mandati, the day of Commandment, because of that great charge
which our Savior gave to his Disciples, concerning the observation of his
Supper, being the Thursday next before Easter day. Mangonels, the same as
Magonells. Mangonization, (lat.) a trimming, or setting out things to the best
advantage for sale. Manichees, a sort of Heretics that maintained that there
was a fatal necessity of sin, which Doctrine was first broached by one Manes a
Persian. Manicles, (French) fetters wherewith the hands of prisoners are bound,
being derived originally from the Latin word Manus, a hand. Manifesto, (Ital.)
a Declaration of some Prince, or Commonwealth, about public affairs. Maniple,
(lat.) a handful, in physic more especialy it is taken for such a bundle of
herbs or other things as may be griped with the hand; also a company consisting
of 10 soldiers; some also take it for a fannel or such a kind of ornament as
Priests used to wear about their wrists when they went to sacrifice. Manipular,
(lat.) belonging to a maniple. Manlius, the name of diverse famous Romans,
whereof the chief were Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, and Titus M^nlius Torquatus.
See Capitolinus and Torquatus. Manna, a certain delicious food wherewith God
fed the children of Israel in their journey to Canaan, being a congealed dew
which fell from Heaven, it comes from the Hebrew word Manah, i. to distribute
or Mahna, i. what is it, because they admired what it was: there is also at
this day a certain sweet dew, which falling early in the morning upon trees and
herbs, is called Manna, which congealing into a whitish substance, is of a
pleasant taste, and is much used in physic. Manor, (in Latin Manerium a
manendo, i. remaining to the heir, or else from the Lords remaining there
himself) it signifies in common Law, a rule or government which a man has
over such as hold land within his fee. Man of War, in Navigation, is taken for
a ship of War, by the figure Metonymia. Manqueller, (old word) a murderer.
Mansion, (lat.) a remaining, an abiding, also a Manor-house, or the Lords chief
dwelling house within his fee. Manslaughter, in Common Law, is the unlawful
killing of a man upon some sudden occasion, or falling out, without
premeditated malice. Mansuetude, (lat.) gentleness, tractablenesse, meekness.
Manteleth, a term in Faulconry, for when the Hawk stretches one of her wings
along after her legs, and so the other: It is said she Manteleth. Mathematics,
Arts taught by demonstration which comprehend four of the liberal Arts,
Astronomy, Arithmetic, Music, and Geometry. Manticore, (Ital.) a kind of
Indian beast, faced like a Man, and bodied like a Lion, and having three rows
of sharp teeth. Manticulation, (lat.) a doing a thing slily, a carrying on a
business closely. Mantle, or Mantile, (lat.) a kind of long robe, also in
Heraldry it is that flourish which proceeds from the wreath and helm, and
descends on each side the Escutcheon. Mantua, a City of Italy, situate upon the
River Po, and built by Ocnus, who called it so from his mothers name Manto a
Theban Prophetess, the daughter of Tiresias, she after the death of her father
fleeing from the tyranny of Creon King of Thebes, went first into Asia and
built the Temple of Apollo Clarius, afterward she came into Italy, where being
got with child by Tiberinus, she brought forth Ocnus. Manual, (lat.) belonging
to the hand, filling the hand; it is also used substantively, for a book of a
small volume which may easily be carried in ones hand. Manubiary, (lat.)
belonging to the spoil or prey. Manucaption, (lat.) a taking by the hand.
Manucaptors, (lat.) Sureties or Bailes. Manuduction, (lat.) a leading by the
hand, a guiding. Manuel, in Common Law, signifies that whereof present profit
may be made. Manufacture, (lat.) handiwork. Manumission, (lat.) an
Enfranchising, a making free a slave or bondsman, which in former time was
performed with diverse ceremonies before a Magistrate. Manure, from the French
word Manouurier, to work and labor the earth with the hand. Manuscript, (lat.)
a thing only written with the hand. Manutenentia, a Writ used in the case of
maintenance. Manutention, (lat.) a holding by the hand. Marria or Mar, the name
of a Country in the North part of Scotland. Marathon, a Town of Greece, about
ten miles distant from Athens, famous for the Victory of Theseus over the
Marathonian Bull, and of Miltiades over Darius his Army consisting of above
100000. men. Maravedis, a kind of Spanish coin of very small value, 34 of them
amounting but to a Royal, which is about 6 pence of our money. Marcellus, a
great General of the Romans, who overcame the Captain of the Gauls in a single
Duel; vanqvisht Hannibal after he had given the Romans several great
overthrows, took Syracuse, and at last was circumvented by Hannibal and slain.
Marcessible, (lat.) apt to putrify or corrupt. Marcgrave, (Dutch) a Count or
Earl of the Marches, i. e. the Frontier of a Country, whence the title of
Marquess seems to be derived; also those Noblemen which from the Marches, i.
the limits between England and Wales, or between England and Scotland, were
heretofore called Marchers, and enjoyed private Laws to themselves which now
are worn out. March, so called because it was dedicated to Mars by his son
Romulus. Marchesite, or Marquesite, (Span.) a certain kind of stone
intermingled among metal, and partaking of the nature and color of the metal
it is mixed with* it is by some called a firestone. Marcheta, a certain Law made
by Eugenius King of Scotland, which was that the Lord of the land should have
the first nights lodging with every married woman within his jurisdiction, (the
word signifying, as some think, the first carnal copulation with a woman) but
this law was abrogated by Malcolm the third. Marchpane, (French) a kind of
Sugered paste made into little cakes, it is called in Greek Saccharites, in
Latin Panis dulciarius, also Sagunculus, from Saguntum a Town in Spain where
the best are made, or Panis Martius, because it had wont to be consecrated to
Mars, having towers, castles, and such like on it. Marcidity, or Marcour,
(lat.) a withering away, rottenness. Marcionists, a sort of ancient Heretics,
so called from one Marcion a Stoic, they denied Christ to be the Son of God.
Marcus, the praenomen of diverse eminent Romans, as Marcus Curtius, (who for the
public good, devoted himself to the infernal powers, and rid completely armed
into a monstrous gap with which the earth opened) and others. See Regulus
Salinat^r, etc. Maremaid, see Siren. Mareotis, a great Lake in Egypt, on the
south side of Alexandria, having a large and commodious Port. Margaret, (Greek)
pearl, the Christian name of diverse women, contracted Marget. Margaritiferous,
(lat.) bringing forth, Margarites, i. pearls which are found in Oysters and
other kind of shellfish. Margery, a Christian name of diverse women; some think
it to be the same with Margaret, others derive it from Marjora, a kind of
flower. Marginal, (lat) belonging to the margin or margent, i. the brink or
brim of any thing, also written in the margin of a book, which is, the extreme
or uttermost part of a page, which terminates the lines. Mariandunum, a Country
of Asia, famous for the Acherusian Den, through which the Poets feign that
Hercules went down into Hell. Mariets, (French) a sort of violets, called also
Marian violets; some think from Maria the name of a woman who first discovered
them. Marigold, a kind of flower of a yellow or golden color, called in Latin
herba solaris, in Greek Heliotropium, because at night it contracts it self,
and at sunrising opens and dilates it self. Marine, (lat.) belonging to the
Sea, whence Mariner, a Sailour, a Seafaringman. Marital, (lat.) belonging to
Wedlock or Marriage. Maritime, (lat.) belonging to the Sea, or being along the
Sea side. Marius, a stout Roman born at Arpinas, he overcame Jugurth King of
Numidia, and led him in Triumph before his Chariot, after he had had five
Consulships together conferred on him by the Romans, being the sixth time
Consul with Catulus, he overthrew the Cimbrians in Gallia, and the Teutones in
Italy, at length being overcome by Sylla, he hid himself by the Lake Minturna,
from whence he fled into Africa, but was recalled by Cinna, and made Consul the
seventh time. Mark, (Hebr.) high, or from the Latin Marcus, which name
according to Varrow, was given to those that were born in the month of March,
but according to Festus, it signifies a hammer or mallet. Mark, a sort of coin,
or money valueing with us about thirteen shillings and four pence, but a Mark
of Gold is counted about eight ounces, or thirty three shillings and four
pence. Marcab, the pinion of the wing of Pegasus. Marleborough, a Town in
Wiltshire, seated upon the River Cunetio or Kenet, so called from Marga or
Marle, because it stands upon a chalky ground. Alexander Necham calls it
Merlebrigia, from the Tomb of Merlin the Prophet; this Town is famous for a
Parliament in old times, assembled here, who made a Law for appeasing tumults,
called the Statute of Marleb^row. Marlin, a kind of Hawk called in French
Esmerillion. Marling, a term in Navigation, being a small line made of
untwisted hemp, to sease the ends of ropes from farsing out. Marmaduke, the
proper name of a man, from the Dutch Mermachtig, i. more mighty. Marmalade,
(Ital.) a kind of conserve made of quince, which is called by the Italians
Marmelo. Marmorean, (lat.) like Marble, or made of Marble. Marmoset, a Monky,
from the French word Marmotter, i. to mutter. Maronean wine, a sort of wine
made at the City Maronea, of great virtue and strength. Maronites, were a sort
of Christians dwelling in Mount Libanus, they received the Catholic religion
from Pope Clement the eighth, and were a branch of the Jacobites having a
Patriarch of their own, who was always called Peter. Marpessa, called also
Alcyone, the daughter of Euenus, and wife of Idaeus, the comliest man of his
time, she was so loved of her husband, that when Apollo carried her away he
pursued the god with his bow and arrows; he had by her a very fair daughter
called Cleopatra, who was married to Meleager. Marque, see Letters of Mart, or
Marque. Marquesite, see Marchesite. Marquetry, a kind of checkered or inlaid
work, made with wood of diverse sorts or colors, into the shape of knots,
flowers, or other things. Marquisate, (French) the title and jurisdiction of a
Marquess who is a Noble man, next in Dignity and account unto a Duke, from the
Dutch word March, i. a bound, because originally they were the Prefects of the
borders of some Country. A Marrow, (French) a companion or fellow, also a
beggarly rascal. Mars, the son of Juno, who without the help of Jupiter, proved
with child by eating of a flower which grew in the Olenian fields, according to
the advice of Flora and brought forth Mars, who was called the god of War; he
being in bed with Venus, was discovered by Vulcan her husband, who throwing an
iron net over them exposed them to the view and laughter of all the gods; but
at the suite of Neptune they were set free. Also the name of one of the 7
Planets. Marshal, (in Latin Mariscallus) was anciently no other than a Master
of Horse, from the Dutch words Mar, i. a horse, and Scalc, i. a servant, but of
late there are several officers of that name, as the Marshals belonging to the
several Courts of Law, the Marshals of each Regiment in an Army, but the
highest officers that bore this name among us, were the Lord Marshal of
England, whose power consisted chiefly in matters of war and arms, and
Marshals of the Kings House, whose office was to hear pleas of the Crown, and
to punish faults committed within the verge. Marshalsee, as it were Marshals
seat, the Court of the Marshal. Marsyas, a certain Musician of Phrygia,
instructed by Minerva, he provoking Apollo to a contest in Music, was overcome
and flead for his presumption, and from his name the River Marsyas whose
streams were augmented by the tears of the Nimphs that bewailed him, took its
denomination. Marternes, or Sables, a kind of rich Fur, being the skin of a
little beast called a Marten. Martia, the wife of Cato Vticensis, whom he gave
to his friend Hortensius, and after he was dead, about the beginning of the
civil wars, took her again. Martial, (lat.) born under the Planet of Mars, also
warlike or valiant, whence the Law of Arms is called Martial Law. Martichore,
see Manticore. Martin, the proper name of a man, from the Latin Martius. The
first of this name was St. Martin the Military Saint, Bishop of Tours.
Martinet, or Martelet, a kind of bird, called in Greek Apus, because it wants
the use of its feet. Martingale, see Cavechin. Martnets, a Term in Navigation,
the small lines which being fastened to the legs on the leetch of a sail, come
down by the mast to the deck. Martyrologie, (Greek) a discourse, treating of
the lives, and sufferings of Martyrs. Marullus Pomponius, the greatest
Grammarian and Critic of his age, who reprehended Tiberius for speaking
improper Latin, and gave Ateius Capito, the lie for vindicating it. Mary,
(Hebr.) exalted. Mascarade, (French) a mask, or pompous representation. Mascle*
in blazon, is a short lozenge, having a square hole in the midst, from the
French word Macle, i. e. a spot, also the mash, or hole of a Net. Masculine,
(lat.) manly, or of the male kind. Massagetae, see Scythia. Mass, (in latin
Missa) the Liturgy, or Divine service performed by the Roman Catholics, is
also called from the Hebrew Missah, l. sacrifice, or oblation. Massicot, a
kind of Oaker, made of Ceruse, or white Lead. Massilia, a Town of Gallia
Narbonensis, which after it had been destroyed, was rebuilt by the Phocences,
who flying from the Tyranny of Cyrus, seated themselves in this place; the Arts
and Sciences flowrish't here at that height, that it was accounted a second
Athens, it is vulgarly called Mar^eiltes. Massinissa, a King of Numidia, who
from an inveterate enemy of the Roman name, became a faithful friend and
allie, he was a man of that strength, and vigor of body, that at 90 years of
age, he begat a son. Massorets, a sort of Jews, which corrected the false
written words of the Scripture, noting them wit a little o. (for they made a
scruple to blot them out) and setting down their corrections in the Margin.
Mastication* (lat.) a chewing between the teeth. Mastick, a kind of sweet Gum*
distilling out of the Mastich, or Lentiske Tree. Masticot, a kind of yellow
color used in painting. Mastigophore, (Greek) an Usher that with stripes makes
way in a crowd. Mastruke, (French) a kind of winter Garment made of Wolves and
Deers skins together. Mastupration, (lat.) lascivious violence offered to a
man. Matachin, (French) a kind of French dance. Matagot, (French) a kind of
Ape, or Monky, also a Hypocrite. Match, a Term in Hunting, when a Wolf desires
copulation, he is said to go to his match, or to his mate. Mateotechny, or
Mataeotechny, (Greek) the vanity of any Art, a vain Science. Mate, (Saxon)
daunted, also consumed. A Mate, or Checkmate, (a Term used in the Game at
Chess) is when the Game is brought to that pass, that there is no way left for
the King to escape, from the Italian word Motto, i. foolish and inconsiderate,
or the Spanish Matar, i. to kill. Matelotage, the Hire of a Boat, or ship, from
the French word Matelot, a Saylour, or Shipman. Material, (lat.) consisting of
matter, or substance; also being of some weight, or importance. Materiation,
(lat.) a ^elling of Timber for building. Maternal, (lat.) motherly, on the
mothers side, whence maternity, motherhood. Mathematician, (lat.) one that is
skillful in the Mathematics, that is, those Sciences which are understood by
demonstration, of these there are four in all, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, and Music. Matthew, (Hebr.) Gods gift. Mathurins, certain Friars of
the Order of the holy Trinity, whose Office is to redeem Christian Captives out
of Turkish slavery. Matricide, (lat.) a killing of ones mother, or one that
kill's his mother. Matrice, (lat.) that part of the Womb, where the Child is
conceived, also a mould for letters. Matriculation, (lat.) a Registring of
young Scholars, into the society of their Foster-mother of learning the
University. Matrimonial, (lat.) belonging to matrimony, i. marriage, or
wedlock. Mattins, (French) Morning-prayer. Mattock, a kind of Pick-axe, from
the Dutch word, Metha^^k, i. with hook. Mattresse, (French) a quilt, or
flock-bed. Matura, a certain goddess among the ancient Romans, who was said to
be the Patronnesse of Corn, when the ears began to ripen, as Patalena took
charge of them when the cups began to open, and Lactucina, when the juice, or
milky substance began to abound. Maturity, (lat.) ripeness, whence maturation,
a ripening. Matuta, see Ino. Matutine, (lat.) belonging to the morning. Maud,
(Germ.) a Christian name of diverse women from Matilda, or Mathildis, i.
Honorable Lady of maids. Maugre, or Maulgre, (French) whither one will, or no,
or as we commonly say in despite of his teeth; also a proper name, in Latin
Malgerius. Mavis, in Latin Malviccium, a bird called a Thrush, or Thrussel.
Maund, (French) a hand-basket, from Manus, i. a hand, or from Mandere, i. to
eat, because they use to carry meat in it. Maundy-Thursday, see Mandy-Thursday.
Mavors, the same as Mars. Mauritania, the utmost Region of Africa, toward the
Gaditan Bay, now called the Streights of Gibraltar, where the Giant Antaeus is
said to have reigned, who was overcome by Hercules, it is divided into
Tingitana and Caesariensis, which Strabo call's Massilia and Massaesylia.
Mausolus, a King of Caria, the husband of Artemisia, by whom he was so entirely
loved, that after he was dead, she is said to have drunk up his ashes in wine,
and built him a very stately Sepulcher, which from his name she called
Mousoleum, being one of the seven wonders of the world, and from which every
rich Monument is figuratively called a Mausoleum. Maxillar, or Maxillary,
(lat.) belonging to the jawbone. A Maxim in Philosophy, or Law, is a
proposition, or principle generally received, grounded upon reason, and not to
be denied, called also an axiom. Maximilian, a name, first given to one of the
German Emperors, by his father Frederick the third, composing it of the names
of two famous Romans, Quintus Fabius, Maximus, and Scipio Aemelianus, with hope
that his son would imitate their virtues. May, so called, because Romulus
dedicated it to M^ya, the mother of M^rcury. Maze, an astonishment, also the
same as Labyrinth. Mazer, a Beker, or standing Cup to drink in, from the Dutch
word Maeser, i. Maple, of which sort of wood those Cups are commonly made.
M E
Mead, the same Hydromel. Meagre, (French) scraggy, or lean. The Mean, in
Music the Tenor, or middle part, also in Law, it is used for the interim, or
middle time, as, the action was mean, etc. Meander, or Maeander, a River of
Phrygia, which has many oblique diversions, whence a thing that is full of
intricate turnings and windings, is called a Maeander, by way of Metaphor.
Mearstones, (in Latin Lapides terminales) certain stones, which are put as
bounds and limits between one man's land and another. Mease, (in Latin Mansus)
a Mansion house, from the French word Maison, i. e. a house, or as some say
from Meix, i. e. a Mansion, also Mease, or Mese, is used for a measure of
Herrings, consisting of 500. Measandue, an Hospital, from the French Maison de
Dieu. Mead, a Province of Ireland, containing these following Counties,
Eastmeath, Westmeath, and Longford. Mecaen^s, a learned Nobleman of Rome, who
lived in the time of Augustus, he was a great favourer of Virgil and Horace,
whence every favourer of learning, and learned men has been ever since saluted
with the Title of Mecaenas. Mecha, a City in Arabia Foelix, which is had in
great reverence by the Turks, as being the place where Mahomet was buried.
Mechanic Arts, or Handycrafts those Arts, which require the labor of the
hand, of which these seven are esteemed the chief; Agriculture, Clothing,
Navigation, Hunting, Architecture, Medecin, Military Discipline: the word
comes from the Greek, M^chane, an artifice, or invention. Mechation, (lat.) a
committing fornication, or whoredom. A Medal, (French) a kind of ancient coin,
or piece of plate, having stamped upon it the effigies of some Prince, or other
eminent man. Medea, see Jason. Medewife, (Sax.) a woman of merit. Media, a
large Country in Asia, so called from Madai the son of Japheth, or Medus the
son of Aegeus and Medea, it is divided into the greater Media, whose chief
City is Ecbatana, and the lesser called also Atropatia. Mediastine, from the
Latin Mediastinus, is a drudge, or Kitchen slave, from Mediastinum it signifies
that partition made by certain thin skins, dividing the whole breast into two
hollow bosoms. Mediation, (lat.) a dividing into two, also a making suit, or
means for any one, whence Mediator, an intercessour. Medicable, (lat.) able to
heal, also easy to be healed, or cured. Medicament, (lat.) a Medecin, or
Physical drugge. Medication, (lat.) a curing, or healing. Medietas linguae, an
inquest empanell'd upon any cause, whereof one part consists of Denizens, the
other of strangers. Mediety, (lat.) the half, or middle. Medimne, (lat.) a
certain measure, containing six bushels. Mediocrity, (lat.) a mean, a middle
temper, and indifferency. Mediolanum, the chief City of that part of Italy,
formerly called Gallia Cisalpina, it was first built by the Gauls, who as they
were digging in the earth, finding a sow half covered with wool like a sheep,
called the City Mediolanum, vulgarly Millain, and the whole Country
afterward being Conquered by the Lombards, was thence named Lombardy.
Medisance, (French) evil speaking, obloquy, or reproach. Meditation, (lat.) a
studying, or devising. Mediterranean, (lat.) being in the middle of the earth,
or land, whence the Mediterranean Sea is that Sea, which has its course in the
midst of the earth. Medrinacles, a kind of course Canvas, called also
Pouledavies. Medullar, (lat.) belonging to the marrow. Medusa, the daughter of
Phorcys, with whose golden hair Neptune was so much in love, that he lay with
her in the Temple of Minerva, and begat Pegasus, at which the goddess being
incenced, turned her hairs into Serpents, whose sight converted all that looked
on them into stone, but at length Perseus finding the Serpents asleep, killed
them, and cut off Medusa's head. Meed, (old word) merit, or reward. Mien,
(French) the countenance, or posture of the face, also the outward Garb. Mere,
in Common Law, has been used for mere right. Mees, (Saxon) Meadows. Megabysus,
one of the Persian Nobles, who in the behalf of Darius overthrew the Tyranny of
the Magi, in Europe he took Perinthus, overcame the Paeones, and attempted
Macedonia. Megaclo, the daughter of Macares, King of the Lesbians, who being of
a froward disposition, and always contending with his wife, Megaclo was so
grieved at her mothers calamity, that she hired the Muses to be her maids, and
teaching them to sing, they by the sweetness of their Music, so allayed the
spirit of Megares, that his wife ever after lived a better life with him, for
which benefit to her, she in thankfulness built pillars of brass to their
glory, and caused them to be honored in all the Temples thereabout. Megacosme,
(Greek) the great world. Megaera, the name of one of the three Furies, the
other two being Alecto, and Tisiphone. Megalesian games, were certain games
celebrated in ancient times at Rome, in honor of Cybele, or the great
goddess. Megalopsychie, (Greek) Magnanimity, or greatness of mind. Megara,
the daughter of Creon, King of Thebes, she was given in marriage to Hercules,
upon condition that he should free the Thebans from the oppression of Erginus,
King of the Orchomenii, which he performed, but Juno being highly incenc't
against him for killing Lycus, possessed him with such a madness that he slew
his wife Megara, and all the Children he had by her. Megrim, a distemper which
causes a great pain in the temples and fore part of the head; the word seems
to be contracted from the Greek word Hemicrania. Meire, a term in Blazon. See
Varry Cuppy. Melampod, (in Greek Melampodium) a certain kind of herb, otherwise
called Hellebore. Melampus, the son of Amythaon and Dorippe, who laying him
abroad in the Sun and covering all his body except his feet, they were so
scorched by the Sun, that they became black, whence he was called Melampus, i.
Blackfoot. He was a famous Physician and understood the voices of birds and
beasts, he cured the daughters of Praetus of their madness, one of whom named
Iphianassa he married. Melancholic, (Greek) sad, pensive, troubled with
melancholy, i. e. black choler, one of the 4 humors of the body, also a
distemper caused by the abounding of that humor. Melantho, the daughter of
Proteus, who had a humor to ride upon a Dolphins back up and down the Sea,
which Neptune observing turned himself into a Dolphin, and carrying her to
shore upon his back, ravished her and begot Amycus. Melanthus, the son of
Andropompis, he being a Messenian was driven out of his Country by the
Heraclidae; he went and helped the Athenians against the Boeotians, and killed
their Captain Xanthus; for which he was chosen King of the Athenians in the
place of Thymoetes. Melborn, a Castle in Darbyshire, where John Duke of Barbon,
taken prisoner at Agincourt, was detained prisoner 19 years under the custody
of Sir Nicholas de Mountgomery the younger. Melchior, the name of one of the
Magi, or Wise men of the East who offered gifts to our Savior; He offered Gold
as to a King, the second called Jasper frankincense as unto God, the third
called Balthazar Myrrh as to one that was to die; also the name of a great
Heretic, the founder of that sect called the Melchiorists. Melchites, a sort
of Christians in Syria, subject to the Patriarch of Antioch, they are so called
from Melchi, which in the Syriack tongue signifies a King, because they used to
follow the Emperors injunctions in matters of Religion. Melicent, (French)
honey-sweet, a Christian name of women. Meleager, the son of Oeneus King of
Calidonia, and Althaea, he gathered a company of valiant youths together to
slay a wild Bore that wasted the Country of Aetolia, and having slain it,
presented the head to Atalanta the daughter of Jasius King of Argos, which
Plexippus and Tox^us the brothers of Althaea endeavoring to take away, he slew
them both, and married Atalanta, but Althaea enraged at the death of her
brothers, threw the brand into the fire which she had saved from the Destinies
when he was borne, which as it burnt, he consumed away. Melimele, see Pome
Paradise. Melioration, (lat.) a making better, an improving. Melissa, see
Mellona. Mellation, (lat.) the driving away of the Bees, and taking the honey
out of the Hives. Mellification, (lat.) a making Honey. Melli^^uous, (lat.)
flowing with Honey, full of sweetness. Melliloquent, (lat.) speaking sweetly,
as it were speaking Honey. Mellilote, or Melilote, a certain herb, bearing
round leaves with slender branches, from the Greek word meli, i. honey, and
Lotus the Lote-tree, as it were, the Lote bearing honey. Mellona, a certain
goddess worshipped by the ancient Romans, as the Patroness of Bees, perhaps the
same with Melissa who first found out the use of Honey, whom the Poets feign to
have been turned into a Be; she was the daughter of Melissus King of Creet,
and the sister of Amalthea, the Nurse of Jupiter. Melody, a musical sound, or
sweet air, from the Greek words, meli, i. honey, and ode, i. a song, as it
were a honey'd or sweet song. Melpomene, the name of one of the nine Muses, the
first inventresse of Tragedies. Membrane, (lat.) a certain little thin skin
which covers every part of the body, also a skin of parchment, also the pill
between the bark and the tree. Memnon, the son of Tithonus and Aurora, and
brother of Laomedon, he was slain by Achilles in the Trojan War, and his body
being burnt, it is reported that there flew out certain Birds, which are thence
called Memnonian Birds, who are said every year to come out of Aethi^pia to
visit the Tomb of Memnon. Memorandum, (lat.) a short note or token for the
better remembrance of any thing, or as we commonly say, an I^em. Memorable,
(lat.) easy to be remembered, worthy of remembrance. Memorial, (lat.) a
remembrancer, or that which puts one in mind of any thing. Memphis, the chief
City of Egypt, built by Ogdous, and called after his daughters name, and from
whence the Egyptians are anciently named Memphians; it is now vulgarly called
Alcairo. Menalippus, a Theban, who having given Tydeus a mortal wound, was
slain by the friends of Tydeus, who causing Menalippus his head to be brought
to him, tore it in pieces for revenge, and immediately after died.
Mendaciloquent, (lat.) speaking false, telling lies. Mendication, (lat.) a
begging, whence a Friar Mendicant is one that goes up and down begging alms.
Menelaus, the son of Atreus and Aerope, he marrying Helena the daughter of
Jupiter and Leda, she was in his absence stolen away by Paris the son of
Priam, which was the occasion of the Trojan war, wherein after 9 years siege
Troy was destroyed, and Helena recovered. Menestheus, the son of Peleus, he
with the help of the Tyndaridae raising a sedition against Theseus, became King
of the Athenia^^, but going to the siege of Troy he there died. Menial or
Moenial servant, one that lives within the walls of his masters house, from the
Latin word Moenia, i. walls, or from the old word Meny, which significes a
Family. Meninges, (Greek) two thin skins which enwrap the brain, the one called
dura matter next to the skull, the other pia matter, which immediately covers
the brain. Meniver, a kind of Fur, being as some think, the skin of a Squirrels
belly, or as others say, of a little white beast, (like to a wesel) breeding in
Muscovy. Mennow, (from the French word Menu, i. small) a little fish, otherwise
called a Cackrel, in Latin Minimus. Menoecus, a Theban youth, the son of Creon,
he was so zealous for the safety of his Country, that when the Oracle had
foretold that the City, which was besieged by the Argives, could not be saved
unless the last of the race of Cadmus would voluntarily kill himself, he slew
himself with his own sword. Mensal, (lat.) belonging to a table. Mension,
(lat.) a measuring. Menstruosity, (lat.) the abounding of women's monthly
flowers. Mensuration, (lat.) the same as Mension, or measuring. Mental, (lat.)
kept in the mind, whence mental reservation, a speaking something, and
concealing the rest. Menteith, the name of a Country in the south part of
Scotland. Mentition, (lat.) a lying, or forging tales. Mera, the daughter of
Praetus and Antia, she being a great Huntresse and following Diana in the
Woods, was ravished by Jupiter, who lay with her in the shape of Diana,
whereupon the goddess shot her to death with one of her arrows, and afterward
turning her into a dog, she placed her among the heavenly Constellations; also
the name of Icarius his dog. See Icarius. Meracity, (lat.) a being pure and
without mixture. Menker, the jaw of the Whale. Meraud, the Christian name of
diverse women, from the precious stone called the Emerauld. Mercature, (lat.) a
buying, trading, or merchandising. Mercedary, (lat.) hired with reward or
wages. Mercenary, (lat.) the same. Merch, the name of a Country in the south
part of Scotland. Merchenlage, the law of the Mercians, or the inhabitants of
these eight Countries, Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick, Oxford,
Chester, Salop, and Stafford, the Land being formerly divided into three parts;
the Mercians, the West Saxons, and the Danes. See Denelage. Mercury, as it were
Medius currens inter Deos and homines, i. e. sent on messages between the gods
and men, the son of Jupiter and Maia the daughter of Atlas, he lay with his
sister Venus and begat Hermaphroditus, he was counted the god of Eloquence, of
Merchandry, of Handycrafts-men, and the first inventour of the Harp, also
among Astronomers the name of one of the seven Planets; among Chemists of
Quicksilver. Mercurial, or Mercurialist, one born under the Planet Mercury.
Meretricious, (lat.) belonging to a Whore. Meridian, (lat.) belonging to noon,
also substantively used for one of the greater circles dividing the Sphere into
two equal parts, and passing through the Poles of the World, and the Zenith or
Vertical point. Meridiation, (lat.) a sleeping at noon. Meritot, a kind of
play used by Children, wherein they swing themselves up and down upon a Rope,
to which is tied a little beam, acrosse which they sit, it is called in Latin
Oscillum. Meremaid, or Maremaid. See Siren. Mern, a County in the North of
Scotland, the people whereof were anciently called Vernicones, by some
Vecturiones. Meroe, an Island encompass't with the River Nilus, in which there
is a City of the same name, built by Cambyses, whose sister was called Meroe,
from wence the City and Island took their denomination, this City Astronomers
make to be the farthest of the Northern Climats, whose parallel-line they call
Dia Meroes, because it runs through the midst of the City. Merope, one of the
seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, they were feigned by the Poets to be
changed into seven stars, called the Pleiades. Merrick, a proper name of a man,
among the ancient Britains, in Latin Meuricus. Mersion, (lat.) a ducking, or
plunging over head and ears into the water, a drowning. M^rton, a Town in
Surrey, where Kinalph, King of the West Saxons was slain by a Clito, or Prince
of the blood, in a Harlots house, the Clito himself being also stabbed
immediately by Kinulphs followers: in this place was born Walter de Merton,
founder of Merton College in Oxford. Mese, see Mease. Mesel, (Sax.) a Leaper.
Mesentery, (Greek as it were, the middle of the entrails) a certain thick, and
double skin that fastneth the bowels, or entrails to the back, and affords
passage to a number of veins, called the Mesenterick, or Meseraick veins.
Meskite, a Church, or Synagogue among the Turks and Moors, from the Arabic
word Mezquidun, i. an Oration. Mesnagerie, (French) husbandry, or housewifery.
Mesnalty, a Term in Common Law, the right of the Mes^, that is, a Lord of a
Manor, who has Tenants holding of him, yet holding himself of a Superior
Lord, from the French word Maisne, i. e. younger by birth. Mesopotamia, a large
Country of Asia; so called because it is between the two Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates, it was called by the ancient Hebrews Aram Naharaim, i. e. Syria of
the Rivers, now Apamia, and by some Adiabene. Messagry, (old word) diligence in
doing a message. Messalians, a Sect of Heretics, who held the Lords Supper,
and baptism to be but of indifferent concernment. Messana, the chief City of
Sicilie, built by the Messenians, near unto the Promontory of Pelorum.
Messapia, or Mesapia, a Country of Italy, anciently so called from Messapus,
the son of Neptune, it contains those Regions which are now called Calabria,
and Apulia. Messenae, a famous City in Greece, situate in the Peloponnesus,
whose ancient inhabitants the Messenii, waged a long and bloody war with the
Spartans, but at last were reduced to absolute slavery. Messiah, the same in
Hebrew as Christos in Greek, i. anointed, and is often used in the Holy
Scriptures for our Savior Christ. Messorious, (lat.) belonging to mowing,
reaping, or harvest. Mesuage, in Common Law, is used for a dwelling house, with
Garden, Courtilage, Orchard, and all other things belonging to it.
Metachronisme, (Greek) an error in Chronology by the mis-reckoning of time, or
the ill connection of passages, a word compounded of the Greek preposition Meta
and Chronos, i. time. Metaleptick, (Greek) belonging to the figure Metalepsie,
wherein one thing is used to signify another. Metalline, (lat.) belonging to
metals. Metamorphosis, (Greek) a changing of one body, or figure into another.
A Metaphor, (Greek) a certain figure, wherein one word is borrowed to express
the signification of another, as smiling Meadow's, youthful Summer.
Metaphysics, (Greek) a science, which treats of supernatural things, as God,
Angels, the Souls of men, etc. Metaplasmus, (Greek) a Rhetorical figure,
wherein words, or letters are placed contrary to their usual order. Metaris, an
arm of the Sea in Lincolnshire, commonly called Maltraith, and the Washes.
Metathesis, (Greek) transposition, being a certain figure wherein one letter is
put for another. Metellus, a famous Roman Captain, who being to go by Sea, with
a great Army against the Carthaginians and Sicilians, prayed to all the gods
but Vesta, who being thereby offended, kept back the Navy with contrary winds,
which Caius Julius the Priest affirmed could not be diverted, but by the
sacrificing of his daughter Metella, which he yielding unto, the goddess took
compassion of the Virgin, and sent a Heifer in her stead, also the name of a
High Priest of the Romans, who when the Temple of Vesta was on fire, running
into the Palladium out of the flame, he lost his sight by venturing too far
into the fire. Metempsychosis, (Greek) a Transmigration, or passing of the Soul
out of one body into another. Meteor, (from the Greek word Meteoros, i. high) a
certain imperfectly mixed body, consisting of vapors drawn up into the middle
Region, whereof are engendered Rain, Winds, Thunder, and Lightning.
Meteorologie, (Greek) a discourse of Meteors. Meteoroscopie, that part of
Astrology, which handles the difference of Sublimities, and distance of Stars.
Metheglin, (in latin Mulsum) a kind of drink made of Herbs, Honey, Spice, etc.
Methodical, (Greek) belonging to a Method, i. an orderly, or artificial
disposing, or placing of things. Metiochus, the son of Alcibiades, he being
taken by the Phaenicians, and brought a prisoner to Darius the King of Persia,
against whom his father then made war, was yet honorably received, the King
bestowing upon him large possessions, and a wife named Persiba, by whom he had
many Children. Metius Suffetius, Dictator of the Albans, who being bound by
Covenant to aid Tullus Hostilius, King of the Romans, against the Fidenates,
stood with his Army upon a Hill, to see the event of the battle, for which he
was by the command of Hostilius, torn in pieces with wild horses. Metonymie,
(Greek) a Rhetorical figure, wherein there is a changing of one name for
another, as of the cause for the effects, of the subject, for the adjuncts, and
contrarily. Metope, (a Term in Architecture) the distance of space in a pillar,
between the Denticles and Triglyph's. Metoposcopy, (Greek) the guessing at men's
inclinations, as also the future events of men, by looking on their faces.
Metrical, (lat.) belonging to Meeter, or verse. Metropolitan, belonging to a
Metropolis, (Greek) i. the chief City of a Country, or Province, whence an
Archbishop is called a Metropolitan Bishop, because his Sea is always in the
chief City. Mexico, a great and famous City of the Mexican Province in Nova
Hispania, the City was the chief seat of Montezeuma, who was Lord of the new
world. Mezentius, a King of the Thuscans, who with his son Lausus, assisting
Turnus in the war against Aeneas, and the Trojans, they both fell by the hand
of Aeneas himself.
M I
Miagrus, the God of flies, so called by Plautus, by others Myopes. Miasme,
(Greek) a polluting, or defiling. Michael, (Hebr.) who is like God. St.
Michaels Mount, a Rocky cliffe, or Promontory in Corn-wall, which John, Earl
of Oxford fortified against King Edward the fourth, there is also a place so
called in Normandy. Miche, to play the Truant, or hide ones self out of the
way, from the French word Muser, i. to be idle, or the Dutch Micke, i. a wary
looking about. Mickle, much, from the Saxon word Micel, or as some say from the
Greek word Megale. Microcosme, (Greek) the body of man is commonly so called,
being as it were a little world, see Macrocosme. Micrologie, (Greek) a
discoursing about petty small affairs. Microscope, (Greek) a certain instrument
whereby the full proportion of the smallest things may be discerned. Midas, a
King of Phrygia, the son of Gordias a Cowheard, he having entertained Bacchus,
and being bid to ask of him what ever he had a mind to, he desired that
whatsoever he touched* might be turned into gold, which desire was immediately
granted, and not only every thing else he touched, but his meat also, before
he could bring it to his mouth, was changed to gold, whereupon he being forced
to request that he might be freed from that gift he was counseled to wash
himself in Pactolus streams, which immediately became very bright with the
glistering of the sands which were turned into gold, afterward Pan having
challenged Apollo to a music duel; Tmolus being chosen Judge, Midas being the
only man that gave the victory to Pan, was adjudged for his ignorance to have
Asses ears grow to his head, which disgrace nevertheless had been concealed,
had not his Barber gone into a hollow place of the earth, and cried out Midas
has Asses ears, and soon after the reeds which grew in that place became
vocal, and continually uttered the same words. Middleburgh, the chief City of
Zealand. Midriffe, see Diaphragme. Migration, (lat.) a removing, or passing
from place to place. Mile, such a space of ground in length only, as
contains a thousand paces, or eight furlongs, every furlong containing 125
paces. Miles, the proper name of a man, in Latin Milo, from the grain called
Milium, i. Millet, others make it a contraction from Michael. Miletus, the
chief Ci^ie of Ionia, whose inhabitants the Milesii were accounted the
potentest, and the richest people of all Asia; it was originally called
Anactoria, now Melazzo, also a City of Caria, built by Miletus the son of
Apollo and Arg^a, or as some say, by Sarpendon the son of Jupiter, and the
brother of Minos, and Rhadamanthus. Milfordhaven, a very commodious Haven in
Pembroke-shire, where Henry Earl of Richmond landed, when by that famous
battle at Bosworth, he won the Crown from Richard the third, this Haven has
sixteen Creeks, five Bay's, and thirteen Rodes. Military, (lat.) belonging to
Soldiers or War. Millefoile* (in Lat. Millefolium) a kind of Herb, otherwise
called yarrow. Millenarians, see Chiliasts. Millet, in Latin Milium, in Greek
Cenchros) a kind of plant, so called from the multitude of small granes, or
seeds which it bears. Milo, a certain Crotonian of that vast strength, that
at the Olympic games he carried an Ox the space of a whole furlong, killed it
with his fist, and afterward eat it all himself in one day. Miltiades, a great
Captain of the Athenians, who with 11000 Greeks overthrew 600000 Persians in
the fields of Marathon, yet afterward being accused of bribery, he was forced
by the Athenians to die in Chains. A Mime, or Mimick, (Greek) a Jester, or one
that counterfeits the gestures, or countenances of others, whence Mimical,
Apish, or given to imitate. Minacity, (lat.) a menacing, or threatening.
Minchings, an ancient word for those consecrated, whom we call Nuns. Mindbruch,
(a Saxon word) a hurting of honor and worship. Mine, (French) the same as
mien, the aspect, or garb of any person. Cleop. Mineralist, one skillful in
minerals, (lat.) i. metals, or any thing growing in mines. Minerva, the
goddess of wisdom, she is said to have been born without a mother, and to have
sprung out of Jupiters head, she is reported also to have invented the liberal
sciences, and to have found out the use of wool, about which a Lydian Virgin
named Arachne, contesting with her, was overthrown and turned into a Spider,
also to her is attributed the first finding out of the use of Oil, she was
called in Greek Athenaea, and from her the City of Athens took its
denomination. Miniature, a drawing of pictures in little, which is many times
done with Minium, i. red lead. A Minime, a certain quantity in music,
containing one time up, or down, from the Latin word Minimus, i. least, also
Minime friars, are a certain order instituted by Fran. de Paul. A Minion, or
Mignon, (French) one that is in highest credit and esteem with a great person,
above any one besides, but especially in an amorous sense, it is also used
adjectively for neat, spruice, polisht, or adorned. Minious, (lat.) of a red,
or Vermilion color. Ministry, (lat.) service, or charge in any employment,
but used more especially in a spiritual sense for the Priestly function.
Miniver, see Meniv^r. The Minor, in a syllogism the latter part, or
assumption. Minoration, (lat.) a diminishing, or making less. Minority, (lat.)
nonage, or being under age. Minos, a King of Creet the son of Jupiter, (or as
some say, of Xanthus) and Europa, he having great wars with the Athenians and
Megareans, because they slew his son Androgeus, had Megara delivered to him by
the treachery of Scylla; he entertained Daedalus an Athenian being banished from
his Country, who being an excellent Artist, made that famous Labyrinth into
which the Minotaur was put; But afterward for making a wooden Heifer into
which Pasiphae the wife of Minos being included, received the Bull again, by
which she had formerly had the Minotaur, he was shut up into the Labyrinth
himself, together with his son Icarus; but he making waxen wings for himself
and his son, fled away into Sicily, where he was stifled in a Bath by the
daughter of King Crocalus, his son having melted his wings by the way, and
fallen into the Sea, which was thence called the Icarian Sea. Minotaurus, the
Monster which Pasiphae the wife of Minos brought forth, having had carnal
copulation with a Bull, it had partly the form of a man, partly of a Bull: to
this Monster the Athenians overcome by Minos, were bound by covenant to sent
yearly seven of their noblest youths to be devoured; but in the third year
Theseus the son of Aegeus was sent to slay the Minotaur, which having done, he
escaped with the help of Ariadne out of the Labyrinth by a clew of thread.
Minouery, (from the French word Mainovre, i. handiwork) is a trespass
committed by a man's handiwork in the Forest, as an engine to catch Dear, etc.
Minster, a Saxon word, signifying a Monastery. Mint, a certain herb, so called
from Minthe the daughter of Cocytus, who being taken away with Proserpina by
Pluto, was changed into a plant of the same name, also the place where the
Kings coin is formed, which at present is at the Tower of London, but in
ancient times it was at Caleis. Minute, (lat.) little, small, whence Minution,
a diminishing, or making little, also a Minute is substantively used for a
moment or the smallest part of time. Mirabile, (lat.) wonderful, strange, to be
admired. Miraculous, (lat.) the same. Mirmillions, (lat.) a sort of gladiators
or sword-fighters. Mirour, or Mirror, (French) a looking-glass. Misanthropy,
(Greek) a man-hateing, a flying the company of men. Mirach, the Girdle of
Adromeday. Misaventure, in Common Law, is the killing of a man, partly by
negligence, and partly by chance, as by throwing a stone carelessely, shooting
an arrow, or the like. Misbode, (old word) wrong. Miscellanies, (lat.) a
mixture of several things together, a collection of diverse notions treating of
different matters. Miscreant, (French) an Infidel, or unbeliever. Mise, a
French word, signifying in an action of right or property, the point whereupon
the parties proceed to trial, either by Assize or Battle, as issue is in an
action personal. Misericordia, in Common Law, is an arbitrary punishment, very
moderate, and rather less than the offense. Miskenning, is a changing of
speech in Court. The Misne, or Misen-sail of a Ship, is that which is between
the poop and the main-sail. Misogamy, (Greek) a hating or contempt of marriage.
Misoginy, (Greek) a hating of women. Misprision, (from the French word mespris)
signifies in Common Law, a neglect or oversight, as a misprision of Felony,
etc. is a neglect or light account had of Felony committed, by not revealing
it, when we know it to be committed. To Misqueam, (old word) to displease.
Missale, (lat.) a breviary or masse-book. Misseltoe, or Misseldin, (in Dutch
Mistel) a certain plant which grows not upon the ground, but upon other trees,
of which it is reported, that Thrushes eating the berries of this plant and
afterward sitting to roust all night, and shitting upon it, causes it to bear
bird-lime, whence comes the Proverb, The Thrush shits her own sorrow. Missile,
(lat.) a dart or arrow, also a term in Heraldry, being a mixture of several
colors together. Mission, (lat.) a sending, it is also taken peculiarly for a
power given by the Church of Rome, to go into other Countries and preach the
Catholic Faith, and those that are thus sent, are called Missionaries, or
fathers of the Mission. A letter Missive, (lat.) a letter which is sent from
one friend to another. Mister, (old word) need, want. Mystery, (French Mistier,
Latin Magisterium) a craft, trade, or occupation, but coming from Mysterium, it
signifies a secret or hidden business. Mithridates, a King of Pontus, who
spoke 22 Languages, he rebelling against the Romans was overcome by Sylla near
Dardanus, and afterward by Lucullus near Cyzicus, and flying to Tigranes King
of Armenia he renewed the war, but at length was totally overthrown by Pompey,
and besieged in his own Palace, where having in vain attempted to poison
himself, he assisted Gallus the Executioner (when his hand trembled) in the
murdering of himself. He was the first inventour of that excellent Antidote
against infection and poison, called from his own name Mithridate. Mitigation.
(lat.) a pacifying or asswaging. Mittins, (in French Mitains) certain winter
gloves made of cloth or furs. Mittimus, a Justice of peace his warrant to send
an offender to the Goal or prison. Mitylene, an ancient City of Lesbos, not
far from Methymna: from this City the whole Island now takes its denomination.
Mixen, (old word from Meoxe, i. dung) a dunghill. Mixture, (lat.) a mingling of
several things together. Mizmor, (Span.) a Dungeon.
M N
Mnemosyne, a certain Nymph who being got with child by Jupiter, brought forth
the nine Muses; the word signifies in Greek memory. Mnesteus, see Menesteus.
M O
Mobbi, a certain drink made of Potato roots, much used in the Island of
Barbado's. Mobility, (lat.) moveablenesse, inconstancy. Modality, (lat.) a
School-term, signifying the manner of a thing in the abstract. Modder, (from
the Dutch word Modde or Moddekin, i. a Maid or Virgin) a young girl or wench.
Moderation, (lat.) temperance, government, discretion. Moderatour, (lat.) a
discreet governor, a decider of any controversy. Modern, (lat.) of late time.
Modicum, (lat.) a little matter, a small pittance. Modification, (lat.) a
qualifying, a setting a measure or limit to any thing. Modulation, (lat.) an
exact singing, a keeping time and measure in singing. Mogontus, a certain
heathen god, worshipped by the ancient Britains in Northumberland, like as
Bellotucardus in Cumberland, and Andates in Essex. Moguntia, a City of Germany,
now called Mentz: the Archbishop of this place is one of the three spiritual
Electors of the Empire. Moiles, (in Latin Mallei) a kind of highsoaled-shooes
worn in ancient times by Kings and great persons. Moitie, (French) the half
part of any thing. Mokel, (Sax.) bigness. Molar, (lat.) belonging to a Mill,
whence the molar-teeth are those five most extreme teeth on either side of the
mouth both above and beneath, which are called Grinders. Molendinarius, (lat.)
belonging to a Mill. Molestation, (lat.) a vexing, a troubleing. Moliminous,
(lat.) requiring strength, force, stresse, or endeavor. Molition, (lat.) a
trying, endeavoring, or attempting. Mollification, (lat.) a making soft or
tender. Mollitude, (lat.) softness, tenderness, effeminatenesse. Mollock, or
Meore, (old word) dirt, dung, excrement. Molochite, see Malachite. Moly, a
certain herb of very great virtue, mentioned by Homer. Momus, a certain deity
among the Ancients, reputed the god of carping and reprehension, he is feigned
by the Poets to have been born of Nox and Somnus, and that his whole business
was to reprehend and carp at all the other gods. Mona, see Anglesey. Monachal,
(lat.) belonging to a Monk. Monarchy, (Greek) the government of a Commonwealth
by a Monarch or one man alone. Monas, (Greek) the number one. Monasterial,
(lat.) belonging to Monasteries, i. solitary places where Monks live: it comes
from the Greek word Monos, i. alone. A Mond, a ball of Gold, being one of the
Ensigns of an Emperor, who challenges a kind of right to the whole World.
Monedule, (lat.) a jackdaw. Monmouth, the chief Town of Monmouthshire, called
in the British tongue Mongwy, because it is seated at the confluence of the
Rivers Munow and Wye. This Town is famous for the birth of King Henry the
fifth, and of Geffry ap Arthur Bishop of Asaph, the compiler of the ancient
British Story. Month, (Sax. Monad, Dutch Maendt, from Maene, i. the Moon) the
space of 28 days, in which time the Moon compleateth her circle. There are
four sorts of months. First a month of Apparition, i. the space of 26 days
and 12 hours, wherein the Moon appears, the other three days being deducted
wherein it is obscured by the Sun. Secondly Medical or Decretorial, i. the
space of 26 days and 22 hours, Thirdly of Consecution or Progression, i. the
space of one conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and the other being 29 days
and a half. Fourthly of Peragration, i. the space of the Moons revolution from
any part of the Zodiac unto the same again, being 27 days and 8 hours.
Monger, or Manger, a Saxon word anciently used for a Merchant, whence
Woodmonger, etc. i. a Woodmerchant. Moniers, a word anciently used for
ministers of the Mint, coiners of money. Monition, (lat.) an admonishing, or
giving warning. Monkeshood, a kind of flower called in Latin Consolida Regalis.
Monoceros, (Greek) a Unicorn, or beast having but one horn. Monocular, (lat.)
having but one eye. Monodical, (Greek) belonging to Monody, i. a kind of
Funeral-song, wherein one sings alone. Monogamy, (Greek) a single marriage, a
having but one wife or one husband. Monogram, (Greek) a writing or sentence,
consisting of one line or verse. Monology, (Greek) a talking alone, a discourse
held by one man only. Monomachy, (Greek) a single combat, or fighting of one
couple only hand to hand. Monophagy, (Greek) an eating alone, or of one kind
of meat. Monopoly, (Greek) the engrossing of any saleable commodity by one man,
that no body can gain by them but himself. A Monops, (Greek) a kind of beast of
Paeonia, otherwise called a Bonasus, which voideth a kind of sharp and fiery
ordure deadly to whomsoever it lights upon. Monoptote, (Greek) a term in
Grammar, being a Noun that has but one Case. Monostick, (Greek) a sentence
consisting only of one single verse. A Monosyllable, (Greek) a word consisting
only of one syllable. Monothelites, (Greek) a sort of Heretics living in the
year 640, who held that there was but one will in Christ. Monstrosity, (lat.)
monstrousness, that which is beyond the ordinary course of nature. Montanists,
a sort of Heretics, so called from their first Author Montanus; they held that
the Holy Ghost was not given to the Apostles, but to themselves. Montanous,
(lat.) full of mountains, belonging to a mountain. Montchensy, a great surname
in Kent and Suffolk, styled in Latin records de Monte Canisio. Montefiasco, a
sort of rich wine made at Montefiascone a City in Italy. Montera, (Span.) a
kind of cap used by Hunters and Seamen. Monticulous, (lat.) full of Monticles,
i. little mountains or hillocks. Montivagous, (lat.) wandering up and down the
hills and mountains. Montfichet, a name of great note, styled in the Latin
records, de Monte Fixo. Montgomery, the chief City of Montgomeryshire, so named
from Roger de Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury who built the Castle. It is called
in Latin Mons Gomericus. Monument, (lat. from the verb M^nere, i. to admonish)
a memorial of any famous person or action, by Sepulcher, Statue, Pillar, or the
like. Monychus, the name of one of the Centaurs, whose strength was such, that
he could pull up the strongest trees by the roots, and use them instead of
darts. Monyma, the wife of King Mithridates, who when her husband was
overthrown, attempted to have strangled her self by tying her Diadem to her
neck, but the rope breaking, she cursed her Diadem, as being neither useful in
prosperity, nor adversity, and delivered her self up to an Eunuch to be slain.
To Moor a ship, a term in Navigation, to lay out her Anchors, as is most fit
for the Ship to ride by in that place where she is. Moorland, a part of
Staffordshire, so called from certain barren places thereabout which have been
anciently called Moors. To Moot, (from the French word Mot, i. a word, or the
Dutch ghe-moet, i. a meeting together) a term used in the Innes of Court, and
signifies to handle a case in Law, and those that handle these cases are
called Mootmen, who after 7 or 8 years study, are chosen Utterbaristers. Moral,
(lat.) pertaining to manners or civility, also the moral of a fable is used
substantively for the application of it to men's lives and manners; whence to
moralize, is to give the moral sense or interpretation of any thing. Moration,
(lat.) a tarrying or staying. Moravia, a Country of Germany, anciently called
Marcomannia, it is now joined to the Kingdom of Bohemia. Morbidezza, (Ital.)
tenderness, effeminacy. Morbi^ical, (lat.) causing sickness, bringing
diseases. Mordacity, (lat.) bitingnesse, sharpness, also bitterness of
speech, taunting terms. Mordication, (lat.) a biting or fastening the teeth deep
into any thing. Moresk work, (French) a kind of antic work in painting or
carving, wherein there is a wild resemblance of birds, beasts, trees, etc.
intermingled. Morgan, a proper name of a man, signifying in the ancient
British tongue, as much as Seaman. Morglay, (from the French words Mort, i.
death, and Glaive, i. a sword) a mortal or deadly sword. Moris, a proper name,
in Latin Mauritius, from Maurus a Moor. the most famous man of this name was
St. Morice, a Commander in the Theban Region, martyred for the Christian Faith
under Maximianus. Morigeration, (lat.) as it were a bearing manners, an
obeying, a yiedling obedience. Morion, (Ital.) a steel-cap or headpiece.
Morisco, (Span.) a Moor, also a kind of Dance which seems to be the same with
that which the Greeks call Pyrricha, we vulgarly call it the Morris Dance, as
it were the Moorish Dance. Morkin, (a term in Hunting) a Deer that dies by
mischance or sickness. Morling, or Mortling, the wool which is taken from the
skin of a dead sheep. Morology, (Greek) foolish speaking, talking like a fool.
Morosity, (lat.) peevishness, frowardness, waywardness. Morphew, a kind of
white scurfe upon the body, from the French word Mortfeu, i. dead fire, because
it looks like the white sparks that fall from a brand extinguished. Morpheus,
the minister of sleep, used also metaphorically for sleep it self. Morta, the
name of one of the three Destinies according to the Latins. See Parcae. Mortal,
(lat.) deadly, bringing death. Mort d' ancester, is a Writ that lies where a
man's father, mother, brother, or Uncle die seized of land, and a stranger
abateth or enters the land. Mortgage, (French) a pawn of land or goods, bound
for money borrowed to be the Creditours for ever, if the money be not repaied
at the time agreed on. Mortiferous, (lat.) bringing death. Mortification,
(lat.) as it were a making dead, a quelling or subduing, but it is peculiarly
used in Divinity for an humbling or bringing down the flesh by fasting and
prayer. A Mortise, (French) a term in Carpenters work, being a fastening a piece
of wood as it were by biting into another piece. Mortmain, (French) signifying
a dead hand) is in Common Law an Alienation of Lands, or Tenements to any
Corporation, or Fraternity, and their Successors with the License of the King
and the Lord of the Manor. Mortresse, a kind of made dish of meat consisting
of several ingredients. A Mortuarie, (lat.) a Funeral, a burying place, also a
gift left by a man at his death to his Parish in recompense of his Tithes not
duly paid in his life time. Mosaical, Musaique, or Musive work, a kind of
curious work in Architecture, consisting of small inlayed pieces of stone,
glass, sundry colored shells, or other materials. Moscovia, a large Country
of Europe, otherwise called Russia, bordering upon Tartary, it is governed by
the great Duke of Muscovie, called also Emperor of R^ssia. Moses, (Hebr.)
drawn up. A Mosque, the same as Meskite. A Mosstick, a word used in painting,
being a round stick about a yard long, which the Artist does rest upon when he
paints. Mot, or Motto, (French and Italian) an Emblem, Impresse, or devise, as
it were a a short sentence comprised in a word, also a certain note which
hunts-men wind on their horn. Motet, (French) a verse in Music, a stanza of a
song, also a short posie. Mouch, (old word) to eat up. Mougnon, (French) the
brawny part of the arm, also the brassel, or that part of a Coat of Armor,
which covers the Arms. Mound, q. Munimentum, a Fence, or Hedge. Mounster, a
Province in Ireland, containing these following Counties, Kerry, Desmond, Kork,
Waterford, Limmerick, Tipperary. Mountain of piety, a certain stock, or bank of
money, which used to be raised out of voluntary contributions, and treasured up
to be lent upon occasion to poor people, who were ruined by the usury and
extortion of the Jews. Mountebank, (from the Italian word Montimbanco, because
he monts upon some high bench or form) a Drugseller, or one that buys Drugs of
Apothecaries, and by much boasting of their virtues, sells them again for
choice Medecins. He is called in French Charlatan, from his great talking and
bragging. A Mow, (from the French Amas, i. ^ heap) a pile or stack of corn or
hay.
M U
Mucilaginous, or Mucculent, (lat.) full of snotty or slimy substance.
Mucidity, or Mucour, (lat.) mouldiness, hoarinesse, filthiness. A Muefor
Hawks, a kind of cage or aviary where Hawks are kept when they change their
feathers, it comes from the from the French word Muer, to change, whence that
place called the Mues near Charing-crosse came to be so called, it having been
anciently appointed for the keeping of the Kings Hawks. Mufti, the chief Priest
among the Turks, who is created by the Emperor himself. Mugwort, a kind of
herb, which being carried about a man, takes away weariness; it is called in
Latin Artemisia, from Artemisia the Queen of Caria, or from Artemis, i. Diana.
Mulato, (Span.) one whose father is a Blackmore, and his mother of another
nation or contrarily. Mulct, (lat.) a fine, penalty, or amerciament. Muleto,
(Ital.) a beast called a Moile or great Mule, made use of in some parts for the
carrying of Sumpters. Muliebrity, (lat.) womanishnesse, softness, effeminacy.
Mulier, in Common Law, is a word taken contradistinct to a bastard, as if a man
have a son by a woman before marriage, and then marrying the mother of that son
who is called a bastard, have another son, this second son is called Mulier,
and being compared together, they have this addition, Bastard eldest, and
Mulier youngest; but the most proper signification of Mulier is a woman that
has had the company of man. Mullar, (in French Mulleur) the upper stone
wherewith Painters use to grind their colors. Mullet, (in Latin Mullus) a kind
of fish called a Barbel, also a term in Heraldry, being like a spot falling
from above, and divided into five ends. Mulse, (lat.) a kind of wine mingled
with honey. Multifarious, (lat.) of diverse sorts, divided into many parts.
Multifidous, (lat.) having diverse slits, cleft into several parts.
Multiformity, (lat.) a having diverse forms, or shapes. Multiloquous, (lat.)
talking much, of many words. Multiparous, (lat.) bringing forth many young ones
at a birth. Multiplicious, (lat.) manifold, consisting of diverse ways or
things. Multiplication, (lat.) an increasing, a making much or many.
Multipotent, (lat.) having much power, able to do much. Multiscious, (lat.)
having much skill, or knowledge. Multisonant, (lat.) sounding much, making much
noise. Multivagant, (lat.) straying, or wandering much. Multure, in Common Law,
is a toll that a miller takes for grinding of corn. Mumme, a kind of Dutch
Beer made originally at Brunswick. Mummery, (French) a personating of any one
in a mask. Mummy, (lat.) a kind of pitchy substance arising from the moisture
which is sweat out of dead bodies that have been embalmed with diverse sorts of
spices, and is called in Greek Pissasphaltus. Muncerians, a sort of Anabaptists
that made a great insurrection in Germany, so called from their Ringleader
Muncer. Mundane, (lat.) worldly, belonging to the world. Mundification, (lat.)
a making clean, purging, or purifying. Muneration, (lat.) a recompencing, or
rewarding. Municipal, (lat.) enjoying a freedom, or the right of a free City.
Munificence, (lat.) bountifulness, liberality. Muniment, (lat.) a Fence or
Fortress, also a house of Strength where the Deeds or Plate of a College are
kept. Munite, (lat.) fenced, made strong. Munkseam, (a term in Navigation) a
kind of sowing the canvasses of sails the edge of the one over the edge of the
other. Murage, (lat.) a toll to be levied for the building or repairing of
public walls. Mural, (lat.) belonging to a wall. Mural Crown, a Crown which
among the ancient Romans was given to him who first scaled the walls of an
enemies City. Murder, in Common Law, is a wilful and felonious killing of any
man upon premeditated malice. Murengers, certain officers in Westchester that
look to the City walls. Muricide, (lat.) a mouse-killer, a cowardly fellow.
Muriel, the Christian name of diverse women, from the Greek Myron, i. sweet
ointment. Muring, a term in Architecture, the raising of walls. Murrain, (from
the Greek word Maraino) a kind of rot or consuming disease among cattle.
Murnival, (French) the number 4. Murray, a Country in the North part of
Scotland, called in Latin Moravia. A Murrey color, (from the Greek word
Maurus) a dusky, blackish, or dun color. Musach cassa, a certain chest in the
Temple of Jerusalem, wherein Kings were wont to cast their offerings. Musaph, a
certain book containing the Laws of the Turks. Muscadel wine, (French) a sort
of wine brought from the Island of Candy, having a sweet odor like to that of
Musk. Mus^hamp, a name formerly of great note in Northumberland, styled in
Latin records, de Musko Campo. Muscheto, a kind of Insect so called, somewhat
resembling a gnat. Mussack, a kind of drink, much in use among the Chinese.
Muscous, (lat.) mossy, or full of moss. Musculous, (lat.) belonging to, or
full of Muscles, i. certain organick parts of the body being of a fleshy and
tendinous substance, and interlac't with filaments and little veins and
arteries, and serving as the instruments of motion to every part. Musen, a term
among Hunters, is when a Stag or male Deer casts his head. Muses, the 9
daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, born in the Country of Pieria (whence they
are called Pierides) and inhabiting Helicon a hill of Boeotia, they were
accounted the goddesses of Music and Poetry, and the rest of the ingenuous
Arts and Sciences, their names were Calliope, Clio, Erato, Thalia, Melpomene,
Terpsichore, Euterpe, Polyhymnia, and Urania. Musive, see Mosaical. Musket, the
tassel or male of a sparrow-Hawk. Muskinne, a kind of bird otherwise called a
finch, in Latin fringillago. Musmon, the name of a certain beast resembling
partly a sheep, partly a goat. Mussitation, (lat.) a muttring or speaking
between the teeth Mussulmans, or Mulsulmans, an Arabic word, signifying a
people faithful in their Religion, being an attribute which the Turks or
Mahumetans arrogate to themselves. Must, (lat.) wine newly pressed from the
grape. Mustache, or Mustachio, (French from the Greek word Mystax) the beard of
the upper-lip. Mustaphis, certain Prophets or Learned men among the Turks.
Musteline, (lat.) belonging to a weasel. Mustriche, a Shoomakers last.
Mutability, (lat.) changeableness, inconstancy. Mutation, (lat.) a changing.
Mute, (lat.) dumb, speechless, also Mutes, used substantively for those
consonants which have no sound of a vowel before them; also certain
Executioners among the Turks appointed to strangle offenders, are called Mutes.
Also a Hawk is said to mute, not to dung. Mutilation, (lat.) a maiming or
curtailing of any thing. Q. Mutius, a stout Roman, who in the war with Porsenna
King of the Hetrurians went into the enemies Camp with an intent to have killed
the King; but being taken and threatened with extraordinary punishments, he
thrust his right hand into the fire and burnt it off, to show his contempt of
torments; whence he was called Scaevola, and telling Porsenna, that 300 youths
had in like manner conspired against him, he was so terrified that immediately
he made a peace with the Romans. Mutual, (lat.) passing between two,
interchangeable.
M Y
Myriad, (Greek) the number of ten thousand. Myrmidons, a certain people of
Thessaly, who went under the conduct of Achilles to the wars of Troy. They were
so called from Myrmidon an ancient King of Thessaly the son of Jupiter and the
Nymph Corymosa, or else from a certain Virgin called Myrmice, who for
contemning Ceres, was changed into an Ant, from which there springing up a
multitude of Ants, they were by the prayers of Aeacus, when Thessaly was almost
depopulated, changed into men. Myrobalanes, a sort of medicinal fruit, by some
called Egyptian acorns, of which there are five sorts, Bellerick, Chebule,
Citrine, Emblick, and Indian. Myropolist, (Greek) a seller of ointments or
sweet oiles. Myrrha, the daughter of Cynaras King of Cyprus, who by the help of
her Nurse coming to lie with her father, was got with child by him, and brought
forth Adonis the Paramour of Venus, but Cynaras afterward being sensible of
what was done, would have slain her with his sword, whereupon she fled into
Arabia Felix and was changed into a Tree of her own name, from which there
distilleth a sweet aromatic Gum called also Myrrh. Myrrhine, (lat.) belonging
to myrrh, made of myrrh. Myrsilus, the son of Myrsus, a King of Lydia, called
also Candaules the last of the race of the Heraclidae. See Candaules. Myrtilus,
the son of Mercury and Phaethusa, he was the Chariot-driver of Oenomaus, who
being to run a race with Pelops Myrtilus being promised a great reward,
loosened the axeltree so, that the Chariot being overturned Oenomaus fell out
and broke his neck, but before he died, he entreated Pelops to revenge his
death; whereupon when Myrtilus came to demand his reward, he was thrown into
that Sea which from thence was called Mare Myrtoum, now Mar de Mandria. Myrtle,
a kind of low tree which bears a little blackish leaf of a very fragrant
scent, and grows only in hot Countries; this tree was by the ancients
acounted sacred to Venus. Mysia, a Country of Asia the Less, anciently divided
into Higher Mysia and Lower Mysia, it contains those Countries which are now
called Servia, Bulgaria, and Wallachia. Mystagogical, (Greek) belonging to a
Mystagogue, i. e. he that interprets Divine mysteries or ceremonies, also he
that has the keeping of Church relics, and showing them to strangers.
Mysteriarch, (Greek) a chief overseer of sacred mysteries. Mystical, (Greek)
mysterious, secret, hidden. Mithology, (Greek) a discourse and exposition of
fables.
N A
NAam (from the Dutch word Memmen, i. to nim or take hold on) in Common Law is
the taking of another moveable goods, which if it be by reasonable distress
proportionable to the value of the thing distrained for, it is called lawful
Naam. Nacre, (French) mother of pearl. Nadir, an Arabic word often used in
Astronomy, signifying that point of heaven directly under our feet, and
opposite to the Zenith. Naenia, (lat.) Funeral-songs, Funeral-prayers or
praises. Naiades, the Nimphs of Rivers and Fountains, from the Greek word Nao,
i. to flow. Naiant, (French) swimming or floating, a term in Heraldry. Naif,
(French) a term in Jewelling and is spoken of a Diamond or other Stone, which
looks quick and natural, and has all its properties as in water, cleanness,
etc. Nantwich, a Town in Cheshire, famous for the pits of brine or salt water,
which are called Wiches; it was named by the ancient Britains Hellath Wen, i.
the white Which or Salt pit; and by Latin Writers Vicus Malbanus, perhaps from
one William Malbedeng or Malbanc, anciently Lord thereof. Napaeae, the Nimphs
of the woods and mountains, from the Greek word Nape, i. a wood. Napthe, (lat.)
a kind of sulphurous substance, called Median oil, or Babylonish bitumen.
Narcissus, a youth of great beauty, the son of Cephisus and Liriope, of whom
the Prophet Tyresias foretold that he should live so long as he should abstain
from beholding himself; he being beloved of many Nimphs and especially of Echo,
was insensible to all their loves, and at length coming to drink of a clear
Fountain, and beholding his image in the water, he fell in love with it, and
seeing no hopes of enjoying it, he pined away for grief and was changed into a
Flower of the same name, vulgarly called a white Daffadilly, and Echo seeing
her self despised likewise, pined away, and was changed into a voice. Also the
name of a Bishop of Jerusalem, who when oil was wanting at Divine service for
the Lamps, by his prayers turned water into oil. Narcotique, (Greek) of a
stupefying and benumming quality, whence diverse things which are used in
physic to that end, are called Narcotic Medicines. Nares, a term in Faulconry,
the holes in the Hawks beak. A Narration, or Narrative, (lat.) a report,
discourse, or relation of any thing. Narses, an Eunuch who being General of the
Emperor Justinians Army in Italy, after Belizarius performed very great
service against the Goths, but at last being affronted by Sophia the Empress,
he called in the Lombards into Italy. Nasicornous, a made word which signifies
having a horn upon the nose, from the Latin Nasus, i. a nose, and Cornu, i. a
horn. Natalitious, (lat.) belonging to ones nativity or birthday. Natation,
(lat.) a swimming. Nathaniel, a proper name, signifying in Hebr. the gift of
God. Nativity, (lat.) the birth, or first entrance into the World. Nativo
habendo, a Writ for the apprehending and restoring to a Lord his villain
claimed as his inheritance, who in Common Law is called Nief. Naturalist,
(lat.) one that understands natural causes, a natural Philosopher.
Naturalization, (lat.) an admitting of strangers into the number of Natural
Subjects. Naval, (lat.) belonging to a Ship or Navy. To Naucifie, (lat.) to set
at naught. The Nave of a wheel, the middle, or that part into which axeltree
is put. Naufrage, (lat.) shipwreck, loss at sea. See Wreck. Navicular, (lat.)
belonging to ships. Navigable, (lat.) passable by ships. Navigation, (lat.) a
sailing, also the Art of Seafaring, the knowledge of Sea-affairs. Navity,
(lat.) diligence, stirringnesse. Naulage, (French) the freight or passage money
for going over the Sea, or any River. Naumachy, (Greek) a fighting at sea, a
sea*battle. Nauplius, the son of Neptune and Amymone the daughter of Danaus, he
was King of Eubaea, and father of Palamedes, who being by the means of Ulysses
stoned to death, Nauplius in revenge made a great fire upon the Mountain
Caphareus, which the Greek Navy taking to be the light of some near Harbor,
sailed so near, that they were cast away upon the rocks. Nauseous, or
Nauseative, (lat.) going against ones stomach, making one ready to vomit.
Nausicae, the daughter of Alcinous and Arete, she going out of the City one
night with her maidservants to bath her, met with Ulysses who was shipwrack't
upon that shore and almost naked, whom she brought to her fathers Palace, gave
him cloths, and entertained him with a great deal of respect. Naustible, (lat.)
a Haven for ships. Nautical, or Nautic, (lat.) belonging to Mariners or to
Ships. Naxos, one of the Cyclades, Islands in the Aegean, anciently called
Strongyle and Dia; in this Island Ariadne being left by Theseus, married
Bacchus. Nazal, (French) the nose-piece of a Helmet. N^zarites, (Hebr.) a sort
of Jews who separated themselves from all others, and vowed themselves to God
for a certain time, in which they abstained from wine and suffered their hair
to grow, also the Disciples were called Nazarites, from Nazareth the place
where Christ was born.
N E
Neades, a certain kind of beast, whose bones are of a miraculous greatness.
Neaera, the name of a very fair Nymph, who being got with child by Phoebus,
brought forth two daughters, Lampetia and Phaethusa, who kept the flocks of
their father the Sun in Sicily, many of which were killed by the companions of
Ulysses, for which they were cast away at sea. Neale-too, in Navigation, is
when it is deep water close to the shore. Neapolis, the City of Naples situate
in Campania in Italy, upon the Mediterranean Seaside; it was built first of
all by the Citizens of Cuma and called Parthenope, from the name of one of the
Sirens who was there buried, afterward it was destroyed, then rebuilt and
called Neapolis, which in Greek signifies the new City; from this City the
Kingdom of Naples takes its denomination, containing all those Countries of
Italy which are called Campania, Apulia, Lucania, Magna Graecia, and part of
Latium. Neap-tides, those smaller tides which happen 7 days after the change,
and 7 days after the full of the Moon, whereas the greater tides which happen
7 days before the change and full, are called Spring-tides. Neat, (from the
Dutch Nieten, i. to but) an Ox, Cow, or Stear. Nebule, a term in Heraldry,
bearing a representation of the clouds. Nebulous, (lat.) misty, foggy, cloudy.
Necromancy, (Greek) a divination by calling up deceased bodies, also the black
art, or any kind of conjuration by dealing with the Devil, or evil spirits.
Nectarean, (Greek) pleasant, immortal; from Nectar, i. a certain pleasant drink
which the Poets faign to have been the drink of the Gods, and that whosoever
drunk of it would become immortal. Nefandous, (lat.) heinous, horrible, not to
be mentioned. Nefarious, (lat.) very wicked, abominable. Negative, (lat.)
denying, or gainsaying. Negative pregnant, in Common Law, is when a man being
impleaded to have done a thing upon such a day denies that he did it after the
manner and form declared. Negotiation, (lat.) a merchandising, trafficking, or
mannaging of affairs. Negro, (Ital.) a black-more. Neif, see Nativo habendo.
Nemoea, a certain woody Country of Achaia, between Cleonae and Phlius, here
it was that Hercules slew a Lion of a Monstrous bigness, which from the place
was called the Nemae^n Lion, in remembrance of which exploit he instituted
certain games, called also Nemaean games. Nemesis, the goddess of reward and
revenge, and the daughter of Jupiter and Necessity, she was also called
Adrastia and Rhamnusia, and placed by the Egyptians above the Moon. Nemoral,
or Nemorous, (lat.) belonging to woods, woody, shaded with trees. Nenuphar,
(Arab.) a certain flower commonly called a water-lilly. Neogamist, (Greek) one
newly married. Neophyte, (Greek) a plant newly set or planted, also
metaphorically one newly entered into any profession, or one newly converted to
the Faith. Neoterical, or Neoterique, (Greek) new or of a late time. Nepenthe,
a certain herb (mentioned by Pliny) which being put into wine, expeleth
sadness. Some think it to be the same with Buglosse. Nephglian Crookhorn, is
Aries. Nephritick, (Greek) troubled with a disease which causes a pain in the
reins of the back. Nepotation, (lat.) riotousnesse or luxury. Neptune, the son
of Saturn and Ops, in the division of the world among Saturns sons, the Empire
of the Sea fell to him by lot. Nereides, the Nimphs of the Sea, the daughters
of Nereus and Doris, among whom was Amphitrite the wife of Neptune. Domitius
Nero, one of the ancient Roman Emperors, who killed his mother Agrippina, his
wife Octavia, the Poet Lucan, and Seneca his master. Nerve, (lat.) a sinew,
also by metaphor, force, or strength of body. Nervosity, (lat.) a being full of
Nerves or Sinews, i. certain organick parts of the body, which cause strength
and motion; it is also metaphorically taken for strength or vigor. Nescious or
Nescient, (lat.) ignorant or not knowing. Nesh, (old word) tender. Nessus, one
of the Centaurs whom Ixion begat upon a cloud formed into the likeness of
Juno, he was slain by Hercules for attempting to ravish his wife Deianira.
Nestor, the son of Neleus and Chloris, he came with 50 ships along with the
Grecian Army to the wars of Troy, and was famous for his prudence and
eloquence, and the great age he lived to. Nestorians, a sort of Heretics, so
called from Nestorius, their first founder, their chief tenet was, that there
were two persons as well as two natures in Christ. Nettings, (a term in
Navigation) those small ropes which are ceased together with roap yarnes, in
the form of a Net with Mashes. Nevin, a Town in Caernarvonshire, where in the
year 1284. the Nobles of England triumphed over the Welsh with solemn Justs
and Tournaments, wherewith they celebrated the memory of King Arthur. Nevosity,
(lat.) fullness of Warts, or Moles. Neustria, a region of Gallia Celtica,
vulgarly called Westrich. Neutral, (lat.) indifferent inclining to neither
side. Newark, a pleasant Town, seated upon the River Trent in Nottinghamshire,
it is so called as it were, the new work, from a stately Castle, built in King
Stephens time, by Alexander Bishop of Lincoln. In this Town King John ended his
days. Newcastle, a noted Town in Northumberland, situate upon the River Tine,
which makes a very commodious Haven for ships: It derived this name from the
new Castle built by Robert son to William the Conqueror. Some think it to have
been that Town which was anciently called Gabrosentum. Newcolledge, a College
in the University of Oxford, built by William Wickam, Bishop of Winchester.
Newyears-gift, a gift presented to friends or great persons the first day of
January, a custom derived from the ancient Romans who used to offer Presents to
the Emperors in the Capitol though they were absent. In Italy it is the custom
for the greatest persons to give to the meanest, whereas here the meanest give
to the greatest. Nexible, (lat.) easy to be knit.
N I
Nias hawk, (a term in Faulconry) a Hawk newly taken out of the nest, and not
able to prey for her self; also metaphorically taken for a Novice. Nicaea, a
City of Bithynia, famous for the great Synod or Council which was kept there by
the appointment of Constantine the Great, consisting of 318 Bishops. Nicia, a
Christian name of women, in Greek Victorious. Nicias, an Athenian Captain, who
together with Demosthenes being sent against the Syracusians, was repulsed with
a very great overthrow by Gylippus the Lacedemonian who was sent to aid the
Syracusians. Niches, or Ni^es, a term in Architecture, the hollow places in a
wall wherein Statues or Images are set. Nicholas, (Greek) Victorious over the
people. Nicholaitans, a sort of Heretics who held it lawful to have their
wives in common, so called from Nicholas of Antioch, who was created by the
Apostles, one of the 7 Deacons. Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia, wherein
Constantine the Great died, having in his sickness been baptized by Eusebius
Bishop of this City, a maintainer of the Arrian Heresy; it was anciently built
by King Nicomedes, and is at this day called Nichor. Nicodemites, a sort of
Heretics in Switzerland, so called from their imitation of Nicodemus, who made
profession of his faith in private. Nicopolis, (as it were the City of Victory)
a City of Epirus, so called from the great Battle at Actium (which is near this
City) where Augustus overcame M. Antony and Cleopatra: It is now vulgarly
called Gallipoly. Nicostrata, the mother of Euander, she was otherwise called
Carmenta. Nicotian, a certain plant vulgarly called Tobacco, it was called
Nicotian from one I. Nicot, who first brought it from France into Portugal.
Nictation, (lat.) a twinkling with the eyes. Nidgeries, (French) trifles,
fooleries. Nidification, (lat.) a building of a birds nest. A Niding, an old
English word, signifying a base-hearted fellow, a coward. Nidisdale, a Country
in the south part of Scotland, q. the dale upon the River Nid. Nidulation,
(lat.) the same as Nidification. Nief, see Neif. Nightertaile, (Saxon) by
night. Nigrefaction, (lat.) a making black. Nihil dicit, in Common Law, is a
failing to put in an answer to the plea of the Plaintiff by the day assigned,
whereupon judgment passes against him as saying nothing. Nil, the sparkles
that fly from metals tried in a furnace: it is called in Greek Pompholyx or
Spodium. Nilling, (old word) unwilling. Nilus, a River running through the
midst of Egypt and Aethiopia, counted the chiefest and the father of all other
Rivers, and as some say, takes its name from Nilus an ancient King of Egypt.
This River is famous for overflowing the Country every year, and making the
soil fruitful, and for falling into the Sea within seven mouths in he figure of
a Greek D. Nimbiferous, (lat.) bringing tempests or stormy showers. Nimbot,
(French) a dandiprat, a dwarf. Nimious, (lat.) excessive, overmuch. Ninus, an
ancient King of the Assyrians the son of Jupiter Belus, he very much enlarged
the Assyrian Empire, overcame Barzanes King of the Armenians, Pharus King of
the Medes, Zoroaster the King of the Bactrians, the first inventour of Magic,
and Sabarius King of the Sagae, at length he was secretly made away by his wife
Semiramis, (whom he had taken from Menon the Prefect of Syria) who conspiring
against his life succeeded him in the Kingdom. Niobe, the daughter of Tantalus
and sister of Pelops, she was married to Amphion, and by him had 6 sons and 6
daughters, whom Juno prevailed with Apollo to kill with his Bow and Arrows,
because their mother had adventured to prefer her self above the goddess,
and Niobe her self while she was railing against Juno was carried by a
whirlewind into Asia, and there changed into a stone. Niphates, a Hill parting
Armenia the greater from Assyria, from this Hill the River Tigris springs.
Niseus, a Tyrant of Syracuse, who being admonish't by the Augurs that he had
but a short while to live, spent the remainder of his life in excess of
luxury, and revelling. Nisi prius, a Writ judicial that lies where the Enquest
is panelled and returned before the Justices of the bank, the one party, or the
other making petition to have this Writ for the ease of the Country. Nisus, a
King of the Megarenses, against whom war was made by Minos, a King of Crete, to
revenge the death of his son Androgeus, who was slain by the Megarenses and
Athenians, conspiring together; at length Megara was taken by the treachery of
Scylla, who for the love of Minos cut off her fathers purple Lock on which
depended the fate of his life and Kingdom, whereupon Nisus pined away for
grief, and was changed into a Hawk, and Scylla seeing her self despised of
Minos pined away also, and was changed into a Partridge. Nitidity, or Nitour,
(lat.) cleanness, gayness, brightness. Nitrous, (lat.) full of, or savouring
of Nitre, i. a kind of substance like unto Salt, somewhat spongy, and full of
holes, it a little resembles Salt peter, but is not the same as some suppose
it to be. Niveous, (lat.) snowy, white, like unto snow. Nixii, certain gods
among the Romans, who were said to be assisting to women in Childbirth. Nixus,
one of the heavenly constellations, resembling Hercules with his knee bent, and
endeavoring to strike at the Dragons head; it is also called Ingeniculum, in
Greek Engonasin.
N O
Nobilitation, (lat.) an enobling, or making noble. Noblesse, (French)
nobility, generosity, both of blood and of mind. Nocent, or Nocive, (lat.)
hurtful, injurious, or doing harm. Noctiferous, (lat.) bringing night, or
darkness. Noctivagant, (lat.) night-wandring, walking by night. Nocturnal,
(lat.) belonging to the night time, nightly; also a Nocturnal is substantively
taken for a night Dial. Nocturnes, certain Prayers, or Psalms, appointed by the
Church to be read in the night time. Nocument, (lat.) hurt, damage, or harm.
Nocuous, (lat.) harmfull, doing hurt. Nodinus, a certain God among the Romans,
being overseer of the knots and joints in the stalks of Corn. Nodous, (lat.)
full of knots, knobs, or joints. Noel, (French) the time of Christ's Nativity,
vulgarly called Christmas. Noli me tangere, a kind of Herb whose seed spurts
away as soon as it is touched; also a disease so called wherein the part
affected, the oftener it is touched the worse it grows. Nomades, a certain people
of Scythia Europaea, who are said to be descended from those that followed
Hercules in his expedition into Spain. Nomarchy, (Greek) a Mayralty, the
government of a City, or County. Nombreil, a Term in Heraldry, being the lower
part of an Escutcheon, the honor point being the uppermost part, the Fesse the
middle part, the word signifies in French a Navel. Nomenclator, (from the
Latin word Nomen, i. e. a name, and the Greek Cale^, i. e. to call) one that
calls things by their proper and significant ^ames, among the Romans there
were certain Officers, so called, who gave unto their Lord an account of the
names of all such as saluted him as they passed, they were also such as we call
the Criers of a Court. Nominal, (lat.) belonging to a name. Nominalia, (lat.)
certain festival days among the Romans wherein they gave names to their
Children, for Males it was the eighth day, for Females the ninth, which was
called dies lustricus. Nomination, (lat.) a naming, also in Common and
Canon Law, it is taken for a power that man has by virtue of a Manor, or
otherwise to appoint a Clark to a Patron of a benefice by him to be presented
to the ordinary. Nomographer, (Greek) a Writer of Laws. Nomothesie, (Greek) a
making, or publishing of Laws. Nonability, (a Term in Law) being an exception
taken against the Plaintiff, or Defendant, why he cannot Commence any suit in
Law. Nonacris, a Mountain of Arcadia, at the foot of which is the River Styx,
whose water is so cold that it cannot be contained in any other Vessel, but
only in the hoof of a Mule. Nona, the name of one of the three destinies among
the Latins, see Morta. Nonage, in Common Law, is the time of a man's, or woman's
being under age, see age. Non claim, is an exception against a man that
claims not within the time limited by the Law. Non compos mentis, or one that
is not in his right wits, signifies in Common Law; first, an Idiot born;
secondly, one that by accident loses his wits; thirdly, a Lunatic; fourthly,
a drunkard. Non est culpabilis, the general answer to an action of Trespass,
whereby the Defendant does deny the fact imputed unto him by the Plaintiff.
Non est factum, an answer to a Declaration whereby a man denies that to be his
deed whereupon he is impleaded. Non liquet, a Law-term, signifying it appears
not; a Verdict given by a Jury, when a matter is to be referred to another day
of Trial. Nonpareil, (French) Peerlesse, having no fellow, or Peer; also a Term
in printing, see Pareil. Non-pri^^^piate, (a made word compounded of non and
principium) not having a beginning. Non-residencie, the unlawful absence of a
beneficed man from his spiritual charge. Non sanae memoriae, an exception taken
to any act declared by the Plaintiff, or Defendant, as not being well in his
wits. Nonsuit, a renunciation of the suit by the Plaintiff, or Demandant when
the the matter is so far proceeded in as the Jury is ready to give their
Verdict. Non-Term, the time of Vacation between Term and Term, it was wont to
be called the days of the Kings peace. Nones of a month, are certain days
next following the Calends, or first day, in March, May, July, and October,
they are six days, in other months but four. None of a day, the third quarter
of the day, from noon till sun set. To stand at a Non plus, (lat.) to be able
to answer never a word, to have nothing more to, say. Nonupla, (a Term in
Music) being a very quick time, and peculiar to Jiggs. Noricum, a Country of
Germany, now called Bavaria it is divided from Vindelicia, by the River Aenus,
from the higher Pannonia, by the Mountain Cecius. Normal, (lat.) done exactly,
according to the rule, or square. Normannia, or Normandy, a Country of Gallia
Celtica; so called from the Normanni, a people anciently inhabiting Norwegia,
who in the time of Charles the Gross had this Country assigned them to dwell
in, it being formerly called Neustria, and the people were all baptized with
their Duke Rollo, whose name was changed into Robert. Northallerton, or
Northalverton, the chief Town of Northallertonshire, being a part of
Yorkshire, anciently so called, near this Town was fought that famous pitched
field, commonly called the battle of the Standard, where Ralph Bishop of
Durham overthrew David King of Scots, it was so called because the English
receiving the first onset of the Scots, kept themselves close together about
the Standard, which resembled the Caroccio, so much used by the Italians.
Northampton, the chief City of Northamptonshire, so called by contraction from
Northfandon, near this place was fought that bloody battle wherein King Henry
the sixth was taken prisoner, by Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick. Nostoch, is
taken by some for a certain kind of excrement, or polluted matter like to a
gelly, of an obscure red color dropping upon the earth from some luxuriant
Planet, or other Star. Norwegia, a Country of Europe, formerly a Kingdom by it
self; it is now called Norwey, and is under the Government of the Danes.
Norwich, the chief City of Northfolk, heretofore called Northwick, i.
Northerly Creek, Wick signifying in the Saxon tongue, the Creek, or Cove of a
River, it was set on fire by Sweno the Dane, in the time of King Ethelred, but
it flourisht again after the Conquest, and the Castle was re-edified by Hugh
Bigod, Earl of Northfolk, Lewis the Frenchman won it by assault from King
John. Notarie, (lat.) one that takes Notes, and makes a short draught of
Contracts, Obligations, and other instruments, a Scribe, or Scrivener. Note, a
Term in faulconory, vide Pruneth. Notification, (lat.) a making known, a a
giving information, or advertisement. Notion, (lat.) understanding, or
knowledge. Notius, vide Pisces. Nottingham, the chief Town of Nottinghamshire,
it is so called by a mollified pronuntiation, from the Saxon word Snottengaham,
i. a house of Dens, or Caves, it has a strong Castle, which the Danes held
out against Aethered, King of the West Saxons, and his brother Aelfrid, who
were stirred up by Burthred, King of the Mercians against them. Novae tabulae,
(lat.) certain Tables among the ancient Romans, whereby old debts, or
obligations were cancelled, and made void. Novatians, a sort of Heretics, who
condemned second marriages, and held that those who had once fallen, ought not
to be received into the Church, although they afterward repented: they were
seduced by one Novatus, in the year 215. Novation, (lat.) a renewing, or making
new. Novels, certain volumes of the Civil-law, in number 168. they were set out
by the Emperor Justinian after the Codex, also certain little tales, or
Romances. November, so called because it is the ninth month from March.
Novempopulana, the Country of Gascoin in France, whose chief Cities are
Bourdeaux and Tolouse. Novendial, (lat.) continuing the space of nine days.
Novennial, (lat.) continuing the space of nine years. Novercal, (lat.)
belonging to a stepmother. Novice, (lat. Tyro, Greek Neophyte) one newly entered
into Orders, also a young beginner in any art, or profession. Novity, (lat.)
newness, strangeness. Nowed, (French) tied in a knot, a Term in Heraldry.
Noxi^us (lat.) guilty, also hurtful, or offensive.
N U
Nubiferous, (lat.) cloud-bearing, bringing, or causing obscurity. Nubilous,
(lat.) cloudy, or tempestuous. Nude contract, in Common Law, is a bare
contract, or promise of any thing without assigning, or agreeing what another
shall give. Nudation, (lat.) a making bare. Nudity, (lat.) nakedness,
bareness. Nugation, (lat.) a toying, or trifling. Nuisance, or Nuisance, see
Annoyance. Nullifidian, (lat.) one of no faith, or honesty. Nullity, (lat.)
nothing, or a being of no effect. Nullo, (Arithm.) a Cipher that stands for
nothing. Numa Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, a Sabine born, he built
the Temple of Janus, created the Dial Martial, and Quirinal Flamins, he made
the twelve Salii, or Priests of Mars, and the High Priest, consecrated the
Vestal Virgins, distinguished the days into hallowed and unhallowed, and
divided the year into twelve months, and that these things might gain the
greater credit with the people, he faign'd that every night he had private
discourse with the Nymph Aegeria, and that what he had instituted was by her
appointment. Numbles, (French) the entrails of a Stag, or Dear. Numeration,
(lat.) a numbering. Numerical, (lat.) belonging to number, also a Term in
Logic, as Numerical difference is that difference which together with the
lowermost species constitutes the Individuum. Numitor, the son of Procas, King
of the Albanians, he was driven out of his Kingdom by his younger brother
Amulius. Nun, (Dutch) a Virgin that by holy vow obliges her self to perpetual
virginity, and espouseth her self to the Church. Nuncupation, (lat.) a
pronouncing, or calling by name. A Nuncupative Will, or Testament, is that
which is declared by words, and not written. Nundinary, (lat.) belonging to
fairs, or markets, whence Nundination, a Trafficking, or Trading. Nuntio,
(Ital.) a Messenger Legate or Ambassador, it is a word most peculiarly
appropriate to the Popes Legate. Nuper Obiit, the name of a Writ, which lies
for a Coheir, being deforced by her Coheir of Land, or Tenements, whereof any
of their Ancestors died seized in fee-simple. Nuptial, (lat.) belonging to a
marriage or wedding. Nurture, for nouriture, i. a nourishing, a teaching of
good manners. Nutation, (lat.) a nodding. Nutrition, (lat.) a nourishing.
N Y
Nycteus, the son of Neptune and Celene, the daughter of Atlas, he married a
Cretan Nymph, called Amalthaea, by whom he had Antiope and Nyctimene, the
latter of which falling in love with her father, came by the help of her Nurse
to enjoy him, but being afterward known, and flying from her fathers wrath,
she was changed into an Oak. Nymphs, see Nymphal. Nymphal, (lat.) belonging to
the Nymphs, which were accounted by the ancients certain rural goddesses, of
which some were called the Nymphs of the woods, or Dryades, some of the
mountains, or Oreades, some of the waters, or Naiades, etc. Nymphet, (French) a
little Nymph. Nysa, a City built by Bacchus in India, being situate in a very
fruitful soil; also one of the tops of the mountain Parnassus, consecrate to
Bacchus. Nysus, a King of the Megarenses, whose City was betrayed to Minos, by
his daughter Scylla, see Scylla.
O A
OAxis, a River of Creet, so called from Oaxis, the son of Apollo, who lived
there. Oaxus, the son of Acacallis, daughter of Minos, also a City of Creet,
which took its denomination from the above mentioned Oaxus, in this City
Etearchus the father of Phronima, who was the mother of Battus reigned.
O B
Obaceratio, (lat.) a stopping ones mouth. Obambulation, (lat.) a walking
abroad, about, or against. Obarmation, (lat.) an arming against. Obduction,
(lat.) a covering about. Obduration, (lat.) a hardening, a growing obstinate
against. Obedientia, has been used in Law for a certain Rent paid in ancient
time, also in Canon Law it is taken for the administration of an Office, whence
Obedientiales are those that execute an Office under their Superiors. Obelisk,
(Greek) a great stone waxing smaller and smaller from the bottom, and ending in
a point at the top, differing only from a Pyramid, in that it is apiece,
and all of one stone; also a long stroke in writing, signifying that something
is amiss, and better left out then inserted. Obequitation, (lat.) a riding
about. Oberration, (lat.) a straying, or wandering about. Obesitie, (lat.)
grosnesse, or fatness. Objection, (lat.) a casting against, also a laying to
ones charge. An Obit, (lat.) a trental, an obsequy, or funeral. Objuration,
(lat.) a binding by Oath against any person, or thing. Objurgation, (lat.) a
chiding, rebuking, or reproaching. An Oblat, (French) a Soldier, who being
maimed in the wars is maintained in an Abbey; it is also taken for the
maintenance it self. Oblation, (lat.) an offering, more especially that which
is offered by religious persons to the Church, or to pious uses, also a toll,
or subsidy. Oblatration, (lat.) a barking, or exclaiming against. Oblectation,
(lat.) a delighting, pleasing, or recreating ones self. Obligation, (lat.) a
binding, or obliging ones self to any thing. Oblimation, (lat.) a plaistring,
or dawbing over, a stopping up with mud. Oblique, (lat.) crooked, awry.
Obliquation, (lat.) a crooking, or bending. Obliteration, (lat.) a blotting
out, a cancelling, or abolishing. Oblivion, (lat.) forgetfulness. Oblong,
(lat.) a Term in Geometry, a quadrangle, or foursquare figure, whose length
exceeds its breadth. Obloquy, (lat.) a speaking evil against any one, a
backbiting, or slandring. Obmutescence, (lat.) a remaining silent, a holding
ones peace. Obnoxious, (lat.) guilty, faulty, liable to punishment.
Obnubilation, (lat.) a darkning, or obscuring with clouds. Obnunciation, (lat.)
a forbidding any thing upon foreknowledge, or conjecture of ill success.
Obole, (lat.) a certain kind of Coin, valueing with us about a half penny;
also a weight of 12. or 14 grains. Obreption, (lat.) a creeping, or stealing
upon by craft; whence obreptitious, i. stolen upon by crafty means. Obrizum,
q. Ophirizum, fine gold, gold of Ophir. Obrogation, (lat.) an interrupting, or
hindering, also a gainsaying. Obscaenity, (lat.) ribaldry, baudinesse, unclean
speech or action. Obscuration, (lat.) a making dark or obscure. Obsecration,
(lat.) a beseeching or praying earnestly. Obsequious, (lat.) dutiful, obedient,
diligent to please. Obsequies, (French) Funeral Rites, from the Latin word
Obsequium, i. duty, because in accompanying the dead corpse to the grave, we
perform a civil duty to the person of the dead. Obserration, (lat.) a locking
or shutting up. Observant, (lat.) diligently marking, also dutiful, respectful:
there are also a sort of Franciscans or gray Friars instituted by St. Francis
of Assisium, who are called Observants, Obsession, (lat.) a besieging,
beleaguring or encompassing about. Obsibilation, (lat.) a hissing against.
Obsidian stone, a kind of precious stone, spoken of by Pliny in his natural
History* Cambden thinks it to be the same with our Canole cole. O^sidional,
(lat.) belonging to a siege, whence an Obsidional Crown, is a Crown given to
him who raises an exraordinary siege, an honor often conferred by the ancient
Romans upon their Captains. Obigillation, (lat.) a sealing up. Obsolete, (lat.)
grown old, out of use or fashion. Obstacle, (lat.) as it were a standing
against, a let or hindrance. Obstetrication, (lat.) a doing the office of a
Midwife. Obstinacy, (lat.) as it were a holding against, self-will,
stubbornness. Obstipation, (lat.) a stopping up. Obstreperons, (lat.) making a
loud noise. Obstrigillation, (lat.) a reprehending, also a resisting or
withstanding. Obstruction, (lat.) a stopping or shutting up, also a hindering.
Obstupefaction, (lat.) a stupefying, astonishing, or making abashed.
Obtemperation, (lat.) an obeying, a yiedling obedience. Obtenebration, (lat.) a
making dark or cloudy. Obtestation, (lat.) an humble requesting or beseeching,
a calling God to witness for any thing. Obticence, (lat.) a being silent, a
holding ones peace. Obtrectation, (lat.) a calumniating, depraving, or
backbiting. Obtrition, (lat.) a bruising, or wearing away against any thing.
Obtruration, (lat.) a stopping, shutting, or closing up. Obtuse, (lat.) blunt
having a dull point or edge, also heavy or dull-witted. In Geometry an Obtuse
Angle, is when two lines do include more than a square, make a blunt angle.
Obvallation, (lat.) an invironing or encompassing with a trench. Obvarication,
(lat.) a hindering any in their passage. Obverted, (lat.) turned against or
about. Obvious, (lat.) meeting in the way or coming toward. Obumbration, (lat.)
an obscuring or shadowing over. Obuncous, (lat.) crooked. Obundation, (lat.) a
flowing against. Obvolation, (lat.) a flying against. Obvolution, (lat.) a
rolling against, or to and fro.
O C
Occaecation, (lat.) a blinding. Occallation, (lat.) a making hard like brawn.
Occidental, (lat.) belonging to the occident, i. the going down of the Sun, or
the west part of the World; also when a Planet sets after the Sun and is
seen above the Horizon after him. Occiduous, (lat.) setting, falling, or going
down. Occipital, (lat.) belonging to the hinder part of the head, which is
called Occiput. Occision, (lat.) a slaughtering, or killing. Occlusion, (lat.)
a shutting up. Occulcation, (lat.) a spurning or treading upon. Occult, (lat.)
hidden, secret, privy, whence occultation a hiding or keeping secret.
Occupation, (lat.) a using, also business or employment, also a Mystery or
Art. To Occur, (lat.) to happen, also to meet with. Oceanine, (lat.) belonging
to the Ocean, i. the broad and main Sea which compasses the World, and has
several denominations according to the several Regions to which it is annexed.
Among the Poets the son of Coelus and Vesta is cal^ed Oceanus, who marrying
Tethys, was thought to be the father of all the Rivers and Fountains.
Ochlocrasie, (lat.) such a government wherein the common people or multitude
bear sway. Ockham, a term in Navigation, being toe or flax, or old ropes
untwisted and employed about a Ship. Ochus, the surname of Artaxerxes the son
of Artaxerxes Mnemon by his daughter Ancestris, he subdued Egypt, overcame
Tennes King of Phoenicia, Hermias the Acarnensian Tyrant, Euagoras King of
Cyprus, took Sidon, by the help of Mentor, he buried his Sister and Mother in
Law alive, caused his Uncle with a hundred of his children and grandchildren to
be slain, but at last was poisoned by his Physician Bagoas. Ocnus, see Manto.
Octangular, (lat.) having 8 angles or corners, a term in Geometry. Octave,
(lat.) a musical proportion called an eighth, also the eighth day next after
some Principal Feast, of the year. Octavo, a book is said to be in Octavo,
when it consists of sheets doubled into eight leaves a piece. Octennial,
(lat.) comprehending the space of eight years. October, so called because it is
the eighth month from March. Octohedrical, (a term in Geometry) having eight
sides. Octonary, (lat.) belonging to the number eight. Octogon, (Greek) a
Geometrical figure consisting of eight angles. Ocular, (lat.) belonging to the
eyes. Oculate, (lat.) full of holes like eyes, also quicksighted. Oculus
Christi, a certain herb very good for the eyes, otherwise called wild clary.
Oculus Tauri, a constillation in 24 degrees 39 minutes of Gemini. Ocypete, the
name of one of the three Harpyes, so called from the swiftness of her flight.
Ocyroe, the daughter of Chiron and the Nymph ^hariclo, she being a great
Prophetess fortold that Aesculapius should be the best of Physicians, and that
she her self should be changed into a Mare, which things happened accordingly.
O D
Ode, (Greek) a Song or Lyrick Poem. Odelet, (dimin.) a short Ode. Odoacer, a
King of the Heruli and Thuringians, who having possessed himself of Ticinum,
Ravenna and Rome, and utterly defeated Augustulus, the last of those that
usurped the title of Roman Emperor, he caused himself to be proclaimed King of
Italy and Placentia. Odoriferous, (lat.) sweet smelling, bearing perfumes or
odours. Odor, (lat.) a scent or smell.
O E
Oeconomical, (Greek) belonging to Economy, i. the ordering or governing of a
household or family. Ecumenical, (Greek) belonging to the whole world,
universal. Oedastine, (Greek) skilful in weights and measures. Oedemato^s,
(Greek) belonging to an O^d^my, i. a tumor or swelling in the body rising from
the abundance of phlegm. Oedip^s, the son of Laius, King of Thebes and Jocasta
the daughter of Creon, he was brought by Phorbas to Polybius King of Corinth,
and bred up by the Queen as her own son: when he came to age he unfolded the
riddle of Sphnix, slew his father, and married his mother. See Creon and
Jocasta. Oen^maus, see Pelops. Oenopolist, (Greek) one that sells wine, a
Vintner.
O F
Offertory, (lat.) a part of the Mass, also a place where offerings are kept.
An Official, (lat.) is used in the Canon Law, for him to whom any Bishop does
commit the charge of his spiritual jurisdiction. Officine, (lat.) a shop or
workhouse. Officious, (lat.) dutiful, or serviceable. Offton, a Town in
Suffolk, so named from Offa King of the Mercians, as it were Offa's Town.
Offuscation, (lat.) a shadowing, a making dark or dusky.
O G
Ogdastick, (Greek) an Epigram or a Stanza consisting of 8 verses. Ogive, or
Ogee, (French) a wreath, circlet or round band in Architecture. Ogyges, an
ancient King of Boeotia who built the City of Thebes, in his time happened a very
great flood called the Ogygian flood, bigger than that of Deucalion but less
than Noah's Flood.
O I
Oisterloit, a certain herb otherwise called snakeweed, in Latin Bistorta.
O K
Oker, a color used in painting whereof are several kinds, Oker de lace, or
yellow Oker, burnt Oker, and brown Oker.
O L
Oleaginous, (lat.) belonging to an Olive Tree. Oleander, a certain shrub
called Rosebay, in Greek Rododendron, or Rododaphne. Oleity, (lat.) the time of
gathering Olives, also oilynesse. Olfact^ry, (lat.) belonging to the sense of
smelling. Olicana, the ancient name of a Town in Yorkshire, re-edified by
Virius Lupus then Propretor in Britain, and is thought to have been the same
with that which is now called Ilkely. Olidous, (lat.) rank-smelling, having a
strong savor. Oligarchy, (Greek) the government of a Common wealth by a few.
Olivaster, (lat.) of an olive color, also a wild olive tree. Oliver, the
proper name of a man, derived from the peace-bringing Olive, as Daphnis from
the Laurel. Oliviferous, (lat.) olive-bearing, bringing forth Olives. Olivity,
see Oleity. Olla podrida, (Span.) a hotchpot or dish of meat consisting of
several ingredients, being somewhat like that which the French call a Bisque.
Olympia, a City of Greece, near unto which were solemnized the great Games
instituted by Hercules in honor of Jupiter; they were from the name of this
City called the Olympian Games, and were celebrated every fifth year, which
space was observed as an Epoch of time by the Greeks, and called an Olympiad.
Olympias, the Christian name of diverse women, so called from Olympus. Olympus,
a hill in that part of Thessaly that lies against Macedon, the top of this
hill touches the clouds, and therefore it has been taken by the Poets for
Heaven, or the seat of the gods. Olynthus, a City of Thrace which Philip of
Macedon won from the Athenians by corrupting the soldiers with money.
Olysippo, the chief City of Portugal, vulgarly called Lisbon.
O M
Ombrage, (French) a shadow, also a color or pretense. Omega, (Greek) the last
letter in the Greek Alphabet: It is also used metaphorically for the end of any
thing. Omelet, (French) a pancake or froise. Ominous, (lat.) portending good or
ill luck, but most commonly it is taken in the worst sense. Omission, (lat.) a
neglecting or letting a thing pass. Omnifarious, (lat.) diverse, sundry, of all
sorts. Omniparent, (lat.) bearing or bringing forth all things. Omnipotent,
(lat.) all mighty, all-powerfull. Omnipresent, (lat.) present in all places.
Omniscious, or Omniscient, (lat.) knowing all things. Omnivagant, (lat.)
wandering every where, or in all places. Omniv^rous, (lat.) eating or devouring
all kind of things. Omology, (Greek) agreeableness or proportion, also a
confession. Omphale, a Queen of Lydia by whom Hercules was highly rewarded for
killing a great Serpent upon the River Sangaris, and afterward he falling in
love with her and desiring to be entertained in her service, she compelled him
to sit and spin, while she leaving her distaff, put on his arms and Lions
skin; others say that he was sold to her by Mercury at the command of Jupiter,
for having slain Iphitus the son of Euritus.
O N
Onagre, (lat.) a wild ass, also a certain Engine used by the Ancients, out of
which they used to shoot great stones. Onerary, (lat.) serving for burden or
carriage. Oneration, (lat.) a loading or burthenning. Onomancy, (lat.) a
divination by names, also a repeating of many names by the Art of memory.
Onomatopy, (Greek) the faining of a name, from any kind of sound, as Bombarda,
i. a Gun, from the sounding of bom. Onpresse, (old word) downward. Onyx, a
certain precious Stone, so called from the Greek word (...). i. a nail of a
man's hand, because it is of a kind of whitish color, resembling the color of
a man's nail. Some say it is the congealed juice of a Tree called Onycha, it is
also called a Chalcedonie.
O P
Opacous, (lat.) shady, obscure, darkened. Opal, (Greek) a precious stone of
diverse colors, yellowish, green, and purple. Opening of Gates, is, when a
Planet applies it self to another, who rules the figure opposite to his house,
or when one Planet separates from another, and applies immediately to one that
has dominion by house, in the sign opposite to these ruled by the Planet with
whom it was joined, either by body, or aspect. Opera, a kind of Dramatick
Poem, in use among the Italians, performed by voices and instrumental Music in
a recitative style, and adorned with Scenes by Perspective. Operation, (lat.) a
working, or laboring. Operiment, (lat.) a covering. Operosity, (lat.) busy
work, great pain, or travel. Ophthalmy, (Greek) a certain disease of the eye,
rising from an inflammation of the uttermost skin of the eye, called Adnata.
Ophites, (lat.) a kind of marble variegated like a Serpent. Ophiuchus, a
constellation in Sagittary. Ophiusa, an Island in the Balearick Sea, so called
from the abundance of Serpents, which are in it. An Opiate, (lat.) a confection
of Opium, i. the juice of black Poppy, which is used to cause sleep, or assuage
excessive pain. Opiferous, (lat.) bringing aid, help, or succor. Opifice,
(lat.) workmanship. Opimous, (lat.) fat, or gross, also rich, or plentiful.
Opination, (lat.) a thinking, or supposing. Opiniatrecy, (French)
opiniativenesse, obstinacy, a wilful persisting in any opinion. Opisthograph,
(Greek) a book, or paper, written upon on the backside. Opitulation, (lat.) a
helping, or aiding. Opobalsame, (Greek) the gum, or liquor that distilleth
from the Balm-tree. Oppication, (lat.) a covering over with pitch.
Oppignoration, (lat.) a pawning, or laying inpledge. Oppilation, (lat.) an
obstruction, or stoppage in the inward parts. Oppletion, (lat.) a filling up.
An Opponent, (lat.) a withstander, or contradicter, one that maintains a
contrary argument in the Schools, to what is generally held. Opportune, (lat.)
fit, seasonable, convenient, whence opportunity, due time, or season. Opposite,
(lat.) contrary, or over against, also opposites substantively used, signify
in Logic, things relatively opposed as master and servant, or privately, as
light and darkness, or contraries, as knowledge and ignorance. Opposition,
(lat.) a contrary setting against, also a resisting; in Astrology it is when
two Planets are in houses opposite to one another, it is 180. d. distance, or
six signs, and is thus Charactered. o -- o. Opprobrious, (lat.) reproachful,
upbraiding, or reviling. Oppugnation, (lat.) a fighting against, an assalting,
or laying siege unto, also a violent opposing. Ops, the daughter of Coelus and
Vesta, the wife and sister of Saturn. Opsimathie, (Greek) a learning late.
Opsonation, (lat.) a catering, a purveying, or buying of meat. Optation, (lat.)
a wishing, desiring, or looking for. Ophthalmie, (Greek) a certain disease in
the eye, occasioned by the inflammation of the annate Tunicle. Optic, (Greek)
belonging to the sight, also substantively used for that science, whereby the
reason of sight is known. Optimacie, (lat.) a governing of the Commonwealth,
by the Nobler sort of persons. Option, (lat.) election, choice, wish, or
desire. Opulencie, (lat.) riches, wealth, plenty. Opuscle, (lat.) a little
work, or labor.
O R
Or, (French) a Term in Heraldry, expressing the color of Gold. Orache, or
Orage, a certain Pot-herb of an insipid taste, called in Latin Atriplex.
Oracle, (lat.) an answer, or Counsel given by God, a foretelling of things to
come by Divine revelation, a saying whose truth is unquestionable, Oracles were
anciently very frequent among the Gentiles, but they all ceast immediately
after the coming of Christ. Oral, (lat.) belonging to the mouth, face, or
visage. Oration, (lat.) a praying, also a speech. Oratory, (lat.) eloquence,
also a Chapel, or place dedicated to prayer. Oratorians, an Order of Friars,
so called from the Oratory of St. Hierom in Rome, where they used to pray, they
were instituted by St. Philip Nerius, a Florentine. Orbation, (lat.) a
bereaving, depriving, or making desolate. Orb, a body contained under one
round superficies; those Orbs that belong to the celestial firmament, are
either with, or without Stars, that without Stars is the primum mobile, the
other are all stellified, either with fixed Stars, or Planets. Orbicular,
(lat.) round, in fashion of a Ball, or Globe. Orbity, (lat.) the lack of
Parents, or Children, generally any want. Orbona, a certain goddess among the
ancient Romans, to whom Parents, or Children used to pray against Orbity.
Orcades, certain Islands in the British Ocean, thirty in number, vulgarly
called the Isles of Orkeney. An Orch, or Ork. a monstrous fish, vulgarly called
a whirle-pool, also a Butt for wine, or figs. Orchall, see Corck. Orchamus, see
Leucothoe. Orchanet, (Arab. Alcanet) a certain Herb, called in Spanish
Buglosse, or wild Buglosse, in Greek Anchusa. Orchel, or Orchal, a certain
stone like Alum, wherewith Dyers use to color red, in some old Statutes it
seems to be the same thing with Cork. Orchester, (Greek) that part of the
Scene in a Theater, where the Chorus uses to dance; it is also sometimes taken
for the place where the Musicians sit. Orcus, a River of Thessaly, flowing out
of the Lake Styx, whose waters are so thick, that they swim like Oil upon the
top of the River Peneus into which it flows, it is often times taken by the Poets
for Hell. Ordeal, (a Sax. word, signifying judgment) a kind of purgation
practiced in ancient times, whereby the party purged was judged free from
Crime, it is called in Common Law purgatio vulgaris, of this purgation there
are several kinds; as Camp-fight, wherein he that overcame in single Combat,
was judged to have the right on his side. Fire-Ordeal, i. a passing blindfold
with bare feet over red hot plough-shares, and Water-Ordeal, i. e. a putting
ones arms up to the elbows in seething water. Ordinary, (lat.) in the
Civil-law, signifies any judge that has authority to take knowledge of causes
in his own right, as he is a Magistrate, and not by deputation, in Common Law
it is usually taken for him that has ordinary Jurisdiction in Causes
Ecclesiastical; also in Heraldry, Ordinaries are those charges that by a
certain property do belong, to that art, and are of ordinary use therein, they
are also called proper charges. Oreads, (Greek) Nymphs of the Mountains.
Oredelf, ore lying under ground, also a liberty whereby a man claims the ore
found in his own ground. Oreford, a Town in Suffolk, where in the reign of King
Henry the second, a certain hairy creature perfectly resembling a man, in all
parts and proportions, was taken out of the Sea by fishermen in a Net, who
after he had been kept awhile, secretly slipped away into the Sea, and was never
seen after, this Ralph Cogeshall an old Writer records. Orestes, the son of
Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, he was preserved from Aegisthus, by his sister
Electra, and sent to Strophius, King of the Phocences, where he remained twelve
years, after which returning disguised to Argos, he slew Aegysthus (who had
murdered his father Agamemnon) together with his mother Clytemnaestra, with
whom Aegysthus had lived in adultery, he also with the help of Macarus the
Priest slew Pyrrhus, in the temple of Apollo, because he had taken away
Hermione, the daughter of Menelaus, who had been first espoused to him, for
which crimes, being stricken with madness, he was cured at the Altar of Diana,
being brought thither by Pylades, who was so faithful a friend to him, that
when Thoas King of Taurica had designed to sacrifice Orestes, he affirmed
himself to be Orestes, that he might die for his friend; but Orestes slaying
Thoas, freed both himself and Pylades, with the help of his sister Iphigeneia,
who had been made the over-seer of those sacrifices, at last he was bitten by a
Viper in Arcadia, at a place called Orestion, of which wound he died, and his
body being dug up, was found to be seven Cubits in length. Orewood, a kind
of Sea-weed. Orfgild, a restitution made by the hundred, or County of any wrong
done by one that was in Plegio. Orfraies, (French) a certain frisled Cloth of
Gold, much worn heretofore in England, both by the Clergy, and Kings
themselves. Orgal, the lees of wine dried, used by Dyers. Organical, (Greek)
belonging to, or consisting of Organes, i. instruments, also the substantial
parts, or Members of the body. Organie, a kind of Herb, growing much upon the
Mountains, called in Latin Origanum. Orgeis, a word used in some old Statutes,
signifying the greater sort of North-sea fish. Orgies, (lat.) certain feasts
and revels, instituted by Orpheus to the honor of Bacchus. Orial College, a
College in Oxford, built by King Edward the second. Oriental, (lat.) belonging
to the Orient, i. the East, or that part of the world where the sun rises.
Orifice, (lat.) the mouth, or utmost brim of any thing, the outward hole of a
wound. Oriflambe, (French) the great and holy Standard of France, having on the
top a purple Flag, or Ensign, born at first only in the wars against infidels.
Original, (lat.) a beginning, or fountain; also a stock, or pedigree; also a
first draught. Orisons, (French) prayers. Orion, the name of a great hunter,
who vaunting himself to be of that strength of body, that there was no wild
beast that he could not kill, the earth brought forth a Scorpion, which
stinging him to death, he was placed together with the Scorpion among the
heavenly constellations, some say he was the son of Oenopion King of Sicilie,
and that lying with his sister Candiope, he had his eyes put out by his father,
others deliver him to have been born by a very strange way, of which see more
in Hyreus. Orithyia, the daughter of Erectheus, King of Athens, she was
ravished away by Boreas, who fell in love with her, and brought forth Zethus
and Calais, who going with the Argonauts to Colchos, put the Harpies to flight.
Orle, a Term in Blason, being an ordinary composed, of a threefold line
doubled, admitting a transparency of the field through the innermost space.
Orlop, a Term in Navigation, signifying the second and lower deck of a ship.
Ormus, a famous City of Persia, being most pleasantly situated in an Island,
and abounding with shells which breed the fairest and clearest Pearls that
are; it was taken by the Lieutenant General to the King of Portugal, in the
year 1506. Ornature, (lat.) a setting forth, trimming, or adorning. Ornomancy,
(Greek) a kind of Divination by birds. Orontes, a River of Coelosyria, which
rising out of the Hill Libanus runs under ground, till it come to Apamia, and
falls into the Sea, near Seleucia. Orphanisme, (lat.) the state of an
Orphane, i. a fatherless Child. Orpheus, a famous Poet, and Musician of
Thrace, the son of Calliope and Apollo, he took so heavily the loss of his
wife Euridice (of which see Euridice) that he utterly abandoned the company of
women, for which he was torn in pieces by the Maenades at the Feast of Bacchus,
and his several members being cast down the River* Hebrus were gathered up by
the Muses and buried, and his Harp translated up to Heaven. Orpiment, a certain
drug found deep in the earth, being a kind of Arsenick or Ratsbane, and is
called in Latin Auripigmentum, from its golden color. Orpine, a kind of herb
called in Greek Telephion, from Telephus the first discoverer of it. Orque,
(lat.) a hulk or huge Ship, also the same as Orch. Orrice, a certain flower
called in Greek Iris, because it resembles the Rainbow in diversity of
colors, it is vulgarly called a flower delice. Orsilochus, the son of
Idomeneus, who following his father to the wars of Troy, was at the taking of
Troy slain by Ulysses. Ortelli, a word used in the Forest Laws, signifying the
claws of a dogs foot. Orthodox, or Orthodoxal, (Greek) of a true and right
opinion, of a sound faith. Orthogonal, (Greek) having even or right angles.
Orthography, (Greek) the manner of right and true writing: Also in Architecture
or Fortification, it is taken for the upright erection of any work, as it
appears when it is finished. Ortygia, one of the Cyclades Islands, called also
Delos sacred to Apollo, and into which the Poets feign Asteria the sister of
Latona to have been turned after she had been turned into a quail, called in
Greek ortyx. Orval, a certain herb otherwise called Clary or Clear-eye. An
Oryx, or Orynx, (Greek) a kind of wild Goat in Africa.
O S
Osbert, a proper name among the Saxons, signifying, Light of the Family.
Osborn, another proper name signifying in Saxon, House-child. Oscillation,
(lat.) a hanging or tottering motion, a swinging upon a rope whose ends are
tied to several beams. Oscines, (lat.) those kind of birds by whose feeding or
voices the Augures used to fortell things to come. Oscitation, (lat.) a yawning
or gaping, also idleness. Osculation, (lat.) a kissing or embracing. Osiris,
the son of Jupiter and Niobe the daughter of Phoroneus, whom he succeeded in
the Kingdom of Argos, but after a while leaving that Kingdom to his brother
Aegialeus, he went and subdued Egypt, and married the daughter of Inachus
called Io or Isis, who first taught the Egyptians Letters, and sundry Arts and
Sciences; he was at length slain by Typhon his brother, and after his death was
worshipped by the Egyptians in the shape of an Ox. St. Osith, a Town in Essex
so called, for it was anciently named Chic, from Osith a Virgin of a Royal
Family, who having consecrated her self to the service of God, was here slain
by Danish Pirates. Osmund, the proper name of a man, signifying in the Saxon
tongue House-peace. Osprey, a kind of Eagle called in Latin Ossifraga, in Greek
Perenopterus. Ossicle, (lat.) a little bone. Ossifrage, (lat.) a kind of Eagle
which breaks bones with her beak, the same as Osprey. Ostensional, (lat.) a
soldier attending the Prince in public Shows. Ostent, (lat.) a wonder, a
monster, or strange thing. Ostentation, (lat.) a boasting, vainglory. Ostiary,
(lat.) one that keeps the hoasts in a Church a doorkeeper or porter. Ostomachy,
(Greek) a playing at bones. Ostracisme, (Greek) a kind of punishment among the
Athenians which was a banishing for ten years by delivering shells to the
condemned persons, wherein their names were written. Oswestre, in British
Croix Oswalds, a Town in Shropshire, so called (for it was anciently named
Masserfield) from Oswald King of Northumberland, whom Penda the Pagan King of
the Mercians after he had slain him in a bloody battle, tore to pieces in a
barbarous manner. Oswold, a proper name of a man signifying in Dutch
House-ruler or Steward, and equivalent to the French le Dispencer.
O T
Oaths, in Latin Otho or Eudo, the proper name of a man, from the Saxon word
Hud, i. Keeper. Othryades, a certain Lacedemonian, who in a combat of 300
Lacedaemonians to 300 Argives, being the only man of all his party left alive,
put to flight those two who were the only men left alive of the Argives, and
writing upon his shield these words, I have overcome, he slew himself, as being
ashamed to return to Sparta, all the rest of his companions being slain.
Otraque, a certain drink which is made of a Nut growing among the Molucca's.
Ottadini, the ancient name of a people inhabiting that part of Britain, which
is now called Northumberland. Otterbourn, a Town in Northumberland near which
was fought a famous battle between the English and Scots, in which William
Douglas the Leader of the Scottish Army was slain, and Sir Henry Percy called
Hotspur Commander of the English, having lost 1500 of his men, was taken
prisoner himself. Otus and Ephialtes, the son of Neptune by Iphimedeia the wife
of Aloeus, they were of those Giants that made war with heaven, throwing huge
rocks and hills against the gods, and were at last shot to death by Apollo:
they were reported to have grown the length of nine acres in nine years.
O U
Oval, (lat.) belonging to, or in the shape of an egg. Ovation, (lat.) a kind
of petty Triumph for a Victory obtained with the slaughter of a few men only,
it is so called from the soldiers following their Commander shouting and
singing O, O, or from Ovis, i. a sheep which used to be sacrificed by him,
whereas in a greater Triumph the General sacrificed a Bull, and his soldiers
following cried out Io, Io, Triumpho, also Ovation, from Ovum, i. an egg
signifying the season wherein hens lay eggs. An Ouch, a collar of Gold, a
Jewel or Tablet; it is also caled a brooch. Oviary, (lat.) a flock of sheep.
Oviparous animals, (lat.) those creatures that bring forth eggs or spawn.
Ounce, a certain weight, being the twelfth part of a pound Troy weight, but in
a pound aver du pois, it is the sixteenth part; also a kind of spotted beast
called a Lynx. Ounding, (old word) rising like waves. Ourage, (French) work or
labor. Outborow, see Inborow. Outfangthef, see Infangthef. Outlawry, (in Latin
Vtlagaria) the loss or deprivation of the benefit belonging to a subject of
the Kings protection and the Realm. Outparters, a sort of thieves about
Ridesdale, that ride about to fetch in such cattle or other things as they can
light on.
O W
Owelty of services, an equality, when the Tenant paravail owes as much to the
Mesen, as the Mesen does to the Lord Paramount. Owen, (in Latin Audoenus) the
proper name of a man, being the same with the Latin Eugenius, as appears by
several Records.
O X
Oxford, the chief City of Oxfordshire, which some say has been anciently
called Caer Vortigern, and Caer Vember, as being thought to have been built by
Vortigern and Memprix; but the Saxons called it Oxenford (corresponding to
Bosphorus among the Greeks) from a foard of Oxen. Leland deriveth it from the
River Ouse, and supposes it may have formerly been called Ouseford. It is
chiefly famous for its University which Cambden calls, Our most noble Athens,
the Muses seat, the Sun, the Eye, and the Soul of England. This University was
begun, as most Authors agree, in the year of our Lord 806. three Colleges
being built by the learned Aelfred who then reigned. Oxgang of land, see Bovata
terrae. Oxygon, (Greek) a term in Geometry, being a Triangle having three acute
Angles. Oxymel, (Greek) a certain kind of potion made of honey, vinegar, and
water boiled together, being good to attenuate gross phlegmatic humors.
O Y
Oyer and terminer, (French) signifies in Common Law, a Commission granted to
certain men for the hearing and determining of one or more causes.
O Z
Ozene, (Greek) a kind of disease or putrified stinking sore in the nostrils.
P A
Pabular, or Pabulatory, (lat.) belonging to forage, provender or fodder for
cattle. Pacation, (lat.) a stilling or appeasing. Pace, a measure of two foot
and a half, or the distance from the toes of the forefoot to the heels of the
hinderfoot: but a Geometrical pace consists of 5 foot, a thousand of which
paces make up a mile. Pachynum, a Promontory of Sicily lying toward the
Peloponnesus. Paciferous, (lat.) bringing peace. Pacification, (lat.) a making
peace, an asswaging or appeasing. Paction, or Pact, (lat.) a bargain, covenant,
or agreement; also a truce in war. Pactitious, (lat.) done by bargain, or upon
condition. Pactolus, a River of Lydia rising out of the hill Tmolus, the gravel
whereof has been said to be of a golden color ever since Midas washed himself
in the streams. Paddock, (from the Dutch word Padde) a toad. Padelion, a kind
of plant otherwise called great Sanicle, in Latin Pes leonis. Padua, a famous
City and University of Italy, now under the jurisdiction of the Venetian: It
was anciently built by Antenor the Trojan, and called Antenorea. Paduentage,
(French) common of pasture in one or more Parishes. Padus, a famous City of
Italy, rising out of the Hill Vesulus, it is now called Po. Paean, (Greek) a
certain Hymn which the ancient Greeks used to sing to Apollo. Paedagogue,
(Greek) a schoolmaster, a bringer up of youth in learning. Paeonia, a part of
Macedon was formerly so called from Paeon the son of Endymion. Paganical,
(lat.) belonging to country villages, (whence Paganals, i. Wakes,
Country-Holidayes, Ploughmens Feasts) also belonging to a Pagan, i. a paynim,
Heathen or Gentile. Paganism, heathenism, gentilism; also the manner or fashion
of the Country. Paginal, (lat*) belonging to a page, i. the side of a leaf in a
book. Pagod, a kind of Idol. Paigles, a sort of flower otherwise called Oxlips.
Paillardise, (French) lechery, whoredom. Pain fort and dure, signifying in
Common Law, an especial punishment for those that being arraigned of felony
refuse to put themselves upon the ordinary trial of God and the Country, and
thereby are mute and dumb. Paisage, (French) the description of any part of the
Country in painting or drawing. See Landscape. Palamedes, the son of Nauplius
King of Eubaea, he was the occasion of Ulysses being forced against his will to
go to the Trojan wars, but was himself by a forged accusation of Ulysses,
stoned to death by the Grecian Army. He is said to have been the first that
accomodated the year to the course of the Sun; he is also said to have found
out the use of weights and measures, and to have added to the Greek tongue
these 4 letters, (...). Palate, (lat.) the roof of the mouth being the
uppermost hollow part, wherein the sense of tasting lies. Palatinate, the
Country or chief Seat of a Count Palatine or Paladine, i. a Supreme Officer in
a Sovereign Princes Palace; but it is more especially taken for one of the
Electors of the Roman Empire called the Palsgrave, or Prince Palatine of the
Rhene; also certain Knights of this Island, in ancient times called Knights of
the round Table, were called Paladines, also Palatine signifies adjectively
belonging to a Princes Palace. Palaemon, the son of A^hamas and Ino, called
also Melicerta. See Ino. Pale, a term in Heraldry, being an Ordinary consisting
of two lines drawn perpendicularly from the top to the bottom of the
Escutcheon. Pales, the goddess of Shepherds, to whom certain Feasts were
consecrated, called Palilia. Palestine, a Country of Syria, thought by some to
have been that Country called Phoenicia, whereof Cadmus was King, it contains
Judea, Samaria, and Galilaea. Palestrical, or Palaestrical, (Greek) belonging
to wrestling. Palfray, (French) a horse of state for a Princess or great Lady.
Palici, or Palisci, two twins the sons of Jupiter and the Nymph Thaleia, whom
he ravished by the River Simethius, when she was with child she wished that the
earth would open and hide her from the wrath of Juno, whereupon the earth
immediately opened and received her within its bowels, and as soon as she was
delivered, it opened again and let out the two twins into the World.
Palindrome, (Greek) a certain verse or sentence which being read forward or
backward the words and sense are the same, as Sator arepo tenet opera rotas
Palingenesie, (Greek) regeneration or new birth. Palinode, or Palinody, (Greek)
a recantation or unsaying what one had spoken or written before. Palinurus, a
Promontory of Lucania, so called from Palinurus the Pilot of Aeneas, who
sleeping fell into the sea, and being taken up and rifled by the inhabitants of
this place, had a Grove consecrated and Cenotaph built unto him to appease his
ghost. Palisado, (Span.) a defense made with stakes, posts, piles, etc. to keep
out an enemy. Pall, (lat.) a certain robe or long garment which has usually
been worn by persons eminent either in learning or in war. Palladium, a certain
Image of Pallas which was kept by the Trojans in a Tower that was built on
purpose, but this Image being stolen out of the Temple by Ulysses and Diomede,
the City was soon after taken by the Greeks, it was at last brought to Rome and
placed in the Temple of Vesta. Pallas, the same as Minerva. A Pallat, a word
used in Painting, being a thin piece of wood which a Painter makes use of to
place his colors upon. Pallemaille, (French) a certain Game wherein a round
bowl of box is with a mallet struck through a hoop of iron, into which he that
can strike it at the fewest blows wins. Pallet, a term in Heraldry, being the
moity or one half of the pale. See Pale. Palletoque, or Pallecoat, (French) a
cassock or short cloak with sleeves, such as Pages wear. Palliardize, see
Pailliardize. Palliation, (lat.) a cloaking, hiding, or concealing. Pallid,
(lat.) pale, whitish, bleak. Pallification, (lat.) a term in Architecture, it
signifies the piling of the groundwork, or the strengthening of the groundwork
with piles of timber driven into the ground, when they build upon a moist or
marshy soil. Palmar, (lat.) belonging to a Palm, i. the inward part of the
hand called the Palm of the hand; also a measure containing the breadth of 4
fingers, a hand breadth. Palm Tree, (lat.) a certain tree bearing the fruit
called Dates, it is reported to be both male and female, the male bearing
blossoms only, the female both blossoms and fruit. The leaves shoot upward
though oppressed with never so much weight. Whence the Palm is metaphorically
used for Victory, Praise, and Commendations. Cleop. Palm Sunday, the Sunday
before Easter, so called because on that day the people went to meet our
Savior with Palm and Olive-branches in their hands when he rode solemnly into
Jerusalem. Palmer, a certain instrument wherewith schoolboys are struck on the
palms of their hands, otherwise called a Ferular; also a kind of caterpillar or
worm with many feet* also a poor Pilgrim that travels up and down to visit Holy
places with branches of Palm in his hand. Palmestry, the same as Cheiromancy.
Palmeto-tree, a certain tree in the Isle Mauritius, of whose juice they make a
very pleasant sort of wine. Palmiferous, (lat.) bearing Palms, Victorious.
Palmipedous birds, (lat.) those that are whole footed, or have plain and flat
feet as water-foule. Palpation, (lat.) a gentle handling or feeling; also a
flattring or fair speaking. Palpitation, (lat.) a panting, or trembling or
moving up and down. Paltsgrave, a Dutch word signifying a Count of a Palace,
being more especially the Title of the Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhene.
Paludament, (lat.) a certain Military garment which used to be worn by none but
chief Captains; also a Heralds Coat of Arms. Palumbine, (lat.) belonging to a
Ring Dove, otherwise called a Wood Culver. Pamphylia, a Country of Asia the
less, wherein are two famous Rivers, Eurimedon and Melas. Pampination, (lat.)
a lopping off, of superfluous branches from a Vine from Pampinus a Vine-branch.
Pan, the son of Demogorgon, he was worshipped in Arcadia; as the God of
sheapherds, being smitten by Cupid, he fell in love with the Nymph Syrinx, who
passing over the River Ladon, was turned into a Reed, which Pan beholding, made
him a Pipe with the same Reed, whence he is said to have first found out the
use of the Pipe and Oaten Reed. Panado, (Span.) a certain kind of meat, made
of crumbs of bread boiled in water. Pancart, (French) a paper containing the
particular rates of Tolls, or rates due to the King, or Commonwealth.
Panchaia, a Country of Arabia, where Frankincence grows in great abundance.
Pancratical, (Greek) expert in all kind of Games, and exercises of activity. A
Pandar, one that procures the hire of a strumpet, a baud, or pimp. Pandects,
(lat.) books that handle all subjects, or all the part of the subject whereof
they treat, there is also a volume of the Civil-law, so called. Pandiculation,
(lat.) a gaping and stretching out of the whole body. Pandion, the son of
Erectheus, and King of Athens, whose daughter Progne was married to Tereus,
King of Thrace, by whom her sister Philomela was ravished. Pandora, by the
Poets fained the first of all women, made by Vulcan at the command of Jupiter,
and endowed with several gifts, by all the gods and goddesses, she was espoused
to Epimetheus, to whom she was sent with a box shut, which he unadvisedly
opening, filled the world with all manner of diseases and calamities. Pandure,
(lat.) a kind of Musical instrument, called also a rebeck. Panegyric, (Greek)
a solemn convention of people, at some public solemnity; also an Oration in
the praise of some great person. Panel, (from the French word Pan, i. a skin)
it signifies in Common Law, a Schedule, or Roll, containing the names of such
Jurors; as the Sheriff provideth to pass upon any trial. Pangonie, (Greek) a
kind of precious stone, so called from its multitudes of Angles. A Panguts,
(as it were all guts) a drossel, a gorbelly, an unweildy fellow. Panick, or
Painick, (lat.) a certain kind of Grain like unto Millet, also Panick fear, a
sudden fear, or distraction from god Pan, who was the first that coming on a
sudden upon his enemies with much noise and tumult, cast a mighty terror and
amazement into them. Panifice, (lat.) a making of bread. Pannade* (French) the
curvetting, or prauncing of a lusty horse. Pannage, (in French Pasnage, (the
money taken by Agistors, for feeding of Hoggs with the mast of the Kings
Forest. Pannicle, (lat.) a little piece of Cloth, also the fleshy Pannicle, a
Term in Anatomy, being the membrane, or skin, which lies next under the fat of
the paunch. Pannier, (French) a dosser, or basket to put bread in. Pannonia,
see Hungaria. Panomphaean, an Epithete of Jupiter, it comes from the Greek
words Pan. i. all, and Omphe, i. a voice, because he was worshipped in all
languages. Panoply, (Greek) complete Armor, or Harness. Pansie, a kind of
flowr, vulgarly called hearts-ease. Pans^phie, (Greek) wisdom, or knowledge in
all things. Pantagruelist, (French) a merry drunkard, or good fellow. Pantarb,
a precious stone, called in Spanish Pantarva, in English the stone of the Sun.
Panters, toiles to take deer with. Pantheologie, (Greek) the whole sum of
divinity. Pantheon, (Greek) an ancient Temple in Rome, dedicated to all the
heathen gods, and since by Pope Boniface the 4th. to the Virgin Marie and all
the Saints. Panther, (lat.) a kind of spotted beast, the Leopard, or Libard
being the Male, the Panther, the Female. Pantomime, (Greek) a player, one that
can act all parts, and counterfeit all kind of persons. Panurgie, (Greek)
craft, or skill in all kind of matters. Papal, (lat.) belonging to the Pope,
who is called Papa, being a contraction of the two words Pater Patrioe.
Papaverous, (lat.) belonging to Chestoul or Poppy. Papelardise, (French)
hypocrisy, or dissembling. Paphus, the son of Pygmalion, the son of Cilix and
Eburnea, for Pygmalion being an excellent graver, came into the Island of
Cyprus, made the statue of a woman so admirable, that he fell in love with it,
and prayed to Venus that he might have a wife as like as might be, to the
statue he had made, which prayer was granted, and he coming home one time found
the statue enlivened, with whom having lain he begat Paphus, who became King of
Cyprus, and built a City which he called by his own name, and dedicated it to
Venus, who was thence called the Paphian Queen. Papian Law, see Popaean Law.
Papulosity, (lat.) a fullness of blisters, or pimples, called in Latin Papulae.
Papyrius Cursor, a famous Roman Captain, who in the war against the Samnites
was made Dictator, and gave a total overthrow to the Enemy, after they had
beat the Romans at a place called ^urcae Caudinae. Parabien, (Span.) a
congratulation, or bidding of joy. Parable, (Greek) a declaration, or
exposition of one thing by another, which is like a similitude, or comparison.
Paracelsian, a Physician that in curing of diseases follows the Method of
Paracelsus. Paraclete, (Greek) a comforter; the holy Ghost is sometimes so
called in Scripture. Parackmastical, (lat.) diminishing, or declining by little
and little from the violence of a hot fit in a fever. Parade, (French) a Term
in Military Discipline, being an appearance of Soldiers at a set time to
receive Orders; also any great preparation, or appearance. Paradigme, (Greek) a
pattern, or example. Paradise, (Greek) a place of pleasure. Paradox, (Greek) a
thing which seems strange and absurd, and is contrary to common opinion.
Paradoxologie, (Greek) a speaking by Paradoxes. Paradrome, (Greek) a walk, or
gallery that has no shelter over head. Paraenetical, (Greek) apt to persuade,
or admonish. Parage, (old word) parentage. Paragogical, (Greek) belonging to
the figure Paragoge, which is an adding of a letter, or syllable at the end of
a word. Paragon, (French) a Compeer, an equal; also a Peerlesse Dame, one
without compare. A Paragraphe, (Greek) a full head, or title in any kind of
writing; as much as is comprehended in one section, it is also called a
Pillkrow. Paralipomenon, (Greek) a title commonly given to such books as
briefly contain those things, which are either omitted, or imperfectly handled
in others; in the Old Testament, there are two books, so called. Parallax, the
difference between the true place, or apparent place of a Comet, Eclipse, or
Planet, by reason we behold it from the superficies not from the center.
Parallels, (Greek) a Term in Geometry, lines running at an equal distance one
from the other and never meeting, in Astronomy they are certain imaginary
Circles in the Globe, for the better Calculation of the degrees of Northern, or
Southern Latitude. Parallel, (Greek) to compare. Parallelogram, (Greek) a
certain Geometrical figure, wherein on each side the lines run parallel one to
another. Paragolisme, (Greek) a fallacious, or deceitful way of arguing,
wherein from true extremes, a false conclusion is brought out. Paralytick,
(Greek) sick of a Paralysie, or palsy being a disease which causes a
resolution, or loosening of the sinews. Paraments, robes of state. Lord
Paramount, in Common Law, is the highest Lord of the Fee, as he that holds of
a Superior Lord, yet has a Tenant under him, is called Lord of the Mesne, but
the lowest Tenant is called Tenant paravail. Paramour, a Lover, or Sweetheart.
Paranymph, (Greek) he, or she that is joined with the Bridegroom, or Bride, to
see all things well ordered at a Wedding, also one that makes a speech in
commendation of those that are to commence Doctors. Parapet, (French) a Term in
fortification, a wall, or battlement of a wall, breast, to defend from the
enemies shot. Paraph, (Greek) a subsignature, or flourishing mark set under
ones name in signing a letter or deed, also a mark in the margent of a book.
Paraphonalia, or Paraphernalia, a word in the Civil-law, signifying those goods
which a wife brings her husband over and above her dowr, as Jewels, Apparel,
Plate, etc. Paraphrase, (Greek) an exposition, which alters the words, yet
holds the sense of the thing expounded. Parasang, a certain measure of
ground, containing thirty stades, or furlongs. Paraselinii, the same that
Paretii, and those happen to the Sun, and these to the Moon. Parasite, (Greek)
a smell feast, a flatterer, a belly-friend. Paravaile, see Paramount. Parazon,
a wood-knife. Parbreak, (old word) vomit. A Parbunkle, (a Term in Navigation) a
roap seized together at both ends; and so put double about the Cask to holse it
in by. Parcae, the three Destenies, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. Parcinarie,
in Common Law, is a holding of Land, by two, or more pro indiviso; or by
Joynt-Tenants, otherwise called Copartners. Parciloquy, (Lat.) a moderation in
words, a speaking little. Parcity, (lat.) thrift, sparingnesse, frugality.
Pard, (lat.) a certain beast, called a Libard. Pareil, the name of one of the
sorts of Characters, or Letters used by Printers, the rest being Nonpareil,
Brevier, Longprimer, and Pica. Parental, (lat.) belonging to Parents, or
ancestors. Parentation, (lat.) a celebrating of funerals. Parelii, mock-suns
appearing on each side of the Sun, occasioned by a thick Cloud gathered
together toward the side of the Sun, in which the broken beams of the Sun being
gathered, the very same of the Sun is represented to us therein. Parenthesis,
(Greek) the interrupting of a sentence, by interposing a clause, which being
removed, the sense would nevertheless remain entire. Parenticide, (lat.) a
killing of ones Parents. Parergie, see Lantskip. Parian Marble, see Paros.
Paricide, (lat.) from Paricida) a murderer of his father, or mother; also any
heinous murderer, but from paricidium, it signifies the act it self.
Parilian, or Palilian feasts, see Pales. Paris, the son of Priamus, and Hecuba,
he was also called Alexander, whom his mother caused to be nursed up privately
on the Mountain Ida by the shepherds, where, coming to age he fell in Love with
the Nymph Oenone, and lying with her, had two Children by her; afterward,
there growing a contention between the three goddesses, Juno, Pallas, and
Venus, they agreed to submit themselves to the judgment of Paris; Juno
proffering him a Kingdom, Pallas wisdom, and Venus the handsomest of women,
whereupon he gave his judgment for Venus; soon after he was returned home, he
was sent into Greece as an Ambassador to demand Hesione, and being entertained
by Menelaus, he fell in Love with Helena his wife, and Menelaus being absent
about some affairs, he soon won her to his desires, and carried her away with
him by stealth, whereupon there immediately grew a violent war between the
Greeks and the Trojans, wherein after nine years siege Troy was taken, and
Paris (having shot Achilles in the heel with his Bow and Arrows in the Temple
of Apollo, whither he had led him under pretense of marrying him to his sister
Polixena) was himself slain by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles. Parish or
Parochial Church, is that which is instituted for the saying of Divine Service
to the people dwelling within a certain compass of ground near unto it, the
other Churches being either Cathedral, that is where the Bishop has his chair
or seat, and conventual consisting of Dean and Chapter, or of regular Clerks
professing some order of Religion. Parisyllabical Nounes, (a term in Grammar)
those Nounes which consist of equal syllables, or those Nouns that have not
more syllables in one Case than in another. Parity, (lat.) equallity or
evennesse. Park, an Enclosure or place fenced about for the keeping of Deer, or
any other sort of wild beasts; it seems to be derived from the Latin word
Parcus which Varro uses in the same sense. Parliament, (Ital. q. parlar la
mente) the chief Assembly and Council of a Kingdom met together to make or
correct Laws, and to debate matters touching the Commonwealth: in this Kingdom
it used to consist of the King and the three Estates of the Realm, i. the Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons. Parmacety, a precious and very
excellent confection, so called from Parma a City of Italy between Placentia
and Cremonia, or because it is made of the seed of the Whale which is called
Sperma Ceti. Parmesan, an inhabitant of Parma, also a sort of cheese so called
because it is made in that City. Parnassus, a Mountain of Phocis in Greece,
sacred to Apollo and the Muses, who are thence called Parnassides, it has two
tops, whereof one is called Tithorea the other Hyampeus. A Parnel, a pretty
woman-lover. Parochial, see Parish. A lease Parole, in Common Law, is a lease
made only by word of mouth, also when a prisoner of war has liberty given him
upon his word to return at such a time, he is said to go upon his Parole, which
in French signifies a word or saying. Paros, an Island of the Aegean Sea, one
of the Cyclades, it is so called from Paros the son of Jason; in this Island
there is an excellent sort of Marble called Parian Marble. Paroxysme, (Greek)
the access or fit in an Ague or Fever. Parrells, a term in Navigation, those
things made of trucks, ribs and ropes, which go about the mast and are at both
ends made fast to the yard. Parrhasius, a famous Painter, the first that
painted by the life, he drew the picture of a linen Tablecloth so admirablely,
that Zeuxis looking on it, bid him take away the cloth that he might see the
picture underneath it. Parsimony, (lat.) sparingnesse, frugality, good
husbandry. Partage, (French) a partition, sharing or dividing. Parthenian,
(Greek) belonging to Virgins or Virginity. Parthenope, the name of one of the
Sirens that endeavored to ensnare Ulysses and his companions, also the ancient
name of a famous City of Italy, now called Naples. Parthia, a Country of Asia,
whose inhabitants were anciently a very warlike people; it is now called Arach.
Partiality, (lat.) an inclining more to one part than to the other.
Participation, (lat.) a being partaker, a giving or taking part with any one.
Participle, (lat.) one of the parts of speech in Grammar, so called because it
partakes both of the Noune, and of the Verb. Particle, (lat.) a parcel, a small
part or portion. Partile aspect, when two Planets are both in the same number
of degrees and minutes either by conjunction or aspect. Partition, (lat.) a
parting, sharing, or dividing. Partisan, (French) a partaker or partner, also a
leading-staff or javelin. Partlet, a word used in some old Statutes, signifying
the loose collar of a dublet to be set on or taken off by it self without the
bodies, also a woman's neckercheif. Partners, those timbers which are bolted to
the beams and do compass the shoot in the mast at the deck. Parturient, (lat.)
traveling or being about to bring forth. Parvity, (lat.) littleness,
smallness. Pas a pas, (French) leasurely. Pascage, (French) grazing or feeding
of cattle. Paschal, (lat.) belonging to the Pasche, i. the Jewish Passover,
also the Feast of Easter. Pascuous, (lat.) belonging to pasturage or feeding of
cattle. Pasiphae, see Minos. Pasquil, or P^squin, a certain statue or image in
Rome whereon all Satyricall invectives were wont to be fixed and fathered as the
Author, whence it is commonly used for any slanderous libell or defamatory
book. Passade, (French) an alms or benevolence given to a passenger, also a
posture in the management of a horse. Passant, (French) going or passing by, a
term in Heraldry. A Passartdo, a rope wherewith we hale down the sheat-blocks
of the main and fore sails when they are haled aft the clew of the main sail to
the cubbridge head of the main mast. Passe-flower, a certain kind of flower,
otherwise called Pulsatil. Passenger, a kind of small trained hawk called in
French Pellerin. Passeport, (French q. passer le port) a license made by any
that has authority for the safe passage of any man from one place to another,
a pass or safe conduct. Passibility, (lat.) an aptness or ableness to suffer.
Passion, (lat.) a suffering, also an affection of the mind, also in Poems and
Romances it is more peculiarly taken for the passion of love. Artam. Passive,
(lat.) suffering or bearing. Pastill, (lat.) a lump of any kind of paste made
up into a little long roll, also woade. Pastern, the huckle bone of any beasts
foot. Pastilication, (lat.) a making any thing into the form of a pill or round
ball Pastination, (lat.) a digging or delving of ground. Paston, a Townlet in
Northfolk, giving surname and residence to an honorable Family of this County.
Pasture, (lat.) a feeding. Pastophories, (Greek) the most honorable order of
Priests among the Egyptians. Pastoral, (lat.) belonging to a shepherd or rural
life, whence a pastoral Song. Pasvolant, (French) one that is foisted by a
Captain into his Company on a muster-day, whence it is taken for a hireling or
base fellow. Pataque, (French) a Neapolitan com worth a hundred quadrins.
Patart, a Dutch coin, five whereof amount to six pence. Patee, a term in
Heraldry, as a cross Patee, i. e. a cross whose ends are broad and opened.
Patefaction, (lat.) a making open, also a discovering or making manifest.
Patelena, see Matura. Patelin, (French) a flatterer, cogger, or deceiver.
Paten, a kind of wooden shoe, from the Greek word Pateo, i. to tread under
foot, also a little flat saucer used by the Priests with the chalice at Mass.
Letters Patents, see Letters. Patency, (lat.) a being uncovered, a lying open.
Paterguardian, a title given to the chief of the Franciscan Friars in their
Monasteries. Paternal, (lat.) fatherly, belonging to a father. Pathetical,
(Greek) apt to persuade or move the affections. Pathology, (Greek) that part of
physic which treats of the causes and differences of diseases. Patible, (lat.)
to be suffered or endured. Patibulary, (lat.) belonging to a gallows. Patin,
(lat.) a kind of platter, charger, or basin. Patonce, a term in Heraldry, as a
cross Patonce, i. e. whose ends are both broad and as it were three ways
hooked. Patration, (lat.) a doing any thing, a finishing any work.
Patriarchate, (lat.) the estate, dignity, or chief seat, of a Patriarch, i. the
first father of a Family or Nation. Patricians, (lat.) those men among the
Romans who were accounted of the most noble, as being descended of Senators.
Patrick, the proper name of a man, from the Latin word Patricius, a Peer or
Statesman. Patricide, see Parricide. Patrimonial, (lat.) belonging to a
Patrimony, i. an inheritance or estate left by a father to his children.
Patrocination, (lat.) a defending the quarrel, or maintaining the right of any
one. Patroclus, the son of Menoetius and Sthenele, he having slain Cleonymus
the son of Amphidamas, fled to Phia, where he was entertained by Peleus, and
together with Achilles educated by the Centaure Chiron, afterward he went to
the wars of Troy with Achilles, with whom he had contracted an inviolable
friendship, and when Achilles having made a defection from the Grecian Army
could by no means be won to fight with Hector, he at last was prevailed with to
send Patroclus in his stead, and with his own armor, in which fight Patroclus
being slain, Achilles then whom no other respect could move, would fight to
revenge the death of his friend, and having new arms made for him by Vulcan, he
fought with Hector and slew him. Patronal, (lat.) belonging to a Patron, i. an
advocate, defender, or pleader; also in Civil Law, a Patron is taken for him
that has manumitted a servant and thereby challength of him certain reverence
and duty during his life, and in the Canon Law for him that has the gift of a
Benefice. Patronymicks, (Greek) those names which men derive from their fathers
or ancestors with some little addition, as Aeneades from Aeneas. Patulication,
(lat.) a being opened, or made wide. Pauciloquy, (lat.) a speaking few words,
little talk. Paucity, (lat.) fewness, a being of a little or small number.
Pavefaction, (lat.) a terrifying or making afraid. A Pavese, or Pavice, (Ital.)
a large shield which covers the whole body. Pavidity, (lat.) timerousnesse,
fearfulness. Pavillion, (French) a Tent, or Tabernacle of State. Pavin,
(Span.) a kind of Dance so called. Paul, the proper name of a man, signifying
in Hebrew, wonderful or rest. Paulin, a diminutive from Paul. Paunage, see
Pannage. Pavoisade, or Pavezado, (French and Spanish) a target defense in
Galleys whereby the slaves are defended from the small shot of the enemy.
Pavonine, (lat.) belonging to a peacock or peahen. Pausade, (French) a pausing
or resting. Pausanias, the son of Cleombrotus, he was a famous Lacedemonian
Captain and won many Victories in the wars against the Athenians, also a
Macedonian youth who slew Philip of Macedon, because having received a rape,
and complaining often of it to Philip, he could receive no redress. Pain, the
proper name of a man, in Latin Paganus, a Villager.
P E
Pean, the same as Erminois, a term in Heraldry. See Erminois. Perch, a rod or
pole wherewith land is measured, forty whereof in length, and four in breadth
make an acre, it contains sixteen foot and a half. Pearls, a sort of Gemms
which are bred in some kind of shell-fishes. Peccadillo, (Span.) a little crime
or fault. Peccant, (lat.) sinning, committing a crime. Pectination, (lat.) a
kembing, also a raking together of Corn. Pectoral, (lat.) belonging to the
breast, also used substantively for a brestplate, peitrel, or stomacher.
Pecuarious, (lat.) belonging to beasts, or cattle. Peculation, (lat.) a robbing
of the Prince or Commonwealth. The Court of Peculiars, a certain Court in the
Bishops time, which dealt in certain Parishes exempt from the Bishops
jurisdiction in some Diocesses, and were peculiarly belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Peculiation, (lat.) a taking away a man's goods.
Pecuniary, (lat.) belonging to money. Pedage, (lat.) money given for passing by
foot or horse through any Country. Pedal, (lat.) containing a foot in measure.
Pedaneous, (lat.) going on foot. Pedantism, (French) the office of an ordinary
Schoolmaster or Pedant. Pedation, (lat.) a propping or setting up of vines.
Pedature, (lat.) an assignment of so many foot to workmen in digging or
building. Pederasty, or Paederasty, (Greek) buggery, or a lusting after boys.
Pedestal, (French) a term in Architecture, the basis or foot of a pillar.
Pedestrial, (lat.) going on foot, belonging to the foot. Pedicle, (lat.) a
little foot, also the stalk of any fruit or flower. Pedobaptism, or
Paedobaptism, (Greek) Infant Baptism, the baptizing of Children. Pedotribe, or
Paedotribe, (Greek) one that instructs children how to exercise their bodies.
Peer, (French) a Fortress made against the force of the Sea, also Peers q.
pares, i, equals are the Nobles or chief Lords in Parliament: this denomination
is thought to be derived from the 12 Peers of France instituted by Charles the
great, or Lewis the younger; also in Common Law those that are impanneled upon
Enquest are called Peers. Pegasean, (lat.) swift, from Pegasus the winged horse
of Perseus. Pejeration, (lat.) a forswearing. Pejoration, (lat.) a making
worse. Peitrel, or Poitral, (French) the brest-leather of a horse. Pelagians, a
sort of Heretics so called from Pelagius their first founder; they denied
original sin, and had many other erroneous tenets. Pelasgi, an ancient people
of Greece, so called from Pelasgus the son of Jupiter and Larissa, they
inhabited a part of the Peloponnessus called Pelasgia. Pelias, the son of
Neptune and Tyro the daughter of Salmoueus, he was the brother of Aeson King of
Thessaly, and meditating the ruin of his brothers son, he sent him to Colchos
for the Golden Fleece, he was at last slain by his daughters at the instigation
of Medea. Pelion, a mountain of Thessaly which the Titans when they made war
against the gods heaped upon Ossa a neighboring mountain* the top of this
mountain is thick set with Pine trees, and hangs over the Pelasgian Gulf.
Pelican, a certain bird that pecking her own breast, draws blood thence to
feed her young ones. Pelliculation, (lat.) a deceiving with fair words.
Pellicle, (lat.) a little skin or thin rind. Pellucid, (lat.) clear, bright,
shining thorough. Pel-mel, (French) confusedly, one with another. Pelopaea, the
daughter of Thyestes, who being got with child by her father, brought forth
Aegysthus. Peloponnesus, a Country of Greece, lying upon the Adriatic Sea, it
was anciently called Pelasgia, now Morea. Pelops, the son of Tantalus King of
Phrygia, by Taygete, he, when his father had invited the gods to a Feast, was
killed and set before them to eat, from the eating of which when all the gods
abstained, only Ceres eat up his shoulder, for which Jupiter restoring him to
life again, made him an Ivory shoulder, he being to run with Oenomaus King of
Elis, was to marry his daughter Hippodamia on condition he won the race, which
he did by corrupting Myrtilus the Chariot-driver of Oenomans. See Myrtilus.
Pelota, the ball of the foot, from the French Pelote, i. a ball. Clerk of the
Pels, an officer of the Exchequer, who enters every tellers bill in a parchment
roll called pellis receptorum, i. the skin or roll of receipts, and makes
another roll of payments called Pellis exituum. Peltiferous, (lat.) a
Target-bearer, he that carries a Pelt which is a kind of Target made of skins.
Peltwool, wool pulled off the pelt or skin of a dead sheep. Pelure, rich Fur.
Pelusium, one of the seven mouths of Nile now called Damiata. Pembroke, the
chief Town of Pembrokeshire, in British called Penbro, i. a Cape or Head of
the Sea, Pen signifying in the British tongue, a head. It has a little Castle
(built by Arnulph of Montgomery, brother to the Earl of Shrewsbury) which
Girald his Constable valiantly holding out with a small Garrison against the
force of all South Wales laying siege to it, thereby purchased to himself much
honor, and raised his Family to a great height, from which the Giraldines and
Fitzgiralds in Ireland are descended. Penarious, (lat.) belonging to victuals
or provision. Penates, (lat.) houshold-gods. Pencills, certain small
instruments made of Bears, Ermin's or Hogs hairs put into quills of several
sizes, which Painters use to paint withal. A Pendant, a Jewel, q. Pendent, i.
hanging down, also Pendants in a Ship, are short ropes made fast at one end
either to the head of the mast or to a yard, or to the clew of a sail.
Pendiloches, (French) a term in Jewelling, the lowest part of Jewels that
dangle and hang down. Pendulous, (lat.) hanging down in a rope, clammy.
Penelope, the daughter of Icarius and the wife of Ulysses, she being careful to
preserve her chastity in her husbands absence, being importuned by many
suitors, who having been put off a great while, were at last resolved to ravish
her; she desired only so much time till she had made an end of what was upon
her distaff, which when she had obtaind, she ravelled over night what she had
spun in the day time, by which means she put them off till her husband returned
home. Penetrable, (lat.) to be pierced or bored thorough. Peneus, a River of
Thessaly, upon whose bank Daphne was turned into a Laurel-tree, near unto which
is a most pleasant Vallie, called the Peneian Vallie. Peninsule, (lat.) a tract
of Land, which is almost an Island, only joined to the continent by a narrow
neck of Land, called an Isthmus. Penitential, (lat.) sorrowful, penitent, also
moving to repentance. Penitentiary, (lat.) a Priest that imposes what penance
upon an offender he thinks fit; also a place in Rome, where Priests sit and
hear the confessions of those that come unto them to that end. Pennigerous,
(lat.) bearing feathers, winged, feathered. Pennant, see Pendant. Pennocrucium,
the ancient name of a Town in Staffordshire, called from thence at this day
Pencridge. Penon, (French) a flagge* or banner in war; also a streamer in a
ship, also a Term in Heraldry. Penoncels, little Penons. Pensans, (i. the Cape,
or head of Saints, or as some interpret it, the head of sands) near which is
that famous Rock, called Main-Amber, or Marine-Amber, which being equally
counterpoised upon a lesser Rock, may be stirred by the push of a finger, but
cannot be removed out of its place by a multitude of men. Pensitation, or
Pensiculation, (lat.) a diligent considering, weighing, or pondering. Pension,
(lat.) a stipend, or ordinary payment. Pensive, (French) sad, heavy,
sorrowful. Pentahedrical figure, (Greek) a Mathematical Term, being a figure
which has five sides. Pentaglottical, (Greek) skillful in five tongues, having
several languages. Pentagonal, (Greek) having angles, or corners. Pentameter,
(Greek) a verse consisting of five feet. Pentasticks, (Greek) Stanza's,
consisting of five verses; also Porches having five rows of Pillars.
Pentateuch, (Greek) the five books of Moses; also any volume consisting of five
books. Pentecontarck, (Greek) a Captain that has the command of fifty men.
Pentecost, (Greek) the feast of Whitsuntide, so called, because it is the 50th.
day from Christ's resurrection. Penthesilea, a Queen of the Amazons, who coming
to help the Trojans, was slain by Achilles. Pentheus, the son of Echion and
Agave, the daughter of Cadmus, he was torn in pieces by his mother and sister,
for despising the rites of Bacchus. Penury, (lat.) want, need, poverty. Pepin,
a King of the Francks, and father of Charles the Great, he reduced the Lombards
to the obedience of the Church, for which he had the title of most Christian
King, bestowed upon him and his successors by Pope Zachary. People, (lat.) a
hood, or kerchief; also a a kind of imbroidered vesture. Pepti^k, (Greek)
concoctive, or digestive. Peracter, a Mathematical instrument, the same as
circumferentor. Peraction, (lat.) a performing, or finishing a business.
Peragration, (lat.) a traveling, or wandering about. Perambulation, (lat.) a
walking through or about. Perangust, (lat.) very narrow. Percepier, a certain
Herb, growing in some parts of Somersetshire, it has small flowrs of a
greenish hew, and is good to provoke urine. Per^eptible, (lat.) perceiveable,
or to be apprehended. The Perch-stone, a white stone found in the head of a
Perch. Percival, a proper name from Percheval, a Town in Normandy. Percolation,
(lat.) a straining through. Percontation, or Percunction, (lat.) a diligent
searching, inquiring, or demanding. Percullis, see Poursuivant at Arms.
Percussion, (lat.) a striking, or hitting. Perdiccas, a stout Macedonian, one
of the Commanders of Alexander the Great. Perdition, (lat.) destruction, utter
loss. Perdix, the Nephew of Daedalus, he found out the use of the saw, for
which being envied of his Uncle, and by him cast down from a high Towr, he was
changed into a Patridge. Perduction, (lat.) a leadingh through. Perdues, a Term
in Military discipline, certain chosen Companies, who are put upon the most
desperate services; from the French word Perdu, i. lost. Perduellion, or
Perduellisme, (lat.) an open act of Hostility. Perduration, (lat.) a lasting
very long. Peregrine, the proper name of a man, in Latin Peregrinus, i.
outlandish; also a Hawk of the kind of Falcons. Peregrination, (lat.) a going
on Pilgrimage, a travailing into far Countries; in Astronomy it is an essential
debility, as when a Planet is in a sign, wherein he is altogether a stranger,
by being neither in his House, Exaltation, Trine* Term, or face: and therefore
then he is very weak. Peremptory, (lat.) absolute, without exexception, or
excuse, from Perimere, i. utterly to take away. Perendination, (lat.) a putting
off for a day. Perennity, (lat.) continuance, long lastingnesse. Pererration,
(lat.) a wandering up and down. Perfidie, (lat.) treachery, falsness, breach of
faith, or trust. Perforation, (lat.) a boring, or piercing through.
Perfretation, (lat.) a wading through. Perfrication, or Perfriction, (lat.) a
rubbing, or chasing thoroughly. Perfunctorie, (lat.) carelessly, or negligently
done. Pergamus, a City of Natolia, where Parchment, or Vellum was invented,
which is thence called Pergamena. Pergraphical, (Greek) work-manlike,
artificial. Periander, a Tyrant of Corinth, the son of Cypselus, he was
accounted one of the seven wisemen of Greece. Pericardie, (Greek) the film, or
thin skin, wherein the heart is enwrapped. Periclitation, (lat.) an
adventuring, hazarding, or endangering. Pericranie, (Greek) the hairy scalp, or
skin that covers the skull. Perigee, (Greek) that point of heaven, wherein
the Sun, or any other Star is nearest the Center of the earth. Perillus, see
Phalaris. Perimeter, (Greek) the outermost line of any solid body; also a verse
that has a syllable above the just measure. Perioch, (Greek) an argument,
containing briefly the sum of an ensuing discourse. Periodical, (Greek)
belonging to a period, i. e. the Term of time wherein any thing is finished;
also the end of a perfect sentence. Perioici, or Perioeci, those that dwell in
the same climate. Peripateticks, (from the Greek word Peripatein, i. to walk)
the Disciples and followers of Aristotle, who was wont to teach walking.
Periphelium, (Greek) that point of the heaven, wherein the earth, or any other
Planet is nearest to the Sun. Peripherie, (Greek) as it were a carrying about
the circumference, or round crooking line of a Circle. Periphrastical, (Greek)
spoken by a Periphrase, i. circumloquution, or expressing a thing by many
words. Peripneumonical, (Greek) sick of a Peripneumony, i. a disease which
causes an inflammation of the Lungs, and shortness of breath. Periscians,
(Greek) those that dwell where the shadows are cast round about them.
Perissologie, (Greek) a redundancy, or superfluity of speech. Peristaltick,
(Greek) having the power to strain, or press together. Perit, a certain
measure, being the 20th. part of a Droit, a Droit the 24th. part of a Mite, a
Mite the 20th. of a Grain, a Grain the 24th. part of a penny-weight, and a
penny-weight the 20th. part of an Ounce, 24. blanks make a Perit. Peritoneum,
the caul, which is extended over the bowels, and vessels that lie between the
Diaphragma and the thighs. Perjuration, see Pejeration. Perkin, a proper name,
as it were Peterkin, i. little Peter, the particle Kin, being in the Saxon
language a note of diminution. Permagies, a sort of Turkish boat. Permanent,
(lat.) durable, very lasting. Permeation, (lat.) a going, or passing through.
Permission, (lat.) a suffering, or giving leave. Permistion, (lat.) a mingling
well together. Permutation, (lat.) an exchanging one with another. Pernel, the
Christian name of diverse women from Petronilla, pretty stone. Pernicious,
(lat.) hurtful, destructive, dangerous. Pernicity, (lat.) swiftness.
Pernoctation, (lat.) a tarrying all night. Pernour of profits, (French) a taker
of profits, a Termin Common Law. Peroration, (lat.) the conclusion, or last
part of an Oration. Pero, the sister of Nestor and Periclimenes, and the
daughter of Neleus and Chloris, she was married to Bryas, the son of Amythaon
and Aglaia, after he had brought Neleus the Oxen, which Hercules took from
Diomedes. Perpenders, or Perpent stones, stones fitted to the thickness of a
wall. Perpendicle, (lat.) a Plumb-line, whence Perpendicular, i. falling
directly down, and inclining neither way. Perpenna, a famous Roman overthrown
by Pompey, he slew Sertorius at a Banquet. Perpension, or Perpensation, (lat.)
a diligent weighing, considering, or examining. Perpession, (lat.) a suffering,
or enduring. Perpetration, (lat.) a committing, acting or atchieving any thing.
Perpetuation, (lat.) a making a thing continue, or abide everlastingly.
Perplexity, (lat.) doubtfulnesse, incertainty; also trouble, or anguish of
mind. Perplication, (lat.) a folding through. Perquisites, (lat.) those
profits that accrue to a Lord of a Manor over and above his yearly Rents, by
virtue of his Court Baron. Perquisition, (lat.) a diligent searching, or
inquiring. Perry wright, (old word) imbroidered with precious stones.
Perscrutation, (lat.) a searching thoroughly, or into the depth of any thing.
Perse, sky color. Persecution, (lat.) a following after any one, to do them
harm. Perseverance, (lat.) constancy, firmness, steadfastness in any thing.
Perseus, the son of Jupiter and Danae, see Danae, and Andromeda. Persia, a
famous Country in the Eastern part of the world; so called from Perses, the
son of Perseus and Andromeda, its famous City Persepolis was destroyed by
Alexander, at the request of Lais. Personable, a Term in Law, enabled to hold
Plea in Court; as, he was made personable by Parliament; that is, he was made
able to stand in Court. Personality, (a Law-Term) an abstract of personal, as
the action is in the per^onalty; that is, brought against the right person,
against whom in Law it lies. Personate, (lat.) to sound very loud; also to
represent the person of another. Perspective, (lat.) the art of advantaging the
sight by the contrivance of glasses, being a branch of Optics. Perspicacity,
(lat.) quickness of sight, or apprehension. Perspicil, (lat.) a kind of
mirror, or looking-glass, wherein the form of any thing is clearly
represented. Perspicuity, (lat.) clearness, easiness to be seen through.
Perspiration, (lat.) a breathing through. Perterebration, (lat.) a boring
through with a wimble. Perthia, or Perth, a large and plentiful Country in
the North-part of Scotland. Pertinacie, or Pertinacity, (lat.) obstinatenesse,
stiffness in opinion. Pertinent, (lat.) pertaining, or belonging unto.
Pertingent, (lat.) joining, or reaching near unto. Aelius Pertinax, a Roman
Emperor; so called because he obstinately refused the Empire when it was
offered him, he was slain in his Palace by the Praetorian Soldiers at the
instigation of Didius Julianus, who succeeded. Pertingent lines in Heraldry,
vide Entire. Pertransient lines in Heraldry, vide Entire. Perne, a great
Province in America, or the West Indies, having in it a famous City of the
same name. Perturbation, (lat.) a disquieting, or troubling. Pervade, (lat.) to
go through, or into. Pervagation, (lat.) a straying, or wandering through, or up
and down. Perversity, (lat.) frowardness, crosnesse, overthwartnesse. Pervert,
(lat.) to corrupt, to overthrow, or turn upside down. Pervestigation, (lat.) a
finding out by diligent seeking. Pervicacy, (lat.) obstinacy, or stubbornness.
Pervigilation, (lat.) a watching all night. Pervise, (a rail, or bar) also a
conference among young pleaders and Students in the Law, it was so called in
ancient time, and seems to be the same with that which we now call mooting.
Pervious, (lat.) easy to be passed through. Pessary, (lat.) a kind of
suppository made of soft wool. Pessundation, (lat.) a putting to the worst, a
casting under foot. Pestiferous, (lat.) bringing Pestilence and destruction,
unwholesome. Petalisme, (Greek) a manner of banishment among the Siracusians,
which was inflicted by writing the offenders name upon an Olive leaf. Petard,
(French) a kind of Engine like a Mortar, wherewith strong gates are burst open
in war. Petarrade, (French) a gunshot of farting, a yerking out of a horse
behind, commonly accompained with farting. Petaurist, (Greek) a tumbler or
dancer on the ropes. Peter, the proper name of a man, from the Greek word Petra
a rock. Peterpence, a tribute given by I^^s King of the West Saxons being in
pilgrimage at Rome in the year 720, which was a penny for every house, it was
also called the fee of Rome. Peter's post, that famous delph or quarry of stone
in Yorkshire, out of which the stones that built St. Peter's Church in York were
hewed, by the liberal grant of the Vavasours. Clerks of the Petit bag, three
officers of Chancery who record the return of all inquisitions out of every
Shire, all liveries granted in the Court of Wards, make all Patents of
Customs, Gaugers, Controllers, etc. each record being put in a petit or little
leather bag; whence they had the denomination of Clerks of the Petit bag.
Petitory, (lat.) belonging to a petition, i. a request or entreaty made by an
inferior to a Superior. Petrary, the same as Ma^gonel. Petreius, a famous
Roman Captain who was Caesar's Legate in Gallia, but afterward taking part with
Pompey, he was overthrown in Mauritania, together with King Juba, whereupon
they consented mutually together to kill one another. Petrification, (lat.) a
making stony, a turning to stone. Petrobusians, a sort of Heretics that denied
the keeping of Feasts. Petrol, (lat.) a sort of marle or chalky clay; some take
it for a kind of Bitumen or Naphta. Petronel, a kind of Harquebuse, or
Horsemans piece, so called because it is to aim at a horses breast. Petropolis,
a Town in Northamptonshire, commonly called Peterborow, from a Monastery
dedicated to St. Peter, begun by Penda, a Christian King of the Mercians and
finished by his brother Wolpher to expiate the crime of murdering his two sons
Wolphald and Rufin. This Town was anciently called Medeswelhamsted or
Medeshamsted, from Medeswell a deep whirlpool. Pettifogger, a silly Advocate,
Attorney, or Lawyer; fogen signifying in Dutch to comply or insinuate.
Pettisergeantry, a certain tenure of Lands holden of the King by yiedling him a
shield, bow, arrow, etc. Petulancy, (lat.) saucynesse, impudence, wantonness.
Pexity, (lat.) the roughness of the web.
P H
Phaedra, the daught of Minos King of Creet, and the wife of Theseus, she
contrived the destruction of her son in Law Hippolytus because he would not
yield to her allurements. See Hippolytus. Phaemonoe, a Virgin who first
invented Heroic Verses, and who was the first Priestesse of Apollo at Delphos.
Phenomenon, (Greek) appearances of Meteors or any other Signs in the Air or
Heavens. Phaeton, the son of Sol and Clymene, he, when Epaphus the son of
Jupiter and Isis had objected to him that he was not the son of Phoebus,
requested of his father that he might have the guidance of his chariot for one
day, which being granted, he set the Heavens all of a flame, for which Jupiter
struck him down with his thunder into the River Padus or Po. Phaetontiades, the
sisters of Phaeton* See Heliades. Phagedaenick, (Greek) troubled with pimples,
pushes, or breakings out in the body. Phalanx, (Greek) a Military squadron
consisting of 8000 men, most in use among the Macedonians; some think it was
first invented by Phalanx, and from him so called; he was the brother of
Arachne, and was instructed in Military discipline by Pallas, and taught his
sister the use of the needle, but afterward lying with his sister, they were
both turned into vipers by Pallas. Phalaris, a Tyrant of Agrigentum who caused
Perillus, a rare Artificer, to make a brazen Bull wherein he tormented many by
putting them into the belly of the Bull after it had been heated with a
vehement fire, and among many others Perillus the author of it was served in
the same manner. Phalerated, (lat.) dressed or adorned with trappings.
Phaleucian verse, a verse consisting of eleven syllables, and five feet, viz. a
dactyle, spondee, and three trochee's. Phanatick, (lat.) See Fanatic.
Fantasy, (Greek) a representation of things to the fancy or imagination, a
conceiving of things in the mind. Phantasm, (Greek) the same, also a false
imagination or apparition, a vision of night-ghosts. Phao, a Lesbian youth, who
receiving from Venus an Alabaster box of ointment, became therewith so
beautiful, that the chief Dames of Mitylene especially Sappho fell in love with
him. Phare, (Greek) a watchtower or high place by the sea coast wherein lights
continually shine to light Seamen to their Haven, so called from Pharos an
Island in the Canopick mouth of Nile, where such a tower was built by Gnidius
the Architect. Pharetriferous, (lat.) bearing a quiver of arrows. Pharisaism,
hypocrisy, the profession and opinion of the Pharisees, who were a sect of the
Jews so called from the Hebrew word Pharesh, i. to separate, because they were
Interpreters of the Law, and separatists from the rest of the Jewish Church,
pretending more holiness than the rest of the people. Pharmaceutic^* (Greek)
belonging to Medicines or (...) also that part of physic which treats of
Medicines. Pharnaces, the (...) of Mithridates King of Pontus, who coming with
a great army into Cappadocia was overthrown by Caesar. Pharsalus, a Town of
Thessaly, seated upon the banks of the River Enipeus, near unto which are those
famous fields where the great battle was fought between Caesar and Pompey, and
between Augustus, Brutus, and Cassius. Phasm, (Greek) a surprising vision, or
dazeling appearance of light. Phegeus, the father of Alphesibaea, he purged
Al^maeon of his crime when he had slain his mother by his fathers command, and
gave him his daughter Alphesibaea in marriage. Pheon, the head of a dart, a
term in Heraldry. Pheron, the son of Sesostris King of Egypt, he being struck
blind for shooting a dart into the the stream of Nilus, was advised by the
oracle to wash his eyes in the urine of a woman that had known but one man,
which having done, he recovered his sight. Phial, (lat.) a pot or glass with a
wide mouth, also a certain measure. Philadelphia, a City of Misia in Asia the
Less, also the proper name of a woman, signifying in Greek brotherly or
sisterly love. Philanthropy, (Greek) humanity, the love of mankind. Philargyry,
(Greek) the love of silver, covetousness Philauty, (Greek) self-love.
Philibert, the proper name of a man signifying in the German tongue, Bright and
Famous. Philippolis, a City of Macedon, near which are the Philippick fields,
where Augustus and M. Antony got the great victory over Brutus and Cassius.
Philippus, the name of many famous men, especially the father of Alexander the
Great, the word signifies in Greek, a lover of horses; there is also a coin of
gold so called worth three shillings sterling. Phillis, the proper name of a
woman, signifying in Greek, Lovely. Philoctetes, the son of Paeas, and the
companion of Hercules, to him Hercules dying left his bow and arrows dipped in
the Lernaean poison, and because the Delphian Oracle admonished that there was
need of the arrows of Hercules, he was brought to the wars of Troy, where he
received an almost irrecoverable wound by letting fall one of his arrows upon
his foot, whereupon being ashamed to return lame into his own Country, he went
into Calabria in Italy where he built Petilia, at length by the help of Machaon
he was cured. Philology, (Greek) the love of learning or study. Philomela, the
daughter of Pandion King of Athens, her sister Pr^gne was married to Tereus
King of Thrace (the son of Mars by the Nymph Bistonis) who having ravished
Philomela and cut out her tongue, that she might not declare her sufferings to
any one, she wrought the story of them with her needle, and sent it to her
sister Progne, who in revenge caused her son Itys to be killed at the Feast of
Bacchus, and set before Tereus, who following Progne with his sword drawn was
changed into a Moorcock, Itys into a Pheasant, Progne into a Swallow, and
Philomele into a Nightingale. Philomusous, (Greek) a lover of the Muse.
Philonomia, the daughter of Nyctinus and Arcadia, she, as she went a hunting
one day with Diana, was got with child by Mars, and after she had brought forth
twins she cast them into the River Erymanth^s, who being a little after found
by the Shepherd Tyliphus sucking a she Woolf, they were brought up by Tyliphus,
and being called Lycastus and Parrhasius, succeeded in the Kingdom of Arcadia.
Philos^phical, (Greek) belonging to a Philosopher or Philosophy, i. the love
and study of wisdom, knowledge of natural causes. Philotimy, (Greek) the love
of honor. Philtre, (Greek) a potion, powder, or any kind of Medicine procuring
love. Philyra, the daughter of Oceanus, with whom Saturn lying in the shape of
a horse, begat the Centaur Chiron, who being wounded with one of the arrows of
Hercules that had been dipped in Lernaean poison, wished to die, but being
immortal was placed among the heavenly Signs, and called Sagitarius. Phineus,
the son of Agenor, or as others say of Phoenix and Cassiopaea, he was King of
Thrace, and had by his first wife Cleopatra, Orythus and Crambus, whose eyes he
put out at the persuasion of his second wife Harpalice the sister of Zethes and
Calais, for which he was stricken blind himself, and the Harpyes were sent
against him who continually defiled his meat as it came to his table; but at
last they were driven by Zethes and Calais into the Strophades Islands, and
Phineus himself was killed by Hercules after he understood that the children
were blinded without a cause. Phlebotomy, (Greek) a cutting of a vein, a
letting blood. Phlegmatic, (Greek) full of phlegm or fleam, i. one of the four
humors of the body being cold and moist. Phlegmon, (Greek) a hot and red
swelling of the body, caused by an inflammation of the blood. Phlegraean
fields, certain fields of Thessaly, where the Giants fought against the gods.
Phlegyas, son of Mars and King of the Lapitheans in Thessaly, he was the father
of Ixion and the Nymph Coronis, who being ravished by Apollo, Phlegyas in
revenge burnt his Temple, for which being cast into Hell, he remained in
continual fear of the falling of a great stone which hung over his head.
Phoebus, the son of Jupiter and Latona, born at the same birth with Diana, he
is also called Apollo and Sol. Phoenix, (Greek) an Arabian Bird of which it is
reported that there is but one of them in the World at a time, and that having
lived 500 years, it builds a nest of combustible spices, which taking fire from
the Sun, she fans it with her wings, and burns her self therein, out of whose
ashes there springs up a new Phoenix; It is also an ancient name of several
famous men. Phorbas, the son of Priamus and Epithesia the daughter of Stasippus
King of Mygdonia, he was, after many great atcheivements performed in the
Trojan war, slain by Menelaus. Ph^rcys the son of Neptune and the Nymph Thesea,
and father of Medusa, he was King of Corsica and Sardinia, and being overthrown
by Atlas in a Sea Fight, was turned into a Deity of the Sea. Phospher, (Greek)
as it were a bringer of light, the morning (...) Phrase, (Greek) a (...)
peculiar manner and form of speech. Phrenetick, ((...)) possessed with a
Frenzy, i. a certain kind of madness, arising from an inflammation of the
membranes of the brain. Phrygia, a Country of Asia the Less, bounding upon
Caria, Lydia, and Bithynia, it is divided into the Greater Phrygia and the
Lesser. Phryxus, the son of Athamas and Nephele, and the brother of Hell. See
Ino and Hell. Phtisick, (Greek) a kind of Consumption accompanied with a Cough
and Ulceration of the body. Phylarch, (Greek) the Govenour or chief Ruler of
any Tribe or Family. Phylacteries, (Greek) scrolles of parchment having the ten
Commandments written upon them, which the Pharisees were wont to wear about
their necks and arms; also preservatives against poison or witchcraft; also
places to keep things safe in. Phyllis, the daughter of Lycurgus King of
Thrace, she hanged her self for the love of Demophoon, who she thought had
neglected her, and was turned into an Almond tree. Physic, (Greek) natural
Philosophy, also the Art of curing by Medicines. Physiognomy, (Greek) an Art
which teaches to know the dispositions of men by looking on their
countenances, it is vulgarly called Phisnomy. Physiology, (Greek) a discourse
of natural things, a handling of natural causes.
P I
Piacular, (lat.) able to absolve or clear a man from some heinous sin or
offense. Pia matter, (lat.) a film or skin which encompasseth the brain.
Piation, or Piacle, (lat.) a satisfaction for sin, a purging by sacrifice or
intercession. Piazza, (Ital.) a great open place or broad street, a
marketplace. Picardy, a Province of that part of France called Gallia Belgica,
whose chief City is Amiens. Piccage, money paid in a Fair for breaking up the
ground to set up a standing or booth. Picenum, or Picentum, a Region of Italy
between the Apennine hills and the Adriatic Sea, vulgarly called Marca
Anconitana. Pickadil, (from the Dutch word Pickedillekens) the hem about the
skirt of a garment, also the extremity or utmost part of any thing, also an
Ordinary at St. James's so called. To Pickear, (French picquer) is when
particular persons fight between two Armies before the main Battle is begun.
Picle, or Pitle, (from the Italian word Piccolo, i. little) an enclosure or
small close. Piepouders court, (from the French word pied, i. a foot, and
pouldreux, i. dusty) a Court held in Fairs for the redress of all disorders
committed within them. Pierced, a term in Heraldry, as a cross pierced, i. e.
bored in the middle. Pieria, a Country in the confines of Macedonia, by the
Rivers Axius and Haliacmon. Pierpoint, a surname of great note and antiquity,
stilled in Latin records, De Petrae Ponte. Pight, (old word) propped settled.
Pigment, (lat.) a kind of painting wherewith women color their faces; it is
also used metaphorically for deceit or guile. Pigneration, (lat.) a gaging or
laying to pawn. Pignitis, a certain kind of Mineral, commonly called black
chalk. Pigritude, (lat.) laziness, slothfulness. Pilaster, (French) a little
pillar, also an inflammation of the Uvula. Pilchard, or Pilcher, a kind of
fish, called in Latin Sarda, in Greek Trichis. Pile, a term in Heraldry, being
an Ordinary consisting of a twofold line, formed after the manner of a wedge.
Pilgrim, (from the Ital. Pelegrino) one that travelleth out of devotion
thorough strange Countries to visit holy places. Pilkrow, see Paragraph.
Pillaw, a kind of meat made of rice, used among the Turks. Pilosity, (lat.)
hairinesse, roughness. Pilotage, the office of a Pilot or Steersman of a Ship,
called in Dutch a Lootsman. Pilumnus, the son of Jupiter, and King of Daunia,
he married Dane the daughter of Acrisius and mother of Perseus. Pimpernel, a
kind of little flower called in Latin Pimpinella. Pimpompet, a kind of antic
dance wherein three hit each other on the bum with one of their feet. Pimplea,
a mountain in Macedon, near which was the Pimplean Fountain and Den sacred to
the Muses, from whence they were called Pimpleides. Pingres, or Pingles,
(French) a kind of play wherein they use Ivory balls. Pinguedinous, (lat.) fat,
or gross. Piniferous, (lat.) bearing Pine-trees. Pink, a kind of yellow
color used in painting. Pinnace, a kind of small ship, so called, q. Pennata,
i. winged, or from Pinus, i. a Pine Tree, of which it is commonly made.
Pinnigerous, (lat.) finned like a fish, bearing fins. Pioners, certain
underminers and casters up of trenches in an army, from a certain people of
Mysia, called Piones, who used to dig them houses in Rocks. Pipation, (lat.)
a kind of shrill crying, or weeping. Pipe, a measure of wine, or oil,
containing 26 gallons, or half a tun. Clerk of the Pipe, an Officer in the
Exchequer, who having all accounts and debts due unto the King, drawn out of
the remembrancers Office, charge them down into the great Roll. P^quant,
(French) sharp, biting, or quick-tasted. Pique, (French) a quarrel, or
distaste. Piqueron, (French) a Javelin, or Dart. Piquy, a Term in printing, see
Pareil. Piratical, belonging to a Pirate, i. a Robber on the Sea; so called
from the Greek word, Peiran, i. to pass the Seas. Pirene, see Pyrene.
Pirithous, the son of Ixion, he was joined with Theseus in a perpetual league
of friendship, and assisted him against the Centaurs that would have ravished
away Hippodamia, at last they going together to Hell to fetch away Proserpina,
Pirithous was slain by Cerberus, and Theseus being taken prisoner by Dis, was
freed by Hercules. Piscarie, in Common Law, is a liberty of fishing in another
man's waters. Piscation, (lat.) a fishing. Piscinal, (lat.) belonging to a
fish pond. Pisces, the 12th. and last figure of the Zodiac, the one is
Northerly, the other Southerly, and is called Notios. Pisistratus, a King of
the Orchomenians, who for too much favoring of the people was slain in the
Senate House by a faction of the Nobility, his son Telesimachus being chief of
the conspiracy; also the name of a famous Tyrant of Athens, the son of
Hippocrates, he was a man* o^ singular eloquence, and a great favourer of the
Arts and Sciences. Pissaphalt, (Greek) a kind of mineral, consisting of pitch,
and the lime Bitumen incorporated together. Pistachoes, or Pistack Nuts, a
kind of small Nuts growing in Egypt and Syria, being often used in Physic.
Pistolado, (Ital.) a shot, or wound given with a Pistol. Pistrine, (lat.) a
grinding house, or mill; also a bake house. Pittacus, a Philosopher of
Mitylene, and one of the seven wisemen of Greece, who in a war between the
Athenians and Mitylenians, overcame Phrynon, Captain of the enemies by
intangling him in a Net, from whence arose the faction of the Retiarii and the
Myrmillions. Pituitous, (lat.) phlegmatic, full of waterish humors.
P L
Placability, (lat.) easiness to be pacified, or appeased. Placard, (French) a
License, whereby a man is permitted to maintain unlawful Games; also a decree,
or Mandate of a Prince; also any Table hung up, wherein Laws, or Orders are
written. Placence, see Greenwich. Placidity, (lat.) gentleness, mildness,
quietness. Placit, (lat.) an opinion, or decree. Plagiary, (lat.) he that
steals people out of one Country, and sells them into another; also a stealer
of other men's works, or writings. The Plain Table, a certain Mathematical
instrument used for the surveying of Land. Plaint, (in Common Law) is the
propounding of any action real, or personal in writing, whence Plaintiff, see
Demandant. Planetarie, (lat.) belonging to a Planet, i. a wandering star;
whereof there are seven in number, which take their names from the chief
heathen deities Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna. Planiloquy,
(lat.) plain, and free speech. Planimetry, (Greek) a measuring of plains, as
lands, boards, etc. Planisphaere, (lat.) an Astrolabe, or plain Sphere.
Plantation, (lat.) a planting, or setting* Plastic, (Greek) the art of making,
or forming the figure of any thing out of earth. Plastograph, (Greek)
counterfeit writing. Platanine, (lat.) belonging to a Platane, or Planetree.
Platonic, belonging to, or affirmed by Plato, (whence Platonic love, or
Platonic year i. the space of 36000 years) he was the chief of the Academick
Philosophers, he was at first called Aristocles, was a great wrestler, and much
given to painting; afterward became a hearer of Socrates, then he sailed into
Italy, to hear Pythagoras, and took many things out of the books of Philolaus
Crotoniatos, next he went into Egypt to hear the Gymnosophists, and as some
say, read the books of Moses, he was called Divine Plato, and was esteemed the
most famous Philosoper of the world, his chief opinion being, that the abstract
Idea's, or images of all virtues, and of all forms had a peculiar subsistence
by themselves. A Plaudite, (lat.) a clapping of hands for joy, a sign of
rejoicing, it being a substantive made of a verb. Plausible, (lat.) acceptable,
received with praise, favor, or joy. Plea, a Term in Law, that which either
party alleges for himself in Court. Plebeian, (lat.) belonging to the common
people; also mean, vulgar, inferior. Plebiscite, (lat.) a decree, statute, or
law, made by the common people. Pledge, (French) a surety, whence to pledge one
in drinking, is to be his surety, or to engage that he shall receive no harm
while he is drinking, which custom was first occasioned, as some say, by reason
of the practice of the Danes, heretofore in this Kingdom, who used frequently
to stab the Natives while they were drinking. Pleget, a long plaster of
Leather, or Linen Cloth. Pleiades, the seven daughters of Atlas, and the
Nymph Pleione, whose names were Electra, Alcynoe, Celaeno, Taygete, Asterope,
Maia, and Merope, they were placed by Jupiter among the stars, and called by
the Latins Virgiliae. Plenarie, (Fr.) full, entire. Plenartie, a word used in
Common Law, signifying a benefice supplied. Plenilunarie, (lat.) belonging to
the Plenilune, or full Moon. Plenipotentiaries, Ambassadors that are invested
with full power and authority to conclude with that state to whom they are sent
about those things contained in their Commissions. Plenitude, or Plenity,
(lat.) fullness. Pleonasme, (Greek) a certain Rhetorical figure, wherein some
superfluous word, or sentence is added. Plethorick, (Greek) troubled with a
Plethora, i. an abounding, or being too full of humors. Pleurifie, (Greek) an
inflammation of the inward skin of the Ribs, caused by too great an abundance
of blood. Pliant, (French) flexible, easy to be bent. Plicature, (lat.) a
plaiting, or folding. Plymouth, a famous Port Town in Cornwell, so called as it
were the mouth of the River Plime: in this place, the fable goes that
Corinoeus threw down the Giant Gogmogog from a steep Rock, it was anciently
called Sutton, and was divided into two parts, Sutton Prior, as belonging to
the Priors, and Sutton Vautort belonging to the Vautorts, styled in old Records
de Valle Terta. Plinth, (Greek) the lowermost part of the foot of a pillar,
being in the form of a Tile, or square brick. Plisthenes, the son of Pelops and
Hippodaemia, he dying young, recommended his two sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus,
to the care of his brother Atreus, whence they were called Atreides. Plonkets,
a word used in some old statutes, signifying woollen cloth. Plottons, a Term
in Military Discipline, consisting of eight in front. Plumage, (French) a bunch
of feathers. Plumbagin, (lat.) silver mingled with lead stone, or oar.
Plumbeous, (lat.) leaden, of the color of lead; also blunt, or dull. A
Plumestriker, a parasite, or flatterer, so called from pulling hairs, or
feathers off from other men's Cloakes. Plumigerous, (lat.) bearing feathers,
having feathers on. Plunder, (Dutch) to rob, or take away by violence in time
of war. Plurality, (lat.) a being more then one. Pluries, the name of a Writ
that goes out the third time; if the Original Capi^s, and the sicut alias
speed not. Plutarch, a famous Philosopher of Cheronea, who lived in the time of
the Emperors, Trajan and Adrian, and wrote many excellent books; he was in
such high esteem with Adrian that he was sent with Consular power into Illyria.
Pluto, the son of Saturn and Ops, to whom in the division of the World between
him and his two brothers Jupiter and Neptune, there fell the infernal Empire by
lot. Pluvial, or Pluvious, (lat.) rainy, full of rain, or watery clouds.
P N
Pneumatical, (Greek) belonging to wind or spirits.
P O
Pocillation, (lat.) the waiting on a great man's cup. Poculent, (lat.) that may
be drunk. Podagrical, (lat.) having the gout in the feet. Podalirius and
Machaon, the sons of Aesculapius, they were Physicians in the Grecian Army that
went against the Trojans. Podarge, the swiftest of Mares, that fed in a place
called Vernum Pratum, on whom Zephyrus begat the Horses of Achilles. Podestat,
(Ital.) or chief Magistrate of a City. Podimetry, (Greek) a measuring by the
foot. Poesy, or Poetry, (Greek) the art of making a Poem, i. any kind of
subject consisting of Rythm or Verses. Points, in Heraldry are certain places
in an Escutcheon diversely named according to their several positions. A
Poinard, or Poinado, (French) a daggar or short sword. Pointblanck, punctually,
absolutely, from the French words, poinct a prick, and blanc white. Polar, or
Polary, (lat.) belonging to the Poles, i. the ends of the axeltree about which
Astronomers imagine the heavens to be moved. The North Pole is called the
Arctick Pole, the South Pole the Antarctick, whence the Polar-circles are two
little circles near the Poles of the World described by the Poles of the
Zodiac. Polemical, (Greek) Military, belonging to War. Policy of Assurance, a
giving to some or other a certain rate or proportion to secure the safe arrival
of a ship and so much wares at a place agreed on. Political, (Greek) belonging
to policy, or the government of a Commonwealth. Politure, (lat.) a polishing
or trimming. Pollard, a ^heven or cod-fish, also a stag or male Deer having
musen'd or cast his head. Pollicar, (lat.) containing the measure of an inch,
which is the breadth of a thumb or toe. Pollicitation, (lat.) a promising.
Pollinarious, (lat.) belonging to, or made into fine flower. Pollincture,
(lat.) the embalming of dead bodies. Poltron, (French) a knave or rascal, also
a coward or lazy fellow. Polycrates, a Tyrant of Samos, being a man of very
great wealth, and of that fortune, that having let fall into the Sea a ring of
great value, it was found the next day in the belly of a fish; but in his later
end he was taken by Orontes the Persian and crucified. Polydamas, the son of
Antenor and Theano the sister of Hecuba, he married Lycaste, the daughter of
Priamus by a Concubine, and is said together with his father Antenor and
Aeneas, to have betrayed the City Troy to the Greeks. Also the son of Panthous
the master of Hector, he was a man of vast strength. Polydorus, see
Polymnestor. Polygamy, (Greek) the having more wives than one. Polygony,
(Greek) the having many angles or corners, also an herb called knot-grasse.
Polyhymnia, or Polymneia, the name of one of the nine Muses, she is said to
have been the first inventour of History. Polymnestor, a Tyrant of Thrace, who
when Priamus fearing the Trojan War had committed his youngest son Polydorus to
his tuition with a great sum of Gold, for greediness of the money killed the
child. Polymorphean, (Greek) having many shapes or forms. Polynices, the
brother of Eteocles, and son of Oedipus King of Thebes, by his mother Jocasta.
Polyphagian, (Greek) one that eats much, a great feeder. Polyphemus, the son of
Neptune by the Nymph Thoosa the daughter of Phorcus, he was one of the Cyclops,
and faling in love with the Nymph Galatea, slew the youth Acis whom she
preferred before him; he devoured four of the companions of Ulysses when they
were cast upon that shore, and would have served the rest in like manner, but
that Ulysses made him drunk with black wine, and put out that one eye which he
had in the midst of his forehead. Polypt^te, (term in Grammar) a Noun that is
declined with many Cases Polypus, a kind of fish that has a great many feet,
called also Pourcontrel; also a tumor or swelling in the nose. Polysyllabical,
(Greek) having many syllables. Polysyndeton, (Greek) a certain figure wherein a
sentence is joined with many conjunction copulatives. Polyxena, (the daughter
of Priamus) whom Pyrrhus the son of Achilles slew upon his fathers Tomb and
sent her to the infernal shades to his father who for her sake had been slain
by Paris. Pomander, (in Dutch Pomamber, as it were an apple of Amber) a little
round ball made of several fragrant perfumes to smell to, or hang about the
wrist. Pomarious, (lat.) belonging to a Pomary, i. an Orchard, or place set
with Apple Trees. Pomegranate, a kind of round fruit, so called because it is
full of grains, or because it grows chiefly in Granata a Region of Spain.
Pomelegryse, (old word) dapple-gray. Pomeparadice, a fruit called a John-apple,
In Greek Melimelum, as it were a Honey-apple. Pomeridian, the same as
Postmeridian. Pomiferous, (lat.) bearing apples or other kind of round fruit.
Pommade, (French) a kind of sweet ointment, also a trick in vaulting. Pomaery,
(lat.) a certain space about the walls of a City or Town. Pomfret, or
Pontfract, a Town in Yorkshire, so called (for in the Saxons time it was named
K^rkby) from a wooden bridge over Are, broken by the confluence of a great
multitude of people that accompanied William Archbishop of York, King Stephens
Nephew when he returned from Rome. This place has been stained with the
bloodshed of many Great men; here Thomas Earl of Lancaster was beheaded by
King Edward the second; King Richard the second was here made away by the
appointment of King Henry the fourth. Also Anthony Earl Rivers, and Sir
Richard Gray, were here beheaded by King Richard the third. Pomona, the
goddess of Orchards, with whom Vertumnus falling in love, courted her in
several s^apes, at last in the form of an old woman he spoke so effectually for
Vertumnus, that he prevailed, and returning to his own shape he married her.
^neus Pompeius, surnamed the Great, which title was given him by the Army of
Sylla for Triumphing over Iarbas a King of Africa, then joining with Metellus
he overcame Sertorius in Spain; next he was chosen Emperor in the Pyratick
War, which he finished in three months; afterward he triumphed over
Mithridates, and restored Tigranes to the Crown of Armenia. Lastly he quelled
the Iberians, Albans, and Jews, taking prisoner their King Aristobulus; at
length in the Civil War between him and Julius Caesar he was overcome at the
Battle of Pharsalia, and flying into Egypt was slain by Aquila, through the
treachery of Ptolomy the young King. Pompetts, Printers balls wherewith they
put the Ink upon their letters. Pompus, (lat.) full of pomp, stately.
Ponderosity, (lat.) weightinesse, heavynesse. Pone, a Writ whereby a cause
depending in the County Court, is removed to the Common Bank. Pontage, a
contribution toward the reedifying of bridges, or keeping them in repair.
Pontes* a Town in Buckinghamshire, so called from the 4 bridges, over the 4
channels into which the River Cole is divided. This Town is now called
Col-Broke. Pontfract, see Pomfret. Pontick, (lat.) belonging to Pontus, i. the
Sea between Meotis and Tenedos, as also the Country joining to that Sea
containing Armenia, and Cappadocia. Pontifical, or Pontificial, (lat.)
belonging to a Pontif or Pontifex, i. a Bishop or Praelate, who being clad in
his Episcopal vestments or those ornaments with which he performs Divine
Service on Festival days, as also those who have on their richest apparel, are
commonly said to be in their Pontificalibus. Popelin, (French) a little finical
darling. Popination, (lat.) excessive eating, or drinking; also a haunting
Popinas, i. Taverns, or Victualing houses. Popingey, a kind of Parret; also an
Herb, so called from being of the color of that bird, being a kind of
greenish color, this Herb is called in Latin Symphonia. Poplemans, a sort of
Hobgoblins, so called from Popleman, a cruel Tyrant, anciently of Polonia.
Poplet, (old word) a young wench. Poplitick, (lat.) belonging to the ham, or
leg. Poppaean Law, a certain Law among the Romans against single life.
Populace, (Fr.) the vulgar, or meaner sort of people. Popularity, (lat.)
familiarity with the common people. Population, (lat.) a wasting, destroying,
or unpeopling of any place. Populiferous, (lat.) bearing poplar Trees.
Populosity, (lat.) abundance, or fullness of people. Porcelane, a kind of
Sallet-herb, called in Greek Andrachne; also the cream, or flowring on the top
of a certain chalky earth, in China steeped in water, of which they make China
dishes. Porcine, (lat.) belonging to a Hog. Porculation, (lat.) a fatning of
Hogs, or Swine. Porcupine, a kind of beast, called in Latin, Histrix, which
casts out of her body certain sharp bristles, like darts against the Dogs
when they hunt her. Porosity, (lat.) fullness of Pores, i. certain little holes
in the skin, through which sweat and vapors do exhale out of the body.
Porpaise, a kind of fish of a^duskish color, called in Greek Phocaena.
Porphyretick, (lat.) belonging to Porphyrie, i. a fine reddish marble, streaked
with diverse colors, whence the Porphyrie Chair of St. John Lateran at Rome,
wherein the Pope is inaugurated. Porrection, (lat.) a stretching out. Portable,
(lat.) to be carried, or born. Portcullis, (French) the falling gate of a
City, which is made to slip down, to keep out the enemy. Portegue, a certain
Coin in Gold, valuing three pound ten shillings. Portemote, (from Port, i. a
Haven, and the Dutch word Gemetan, i. to meet) a Court kept in Havens, or Port
Towns. Portentous, (lat.) prodigious, portending, or betokening some ill to
come. Portglaive, (French) a sword bearer. Portgreve, a pre^ect, or chief
Governor of a Port Town, in ancient times the chief Magistrate of London, was
so called. Portguidon, (French) the Cornet, or Ensign-bearer, to a Troup of
horse, or men at Arms. Portmantean, (French) a kind of Cloak-bagge. Portmen, a
name commonly given to the inhabitants of the Cinque Ports. Portpain, (French)
a kind of Towel used at Court, wherein they carry their bread to serve for the
Table. Portsale, a sale of fish, presently upon return into the haven; also a
public sale like that of the ancient Romans, who used per prae^onem sub hasta
vendere. Posade, (French) a respite, or breathing; also a lighting down of
birds. Pose, see Catarre. Position, (lat.) a putting; also a Term in Logic, a
foundation upon which an argument is built. Possession, (lat.) an absolute
enjoyment of any thing, in Common Law it is taken for Lands and Inheritance, or
for the actual enjoyment of them. Possibility, (lat.) likelihood. Posteriority,
(lat.) a being after, or behind; also in Common Law a man holding Tenements of
two Lords, is said to hold of the first by Priority, of the last by
Posteriority. Posthume, (lat.) a Child, born after the death of the father;
also Posthume works are writings published after the death of the Author.
Postick, (lat.) being behind, or on the backside. Postil, a compendious
exposition, containing more then has been observed before, from the Latin post
illud, i. after that. Postillon, (French) a Posts guide, or forerunner; also
he that rides upon one of the foremost of the Coach-horses, when there are six.
Postliminie, (lat.) the return of one, who was thought to be dead.
Postmeridian, (lat.) done in the afternoon. Postnate, (lat.) the same as
Posthume. Postpone, (lat.) to set behind, to esteem less then another.
Postposure, (lat.) a setting behind. Postvene, (lat.) to come after.
Postulation, (lat.) a requiring, or demanding. Potable, (lat.) fit to be drunk.
Potatoes, a sort of Indian fruit, whose root is of great virtue. Potent, or
Potential, (lat.) powerful, able, endued with might. Potent, in Blazon,
expresses the resemblance of the top of a crowtch. Potentate, (lat.) one
powerful, or mighty. Potulent, (lat.) that may be drunk. Pouches, a Term in
Navigation, small bulk-heads made in howld, either thwartships, or longst
ships. Poul-davies, or Ouldernesse, see Medrinacles. Pounce, (Spanish Poncar,
Latin pungere) to jagge, or cut in and out. Pounces of Hawks, the claws, from
the Latin Pungere. Poundage, a subsidy granted to the King out of all
Merchandises, to the value of twelve pence in the pound. Pourcontrel, the same
as Polypus. Pourmenade, (French) a walk, or Gallery open over head. To make
Pourparty, to sever the Lands that fall to partners, which before partition
they held jointly. Pourpresture, (French) an enclosure; also an incroaching
upon any Land, or Jurisdiction that belongs to the King. P^ursuivants, (French)
followers, also messengers attending the King in wars, or to be sent upon any
special occasion, or message; the four Poursuivants at Arms are those that
attend the Heralds, and are called Bluemantle, Rougecrosse, Rougedragon, and
Percullis. Pourtraiture, (French) a delineating, or drawing a Pourtraict, i. a
picture, or image of any thing. Pourveyour, (French) an Officer of the King, or
other great personage that provides Corn, and other victual for the house.
Power of the County, the attendance of all Gentlemen, Yeomen, Laborers, etc.
within the County, above the age of fifteen, that are capable to bear arms.
Pownd, in Common Law, signifies an enclosure to keep beasts in, but more
especially a place of strength, where Cattle distrained for any trespass are
put, until they be replevied, or distrained. Poynings Law, an Act of
Parliament, whereby the Laws of England became of force in Ireland; so called,
because it was made when Sir Edward Poynings was Lieutenant of Ireland.
P R
Pragmatical, (Greek) busy, or expert in many things. Practick, or Practical,
(Greek) ready to practice, or deal in any Art, or Science, also substantively
taken for any Art, or Science. Prandicle, (lat.) a breakfast, or repast.
Pratique, (Ital.) the same as practick, also a license to traffic. Praeamble,
see Preface. Praebendary, (from the Latin Praebere, to afford) he that receives
a Praebend, i. a portion allowed for the maintenance of the Members of a
Cathedral Church; he is also so called from affording his Counsel, and
assistance to the Bishop. Praecaution, (lat.) a foreseeing, fore-warning, or
preventing. Praecedence, (lat.) a going before, also a surpassing, or
excelling. Praecellence, (lat.) an exceeding, or excelling. Praecention, (lat.)
the flourish, or entrance of a song, or ballad. Preceptive, (lat.) belonging to
a precept, i. a teaching, instruction, or lesson; also a Command.
Praeceptories, certain benefices, anciently possessed by the better sort of
Templers. Praecidaneous, (lat.) that, which is cut, killed, or sacrificed
before. Praecipice, (lat.) a steep place, a downright descent. Praecipitation,
(lat.) a casting down headlong; also rashness, or unadvisednesse; also a Term
in Chemistry, being a steeping, or dissolving of metals, or other bodies in
corroding liquours. Praecocity, (lat.) a too early, or overhasty ripening of
fruits. Praecognition, (lat.) foreknowledge of any thing. Praecontract, (lat.)
a former bargain, or contract. Praecursour, (lat.) a forerunner, a messenger
sent before. Praedation, (lat.) a preying, robbing, or spoiling, Praedecessour,
(lat.) an Ancestour or Fore-father, Praedestination, (lat.) a pre-appointing,
fore-ordaining, or designing before what shall come after. Praedial, (lat.)
belonging to Lands, Manours, or Farms. Praedicable, Praedicament, and
Praedicate, (lat.) three words which are most commonly used as terms in Logic,
Praedicables (which are 5. viz. genus, species, proprium, differentia, and
accidens) are those things which may truly, naturally, and immediately, be
affirmed of more things than one. Praedicaments (which are also called
Categories, and are 10 in all, viz. Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation,
Action, Passion, Where, When, Situation, and Habit) are the Series of things
gradually disposed under the same summum genus. A Praedicate is the last part
of the Proposition or the major term of a Syllogism. Praediction, (lat.) a
foresaying, or foretelling. Praedominant, (lat.) bearing chief sway or rule.
Praeeminence, (lat.) a being to be set before others for eminence or
excellence. Praeexistent, (lat.) existing or being before. Praeface, (as it
were a speaking before, from the Latin Prae, and fari) a prologue or
preparatory speech before any discourse. It is also called a Praeamble, which
is as it were a walking before. Prefect, (lat.) a Governor or chief Ruler of
a City or Province; there was also anciently a chief Officer in the Roman
Empire called Praefectus Praetorio. To Praefer, (lat.) to advance or set before
others. Praegnant, (lat.) great with child, also ripe, forward, of a prompt and
ready wit. Praegnotaries, signifies in Common law, the chief Clerks of the
Kings Court, whereof three are of the Common pleas, and one of the Kings Bench.
Praegression, (lat.) a going before. Praegustation, (lat.) a tasting or trying
before. Praejudication, (lat.) a judging before hand; whence Praejudice is used
for hurt or hinderance. Praelation, (lat.) a preferring or setting before.
Praelections, (lat.) Lectures, or Readings before. Praelude, (lat.) a proaem or
entrance into any discourse or subject; also in Music it is taken for a
voluntary or flourish upon any instrument. Praemature (lat.) ripe before.
Praemeditation, (lat.) a fore-thinking, a musing of a thing before hand.
Praemission, (lat.) a sending before, whence the praemises, i. things sent out
or spoken of before. To fall into a Praemunire, signifies in Common Law, to
forfeit a man's goods to the Prince, and his body to remain in prison: it is a
word corruptly used for praemonere, i. to admonish or forewarn, and is taken
either for the writ, or for the offense whereupon the writ is granted.
Praemonition, (lat.) a forewarning. Praemunition, (lat.) a fortifying before
hand. Prender, a word used in Common Law, things which lie in prender are those
things which the Lord of a Manor may have before atturnment, as the ward of
the body of an heir, or of the land escheats; whereas those things which lie in
Render he cannot take before atturnment; as rents, releifs, heriots, etc.
Praenomination, (lat.) a forenaming. Praenotion, (lat.) foreknowledge.
Praenunciation, (lat.) a fore-shewing, or declaring before hand.
Praeoccupation, (lat.) a possessing before hand, also a preventing. Praepensed,
(French) forethought. To Paeponderate, (lat.) to weigh well, or consider
before hand. Praeposition, (lat.) a putting before, also one of the eight parts
of Speech in Grammar, so called because it is set before a Noun or a Verb.
Praeposterons, (lat.) rash, headlong, out of order. Praepuce, (lat.) the
foreskin which covers the nut of the yard. Praerogative, (lat. a having ones
opinion first asked) a privilege, a peculiar authority or praeeminence.
Praesage, (lat.) a foreguessing or foretelling. Presbytery, (lat.) Priesthood,
Eldership, or a government of the Church by Elders. Praescience, (lat.)
foreknowledge. Praescription, (lat.) a prescribing, limiting, or determining by
a rule or law; also the course or use of any thing for a long time.
Praesentaneous, (lat.) present, ready, speedy, effectual. Praesentation, (lat.)
a showing or setting forth; also in Common Law presentation is the offering or
presenting of any one by his Patron to the Bishop, to be instituted in a
Benefice of his gift. Praesepe, a constellation in 2 degrees 13 minutes of Leo.
To Praeside, (lat.) to rule or have authority over. Praesidiary, (lat.)
belonging to a Praesidy, i. a Garrison of soldiers, also aid, help, or
defense. Prest-money, (from the French Pressed, i. ready, prompt) money that
binds those who have received it, to be ready at all times appointed.
Praestigiation, (lat.) a deceiving, juggling, or playing the impostor.
Praesumption, (lat.) a taking upon one, a being proud or arrogant. Praetence,
or Praetext, (lat.) a cloak or color for any thing, also Praetence or
Praetension, a claim or title to any thing. Praeterition, (lat.) a going by, a
passing over. Praetermission, (lat. as it were a sending besides) a suffering
to pass by, a leaving out or omitting. Praetorian, (lat.) belonging to a
Praetor, i. one that was anciently the chief Ruler of any Province or Country
subject to the Roman Empire, and he had supreme authority not only in Military
affairs, but also in matters of judgment; also the Praetorian Guard was a Band
of soldiers consisting of 10000 who were peculiarly to attend upon the
Emperors person. Praevarication, (lat.) deceit or double-dealing. Praevious,
(lat.) leading the way, or going before. Prasutagus, an ancient King who
reigned over a people of Britain called the Iceni. Pravity, (lat.)
crookedness, deformity, also naughtiness, lewdness. The Prerogative Court, a
certain Court belonging to the Civil Law, in which the Commissary sits upon
Inheritances fallen either by the Intestate, or by Will and Testament. Priamus,
the son of Laomedon King of Troy, he having been led captive by Hercules into
Greece, was afterward ransomed for a great sum of money: He had 50 sons
whereof 17 he had by his wife Hecuba; in his time it was that Troy was taken
and sacked by the Greeks. Priapismus, (lat.) a disease wherein there is an
erection of the yard without lust, from Priapus the son of Bacchus and Venus,
he being born at Lampsacus, became through the malice of Juno, who was his
mothers Midwife, very ugly and deformed, yet he had something about him so
pleasing to the women of Lampsacus that after he was banished by the men of that
place, they built a Temple to him where they were wont to sacrifice an ass,
and called him the god of Gardens. Pricker, a term in Hunting, being used for a
Huntsman on horseback. Pricketh, a term in Hunting, when a Hare beats in the
plain highway where you may yet perceive her footing; it is said she pricketh.
Pricket, a brocket, spitter, or young male Deer of a year or two old, beginning
to put forth the head. Pridian, (lat.) belonging to the day before. Primacy,
(French) the first place or chief rule, especially in Ecclesiastical affairs,
whence a Metropolitan or Archbishop is called a Primate. Primage, a duty due
to Mariners for loading of a Ship, at the first setting forth from any Haven.
Prime, (lat.) first or principal, also taken substantively for the first hour
of the day; whence a Primer is a kind of little prayer book containing prayers,
responsories, and antiphones, chosen for that hour of the day. A Prime, is in
Surveying, an exact part containing 19 inches and four fifth parts of an inch.
Primaevous, (lat.) of a former age, elder. Primero, and Primavista, (Ital.) two
games at Cards formerly much in use. Primier seisin, a word used in Common Law,
a branch of the Kings prerogative, whereby he has the first possession of all
Lands and Tenements through the Realm. Primigenious, (lat.) coming naturally,
or having its original from it self. Primitial, (lat.) belonging to the first
fruits. Primitive, (lat.) ancient, or of the first Age. Primogeniture, (lat.)
a first birth, also a being eldest or first born. Primordial, (lat.) belonging
to the first original or beginning of all things. Primum mobile, (lat.) the
tenth or highest Orb, so called by Astronomers, as being the first, and upon
which the motion of the inferior Orbs depends. Principality, (lat.) the
dignity or chief seat of a Sovereign Prince; also Principality is taken for
one of the Orders of Angels. Princox (from the Latin Praecox) a hasty or
over-ripe headed young boy. Priority, (lat.) see Posteriority. Prisage, a
custom or share belonging to the King out of such merchandises as are taken by
way of lawful prize. Priscilla, the proper name of a woman, being a diminutive
of Prisca, which signifies in Latin ancient. Priscillianists, a sort of
Heretics instituted by one Priscillianus, they denied the Persons of the
Trinity, and held that things had their beginning from two Gods, the one good,
and the other bad. Prism, (Greek) a certain Geometrical figure being a solid
triangle. Pristine, (lat.) former, ancient, wonted. Pristis, (lat.) a kind of
fish very long and slender; also a Ship fashioned long and narrow after the
manner of that fish. Privado, (Span.) a favorite. Privation, (lat.) a
depriving, bereaveing, or taking away. Privilege, that which is granted to any
person or place, against or beside the course of Common Law. Probability,
(lat.) likelihood. Probat of testaments, the producing of dead men's Wills
before the Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary of the place where the dead man
dies. Probation, (lat.) a proving or trying; whence a Probationer in the
University, is one that is to be approved and allowed of by the College for
his doctrine and manners, before he be chosen Fellow. Probe, a Chyrurgions
Instrument wherewith he tries the depth of wounds. Probity, (lat.) honesty,
goodness, integrity. Problematical, (lat.) belonging to a Problem, i. a hard
question propounded to any one to explain. Proboscide, (Greek) the snout of an
Elephant. Procacity, (lat.) sauciness, malepertnesse, scoffing. Procatarctick,
(Greek) as Procatarctick cause, that cause which foregoeth or begins another
cause. Procerity, (lat.) height of stature, tallnesse. Process, (lat.) the
manner of proceeding in every cause be it personal or real, civil or criminal,
even from the original writ to the end. Procession, (lat.) a passing on, a
going forward, also a custom among Clergymen of passing along the streets
singing of Psalms, making supplications and visiting the bounds of the Parish.
Prochronism, (Gr.) an error in Chronology, or the computation of time.
Prochyta, an Island in the Tyrrhene sea, not far from Puteoli in Campania, so
called from Prochyta the Nurse of Aeneas; it has been reported of old* that a
mountain of Inarime a neighboring Island being cast into the Sea by an
Earthquake, was the original of this Island. Procidence, (lat.) the falling
down of any thing out of its place. Procinct, (lat.) a being prepared, or in a
readiness. Proclivity, (lat.) an aptness, propensity, or inclination to any
thing. Proconsul, (lat.) one in the stead or place of a Consul, a deputy
Consul. Procrastination, (lat.) a delaying or putting off from time to time.
Procreation, (lat.) an ingendering or begetting. Proctors, (in Latin
Procuratores) Advocates, or those that solicit other men's businesses; also
those that appear in Parliament for Cathedral or other collegiate Churches, or
for the common Clergy of every diocese. There are also in the University two
men chosen from among the Scholars to see good orders kept and exercises
performed, who are called Proctors. Also in the State of Venice there are
certain chief officers called Procurators. Proculcation, (lat.) a trampling, or
treading under foot. Procyon, the lesser Dog Star. Prodigality, (lat.) riotous,
or wastefull expense. Prodigy, (lat.) a monstrous or unnatural action,
betokening some great evil to come. Proditorious, (lat.) belonging to
Prodition, i. treason, or treachery, traytour-like. Prodrome, (Greek) a
Praecursour, or forerunner. Production, (lat.) a producing, or bringing forth
(whence the product in Arithmetic is any number brought forth out of another)
also a lengthning, or making longer. Profanation, (lat.) a putting holy things
to a common use. Profection, (lat.) a walking forward, or going any journey; in
Astronomy Profection, and Progression are all one, being no more then a regular
change of the significators, according to the succession of the signs.
Professor, (lat.) a Lecturer, or Reader of any Art, or Science in the public
Schools of a University. Proficient, (lat.) helping forward, or profiting.
Profile, (Ital.) a Term in painting, being a picture only drawn side-wayes.
Profligation, (lat.) a driving away, or putting to flight. Profluence, (lat.) a
flowing plentifully, abundance. Prof^und, is oft-times joined to other words,
to add a weight and aggravation to them, as profound reverence. Cleopatra.
Profundity, (lat.) a great depth, a deep extent. Profusion, (lat.) a pouring
out lavishly, a wasting. Progeny, (lat.) an offspring, or issue, whence
Progenitour, a fore-father, or ancestour. Progne, see Philomela.
Prognostication, (lat.) a foretelling of things to come. Progressi^n, (lat.) a
making progress, or going foreward. Prohibition, (lat.) a forbidding, in
Astronomy it is, when two Planets are applying to Conjunction, or Aspect, and
before they come to join themselves, another comes to Conjunction, or Aspect of
the Planet applied to. Projections, a Mathematical Term, all sorts of Globes,
or Spheres in Plano. Projecture, (lat.) a forecasting, or designing; also a
Term in Architecture, a jutting out in pillars, or buildings. Prolatation,
(lat.) a delaying, or deferring. Prolation, (lat.) a putting forth, a
pronouncing, or speaking plain. Proleptical, (Greek) belonging to a Prolepsie,
i. a conceaving of things in the mind beforehand, a figure wherein we prevent
what another intends to allege. Proletaneous, or Proletarious, (lat.)
having many Children, and little to maintain them, of a mean, or low condition.
Prolifical, (lat.) apt to breed* or bring forth, fruitful. Prolifical signs
are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. Prolixity, (latin) teadiousnesse in speech.
Prologue, (Greek) a Preface, a Speech which commends to the people a Comedy, or
Fable, or the Author of it. Proloquutour, (lat.) he that speaks before others,
a Chairman, or Speaker of a Synod, or Convocation-house. Prolusion, (lat.) as
it were a playing before, an Essay, or making trial before hand of what a man
is able to do. Prolyte, (Greek) one that has studied the Law four year, a
Licentiate. Prometheus, the father of Deucaleon, and son of Iapetus and Asia,
he having formed of Clay the Image of a man, and climbing up to Heaven by the
help of Minerva, he kindled a little stick at the Sun, and with that celestial
fire, inlivened the man he had made, for which he was at the command of
Jupiter, bound by Mercury to the Mountain Caucasus, where a Vulture was
continually pecking at his Liver, but afterward having diswaded Jupiter from
marrying Thetis, he was for his good counsel freed by Hercules. Prominence,
(lat.) a jutting, or standing out farther then another. Promiscuous, (lat.
mingled, or confused one with another. Promontorie, (lat.) the top of a Hill,
butting out upon the Sea. Promoters, or Promouters, those men, who for
complaining of such as offend in actions bearing a penalty, have part of the
profit for their reward. Promptitude, (lat.) quickness, or readiness.
Promptuarie, (lat.) a Cellar, or Buttery. Promulgation, (lat.) a proclaiming,
or publishing by hanging any Law in the open market place. Prone, (lat.)
stooping downward, or lying with the face downward. Pronephew, (lat.) a Nephew,
or Grandchilds son. Proem, (lat.) a preface, or prologue, an entrance into any
discourse. Propagotion, (lat.) a planting of many young Vines from the old one
cut down; also a spreading abroad, the multiplying of a stock. Prop^lled,
(lat.) thrust out, or driven forward. Propension, (lat.) a pronenesse, or
inclination to any thing. Properation, (lat.) a doing a thing quickly, a making
haste. Prophetical, (Greek) belonging to Prophecy, i. a foretelling of things
to come by certain hidden, and mysterious speeches. Propination, (lat.) a
drinking to any one. Propinquity, (lat.) nearness, or neighborhood, also
affinity. Propitiatory, (lat.) a place where God is pacified. Propitious,
(lat.) favorable, whence Propitiation, an appeasing of Gods displeasure by
sacrifice, or prayer. Propontis, all that Sea that reaches from the Streights
of Hellespont, to the Bosphorus Thracius. Proportion, (lat.) a convenience, or
answerablenesse of one thing to another. Proposition, (lat.) a propounding, or
showing what one intends to speak of; also the major, or first term in Logic.
Propraetor, (lat.) a Deputy Praetor, or Chief Justice. Proprietary, (French) an
owner, or he that has a property in any thing, or one that has the fruit of a
benefice to himself and his Heirs. Propudious, (lat.) shameful, filthy,
dishonest. Propugnacle, (lat.) a Bulwark, or Fortress, whence propugnation, a
defending, or fighting for. Propulsation, (lat.) a chasing away, or driving
back. Proreption, (lat.) a creeping, or stealing on by little and little.
Proritation, (lat.) a stirring up, or provoking. Prorogation, (lat.) a
deferring, or putting off to another time; it is spoken more especially of the
adjourning of a Parliament, or Council. Prosaick, (lat.) belonging to prose.
Proscription, (lat.) a banishing, or outlawing, a making it lawful for any man
to kill the Proscript, or person outlawed, where ever he finds him.
Prosecution, (lat.) a following, or pursuing eagerly. Proselyte, (Greek) a
stranger converted to our faith, it was heretofore meant only of one converted
from Heathenisme to the Jewish religion. Proserpina, the daughter of Jupiter
and Ceres, she being ravished by Pluto, was sought for by Ceres all over the
earth, but after the whole matter was related by the Nymph Cyane, Jupiter at
her earnest request, granted that her daughter should return again to earth, on
condition she had tasted no meat since she came to Hell, but Ascalaphus having
declared that she had eaten part of a Pomegranate (for which Ceres turned him
into an Owl) she could obtain no more, but that she should be 6 months upon
earth, and 6 months with Pluto. Prosodie, (Greek) the art of giving words
their due accent, or tone. Prosopopaea, (Greek) a certain figure, wherein
diverse things are personated, which are not real. A Prospect, (lat.) a view, or
sight of any thing afar off. Prospicuous, (lat.) fair, or goodly to behold.
Prosternation, (lat.) a throwing to the ground, or laying flat, an overcoming.
Prostitution, (lat.) a Harlots letting out the use of her body for hire.
Prostration, (lat.) a falling at ones feet. Protatick, (lat.) belonging to a
Protasie, i. a proposition; also the first part of a Comedy. Protelation,
(lat.) a driving, or chasing away. Protend, (lat.) to stretch forth.
Protervity, (lat.) way-wardnesse, or frowardness. Protesilaus, the son of
Iphiclus, who going to the Trojan war, contrary to the Oracles advice, was
slain by Hector. Protestation, (lat.) an open declaring of ones mind, whence
the Reformers in Germany, from the protestation they made at Spires, were
called Protestants. Proteus, a Sea deity, the son of Oceanus and Thetys, he was
reported to have been Neptune's Sheapheard, and the keeper of his Sea-calfs;
the Poets also feign that he was a great Prophet, and that he could transform
himself into what shape he pleased, Servius affirms that he reigned in the
Carpathian Island, leaving Pallene, a City of Thessaly, where he first lived.
Protocol, (Greek) the first draught of a deed, contract, or instrument, or a
short Register kept thereof; also the upper part of the leaf of a book, wherein
the Title is written. Protolicia, a Castle in Northumberland, where in King
Henry the second's reign, William King of Scots laying siege to it, received a
repulse; it is thought to have been the same with that, which is now called
Prudhow-Castle. Protologie, (Greek) a fore-speech, or Preface. Protomartyr,
(Greek) the first Martyr, or witness of the New Testament. Protoplast, (Greek)
first formed, or made. Prototype, (Greek) the Original type, or first pattern.
Protraction, (lat.) a putting off, deferring, or delaying of time. Protractor,
a certain Mathematical instrument made of brass, consisting of the Scale and
Semicircle, used in the surveying of Land. Protreptick, (Greek) doctrinal, or
giving instructions. Protrusion, (lat.) a thrusting forward. Protuberant,
(lat.) rising, or swelling out. Protype, (Greek) an Example, or Copy, after
which any thing is made. Proveditor, (Italian, as it were a providour) a great
Military Officer among the Venetians. Proverbial, (lat.) belonging to a
proverb, i. an adage, or old saying. Provincial, (lat.) belonging to a
Province; also a Provincial is taken substantively for a chief Governor of an
Order of Friars. Proviso, (Ital.) a caveat, or condition, made in any writing,
without the performance, of which the writing becomes void. Provocation, (lat.)
a provoking, stirring up, or challenging. Proul, to pilfer, or steal in the
night. Prow, (old word) honor, also the fore-castle of a ship; also a point
jutting out in a building. Prov^st, a President of a College, or Cathedral
Church; also a chief Magistrate of a Town. Proximity, (lat.) nearness, or
neighborhood, a nigh degree of kindred. Prudence, the Christian name of diverse
women, the signification well known. Pruinous, (lat.) frosty, covered with
frost. Prunel, an Herb, otherwise called ^icklewort. Prunella, a kind of fruit,
or Plum, somewhat like a Prune. Pruneth, a Term in Faulconry, they say a Hawk
Pruneth, and not picketh her self; yet a Hawk cannot be said properly to prune
her self, but when she begins at her legs, and fetches moisture at her
tail, wherewith she embalmeth her feet, and strikes the feathers of her wings
through her beak, and this fetching off the Oil is called the Note. Prurient,
(lat.) itching, or having an itching desire. Pruriginous, (lat.) having the
itch.
P S
Psalmodie, (Greek) a singing of Psalms, or verses made of short songs, or
sentences. Psalmographie, (Greek) a writing of Psalms. Psaltery, (Greek) a
certain Musical instrument with ten strings, somewhat like a Harp, some call it
a Shalm. Psephisme, (Greek) an Ordinance, Statute, or Decree. Pseudography,
(Greek) a false writing, or counterfeit hand. Pseudologie, (Greek) a false
speaking, or lying. Pseudomartyr, (Greek) a false witness, a counterfeit
Martyr. Pseudoprophet, (Greek) a false Prophet. Psychomachy, (Greek) a
conflict, or war of the Soul.
P T
Ptisane, (lat.) a kind of drink made of Barley. Ptolomaeus, one of Alexander
the Great's Captains; also the name of several Kings of Egypt.
P U
Puberty, (lat.) youth, the age when hairs begin to grow about the privy
members. Publican, a Farmer of public Rents, or Revenues. Publication, (lat.)
a publishing, or making common. Pucelage, (French) Virginity. Pucle-Church, a
Town in Glo^ershire, in times past, a Manor of the Kings; where King Edmund
interposing himself between his Sewer and one Leove a ruffian to part them as
they were quarreling, was thrust through the body, and so lost his life.
Pudibund, (lat.) bashful, or shame-fac't. Pudicity, (lat.) chastity, or
purity. Puerility, (lat.) boyishnesse, childishness* or simplicity. Puerperous,
(lat.) bearing children, or causing to bear children. Pugill, (lat.) a small
handful. Pugillation, (lat.) a playing the Champion, a fighting for any one.
Pugnacity, (lat.) an eager desire of fighting. Puisne, or Puny, (French as it
were born after) a word used in common Law for the younger. Puissance, (French)
power, force, might. Pulchritude, (lat.) fairness, or tallnesse of person.
Pulicous, (lat.) full of fleas. Pullation, (lat.) a hatching of chickens.
Pullulation, (lat.) a springing, a budding forth, a shooting up. Pulmonary,
(lat) the herb Lungwort. Pulmonarious, (lat.) diseased in the Lungs. Pulp,
(lat.) the brawny or musc'ly part of the body; also a kind of fish, otherwise
called a Cuttle-fish or Polypus. Pulsation, (lat.) a knocking, striking, or
beating upon. Pulverisation, (lat.) a breaking to dust, a reducing into powder.
Pulverulent, (lat.) dusty, full of powder. Pumication, (lat.) a making smooth
with a Pumice-stone, i. a stone that is spongy and full of holes. Punch, a kind
of Indian drink. Pungency, (lat.) a pricking. Punctillo, (Ital.) a diminutive
of Puncto, i. a little point; also a thing of no value or moment. Punick faith,
falsehood or perjury. Punition, (lat.) a chastising or correcting. Puny, see
Puisne. Pupil, (lat.) the ball or apple of the eye, also derived from
Pupillus, it signifies an Orphan or fatherless Child, one under age or ward,
or the tuition of a Tutor. Purbeck, a demi Island in Dorcetshire, in the midst
of which stands Corf Castle, where Aelfrith to make way for her own son
Ethelred to the Crown, caused her son in law Edward to be barbarously murdered
as he came from hunting to visit her. Purfle, (French pourfile) a guard,
border, or fringe about any garment. Purflew, a term in Heraldry, common to all
furs so long as they are used in borders. Purgatory, (lat.) a place of
cleansing or purging, a certain place where the Roman Catholics say the souls
of men are cleansed before they go to Heaven. Purification, (lat.) a purifying,
a making clean or pure. Purlue, (French, as it were pure ground) all that
ground near any Forest, which being anciently made Forest, is afterward by
perambulations severed again from the same. To Purloin, to lurk, to get privily
away. Purple, or Purpure, signifies in Heraldry that color which we commonly
call red. Purpurean, (lat.) made of Purple, or of the color of Purple.
Purulent, (lat.) full of matter or filth. Purveyour, see Pourveyour.
Pusilanimity, (lat.) cowardlinesse, or faint-heartednesse. Pustulous, (lat.)
full of Pustules, i. blisters, blaines, or wheales. Putation, (lat.) a lopping
or cutting off superfluous branches; also a thinking, reputing, or esteeming.
Putrid, (lat.) corrupt, rotten, full of matter, whence putrescence, corruption.
Puttocks, (a term in Navigation) small shroudes which go from the maine, fore,
and missen masts shrouds, to the topmasts shrouds, To Put over, a term in
Faulconry. A Hawk is said to put over when she removes her meat from her gorge
into her bowels by traversing with her body; but chiefly with her neck.
P Y
Pygmachy, (Greek) a fighting with Hurlbats. Pygmies, a certain people
inhabiting the uttermost mountains of India, not above a cubit in height, of
whom it is reported that they ride forth in the Spring time upon Goats or Rams
toward the Sea side, armed with bows and arrows to destroy the nests of the
Cranes, which else would grow so numerous, that they would not be able to
overcome them. Pyramidal, (Greek) belonging to a Pyramid, i. a Geometrical
figure, See Obelisk. Pyrenaean hills, certain hills that divide France from
Spain. Pyrotechnie. (Greek) any structure or machination made by fireworks.
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, also a King of Epirus who made war with the
Romans for a long while, he was slain at the taking of Argos, by the fall of a
tile. Pythagorical, belonging to Pythagoras, a famous Philosopher, who was the
chief that held transmigration or the passing of souls out of one body into
another. Pythonical, belonging to Python, i. a prophesying spirit; also the
name of a Serpent of a very vast magnitude which was killed by Apollo, in
memory of which the Pythian Games were instituted.
Q U
QVabb, a kind of fish, called a water-weasel, or Eelpout. Quacksalver, (Dutch)
a Mountebank or simple Physician. Quadragenarious, (lat.) belonging to 40
years. Quadragesimal, (lat.) belonging to Quadragesima, i. the fourtieth day
before Easter, or first Sunday in Lent. Quadrain, (French) a stanza or staff
consisting of 4 verses. Quadrangular, (lat.) belonging to a quadrangle, i. a
foursquare figure. Quadrant, (lat.) a certain Mathematical Instrument, being
the fourth part of a circle, also the fourth part of any measure or number.
Quadrantal, (lat.) four fingers thick; also a certain figure every way
foursquare. Quadrature, (lat.) a squaring, a making square of any thing.
Quadriennial, (lat.) of four years. Quadrigarious, (lat.) belonging to a Coach
or Chariot drawn with four horses. A Quadrin, (French) a mite or small piece
of money, valueing about a farthing. Quadringenarious, (lat.) belonging to 4
hundred. Quadripartite, (lat.) divided into four parts. Quadrivial, (lat.)
consisting of 4 ways or turnings. Quadrupedal, (lat.) having 4 feet.
Quadrupedian signs, representing four-footed beasts, Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Sagitarius, Capricornus. Quadrulation, (lat.) a doubling four times.
Quadruplication, (lat.) a folding of a thing 4 times. Quail, a kind of bird,
called in Latin Cothurnix. Quakers, a modern Sect of religious Enthusiasts, who
take that denomination from their strange gestures and quaking fits which come
upon them in their public Assemblies. Quandary, (as it were quando ara, i.
when will the altar be ready) a studying or doubting what to do. Quarantain,
(French) Lent, or the term of 40 days before Easter. Quardecue, (French) the
fourth part of a French crown. Quare impedit, the name of a Writ that lies for
him that has purchased a Manor with an advouson thereunto belonging, against
him that disturbeth him in the right of his advouson. Quarentine, a right
allowed by the Law of England to the Widow of a landed man deceased* of
continuing 40 days after his decease in his chief Manour-house. Quarry, a
place whence stones are dug out, also a term in Hunting, being a reward
given to hounds after they have hunted. Quarril, (French) a kind of coin
valuing 3 half pence of our money, the fourth part of a real. Quartan, (lat.)
belonging to the fourth. Quartary, (lat.) the fourth part of a sextary, i. two
pound. Quarter, a term in Blazon, being a fourth part of an Escutcheon.
Quartile aspect, a term in Astronomy, the distance of three signs between one
star and another. Quarto, a book is said to be in Quarto, when it consists of
sheets doubled into 4 leaves a piece. Quassation, (lat.) a shaking or
brandishing. Quater cosins, fourth cosins, the last degree of kindred; also
such whose friendship declines. Quaternion, or Quaternity, (lat.) the number of
four. Quaver, one of the quickest times or pauses in Music. Queenborough, a
Town in Kent, built by King Edward the third in honor of Queen Philip his
wife, who built Queens College in Oxford. Queint, (old word) quenched, also
strange. Quercine, (lat.) belonging to an oak. Querimonious, (lat.) mourning,
bewailing, complaining. Quern, a hand-mill. Querpo, see Cuerpo. Querulous,
(lat.) singing or cherping sorrowfully, declaring ones complaints. Quest, or
Inquest, a meeting of Citizens to inquire what misdemeanors are committed in
every Ward. Questour, or Quaestour, (lat.) the Chamberlain of a City, a public
Treasurer. Quicksilver, a certain Mineral, being a slimy water, mixed with a
pure white earth. Quiddity, a term in School-philosophy, the essence of any
thing, also a quirk or subtle question. Quid pro quo, signifies in Common
Law, a mutual performance of a contract by both parties. Quincupedal, (lat.)
having five feet, or of the measure of five feet. Quingenarious, (lat.)
belonging to five hundred. Quinquagesime Sunday, the fiftieth Sunday before
Easter called Shrove Sunday. Quinquangle, (lat.) having 5 corners or angles.
Quinquennial, (lat.) five years old, or lasting five years. Quinquepartite,
(lat.) divided into 5 parts. Quinquereme, (lat.) a Gally having 5 ranks of
oars, or wherein every oar has 5 men; as the Quadri^eme consisted of 4. and
the Trireme of 3. Quinsiesme, in Common Law, is a certain tax laid upon the
subject by the Prince, being the fifteenth part of men's lands or goods.
Quintain, (French) a certain Game formerly much in request at marriages, being
a running a Tilt with poles against a thick plank or Buttresse of wood, wherein
he that showed most actively, had a Peacock for prize. Quintal, (French) a
hundred weight. Quintessential, (lat.) belonging to Quintessence, i. the purest
substance extracted out of any body, the chief force or virtue of any thing.
Quintile, (lat.) the month of July, being the fifth month from March.
Quintuple, (lat.) five-fold. Quinzain, (French) a stanza or staff of 15 verses.
Quirinal hill, one of the 7 hills of Rome, there is also a gate called Porta
Quirinalis. Quirister, see Chorister. Quiritation, (lat.) a crying, calling or
shouting. Quirites, a name anciently given to the Romans. Quite claim, in
Common Law, is an acquitting of a man for any action that he has against him.
Quodlibetical questions, certain questions disputed pro and con in the
Schools. Justices of the Quorum, four Justices of the peace in any County,
whose presence is required in all businesses of importance, their Commission
beginning thus, Quorum vos A B etc. unum esse volumus. Quotidian, (lat.) daily,
done every day. Quotient, (lat.) a term in Arithmetic, the number that rises
out of the divisour. Quoyl, a term in Navigation, a rope laid up round, one
take over another. Quoyn, a thing which Gunners set under their Ordnance to
mount them higher or let them lower.
R A
RAbbettings, a term in Navigation, the letting in of the planks to the keel.
Rabbinical, belonging to a Rabbi or Rabbin, i. a Doctor or Teacher among the
Jews. Rabid, (lat.) mad or raging. Racemation, (lat.) a gathering of grapes
after the clusters are gone. Racemiferous, (lat.) bearing clusters of grapes.
Rachel, the proper name of a woman, signifying in Hebrew a sheep. Radegund,
(Sax.) favorable counsel, a Christian name of women. Rade vore, (Sax.)
Tapestry or Loom-work. Radiant, (lat.) bright, shining, or glittering like the
Sunbeams. Radiation, a darting forth of beams. Radical, (lat.) belonging to
the root, whence Radical moisture, the natural, and vital moisture spread like
a dew, through all parts of the body; in Astrology a radical question, is a
question propounded, when the Lord of the ascendent, and Lord of the hour are
of one nature and triplicitie. Radication, (lat.) a taking root. Raffinage,
(French) a refining. Raffle, (French) a kind of Game at Dice, also a rifling.
Raft, a kind of Boat, or floating Vessel. Ragounces, (Sax.) a kind of
precious stone. Raillery, (French) jesting, sporting, or scoffing. Raimund,
(Germ.) a proper name, signifying quiet; answering to the Greek Hesychius.
Rainbow, a Meteor of diverse colors, fiery, blue, and green, when the Sun
beams are in a Geometrical opposition to a shallow, and moist cloud. Rally,
(French) to reunite, to gather together dispersed Troops. Ralf, (Germ.) a
proper name of men, contracted from Rodulph, i. help counsel. Ramagious,
(French) wild, belonging to Ramage, i. boughs, or branches. Rambooz, a kind
of compound drink. Ramberge, (French) a kind of swift Gally, or long ship.
Ramist, a follower of Ramus, a modern writer, famous for reducing many of the
arts into a handsome method and abridgement. Ramosity, (lat.) fullness of
branches, or boughs. Rampant, a Term in Heraldry, being spoken of a beast
climbing, or rearing up his fore-feet. Rampire, or Rampert, (French) a Term in
fortification, the wall of a bulwark, or fortress. Ramsey, a famous Abbey in
Huntingtonshire, so called as it were Rams Island; it was built in the time of
King Edgar, by his Kinsman Ailwin, surnamed Healf-Koning, i. half King, and
enlarged by Bishop Oswald. Rancidity, or Rancour, (lat.) mouldinesse,
rottenness, mustinesse; also malice, or inward grudging. Randal, (Sax.) a
proper name, from Ranulph, i. fair help. Ransom, (French, contract: a
redemption) a sum of money paid for the redeeming of a Captive, or for the
pardoning of some heinous Crime. Rapacity, (lat.) ravenousnesse, extortion,
greediness. Rapes, certain divisions of the County of Sussex; as Kent is
divided into Wapentakes, these Rapes are six in all, namely of Chicester,
Arundel, Brembe, Lewise, Pevensey and Hastings. Raphael, a proper name,
signifying in Hebrew the physic of God. Rapidity, (lat.) swiftness,
quickness, hastiness. Rapine, (lat.) Robbery, Pillaging, a taking a thing by
open force, or violence. Rapsodie, (Greek) a contexture, or joining together of
diverse verses, or sentences. Rapture, (lat.) a snatching away by violence; also
an Ecstasie, or Transportment. Rarity, thinness, it is by the Philosophers
opposed to Density, and that body is said to be rare, whose quantity is more,
and its substance less. Rarefaction, (lat.) a rarefying, or making thin.
Raskail, (old world) trash. Raspatory, (French) a Butlers instrument, wherewith
he chips bread. Raspis, a kind of fruit growing on a shrub, called in French
Framboise; as it were a wood Strawberry. Ras-Algense, a Star in the Twin.
Ras-Alden, the head of Junonius. Rasure, (lat.) a shaving, or scraping.
Ratiocination, (lat.) a reasoning, arguing, or discoursing. Ratification,
(lat.) a ratifying, confirming, or making sure. Rational, (lat.) reasonable
endued with reason; it is also substantively taken for a certain Priestly
attire among the Jews. Ravage, (French) havoc, spoil, ransack. Ra^city, (lat.)
hoarsnesse. Ravenna, a famous City of Italy, where anciently the Exarchs
belonging to the Emperor of Constantinople had their residence; it is situate
upon the Adriatic Seashore. Ravishment, or Rape, the violent deflouring of a
woman; also in Common Law, it is used for the taking away, either of a woman,
or an Heir in Ward. Raunge, (Fr.) the Office of a Raunger, who is to drive back
the wild beasts of the Forest, as often as they Raunge out of the same into
any of the Purlues. Ray, (French) a beam of the Sun, or any other Star; also
Metaphorically taken for the luster of any glorious object. Cleopatra.
R E
Reach, a Term in Navigation, the distance of any two points of Land, which
bear in a direct line one toward another. Reading, the chief Town in
Bark-shire, so called from the River Rhea, or from British word Redin, i.
Fern, which grows thereabout in great plenty; here anciently the Danes
fortified themselves, and made a Rampire between Kenet and Tamis, when they
were defeated by King Aethelwolf. Read, or Read, (old word) council, advice,
help. Real, (Span.) a kind of Spanish Coin, valuing about six pence of our
money. Ream, a certain measure of paper, consisting of twenty quires.
Reasonable aid, in Common Law, is a duty that the Lord of the fee claims,
holding by Knights service, or in soccage to marry his daughter, or make his
son Knight. Rebate, see Chamfering. Rebate, a Term used among merchants, to
allow so much as the interest of any sum of money amount to, for the time of
antepayment; also a Term in Faulconry, vide to Bate. Rebecca, (Hebr.) fat and
full, a proper name of women. Rebeck, an old Trot, Chaucer; also a certain
Musical instrument of 3 strings, called in Latin Sistrum, or Fidicula.
Rebellion, (Lat. as it were a rewarring) a second resistance of such, as being
formerly overcome in battle by the Romans, had yielded themselves to their
subjection. Rebus, the expressing of any name, conceit, motto, or devise by a
picture; see Camdens Remains. Rebutter, a Term in Law, is, when the Donnee by
virtue of a Warrantry made by the Donour repelleth the Heir. Recalcitration,
(lat.) a striking back with the heel. Recantation, (lat.) a revoking, or
unsaying what was said before. Recapitulation, (lat.) a brief Repetition, a
summing up the heads of a former discourse. Recargaison, (French) a lading of a
ship homeward, a backfraught. Recede, (lat.) to retire, to go back. Recent,
(lat.) fresh, new, lately done. Recension, (lat.) a rehearsing, reckoning or
numbering. Receptacle, (lat.) a place fit to receive, or contain any thing, a
warehouse, or storehouse. Reception, when two Planets are in each others
dignity, then they are said to receive one another, and it is manifold, by
house, by exaltation, by triplicity, term, or face. Recesse, (lat.) a
recoyling, or going back, a place of recreat, or retirement. Recheat, a certain
lesson, which Hunters wind on their Horn, when the Hounds have lost their Game.
Recidivous, (lat.) falling, or sliding back, to the same pass as it was
before. Reciprocal, (lat.) mutual, or interchangeable, whence Reciprocation.
Recision, (lat.) a cutting away. Recitation, (lat.) a reciting, or rehearsing,
whence Recitative style in Music is a kind of singing, wherewith Heroic, or
Dramatick Poems are rehearsed upon the stage. Reck, (old word) to care.
Recluse, (lat.) shut up, retired, cloistered up in a solitary place.
Recognisance, (Fr.) signifies in Common Law, a Bond of Record, testifying from
the Recognisour to the Recognizee, a certain sum of money, which is
acknowledged in some Court of Record before a Judge, or other Officer of the
Court. Recognition, (lat.) a revising, re-acknowledging, or calling to mind.
Recollects, a certain Order of Friars. Recommendation, (lat.) a commending any
one to another. Recopilation, (Span.) a picking, or choosing out the best from
among a great many things. Record, (French) in Common Law, signifies an
authentical, or uncontrollable testimony in writing. Recordation, (lat.) a
remembering, or calling to mind. Recorder, one whom the Magistrate of a Town
does associate unto him, for his better direction in matters of Justice, and
proceedings according to Law. Recovery, in Common Law, signifies an obtaining
of any thing by Judgment, or Trial of Law. Recourse, (lat.) refuge, or
retreat. Recoyle, (French Reculeer as it were, retrahere culum, i. to draw back
the tail) to retire, or go back. Recreant, (French) fainthearted, not standing
to ones challenge; also treacherous. Recreation, (lat. as it were a making, or
creating anew) a refreshing, reviving, or restoring. Recrement, (lat.) the
dross scum, or dregs of any thing. Recrimination, (lat.) a retorting back a
fault upon the accuser. Rectangle, (lat.) a right, or straight angle, or
corner, which is made by the falling of one line perpendicular upon another.
Rectification, (lat.) a rectifying, a making right, or straight. Recto sur
disclamer, a Writ that lies where the Lord in the Kings Court does avow upon
his Tenant, and the Tenant disclaimeth to hold of him. Rectour, (lat.) a
Governor, also he that has the charge, or cure of any Parish Church. Rectus
in curia, he that stands at the Bar, and has no man to object any thing
against him. Reculade, (French) a recoiling, or going back, also a secret
corner. Reculver, an ancient Town in Kent, heretofore called Regulbium, here
the Captain of the first Band of the Vetasians lay in Garrison; it is also
famous for the Palace, built by Aethelbert, King of Kent, and the Monastery
built by Brightwald, the eight Archbishop of Canterbury, from which the Town
came to be called Raculfminster. Recuperation, (lat.) a recovering.
Recurvation, (lat.) a crooking, bowing, or bending backward. A Recusant, a
Roman Catholic, so called from refusing to submit to the Discipline of the
Reformed Church. Redamation, (lat.) a loving again. Redargution, (lat.) a
disproving, a convincing of falsity by solid arguments. Redborn, (signifying as
much as redwater) a Town in Hertford-shire, seated upon the Military Highway,
commonly called Watling-street, it has been famous heretofore for the Relics
of Amphibalus, who suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian, and who converted St.
Alban to the Christian faith. Reddition, (lat.) a restoring, or giving back.
Redevable, (French) being in arrearage, or behind in payment, whence it is
used in a translate sense, for obleiged, or beholding to. Cleopatra.
Redhibition, (lat.) the causing of any one by Law, to take that again which he
sold. Rediculus, a certain God worshipped among the ancient Romans, without the
Porta Capena, upon occasion of Hannibals returning from Rome, being frighted
with certain apparitions. Redintegration, (lat.) a renewing, a making whole
again. Redition, (lat.) a returning, or coming back. Redituaries, a certain
Order of Friars, being a branch of the Franciscans. Redolent, (lat.) yielding a
sweet smell, fragrant. Redonation, (lat.) a giving back, that which was taken
away. Redoubt, a Term in fortification, the jutting out of the angles, or
corners of any work. A Redstert, a certain bird, otherwise called a Robin
Redbreast, in Latin Rubicilla. Redshanks, the Irish-Scots, are so called from
Reuda, an Irish Captain, who anciently, by force of Arms, seated himself in a
part of Scotland. Redubbours, those that buy Cloth, which they know to be
stolen, and turn it into (...) other form, or fashion. Reduction, (lat.) a
reducing, or bringing back. Redversies, commonly called Rivers's, the name of
an honorable Family in Cornwall, who have been heretofore Earls of Devonshire,
and Barons of Plimpton, they are styled in Latin Records, de Ripariis.
Redundancy, (lat.) an overflowing, abounding, or exceeding. Reduplication,
(lat.) a redoubling, a Rhetorical figure, called in Greek Anadiplosis, wherein
a verse, or sentence ends in the same word as the following begins. Reentry, in
Common Law, is a resuming or taking again possession of what we had last
forgon. Reev, or Greve, from the Saxon word Gerefa, the Bailiff of a Franchise
or Manor. To Reeve, a term in Navigation, and spoken of ropes, signifies as
much as to put in or to put through. Refection, (lat.) a repast or meal.
Refectory, or Refectuary, a place in Monasteries, where the Monks and Friars
eat together. To Refell, (lat.) to disprove by arguments, to confute, to prove
false. Referendary* (lat.) an officer who makes report of Petitions or Requests
exhibited to any Prince, more particularly one under the Master of Requests in
France. Reflection, (lat.) a bowing or bending back, a beating or striking
back; also by metaphor a casting back ones mind upon things past. Reflux,
(lat.) a flowing back, an ebbing of the Sea or any River. Refocillation, (lat.)
a cherishing, comforting, or reviving; also a kindling or keeping warm.
Reformado, (Span.) an officer who having lost his men, is continued in pay as
an inferior soldier. To Reform, a term in Faulconry, for a Hawk is not said
to prune, but to reform her feathers. Refractary, (lat. as it were
irrefrangible, i. unbreakable) stubborn or obstinate. Refranation, is when a
Planet is applying to another, either by conjunction or aspect, and before he
comes joined, he becomes retrograde. Refret, (French Refrain) the burden of a
Ballade or Song. Refrigeration, (lat.) a refreshing or cooling again. Refuge,
(lat.) a flying for succor or safety, a place of respite or succor.
Refulgent, (lat.) shining bright. To Refund, (lat.) to dissolve or melt again,
also to pay back. Refutation, (lat.) a confuting by arguments, a disapproving.
Regal, (lat.) Kingly, Royal, Stately; also a Regal signifies a Ring or Jewel
of great value. To Regale, (French) to fare like a King, to intertain Royally.
Regalia, (lat.) the rights and privileges of a King. Regardant, (French)
looking back, a term in Heraldry. Regarder of the Forest, is an officer of the
Kings Forest, who is sworn to make the regard of the Forest, to surview all
other officers, and to inquire of all offenses, as well of Vert as of Venison,
within all that ground that is parcel of the Forest which is called the
Regard. Regards, (French) attentive markings or observings of men and actions.
Cleopat. Regency, (lat.) a ruling, but more particularly the Protectourship of
a Kingdom. Regeneration, (lat.) a new birth, a being born again spiritually.
Regermination, (lat.) a sprouting forth or budding again. Regicide, (lat.) a
King-killer. Regifugium, a certain Feast celebrated by the ancient Romans the
seventh Calends of March, on which day Tarquin and Kingly government were
banished Rome. Regiment, a body of soldiers consisting of 10 Companies or
Troops. Register, (lat.) a Memorial or Record* more particularly our ancientest
Book of the Law, containing the Original Writs of the Common Law.
Regl^tination, (lat.) a glueing again. Regrater, a word anciently used in the
Common Law for him that bought by the great, and sold by retaile; also one that
trimmes up old wares for sale, a huckster. Regression, or Regresse, (lat.) a
returning or going back. Regret, (French) desire, also sorrow or reluctance.
Regularity, (lat.) order, rule, or prescript; also a Canonical life. Marcus
Attilius Regulus, a famous Roman, who being taken by the Carthaginians, had
leave given him to treat about the exchange of prisoners, upon his word given
to return by such a time, which having performed, he was put to death with
exquisite torments. Regurgitation, (lat.) a swallowing up again. Rejection,
(lat.) a casting off. To Reinbosce, (Span.) to return to the wood, to lie in
ambush again. Rejoinder, in Common Law, signifies a second answer made by the
defendant, or an exception to a replication: the Civilians call it Duplication.
Reister, (French) or Ruyter, (Dutch) a horseman (whence Swartrutter, a horseman
with black armor) also a long horsemans cloak. Reiteration, (lat.) a saying or
doing the same thing over again, a repeating. Relaps, (lat.) a falling back
into any sickness. Relative, (lat.) having relation or nearness to some other
thing. Relaxation, (lat.) a loosening, a releasing, a setting at liberty.
Relay, a term in Hunting, a setting of hounds in a readiness where the Deer
are likely to pass. Release, in the Common Law, is an instrument, whereby
estates, rights, titles, entrys, actions, and other things, are sometimes
extinguished sometimes enlarged, sometimes transferred, and sometimes abridged.
Relief, in Common Law, is a certain sum of money that the Tenant holding by
knights-service, grandsergeantry, or other Tenure, for which homage or regal
service is due, or by soccage for which no homage is due; and being at full age
at the death of his Ancestour, does pay to his Lord at his entrance. Also a
term in Architecture. Releg^tion, (lat.) a sending or conveying away, a
banishing. To Relent, (lat.) to grow soft; it is also used metaphorically for
to melt into pity or compassion. Relevation, (lat.) a raising or lifting up
again. Relict, (lat.) a thing forsaken or left destitute; also the Widow of a
deceased husband, is called the Relict of such a one. Reliquary, (French) a
shrine or casket where reliqnes ( i. something preserved either of the body or
cloths of deceased Saints) are kept. Relo^i^in, a returning to the same point
again. Reliquation, (lat.) remains, or a being in arrearage. Reluctation, or
Reluctance, (lat.) a striving, wrestling, or struggling against. Remainder, in
Common Law, signifies a power or hope to enjoy Lands, Rents or Tenements,
after the estate of another expired. Remancipation, (lat.) a returning back a
commodity into the hands of him of whom it was first bought. Remembrancers,
three officers belonging to the Exchequer; the first is called the Kings
Remembrancer, who enters in his office all recognisanses taken before the
Barons, and makes bonds for any of the Kings debts, or for appearance or
observing of orders, and makes process for the breach of them. The second the
Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, who puts him and the rest of the Justices in
remembrance of such things as are to be dealt in for the Princes behoof. The
third is the Remembrancer of the first fruits and tenths, who takes all
composition for first fruits and tenths, and makes process against such as pay
not the same. Remigation, (lat.) a rowing with oars. Reminiscence, (lat.) a
remembering, or calling to mind. Remiss, (lat.) slack, negligent. Remissible,
(lat.) pardonable, or to be forgiven. Remitter, in Common Law, is a restitution
of him that has two titles to Lands, unto that which is more ancient.
Remonstrance, (lat.) a declaring, showing, or giving of reasons. Remora, a fish
called a Sea-lamprey or Suckstone, which stops the course of a Ship; also
taken metaphorically for any delay or hindrance.* Remorse, (lat.) as it were a
rebiting or gnawing again, the sting of conscience, or troubles of mind for
former evil actions. Remuneration, (lat.) a rewarding or recompensing for
former good turus. Remus, the brother of Romulus, who slew him that he might
obtain the whole dominion to himself. Rencounter, (French) an unexpected
adventure, or meeting of two adverse parties. Renavigation, (lat.) a sailing
back. Rendevous, (a word signifying in French render your selves) a place where
soldiers are mustred. Rendlesham, or Rendlisham, a Town in Suffolk, anciently
the Mansion house of Redwald King of the East Saxons, who being the first of
that Kingdom that was baptized, nevertheless by his wifes seducement, he had
in the same Church one altar for Christian Religion, and another for his old
heathen superstition. Renegado, (Span.) a soldier that revolts to the enemy.
Renimed, or Runningmead, a famous meadow in the County of Middlesex, where in
the year of our Lord 1215 the Barons of England assembled in great numbers to
claim their liberties of King John. Renitency, (lat.) a resistance or striving
against. Renodation, (lat.) an unknitting or undoing of a knot. Renovation,
(lat.) a making new or fresh, a renewing. Rent, in Common Law, is a sum of
money or other consideration issueing yearly out of Lands or Tenements.
Renversed, (French) turned the contrary. Renumeration, (lat.) a numbering,
counting, or paying back. Renunciation, (lat.) a bringing word back again.
Renvoy, (French) a dismission or sending back. Repandous, (lat.) bowed or bent
back. Reparation, (lat.) a mending or making up again. Repast, (French, as it
were a feeding again) a meal. Repastination, (lat.) the altering of grounds
with often digging. Repensation, (lat.) a recompensing, or making satisfaction.
Repentine, (lat.) sudden, unawares, unexpected. Repercussion, (lat.) a beating
or striking back. Repertitious, (lat.) found by chance. Repignoration, (lat.) a
redeeming a pawn or gage. Repletion, (lat.) a stuffing, or filling full.
Replevy, the bringing of a Writ called replegiari facias by him that has his
cattle or other goods distraind, and putting in surety to the Sheriff that upon
delivery of the thing distrained, he will pursue the action against him.
Replication, (lat.) an unfolding, also a second answering or making a reply.
Report, in Common Law, is a relation or repetition of a case debated or argued.
Reposition, (lat.) a putting back, a setting again in his place. Repository,
(lat.) a storehouse, or place to keep things in* more peculiarly by the
Architects, such places as are built for the laying up of rareties either in
picture or other arts are called Repositories. Reprehension, (lat.) a blaming
or reproving. Representation, (lat.) a making the resemblance or likeness of
any thing. Reprise, (French) a taking back again, also any deduction or duty
paid yearly out of a Manor. Reprisell, (French) a seizing on for a pawn or
prize. See Law of Marque. To Reprive, in Common Law, is to take back a prisoner
from the execution or proceeding of the Law. Reprobation, (lat.) a reproving,
also a rejecting or casting out of favor, whence a Reprobate is taken for a
wicked person or one cast out of gods favor. Reptitious, (lat.) stealing or
creeping on by degrees. Repton, a Town in Darbyshire, famous in old times, for
being the burial place of King Aethelbald, and also for the misfortune of
Burthred, the last King of the Mercians, who was here deprived of his Kingdom
by the Danes. Republique, (lat.) a Commonwealth or Free State. Repudiation,
(lat.) a refusing, a putting away or divorcing. Repugnancy, (lat.) resistance,
contrariety of one thing to another. Repullulation, (lat.) a budding forth, a
springing up again. Repumication, (lat.) a slicking, or raizing with a pumice.
Reputation, (lat.) esteem, reckoning, or good opinion. Request, (French) a
petition or desire, also a Court of the same nature with the Chancery,
redressing by equity the wrongs that diverse men suffer, either by Law or
otherwise, at the hands of those that are more powerful than themselves. To
sing a Requiem, signifies to sing a Mass for the eternal rest of the souls
of those that are deceased, the word Requies signifying in Latin rest. Resceyt,
(lat. receptio) in Common Law is an admission of a third person to plead his
right in a cause between other two. To Rescind, (lat.) to take away, to
destroy, or repeal, whence a Rescissorian Act, is that which makes void a
former Act, or Law. Rescissorian action, (lat.) an action that nulleth, or
makes void. Rescous, in Common Law, is a resistance of lawful authority, by
taking away, or procuring the escape of any one arrested by a Bayliffe.
Rescrib^ndary, a certain Officer belonging to Rome, who sets a value upon
indulgencies and supplications. Rescript, (lat.) a writing, which is in answer
to any Letter, Petition, Writ, etc. Research, (French) a constant perseverance,
a continual repetition of services. Cleopatra. Resentment, or Ressentiment,
(French) a sensible feeling, or true apprehension of any thing. Reseration,
(lat.) an unlocking, or unbolting. Reservation, (lat.) a reserving, or keeping
in store; also in Common Law, it is taken for that Rent, or service, which the
Granter in any Grant tieth the Grantee to perform unto him; also Reservation,
or Reservednesse, is used in Romances for that distance and state, which Ladies
observe in their behavior toward those that Court them. Resiance, (French) a
man's abode, or continuance in a place. Residence, (lat.) the same, but more
peculiarly; it is used for the continuance of a Parson, or Vicar upon his
benefice. Residue, (lat.) the rest, or remainder. Resignation, (lat.) an
unsealing, also a surrendering up, but more particularly, the resigning up a
benefice into the hands of the Ordinary. Resilition, (lat.) a rebounding, or
leaping back. Resinous, (lat.) full of Rosin. Resipiscence, (Latin, as it were
a being wise again) a repenting, a changing ones mind from doing foolishly.
Resistance, (Lat. as it were a withstanding) a Term in Philosophy, taken for
the property of a solid body, which resists and opposes whatsoever comes
against it. Resolution, (lat.) in the primitive acception, signifies a
loosening, or untying, but it is generally taken only for a full purpose, or
intention to do any thing, perhaps, because by untying, all knots, and
hindrances are taken away. Resonant, (lat.) resounding, ringing, or ecchoing
out aloud. Resource, (French) a new source, a recovery. Respight of homage,
signifies the forbearing of homage, which ought first of all to be performed
by the Tenant that holds by homage. Respiration, (lat.) a breathing, or
taking ^espite. Resplendent, (lat.) shining bright, or glistering. Response, or
Responsion, (lat.) an Answer. Responsory song, an Anthem, wherein they sing by
turns as it were, one answering the other. Restagnation, (lat.) an overflowing,
a bubling up. Restoration, (lat.) a restoring, making new, or repairing.
Restible, (lat.) tilled every year, also flourishing, or bearing fruit every
year. Restipulation, (lat.) a putting in a pledge or gage for the assurance of
ones answer unto an action in Law. Restitution, (lat.) a restoring back; in
Common Law it is taken for the setting him in possession of Lands, or
Tenements, that has been unlawfully disseised of them. Restive, (French)
unwilling, stubborn, obstinate. Restriction, (lat.) a holding, or restraining.
Resuery, (French) madness, sottishness. Resultancy, or Result, (French) a
rebounding, or leaping back; also the issue, or event of a business; also a
conclusion drawn from any thing. Resumption, (lat.) a taking back again,
particularly a taking back into the Kings hands, as before he had delivered to
the Heir, or granted by Letters Patents to any man. Resupination, (lat.) a
lying along on the back with the face upward. Resurrection, (lat.) a rising
again. Resuscitation, (lat.) a raising up again. Retailler, (French) a seller
by retail, i. by pieces, or parcels, and not by the gross. Retainer, in
Common Law, is taken for a servant not maenial, but only using his masters
name, or bearing his livery. Retaliation, (lat.) a doing like for like, a
requiting, either good, or bad. Retardation, (lat.) a forslowing, lingering, or
staying. Retention, (lat.) a retaining, or holding back; in Common Law, it is
meant, when a Court pronounces not a full arrest, or judgment, but reserves
somewhat to be afterward ordered. Retentive, (lat.) apt to retain, or hold in,
whence Retentive faculty, the retaining power of nature, which keeps in the
nourishment within the body, so long as is convenient. Reticence, (lat.) a
being silent, or holding ones peace. Reticle, (lat.) a little Net. Retinacle,
(lat.) that which retains, or holds back another thing. Retortion, (lat.) a
twisting, or writhing backward. Retraction, (lat.) a drawing back; also a
shifting, or going off from ones word. Retraxit, in Common Law is an exception
against one that formerly commenc't an action, and withdrew it, or was nonsuit
before trial. Retreat, (French) a retiring, also a place of accommodation and
security. Retribution, (lat.) a giving back, a making recompense, or requital.
Retriment, (lat.) the dross, or dregs of metal, also any kind of rubbish.
Retrive, (from the French Retrover, to find again) a Term in Hawking, to
spring Partridges again, after they have once sprung already; also to recover a
thing given for lost. Retroaction, (lat.) a driving backward. Retrocession,
(lat.) a going backward. Retrocopulation, (lat.) a coupling backward.
Retroduction, (lat.) a leading, or bringing back. Retrogradation, (lat.) a
recoiling, or going back; a Planet goes Retrogade, when it goes contrary to the
succession of the signs. Retrogression, (lat.) the same as Retrogradation.
Return in Common Law, signifies the return of a Writ by Sheriffs and Bailiffs,
which is a Certificate made to the Court where the Writ directs him, of that
which he has done touching the serving of the same Writ. Reuda, a certain
Irish Captain, who by force of Arms seated himself in a part of Scotland.
Revelation, (lat.) a revealing laying open, or discovering. Revels, sports of
dancing, masking, comedies, etc. formerly used in the Kings house and Inns of
Court, from the French Reveiller, to awake, because they were performed in the
night time. Reverberation, (lat.) a reflecting, a beating, or striking back.
Reverbitorie, (lat.) a kind of Furnace, or Limbeck. Reverse, (French) a
back-blow in fencing. Reversed, turned backward, or upside down, a Term in
Heraldry, being the abatement of a Cote proper to him that ravishes a Maid, or
Widow, or flies from his sovereigns Banner. Reversion, (lat.) a returning, also
in Common Law, is a possibility reserved to man's self, and his Heirs to have
again, Lands, or Tenements made over conditionally to others, upon the failing
of such conditions. Revestiary, a place where the Church Vestments are kep^, a
Vestry. Reviviction, (lat.) a reviving, a coming again to ones self.
Revocation, (lat.) a calling back. Revolution, (lat.) a rolling back, the
turning back of caelestial bodies to their first point, and finishing their
circular course. Revulsion, (lat.) a plucking back, or drawing away, in Physic
it is an evacuation of the Morbisick matter, by places opposite to the seat of
the humor. Rewish, (Dutch) lecherous, a word applied to the copulation of
Doves.
R H
Rhabdomancy, (Greek) divination by a wand staff, or rod. Rhadamanthus, the son
of Jupiter and Europa, who for his severity in Justice was faign'd by the Poets
to have been one of the three infernal Judges, the other two being Aeacus and
Minos. Rhaetia, a Country of Europe, bordering upon Helvetia, and the Lake
Larius, it is divided into higher and lower Rhetia, the inhabitants of the
higher are called Grisons of the lower Boiarii. Rhapsodie, (Greek) see
Rapsodie. Rhedarious, (lat.) belonging to a Car, or Coach. Rhedarious, (lat.)
belonging to a Wagon, or Cart. Rhesus, a King of Thrace, the son of Strymon
and Euterpe, he came with his white horses to the aid of the Trojans, and was
killed by Diomed and Ulysses, with the help of Dolon, those white horses, upon
which the fate of Troy depended, being brought away by the Greeks. Rhetorical,
(lat.) eloquent, full of Rhetoric, i. the art of speaking well, and
eloquently. Rhinoceros, (Greek) a kind of Indian beast, having a horn on his
nose. Rhodus, a famous Island in the Carpathian Sea, formerly consecrated to
the Sun, in honor of whom a mighty Colossus was made, 50 Cubits in length.
Rhomb, or Roumb, (lat.) a certain Geometrical square figure, consisting of
equal sides, but unequal angles; also a spinning wheel, also a Mariners
Compass, or Sea Chart. Rhonchisonant, (lat.) sounding like one that snorts in
his sleep. Rhythmical, (Greek) belonging to Rhythme, or Meeter in verse; as
also to proportion, or harmony in Music.
R I
Rialto, a stately place in Venice, like to our Royal Exchange. Ribadavia, a
Town in Gallicia, a Province of Spain, from whence is brought a sort of wine
much esteemed. Riband, is less then a Cost, and contains the eighth part of a
Bend. Ribauldry, (Ital.) whoredom, uncleanness, or the carriage of a Ruffian.
Ribibble, (old word) a Fiddle, or Cittern. Richmond, q. rich mount, the chief
Town of Richmondshire; it was walled about, and fortified with a strong Castle
against the Danes, by Allan the first Earl thereof, also the name of one of
the Kings houses in Surrey, where King Edward the third died. Ribolla, a kind
of strong wine, so called. Riches, by the Hunters taken for a Company, and so
they say a riches of Marterns. Richard, a proper name of a man, signifying in
the Saxon tongue powerful disposition. Ricture, (lat.) a grinning or showing
the teeth like a dog, also a fretting or chasing inwardly. To Ride in
Navigation, is, when a ship is held in so fast by her Anchors, that she does
not drive away by the tide, or wind. Riding Clark, one of the six Clarks of
the Chancery, who takes his turn for his year to have the controling of all
Grants which pass the great Seal. Rier County, a public place, which the
Sheriff appoints for the receipt of the Kings money, after the end of his
County. Rigation, (lat.) a bedewing, watering, or sprinkling. Rigidity, or
Rigor, (lat.) stiffness with cold, or frost; also surlinesse, strictness,
severity. Rigel, the left foot of Orion. Rigols, a certain Musical instrument,
called a Clericord, it comes from the French Regalliadir, i. to rejoice.
Ringtail, a kind of Puttock, or Kite, having whitish feathers about his tail.
Ringwalk, a Term in hunting, being a round walk made by Hunters. Riot, in
Common Law, is the forcible doing of an unlawful act, by three, or more
persons assembled together for that purpose. Riphaean-hills, certain Hills of
Scythia, so called from the Greek word Ripe, i. the violent force of winds
blowing from those parts, they are also called Hyperborean Mountains. Ripiers,
those that use to bring fish from the Seacoast to the inner parts of the land,
it comes from the Latin word Ripa, a Bank, or Shore. Risible, (lat.) subject to
laughter. Risingham, (signifying in the British tongue the Giants habitation)
a certain Town in Northumberland, of which the old Britains fabulously
reported, that it was defended by their god Magon, against a Sultan, or great
Prince in those times. Rituals, certain books, which prescribe the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Roman Church. Rivage, (French) the waterside, or Seacoast.
Rivality, (lat.) envy between Rivals, i. two persons loving one, and the same
woman, being a Metaphor borrowed from those that fetch water from the same
river. Rivulet, (lat.) a Brook, or little river. Rixation, (lat.) a brawling,
or wrangling. Rizon, a City of Illyria, seated upon a River of the same name.
R O
Roan color, a kind of dark, or Chestnut color, being most properly spoken of
a Horse. Robert, the proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch famous in
Council. Robigalia, certain feasts kept in May, by the ancient Romans in honor
of Robigus, who was worshipped as a God among them, for that he was thought to
keep the Corn from blasting. Robiginous, (lat.) full of rust, also blasted as
Corn. Roboration, (lat.) a strengthening, or making strong, from Robur, i. an
Oak. Robustous, (lat.) strong as an Oak. Roch, (old word) a Rock. Rochester, a
City in Kent, called in Latin Roffa, from one Rhufus, but more anciently
Durobrevis, in the year 676. it was laid waste by Aetheldred, King of the
M^rcians, and many a time afterward sacked by the Danes. Rochet, a kind of
fish, so called; also a kind of surplice, or Bishops Robe. Rod, a certain Land
measure, see Perch. Rode, a station for ships, from the Dutch word Reed.
Rodknights, or Radknights, certain servitours, which hold by serving their Lord
on hors-back. Rodnet, a Net to catch Black-birds, or Wood-cocks in.
Rodomontade, (Span.) a vainglorious bragging, or boasting. Roe, or Roebuck, a
kind of Deer, called in French la Chevrelle. Rogation, (lat.) an asking,
demanding, or entreating, whence Rogati^n week, the next week but one before
Whi^sunday; so called from the duty of fasting and prayer enjoined at that time
by the Church, as a preparative to the feast of the Ascension, it is also
called Gang week, and by some Grass week. Roger, the proper name of a man,
from the Dutch word Ruger, i. quiet, or Rodgar, i. strong Council. Rogitation,
(lat.) an asking often, an entreating earnestly. Roiston, a Town in
Hertfordshire, anciently called Roises Cross, from a Cross built by Dame
Roise (as some think) Countess of Norfolk, but being augmented by Eustace de
Marck, it came to be called Roiston, q. Roises Town. The Rolls, a place
appointed by Edward the third, for the keeping of the Rolls, or Records of
Chancery, the master whereof in the absence of the Lord Chancelour sits as
Judge. Rollo, a famous Captain, who with a select Company of Danish youths
going to seek out new habitations, settled in that part of France, which is now
called Normandy, the French at last after much War were glad to make a league
with them, and to allow them quiet possession of what they had conquered, and
Rollo marrying the daughter of Charles the simple, was both himself baptized,
and likewise caused all his people to embrace the Christian faith. Roma, the
chief City of Italy, and most famous of the world, built by Romulus and Remus,
the Grandchildren of Numitor, the inhabitants of this City and parts
adjacent, called the Romans, were anciently a people renowned, both in war
and peace, and masters of a great part of the world. Romance, a feigned history
from Romant, the most eloquent sort of French, or Roman, which has heretofore
been used to signify any thing written, or expressed eloquently. Rome, (old
word) to wander, or walk up and down. Romescot, or Romefeoh, a certain tribute
paid to Rome, commonly called Peter Pence. Romulus and Remus, the sons of
Sylvia, (as some suppose by Mars) the daughter of Numitor, King of the Albans,
they were preserved from the cruelty of their Uncle Amulius by Laurentia (of
which see more in Laurentia) Romulus having slain his brother Remus, obtained
the sole Government of the City to himself; he overcam^ the Veientes (who made
war upon the Romans, because that they wanting wives, had ravished the Virgins
that came from Neighboring places to see their shows called Consualia)
dedicating the spoils to Jupiter Feretrius; he also overcame the Fidenates and
the Sabines, whom he caused with Titus Toetius their King, to inhabit Rome, and
to join into one Commonwealth with the Romans, at length in a great Assembly
at the Lake of Caprea, a sudden Tempest arising, he vanished away, none knowing
what became of him. Roncevalles, anciently called Rocida Valis, a Town of
Navar, famous for the burial of Rowland, kinsman to Charles the Great.
Rondacher, (French) he that carries a Rondach, i. a Target, or Buckler.
Rondelier, (French) the same, also a Target maker. Rood, the same as Rod, or
Perch, also a Cross. Roodloft, (Saxon) a shrine, a place to put a rood, or
cross in, or the image, or relic of any Saint. Rorid, Roral, or Rorulent,
(lat.) dewy, bespringled with dew. Rosamunda, the daughter of Cunimundus, King
of the Gepidae, she was married to Alboinus, King of the Lombards, who having
made a feast, drank a health to her out of a Cup made of his fathers skull, for
which she procured his death by the means of Herminges, with whom she fled to
Longinus, Exarch of Ravenna, and married him, but afterward being in hopes to
marry Longinus, she offered a potion to Helminges in the bath, which was
poison, which he suspecting, forced her to drink it her self, the word
signifies in Saxon rose of peace. Rosarie, (lat.) a place where Roses grow;
also a short prayer book, or a pair of beads, containing 150 Pater Nosters, and
150 Avemaria's. Roscid, (lat.) the same as rorid. Roscoman, a County of
Ireland, in the Province of Conaught. Rose, a Christian name of diverse women,
the signification well known. Rosion, (lat.) a gnawing. Rosse, a Country of
Scotland, denominated from the British word Rosse, i. a heath, or place of
lings. Rostration, (lat.) a thrusting in the beak or bill. Rotation, (lat.) a
wheeling, or moving about like a wheel. To say a lesson by Rote, to say it as
roundly and currently, as a wheel runs in his rote, or track. Rotundity, (lat.)
roundnesse. Rou, (old word) ugly, froward. Rouge, Cross, see Pursuivant.
Roundin, a Term in Navigation, is a letting rise the main, or foretack, and
haling aft the foresheat to the cathead, and main sheat to the cabridge-head,
when the wind larges upon the main and foresail. Roundel, a Term in Heraldry,
being the figure of a round ball. Roundelay, a Sheapherds song, or dance.
Roundlet, a wine measure, containing 8 Gallons and a half. Rounds, a Term in
Sculpture, the fragments of statues. Rowland, a proper name of a man,
signifying in Dutch Council for the land. To Rowze a Heart, to raise him from
his harbor. Rowze, the Forresters say a rowz of Wolves; in Faulconry a Hawk is
said to rowse, not shake her self. Rous-in, a Term in Navigation, to make a
Cable tight when it is slack upon the water. A Routurier, (Fr.) a Pesant, or
Plough-man. Color de Roy, a violet color, which is the French Kings proper
color. Royal, (French) kingly, belonging to a King, whence Royalties, the
Rights, or Prerogative of a King: Royal is also a Term in Hunting, see Torch
Royal.
R U
Rubefaction, (lat.) a making red. Rubet, a stone found in the head of a Toad,
commonly called a Toad-stone. Rubicon, a River of Italy, between Rimini and
Ravenna, which ^loweth into the Adriatic Sea; it is now called Runcone* or
Piscatello. Rubicund, (lat.) blood red. Rubie, a certain red Gem shining in the
dark like a spark of fire. Rubiginous, (lat.) see Robigus. Rubrication, (lat.)
a making red, whence Rubricative, a plaster so strongly drawing that it makes
the part look red. Rubric, a special Title of the Law, or a noted sentence of
any book marked with red Letters; also a Calender of Saints and Festivals.
Ructation, (lat.) a belching. Rudheath, a place in Cheshire, where there was
formerly a sanctuary for those that had trespassed against the Law, to remain
secure for a year and a day. Rudiments, (lat.) the first Elements, or
principles of any art, or faculty, because those that come first to be
instructed are to be imagined, altogether rude and ignorant. Ruff, a certain
kind of fish, by some called an Aspredo. Rugosity, (lat.) ruggedness,
fullness of wrinkles. Ruinous, (lat.) going to wrack, falling to decay. A
Carpenters Rule, an instrument to measure board, or timber with. Rumbe, see
Rhombe. Rumia, a certain goddess among the ancient Romans, who was said to
have the care of sucking children, from Rumi, an ancient Latin word, signifying
women's paps. To Rumidge, in Navigation, is to remove goods, or luggage out of a
ships howld, whence it is also used upon other occasions. Rumigeration, (lat.)
a carrying tales, a spreading a rumor, or report abroad. Rumination, (lat.) a
chewing of the cud, a pondering in ones mind, or earnestly thinking upon any
thing. Ruminus, a surname of Jupiter, affording teats to every creature.
Runcina, the goddess of weeding. Ruption, (lat.) a breaking, or bursting.
Rural, (lat.) belonging to the Country. Russia, a Country of Europe,
bordering upon Hungary toward the South. Rustication, (lat.) a dwelling in the
Country. Rusticity, (lat.) a Country Garb, or carriage; also clownishnesse.
Rut, to desire copulation, a Term most properly applied to Deer. Rutilation,
(lat.) a shining, glistring, or glaring. Ruttier, (French) a direction for the
finding out of courses by Land, or Sea; also an old beaten Soldier.
S A
Sabbath, (from the Hebrew Scabath to rest,) a celebration of the seventh day
of the week; as a day of rest among the Jews, in remembrance of Gods resting
from the work of the creation on that day, instead of which the first day of
the week, called the Lords day, has been ever observed by Christians, in
remembrance of Christ's Resurrection. Sabbatarians, those that observe the
Jewish-Sabbath. Sabbatical, (lat.) belonging to the Sabbath. Sabellians, a sort
of Heretics; so called from Sabellius their first Author, they affirmed the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to be one only person, having three names. Sable,
(French) the color black in Heraldry; also a certain rich furre, taken from a
Russian beast, so called. Sabrina, the name of a very fair, and pleasant River,
springing out of Plimlimmon Hills in Wales, and taking its course through
Shropshire, Worcestershire, and several other Shires; it is vulgarly called
Severn, see Severn. Saburrate, (lat.) to ballast a ship with Gravel.
Sacerdotal, (lat.) priestly, belonging to a Priest. Saccus cum brochia, a
service of finding a sack, and a broach to the King by virtue of a Tenure, for
the use of his Army. Sachem, a general name for any great Prince, or Ruler
among the people of the West Indies. Sack, a measure of Wool, containing 26
stone, and 14 pound. Sacramental, (lat.) belonging to a Sacrament, or Oath.
Sacrificial, (lat.) belonging to a Sacrifice, or holy offering. Sacrilegious,
(lat.) committing Sacrilege, i. a robbing of Churches, or violating of holy
things. Sacristie, or Sacrary, (lat.) a Vestry, a place where the Priests
Vestments, and things belonging to the Church are kept. Sadduces, a Sect among
the Jews; so called from Sadock their first Author, they denied the being of
Angels, and the Resurrection of the body. Safe conduct, see Passeport.
Sagacity, (lat.) quickness of understanding, or apprehension, sharpness of
judgment, or wit. Sagamore, a King, or Supreme Ruler among the Indians.
Sagbut, (Span.) a kind of Musical instrument, somewhat resembling a Trumpet.
Sagination, (lat.) a cramming, or making fat. Sagittal, (lat.) belonging to an
Arrow. Sagittarius, one of the 12 signs of the Zodiac, see ^hiron.
Sagittipotent, (lat.) powerful in darts, or arrows. Saguntus, a Town of
Valentia, a Province of Spain, now called Morviedro, situate upon the River
Ibero; it was destroyed by Hannibal, which was the cause of the second Punick
war. Saker, a kind of Hawk, (called in Greek Hierax, i. holy) also a great
piece of Ordnance. Say, a kind of stuff to make Clothes of, called in
Spanish Saietta. Saint Anthonies fire, see Erysipely. Salacity, (lat.)
wantonness, or inclination to Venery, perhaps from Salacia a goddess of the
water, whom the ancients held to be the wife of Neptune, and that she caused
the fluctuation, or moving up and down of the Sea; also the Ebbing and flowing
of the Sea was called by the Romans in old time Salicia and Venilia. Salade,
(French) a kind of headpiece or helmet; called also Salet. Salamander, a
kind of little beast like a Lizard, vulgarly believed to subsist in the
hottest fire, and to quench it. Salarie, (lat.) a servants stipend, or wages;
so called as Pliny says from Sal, i. Salt, both being alike necessary.
Salenae, the ancient name of a Town in Bedfordshire, now called Salndy, Sandy.
Salebrous, (lat.) rugged, rough, uneven. Saliant, (lat.) leaping, a Term in
Heraldry. Saligot, (Fr.) a water-nut, or Caltrop. Salii, the 12 Priests of Mars
instituted by Numa Pompilius. Marcus Livius Salinator, a famous Roman Captain,
Consul with Claudius Nero, he overcame Asdrubal in the second Punick war.
Salique Law, a Law whereby the Crown of France cannot fall from the Lance to
the distaffe, i. cannot be inherited by women; it is so called, either from
these words si aliqua, often mentioned in the Law (which as some say was made
by Pharamond, others by Philip the fair) or else from the River Sala, near unto
which the Francks anciently inhabited. Salisbury, the chief City of Wiltshire,
risen up out of the ruins of a very ancient Town called Sorbiodunum, and by
vulgar Latinists Sarum, and Sarisburia, this place is famous for a stately
Minster, built here in the reign of King Henry the third, by Richard Poor, then
Bishop of Salisbury; this Cathedral has as many windows as there are days in
the year, as many pillars as there are hours in a year, and the gates are
answerable in number to the 12 months. Salivation, (lat.) a fluxing, or
drawing humors out of the mouth by spettle. Salligot, (French) a kind of
fruit, called water Nuts. Sallow, (latin Salix) the Goats willow-tree. Sally,
to issue out of a besieged Town, from the Spanish word Salir. Salmacis, a
Fountain of Caria, near Halicarnassus; so called from Salmacis, a Nymph, who
falling in love with Hermaphroditus, the son of Mercury and Venus, when she
could by no other means draw him to her love, she leapt into the Fountain, and
embracing him, prayed unto the gods that they might grow into one, whereupon
they immediately became one person, having both Sexes; also at the prayers of
Hermaphroditus the Fountain contracted this quality, that who ever entered into
it, were transformed into both Sexes, and called Hermaphrodites. Salmoneus, a
King of Elis, the son of Aeolus, who aspiring to be a god, drove his Chariot
over a brazen bridge, which he had made, that he might imitate Thunder, at
which Jupiter enraged, struck him down to Hell with a Thunderbolt. Solomon, a
proper name, signifying in Hebrew peaceable. Salsamentarious, (lat.) belonging
to salt things, brine, or pickle. Salsure, (lat.) a salting, seasoning, or
powdering. Saltation, (lat.) a dancing, or leaping. Saltimbanco, (Ital.) a
Mountebank, or Quacksalver. Saltire, a Term in Heraldry, see Sautoir. Salvatel
Vein, see Vein. Salubrity, (lat.) wholsomnesse, or healthfulnesse. Salutatory,
(lat.) a place where people stand to salute great men. Salutiferous, (lat.)
bringing health, or safety. Samaria, a Country of Palaestine, bordering upon
Judaea. Sambenito, (Span.) a Coat of course sackcloth, in which Paenitents are
reconciled to the Church. Sambuke, a Musical instrument, called also a
Dulcimer; also a warlike Engine. Samonds, the surname of a very ancient family
of Barons, who heretofore had their chief habitation at Bromham in Wiltshire,
they are styled in Latin Records de Sancto Amando. Samos, the name of two
Islands, the one near Ionia over against Ephesus, sacred to Juno, anciently
called Parthenia, the other in the bay of* Ambracia, over against Epirus,
anciently called Cephalenia. Samothracia, an Island of the Aegaean Sea, not far
from Thrace, heretofore called Dardania. Samplar, corrupted from Examplar, a
pattern or copy. Sampson, a proper name, signifying in Heb. there the second
time. Samuel, another proper name, signifying in Heb. placed of God. Sanable,
(lat.) to be healed or cured. Sanchia, a Christian name of diverse women from
the Latin Sancta, i. holy. Sanctification, (lat.) a sanctifying, hallowing, or
making holy. Sanctimony or Sanctity, (lat.) the profession of holiness.
Sanction, (lat.) a decreeing, enacting, or establishing, any Law or Ordinance.
Sanctuary, (lat.) a sanctified or holy place; also a place privileged by the
Prince for the safeguard of offenders lives, founded upon the great reverence
which the Prince bears unto the place whereunto he grants such a
privilege. Sanctum Sanctorum, the innermost and holiest place of the Jews
Temple where the Arc was kept. Sandal, a kind of pantofle or slipper; also a
precious sort of Indian wood. A Sandapile, (lat.) a coffin or beer to carry
dead bodies on. Sandarach, a kind of red painting, otherwise called Orpine or
red Arsenick. A Sand-bag, in Etching or Graving, is that on which they use to
turn their plate. Sanglant, (French) bloody, or imbrued with blood. Sanglier,
(French) a Bore of five years old. Sanguin, or Sangnineous, (lat.) full or
abounding with blood; also of a complexion where that humor is predominant;
also in Heraldry it is taken for a kind of ruddy or murrey color.
Sanguinolent, (lat.) bloody or cruel. Sanhedrim, (Heb.) the Supreme Council or
Court of judicature among the Jews, consisting of the high Priest and 70
Seniors or Elders who were to consult about the greatest matters of the
Commonwealth, both Ecclesiastical and Civil. Sanity, (lat.) health, soundness.
Sanjacks, the Governors of Cities among the Turks. Sanicle, a kind of herb
called self-heal. Sankfin, (from the French words Sang, i. blood, and fine, i.
ended) a final end of any lineal race or descent of kindred. Saphaena vein,
see vein. Saphick verse, a kind of verse consisting of a trochee, spondee,
dactyle, and two trochee's, and having at the end of every three verses an
Adonic which consists of a dactyl and spondee. This kind of verse was first
invented by Sapho a famous Poetesse of Mitylene. Sapphire, a kind of Gem or
precious Stone of an azure color. Sapidity, or Sapor, (lat.) savorinesse, well
season'dnesse, pleasantness of taste or savor. Sapience, (lat.) wisdom or
prudence. Sapphick, see Saphick. Saraband, (Ital.) a kind of Lesson or Air in
Music going with a quick time. Sarah, a proper name of a woman signifying in
Heb. Mistress or Dame. Sarcasm, (Greek) a bitter jest, scoff, or taunt.
Sarcell, the pinion of a Hawk. Sarcenet, a kind of thin Taffata. Sarcination,
(lat.) a loading with packs or fardells. Sarconia, (Greek) a bunch of flesh
growing upon the nose. Sarcophage, (Greek) a certain stone wherein dead bodies
being enclosed, do consume away within a short time; also a Tomb or Sepulcher.
Sarcotick, (Greek) breeding new flesh. Sarculation, (lat.) a weeding or
plucking up of weeds, whence the time that Countrymen weed their corn in is
vulgarly called Sarcling time. Sardanapalus, the last King of Assyria, against
whom for his luxury and effeminacy, Arbaces, the Satrap of Media and Belochus
of Balylon rebelling, transferred the Empire to Media and Babilonia.
Sardanapalus, as soon as he saw himself in danger, throwing himself and all his
riches into a burning Pyre, which he built for that purpose. Sardel, or
Sardine, a kind of fish called a pilcher. Sardinia, an Island in the Ligustick
Ocean, so called from Sardus the son of Hercules, who planted himself here.
Sardonick laughter, an immoderate and deadly laughter, from the herb Sardon,
which being eaten causes it. Sardonyx, a kind of Gem or precious Stone of a
dark or blackish color, being also called a Corneol or Onyx of Sardinia.
Sarmatia, a very large Country, reaching from the borders of Germany and the
River Vistula, as far as Hircania, and is divided into Sarmatia, Europaea, and
Sarmatia Asiatica. Sarmentitious, (lat.) belonging to branches or twigs.
Sarpedon, a King of Lycia, he was the son of Jupiter by Laodamia the daughter
of Bellerophon, and going to help the Trojans was killed by Patroclus, and
carried out of the field by Apollo at Jupiters command. Sarplar, or Serplath, a
quantity of wool consisting of 80 Tod, each Tod being two stone, and each stone
14 pound. A Sarse, a sive of hair. Sarsaparilla, the root of a certain tree
called Smilax Peruviana. Sassafras, the wood of another Indian tree very useful
in Physic. Satanical, belonging to Satan, i. the Devil, from the Hebrew word
sitnath, i. hatred. It Sat me sore, (old word) it touched me greatly.
Satellite, (lat.) a Yeoman of the Guard, also a Catchpole. Satiety, (lat.)
fulness, glutting, whence satiation, a filling or cloying. Satisdation,
(lat.) a putting in bail or surety. Satisfaction, (lat.) a satisfying or making
amends; also a taking great content or pleasure in any thing. Satorious, (lat.)
belonging to sowing or sowers. Satrap, (Greek) a title anciently given to the
chief Governor of any Province under the King of Persia. Saturity, (lat.) the
same as Satiety. Saturnals, (lat.) Feasts dedicated to Saturn, an ancient
heathen deity, the son of Coelus and Vesta, who married his sister Ops and cut
off the genital members of his father Coelus, and threw them into the Sea, out
of the froth of which sprung Venus, from thence called Aphrodite, he sought to
devour all his male children, wherefore Ops as soon as she was delivered of
Jupiter, and Juno at a birth, she gave him instead of Jupiter a great stone
wrapped up in swadling-clouts, which he devoured; next she brought forth Neptune,
whom she concealed, as also Pluto and Glaucus whom she had at a birth; He was
overthrown by his brother Titan who made war against him for the Kingdom, and
shut up him and his wife in prison, whence he was delivered by his son Jupiter,
against whom also making war himself, he was driven out of his Kingdom, and
fled into Italy to Janus whom he taught Husbandry and the use of the Vine.
Saturn is also the name of one of the 7 Planets, the slowest in motion and of
the melancholiest influence; also among Chemists it is taken for lead. Satyr
(from Satyrus) a certain deity of the Wood, much spoken of by ancient Poets,
resembling in the upper part of their bodies the shape of a man, in the lower
part, of a goat, and being all over hairy, (from Satyra) a kind of sharp and
invective Poem full of taunting expressions against any person or thing.
Satirical (lat.) bitter, invective, taunting, or scoffing. Sauciation, (lat.) a
wounding. Saucidg^, (in French Saucisse) a kind of pudding made of meat chopped
very small. Savine, a kind of herb so called, because it was had in great
veneration among the Sabines an ancient people of Italy. Saultoir, or Sautoir,
(French) a term in Heraldry, being a figure resembling St. Andrews cross.
Saunders, a kind of spice or sweet wood, called in Latin Santalum. Saws, (old
word) sayings. Saxony, a Country of Germany, lying between the Rivers Albis and
Rhine, whose inhabitants anciently under the conduct of their Queen Angela
vanquished Brittany and called it England. Saxifrage, (from the Lat. Saxum i. a
stone, and frangere, i. to break) a kind of herb so called because it breaks
the stone in the kidney.
S C
Scabious, (lat.) scabby or mangy. Scabrous, (lat.) rough, rugged, unpolished.
Scaevity, (lat.) left-handednesse, unluckinesse. Scaevola, see Mutius. Scalary,
(lat.) belonging to a scale or ladder, but in Geometry scale is also taken for
a measure proportionable to the draught. Scalion, a kind of Plant otherwise
called an Onion, or Chibbol, or young Cive. Scaldis, a river of the Low
Countries running by Antwerp, called in Dutch Scheldt. Scallop, (Span. Chalupe)
a ship-boat, called also a shallop; also a kind of fish called in Latin Pecten.
Scalp, the hairy part of the head, which encompasseth the skull; it is called
in Greek Pericranium. Scalper, or Scalping Iron, (from the Lat. Scalpere, i. to
scrape or scratch) a Chirurgions Instrument to scrape or cleanse wounds
withal. Scamander, see Xanthus. Scammony, a kind of herb otherwise called
purging Bindweed. Scandalous, (lat.) giving scandal, i. offense, ill example,
or occasion of other men's sinning. Scandalum Magnatum, signifies in Common
Law, a wrong done to any of the Nobles of the land, as Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
etc. Scanderbeg, a name attributed to George Castriot, the son of John Castriot
Prince of Epirus and Albania, who having been brought up by Amurath the second,
the Turkish Emperor, at last caused Epirus and Macedonia to revolt and
valiantly kept Croia against a mighty power of the Turks, which caused Amurath
to die rageing mad. Scandia, or Scandinavia, a great Island in the North Ocean,
near ajoyning to the Continent of Russia, it was anciently called Beltia or
Basilia. Scapular, (lat.) belonging to the shoulders; whence Scapulary a Monks
hood or cowl reaching down to the shoulders. Scar, an old word, signifying a
steep rock, whence Scarborow Castle in Yorkshire is denominated, as it were a
Burgh upon the Scar or steep Rock. Scarabee, (lat.) a kind of fly commonly
called a beetle. Scarf, a term in Navigation, when the end of one timber is let
into the other very close and even, or as they term it wood and wood.
Scarification, (lat.) a launcing a sore, or making an incision. Scariole, a
kind of herb otherwise called broadleaved endive. Scarpe, a term in
Fortification, the slopenesse of the wall; also in Heraldry it is the
resemblance of a scarf worn by Commanders in the field. To Scathe, to hurt,
from the Dutch word Schaed, i. damage. Scaturiginous, (lat.) overflowing, or
running over. Scavage, or Shewage, a kind of toll or custom exacted of
Merchants by Mayors or Bailiffs of Towns for wares showed to be sold within
their Precincts which are forbidden by Statute. Scavenger, (from the Dutch word
Scaven, i. to pare away) an officer that makes clean the streets and pares away
the dirt. Scedasus, a certain rich Boeotian whose two daughters Hippone and
Milesia were ravished in his absence, and afterward thrown into a Well and
drowned, whereupon he killed himself for grief. Sceleton, (Greek) the whole
structure of the bones of a man's body, the flesh, veins, and muscles being
taken away. Scellum, or Schellum, (Dutch) a rogue, villain, or vagabond.
Scenical, (lat.) belonging to a Scene, i. the changing of persons in every Act
of a Comedy or Tragedy; also the forepart of a Stage or Theater. Scenography,
(lat.) a term in Perspective, the model or description of a Scene, or any work
presented with its shadows. Skeptical, (Greek) contemplative, whence Scepticks
are a sort of Philosophers who only consider and contemplate of things without
determining any thing. Sceptriferous, (Latin) bearing a Scepter. Schediasm,
(Greek) a sudden invention. Schedule, (lat.) a little leaf, bill, or scrowl of
paper. Scheme, (Greek) the form, or outward draught of any thing. Schirrus, a
hard swelling without pain, yet not without senses. Schiph, (Latin Scapha) a
ship-boat, whence Schipper, or Scipper, a Seaman, or Mariner. Schism, (Greek)
a cleaving, rending, or dividing in two, but more peculiarly a division, or
separation in the Church, caused by a dissenting in opinion. Schismatical,
inclining to schism. Scholastic, (Greek) belonging to a School, or Scholar.
Scholiast, (Greek) a Writer of a Scholy, i. a short exposition upon any Author.
Sciagraph, (Greek) a platform, or description of a house, with the contrivance
of every room. Sciater, (lat.) a certain instrument made use of for the better
designing. out the situation of a City. Sciatica, (lat.) the Gout in the hip.
Science, (lat.) knowledge, skill, or learning. Scilcester, a Town in
Northumberland, by some thought to have been the same with that, which in old
time was called Cilurnum; here Ethwald, King of the Northumbers was
treacherously murdered by Sigga a Nobleman. Scintillation, (lat.) a
sparkling. Sciolist, (lat.) one that makes much stir with a little knowledge,
a smatterer in learning. Sciomanty* (Greek) a divining by shadows. Scion, (from
the latin word Scindere. i. to divide) a grass, or tender shoot. Scipio, the
name of several famous Romans, as Scipio Africanus, the son of Cornelius, he
overthrew the Carthaginians in Spain, taking new Carthage, afterward wanting
over his Army into Africa, he utterly defeated Hannibal in a mighty battle;
Scipio Aemilianus, the adopted son of Africanus, who demolish't new Carthage,
and Numantia in Spain, and was killed by a conspiracy of the Gracchi; Scipio
Nasica, a man very eloquent, skillful in the Law, and much beloved of the
people, by whom he was called Corculum; Scipio the father in Law of Pompey the
Great* first succesfull, afterward unfortunate in the wars against Caesar.
Scire facias, a Writ Judicial, to call a man to show a cause unto the Court
from which it is sent, why execution of a judgment passed should not be made.
Sciron, a famous Pirate about Megara, who was slain by Theseus. Scirrous,
(Greek) belonging to a Schirrus, i. a hard swelling in the body without pain.
Scissure, (lat.) a cutting, cleaving, or dividing asunder. Scitament, (lat.) a
pleasant witty passage in discourse. Sclavonia, a Country joining Westward
upon the Adriatic Sea, divided into Istria, Carinthia, Croatia, Carnia, and
Martia; Slavonia vulgarly called Windishmark. Scolopender, (Greek) a kind of
venomous Worm, by some called an Ear-wig; also a certain fish, which having
swallowed a hook vomited up its entrails, and rid of it, sucketh them in again.
Scom, (Greek) a mocking, scoffing, or scurrilous jest. Sconse, (Dutch) a Term
in fortification, a block-house, or chief fortress, whence Metaphorically it
is taken for the head. Scopulous, (lat.) Rocky, full of Rocks. Scorbutical,
(lat.) belonging to the Scorbute, i. a disease called the Scurvy. Scordium, a
kind of Herb, growing plentifully in Cambridgeshire, called in English
Water-germander. Scorpion, a kind of venomous Serpent, also the name of one of
the 12 signs of the Zodiac; also a kind of warlike Engine. Scot and Lot, a
customary contribution laid upon all subjects, according to their ability:
Escot signifying in French a Symbol, shot, or reckoning. Sc^tal, where an
Officer does keep an Alehouse without the Forest, under color of his Office
from Scot and Ale, i. paying the shot for Ale. Scotomy, (Greek) a Vertigo, or
dizzinesse in the head, which causes a dimnesse in the eyes. Scovel, see
Malkin. Scout, (in Dutch showt) an Officer of an Army appointed to discover an
Enemies designs. Screation, (lat.) a spitting. Screkingham, a Town in
Lincolnshire, where Alfrick the second Earl of Leicester was slain by Hubba, a
Dane. Scribe, (lat.) a Writer, Notary, or Srivener; also an Expounder of the
Law among the Jews. Scriptorian, (lat.) belonging to writing, or writers.
Scruple, or Scrupulosity, (lat.) a doubting, or niceness in point of
conscience; also scruple is the third part of a dram, i. seven grains and a
half, troy weight. Scrutation, (lat.) a searching, or inquiring. Scrutiny,
(lat.) the same. Sculpture, (lat.) a graving, or carving. Scurrility, (lat.)
offensive jesting, or scoffing. Scut, (a Term in Hunting) the tail of a Hare,
or Cony. Scutchion, see Escotchion, also the bud of a Tree cut off for
inoculation. Scutiferous, (lat.) bearing a shield, or buckler. Scuttle, a
square hole cut through the hatch, or deck of a ship, to go down by into any
room. Scyld, (Saxon) debt, or default. Scylla, the daughter of Nysus, King of
Megara, which being besieged by Minos, King of Creet was betrayed into his
hands by Scylla, who falling in love with Minos, cut off her fathers purple
lock (upon which the fate of the City depended) and sent it to him; but
afterward seeing her self despised, and dying for grief, she was turned into a
Partridge, and Nisus into a Hawk; also the daughter of Phorcus, who falling in
love with Glaucus, was envied by Circe, who poisoning the water wherein she
used to bath her self, the lower part of her body became altogether like the
grinning of Dogs; whereupon she threw her self headlong down the next
praecipice, and was transformed to a Rock over against Charybdis. Scyllas, one
so skillful in diving, that he regained a great quantity of gold and silver,
which had been lost in a shipwreck. Scymitar, see Semitar. Scythia, the most
Northern Country of the world, divided into Europaea and Asiatica; it was so
called from Scythes the son of Hercules by one that was half a woman, and half
a viper; it is at this day called Tartarick. Scytale, (lat.) a kind of secret
way of writing; also a kind of Serpent, also a field Mouse, called an Ermine,
or a shrew.
S E
Seasnapple, a kind of Shellfish, called in Latin Cochlea veneris, i. Venus
shell. Seax, a kind of sword, anciently in use among the Saxons.
Sebastocrator, (Greek) a great Officer in the ancient Constantinople Empire,
from Sebastos, i. Honorable, and Crator, powerful. Sebastian, a proper name,
signifying in Greek reverend, or Majestical. Sebesten, a kind of Assyria
plumb, called in Greek My^aria. Secandunum, the ancient name of a Town in
Warwickshire, now called Seckinton, where Athelbald, King of the Mercians, was
in a Civil war slain by Beared, who usurping the Kingdom, was soon after slain
himself by Offa. Secant, (a Term in Geometry) is a line drawn from the Center
through one extreme of the given Arch, till it meet with the Tangent raised
from the Diameter, at the other extreme. Secation, (lat.) a cutting. Secession,
(lat.) a separating ones self, a departing from any side, a revolting.
Seclusion, (lat.) a shutting forth, a putting out of doors. A Second in
surveying, is the tenth part of a prime, and contains one inch, and 49 of 50
parts of an inch. Second deliverance, a Writ that lies after the return of
Cattle replevied, for the repleving of the same Cattle again, by reason of some
default in the party that replevied. Secondary, (lat.) the second man in any
place, he, who is next to any Chief, Officer, as Secondary of the fine Office,
etc. Secondine, (lat.) the afterbirth, or skin wherein an Infant is wrapped,
while it is in the womb. Sectary, (lat.) one of a Sect, a follower of new
opinions in matters of religion. Section, (lat.) a cutting, or dividing; also a
certain division in a Chapter. Sector, a Mathematical instrument, consisting of
two right lines, containing an Angle at the Center, and of the circumference
assumed by them. Secular, (lat.) belonging to an age, or the space of an
hundred years, whence secular plays were certain Games among the Romans
performed every hundred years; also a secular Priest, one who is conversant in
the world, and not tied to a Monastical life. Secundary, see Secondary.
Secundation, (lat.) a secunding, forwarding, or making prosperous.
Securiferous, (lat.) bearing a hatchet, or axe. Sedation, (lat.) a quieting, or
asswaging. Sedentarie, (lat.) sitting much, studious, unactive. Sediment,
(lat.) the dregs, or lees of any thing settling, or sinking down to the bottom.
Sedition, (latin as it were feorsum itio, i. a going apart) a stirring up to
rebellion or discord, a raising a faction, or mutiny. Seduction, (lat.) a
seducing, or leading out of the right way. Sedulity, (lat.) diligence. See,
(old word) a seat. Seeling, in Navigation, is the sudden tumbling of a ship to
one side, or other, when the wave of the Sea is past from under her.
Segmentation, (lat.) a dividing into Segments, i. small parts, or pieces of any
thing. Segnity, (lat.) sluggishnesse, or sloth. Segregation, (lat.) as it were
a setting apart from the flock, a severing, or parting. Sejant, (French)
sitting upright, a term in Heraldry. Sejanus, a great favorite of Tiberius the
Roman Emperor, of whom he was so highly esteemed, that he had the chief
management of state affairs, but at last by reason of his pride and ambition he
came to a miserable end. Seignorage, (French) a prerogative of the King,
whereby he challenges allowance for gold and silver, brought in the Mass to
the exchange for Coin. Seignorie, (French) dominion, or Jurisdiction; also a
Manor, or Lordship. Seimours, the surname of an ancient and honorable
family, styled in Latin Records de Sancto Mauro, in whom continue to this day
the titles of Vicount Beauchamp, and Marquis of Hertfort. Seisin, in
Common Law, is the possession of Lands, or inheritance. Sejunction, (lat.) a
severing, or putting asunder. Seker, (old word) in like manner. Sela, or Selah,
an Hebrew word, used in several of David's Psalms; being as some think a pause,
or resting time in Music. Sele-graving, a Term in Sculpture, or the art of
graving, being that which is done in steel or copper, that which is done in
wood, is called graving in ^^at^tich. Selenite, a certain stone wherein there
is a white spot, which increases and decreaseth, according to the course of
the Moon. Seleucus, one of the Captains of Alexander the Great, who after
Alexanders death possessed himself of Syria, where he reigned twenty years.
Selimus, the ninth Emperor of the Turks, who added Egypt and Arabia to the
Turkish Empire. Selion, a ridge of land lying between two furrows. Sellander, a
kind of disease in a horse. Sellengers, contracted from St. Legers, a surname
of great note and antiquity, styled in Latin Records de Sancto Leodegaria.
Sellarie, (lat.) a place where benches, or forms are set. Semblance, (French) a
likeness, see^ing, or outward appearance. Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, King
of Thebes, who being got with Child by Jupiter, brought forth Bacchus.
Sementation, (lat.) a bringing forth seed. Semicircular, (lat.) in fashion of a
half Circle. Semicolon, a half Colon, or Member, being a point in writing, or
printing, thus marked (;) Semidole, (lat.) a pipe, or measure, containing half
a Tun. Seminary, (lat.) a seed-plot, or Nursery of young Plants; it is also
Metaphorically taken for a School, or College, which is a Nursery of learning.
Semination, or Sementation, (lat.) a sowing, or bringing forth seed.
Seminifical, (lat.) producing seed for generation. Semipedal, (lat.) consisting
of half a foot in measure. Semiquadrate, an Aspect consisting of 45 degrees.
Semiquintile, an Aspect consisting of 36. degrees. Semiramis, a famous Queen of
the Assyrians, the wife first of Maenon prefect of Syria, afterward of Ninus,
whom she made away, and succeeded in the Kingdom, she much enlarged the bounds
of her Empire, and built a wall of brick about the City of Babylon, and as
some say, she died in an expedition into India, against Staurobates. Semitar,
or Scymitar, a kind of a short Persian sword, being also much in use among the
Turks. Sempiternal, (lat.) everlasting, perpetual, without end. Semuncial,
(lat.) belonging to a semunee, i. half an ounce. Senatorian, (lat.) belonging
to a Senator, or to a Senate, i. a Supreme Council of a Nation, a Parliament.
Sendal, (French) a kind of Cyprus silk, Greek Sidon. Seneca, a famous
Philosopher born in Corduba, a City of Andalusia, a Province of Spain, he
caused himself to bleed to death for fear of Nero who was his scholar.
Senescal, or Seneschal, (French) a Marshall or Steward. Senescent, (lat.)
growing old, waining. Sengreen, a kind of herb, otherwise called Houseleek, in
Latin Sedum, also Sempervivum, i. always green. Senie, the leaf of a
medicinable herb which purges choleric and melancholic humors. Seniour,
(lat.) elder. Sensiferous, (lat.) bringing sense or feeling. Sensory, (lat.) an
organ of the sense. Sensuality, (lat.) a pleasing or indulging to the sense, a
satisfying the carnal appetite. Sententious, (lat.) full of sentences, i. grave
or wise sayings. Sentiment, (French) sensiblenesse, apprehension, also passion
or a tender feeling of the effects of love. Cleopatra. Sentinel, (French) a
Military Scout or Watchman, from the Latin Sentire, i. to perceive, because he
is to perceive and look narrowly into the enemies designs. Senvie, a certain
plant called in Latin Sinapis, of whose seed mustard is made. Separation,
(lat.) a setting apart, a putting asunder; also when two Planets have been in
partile aspect or conjunction, and part from it. Separatory, (French) a
Chirurgions Instrument wherewith to pick splinters of bones out of a wound.
Sepiment, (lat.) a fence, pale, or hedge. Seplasiary, (lat.) a compounder or
seller of sweet ointments; also a nice effeminate man. Seposition, (lat.) a
setting apart, a putting asunder. September, so called being the seventh month
from March. Septempedal, (lat.) containing seven foot in measure. Septenary,
(lat.) the number 7. Septennial, (lat.) of seven years space. Septentrional,
(lat.) belonging to the North. Septimestre, (lat.) of seven months space
Septuagenary, (lat.) belonging to the number of 70. Septuagesimal, (lat.) the
same, also belonging to Septuagesime, Sunday. The Septuagint translation of the
Bible, the most original and authentic Translation of it by the 70 Elders of
the Jews at the appointment of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus King of Egypt.
Septunical, (lat.) containing 7 ounces. Sepulchral, (lat.) belonging to a
Sepulcher or Grave. Sepulture, (lat.) a burying, or interring in the ground.
Sequel, (lat.) a following, a conclusion or consequence of any thing.
Sequence, (lat.) a following of things in order, one just after another.
Sequestration, (lat.) a separating a thing in controversy from the possession
of both those that contend for it. But it is now commonly taken for a seizing
upon the rents of Delinquents estates, for the use of the Commonwealth.
Seraglio, (Ital.) the Grand Signors Palace at Constantinople. Serain, (French)
the fresh evening air; also a mildew or damp vapor. Seraph, a Turkish coin of
gold. Seraphical, celestical, bright, divine, like a Seraphim or one of the
highest order of Angels. Seraphis, a kind of Serpent anciently worshipped by the
Egyptians. Serenade, (French) an evening-song sung by a Lover under his
Mistresses window. Serenity, (lat.) clearness of the sky, fair weather.
Serge, a kind of woollen cloth, called in Italian Sargia, in Dutch Rasch.
Sergeanty, see Petty Sergeanty, and Grand Sergeanty. Sergreant, a Griffin so
termed in Heraldry. Sericated, clothed in silk, which is called in Latin
Sericum. Series, (lat.) an order, row. Sermocination, (lat.) communing, or
holding a discourse. Serosity, (lat.) the thinner or waterish part of the mass
of blood. Serotine, (lat.) late, done about the evening time. Serpentary, a
kind of herb called vipers-grasse. Serpentine, (lat,) belonging to serpents or
snakes; whence Serpentine verses, those that begin and end with the same word.
Serpet, a kind of basket. Serred, (lat.) sawed, also (from the French Serre)
compact, joined close together. Sertorius, a famous Roman Captain who took part
with Marius and Cinna, after Scylla, returning from the Mithridatick War, had
got possession of Rome, he fled into Spain, and being chosen Captain by the
Lusitanians overthrew the Romans in several battles, at last having stoutly
defended himself against Pompey, he was slain by Perpenna as he sat at supper.
Diana is said to have attended him in all his designs, in the form of a Heart.
Servile, (lat.) belonging to a servant, slavish; whence Servitude, slavery or
thraldom. Serviteur, (French) a serving-man or waiter, also a poor scholar in
the University. Seselie, (Greek) a kind of plant otherwise called Hartwort.
Sesostris, a King of Egypt, the son of Moeris, he endeavored to make a
navigable River out of the Mediterranean into the Red Sea. Sesquipedal, or
Sesquipedalian, (lat.) containing a foot and a half in measure. Sesquitertian,
(lat.) containing a third part over and above another thing. Session, (lat.) a
sitting; Sessions are more particularly taken for a quarterly sitting of
Justices in Court upon their Commission. Sesterce, (lat.) an ancient coin among
the Romans containing 4 denarii, which value about a half penny of our money;
the Sesterce was commonly marked with this Character H-S. Sestain, (French) a
stanza consisting of 6 verses. Sethin, see Sittim. Setigerous, (lat.) bearing
bristles. Setterwort, a kind of herb so called from settering, i. curing of
cattle. Settwall, a kind of herb growing near walls, called also Valerian.
Severance, in Common Law, is the singling of two or more that join in one
Writ. Severians, a kind of Heretics that condemned Marriage and eating of
flesh. Severity, (lat.) gravity, strictness, sournesse, or austerenesse.
Severn, a famous River of England, in Latin Sabrina, so denominated as Geffrey
of Monmouth affirms from a Virgin so called, who was here drowned by the
means of her Stepmother Guendolen. Sevocation, (lat.) a calling aside, a
drawing apart. Sewar, he that comes before the meat of any great personage,
and places it upon the table; also a gutter which carries into the Sea or any
River. Sewel, a term in Hunting, being a thing set to keep a Deer out of any
place. Sexagism Sunday, the Sunday before Shrove-Tuesday. Sexennial, (lat.) of
six years continuance. Sextant, (lat.) a kind of coin of a very small value;
also a weight of two ounces by some called Obolus. Sextary, (lat.) an ancient
Roman measure, containing in liquid things somewhat more than a pint, in dry
things 24 ounces or 2 pound Roman, a pound and a half aver du pois. Sexten,
contract from Sacristian, an officer that looks to the Church and keeps the
Priests Vestments. Sextile, (lat.) the month August, being the sixth from
March, or an aspect consisting of 60 degrees, thus charactered *. Sextule,
(lat.) the sixth part of an ounce, also a land-measure. Sextuple, (lat.)
sixfold, or containing any thing 6 times over.
S H
Shallop, see Scallop. Shafment, a kind of measure containing an handbreadth.
Shaftsbury, a Town in Dorcetshire, so called from the Churches spire-steeple,
such as they anciently termed Scheafts, in Latin Septonia. This place is famous
for Aquila (some say a real Eagle, others a Prophet so called) who foretold
that the British Empire, after the Saxons and the Normans should return again
to the ancient Britains. Shamois, see Chamois. Shamsheer, a kind of sword
among the Persians somewhat like a Scymitar. Shapournet, a term in Heraldry,
being a resemblance of that kind of hood which in French is called Chaperon.
Shash, see Turbant. Shaw, (Persian) a King. Sheen, or Shene, (old word)
bright-shining. To Shend, (old world) to blame. Sherbet, a kind of pleasant
drink, much in request among the Turks and Persians. Shiloh, (Heb.) a Savior,
it is a word used in the Scripture for our Savior Christ. Shingles, (from the
Latin scinder, i. to cleave) lath's or slates to cover houses with; also (from
cingere, i. to gird) a certain disease which causes a redness in the breast,
belly, or back. Shireev, (Saxon) a Questor or Prefect of a County or Shire, of
whose office and authority see Lord Cooks reports. Shoares, a term in
Navigation, pieces of timber set to bear up any other from sinking or falling.
Shoud, a certain Magistrate among the Turks. Shrew, a kind of field-mouse which
does great hurt to cattle; whence the word Shreud, i. lewd or cursed.
Shrewsbury, the chief Town of Shropshire, anciently called Schroesbury, for
that it was a Thicket of shrubs upon a Hill; it is called in the British
tongue Ymwithig from Mewithaw, which is as much as Placentia or Plaisance, in
regard that for the pleasantness of the situation, the Princes of Wales chose
it in times past for their chief Seat. Here Edrick Streona Duke of the Mercians
lay in wait for Prince Afhelm, and slew him as he rode on hunting. This Town is
also commonly called Salop, and in Latin Salopia. Shrift, (Saxon, from the
Latin Scrinium, i. the inward breast) auricular confession; whence Shrovetide
among the Catholics is the time of shrivng or confessing of their sins.
Shrine, (lat. Scrinium) a chest or cabinet; also the same as Roodloft.
S I
Sib, (Saxon) Kindred; whence Gossip is commonly used for a Godfather, i. a kin
in God. Sibilation, (lat.) a hissing. Sicambre, an ancient people of Germany
inhabiting on either side the Rhine. Some think them to be the same with those
which at this day are called Gueldrois, only of a larger extent, happily
possessing also that part which is called Zutphany. Siccity, (lat.) drouth,
dryness. Sicily, an Island in the Mediterrean Sea, so called from Siculus the
son of Neptune; it was of old called Trinacria. Sicle, (Heb. Shekel) a weight
of Silver or Gold, containing 4 drachms, or 384 grains. Sidelays, (a term in
Hunting) when the dogs set upon a Deer by the way as he passes. Sidemen, the
same as Questmen, see Quest. Siderated, (lat.) blasted or planet-struck.
Sidereal, or Siderean, (lat.) belonging to Stars. Siderite, a Loadstone, from
the Greek word Sider^n, i. Iron; also a kind of plant so called. Sidneys, the
surname of a very honorable Family, whose chief seat is Pensherst in Kent;
they derive themselves from William de Sidney Chamberlain to King Henry the
second; but the flower and chief glory of this Family, was that most
accomplished Gentleman Sir Philip Sidney, who valiantly fighting before Zutphen
in Gelderland, lost his life. Sidon, a City of Phoenicia, so called from the
plenty of fish which is there, Sidon signifying in the Phoenician tongue, a
fish. Sigalion, see Harpocrates. Sigillar, (lat.) belonging to a seal or
sealing. Sigles, (lat.) initial letters which by abbreviation are put for whole
words, as S. P. Q. R. Senatus Populusque Romanus. Signature, (lat.) a signing,
marking, or sealing; also the resemblance of any Plant or Mineral unto a man's
body, or any of the parts thereof. Signiferous, (lat.) bearing an Ensign or
Standard. Silentiary, (lat.) an Usher, one that makes room, or keeps silence.
Silerie, see Cilerie. Siliceous, (lat.) flinty, full of flint, of a flinty
substance. Silures, an ancient name given to the people of South Wales.
Similar, (lat.) like, or of the same substance; whence similar parts of the
body, are those which are altogether composed of the same substance.
Similitude, (lat.) likeness. Simon, a proper name, signifying in Heb.
obedient. Simoniacal, (lat.) belonging to Simony, i. a buying or selling
Church Livings; so called from Simon Magus, who would have bought the gift of
the Spirit for money of the Apostles. Simonides, a famous Lyrick Poet of
Thessaly, of such an exact memory, that when diverse men were killed by the fall
of a house, and were so disfigured they could not be known, he could exactly
tell who every one of them was by the order in which he had observed them to
have been placed. Simous, (lat.) having a flat nose. Simplist, (French) one
that understands the nature of Plants and Drugs. Simulacre, (lat.) an Image,
Picture, or Idol. Simulation, (lat.) a faigning, counterfeiting, or making a
resemblance of any thing. Simultaneous, (lat.) bearing a private grudge or
inward malice toward any one. Sincerity, (lat.) pureness, uprightness,
plain-dealing. Sine, (lat.) a Mathematical term used in Astronomy and
Surveying, and signifies the angle of meeting between the minute and the
degree, it being a right line falling perpendicularly from one extreme of the
given Arch upon the Diameter drawn to the other extreme of the Arch. Singeries,
(French) apish tricks. Single, a term in Hunting, the tail of a Buck, Roe, or
any other Deer. Sinister, (lat.) belonging to the left side; also unlucky,
unfortunate; also unhandsome or dishonest. Sinister aspect, is according to the
succession of the Signs. Sinister point, in Heraldry, is the place in an
Escutcheon near the left corner of the chief. The Sinister base point, is under
it at the lower part of the Escutcheon. Sinon, the son of Sisyphus and
grandchild of Autolycus, the thief, he went with Ulysses to the wars of Troy,
and betrayed that City to the Grecians by the means of the Trojan Horse.
Sinoper, see Cinnabar. Sinople, a kind of red lead, so called from Sinopis a
City of Pontus; it is vulgarly called Ruddle. Sipback, (Arab.) the inner rim of
the belly, joined to the cawl, where the entrails are covered. Si quis, (lat.
i. if any one) a bill stuck upon a wall or post, to proclaim any thing that is
lost. Sirens, certain Sea-deities, three in number, Parthenope, Ligea, and
Leucosia, the daughters of Achelous and Calliope, having their upper part like
maids, and their lower parts like fishes; they used by the sweetness of their
voices to allure Mariners to the rocks and cause them to be cast away: which
Ulysses foreseeing, stopped the ears of his associates with soft wax, and caused
himself to be bound to the mast of the ship; whereupon they seeing themselves
contemned, cast themselves headlong into the Sea. Sirius, a star in the mouth
of that constellation which is called Canicula or the Dog, which toward the
latter end of Summer casts forth a vehement and raging heat; whence the
Dog-dayes derive their name. Sirocc^, (Ital.) a Southeast wind. Sisamnes, a
Judge whom Cambyses caused to be flead for bribery, and his skin to be hung
upon the Tribunal. Sisken, or Sirkin, a little bird, other wise called a Finch,
in Greek Acanthis or Ligurinus. Sisley, see Cicely. Sisyphus, the son of
Aeolus, who was slain by Theseus for his robberies, and is feigned by the Poets
to roll a great stone in Hell up to the top of a mountain, which still falls
down again and makes an endless labor. Site, or Situation, (lat.) the seat or
standing of any house or building. Sitient, (lat.) thirsting. Sitomagus, the
ancient name of a Town in Northfolk, now called Thetf^rt; this Town was sacked
by the Danes, in the year 1004. for the recovery whereof Bishop Arfast removed
his Episcopal See from Elmham hither. Sittim, or Sethim, (Hebr.) a certain wood
growing in Judaea, of which the Ark was made. Sixain, see sestain. Size, a Term
used among the Scholars in the University of Cambridge, signifying so much
bread, or beer set upon any of their names in the buttery book, as amounts to
the value of a farthing.
S K
Skeg, in Navigation, is that little part of the Keel, which is cut slaunting,
and is left a little without the stern post. Skinker, (Dutch) a filler of
drink, a Cup Bearer, or Butler. Skuppers, the holes close to the decks, through
the ships side, whereat the water runs forth of the ship from the decks.
S L
Slay of a Weavers Loom, a certain instrument, having teeth like a Comb, it
comes from Slaegen Dutch, i. to strike. Slego, a County of Ireland in the
Province of Connaght. Slockster, (Dutch) a plagiary, or one that inticeth away
men's servants. Slot, the print of a stags foot, a Term in Hunting. Slough, (old
word) a Ditch.
S M
Smalt, a kind of blue color used in painting. Smaragd, a precious stone of a
green color, otherwise called an Emerald. Smectymnus, the title of a certain
book; so called from the first letters of those Ministers names that composed
it. Smegmatick, (Greek) belonging to Soap, of a scouring faculty. Smeth, a
certain ointment to take away hair. Smilas, the name of a fair Virgin, who
falling in love with Crocus, and being despised by him pined away, and was
turned into a plant of that name, called in English a Kidney-bean. Smired,
(Sax.) anointed. Smoterlich, (old word) snout-fair. Smyrna, a City of Ionia,
watered by the River Milete, built as some think by Smyrna the Amazonian, who
possessed Ephesus in this City most conclude Homer was born.
S N
Snakeweed, a kind of plant, otherwise called Adderswort. Snapdragon, a plant
called in Latin Antirrinum; also a kind of Hobgoblin. Snaphaunce, a Firelock,
a kind of Gun that strikes fire without a match. Snette, (a Term in Hunting)
the fat of all sorts of Deer.
S O
Soccage, a certain Tenure of Lands by inferior husbandry services, from the
French Soc, i. a Plough-share. Sociality, (lat.) fellowship, company.
Socinians, a certain Sect that deny the Divinity of Christ, first spread by
Faustus Socinus of Siena. Socome, a Term in Common Law, signifying a custom of
grinding at the Lords Mill. Socord, (lat.) sluggish, idle, slothful. Socrates,
a famous Athenian Philosopher, the son of Sophronius a statuary and Phanareta a
Midwife, he was approved by the Oracle the wisest of men, at length being
condemned to death by the Magistracy, he had a Hemlock potion given him to
drink, which he took with much constancy and patience. Sodality, (lat.)
fellowship, brotherhood or society. Sodomitical, (lat.) belonging to Sodomy, i.
buggery, or unnatural lust. Sokmans, those Tenants that hold by Soc^age Tenure.
Solace, (lat.) comfort, or delight. Solar, (lat.) belonging to Sol, i. one of
the seven Planets, Apollo, or the Sun. Solarie, (lat.) a yearly pension paid to
the Prince to live free from public business; also a yearly rent paid for a
house from Solum, i. the ground, or floor. Soldures, among the old Gauls, were
such as vowed friendship to any, and to take part with them in their good, or
bad fortunes. Soleated, (lat.) shod, having on shoes, or sandals. Solegrove,
an old name for the month of February. Solemnity, a Pomp, or Ceremony
performed yearly, from the Latin Solum, i. alone, and annus, i. a year.
Solicitation, (lat.) a moving to do a thing. Solicitude, (lat.) care, anguish
of mind. Solidation, (lat.) a making firm, or solid. Solifidian, one that
depends upon faith alone without works. Solifuge, (lat.) a certain venomous
animal, found chiefly in the silver Mines of Sardinia. Soliloquy, (lat.) a
talking, or discoursing with ones self alone. Solitude, (lat.) lonelynesse,
privatenesse. Solivagant, (lat.) wandering alone. Sollar, (lat.) an upper roof
of a house, the story next the tiles. Soloecisme, (Greek) a speaking contrary
to the rules of Grammar, from Soli, a barbarous people of Pamphilia. Solon, one
of the seven wisemen of Greece, he made excellent Laws for the government of
Athens, and abolished those of Draco; afterward he flying his Country, went
first into Egypt, next to Cyprus: Lastly to Craesus of Lydia, see Craesus.
Sol^titial, (lat.) belonging to the Solstice, or Sunstead, ^. the time when the
Sun being in Capricorn, the days and nights are at the longest, which is about
the midst of June. Solve, (lat.) to loosen, or undo, whence Solution a
loosning, or undoing; also a resolving a doubt. A Summer, vide a Summer.
Somniferous, (lat.) bringing, or causing sleep. Sonorous, (lat.) sounding, or
making a loud noise. Sontage, a Tax of forty shillings laid upon every Knights
fee. Sontick, (lat.) hurtful, or noisome. Sophia, a proper name of a woman,
signifying in Greek wisdom. Sophisme, (Greek) a cunning evading Argument, or
Oration; whence Sophister, a subtle caviller in words. Sophistication, (lat.) a
falsifying, counterfeiting, or adulterating. Sophronia, (Greek) prudent and
temperate, a Christian name of several women. Sophy, (Arab. Tzaophi, i. pure
and holy) the Monarch of Persia is so called. Sopition, (lat.) a laying to
sleep. Soporation, (lat.) the same. Soporiferous, (lat.) bringing sleep. Sorb,
(lat.) a kind of fruit, called a Service. Sorbition, (lat.) a supping.
Sorbonists, the Divines of a College in Paris, called the Sorbone, from one
Robert de Surbonne, who was the founder of it. Sorcory, or Sorcelery, (French)
a kind of witchcraft, or enchantment, perhaps der^ved from the Lat^n
Sortilegium. Sordet, or Sordine, (French) a pipe put into the mouth of a
Trumpet, to make it sound lower. Sordid, (lat.) foul, filthy, sluttish; also
base, or dishonest. A Sore, or Sore-el, a Male fallow Deer of three year old. A
Sorel color, a kind of a brownish, dun, or dark red. Sorites, (Greek) a kind
of a Syllogism, consisting of diverse propositions heaped together. S^rorcation,
(lat.) a swelling, or becoming round, and embossed like a young Virgin's
breasts. Sorority, (lat.) sisterhood. Sortilegie, (lat.) a divination by lots.
Sortition, (lat.) a casting of lots. Sospitation, (lat.) a keeping safe and in
health, a preserving from danger. Sote, (old word) sweet. Sothale, a kind of
intertainment made by Bailiffs to those of their hundred for their gain; it is
also called Filctale. Sothernwood, a kind of plant, called in Latin Abrotonum.
Sothfast, (Sax.) true, faithful. So^lack, a great Officer among the Turks.
Sour^e, (French) a springhead; also a rise, or beginning of any thing from the
Latin word Surgere to arise. Sourd, (lat.) deaf. Sourdet, see Sordet. Sous, a
kind of French Coin, valuing about a penny. Southhampton, or South-Anton, the
chief City of Hantshire, so called as being situate on the South Side of the
River Test, named in times past Anton; some think it to be the same with that
Town, which Antonine calls Clausentum, from the British Cladh-Henton, i. the
Haven of Henton* in the wars between King Edward the third, and Philip Valoise,
it was burnt to the ground by the French, out of the ashes whereof immediately
sprung up the Town which is now in being. Sown, a word proper to the Exchequer,
signifying as much as to be leviable, or possible to be gathered. Sownder, a
term used by Hunters for a company of wild Bores, as a herd for Deer.
S P
Spade, (lat.) gelded. Spadiceous, (lat.) of a bright bay color, from Spadix
the branch of a Date-tree. Spagyrical, (lat.) belonging to chemical operations.
Spahy, (Persian Espawhee) a Turkish Horseman completely armed. Spaid, a term
used by Hunters, a red male Deer of three years old. Sparsion, (lat.) a
sprinkling. Sparta, a famous City of Peloponnessus, built by Spartus the son of
Phoroneus, or as some say, by Sparta the daughter of Eurotas; it is otherwise
called Lacedaemon. Spartacus, a Thracian gladiatour or swordplayer, who with
Chrysus and Oenomaus, broke out of Capua, got together an Army of slaves, and
overthrew Clodius, Glaber, Lentulus, and Cassius; thereby making himself very
formidable to the Romans; at last he was put to flight by Cr^ssus, but
afterward making head again, was vanquished and slain. Spasmatical, (Greek)
troubled with a Spasm, i. a cramp or shrinking in of the sinews. Spathule, or
Spat, (lat.) an instrument wherewith Chirurgians spread their plasters; it is
also called a splatter or slice. Spatiation, (lat.) a walking at length, or in
a large compass. Species, (lat.) a different kind or form of any thing; in
Logic it is reckoned one of the 5 Predicables. Specifical, (lat.) special,
distinguishing the species or kind. Specification, (lat.) a signifying,
declaring, or manifesting. Specious, (lat.) beautiful to the sight, fair to
behold. Spectacle, (lat.) a public or solemn show. Spectatour, (lat.) a
beholder, or looker on. Spectre, (lat.) a frightful apparition, a vision,
ghost, or spirit. Speculation, (lat.) a spying or watching, also a
contemplating or considering. Spel, (Sax.) a word or saying; also vulgarly used
for a charm. Spelt, a kind of corn growing in some parts of the World, called
in Latin Zea. Sperage, a kind of plant called in Latin Asparagus. Spermatical,
(Greek) belonging to sperm, i. the natural seed of any living creature. Sperma
Ceti, see Parmaceti. Speustick, (Greek) done or made up in haste. Sphacelism,
(Greek) a kind of ulcer or dangerous inflammation. Sphaerical, (lat.) belonging
to a sphere, i. a round globous figure, commonly taken for the round compass
of the Heaven. Sphaeromachy, (Greek) a playing at bowls or tennis. Sphinx, the
name of a certain Monster that kept anciently near Thebes, proposing a riddle
to all passengers that came that way, and none being able to unfold it, she
destroyed them all: at last Oedipus coming that way and expounding it, she
threw her self headlong down a rock for grief. Spiciferous, (lat.) bearing
ears of corn. Spicilegy, (lat.) a gleaning, a gathering ears of corn.
Spigurnells, a word now out of use, anciently the sealers of the Kings Writs
were known by that term, which office together with the Sergeancy of the Kings
Chapel, John de Bohun, the son of Franco resigned unto King Edward the first.
Spinal, (lat.) belonging to a Spine, i. a thorn, prickle, or sting; also the
backbone. Spinosity, (lat.) a being full of spines or thorns. Spinster, a Law
term, being appropriated to unmarried women in all deeds, bonds, and evidences.
Spintrian, (lat.) inventing new actions of lust. Spiracle, (lat.) a
breathing-hole, a place through which smoke may have a vent. Spiral, (lat.)
belonging to a pyramid or spire-steeple. Spiration, (lat.) a breathing or
exhaling. Spiritualities, the profits which a Bishop receives from his
spiritual living. Spissitude, (lat.) thickness or grossness. Spitter, see
Brocket or Pricket. A Spittle-house, (Ital. Spedale) see Hospital. Spleget, the
same as Pleget. Splendid, (lat.) bright, clear, shining, glorious. Splenetick,
(lat.) troubled with a disease or ill humors in the spleen or milt, i. a Bowel
in the left side under the midrife, over against the liver. Spoliation, (lat.)
a robbing or spoiling; also a Writ that lies for one incumbent against
another, when the right of patronage comes not in debate. Spondee, (Greek) a
foot in a verse, consisting of two long syllables. Spondyles, (Greek) the
vertebres or turning joints of the backbone. Spongious, (lat.) full of holes
like a sponge, which is a kind of plant-animal growing under the sea-rocks.
Sponsal, or Sponsalitious, (lat.) belonging to a spouse. Sp^nsion, (lat.) a
bargain or promise; but more especially relating to Marriage. Spontane, (lat.)
done willingly, unconstrained, or of ones own accord. Sporades, certain Islands
that lie scattered up and down in the Carpathian Sea. Spraints, a term among
Hunters, the dung of an Otter. Spray, (old word) a bou^h or sprig. Spretion,
(lat.) a contemning, despising, or scorning. Spr^ghts, a sort of short or
flight arrows. Spring-tides, see Neap-tides. Springal, (Dutch) a stripling or
youngman. Spume, (lat.) foam, froth, or scum. Spurcidical, (lat.) speaking
filthily or uncleanly. Spurious, (lat.) baseborn; also counterfeit. Spurkets, a
term in Navigation, the spaces between the futtocks by the ship sides fore and
aft, above and below.
S Q
Squadron, (French) a certain number of soldiers formed into a square body
Squalid, (lat.) unclean, sluttish, ill-favored. Squamigerous, (lat.) bearing
scales scaly. Squill, (lat.) a kind of plant otherwise called the Sea-onion.
Squinancy, or Squincy, a kind of disease which causes a swelling in the
throat, called in Latin Angina. Squinanth, (lat.) a kind of plant otherwise
called the Sweet-rush.
S T
Stability, (lat.) stablenesse, firmness, surenesse. Stabulation, (lat.) a
standing of cattle in a stable or stall. Stade, (lat.) a furlong, or the eighth
part of an Italian mile, which consists of a thousand paces. Stafford, the
chief Town of Staffordshire, called in ancient times Betheny, where Berteline,
a holy man led an Eremites life; it has a Castle on the south bank of the
River built in the year 914 by King Edw. the Elder. Staggard, (a term in
Hunting) a red male Deer of 4 years old. Stagira, a Town in Macedonia, where
Aristotle was born; whence that Philosopher is called the Stagirite. Stainand
colors, in Heraldry, are tawney and murrey. Stallage, (French) in Common Law,
signifies money paid for setting of stalls in Markets or Faires. Stallion,
(Ital.) a horse kept for mares. Standard, (French) the chief Ensign of an Army,
belonging to the King or General; also the standing measure of the King or
State, to which all other measures are framed. Stanford, in Saxon Steanford, a
Town in Lincolnshire, situate upon the River Welland; it is so called as being
built of rough stone, Stean signifying in the Saxon tongue a stone. In this
Town, under the reign of King Edward the third, an University was instituted,
and public profession of Arts began to flourish; but this Academy continued
not long, it being soon after provided by oath, that no Student in Oxford
should publicly profess at Stanford to the prejudice of Oxford. There is also
another Stanford situate upon the River Avon in Northamptonshire. The
Stannaries, (lat.) the Mines or Tin-works in Cornwall. See Lodework. Stanza,
(Ital.) a certain number of verses commonly called a staff, at the ending of
which the stroph is concluded. Staple, a City or Town where the Merchants by
common order carry their commodities, for the better utterance of them by the
great. Staple-Inne, see Inn. Star Chamber, (so called from a Chamber in
Westminster beautified with Stars, wherein this Court was first kept) a Court
consisting of the members of the Kings Council, wherein are controverted all
matters in which appeal is made from subjects to their Prince. Start, applied
to a Hare, when you force her to leave her seat or form; for then you are said
to start a Hare. Starrulet, ( diminutive) a little Star. Stasiarch, (Greek) a
Captain or chief Ringleader in any tumult or sedition. Stater, (Greek) a
certain ancient coin, valuing about two shillings in silver, seventeen
shillings in gold. Staticks, (Greek) a mechanic Art, treating about weights
and measures. Station, (lat.) a standing-place; also a bay or rode for ships.
Station-staff, an instrument used in Surveying, being a straight pole divided
into feet, inches, and parts of inches, from the bottom upward. Stationary, is
when a Planet stands still and moves neither backward nor foreward. Statuary,
(lat.) a Graver of Statues or Images. Statumination, (lat.) an underpropping or
setting up. Statute, (lat.) signifies in Common Law, a Decree or Act of
Parliament. Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple, are certain bonds made
between Creditor and Debtor, in the form of a Statute, and acknowledged before
the Mayor and chief Warden of any City, and two Merchants assigned for that
purpose. Statute Sessions, are certain petty Sessions or Meetings in every
hundred. Stec^ado, (Span.) the lists, a place railed in for the beholding of
any famous Combat. Stead, (old word) place. Stedship, (old word) firmness or
surenesse. To Steer, in Navigation, is to govern the ship with the helm; also
by metaphor to govern or manage any affair. Stellar, (lat.) belonging to a
star. Stellation, (lat.) a blasting. Stelliferous, (lat.) starry, bearing
stars. Stellion, (lat.) a little beast, so called from certain little spots
upon its skin, almost in the fashion of stars. Stellionate, (lat.) deceit,
cousenage, counterfeiting any kind of merchandise. Stem, (Greek) the stalk
of any herb or flower; also a stock, lineage or pedigree. Stenography, (Greek)
the Art of short-writing. Stentorian voice, a roaring loud voice, from Stentor
a Greek, whose voice was as loud as 50 men's voices together. Stephen, the
proper name of a man, signifying in Greek a Crown. Stercoration, (lat.) a
dunging or covering with dung. Sterility, (lat.) barrenness. Sterling, see
Easterling. Stern, the aftermost part of a ship; also among Hunters the tail
of a Greyhound is so called, as also the tail of a Woolf. Sternutation, (lat.)
a sneezing. Sterquilinious, (lat.) belonging to a dunghill. Stesimbrotus, the
son of Epaminondas, a famous Theban Captain, he was put to death by his father
for fighting against the enemy contrary to his command. Stews, (from the French
word Estuve, a Hot-house) brothel houses or places where women prostitute their
bodies for gain. Sthenelus, a famous Captain in the wars of Troy, the son of
Capaneus and Euadne. Sthenobaea, the daughter of Jobatas King of the Lycians,
and the wife of Praetus King of the Corinthians, who receiving a repulse from
Belleroph^n, complained to her husband, as if he would have offered violence
unto her. Stibium, a kind of Mineral whereof there is great plenty in
Darbyshire Mines; it is commonly called Antimony. To Stigmatize, (Greek) to
brand, or mark with a hot Iron. Stilletto, or Steletto, (Ital.) a sharp pointed
Dagger, or Poniard. Stillatory, (lat.) dropping, or distilling; also a place to
put a Still, or Limbeck in. Stillicide, (lat.) a dropping from the eves of a
house. Stillyard, a place in London, where in old time the Merchants of Haunse
and Almain used to reside; it is so called as it were Steel-yard, because Steel
used to be sold there. Stimulation, (lat.) a provoking, moving, or stirring up.
Stipation, (lat.) a guarding, or invironing about. Stipendial, or Stipendiary,
(lat.) serving for wages, or hire, paying tribute. Stipone, a kind of sweet
compounded drink used in hot weather. Stiptical, (Greek) stopping, or binding a
word, used in Physic. Stipulation, (lat.) a solemn Covenant made by ordinary
words in the Law. Stiricide, (lat.) a dropping of Isicles from the eves of a
house. Stirling, a County in the Southpart of Scotland. Stoaked, a Term in
Navigation, when the water cannot come to the Well, by reason that ballast, or
something else is got into the limber holes. Stoccado, (Span.) a prick, stab,
or thrust with a weapon. Stoical, (Greek) belonging to, or of the humor of the
stoics, i. a certain Sect of Philosophers at Athens, they were so called from
Stoa, i. a Porch, because Zeno their first founder taught in a Porch of the
City. Stoke, a Village in Nottinghamshire, where Sir John de la Pool, Earl of
Lincoln pretending a title to the Crown of England, was overthrown in a great
pitched battle, and slain. Stole, (Greek) a long Robe, or Garment of honor,
among the ancient Romans it is now more especially taken for a Priestly
Ornament. Stolidity, (lat.) foolishness, fondness, dullness, blockishnesse.
Stomachous, (lat.) angry, disdainful. Stomatick, (Greek) having a sore mouth.
Stone of Wool, see Sarplar. Stonefaulcon, a kind of Hawk that builds her Nest
in Rocks. Stonehenge, a wonderful Pile of stones upon Salisbury plain, erected
within the Circuit of a Ditch, in manner of a Crown in three ranks, one within
another, whereof some are 28 foot high, and seven foot broad, upon the heads of
which others lie overthwart with Mortises; so as the whole frame seems to
hang; it is termed by the old Historians Chorea Gigantum, i. the Giants dance.
Stooming of Wine, a putting baggs of herbs, or other infusions into it. Stork,
a kind of bird, so called from the Greek word Storge, i. natural affection,
because of the care which is observed in these kind of birds toward their
Parents, when they grow old. To Stow, a Term in Navigation, to put any
victuals, or goods in order in the hold of a ship. Stounds, (old word) sorrows,
dumps. Stours, (old word) shocks, or bronts. Strabisme, (Greek) a looking a
squint. Strage, (lat.) a felling of Trees, a great ruin, or fall of any thing;
also a great slaughter in an Army. The Struck of a wheel, the Iron wherewith
the Cartwheel is bound. Straineth, a Term in Faulconry they say, the Hawk
straineth, and not snatcheth. Strangurie, (Greek) a certain disease, wherein
the Urine is voided drop by drop, and with great pain; it is vulgarly called
the Strangullion. Strappado, (Ital.) a certain kind of punishment inflicted on
Soldiers for some heinous offense, by drawing them up on high with their arms
tied backward. Stratagem, (Greek) a policy, or subtle invention in war. Strath,
an old British word, signifying a Vale, or Dale, whence are derived the names
of several places, as Strathdee, i. the Vale of Dee, Strathearn, the Vale of
Earn. Stratiotick, (Greek) belonging to Soldiers, warlike. A Straight, a
narrow passage at Sea, between two Lands. Stremeworks, see Lodeworks.
Strenuous, (lat.) stout, valiant, hardy. Streperous, (lat.) jarring, making a
noise. Stricture, (lat.) a gathering, or cropping of fruit; also a spark that
flies from red hot Iron. Strident, or Stridulous, (lat.) making a creaking
noise. Strigilation, (lat.) a currying of a Horse. Strigment, (lat.) the filth,
which is wiped off from the body, or any part of it. To Strike sail, a Term in
Navigation, to pull down the sayls, in token of respect to another ship.
Stromatick, (Gr.) belonging to strewings, or any thing that is spread upon the
ground. Strond, or Strand, a shore, or street lying upon the Sea, or River
side. Structure, (lat.) a building, frame, or Fabric of any thing. Strumatick,
(lat.) troubled with a Strume, i. an Impostume, or swelling in the neck.
Studious, (lat.) seriously bent upon a thing, musing, or meditating, intent
upon books, or study, whence formerly Academies were called Studia, i. studies,
as the study of Oxford, etc. Stultiloquy, (lat.) a speaking, or talking
foolishly. Stupefaction, (lat.) a making stupid, i. dull, senseless,
astonished, or dismayed. Stupration* (lat.) a committing a rape, a deflowring a
Virgin. Stygian, (lat.) belonging to the River Styx, i. a Fountain near
Nonacris in Arcaedia, whose waters are of a nature so vehemently cold, that
nothing but the hoo^ of a Mule is able to contain them; the Poets fained it to
be a River of Hell, and that the most solemn Oath, which the gods swore by,
was by the waters of Styx. Stylo Novo, the new computation of time, according
to the Gregorian account, as Stylo veteri is the computation, according to the
Julian account. Styptick, or Styptical, (lat.) of a stopping, or binding
quality.
S U
Suada, a certain goddess among the Romans called the goddess of eloquence,
as Pitho was among the Greeks. Suasory, (lat.) apt to persuade, or exhort.
Suaviation, (lat.) an amorous kissing. Suaviloquy, (lat.) a sweet, or pleasant
manner of speaking. Suavity, (lat.) sweetness. Subaction, (lat.) a bringing
under, or subduing; also a kneading. Subagitation, (lat.) a driving to and fro;
also a soliciting, also a knowing a woman carnally. Subalbid, (lat.) whitish,
inclining to white. Subaltern, (lat.) taking turns under another. Subaudition,
(lat.) a hearing a little, a perceiving somewhat. Subclavicular Vein, see Vein.
Subcutaneous, (lat.) being under the skin. Subdial, (lat.) being under the sky,
or in the open air. Subdititious, (lat.) put under, or laid in the room of
another. Subdolous, (lat.) somewhat crafty, or deceitful. Subduction, (lat.) a
bringing, or leading under; also a leading away, or withdrawing. Subject,
(lat.) cast, or brought under; also in Logic, it is taken substantively for*
that substantial body, to which any quality adheres; also the matter which any
art, or science treats of. Subingression, (lat.) a subtle, or undiscerned
entering into. Subitaneous, (lat.) done suddenly, or hastily. Subjugaetion,
(lat.) a bringing under the yoke, a subduing. Subjunctive, (lat.) joining
under. Subhastation, (lat.) an ancient manner of selling things among the
Romans, which were confiscate to the public use, namely under a Spear, or
Javelin. Sublation, (lat.) a taking away. Subl^vation, (lat.) a lifting up;
also a helping, or easing. Subligation, (lat.) a binding, or tying underneath.
Sublimation, (lat.) a raising, or carrying up on high; also a Chemical
operation wherein dry exhalations ascending upward, stick to the sides of the
Alembick. Sublimity, (lat.) height. Sublition, (lat.) a plaistering, or
daubing underneath, in painting it is the grasing, or laying the ground color
under the perfect color. Submersion, (lat.) a plunging under water.
Submission, (lat.) a sending under; also a submitting, yielding, or humbling
ones self. Subordinate, (lat.) placed, or appointed under another. Suborn,
(lat.) to prepare, instruct, or set any one on upon the bearing false witness,
or any other mischievous design. Subpedaneous, (lat.) set under foot, used as a
footstool. Subpaena, a Writ to call a man into the Chancery, upon such case
only as the Common Law fails in; also a Writ for the calling in of witnesses
to testify. Subreptitious, (lat.) see Surreptitious. Subrision, (lat.) a
smiling. Subrogation, (lat.) see Surrogation. Subsannation, (lat.) a mocking,
jeering, or scoffing. Subscription, (lat.) a writing underneath, a setting ones
name at the bottom of a Letter, Bond, or Indenture. Subsidence, (lat.) a
settling to the bottom. Subsidiary, (lat.) sent to the aid, succor, or
assistence of any one. Subsidy, a Tax, or Tribute assessed by Parliament,
after the rate of four shillings in the pound for Lands, and two shillings 8^.
for goods. Subsortition, (lat.) a choosing by lot, after others have chosen.
Substitution, (lat.) a putting in the place or room of another. Substracti^n,
(lat.) a drawing a lesser, number out of a greater. Substruction, (lat.) a Term
in Architecture, an underbuilding, a laying the foundation of an Aedifice.
Subsultation, (lat.) a leaping under. Subterfluous, (lat.) flowing under.
Subterfuge, (lat.) an evasion, or cunning shift; also a safe retreat, or
refuge. Subterraneous, (latin) being under ground. Subtlety, (lat.) craft,
cunning, whence subtilties, quirks, or witty sayings. Subventaneous, (lat.)
lying under the wind. Subversion, (lat.) an overturning, or overthrowing.
Suburbian, (lat.) belonging to the Suburbs of a Town, or City. Succedaneous,
(lat.) succeeding, or coming in the room of another. Succedent houses, second,
fifth, ninth, eleventh. Succentour, (lat.) vulgarly Sincantour, see Incentour.
Succenturiation, (lat.) a Term in War, a recruiting a filling up the number of
Soldiers wanting in any Company, or Troup. Succernation, (lat.) a bolting, or
sifting of Meal. Succiduous, (lat.) tottering, ready to fall. Succinct, (lat.)
fenced, or girt about; also brief, or short. Succinous, (lat.) belonging to
Succinum, i. Amber. Succollation, (lat.) a bearing on the shoulders. Succubus,
(lat.) see Incubus. Succulent, (lat.) juicy, full of juice. Succussation, or
Succussion, (lat.) a violent jolting, or shaking. Suction, (lat.) a sucking.
Sudation, (lat.) a sweating, whence sudatory, a stew, or hot-house. Sudorifick,
(lat.) bringing, or causing sweat. Suecia, a Kingdom of Europe, lying on the
North of Germany, anciently inhabited by the Goths, the chief City of which is
called Stockholm. Suffarraneous, or Subfarraneous, (lat.) being under another
servant; it being an ancient custom among the Romans, that the chief servant
took his portion of Corn from the master, the under servant from him.
Suffection, (lat.) a putting under, or in the room of another. Suffition,
(lat.) a perfuming by casting perfumes upon hot Coals. Sufflamination, (lat.)
a stopping the wheels of a Coach, or Cart, with an Instrument called a
Sufflamen, or Trigger. Suffl^tion, (lat.) a puffing up, a making to swell with
blowing. S^ffocation, (lat.) a choking, stifeling, or stopping up of the
breath. Suffossion, (lat.) an undermining, or digging under. Suffragation,
(lat.) a giving suffrage, i. ones vote or voice in favor of any person or
design. A Suffragan, is one who has a voice in Ecclesiastical causes, and
executes the office of a Bishop, but has not the title. Suffumigation, (lat.)
a fuming or smoking underneath; in Physic it is taken for a conveying a fume
into the body from under a close-stoole. Suffusion, (lat.) a pouring or
spreading abroad; also a disease in the eye called a pin and web. Suggestion,
(lat.) a prompting or putting into ones mind. Sugillation, (lat.) a beating
black and blew; allo a reproaching or slandering. Suhit, see Gazul. Sulcation,
(lat.) a making furrows. Sulphurous, (lat.) full of sulphur or brimstone.
Sultan, or Sultan, among the Turks is taken for a King or Prince. Sultana, or
Sultanin, a kind of Turkish coin of Gold, valuing about seven shillings six
pence. Sumach, or Sumack, a kind of rank-smelling plant with a black berry
wherewith Curriers use to dress their cloth. Sumage, (from the French word
Sum, i. a burden, or seam, which in the Western parts signifies a
horse-load) a toll for carriage on horseback. Summary, (lat.) a brief
gathering together of the whole matter in few words. A Summer, in Architecture,
is a great piece of timber or beam which supporteth the building. Summity,
(lat.) the highest part, or top of any thing. Superable, (lat.) to be overcome
or vanquished. Sumpter horse, a horse that undergoes the burden of things
convenient for a journey, from the Latin Sumptus, charges or expenses.
Superaffusion, (lat.) a shedding upon, a pouring on the top. Superannuation,
(Ital.) an out-living, or growing out of date. Superbiloquent, (lat.) speaking
proudly or haughtily. Superchery, (lat.) wrong, injury, an outrageous
assaulting. Supercilous, (lat.) having great eyebrows; also of a sour
countenance, severe in carriage. Supereminence, (lat.) excellent, or authority
above others. Supererogation, (lat.) a performing more good works than a man is
bound to do* a term in Theology. Superfaetation, (lat.) a second conceiving
before the first young is brought forth, a breeding of young upon young, as
Hares and Conies do. Superficiary, (lat.) he that builds a house upon another
man's ground, and pays quit-rent. Superficies, (lat.) the surface or uttermost
part of any thing. In Geometry it is defined to be a magnitude consisting of
lines having only length and breadth without profundity. Superfluity, (lat.)
excess, an over-abounding, more than enough. Superjection, (lat.) a casting
upon. To Superinduce, (lat.) to bring or draw one thing over another.
Superintendent, (lat.) an Overseer. Superiority, (lat.) a being Superior, i.
higher, set above or over others. Superior Planets, those that are above the
Sun. ^. Suparlative, (lat.) highest advanced; in Grammar Suparlative degree is
the highest degree of comparison. Supermeation, (lat.) a flowing or passing
over. Supernal, (lat.) coming from above. Supernatation, (lat.) a swimming
over, or upon. Supernatural, (lat.) being above nature or natural cause.
Superscription, (lat.) a writting over or on the out side of any thing. To
Supersede, (lat.) to omit* to leave off, to let pass. Supersedeas, a Writ
signifying a command to stay the doing of that which in appearance of Law were
to be done. Superstition, (lat.) over-scrupulousnesse in Religion, over much
ceremony in divine worship. Supervacaneous, (lat.) more than, just, or, serves
for common use, needless, vain, unnecessary. To Supervene, (lat.) to come upon
on a sudden or unexpected. To Supervive, see Survive. Supine, (lat.) lying with
the face upward; also negligent or careless. Suppedaneous, (lat.) see
Subpedaneous. Suppeditation, (lat.) a supplying, ministering, or affording what
is needful. Suppilation, (lat.) a pilfring, or stealing underhand. To supplant,
(lat.) to plant or set under, also to deceive or beguile. Supplement, (lat.) a
supplying the which is defective, a filling up a place that is vacant or empty.
A Suppliant, (French) a petitioner or humble suitor. Supplication, (lat.) a
petitioning or making an humble request. Supplice, (lat.) punishment or
corre^ion. Supplosion, (lat.) a making a noise by stamping with the feet.
Supposititious, (lat.) laid in the place or room of another. Suppository,
(lat.) put under; also in Physic it is used substantively for any solid
composition put up into the body to make it soluble. To Suppress, (lat.) to
press under, to stifle or keep down. Suppuration, (lat.) a ripening of a bile
or imposthume, a gathering or resolving into matter. Supputation, (lat.) a
pruning of trees; also a counting or casting up. Supremacy, (lat.) a being
Supreme, i. highest in power and authority. Surannation, (lat.) the same as
Superannuation. A Surbating, (French) a beating or galling on the soles of ones
feet. To Surcease, (French) to give over. Surcharge, (French) charge upon
charge, or load upon load. A Surcharger of the Forest, he that commons with
more beasts than a man has right to common withal. A Surcingle, (French) an
upper girth or girdle. Su^rc^at, (French) a coat of Arms to wear over armor.
Surcrew, (French) an over-growing; also advantage, amends, over-measure.
Surculation, (lat.) a pruning of trees, a cutting off Surcles, i. young graffs,
shoots, or sprigs. Surdity, (lat.) deafness^. Surge, a wave, from the Latin
Surgere, i. to rise. Sureby, a Port Town in Yorkshire, which some think to be
the same with that ancient Town called by Antonine (...) Gabrantovicorum, and
by the Latins Sinus port^osus and salutaris, each of these names implying as
much as, sure or safe Haven. Surface, (French) the same as Superficies.
Surkney, a kind of white garment like a rotchet. To Surmo^^^, (French) to
excel, (...) overcome. To Surpass, (French) the same. Suria, the name of a
certain goddess to whom an altar was anciently erected at Melkrig in
Northumberland by Licinius Clemens a Captain under Calphurnus Agricola,
Lieutenant to Augustus. Surplusage, (French) signifies in Common Law, a
superfluity or addition more than needs, which is a cause sometimes that the
Writ abateth. Surprizal, (French) a sudden assaulting or setting upon, a coming
upon a man unawares. Surquedry, (old word) pride, presumption. Surrejoynder,
(French) a second defense of the Plaintiffs action, opposite to the Defendants
rejoinder. The Civilians call it Triplication. A Surrender, in Common Law, is
an instrument or writing, signifying a Tenants consent or agreement to yield
and give up his lands to the possession of him that has the next immediate
remainder or reversion. Surrentum, a Town of Campania in Italy, built by the
Greeks, anciently called Petrae Sirenum. Surreptitious, (lat.) taken
deceitfully, or by stealth. Surrogation, (lat.) an appointing as Deputy in the
room of another. To Survive, (French) to outlive; whence a Surviver in Common
Law, is taken for the longer liver of two joynttenants. Susan, the proper name
of a woman, signifying in Heb. Lilly. Susception, (lat.) an enterprising or
undertaking a thing. Susceptible, (lat.) pliable, apt to receive any
impression. Suscitation, (lat.) a raising, quickening or stirring up.
Suspension, (lat.) a hanging up; also a being in doubt or uncertainty: in
Common Law it is taken for a temporal stop of a man's right. Suspiral, (French)
a breathing-hole, a vent or passage for air; also a spring of water, passing
under ground to a Conduit. Suspiration, (lat.) a fetching a deep sigh.
Susurration, (lat.) a whispring, or muttring. Sutherland, the name of a
Country in the North-part of Scotland. Sutorious, (lat.) belonging to a
Shoemaker. Suture, (lat.) a seam, or sewing together, a fastening together of
bones. There are three remarkable Sutures in the head, the Coronal, Lamdoidal,
and Sagittal.
S W
Swainmot, (Sax.) a Court of Freeholders within the Forest kept by the Charter
of the Forest thrice a year. Swallows-taile a term among Architectours and
Carpenters, a fastening together of two pieces of timber so strongly, that they
cannot fall asunder. Swan, a celestial Constellation. Swart ruiter, see Ruiter.
To Sweep, a Hawk after she has fed, is said to sweep, not wipe her beak.
Swepe, a certain instrument with crossebeams, to draw water with. Swilpough, a
Dilling, or child born when the Parents are old. Swink, (old word) labor.
Swithin, a proper name, signifying in the Saxon tongue, very high. There was a
Bishop of Winchester famous for holiness called St. Swithin.
S Y
Sybaritical, dainty, wanton, effeminate, from the Sybariae, the inhabitants of
the City Sybaris, a people advanced to that height of luxury and
voluptuousness, that they had their horses taught to dance to the sound of the
Flute, by which means, the Crotoniatae who waged war with them, bringing pipers
along with them into the field, made their horses to fall a dancing; whereupon
they rushed in among them, broke their ranks, and utterly overthrew them, and
destroyed their City. Sybill, (Heb.) divine doctrine, a Christian name of
diverse women. Sybilline, (lat.) belonging to the Sybills, who were certain
women that prophesied concerning the birth of our Savior Christ; they were
thought to be ten in number, the Persian, Cumaean, Lybian, Delphian,
Erythraean, Samian, Hellespontian, Phrygian, Tiburtine, Cuman. Sycomore,
(Greek) a kind of fair tree, abounding in many parts of Egypt, partaking
partly of the Fig Tree, partly of the Mulberry. To Sycophantise, (Greek) to
play the sycophant, i. a parasite, flatterer, or talebearer. Syderati^n,
(lat.) a blasting. Syderation, in Physic is when not only the solid parts but
the bones also are corrupted. Sylla, a famous Roman Captain, who brought
Jugurth in chains to Rome, overcame Mithridates, broke the tyranny of Cinna,
and banished Marius: afterward being made Dictatour, he became Tyrannical
himself, till at last the Commonwealth being settled, he retired to Puteo^i,
where he lived a private life. Syllabical, (Greek) consisting of syllables.
Syllogistical, (Greek) belonging to a Syllogism, i. a kind of argumentation
wherein some things being granted, there follows necessarily a conclusion
different from those things which were granted. Sylvanectum, a Town of Picardy
in France, now called Senlis. Sylvanus, the son of Valerius, by his daughter
Valeria Tusculanaria, he was called the god of the Woods, and by some thought
to be the same with Pan. Sylvatical, or Sylvestrious, (lat.) woody, full of
trees, belonging to Woods or Forests. Symbolycal, (Greek) belonging to a
Symbol, i. a sign or token, a secret note, a short or mysterious sentence.
Symmachy, (Greek) a joining in war against a common enemy. Symmetry, (Greek) a
due proportion of each part in respect of the whole Sympathetical, (Greek)
having a sympathy, i. a natural agreement or consent in mutual affection or
passion. Symphoniacal, (Greek) belonging to Symphony, i. consent in Harmony,
agreement in tune or time. Symposiast, (Greek) the Master or Overseer of a
Feast or Banquet. Symptomatical, (Greek) belonging to a Symptom, i. an
accident or effect, accompanyin^ any disease, as the Ague does the headache.
Synagogical, (Greek) belonging to a Synagogue, i. a Congregation or Assembly.
Synalaepha, (Greek) a contraction of two vowels into one. Syncategorematical,
(Greek) a term in Logic, having no predicamental or self-signification.
Synchronical, (Greek) being or done together at the same time. Syncope, (Greek)
a figure wherein a letter or syllable is taken out of the middle of a word;
also in Physic it is taken for a certain disease which causes a sudden decay
of the spirits. Synchrism, (Greek) a kind of liquid or spreading ointment.
Synchronism, (Greek) a happening of two things at the same time. Syncope, a
sudden or hasty decay of the strength caused by a disolution of the natural
heat. Syndick, (Greek) one that has Commission to deal in the affairs of the
Commonwealth, a Controller or Censor. Syndrome, (Greek) a concourse, meeting
or running together. Synecdochical, (Greek) belonging to the figure Synecdoche,
i. a taking a part for the whole. Syneresis, or Synaeresis, (Greek) the same as
Synalaepha. Syngraph, (Greek) a deed or writing signed with ones own hand.
Synodical, (Greek) belonging to a Synod, i. an Assembly or meeting together of
Ecclesiastical persons, to consult about the affairs of the Church. Synonimous,
or Synonimal words, (Gr.) several words having all the same signification.
Synople, (French) a term in Heraldry, signifying Green. Synopsie, (Greek) a
brief summing up of things contained in a large Treatise. Syntagme, (Greek) an
ordering, disposing, or placing of things together. Syntax, (Greek) the same;
also in Grammar it is taken for a joining together of the several parts of
Speech in an orderly construction. Synteresie, (Greek) a remorce, or sting of
conscience. Syntheme, (Greek) a watchword; also an intricate sentence; also
the same as Diploma. Syracuse, the chief City anciently of the Isle of Sicily,
where the Poet Theocritus was born. Syria, a Region of Asia, by some divided
into Syria, Assyria, Coelosyria, and Leucosyria. Syrinx, an Arcadian Nymph, one
of the Naiades, who flying from the violence of Pan, was turned into a reed, of
which Pan made his pastoral pipe, which for her sake he much delighted to play
upon. Syrtes, two dangerous creeks in the Lybian Sea, called the greater Syrtis
and the lesser Syrtis. Systatique, (Greek) compacting, ordering, or placing
together. Sysigie, (Greek) a conjunction, a joining or coupling together.
System, (Greek) a composing, or putting together; also a Treatise or body of
any Art or Science, also the compass of a Song. Systole, (Greek) a contraction
or drawing together; also in Physic it is taken for that motion of the pulse
which compresses the heart and arteries as Diastole dilates them; also a making
short a long vowel.
T A
St. TAbbs, or St. Ebbes, a Town in the Bishopric of Durham, otherwise called
Ebbechester, from Ebba, a Virgin of the blood Royal of the Northumbers, who for
the great opinion that was conceived of her Sanctimony, was Canonized among the
Saints. Tabefaction, (Greek) a melting, corrupting, or consuming. Tabellary, or
Tabellion, (lat.) a Scrivener or public Notary; also a Letter-carrier. Taberd,
(Sax.) a jerkin or coat without sleeves; also a Heralds coat of Arms in
service. Tabernacle, (lat.) a Booth, or little Shop; also a Pavilion or Tent
for War. There was anciently among the Jews a certain holy Structure so called,
which was made to remove up and down from place to place. Tabernarious, (lat.)
belonging to Taverns or Shops. Tabid, (lat.) wasting or pining away. Tabitha,
the proper name of a woman, signifying in Hebrew Roebuck. Tabouret, (French) a
little stool to sit on. Tabularious, (lat.) belonging to writings, evidences or
accounts. Tabulation, (lat.) a fastening together of planks or boards, a making
a floor. Taces, (in French Cuisseaux) armor for the thighs. Tachos, a King of
Egypt, who for jeering at the short stature of Agesilaus, was the cause of the
breach of the league between them, and of the loss of his own Kingdom.
Tachygraphy, (Greek) the art of swift writing. Tacit, (lat.) silent.
Taciturnity, (lat.) a being silent, a holding ones peace. Tackle, a Term in
Navigation, the small ropes of a ship. Tacticks, (Greek) books treating of the
ordering of Soldiers in an Army. Taction, (lat.) a touching. Taenarum, a
Promontory in the Country of Lacaedemon, near which is the Den where Hercules
ascended, when he brought Cerberus out of the deep. Tages, the Grandchild of
Jupiter, and son of Genius, he is said to have taught the Hetrurians the art of
divining, when he was a boy of twelve year old. Tagliacotius, a famous
Surgeon of Bononia, who could put on new noses. Tagus, a river of Portugal
famous among the ancients, for its gravel resembling Gold. Tail, in
Common Law, is a kind of inheritance in fee, when a man holds certain Lands
to him, and the Heirs of his body Lawfully begotten, and is taken opposite to
fee-simple. Tainct, a little red colored insect, being a kind of Spider that
infesteth Cattle in the Summer time. Takel, (old word) a Feather, or Arrow.
Talaries, (lat.) the winged shoes, which the Poets faigne that Mercury wore.
Talent, (lat.) a certain weight of silver, differing in value, both among
Hebrews and Greeks. Tales, (lat.) i. such like) it is used in Common Law, for a
supply of men empannell'd upon a Jury* and not appearing, or challenged as not
indifferent. Talismannical, belonging to Talismans, (Arab.) i. images, or
figures made under certain constellations. Tallage, or Tailage, (French) a Tax,
Tribute, or Imposition. Tallion, see Lex Talionis. Tally, or Taley, (from the
French Tailler, i. to cut) a score, or stick of wood divided into two pieces,
for the keeping of a reckoning between two parties. Talmudical, belonging to
the Talmud, i. a certain book compiled by the Rabbis, containing the Law,
Ceremonies, and Religious Rites of the Jews. Talus, a sisters son of Daedalus,
he found out the use of the saw, by seeing the Jawbone of a Serpent, and
invented the Potters wheel, but was at length treacherously slain by his Uncle,
who envied his art and ingenuity. Tamarinds, a kind of Indian fruit somewhat
like a Damascene, much used in Physic. Tamarisk, a kind of shrub, having a
red bark, and a leaf like heath. Tamerlane, a Scythian, who invaded the
Dominion of the Turks, with a vast multitude of men, and having overthrown and
taken Bajazeth, the Emperor of the Turks, he led him up and down all Asia in
an Iron Cage, he was, as some say, at first a Swinheard, but by a full gale of
fortune, was blown up into the Imperial Thrown. Tamesis, the chief River of
England, which from the confluence of Tame, and Isis, two Rivers, which meeting
together, join into one stream, thenceforth assumes a name compounded of them
both. Tampoy, a kind of pleasant drink, much used in the M^luc^oes. Tampoon, or
Tampkin, a small piece of wood serving for a bung, or stopple to a piece of
Ordnance. Tamworth, a Town so called from the River Tame, and the Saxon word
Weordh, which signifies a Barton, Ferm-house, or River Island; it is situate
partly in Warwickshire, partly in Staffordshire, and was anciently the chief
residence of the Kings of the Mercians. this Town after it had suffered much by
the Danish Wars, was repaired by Aethelfleda, Lady of the Mercians; also Edith
King Eadgar's sister founded here a Religious house for veiled Virgins.
Tanacles, certain instruments of torment like pincers. Tanet, an Island in
Kent, so called, as some vainly imagine (...), i. from the death of Snakes, here
the Saxons first seated themselves, but were vanquished with a great slaughter
at Stovar; nevertheless, afterward at Whipped-fleet, a place so called from
Whipped, a Saxon there slain, Hengist overthrew the Britains, and put them to
flight. Tangent, (lat.) a Mathematical Term used chiefly in Astronomy, and
signifies, a right line perpendicular, to the Diameter drawn by the one extreme
of the given Arch, and terminated by the Secant, and drawn from the Center
through the other extreme of the said Arch. Tangible, (lat.) that may be
touched. Tanistry, a certain ancient custom in Ireland, whereby he that had
most power, or policy inherited in any principality, or Lordship; it comes from
the Saxon word Thane, i. a Nobleman. Tantalus, an ancient King of Phrygia, the
son of Jupiter by the Nymph Plotis, he inviting the gods to a feast, killed his
son Pelops, and set before them to eat, for which he was condemned to this
punishment in Hell, namely to stand up to the chin in water, and to have
pleasant apples hang over his head, and yet to be neither able to eat nor to
drink, whence a man that is brought near to happiness, and yet deprived of it,
is commonly said to be Tantaliz'd. To Tap, vide, to Beat. Taphus and Telebus,
the sons of Pterelas, the son of Neptune and Hippothoe, the daughter of Nestor;
their Successors, the Taphi^, and Teleboae inhabited the Taphian, or Echinades
Islands, see Amphitryon. Tapinage, (French) a lurking, or lying secret, whence
Tapissant, lurking, or squatting, a Term in Hunting. Taprobane, an Island in
the Indian Sea, 1000 mile long, and 625 mile broad, now called Sumatra.
Taratantarize, (Greek) to imitate the sound of a Trumpet, which seems to
express the word Taratantara. Tarantula, a kind of venomous Creature,
abounding in Tarantum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, which casts forth a
sting, only curable by the sound of Music. Tardigrade, (lat.) going a slow
place. Tardity, (lat.) slownesse, or delaying. Tarentum, a City of Magna
Graecia in Italy, built by Tarentus the son of Neptune, and augmented by
Phalantus, a Lacedaemonian. Tarpawling, a Term in Navigation, a piece of
Canvasse that is all tarr'd over to lash upon a deck, or grating, to keep the
rain from soaking through. Tarpeia, a vestal Virgin, the daughter of Tarpeius,
she betrayed the Roman Capitol to the Sabines, desiring for a reward what ever
they carried upon their right Arms, whereupon they all threw their sheilds upon
her, and pressed her to death. Tarquinius Priscus, the son of Demaratus a
Corinthian, who by the persuasion of his wife Tanaquil went to Rome, where by
insinuating himself into the favor of Ancus Martius, he at length obtained the
Kingdom. Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh King of the Romans, whose son
Tarquinius Sextus ravishing Lucretia, the wife of Tarquinius Collatinus, was
the cause that kingly Government was utterly expelled out of Rome. Tarracon, a
famous City of Arragon, anciently called Tarraconia, a Province of Spain.
Tarrasse, see Terrasse. Tarsus, a famous City of Cilicia, where St. Paul was
born, which City together with Anchialus are said to have been built in one
day, by Perseus the son of Danae. Tartarean, (lat.) belonging to Tartarus, i. a
deep place in Hell often mentioned by the Poets. Tartaria, a large Country of
Asia, containing Sarmatia, Asiatica, the two Scythia's and Cataia. Tarter, the
Lees of Wine; also a kind of Gravelly-stone, growing in the inside of Wine
vessels. Tasck, an old British word, signifying as much as Tribute, from
whence happily comes our word Task, which is a duty, or labor imposed upon any
one. Tassel, (French) a Term in Falconry, the Male of any Hawk. Titus Tatius, a
Captain of the Sabines, who after great Wars with the Romans, at length
concluding a peace with them, was received as a sharer in the Government.
Tavistoke, or Teavistok, a Town in Devonshire; so called from the River Teave,
it has been famous in times past, for the Abbey built by Ordolph, the son of
Ordgare, Earl of Devonshire, in the year 961. he being admonished, as some say
by a Vision from Heaven; this Abbey was destroyed by the Danes, but afterward
flourished again, and in it Lectures were instituted of the English Saxon
tongue. Tawnton, or Thonton, a Town in Somersetshire; so called as it were a
Town watered by the River The One, here I^a King of the West Saxons, built a
Castle, which Desburgio his wife rased to the ground, after she had expelled
from thence Eadbritch, King of the South Saxons. Taurine, or Taurean, (lat.)
belonging to a Bull. Taurinum, a City by the Alps in Piedmont, vulgarly called
Turin. Taurus, a very great ridge of mountains, stretched out a mighty length
through diverse Countries, and called by several names; as Imaus, Parapomisus,
Circius, Taurus, Cau^asus, Sarpedon, Ceraunius, etc. also the name of one of
the twelve signs of the Zodiac, the word signifying in Latin a Bull.
Tautologie, (Greek) a repeating of one thing several times over in different
expressions. Taximagulus, a petty King of Kent, one of those that opposed
Julius Caesar, when he made War with the Britains. Taygetus, a very steep Hill
by the City of Sparta.
T E
Team, or Theme, (Sax.) a Royalty granted by the Kings Charter, to a Lord of a
Manor. Teasels, a kind of Plant, called in Greek Dipsacus, in Latin labrum
veneris. Technical, (Greek) artificial, done by Art. Tectonick, (lat.)
belonging to a building. Tedder, a tying of any beast in a roap, that he may
graze within a certain compass. Tediferous, (lat.) bearing a Taper, or Torch.
Tegea, a Town in Arcadia, whose inhabitants having great Wars with the
Phaeneatae; it was decided in a Duel between the three sons of Rherimachus for
the Tegeans, and the three sons of Demostratus for the Phaeneatae, like that of
the Horatii and Curiatii. Tegment, (lat.) a covering, or clothing. Teifidale,
a Country in the South-part of Scotland, so called as it were a Dale, by the
River Teif. Telarie, (lat.) belonging to a Weavers Web. Teliferous, (lat.)
carrying, or bearing darts. Tellers of the Exchequer, four Officers appointed
to receive all moneys due to the King, and to give a Bill to the Clark of the
Pell to charge him therewith. Telamon, the son of Aeacus, King of Salamis, he
was the first that got upon the Walls of Troy, when Hercules besieged it,
whereupon he gave him Hesione the daughter of Laomedon. Telegonus, the son of
Ulysses and Circe, who slew his father at Ithaca not knowing him, afterward
going into Italy he built Tusculum. Telephus, the son of Hercules, and the
Nymph Auge, who being exposed to the Woods by his Grandfather, was brought up
by a Heart, afterward becoming King of Mysia, he was wounded by Achilles, whom
he denied passage through his Country going to the Wars of Troy, but at length
was cured by the same dart that wounded him. Telescope, (Greek) a certain
Mathematical instrument, by which the proportion of any thing is discerned at a
great distance. Tellus, the goddess of the earth, and oftentimes taken for the
earth it self. Temerity, (lat.) rashness, unadvisednesse. Tempe, certain
pleasant fields in Thessaly, five miles long, and six miles broad, watered by
the River Pen^us, which makes them so ever green and flourishing, that all
delightful places are by Metaphor called Tempe. Temperament, (lat.) a moderate
and proportionable mixture of any thing, but more peculiarly of the four
humors of the body. Temperance, (lat.) moderation and abstinence, a
restraining the violence of a man's affections, or passions. Temperature, (lat.)
the same as temperament. Tempestivity, (lat.) seasonablenesse, due or
convenient time. Templars, or Knights of the Temple, see in Knight.
Temporaneous, or Temporary, (lat.) belonging to time done suddenly, or a
certain time. Temporalities of Bishops, such Lands, or Revenues as are added to
Bishops Sees by great persons of the Land. Temporize, to live according to the
times, to comply with the times. Temulency, (lat.) drunkenness. Tenacity,
(lat.) an aptness to keep, or hold fast. Tenderlings, a Term among Hunters,
the soft tops of Deers Horns, when they begin to shoot forth. Tendons, (lat.)
certain small ligaments, or chords, in which the muscles do end. Tendrells, the
young branches of a tree, and chiefly of a vine. Tenebres, certain divine
Services performed among the Catholics some days of the week before Easter
Sunday, in representation of our Saviors Agony in the Garden, there being put
out, of the 15 lamps which they light, one at the end of every Psalm they
repeat, until all the lights are extinguished. Tenebrion, (lat.) one that
lurks in the night to pilfer or steal; also a night-spirit. Tenebrosity, (lat.)
darkness or obscurity. Tenedos, an Island in the Aegaean Sea, between Lesbos
and the Hellespont, hither the Greeks retired while the Trojans received the
great horse. Tenerity, (lat.) tenderness or softness. Ten, a kind of tawny
color, a term used in Heraldry. Tenon, a term in Building, a piece of a rafter
put into a mortisehole to bear it up. Tenor, (lat.) the effect or purport of
any thing; also a rule or proportion; also one of the five parts in Music.
Tensil, (lat.) easy to be bent or stretched out. Tensity, (lat.) stiffnesse, or
a being stretched out hard. Tent, among Jewellers, is that which they put under
table Diamonds when they set them in work; it signifies also a Pavillion, also
a Chirurgions Instrument to search wounds with. Tentation, (lat.) a tempting,
trying, or proving. Tentorian, (lat.) belonging to a Tent or Pavillion.
Tenuity, (lat.) smallness, thinness, slenderness; whence Tenuation, a making
thin or slender. Tenure, in Common Law, is the manner whereby Tenants hold
Lands of their Lord. Tepefaction, (lat.) a making lukewarm. Tepidity, (lat.)
lukewarmnesse. Tercera, one of the Isles which the Spaniards call Acores.
Terebinthine, (lat.) belonging to Terebinth, i. the Turpentine-tree; as also a
certain Gum issuing out of that tree. Terebration, (lat.) a boring through.
Tereus, see Philomela. Tergeminous, (lat.) three born at a birth; also
threefold. Tergiversation, (lat.) a turning ones back, a flinching or
withdrawing; also a nonsuit in Law. Terminals, (lat.) certain Feasts made in
honor of Terminus, an ancient god among the Romans, called the god of bounds,
because after the banishment of Saturn, he used to decide the controversies of
Husbandmen falling out about the limits of their grounds. Termination, (lat.) a
limiting, ending, or bounding. Ternary, or Ternion, (lat.) the number three.
Terra Lemnia, an exceeding red earth of the Island of Lemnos, dug from a red
hill. Terra Samia, a kind of white, stiff, and tough earth, from the Isle of
Samos. Terra Sigillata, (lat.) a kind of earth much used in physic, so called
because it used to be sent from the Isle of Lemnos sealed. Terrae filius,
(lat.) one that is allowed to make lepid or jesting speeches at an Act at
Oxford. Terraqueous, (lat.) composed of earth and water together. Terrar,
(lat.) a survey of the whole quantity of acres in any man's land. Terrasse,
(French) a Bullwark of earth; also an open Walk or Gallery on the top of an
house. Terrene, or Terrestrial, (lat.) earthy, belonging to the earth.
Terretenant, in Common Law, is a land tenant, or he that has a natural and
actual possession of land which is otherwise called occupation. Terrisonant,
(lat.) sounding terribly. Territory, (lat.) lands that belong to the
jurisdiction of any State, City, or Commonwealth. Terse, (lat.) neat, clean,
polite. Tertiation, (lat.) a dividing into three, also a doing any thing the
third time. Tesserarious, (lat.) belonging to a Tessera, i. a die; also a
signal or watchword. Testaceous, (lat.) made of tile, brick, sherd, or the
shell of a fish. Testamentarious, (lat.) belonging to a Testament, i. a man's
last Will, which is of two sorts, either in writing or nuncupatory. Testation,
(lat.) a witnessing. Testator, (lat.) a bearer of witness; also he that makes a
Will and Testament. Testicular, (lat.) belonging to the Testicles or Stones.
Testif, (old word) wild-brained, furious. Testification, (lat.) a proving by
witness. Testudineous, (lat.) belonging to, or like a Testude, i. a
Tortoise-shell; also an Engine of War used among the ancients. Tetchie, (old
word) froward, peevish. Tethys, the goddess of the Sea, the daughter of Coelus
and Vesta, and the wife of Neptune. Tetrachord, (Greek) an instrument of four
strings. Tetragonal, (Greek) quadrangle, or having four angles. Tetragrammaton,
(Greek) the ineffable Name of God Jehovah, among the Hebrews so called, because
it consists of four Hebrew letters. Tetraptote, (Greek) a term in Grammar, a
Noun declined with four Cases. Tetrarch, (Greek) a Prince or Ruler of a fourth
part of a Kingdom. Tetrastick, (Greek) an order of four verses.
Tetrasyllabical, (Greek) consisting of four syllables. Tetricity, or Tetritude,
(lat.) fournesse, or severity of countenance. Teucer, a King of Troy, the son
of Telamon and Hesione. Teuthras, a King of Cilicia and Misia, the son of
Pandion, he had 50 daughters who were all got with child by Hercules in one
night. Teutonick, (lat.) belonging to an Almain or German, so called as some
think from Tuisco the son of Mercury. Tewkesbury, a Town in Glocestershire,
called by the Saxons Theoc'sbury, by the Latins Theoci curia, from one Theocus
who here led an Hermites life. Here was fought that memorable battle between
the Houses of York and Lancaster, where King Edward the fourth had the Victory,
and Prince Edward the only son of King Henry the sixth was killed in a
barbarous manner: this Town is also famous for making of woollen cloth, and the
best mustard. Textile, (lat.) woven or knit. Texture, (lat.) a weaving or
knitting.
T H
Thalassiarch, (Greek) a Supreme officer at Sea, an Admiral. Thalassion, (lat.)
a Nuptial Song, from Thalassius the god of Marriage Rites among the Romans.
Thales, an ancient Greek Philosopher, reckoned among the seven Wisemen. He is
said to have first found out Geometry, and the motion of the Spears.
Thalestris, a Queen of the Amazons, who went thirty days journey to Alexander
the Great, and was according to her request got with child by him. Thane,
(Sax.) a Nobleman or Magistrate, called also Thingus or Thegne. Thavies Inn,
see Innes of Chancery. Theano, the wife of Metapontus King of Icaria, she,
wanting children of her own, brought up two twins the sons of Neptune and
Menalippe the daughter of Desmontes; but afterward bringing forth two sons of
her own, which were likewise twins, and seeing her husbands affections
inclining more to Menalippe's sons, than to her own, she was much troubled, and
as soon as her sons came of age, she set them on to kill their supposed
brethren; but Neptune their father coming to their aid, they killed the sons of
Theano, which as soon as she came to hear, she killed her self. Theatral,
(lat.) belonging to a Theater, i. a place where public Shows or Plays are
exhibited. Theatins, an order of Religious persons instituted by John Peter
Caraff Bishop of Theate in the Kingdom of Naples. Thebae, or Thebes, vulgarly
called Stibes, the chief City of Thebais in Egypt, built by King Busiris, and
called also Hecatompyl^s, from its hundred gates; also a City of Boeotia built
by Cadmus. Theftbote, (Sax.) a maintaining a thief, by receiving stolen goods
from him. Themis, the daughter of Coelus and Terra, who flying the Nuptials of
Jupiter, was ravished by him in Macedonia; she was worshipped as the goddess that
first taught men right and justice, and had an ancient Oracle in Boeotia.
Themiscyra, a Region bordering upon Cappadocia, and watered by the River
Thermodon, having also its chief City of the same name. Themistocles, a famous
Athenian Captain, who fortified the Pyraeum, and overcame the Persians at
Salamina; but afterward being banished his Country, he was entertained by
Xerxes and made Captain of an army against the Athenians, whereupon he drank
Oxes blood and poisoned himself, that he might neither be ungrateful to the
King, nor fight against his Countrymen. Theodamas, a King of Chaonia, against
whom Hercules made war, because he denied him provisions when he came to Dryope
with Dejanira and his son Hyllus, and having got the Victory he slew Theodamas,
carrying away his son Hylas whom he always had in very great esteem. Theobald,
the proper name of a man, signifying in Saxon, bold over the people.
Theodolite, a certain Mathematical Instrument, chiefly used in Surveying,
consisting of the Planisphere, Geometrical square, Quadrant, and Scale.
Theodom, (Sax.) servitude. Theodoricus, a King of the East Goths, who having
overcome Od^acer, was Crowned King of Italy, and reigned there 33 years; also
the name of a King of the Gauls, who with his favorite Ebroinus was deposed,
and Childerick set up in his room: the word signifies in Dutch, rich in
people. Theodorus, a proper name of several famous men, the word signifying in
Greek a gift of God. Theod^sia, a Christian name of women, answering to
Theodorus or Theodosius in men. Theodosius, the name of two famous Emperors of
Constantinople, the first the son of the Emperor Gratian, the second the son
of Arcadius and E^doxia, he had wars with the Persians, Vandalls, and Hunns.
Theogonie, (Greek) the generation of the gods. Theological, (Greek) belonging
to Theology, i. Divinity or discourse of God and Divine things. Theomachy,
(Greek) a warring or fighting against God. Theomagical, (Greek) belonging to
Divine Magic, or the wisdom of God. Theomancy, (Greek) a divination by calling
upon the names of God. Theophilus, a proper name of a man, signifying a friend
or lover of God. Theorba, (Ital. Tiorba) a Musical Instrument, being a kind of
base Lute. Theorematick, (Greek) belonging to a Theoreme, i. an axiom or
undoubted truth of any Art. Theorie, (Greek) the contemplation or study of any
Art or Science without practice. Therapeutick, (Greek) healing or curing.
Theraphim, (Heb.) an Image made in the form of a man. Theriacal, (Greek)
belonging to Treacle, i. a Medicine against poison, made of the flesh of a wild
beast. Thermometre, (Greek) a certain Instrument whereby one may guess at the
change of weather, a weather-glasse. Thermopylae, a long ridge of mountains in
Greece, at whose streights Leonidas the Spartan King with 300 Lacedaemonians
stoutly fighting, were all cut off by Mardonius the Persian. To Thesaurize,
(Greek) to treasure or heap up riches. Theseus, the son of Aegeus King of
Athens, he overcame the Amazonians, and brought away their Queen Hippolyte, on
whom he begat Hippolytus, he slew the Minotaur at Creet, and brought away
Ariadne and Phaedra the daugh^ers of Minos, the last of whom he took to wife.
He overthrew three famous thieves, Sciron, Procrustes, and Schinis; Lastly he
went down with Pirithous into Hell to fetch away Proserpina. See Pirithous.
Thesis, (Greek) a general argument or position. Thessalia, a Region of Greece
lying between Boeotia and Macedon, it was anciently called Pelasgicus, from
Pelasgus, Aemonia, from King Aemon, Pyrrhaea from Pyrrha the wife of Deucalion.
Thetford, see Sitomagus. Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, whom Jupiter
being about to have married, was dissuaded by Prometheus, so that she married
Peleus the son of Aeacus, to whom she brought forth Achilles. Thiller, a horse
which is put under the Thills, i. the beam of a Cart or Wain, called in Latin
Temo. Thole, (lat.) a term in Building, the scutchin or knot in the midst of a
timber vault, also a place in Temples where D^naries are hung up. Thomas, the
proper name of a man, signifying in Hebrew, deep, or, as some say, twinne.
Thomyris, a Queen of Scythia, who enraged that Cyrus had slain her son
Spargapises in a battle, recollected all her forces, overthrew his Army, and
slew him, and putting his head in a tub of blood, said in an upbraiding manner,
Fill thy self with the blood for which thou have thirsted. Thon, a King of
Canopus, who falling in love with Helena, was slain by Menelaus. Thongcaster, a
Castle in Lincolnshire, commonly called Castor, in British Caeregary, it took
the name from the same occasion as Byrsa a Castle of the Carthaginians; for
Hengi^ obtaining so much ground in this tract, of Vortigern, as he could
measure out with an Oxehide, cut the hide out into very small laners, which we
commonly call Thongs, and therewith measuring out the ground, built upon it
this Castle. Thor, a certain Idol worshipped by the ancient Saxons, thought to
be the same with Jupiter, or the god of Thunder; whence Thursday took its
denomination. Thoracique, (lat.) belonging to the stomach or breast. Thorp, an
ancient Saxon name, for a Village or Country Town. Thowles, the small pins
which they bear against with their Oars when they row. Thracia, a Country of
Europe, lying on the East of Macedonia, now called Romania. Thrasonical,
(Greek) insolently boasting. Thrasybulus, an Athenian exile, who freed the City
from the oppression of the thirty Tyrants. Thrave, a certain quantity of corn
containing 4 shocks, each shock consisting of six sheaves. Threnody, (Greek)
the singing of a Threne, i. a mourning or funeral-Song. To Threpe, (Sax.) to
affirm. Thrilled, or Thirled, (Sax.) killed. Thridboroughs or Thirdborough, a
word used in some old Acts, for a Headborough or Constable. Throb, (Sax.) the
vehement beating or panting of the heart. Thrones, see Angel. Thucydides, an
elegant Greek Historian who writ the Peloponnesian war. Thule, an Island on the
north of Scotland, now called Island. Thummim, see Vrim. Thuriferous, (lat.)
bearing Frankincense. Thyestes, the son of Pelops and Hippodamia, and the
brother of Atreus. see Atreus. Thymaetes, a Trojan, who marrying Arisbe the
daughter of Priamus, had a son born on the same day with Paris, and because the
Augurs had foretold that one born that day should be the destruction of Troy,
Priamus commanded that both the children should be slain; but Paris being saved
by his mother, Thymaetes son was only killed, for which he bearing a revenge
in his mind, was the first that caused the Trojan horse to be let in. Thymick
vein, see vein. Thymomancy, (Greek) a kind of presaging from a man's own hopes
and fears. Thyrse, (Greek) a stalk or stem of any herb, or a trunchion wrapped
with Ivy, which was anciently used by the Bacchides in the Feasts of Bacchus.
T I
Tiara, a certain ornament for the head used anciently among the Persians;
whence some think our word Tire to be derived. Tibial, (lat.) belonging to a
Pipe or Flute. Tibicination, (lat.) a playing on a Pipe. Tiercel, (French) the
same as Tass^l. Tierce, (French) a certain liquid measure containing the third
part of a Pipe which is two Tuns. Tiercet, (French) a stanza or staff of three
verses. Tigrine, (lat.) belonging to, or like a Tiger. Timariots, certain
soldiers among the Turks, who out of conquered lands have a certain portion
allowed them during term of life, to serve on horseback. Timbers of Ermine, a
term in Armory or Blazon, the rows or ranks of Ermine in the Noblemens Capes.
Timbrel, (Dutch Trommel) a kind of musical Instrument, by some called a Taber.
Timidity, (lat.) timerousnesse, fearfulness. Timochares, one that belonged to
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who would have covenanted with Fabricius the Consul, to
have poisoned Pyrrhus, but Fabricius disdaining so great a baseness revealed
the intention to Pyrrhus. Timocracie, (Greek) a certain Government, wherein the
richest men bear sway. Timoleon, a famous Corinthian Captain, who at the
request of Dion, the Syracusian freed Syracuse from the Tyranny of Dionysius.
Timon, a sour Athenian, who shund and hated the company of all men. Timotheus,
the son of Conon an Athenian Captain, who had his statue erected in the Market
place, for the great victory he obtained over the Lacedaem^nians, it being also
a proper name of many men, signifying in Greek an honourer of God. Tincel, a
kind of Cloth composed of silk and silver, glistering like starers, or sparks
of fire, from the French Estincelle, a sparkle. Tincture, (lat.) a staining, or
dying; also a Term in Heraldry, signifying a variable hew of Arms. Tinm^uth*
see Tunnocellum. Tinniment, (lat.) a tingling, or sounding of metals. Tintamar,
(French) a kind of clashing, or gingling noise. Tintinnation, (lat.) a ringing
like a bell. Tiresias, a Theban Sooth-sayer, who being struck blind by Juno,
received in recompense thereof the gift of Prophecy from Jupiter, see Ovid.
Metamorph. ^. 3. Tissue, (French) a kind of Cloth, or silver woven. Titanick,
belonging to Titan, i. the son of Caelus and Vesta, and the brother of Saturn,
he is by the Poets oftentimes taken for the Sun. Tithing, a company of ten men,
with their families joined together in a society, the chief whereof is called a
Tithing man. Tithonus, the son of Laomedon, King of Troy, with whom Aurora
falling in Love, snatched him up into her Chariot, and carried him into
Aethiopia, where she had Memnon by him, being at length grown very old, he was
changed into a Grassehopper. Titillation, (lat.) a tickling, or pleasant
itching. Title in Law, is a lawful cause to claim a thing, which another man
has, he having no action for the same. Titubation, (lat.) a stumbling.
Titular, (lat.) belonging to a title, having a title. Tityus, the son of
Jupiter and Elara, the daughter of Orchomenus; he, for endeavoring to force
Latona, was slain by Apollo, and cast down into Hell, where a Vulture is said
continually to gnaw upon his Liver, which grows again as fast as it is
devoured.
T L
Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules and Astioche, he was of a vast stature and
strength, and reigned over three Cities in Rhodes, at last he was slain by
Sarpedon, in the Trojan war.
T M
Tmolus, a Mountain near Sardes in Lydia, out of which rises the River
Pactolus, famous for its Golden Sands.
T O
Tobacco, a certain Plant, whose smoke taken in pipes, is generally in much
request; it was first brought into these parts out of the Indies, by Sr.
Francis Drake, and is so called as some say, from an Island of that name.
Tobias, a proper name of a man, signifying in Hebrew the Lord is good. Tod, of
Wool, see Sarplar. Toll, a liberty to buy, and sell within the Precincts of a
Manor; also Tribute, or Custom. Toletum, or Toledo, the chief City of new
Castile in Spain, begirt with a strong Wall, and a hundred and fifty little
Towers. Tolsey, a kind of Exchange, or place where Merchants meet in Bristow.
Toman, a kind of Persian Coin. Tomarus, a mountain in Thesprotia, where there
are a hundred Fountains. Tome, (lat.) a part, or volume of a book. Tomin, a
certain weight among Jewellers, weighing about three Carrats. Tonicul, (lat.)
belonging to a Tone, or Accent. Tonitruation, (lat.) a thundering. Tonnage, a
Custom due for merchandise brought, or carried in Tuns. Tonsils, (lat.)
certain kernels at the root of the tongue. Tonsorious, (lat.) belonging to
trimming, or barbing. Toparch, (Greek) a Governor, or Ruler of any place.
Topaze, a kind of precious stone, of a Gold, or Saffron color. Topical,
(Greek) belonging to Topics, i. a part of Logic treating of places of
invention. Topography, (Greek) a particular description of any place. Torce, a
Term in Heraldry, see Wreath. Torch Royal, a Term in Hunting, the next start in
a Stag's head growing above the Royal. Torcularious, (lat.) belonging to a Vine
press. Torcular vein, see Vein. Tormentill, a kind of Plant, called in
English Setfoil, good against gripings of the guts. Torminous, (lat.) troubled
with Tormins, i. gripings of the Belly. Tornad^, (Span.) a sudden, or violent
storm of ill weather at Sea. Torosity, (lat.) brawninesse, or fullness of
flesh. Torpedo, (lat.) a kind of fish of that stupefying quality, that if any
one touch it with a long pole, it benums his hand. Torpid, (lat.) number, also
slow, or dull. Torquated, (lat.) wearing, a Chain, or Collar. Titus Manlius
Torquatus, the son of Manlius, surnamed the Imperious, he overcame the Gaul
that challenged the stoutest of the Romans to fight with him, and took off his
Golden Chain, whence Torquatus became a name to him and all his family, he
caused his son to be beheaded for fighting against his command;
notwithstanding he had obtained the victory, whence Manlian severity became a
proverb. Torrefaction, (lat.) a parching, scorching, or roasting. Torrent,
(lat.) a strong stream, or violent flood running down a Hill. Torrid, (lat.)
burning, or parching. Torsion, (lat.) a wresting, or wringing of any thing.
Torteauxes, (French) a sort of round figures in Heraldry, by some called
wastells. Tortuosity, (lat.) a winding, or crooking in and out. Torvity, (lat.)
sowrnesse, crabbednesse, or grimnesse of Aspect. Totality, (lat.) the whole sum
of any number; also the whole, or entire part of any thing. Totilas, a King of
the Goths, who overcame the Romans, and took most of the imperial Cities.
Tournement, (French) a revolution, turning, or changing; also a justing, or
tilting. Tournois, a kind of French Coin, valuing the tenth part of a penny.
To Tow, a Term in Navigation, to drag any thing a stern a ship in the water.
Towton, a Town in Yorkshire, where in the year 1461. a mighty pitched battle
was fought between the 2 houses of York and Lancaster, where 30000 men were
left dead upon the place, but the victory fell to York. Towrus, when a Roe
desires copulation, he is said to go to his Towrus, (Term of Hunting.) Toylet,
(French) a kind of bag to put night-cloaths in.
T R
Trabal, (lat.) belonging to a beam. Tracasserie, (French) a needless
hurrying, or restless traveling up and down. Traces, among Hunters,
signifies the foot-steeps of wild beasts. Tract, (lat.) a continued line, a
long road; also a discourse drawn in length. Tract is also the footing of a
Boar, (Term in Hunting.) Tractable, (lat.) gentle, or easy to be managed, or
ordered. Tractate, (lat.) a handling, or treating of any thing, a treatise.
Tradition, (lat.) a delivering; also a bequeathing any Doctrine to posterity
from age to age. Traduction, (lat.) a translating, or conveying from one thing,
or place to another; also a defaming, or slandering. Tragecomoedie, (Greek) a
play that is half Tragedy and half Comedy. Tragedian, or Tragediographer,
(Greek) a writer of Tragedies, i. a sort of Dramatick Poetry, or Stage Play,
representing murders, sad and mournful actions, and setting forth the highest
and noblest sort of persons. Tragical, (Greek) belonging to Tragedies, sad,
blondy, disastrous. Tragelaph, (Greek) a stone-buck, or Goat-hart; so called,
because it is begotten between a Goat and a Deer. Tragematopolist, (Greek) a
Comfitmaker, a seller of Preserves and Confections. Trajection, (lat.) a
passing, or conveying over. Tralucencie, (lat.) a being through clear, a
shining through. Tramontane, (Ital.) Nothward, or beyond the Mountains from
Italy. Tranquillity, (lat.) calmnesse, quietness, stillnesse. Transaction,
(lat.) a finishing, or dispatching any business. Transalpine, (lat.) being
beyond the Alps. Transcendent, (lat.) surpassing, exceeding, or excelling.
Transcript, (lat.) that which is written out from an Original. Transcurrence,
(lat.) a running over quickly. Transduction, the same as Traduction.
Transfiguration, (lat.) a transforming, or changing out of one shape into
another. Transfix, (lat.) to run through any thing with a Dart, Sword, or any
other sharp weapon. Transfretation, (lat.) a passing over a River, or cross
the Sea. Transfusion, (lat.) a pouring out of one thing into another.
Transgression, (lat.) a going beyond ones bounds, a committing a Trespass, or
Crime. Transjection, (lat.) see Trajection. Transition, (lat.) a passing from
one thing to another, in Rhetoric it is a part of an Oration, wherein they
pass from one subject to another. Transitory, (lat.) soon passing away,
fading, or perishing. Translation, (lat.) a changing from one thing, or place
to another, a turning out of one language into another; also when a light
Planet separateth from a more weighty one, and presently applies to one more
heavy. Translucid, (lat.) the same as Transparent, shining through.
Transmarine, (lat.) being beyond the Seas. Transmeation, (lat.) a passing
through, or beyond. Transmew, (old word) to change. Transmigration, (lat.) a
removing ones habitation from one place to another. Transmission, (lat.) a
conveying through, a sending from one place to another. Transmutation, (lat.) a
changing from one thing to another. Transome, in Architecture, is an overthwart
beam, or brow-post. Transparent, (lat.) to be seen through. Transparency, a
Term in Heraldry, vide adumbration. Transpiration, (lat.) an evaporating,
exhaling, or breathing forth. A Transport, or Transportation, a carrying over
the Seas, or any River; also a sudden trance, or rapture of mind.
Transposition, (lat.) an inverting, or changing the order of things.
Transsylvania, a Country lying beyond the Carpathian Mountains, now called
Sibemburghen, which together with Servia and Wallachia were heretofore called
Dacia. Transubstantion, (lat.) a converting, or changing of one substance into
another, more especially among the Papists; it is taken for the bread in the
Sacrament, being changed into the body of Christ. Transvection, (lat.) a
carrying over. Transvers, (lat.) acrosse, or overthwart. Transvolation, (lat.)
a flying over. Traperzium, a figure consisting of some unequal sides, and as
many un-equal angles. Trave, (French) a Term in Architecture, a trevise, or
little room. Traverse, (French) to go acrosse, or overthwart, in Common Law, it
signifies to deny any point of the matter wherewith one is charged; also in
Navigation it is taken for the way of a ship, in respect of the points whereon
they sail. Traverses, (French) turnings and windings; it is also taken
figuratively for troubles and vexations. Cleopatra. Travested, (French) shifted
in apparel, disguised. Traumatick, (Greek) belonging to wounds. Treasure trove,
money which being found in any place, and not owned, belongs to the King.
Treated, (French) handled, also entertained. Tredeale, an Aspect of 108. d.
Tree-nells, in Navigation are certain pins made of the heart of Oak, wherewith
they fasten all the planks unto the Timbers. Trellis, (French) a Lattice,
Grate, or Cross bar. Tren, (French) a certain instrument, wherewith Mariners
kill fish. Trenchant, (French) sharp, also bowing. Trentalls, (French)
obsequies, dirges, or funeral songs. Trepan, a kind of Chirurgions instrument.
To Trepan, or Trapan, (Ital. Trapolare) to entrap, or ensnare, but more
especially in that manner, which is used by Whores and Ruffians. Trepidation,
(lat.) a trembling. Trestle, a Trevet, or Stool with three feet. Triacle, a
kind of Antidote against poison, called in Latin Theriaca. Triangular, (lat.)
made in the fashion of a Triangle, i. a figure having 3 angles, or corners.
Triarchie, (Greek) a government by three. Triarians, (lat.) one of the Orders
of the Roman Soldiers, who were divided into Principes, Hastati, Triarii, and
Velites. Tribe, (lat.) a kindred, family, or company dwelling in the same Ward.
Tribunal, (lat.) a Judgements-seat. Tribune, (lat.) an Officer of great
Authority among the Romans, of which there were two sorts, Tribunus Plebis, i.
a Tribune of the people, and Tribunus Militum, i. a Tribune of the Soldiers.
Tributary, (lat.) paying Tribute, i. money exacted out of men's Estates. Trica,
the hair of Berenice. Tricennial, (lat.) of 30 years. Tricliniary, (lat.)
belonging to a dining Room, or Parlour. Tricornous, (lat.) having 3 horns.
Trichotomy, (Greek) a dividing into 3 parts. Trident, (lat.) a three forked
instrument, but more peculiarly it is taken for that Mace, which the Poets
faign to have been born by Neptune, as an Ensign of his command. Tridentine,
(lat.) belonging to Trent, a City in the Country of Tyrol. Triduan, (lat.)
continuing three days. Triennial, (lat.) continuing three years. Triental,
(lat.) a Vessel containing half a pint, or the third part of a Sextary.
Trieterick, (Greek) done every 3 year. Trifarious, (lat.) divided into three,
or done three manner of ways. Trifole, (lat.) a kind of Plant, called
three-leaved grass; also a resemblance of that Plant in Heraldry. Triform,
(lat.) having three forms. Trifurcous, (lat.) three forked. Trigamist, (Greek)
having three wives. Trigeminous, (lat.) three brought forth at a birth; also
treble, or threefold. Trigliph's, (Greek) a Term in Architecture, or Masonry,
being certain Compartiments, or Borders graven like three furrow's. Trigonal,
(Greek) having three angles, or corners. Trillo, (Ital.) a graceful shake, or
trembling of the voice in singing. Trimenstruous, (lat.) of three months.
Trinacria, the ancient name of the Island of Sicily, called also Triquetra,
from its three Promontories Lilybaeum, Pachynum, and Pelorum. Trine, (lat.)
belonging to the number 3. an Aspect of 120 d. thus marked D. Trinitarians,
(lat.) a sort of Heretics that deny the Mystery of the Trinity. Trinity,
(lat.) the number three; also the distinction of three persons in the Unity of
the Godhead. Trinobantes, a certain people anciently inhabiting the East part
of the British Island. Tripontium, the ancient name of a Town in
Northamptonshire, implying as much as a Town that has three Bridges, and
therefore it seems to be the same with that Town which is commonly called
Torcester, which is cut through by three special channels, which have three
several Bridges over them. Trinodal, (lat.) having three knots. Trinquet,
(French) the highest sail or top-gallant of any ship; it is also taken
metaphorically for any gay trifling thing. Triobol^r, (lat.) as it were worth
but three half pence, vile, little set by, or esteemed. Triours, in Common Law,
are such as are chosen by the Court to examine whether a challenge made to any
of the Panel be just or no. Tripartite, (lat.) divided into three parts.
Tripedal, or Tripedaneous, (lat.) containing three foot in measure. Triplicity,
(lat.) a being treble or threefold; whence Triplication, a trebling. Tripode,
(Greek) a stool, or any thing that stands upon three feet. Tripoly, a kind of
Plant by some called Turbit, by others blew Camomile; also a stone which being
reduced to powder, is made use of by Lapidaries to polish their Jewels.
Triptote, (Greek) a term in Grammar, being a Noun declined with three Cases.
Tripudiation, (lat.) a trippling on the toe in a Dance. Trireme, (lat.) a Gally
with three oars on each side. Mercurius Trismegistus, a famous Egyptian in
ancient times, who was both a great Philosopher, Priest, and King. Trisulk,
(lat.) three furrowed. Trisylla^ical, (Greek) consisting of three syllables.
Trite, (lat.) worn, old, made common with much use. Tritheites, (Greek) a sort
of Heretics which held the Trinity to be divided into three distinct
Godheades. Triticean, (lat.) made of wheat. Tritis, the immunity of a man
dwelling in the Forest from his attendance therein. Triton, a Sea Deity, the
son of Neptune and Salacia, feigned by the Poets to have been the Trumpeter of
Neptune. Trituration, (lat.) a threshing of Corn. Trivial, (lat.) scattered in
the highway, common, little esteemed or valued, from trivium, a place where
three ways meet. Triumphal, (lat.) belonging to a Triumph, i. a solemn show at
the return of a General from some noted Victory. See Ovation. Triumvirat,
(lat.) an ancient Magistracy in Rome, wherein three men had an equal authority.
Trochisk, (Greek) a certain medicinal composition made of powders, and formed
round in fashion of a little wheel. Troglodytes, a people anciently inhabiting
the farthest part of Aethiopia, of a fierce salvage nature dwelling in caves,
and feeding upon raw flesh. Troilus, the son of Priamus and Hecuba, who
venturing to fight with Hercules, was slain by him. Tromperie, (French) deceit,
or cousenage. Trophy, (Greek) any thing set upon in token of victory.
Trophonius, a certain Prophet inhabiting a Cave, called the Trophonian Den,
into which who ever entered, became incapable of laughter. In this Cave there
was an Oracle of Jupiter, who was thence called Jupiter Trophonius. Tropical,
(Greek) belonging to a Trope, i. a kind of Rhetorical figure. Tropicks, (from
the Greek word trepein, i. to turn) two imaginary circles of the Sphere, being
the utmost bound, of the Suns course; the one is called the Tropic of Cancer,
the other the Tropic of Capricorn. Trosque, the same as Trochisk. Troy weight,
in measuring, is an allowance of 12 ounces only to the pound. Trover, in
Common Law, is an action against him who having found another man's goods,
refuses to deliver them upon demand. Trowel, (French) an Instrument used by
Masons to dawbe mortar withal. Truand, (French) a vagabond or lazy loytring
fellow, a common beggar. Truchman, see Drogoman. Trucidation, (lat.) a cruel
murdering. Truculent, (lat.) of a cruel, rough, or threatening countenance.
Trullissation, (lat.) a plaistering with mortar. Truncation, (lat.) a lopping,
maiming, or cutting short. Trunck, (lat.) a stock, stem, or body of a tree;
also a man's body having the head, arms, and legs cut away. Trutination, (lat.)
a weighing or ballacing; also a strict examining or considering well of a
thing.
T U
Tube, (lat.) the pipe through which the marrow of the backbone runs; also
any long pipe through which water or other liquid substance is conveyed.
Tuberous, (lat.) having wenns or fleshy bunches; also full of swellings.
Tubicination, (lat.) a sounding of a Trumpet, Pipe, or Cornet. Tubulation,
(lat.) a making hollow like a pipe. Tudiculation, (lat.) a bruising or pounding
with Smiths hammers. Tuel, among Hunters, the fundament of any beast. Tuition,
(lat.) a protecting, guarding, or safe keeping. Tulipant, a Shash or Wreath
worn by the Indians instead of a Hat. Tullia, the daughter of Servius Tullius,
who being married to Tarquinius Superbus, incited her Husband to kill her
Father, that he might enjoy the Kingdom himself. Tullus Hostilius, a warlike
King of the Romans, who was the first that ordained tribute and custom and most
of the Ensigns of authority used among the Romans, as the Sella curulis, toga
picta, and P^ae^exta. Tu^brel, a certain Engine for the punishing of sco^ds,
called also a cucking-stool. Tumefaction, (lat.) a causing to swell. Tumid,
(lat.) puffed up or swollen. Tumor, (lat.) a swelling or rising of the flesh.
Tumulation, (lat.) a burying or intombing. Tumultuary, (lat.) done in haste,
suddenly, or without advice. Tun, a certain liquid measure containing 252
gallons. Tunicle, (lat) a little coat; also a membrane or thin skin, covering
any part of the body: there are four especially which cover the eye, the
Corneal or Horny, the Uveal, the Vitreal or glassy, and the Christalline, and
to each of these there are four humors answerable. And four that cover the
cods, the Scrotum, the Erythroides, the Epididymis, and one other which is
called Dartos. Tunnocellum, the ancient name of a Town in Northumberland, by
Camden thought to be the same with that which we now call Tinmouth, q the mouth
of the River Tine, where the first Cohort Aelia Classica was in pay for
Sea-service. This Town has a very strong Castle, which Robert Mowbray Earl of
Northumberland holding against King William Rufus, was therein closely besieged
and taken prisoner. Turbant, a certain Wreath or Ornament for the head used
among the Turks and other Oriental Nations instead of Hats; it is made of a
shash or whole piece of linen called Telbent, and the Turbant it self is
called by the Turks Saruck. Tur^ary, an interest to dig turfs upon a Common.
Turbervills, the surname of a very considerable Family, who have had their
ancient habitation at Bear in Dorcetshire; they are styled in Latin Records, De
Turbida Villa. Turbination, (lat.) the fashioning of a thing small at the
bottom, and broad above like a top. Turbin^ous, (lat.) belonging to a storm or
whirlwind. Turbith, a kind of plant called Tripoly; also a red Mineral, which
being beaten to powder, is used in physic. Turbot, a kind of fish called in
Greek Rhombus. Turbulent, (lat.) busy, troublesome, sedi^ious. Turgescence,
(lat.) a swelling up, or growing big. Turgid, or Turgent, (lat.) swelling,
rising, puffed up. T^rgy, (in Greek Th^urgia) a conference with good Angels; it
is also called white Magic. Turingia, a Country of Saxony, once a Kingdom, now
a Landgraviat; it lies upon the Rivers Sala and Werra, and has the Hercynian
Wood on the North: the chief City of this Country is called Erdfordia.
Turneament, see Tournement. Turnsole, a kind of color used in painting.
Turpentine, (Greek terebinthina) a kind of Gum or Rosin distilling from the
Larch tree. Turpitude, (lat.) filthiness, baseness, sordidnesse. Turriferous,
(lat.) bearing Towers. Tuscane work, in Architect^re, one of the five sorts of
pillars. See Corinthian. Tuscia, a Country of Italy, lying between the Rivers
Ti^er and Macra; it was anciently called Tyrrh^nia, from Tyrrhenus the son of
A^ys; also Hetruria and Toscany, from Tusculus (as some say) the son of
Hercules. Tutelary, (lat.) having the guard, custody, or protection, of any
thing. Tutia, a Vestal Virgin, who being accused of incest, would not fly to
any man for her absolution, but putting a sive into the River Tybur, prayed to
Vesta that if she were free, she might have power to carry water in it to her
Temple, which was immediately performed. Tutie, (lat.) the dust or foil of
brass, growing together into a kind of stone which is much used in physic.
Tutilina, a certain goddess among the Romans, who was said to have the care
and protection of Corn. Tuisco, a certain Idol adored by the ancient Germans,
thought by some to be the same with Mercury: from this Idol Tuesday took its
denomination, and the people were called Duytsh people.
T W
Twibil, (Dutch) a Carpenters Instrument to make mortise-holes withal.
Twilight, (Dutch) the time betwixt day and night, the dusk of the morning or
evening. Twight, (Sax.) pulled. To Twyer, (Sax.) to sing.
T Y
Tybur, a City not far from Rome, built as some say by Catillus the Arcadian
the Admiral of Euander; others by Tyburtus the grandchild of Amphiaraus: it is
now called Tivoli. Tydeus, the son of Oeneus King of Caledonia, he having slain
his brother Menalippus, fled to Adrastus, whose daughter Delphile he married;
afterward being sent by Polynices to his brother Eteocles, King of Thebes, he
overcame all his guests at several Combats; whereupon at his return they set 50
young men to lie in wait for him under the command of Maeon the son of Aemon,
and Lycophon the son of Autophonus, who were all slain by him except Maeon,
whom he sent back to carry news of the others deaths: at length he was mortally
wounded by one Menalippus a Theban. Tymnaetes, a great Prophet, the son of
Priamus and Aristia. Tympanist, he that plays upon a Tymbrel, Taber, or Drum,
called Tympanum. Tympany, (Greek) a kind of disease wherein the body becomes
swollen up with wind, a dropsy. Tyndarus, a King of Oebalia, whose wife Leda
brought fourth two eggs, in one whereof was contained Pollux and Helena, in
the other Castor and Clytemnestra. Type, (Greek) see Typical. Typhoeus, the son
of Titan and Terra, a Giant of a very vast bigness, who going to make War with
Jupiter, was by him struck with Thunder. Typhon, a King of Egypt, who killing
his brother Osiris, and cutting him into several pieces, dispersed him through
diverse Countries. Typical, (Greek) bearing a Type, i. an example, figure,
likeness, or shadow of any thing. Typographer, (Greek) a Printer. Tyrannicide,
(Greek) the killing of a Tyrant, or cruel Governor. Tyrconel, a County of
Ireland, in the Province of Vlster. Tire, a famous City of Phoenicia,
anciently called Sarra, which in the Phoenician language signifies a fish,
that place abounding with a kind of shellfish, the liquour whereof colors
of a purple dye. Tyro, a Thessalian Virgin, the daughter of Salmoneus and
Alcidice, after the death of her own mother, she was very harshly dealt with by
her mother in law Sidero, she being got with child by Neptune (who lay with her
in the shape of Enipeus, with whom she was in love) brought forth twins, Pelias
and Neleus, and afterward being married to her Uncle Cretheus, she brought
forth Aeson, Amythaon, and Pheres. Tyrociny, (lat.) an apprentiship, or new
beginning in any Art or Faculty; but more peculiarly Military discipline, from
Tyron, a raw young soldier, one newly entered into the Art of war. Tyrrheni, a
people inhabiting Tuscia or Tyrrhenia, being that part of Italy which lies
upon the Sea, called from thence the Tyrrhen Sea.
V A
VAcation, or Vacancy, (lat.) a being at leisure, or ceasing from business. It
is also commonly taken for that time which is between one Term and another.
Vaccary, in diverse Statutes is taken for a place to keep Cows in; also a
certain compass of ground within the Forest of Ashdown. Vacchoris, an ancient
King of Egypt, who relinquisht all his riches and state, to live a private
austere life. Vacillation, (lat.) a wavering, tottering or inconstancy. Vacive,
(lat.) void, empty. Vacuity, (lat.) emptiness, voidnesse. Vacuna, a certain
goddess among the ancient Romans, to whom the Husbandmen sacrificed at such
times as they rested from their labors. Vadimony, (lat.) suretiship. Vafrous,
(lat.) crafty, or subtle. Vagabond, (lat.) a wandering beggar, or idle fellow.
Vagation, (lat.) a straying or wandering up and down Vagination, (lat.) a
sheathing. To Vail-bonnet, to strike sail in token of submission; also to put
off ones Hat, or give any sign of respect. Vaire, a term in Blazon, being a Fur
composed of 4 distinct colors, i. argent, gules, Or, and sable. Valasca, a
certain Queen of the Bohemians, who having made a conspiracy to shake off the
dominion of men, raised a great Army of women, and having overcome the men,
reigned a good while like a Queen of the Amazons. Valdombreux, a certain
religious Order of men instituted by Gualbert a Florentine, who betook himself
to a private studious life in a place called Valdombre, or the shady Vale.
Valect, see Valet. Valdo, a certain pious man, who was the first institutour of
the Waldenses in Piemont. Valentine, a certain Roman Bishop, in remembrance of
whom every fourteenth day of February is solemnized; about which time birds
choose their mates; whence arises the custom of choosing Valentines upon that
day. Valentinians, a sect of Heretics instituted by one Valentinianus.
Valerius, the name of diverse famous men among the Romans, the chief whereof was
called Valer^us Publicola, who Triumphed over the Vei^ntes and the Sabines, and
because having built him a house in a very strong place, he was suspected of
affecting Tyranny, he caused his house to be pulled down. Valet, (French) the
Groom of a chamber; also a young Gentleman under age. Valetudinary, (lat.)
sickly, also Subst. an Hospital, or place to keep sick people in. Validity,
(lat.) strength, power, for e. Valtorts, the surname of a very noble Family,
who had their ancient residence at Saltash in Cornwall; they are styled in
Latin Records, De valle to^ta. Vambrace, or Vanbrace, (French) a Gantlet.
Vancurriers, or Vaunteourers, (French) forerunners. Vandelbiria, the ancient
name of a place in Camebridgeshire, so called for that in times past the
Vandalls or Danes, there encamped themselves with a Trench and Rampire; it is
thought to have been the same with that which is now called Wandlesbury.
Vaniloq^ence, (lat.) a talking or babbling vainly. V^ntguard, (French) the
foremost part of an Army in battle. Vantrarius, a corrupt Latin word, used as a
Law-term only upon this occasion, Sir Richard Rockes^y, held Lands at Seaton
by Sergeanty to be Vantrarius Regis donec perusus fuerit Pari solutarum pretii
4d. i. e. to be fore-footman to the King at some certain time, e. g. when he
goes into Gascoign, un^il he had worn out a pair of shoes prized 4d. Vapid,
(lat.) casting forth an ill smack or savor. Vaporation, (lat.) an exhaling or
sending forth of vapors, i. certain fumes or smoke drawn out of the earth by
the heat of the Sun, and easily resolvable into water. Vapulation, (lat.) a
being scourged or beaten. Variegation, (lat.) a beautifying with various
colors. Varnish, is that wherewith a picture is rubbed over to make it shine
and have a gloss; there is also a ground or varn^sh which is laid upon a plate
that is to be etched. Varry, (French) in Heraldry is a mixture of argent and
azure together. Varry cuppy, a term also of Heraldry, signifying a Fur of cups;
it is also called Varry tassa, or Meire. Varvells, (French) little rings of
silver about hawks legs, having the owners name engraven on them. Vasiferous,
(lat.) carrying a vessel. Vassal, in Common Law is he that holds land in fee
of his Lord; it is also taken for a Slave, or Inferior Servant. Vastation,
(lat.) a wasting, or destroying. Vastity, (lat.) excessive bigness, hugeness,
or vastness of stature. Vatican Hill, one of the seven Hills of Rome, whereon
there stands a famous Palace and Library, built by Pope Sixtus the fourth.
Vaticination, (lat.) a prophesying, or telling of things to come. Vavasours, or
Valvasours, those that in degree are next unto Barons. Vaudevil, (French) a
Country ballade, roundelay, or song, it is also called a Virelay. Vauntlay, in
Hunting, is the setting of Hounds in a readiness, where the chase is to pass.
Vawmure, an ancient word, signifying a Bulwark, or Outwork for defense. Vaward,
see Vanguard. Vayvode, a Prince, or chief Ruler in Transylvania, and some of
those Northern parts.
U B
Vberty, (lat.) store, plenty, fertility. Vbiquitarians, a Sect of Heretics,
holding Christ's body as well as his Godhead to be every where. Vbiquity, (lat.)
a being in all places at one time.
V E
Vecordy, (lat.) unsoundnesse of mind, dotage, stupidity. Vectarious, (lat.)
belonging to a Wagon, or carriage. Vection, (lat.) a carrying. To Veer, in
Navigation, to put out more rope, or more sheat. Vegetable, Vegetal, or
Vegetive, (Lat.) living after the manner of Plants and Minerals, endued with
vigor, moisture and growth. Vehicular, (lat.) belonging to a Vehicle, i. a
Cart, Wagon, or Coach, or any thing whereby another is carried, or conveyed. A
Vein is defined by Anatomists to be a common Organ of the body, round, and
oblong apted for the conveyance of blood and natural spirits through all the
parts, and according to the several parts, it passes through, it takes
several Denominations, as the Basilick vein, that which passes from the Liver
through the inward process of the arm, the Cephalic the head vein, the
Coeliacal, that which runs into the blind Gut, the Cystick, that which runs up
toward the Neck of the Gall, the Epigastrick, the flank veins Gastroepiploick,
that which spreads it self through the bottom of the Ventricle, Intercostal,
those which run through the upper Ribs. Port vein, that which is rooted in the
Liver, and from thence passes into the Ventricle, Mesentery, and other parts.
Ranular, that which ascends from the Throat to the tongue. Salvatel, that which
from the Liver runs through the wrist into the hand; Saphaena that which
runs through the inward part of the Leg to the Ankle. Subclavicular, a
branch of the hollow vein, which runs under the Neck bone. Thymick, a branch
of the Subclavicular. Torcular, that which ascends by the inside of the scull
to the brain. Velification, (lat.) a hoising of sayls. Velites, (lat.) the
light armed Soldiers among the Romans, see Triani, whence Velitation, a light
skirmishing. Velivolent, (lat.) flying as it were with full sail. Vellication,
(lat.) a plucking, twitching, or giving a sudden pull. In Physic they are said
to be certain convulsions that happen in the Fibers of the Muscles. Velocity,
(lat.) swiftness. Venality, (lat.) a setting to sale, a being saleable.
Venatick, or Venatorious, (lat.) belonging to hunting, or chacing. Vendible,
(lat.) saleable, fit for sale. Vendication, (a challenging to ones self, a
claiming. Venditation, (lat.) ostentation, a bragging, or vain setting forth of
ones self. Vendition, (lat.) a selling. Venedotia, the ancient name of all that
part of Wales, which is otherwise called Guinethia, or N^rthwales. Venefick, or
Veneficious, (lat.) belonging to Venefice, i. the art of making poisons; also
witchcraft, or sorcery. Venenous, (lat.) venomous, or full of poison.
Veneration, (lat.) a reverencing, or worshipping. Venereal, or Venereous,
(lat.) given to Venery, i. lust, or carnal desires. Venereal disease, (lat.
Morbus Gallicus, or Lues Venerea) a certain virulent, and contagious
disposition of the body, contracted by immoderate Venerie, or coupling with
unsound persons; it is vulgarly called the French Pox. Venetiae, a famous City
of Italy, built in the year 421. upon certain Islands of the Adriatic Sea, 60
in number, by the inhabitants of Aquileia and Pavia, who fled thither for fear
of the Huns; it is now become a great Common wealth, and has large
Territories, both in Italy and other places. Venew, in Common Law, is taken for
a a neighboring, or near place. Venial, (lat.) worthy of pardon, or
forgiveness; whence in Theology they make a distinction between mortal sins,
and Venial sins. Vent, (lat.) a wind, or breath; also a place for air to come
in, and out at. Venta Belgarum, the ancient name of Winchester, a pleasant
City in Hantshire, called by the Britains Caer Guente, by the Saxons
Windanceaster, and by the vulgar Latins Wintonia; Venta gives name also unto
two other Towns, Caster in Northfolk, called Venta Icenorum, and Caerwent in
Monmouthshire, called Venta Silurum. Ventelet, (Dimin.) a small gale of wind.
Ventiduct, (lat.) a conveyance of wind by pipes, or otherwise. Ventilation,
(lat.) a fanning, or gathering of wind; also a winnowing of Corn. Ventosity,
(lat.) windiness. Ventricle, (lat.) the stomach; it is also taken for any
round concavity of the body. Ventriloquy, (lat.) a speaking inwardly, or as it
were from the belly. Venundation, (lat.) a buying, or selling. Venus, (lat.)
the goddess of love, pleasures, and delights, whom the Poets faign to have
sprung out of the foam of the Sea, after that the Testicles of Caelus had been
cut off, and thrown in by Saturn, whence she was called Aphrodite; also the
name of one of the seven Planets, or wandering Stars. Ven^station, (lat.) a
making handsome, or beautiful. Veracity, (lat.) a saying truth. Verbal, (lat.)
consisting of words, or delivered only in words. Verbatim, (lat.) word for
word. Verbeia, a certain goddess, among the ancient Britains, to whom the
Captain of the second Cohort of the Lingones erected an Altar near Ilekly in
Yorkshire, she is thought by Cambden to have been the Nymph, or goddess of
the River Wherf, which was also anciently called Verbeia. Verberation, (lat.) a
beating, or strikeing. Verb^sity, (lat.) a being full of words. Verecund,
(lat.) shamefaced, modest, bashful. Verdant, (lat.) green, fresh, flourishing.
Verderer, (lat.) Viridarius) a judicial Officer of the Kings Forest, who
receives and inrols the attachments of all manner of trespasses of the Forest
of Vert and Venison. Verdie, or Verdea, a kind of rich Italian wine. Verdict,
the answer of a Jury, or Inquest, made upon any cause, Civil, or Criminal
committed by the Court to their consideration, or trial. Verdigrease, (lat.)
Aerugo) a green substance taken from the rust of Brass, or Copper. Verditure,
a green color among Painters. Verdoy, a Term in Heraldry, when a bordure is
charged with leaves, fruits, and flowrs, and other the like vegetables Verdure,
(French) greenness. Verge, (French) a rod, wand, or Sergeants Mace; also the
compass about the Kings Court, that bounds the Jurisdiction of the Lord
Steward of the Kings household, and of the Coroner of the Kings house, and is
accounted twelve miles compass; also a rod whereby one is admitted Tenant
holding it in his hand, and swearing ^^alty to the Lord of the Manor, and for
that cause is called Tenant by the Verge. Vergobert, (French) a chief Officer,
or Magistrate among the ancient Hedui. Veridical, (lat.) telling, or speaking
truth. Veriloquent, (lat.) the same. Verisimility, (lat.) the probability, or
likelihood of a thing. Vermiculate, (lat.) worm-eaten; also imbroidered with
several colors. Vermillion, (French) a ruddy or deep red color. Vermination,
(lat.) a certain disease wherein worms are bred, and cause a griping of the
guts. Vermiparous, (lat.) breeding or bringing forth worms. Vernaccia, a kind
of Italian Wine. Vernaculous, (lat.) proper and peculiar to a Country. Vernal,
or Vernant, (lat.) flourishing or belonging to the Spring. Vernility, (lat.)
servilenesse, or slavery. Verona, a famous City of Italy, built as some say, by
Brennus the Gaul, heretofore governed by the Family of the Scaligeri, and now
under the jurisdiction of the Venetians. Verrey, a term in Heraldry, the same
as Varry, i. Fur consisting of Or and Azure, or Or and Vert. Verrucous, (lat.)
full of warts or little excrescences of the flesh. Versatile, (lat.) apt to be
wound or turned any way. Versation, (lat.) a turning or winding to and again.
Versicle, (lat.) a little verse or sentence. Versification, (lat.) a making of
verses. Version, (lat.) a translation or turning out of one language into
another. Vert, in Heraldry, a green color; but in the Forest Laws, it is
every thing that grows and bears a green leaf within the Forest that may
cover and hide a Deer. Verterae, a Town of ancient memory in Westmoreland,
where in the Romans time a Captain kept his residence with a Band of the
Directores; this place remains yet a poor village, called Burgus sub Saxeto,
or Burgh under Stanmore. Vertical point, in Astronomy, is that point of the
Heavens which is directly over ones head. Vertiginous, (lat.) troubled with a
Vertigo, i. a swimming or giddiness in the head. Vertumnus, a certain Deity
worshipped by the ancient Latins who could change himself into all forms. See
Pomona. Vervain, a kind of herb called in Latin Verbena, anciently used about
sacred rites and ceremonies. Vervecine, (lat.) belonging to a weather. Vervise,
a kind of cloth otherwise called plonkets. Verulamium, by Ptolomy called
Vrolanium, the name of a City heretofore of very great repute in Hertfordshire,
the ruins whereof appear at this day, near unto Saint Albans; the Saxons
termed it Watlingacester, from the famous highway commonly called
Watling-street, and also Werlamceaster. Very Lord and very tenant, in Common
Law, are those that are immediate Lord and Tenant to one another. Vesanous,
(lat.) mad, furious, outrageous. Vesculent, (lat.) to be eaten, fit for food.
Vesicatory, (lat.) a Cupping-glasse; also a sharp plaster or ointment applied
to raise blisters in the skin. Vesicle, (lat.) a little bladder. Vespers,
evening-song, prayers said about evening time. Vespertine, (lat.) belonging to
the evening. Vespilone, (lat.) one who in the time of a great sickness
carries forth dead bodies in the night time to be buried. Vesta, the daughter
of Saturn and Ops, taken ofttimes by the Poets for the earth and sometimes for
the fire, in honor of whom Numa Pompilius instituted many Rites and
Ceremonies, and conscecrated to her service certain Virgins called Vestalls,
who were to take care of the Vestal fire, which when it went out, was not to be
kindled by any earthly fire, but to be renewed by the beams of the Sun. They
were enjoined to preserve their virginity inviolable so long as they remained
in the service of the goddess, and who ever was found faulty among them was
buried alive. Vestiary, (lat.) a Wardrope or place to lay clothes or apparel
in. Vestible, (lat.) a porch or entry. Vestigation, (lat.) a seeking any one by
the print of their foot, a searching diligently. Vestige, (lat.) a footstep, or
print of any ones foot. Vestment, or Vesture, (lat.) a garment, clothing, or
attire. Vetation, (lat.) a forbidding. Veteran, (lat.) old, serving long in any
place or office. Veteratorian, (lat.) crafty, experienced. Veterine, (lat.)
belonging to carriages or burdens. Vexillary, (lat.) belonging to an Ensign or
Standard; also subst. a Standarn-bearer.
U F
Vfens, a Captain of the Aequicolae who came to assist Turnus against Aeneas,
and was slain by Gyas a Trojan. Vffkines, a name anciently given to the
successors of Vffa, the first King of the E^st-English; they were vassals
sometimes to the King of M^rcia, sometimes to the Kings of Kent.
V I
Via combusta, the last 15 degrees of Libra, and the first 15 degrees of
Scorpio. Vial, (lat. Phiala) a pot or glass with a wide mouth. Viand, (French)
meat, food, victuals. Viatick, (lat.) belonging to a journey, or traveling by
the high way; also subst. provision or things necessary for a journey.
Viatorian, (lat.) belonging to travelers. Vibius Virius, a Citizen of Capua,
who causing that City to revolt to Hannibal, and being besieged by the Romans
poisoned himself, and persuaded many of the Senators to do the like.
Vibration, (lat.) a shaking or winding about, a brandishing. Vibrissation,
(lat.) a quavering, or shaking of the voice in singing. Vicenarious, or
Vicesimal, (lat.) belonging to twenty, or the twentieth in number. Viceroy,
(French) a Deputy-King, one that governs in the place of a King. Vicinity,
(lat.) neighborhood, nearness. Vicissitude, (lat.) a changing, or succeeding
by turns. Vicount, (lat. Vicecomes) a kind of Magistrate, being the same as a
Sheriff; also a Nobleman next in degree unto an Earl. Victime, (lat.) a
sacrifice or oblation. Victour, (lat.) an Overcomer or Conqueror. Vidame,
(lat. Vicedominus) the Judge of a Bishops temporal jurisdiction, being
originally the same to a Bishop, as a Vicount to an Earl. Viduation, (lat.) a
depriving, making desolate, putting into the estate of Viduity or Widdow-hood.
The Vies or Devizes, a Castle in Wiltshire, once a very stately and magnificent
Structure, built at the vast expenses of Roger Bishop of Salsbury in the reign
of King Stephen; it is called in Latin by some Divisio, by others Divisae.
View, signifies in Hunting the print of a fallow Deers foot upon the ground.
Viewers, in Common Law, those that are sent by the Court to take view of any
place in question, for the better decision of the right; also upon other
occasions, as of a man in case of sickness or of an offense. Vigone, (French)
a Demicaster, or a kind of Hat made of the wool of a beast so called. Vigorous,
(lat.) full of vigor, i. strength, courage, lustiness. To Vilify, (lat.) to
set light by, to disesteem, to make of no value. To Vilipend, (lat.) the same.
Vility, (lat.) cheapnesse, a being base, or of little worth. Villenage, in
common Law, is a servile Kind of Tenure such as Villeins, i. bondmen, are
fittest to perform: but there are several sorts of Villenage, not every one
that holds in Villenage being a servant or bondsman. Viminal, (lat.) belonging
to Osier twigs. Vincible, (lat.) to be overcome, or vanquished. Vincture,
(lat.) a tying or binding. Vindelicia, a Country of Germany, bounded on each
side with Rhaetia, Noricum, Danubius, and the Alps. Vindemial, or Vindemiatory,
(lat.) belonging to a Vintage, i. a Vine-harvest, or gathering of grapes.
Vindication, (lat.) a revenging or punishing, also a delivering or saving from
danger. Vindonum, the chief City, anciently of the Segontiaci, a people of
Hantshire; it was called by the old Britains, Britenden, now Silecester.
Vinitorian, (lat.) belonging to the keeping of Vines, Vinyards, or Wine.
Vinolent, (lat.) savouring of Wine, given to drink Wine. Violation, (lat.) a
defiling, misusing; also a transgressing. Viperine, (lat.) belonging to vipers,
being a sort of venomous Serpent in some hot Countries. Virago, (lat.) a manly
or courageous woman. Virason, a cool gale of wind. Virbius, the son of Theseus
and Hippolyta, called also Hippolytus; it signifies twice a man. Virelay, see
Vaudevill. Virge, certain rays obliquely striking through a cloud, and
signifying rain. Virginalls, a certain musical Instrument commonly known.
Virgo, (lat.) one of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, being phancy'd to bear the
resemblance of a Maid or Virgin. Virgult, (lat.) a twig or company of young
shoots or sprigs growing together. Viriatus, a famous Portughese, who from a
Hunter and noted Robber became at last a great Commander; he overthrew the two
Roman Pretors Ventidius and Plancius, but at last was vanquished by a Consular
Army, and slain treacherously by the counsel of Caepio. Viridity, (lat.)
greenness, also lustynesse, strength, freshness. Virility, (lat.) man's
estate, manliness; also ability to perform the part of a man in the act of
generation. Viripotent, (lat.) ripe for man. Virtuoso, (Ital.) a man
accomplished in virtuous Arts and Ingenuitie. Virulent, (lat.) full of venom or
deadly poison. Visceral, (lat.) belonging to the bowels of any creature.
Vicidity, or Viscosity, (lat.) a clamminesse, a sticking to any thing like glue
or birdlime. Visibility, (lat.) an aptness to be seen or discerned. Vizier, a
Viceroy or chief Statesman among the Turks. Vision, (lat.) a seeing or
discerning. Vistula, a famous River, vulgarly called Wixel, running out of the
Carpathian Hill, and dividing Germany from Europaean Sarmatia. Visual, (lat.)
belonging to the sight. Vital, (lat.) belonging to, or sustaining life.
Vitation, (lat.) a shunning or avoiding. Vitelline, (lat.) resembling the yolk
of an egg. Vitemberga, the City of Wittenbergh in Germany. Vitiation, (lat.) a
corrupting or defiling; also a deflowring. Vitiferous, (lat.) bearing vines.
Vitoldus, a cruel Tyrant of Lithuania, who carried with him a bow and arrows
wheresoever he went killing whomsoever he had a mind to kill, though upon never
so slight an occasion, making it his chiefest sport and recreation. Vitreal, or
Vitrine, (lat.) belonging to, or made of glass. Vitrification, (lat.) a making
of glass. Vitriolous, (lat.) belonging to Vitriol, i. a kind of middle
substance between stone and metal, called also Copperass. Vituline, (lat.)
belonging to a Calf. Vituperation, (lat.) a blaming, reprehending, or
dispraising. Vivacity, (lat.) liveliness, lustiness, vigor. Vivification,
(lat.) an enlivening, reviving, quickening. Viviparous, (lat.) bringing their
young alive.
U L
Vladislaus, a King of Hungaria, who was slain in a great battle against the
Turks; also the name of several other Kings of Hungaria and Bohemia.
Vlceration, (lat.) a bli^^ering or breaking out into an ulcer or running sore.
Vliginous, (lat.) plashy, wet, full of standing water. Ulysses, the son of
Laertes and Anticlea, he married Penelope the daughter of Icarius, by whom he
had Telemachus; he was by Palamedes forced against his will to go to the wars
of Troy where he proved very serviceable to the Greeks by reason of his great
subtilty; for he brought Achilles to them who had hid himself among the
daughters of Lycomed; He stole away the ashes of Laomedon which were kept in
one of the gates of the City; He took away the Palladium, and with the help of
Diomed slew King Rhaesus and brought away his white horses; He by a wile caused
Palamed to whom he bore a grudge, to be stoned to death, and after Achilles was
slain, he was preferred before Ajax by the common sentence of the Greeks, to
have his arms: after the wars of Troy, intending to sail back to his own
Country, he was cast by tempest together with his companions upon unknown
Regions; being cast upon Aeolia, he obtained of Aeolus the winds in a bottle,
which was broken by his companions thinking there had been a treasure concealed
in it; next coming to the Country of the Laestrigones, his companions were
changed into beasts by Circe, whom he compelled to restore them to their former
shapes, and lying with her he begat Telegonus; having escaped the charms of the
Sirens, his companions were afterward cast away for killing the flocks of
Phaethusa the daughter of the Sun, and he only escaping, was cast upon Ogygia
and entertained by Calypso, on whom he begat Nausithous and Nausinous; at
length he was entertained by Nausicaa the daughter of Al^inous King of the
Phaeacenses, and his wife Arete, he obtained of them a new ship and attendants,
with whom he arrived safe at Ithaca, where he slew all his rivals, and was
himself slain unknown by his son Telegonus. Vlophone, a kind of plant called
the black Chamaeleon thistle; it is also called Vervilago. Vle-games, Christmas
games or sports, from the French word Noel, i. Christmas, or the Latin
jubilum. Vl^ter, a Province in Ireland, which contains these following
Counties, Louth, Cavon, Fermanagh, Monaghan, Armagh, Down, Antrim, Londonderry,
Tir Owen, Tirconel. Vltimate, (lat.) the last, extreme, or utmost. Vltion,
(lat.) a revenging. Vltramarin, (lat.) beyond the Seas; also a kind of color
used in painting. Vltramundane, (lat.) being beyond the visible World.
Vlulation, (lat.) a howling like a dog or wolf.
U M
Vmber, a kind of beast; also a dark yellowish color used in painting.
Vmbilical, (lat.) belonging to the navel. Vmbrage, (French) a shadow, also
suspicion, also a pretense. Vmbragious, Vmbratical, or Vmbratile, (Fr. Lat.)
shady, covert, obscure. Vmbrello, (Ital.) a great broad fan or skreen, which in
hot Countries people hold over their heads to keep off the heat of the Sun.
Vmple, a word used in some ancient Statutes for fine Lawn.
U N
Unanimity, (lat.) a being of one mind or will, a consenting or according
together. Vncial, (lat.) containing an ounce or inch. Unction, (lat.) an
anointing with oil, or any oily substance. Uncouth, (Sax.) unknown in Common
Law, it is more peculiarly taken for one for whom his Host is not bound to
answer for any offense committed by him, he being not counted a guest till the
third night. Vndation, (lat.) a waving or rising of waves. Vnder^ide, (Sax.)
the evening time. Vndulate, (lat.) Chamolet wrought, or painted like waves.
Vndulation of the air, the waving of the air to and fro. Uneath, (old word)
scarce, difficult. Unguent, (lat.) an ointment or liquid salve. Vnicornous,
(lat.) having but one horn. Uniformity, (lat.) a being of one and the same
form, figure, and fashion. Union, (lat.) a joining together, a growing into
one; also a kind of pearl growing in couples; also a combining of two Churches
in one, which is done by the consent of the Bishop, Patron, and Incumbent.
Vniparous, (lat.) bringing forth one only at a birth. Unison, (French) an
agreement of two notes in one tone. Unity, (lat.) a being one in substance or
in mind, union, concord. Unity of possession, in Common Law, is a joint
possession of two rights by several titles. It is called by Civilians
consolidatio usus fructus. Universal, (lat.) general, extending to all.
University, (lat.) in the Civil Law, is taken for a body politic or
corporation; also an Academy. University College, the most ancient College of
Oxford, begun by King Aelfred who founded this Academy, and reedified by
William Archdeacon of Durham. Univocal, (lat.) consisting of one voice, name,
or sound; in Logic it is, when under one name one thing is signified.
Vnkennel, To unkennel a Fox, that is to drive or force him from his hole.
Vnselinesse, (Sax.) unhappiness. Vnweather, (Sax.) a storm or tempest.
V O
Vocabulary, (lat.) a Dictionary or Index of words. Vocal, (lat.) belonging to,
or consisting in the voice. Vocation, (lat.) a profession, calling, or course
of life. Vociferation, (lat.) a putting forth the voice, a crying out, or
exclaiming. Voculation, (lat.) a giving a word its right tone or accent. Vogue,
(French) power, swey, authority. Voidance, a want of an incumbent upon a
benefice. Voider, a Term in Heraldry, being an Ordinary, consisting of an
Archline moderate bowing from the corner of the chief toward the Nombrill of
the Escotcheon. Voiding, a Term in Heraldry, being an exemption of some part of
the inward substance of things voidable, by reason whereof the field is
transparent through the charge. Vo^sinage, (French) neighborhood. Volant, or
Volatical, (lat.) flying, or passing swiftly away. Volatile, (lat.) a Term in
Chimystry, unfixt, apt to evaporate. Volitation, (lat.) a flying often. Volta,
(Ital.) a course, or turn in riding or in dancing. Volubility, (lat.) facility,
or aptness in turning about, or changing; also a quick and easy delivery in
speech, or pronunciation. Voluntary, (lat.) done willingly, without force, or
constraint. Voluptuous, (lat.) given to pleasures, or delights. Volutation,
(lat.) a tumbling, rolling, or wallowing. Volutina, a certain goddess among
the Romans, who according to Varro was said to be the overseer of the little
cups, or sheaths of Corn, wherein the Grain is enclosed, which in Latin is
called Involucrum, as Hostilina was to take care that the Corn was supplied
with new ears, which is called in Latin Exaequatio, or Hostimentum. Vomanus, a
River of Picenum in Italy. Vomition, (lat.) a vomiting, or spewing. Voracity,
(lat.) greediness, gluttony, aptness to devour. Voraginous, (lat.) swallowing
up like a Vorago, i. a Whirlpool, Gulf, or Quagmire. Voration, (lat.) a
devouring. Votary, (lat.) he that binds himself to the performance favor.
Voucher, in Common Law, is a calling of one into the Court to warrant, or make
good Lands bought with warranty, for the secure enjoying thereof against all
men. Vowel, a letter which sounds of it self, without the help of a
consonant.
U R
Urania, see Muses. Vranoscopy, (Greek) a viewing, or contemplating of the
heavens. Vrbanity, (lat.) the fashion of the City, civility, courtesy,
gentleness in speech, or behavior. Vreter, (Greek) the passage of the Urine
from the Reins to the Bladder. Vricornium, in old times a very famous City,
and the principal in Shropshire, built by the Romans, the Saxons called it
Wrekencoaster, from the Hill Wreken, near which it stood, it is now but a poor
Village, and called Wreckceter, or Wroxcester. Vrim and Thummim, (Hebrew,
lights and perfections) 12 precious stones in the breast plate of the
High Priest, which shon like the flame of fire. Vrinator, (lat.) a diver, or
swimmer under water. Vrn, (lat.) a certain Vessel among the ancients, where the
ashes of dead bodies that had been burnt were kept, hence it is taken for any
grave, or sepulcher, it signifies also a certain liquid measure, containing
two gallons and a pottle. Vroscopy, (Gr.) an inspection of Urines, commonly
called a casting of water. Vrsa Major, the great Bear, a constellation in the
heaven. Vrsine, (lat.) belonging to a Bear. Vrsula, the proper name of a woman,
signifying in Latin, a little she Bear. Ure, (Greek, from Oros a mountain) a
kind of wild Ox.
U S
Vsquebagh, a strong liquour used among the Irish, signifying in that language
as much as Aqua vitae. Vstion, (lat.) a burning. Vstulation, (lat.) the same,
also a curling with hot irons. Vsufructuary, (lat.) reaping the profit of that
thing, whose propriety belongs to another. Usury, (lat.) the taking of
interest, or use-money for any sum lent. Usurpation, (lat.) a having, or
possessing against right, or equity.
U T
Vtas, the eighth day following any term, or feast. Vtensil, (lat.)
household stuff, that which is useful and necessary about a house. Vterine,
(latin) belonging to the womb. Vtlarie, (in Latin Vtlagatio) a punishment for
such as being called into Law, do contemptuously refuse to appear, whereby they
forfeit their goods, or lands to the King, or State. Vtopia, the feigned name
of a Country described by Sir Thomas More, as the pattern of a well governed
Commonwealth; hence it is taken by Metaphor for any imaginary, or feigned
place.
U V
Weal, (lat.) belonging to a Grape, like a Grape. Wid, (lat.) moist, or wet.
Vulcan, the God of fire, the son of Jupiter and Juno, he was thrown out of
heaven for his deformity, into the Isle of Lemnos, by which fall he became
lame, he was brought up by Eurynome, the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, he was
the master of the Cyclops, and made Thunderbolts for Jupiter; also Hermione's
bracelet, Ariadne's Crown, the Chariot of the Sun, the Armor of Achilles and
Aeneas, etc. he would have married Minerva, but she refusing him, he married
Venus, whom he having caught in bed with Mars, threw a Net over them, and
exposed them to the view of all the gods. Vulgarity, (lat.) a being common,
vulgar, or publicly known. Vulneration, (lat.) a wounding, or hurting.
Vulpine, (lat.) belonging to, or like a Fox, crafty, subtle. Vulsion, (lat.) a
pulling. Vulturine, (lat.) belonging to a Vultur, or Geyr, being a ravenous
kind of bird. Vulturnus, a certain Town of Campania, with a River of the same
name. Uvula, (lat.) the pallat of the mouth.
U X
Vxellodunum, a Town of Quercy in France, vulgarly called Cadenack. Vxorious,
(lat.) belonging to a wife; also fond, or doting upon a wife.
U Z
Vzita, a City of Africa, called by Strabo Uxitas.
W A
WAdham College, a College in the University of Oxford, so called from the
name of him that erected it. Wafters, (a Term in Navigation) men of War, that
attend merchants ships to conduct them safe along. Wage, see Gage. To Wage Law,
to prosecute a law suit. A Wagtail, a kind of bird, otherwise called a
Waterswallow, in Latin Motacilla, in Ital. Ballarina. Waif, or Waive, the same
which the Civilians call derelictum, any thing (whether it be Cattle strayed,
or goods stolen and quitted upon Hue and Cry) which being found are to be
proclaimed sundry Market days, and if they challenge them within a year and a
day are to be restored, otherwise they are to belong to the Lord of the
Franchise; also as a man forsaken of the Law, to which he was sworn is said
outlawed, so a woman not being sworn to the Law is called Waive. Wain, (Dutch)
a decreasing, defect, or want. Waive, see Waif. Wakes, certain feasts and
solemnities, which use to be kept the week after that Saints day, to whom the
Parish Church was dedicated. Walbury, (Sax.) gracious, an ancient proper name
of several women. Waldwin, a proper name, signifying in the German tongue a
Conqueror, answerable to the Latin name Victor, for Waldin we now use Gawen.
Walereared, a Term in Navigation, not shipshapen, or when a ship is built right
up. Walter, the proper name of a man, signifying in Dutch a Pilgrim, or as
others say a Woodman. Wandsdike, (contracted from the Saxon Wodensdike, i. the
Ditch of Woden, the British Mars) a Ditch of wonderful work in Wiltshire,
many miles in length, near which Ina, King of the West Saxons, and Ceo^red King
of the Mercians joined battle, and departed the field on even hand. Wantage, in
the Saxon tongue Wanading, a place in Bark-shire, anciently a Manor house of
the Kings of England, famous for being the birthplace of Alfred, that prudent
and learned Prince. Wapentake, a certain division of a County, called also a
hundred, it is so called from an ancient custom, wherein he that came to take
the government of a hundred was met by all the better sort, who came and
touched his Lance, or Weapon, by which Ceremony they were sworn and
confederate. Warbling of the wings, a Term in Faulconry; for after a Hawk has
mantled her self, she crosses her wings together over her back; which action is
called the warbling of the wings. Ward, a portion of the City committed to the
special charge of one of the 24 Aldermen; also a part, or division of a
Forest; also the Heir of the Kings Tenant, holding by Knights service, during
his nonage, is called Ward, whence Warden, a Guardian, or Oversee-er. Warin, a
proper name, in Latin Guarinus, it comes from the German Gerwin, i. all
victorious. Wardmote, a Court kept in every Ward in London. Wardstaff, a kind
of petty Sergeanty, which is a holding of Lands by this service, namely to
carry a load of straw in a Cart with six horses, two roaps, two men in harness
to watch the said Wardstaff, when it is brought to the place appointed.
Wardwit, see Warwit. Wardrobe, (Ital. Guardaroba) a place where the Garments of
Kings, or great persons use to be kept, and he that keeps the inventory of all
things belonging to the Kings Wardrob, is called Clark of the Kings great
Wardrobe. Wards and Liveries, a certain Court erected in the time of King Henry
the eighth. Warrant, or Warranty, in Common Law, is a Covenant made in a deed
by one man unto another, to warrant and secure himself and his Heirs, against
all men whatsoever, for the enjoying of any thing agreed upon between them; it
is called by the Civilians A^tipulati^. Warren, (lat. Varrenna, or Vivarium) a
prescription, or grant to a man from the King, of having Pheasants, Partridges,
Conies, and Hares, within certain of his Lands. Warscot, a contribution, that
was wont to be made toward Armor in the Saxons time. Warwick, the principal
Town of Warwickshire, which with much probability is judged to be the same
with that, which anciently was called praesidium, i. a Garrison; for the
Saxons, called it Warringwyck, the Britains, Caer G^arvick, both which words
seem to have sprung from the British word Guarth, which also signifies a
Garrison; here the Captain of the Dalmatian hors-men kept his residence, under
the command of Dux Britanniae, this Town is situate over the River Avon, upon a
steep Rock, fortified with strong walls, and a Castle toward the South-west.
Warwit, or Wardwit* a being quit of giving money for keeping of watches.
Wassail, (Sax. Waesheal, i. be in health) an ancient Ceremonious custom, still
used upon twelf day at night, of going about with a great bowl of Ale, drinking
of healths, taken from Rowena, the daughter of Hengistus, her Ceremony to King
Vortiger, to whom at a banquet she delivered with her own hands a Golden Cup
full of wine. Wast, in Common Law, is, where a Tenant for Term of years, or
otherwise does, to the prejudice of the Heir, or of him in the reversion make
waste, or spoil of houses, woods, gardens, orchards, by pulling down the House,
cutting down Timber, etc. Water-line, (a Term in Navigation) that line which
ought to be the depth, that a ship should swim in when she is laden a head, and
a stern. Watling street, see Ikenild street. Wavey, a Term in Blazon, bearing a
resemblance of the swelling wave of the Sea.
W E
Weald of Kent, the woody part of the Country, from the Dutch word Wald,
which signifies a Forest, or Wood. Wega, the shining Harp. Weapon salve, that
which cures a wound by being applied to the weapon that made it. Weathercoil,
is, when a ship being a Hull, lays her head the other way, without loosing
any of her sail, which is done by bearing up the Helm. Weed, or Wede, (Sax.) a
garment, or suit of apparel. Wedding, a joining in marriage, from the Dutch
word Wed, i. e. a pledge. Weigh, a certain weight of Cheese, or Wool,
containing 256 pounds of Av^ir du pois. Weights, see Aver du pois, and Troy
weight. Welken, an old Saxon word, signifying a Cloud; also the Element, or
Sky. Weold, or Would, (Sax.) a Forest. Werewolf, or Manwolf (Were signifying in
the Saxon language a man) a kind of Sorcerer, who by anointing his body, and
putting on an enchanted girdle, takes upon him the shape, and nature of a Wolf,
worrying and killing humane Creatures. Weroance, a name given to any great
Lord, among the West-Indians. Werre, or Were, a certain pecuniary mulct,
anciently set upon a man's head for killing of a man. Werregelt theft, a thief
that may be redeemed by Werre. Westphalia, a Province of Germany, and one of
the 12 Circles of the Empire, containing in it 6 Bishoprics, 3 principalities,
7 free Cities, with diverse great Earledoms.
W H
Wharfage, a fee due, for things landed at a wharf, or brought thither to be
exported. While, (Sax.) which. Whitehart silver, see Blacklow Forest.
Whitespurres, certain Squires made by the King. Whitsuntide, as it were the
time of the white son; also Whitsunday seems to signify as much as sacred
Sunday; from the Saxon word Wihed, i. sacred, being a certain feast celebrated,
in memory of the holy Ghost, descending upon the Apostles in fiery tongues; it
is called in Greek Pentecost, as being the 50th. day from the Resurrection.
Whole-chace-boots, large hunting, or winter riding boots; summer riding
boots, being called demichace. Wh^odings, plancks, which are joined and
fastened along the ship-sides into the stem. Whorlbat, (in lat. Caestus) a
certain game or exercise among the ancients, wherein they whirled leaden
plummets at one another.
W I
Wigornia, the chief City of Worcestershire, commonly called Worcester, the
Britains called it Caer-Wrangon, and CaerGuarangon, the Saxons Weorgaceaster;
it was set on fire in the year 1041. by Hardy Cnute the Dane, in revenge,
because the Citizens had slain his Huscarles; it was also very much harrassed
in the time of the Civil Wars, in King Stephens reign, but soon it flourish't
again, with greater splendor then before. Wilfred, (Sax.) much peace, a proper
name of men. Saint Wilfrid's needle, a certain narrow hole in the Church of
Wakeman, in Yorkshire, wherein women's honesties were in times past tried, for
such as were chaste did easily pass through, but such as had been faulty, were
miraculously held fast, and could not get through. William, (Dutch Wilhelm) the
proper name of a man, the word signifying a defense to many. Wilton, a Town of
Wiltshire, in ancient times the principal Town of the whole Shire, and from
which it took its denomination, that it was heretofore called Ellandunum,
appears by the Testimony of old Records, when Weolstan being styled Earl of
Ellandunum; it is farther added, that is to say of Wilton, here in a very
bloody battle, Egbert King of the West Saxons, overcame Beorwulf, King of
Mercia, in the year of our salvation 821. here also about fifty years after
King Aelfrid, joining battle with the Danes, was at length put to the worst.
Wimple, a plaited linen cloth, which Nuns wear about their necks; also a flag
or streamer. Wimund, (Sax.) sacred peace, a proper name. Winchester, see Venta.
Windlasse, a piece of Timber placed from one side of the ship to the other
close abast the stem. Windsore, a Town in Bark-shire, by the Saxons called
Windleshore, happily from the Winding-shore; it is famous for a most stately
Castle, built by King Edward the third, who in this Castle held prisoners at
the same time, John King of France, and David King of Scots; he also founded
that Noble Order of the Garter, of which see more in the word Knight, there is
likewise a magnificent Church begun by the same King, and consecrated to the
Virgin Marie, but finished by King Henry, and Sir Reginald Bray. Winefrid, the
name of an ancient British Virgin Saint, of whom it is reported that after her
head was cut off by Cradacus, there sprung up in the same place the Well, which
at this day is called Saint Winefrids Well, and that Benno the Priest joined
her head again to her body; it is also the proper name of diverse women, the
word signifying in the Saxon tongue an obtainer of peace. Winwidfield, a place
near Leeds in Yorkshire, so called from the great victory, which Oswy, King of
Northumberland had over Penda, King of the Mercians, wherein Penda was utterly
overthrown. Wippedfleed, see Tanet. Wisard, a witch, a cunning man, one that
tells where things are that were lost, some think it comes from the Saxon
word Witega, i. a Prophet. Wiseacre, the same, from the Dutch words Waer, i.
truth, and Sagen, i. to tell; it is vulgarly taken for a fool. Witchcraft, a
certain evil Art, whereby with the assistance of the Devil, or evil Spirits,
some wonders may be wrought, which exceed the common apprehension of men. It
comes from the Dutch word Wiechelen, i. to divine, or guess; it is called in
Latin Veneficium, in Greek Pharmaceia, i. the art of making poisons. Withernam,
(from the Dutch words Wider, i. again, and Namp, i. a taking) is in Common Law,
when a distress is taken and driven into a hold or out of the County, so that
the Sheriff cannot upon the replevin, make delivery thereof to the party
distreined.
W O
Woad, a certain herb wherewith cloth is dyed blew; it is called in Latin,
Guadum, Glastum, or Pastellum. Woden, a certain Idol worshipped by the ancient
Saxons, and thought to be the same with Mars, or the god of Battle; whence the
fourth day of the week came to be called Wodensday, or Wednseday. Wodensburgh,
(q. the Burgh or Town of Woden, the abovenamed Idol) a village in Wiltshire,
where in the year 590 Ceaulin King of the West Saxons, was in a bloody battle
vanquished by the Britains, and forced to end his days in exile. Wolds, (Sax.)
mountains or hills without woods; whence that part of Leicestershire lying
Northward beyond the Wreken, is called the Would or Would of Leicestershire, as
being hilly without woods. Wolfetchsod, (Sax.) the condition of an Utlary, upon
whose head the same price was formerly set, as on a Wolfs head to whomsoever
should kill him. Woodstock, (Sax. a woody place) a Town in Oxfordshire, where
King Ethelred assembled the States of the Kingdom and enacted Laws; here King
Henry the first built a very magnificent Royal Palace, in which King Henry the
second, that he might keep his Paramour Rosamund Clifford concealed, built a
Labyrinth with many intricate turnings and windings, which was called Rosamunds
Bower; but it is so utterly effaced, that at this day it is not to be discerned
where it was. In this Town Geffery Chau^er a most famous English Poet was
brought up. Woodward, an officer of the Forest, whose function is to present
any offense of Vert or Venison done within his charge, and if he find any Deer
killed or wounded, to give the Verderer notice of it. Woolwinders, those that
wind up fleeces of wool into a kind of bundle to be packt and sold by weight.
Worcester, see Wigornia. Wormatia, a famous City of Germany, built upon the
River Rhene; it is vulgarly called Worms, and has been sometime an
Archbishops See.
W R
Wreath, in Heraldry, is that which is between the Mantle and the Crest, called
also a Torce; also a Boares tail so termed among Hunters. Wreck, (Fr. Varech,
Lat. Veriscum and naufragium) is when a ship perishes at sea, and no man
escapes alive, in which case whatever goods are cast upon land belong to the
King or the Lord of the soil; but if any person come to land, or if either dog
or cat escape alive, the goods return to the owner if he claim them within a
year and a day. Wreedt, (Dutch) angry, fierce, furious; whence the word wroth
is commonly used by us for anger or fury. Writ, (Lat. Breve because the
intention of it is expounded in few words) signifies in Common Law, the Kings
precept whereby any thing is commanded to be done touching the suit of action,
as a defendant to be summoned, a distress to be taken, etc. It is called by
the Civilians, Actio or Formula.
W U
Wulpher, (Sax.) helper, the proper name of a King of Middle-England, it
answers to the Greek names Alex^as or Epicurus. Wulfrunes Hampton, (from
Wulfrune a devout woman who enriched the Town) a Town in Staffordshire vulgarly
called Wolverhampton.
X A
XAnthi, a certain people of Asia who were utterly destroyed by Cyrus his
Lieutenant Harpagus. Xanthippe, the wife of Socrates, a woman of a very froward
and petulant disposition, insomuch as Alcibies told Socrates that he wondered
how he could endure to live with her, to which he answered, that he kept her to
exercise his patience at home, that he might the better bear the petulancy of
others abroad. Xantippus, a famous Captain among the Lacedaemonians, who
assisting the Carthaginians, overcame the Romans in a great battle, and took
Regulus the Consul prisoner. Xantho, one of the Sea-Nimphs, the daughter of
Oceanus and Tethys. Xanthus, a River of Troas, called also Scamander.
X E
Xenocrates, a famous Chalcedonian Philosopher, who succeeded in the Academy of
Speusippus, he was a man of a very strict and severe conversation. Xenodochy,
(Gr.) an Inn or Hospital, a place for the receiving of Pilgrims Strangers, and
Travelers. Xenophon, the son of Gryllus a famous Athenian Philosopher and
expert Captain, he went with an Army of 10000 men along with Cyrus into Persia,
and after Cyrus was slain, brought back his Army with little loss through many
strange Countries and diverse great difficulties and dangers. He was for his
Eloquence styled the Attick Muse, and writ many choice and elegant books.
Xeriff, the title of a Prince or Supreme Ruler in Barbary. Xerophthalmie, (Gr.)
a certain disease in the eyes which causes a redness or soreness, without
any running or swelling. Xerxes, a King of Persia, the grandchild of Cyrus and
son of Darius and Atossa; he with an Army of 1700000 men, and a Navy so vast
that it filled the whole Hellespont and joined the two Continents together, was
vanquished at Thermopylae by 4000 men, and afterward in a Sea Fight at Salamis
by Themi^tocles, and his General whom he left in Boeotia, was feign to retire
with almost all his forces cut off, he was at length slain in his own Palace by
Artabanus one of his own Captains.
X I
Xilinous, (lat.) belonging to cotton.
X Y
Xylobalsame, (Gr.) a certain sweet wood, whereof baulm is produced.
Y A
YArdland, a certain quantity of land called in Saxon Gyrdlander, in Latin
Virgata terrae.
Y B
Ybel, an old British proper name of a man, it seems contracted from the Greek
Eubulus, i. Good Counselor.
Y E
Year and Day, a certain time in construction of Common Law thought fit in many
cases to determine a right in one, and prescription in another, as in case of
an Estray, of No claim, of Protection, of a Wreck etc. Yeoman* (contract, a
youngman) the next degree to a Gentleman, and called in Latin Ingenuus; in our
Laws he is defined to be a freeborn man, who can dispend of his own free land
in yearly revenue to the sum of 40 shillings Sterling.
Y O
Yonker, (Dutch Junker, i. a Knight or Nobleman) a lusty lad. York, see
Eboracum. Youthwort, a kind of plant called in Latin ros solis.
Y T
Ythel, (British) a proper name, contracted from the Greek Euthalius, i. very
flourishing.
Z A
ZAchary, the proper name of a man, signifying in Heb. Memory of the Lord.
Zachynthus, an Island of the Ionian Sea, between Cephalenia, and Achaia, now
called Zante. Zaleucus, a famous Lawgiver among the Locrians, who having made a
Law for the punishing Adultery, and his son happening to be found guilty of the
same crime, he that he might fulfill the Law and mitigate his sons punishment,
caused one of his sons eyes to be put out, and one of his own. Zameis, the
fifth King of Assyria, the son of Ninus and Semiramis, otherwise called Ninias.
Zany, (French) one that in ridiculous manner, imitates other men's actions to
stir up laughter.
Z E
Zebennia, the wife of Odenatus King of the Palmyreni, who behaved himself with
much gallantry against Sapores King of Persia; she after the death of her
husband enjoyed the Kingdom with her sons Herennianus and Timolaus. Zecchine,
(Ital.) a certain Coin of Gold, valuing about 7 shillings 6 pence Sterling.
Zelot, (Greek) one that is envious or jealous of another actions; also one
that is hot and fervently zealous in Religion. Zelotypie, (Greek) jealousy.
Zenith, (Arab.) the vertical point, or that point of Heaven which is directly
over our heads, and opposite to the Nadir. Zeno, a famous Greek Philosopher,
who was the first Author of the Sect of the Stoics, he strangled him self in
the 72 year of his age, after he had broke his finger by hitting it against a
stone. There was also another Zeno of Elea a hearer of Parmenides, he having
conspired against the Tyrant Nearchus, and being put upon the rack to make him
confess who were the rest of the conspiratours, he bit off a piece of his
tongue and spit it in the Tyrants face; whereupon the Citizens stoned the
Tyrant to death. Zenobia, called also Zebennia, a Queen of Palmyrene, and the
wife of Odatus, she governed the Roman Provinces in Syria, being reckoned among
the 30 Tyrants who usurpt the government of the World in the time of Galenus;
she was at length overcome by the Emperor Aurelian, and led in Triumph through
the City of Rome with Golden Chains: Yet he in compassion afterward gave her a
possession in Tybur. She understood the Egyptian, Greek, and Roman Languages,
and brought up her sons Herennianus and Timolaus in learning, of whom it is not
known what became, whether they died a natural death or were killed by
Aurelian. Zephyrus, the West-wind so called by the Greeks; by the Latins,
Favonius, and begins to blow as Varr^ affirms, about the beginning of February.
Zereth, an Hebrew measure containing nine inches. Zethes, the son of Boreas and
Orithy^, and the brother of Calais; these two brothers went with the Argonants
to Colchos, and because they had wings they were sent to drive away the Harpys
from Phineus his Table, whom they pursued to the Strophades Islands. Zethus,
the son of Jupiter and Antiope the wife of Lycus King of the Thebans, who
divorcing Antiope, married Dirce; after which Jupiter falling in love with
Antiope, got her with child, which Dirce perceiving, fearing lest she might
come again into favor with her Husband, she put her in prison; but the time of
her delivery drawing nigh, she was set at liberty, and flying to the mountain
Citheron, she brought forth twins in the highway, and the children being
afterward found by the Shepherds, were brought up by them, and called the one
Zethus, the other Amphion, who coming to age, and hearing of the injuries which
Dirce had done to their mother, they tied her to the tail of a wild Bull,
whereby she was draged through rough and stony ways to a miserable death, and
changed by Bacchus into a Fountain. Zeuxis, a famou^ Painter of Greece, who
contended with Timantes, Androcides, E^pompus, and Parrhasius, all excellent
Painters of his time; he painted a Boy carrying Grapes, the Grapes being done
with so much life, that the Birds taking them for true Grapes, flew to them to
peck at them, whereat he grew very angry at his own work, saying, That if the
Boy had been drawn as well as the Grapes, they would not have peckt at them for
fear of the Boy.
Z O
Zodiac, one of the greater imaginary Circles, being 12 degrees in breadth,
and 360 in length, and dividing the Sphere obliquely into two parts, and
contains the 12 Signs, which are called Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces, through the
whole length of this Circle runs a line just in the middle which is called
the Ecliptic line, or the pathway of the Sun, because in that line the Sun
performs its course. The word Zodiac comes from the Greek Zodio^, because
of the representations of sundry animals which it contains; in Latin it is
called Signifer. Zoilus, a Sophist of Amphipolis, who lived in the time of
Ptolomaeus King of Egypt, and writ a book against Homer, (whence he was called
Homeroma^tix) which he presented to P^olomy expecting a great reward; but when
he saw that he gave him nothing, he being compelled by want, set on some
friends to beg something of him; but Ptolomy answe^ed that since Homer, so many
Ages past deceased had fed so many men, he wondered how Zoilus could want so
much, being more learned than Homer. Concerning his death some say, that being
convicted of Parricide, he was crucified at the command of Ptolomy. Others that
returning into Greece, he was thrown down headlong from the rock S^yron. From
him every envious carping Critic is called a Zoilus. Zone, (Greek) a belt or
girdle, more particularly it is taken for a gird^e worn anciently by maids
about their middle when they were near marriage, which the Husband untied the
first night of their marriage; also a soldiers belt; also in Cosmography it is
used for a certain space or division of the Heavens or Earth, bounded by the
lesser circles, whereof there are 5 in all; namely, the Torrid Zone included
between the two Tropicks, the two Temperate Zones included between the Tropicks
and the Polar Circles, and the two Frigid Zones which are included between the
Polar Circles and the Poles themselves. Zoography, (Greek) a description of
beasts, a painting of any kind of animals. Zoophytes, (Greek) certain
substances which partake of the nature partly of plants, partly of animals, and
are also called Plantanimals. Zophyrus, a Nobleman of Persia, who when Darius
had besieged Babylon a long time in vain, he fled to the Babylonians as a
fugitive, cutting off his ears and his lips, complaining of the cruelty of his
King; whereupon being received by them, he was made their Captain, and betrayed
the City to Darius, who notwithstanding would often say, That he had rather
have one Zophyrus whole, than take twenty Babylons. Zoroaster, the first King
of the Bactrians, who, as Pliny says, was the first inventour of Magic among
the Persians, he is said to have laughed the first day he was born, and his
brain is said to have beat so strongly, that it repelled any ones hand which
was laid on, which was held to be a sign of his future sagacity, he wrote the
liberal arts upon seven pillars of brick, and also upon seven of brass; he
wrote also one volume concerning nature, one of precious stones, with several
other works; some say, he was consumed with fire from heaven, and that he
foretold to the Assyrians, that if they preserved his ashes, their Kingdom
should never fail, others say, he was slain in the wars he had with Ninus, King
of Assyria.
Z U
Zulemon, a Captain of those Saracens, inhabiting Asia, who invading Thrace
with a numerous Army, part of them besieged Constantinople, part making an
irruption into Bulgaria, were overcome by the Bulgarians. Zuventebaldus, a Duke
of the Maraveni, to whom Arnolphus gave the Dukedom of Bohemia, he rebelling
against the Emperor, overcame him with the help of the Hungarians.
Z Y
Zygactes, a River of Thrace, near the City Philippi, in the passing of which,
Pluto is said to have broke his Chariot, when he ravished Proserpina. Zygostat,
(Greek) one appointed to look to weights, a Clark of a market.
FINIS.
The Errata committed in the Capital Words are to be found by the order of the
Alphabet as follows.
FOr Adory r. Adoxy. Alderanainim vid. Pap. to be left out. for Archirrave r.
Architrave. for Arcuare r. Arcuate. for Aniso r. Aviso.

Bacchus to begin a break after Baccharach. for Becebick r. Becchick. for
Bedobeer r. Bedpheer. for Bourrean r. Bourreau.

For Calcent r. Calecut. for Carm r. Carine. for Cartilagindous r.
Cartilagineous. for Casuit r. Casuist Cnossus should begin a break. for
Columbarg r. Columbarie. for Sir Crispin r. St. Crispin.

For Dantry r. Dautry. Dative to begin a break after Datism. Diple to begin a
break after Dipththong.

For Entire perngents r. Entire pertingents. for Euperation r. Exuperation.

For Fastigation r. Fastigiation. for Fontegeld r. Foutegeld.

For to be Agog r. to be a Gog. Grith to be in the same break with Grithbreach.
Gryph, to begin a break after Gryffen. Gibbosity misplaced in G. Y.

For Langid r. Languid. for Lucida Laucis r. Lucida Lancis.

For Misoginy r. Mysogyny. for Mithology r. Mythology.

For Nephglian r. Nephelian.

For Obigillation r. Obsigillation. for Obtruration r. Obturation.

For Paraselinii r. Paraselenii. for Paretii r. Parelii. for Paricide r.
Parricide, which should have been placed after Parrhasius. for Percontation r.
Percunctation. for Portmantean r. Portmanteau. for Proem r. Prooem. for
Propagotion r. Propagation.

For Quadrulation r. Quadruplation.

Relohihin to be left out.

For Septunical r. Septuncial. for Sicambre r. Sicambri. for Smectimnus r.
Smectimnuus. for Supercilous r. Supercilious. for S^parlative r. Superlative.

In Thirdboroughs leave out s at the later end. for Tonicul r. Tonical. for
Traperzium r. Trapezium* for Tymnaetes r. Tymaetes.

For Vicidity r. Viscidity.

The other Errata are to be found under some or other of the Alphabetical words.
In Corporal, for or r. of a. in Corporeity leave out Corporeature. after term
in Courtilage for Message r. Message. in Declination, for Astrology r.
Astronomy. in Defeisance for or r. see. in Cyclops for Serope r. Sterope. in
Dalreudini for Renda r. Renda. in Dioptick for Neniter capedines r. the
Intercapedines. in Entoire before sorts r. all. in Entweyssel after ancient r.
family. in Epidemical for Epidemie r. Epidemick. in Euterpe before the r. one
of. in Excrementitious after belonging r. to. in Familiar after Substantively
r. used. in Flandria for in r. of. in Grae^ for Phocys r. Phorcys. in Growm for
Ensighn r. Engine. in Gunora after barbdheaded r. arrow. in Hair after time r.
appears above. in Jasion for brought r. taught. in Information for nor r. or.
in Inodoration for swell r. smell. in Introversion, after look r. inward. in
Joys of the Planets for powerfully r. powerful. in Landgraviate place Sea at
the end of the foregoing word. in Laver for or vessel r. a vessel. in Libra for
vernal r. Autumnal. in Lucullus make a comma after besides, not afrer age. in
Lyra for Aphorism's r. Asterism's. in Mate for Motto r. Matto. in Miletus r.
Sarpedon. in Minchings after consecrated r. virgins. in Mirach r. Andromeda. in
Opposite for privately r. privately. in Otus for Son r. Sons. in Parapett for
Breast r. Brestwo^k. in Paraselenii for Paretii r. Parelii. in Pentagonal r. 5
angles. in Peripherie make a comma after about. in Phaleucian for and 5. r. or
5. in Ralph r. helpful counsel. in Schirrus for senses r. sense. in Scolopender
r. vomiteth. in Supereminence for excellent r. excellence. in Tegea r.
Therimachus. in Tissue for or r. of. in Tribunal r. Judgment Seat. in
Tripudiation for tripling r. tripping. in Trophy for upon r. up. in Velites for
Triani r. Triarii. in Xantippe for Alcibies r. Alcibiades. These are the most
considerable Errata 's that I have observed; what ere else may have escaped,
the discree^ Reader will easily correct.

Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed for Nath. Brook, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
THE Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale, Esquire. Octavo.

2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio.

3. The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table; by Dr. Featly, D. D. Quarto.

4. The Quakers Cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

5. Re-assertion of Grace: Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the
Gospel: a reply to Mr. Anthony Burghess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Ruthford*
by Robert Town.

6. Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a dispute with Master Tombs, by Mr.
J. Crag: where all may receive clear satisfaction in that controversy: the
best extant. Octavo.

7. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an explication of some passages exhibited
to the Commissioners of White Hall for Approbation of Public Preachers,
against John Harrison of Land Chap. Lancash.

8. The zealous Magistrate: a Sermon by T. Threscos. Quarto.

9. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, Quarto, in the
year 1651.

10. Divinity no enemy to Astrology: A Sermon for the Society of Astrologers,
in the year 1643. by Dr. Thomas Swaddling.

11. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, August 1648. by J. Shaw
Minister of Hull.

12. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March 24 by J. Shaw.

13. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or
Man, in several Sermons: by J. Webster. Quarto.

14. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth: by K. Matton.

15. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness: or a more hopeful
way to Grace and Salvation. by K. Young. Octavo.

16. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the
wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsley
of Yarmouth.

17. Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are discovered several
Evidences of the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich.

18. Jacobs Seed; or, the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Jer.
Buroughs.

19. The sum of Practical Divinity; or, the grounds of Religion in a
Chatechistical way, by Mr. Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a
useful Piece.

20. Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, their
Governments are turned and changed, by J. Davis Minister in ^over: admirably
useful, and seriously to be considered in these times.

21. The Treasure of the Soul; wherein we are taught, by dying to sin, to
attain to the perfect love of God.

22. A Treatise of Contestation, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by J.
Hall Bishop of Norwich.

23. Select thoughts, or, choice helps for a pious spirit, beholding the
excellency of her Lord Jesus; by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

24. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added,
Songs in the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions; by J. Hall Bishop of
Norwich.

25. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed Soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.

Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chyromancy.
26. Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren.

27. Lux Veritatis, Judicial Astrology vindicated and demonology confuted; by
W. Ramsey Gent.

28. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy; being a determination of the
Original of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow or Peter-House in Cambridge.

29. Cornelius Agrippa, his fourth book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy;
Magical Elements of Peter de Abona, the nature of Spirits: made English by R.
Turner.

30. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the Mysteries of Nature, and his Secret
Alchimy.

31. An Astrological Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations; proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies: by Sir Chr.
Heydon Knight.

32. Merlinus Anglicus Junior; the English Merlin revived, or a Prediction upon
the Affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644. by W. Lilly.

33. Englands Prophetical Merlin; foretelling to all Nations of Europe, till
1663. the actions depending upon the influences of the Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter, 1642. by W. Lilly.

34 The Starry Messenger, or an Interpretation of that strange apparition of
three Suns seen in London, the 19 of November 1644. being the Birthday of King
Charles: by W. Lilly.

35. The Worlds Catastrophe: or Europes many Mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly.

36. An Astrological Prediction of the Occurrences in England; part of the
years 1648, 1649, 1650. by W. Lilly.

37. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England; the Prophecy of the white King,
Grebner his Prophecy, concerning Charles, Son of Charles, his greatness;
illustrated with several Hieroglyphics: by W. Lilly.

38. Annus Tenebrosus, or the Dark Year, or Astrological Judgments upon two
Lunary Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W.
Lilly.

39. An easy and familiar Method, whereby to judge the effects depending on
Eclipses: by W. Lilly.

40. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in London June, 30. 1644. by W.
Lilly: as also all his Works in a Volume.

41. Catastrophe Magnatum: an Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpeper.

42. Teratologia; or, a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody rain
and waters; by I. S.

43. Chyromancy; or the Art of divining by the lines engraven in the hand of
man, by dame Nature in 198 Genitures; with a Learned Discourse of the Soul of
the World; by G. Wharton Esquire.

44. The admired Piece of Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions, and Signal moles of the Body, the Interpretation of
Dreams: to which is added the Art of Memory, illustrated with figuers: by R.
Sanders, in Folio.

45. The no less exquisite then admirable Work, Theatrum Chemicum,
Britannicum; containing several Poetical Pieces of our famous English
Philosophers, who have written the Hermitique Mysteries in their own ancient
Language; faithfully collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by
the Indefatigable industry of Elias Ashmole Esquire. illustrated with Figures.

Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts or Mechanics.
46. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious
manner, (together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison)
and in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Demension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of Measures and Weights, observations on Gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metricald: by T. Wibard.

47. Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares,
Timber, Stone, Steeples, Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the
Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners,
Carpenters, and Masons: by L. Digges.

48. The unparalled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, the exact
Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-Lands, or
Mountains, by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any
Land, to Protect, Reduce or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Cart,
to make a Map of any manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other
Eminent Surveyors Method: a Book excellently useful for those that sell,
purchase, or are otherwise employed about Buildings; by J. Air.

49. The golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals;
the Theory and Practice united in a simpathetical Proportion, betwixt Lines and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure,
Magnitude, and Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by
Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made
compendious and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by
Th. Wilsford Corrector of the last Edition of Record.

50. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-Writing, as it has been proved by many
hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by them practiced, and
acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest method; the meanest
capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice, may attain to a
perfection in this Art: by Jer. Rich Author and Teacher thereof, dwelling in
Swithings Lane in London.

51. Milk for Children; a plain and easy method teaching to read and write,
useful for Schools and Families, by I. Thomas, D. D.

52. The Painting of the Ancients; the History of the beginning, progress, and
consummating of the practice of that noble Art of Painting; by F. Junius.

Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
53. Culpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological j^dgement of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or die, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hipocrates, and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpeper's censure of Urines.

54. Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his Wife for the public good, being the
choicest and most profitable of those secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery; which
whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast, and resolved never to be published
till after his death.

55. The Yorkshire Spaw; or the virtue and use of that water in curing of
desperate diseases, with directions and rules necessary to be considered by all
that repair thither.

56. Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of Man:
by A. Read Dr. in Physic.

57. The Art of Simpling: an introduction to the knowledge of gathering of
Plants, wherein, the definitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differ^^ces,
names, virtues, times of gathering, uses, tempratures of them are compendiously
discoursed of: also a discovery of the lesser World, by W. Coals.

58. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and
Flowers, with their several original names, the places where they grow, their
descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also
their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical
virtues; with necessary Observations on the Seasons of Planting and gathering
of our English Plants. A Work admirably useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons,
and other Ingenuous persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the
English physical simples, that Gerard or Parkinson, in their two voluminous
Herbals have disooursed of, even so as to be on emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the ingredients being to be had in their own fields and gardens;
Published for the general good by W. Coals M. D.

59. The Complete Midwive's practice, in the high and weighty concernments of
the body of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the experiences and
writings, not only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute
practices of the French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations; so fitted for
the weakest capacities, that they may in a short time attain to the knowledge
of the whole Art: by Dr. T. C. with the advice of others, illustrated with
Copper figures.

60. The Queens Closet opened: incomparable secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery,
Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were honored with her own
practice.

Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
61. Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry
in Arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor: by R. Brathwait Esquire.

62. Oedipus, or the Resolver of the secrets of love, and other natural
Problemes, by way of Question and Answer.

63. The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
plantation there, in the year 1628. brought down to these times; all the
material passages performed there, exactly related.

64. The Tears of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel
proceedings of the Spaniards in the Island of Hispani^la, Cuba, Jamai^a,
Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West Indies; in which to the life, are
discovered the tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so
successefully managed against them.

65. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother: written orignally in
Spanish by that incomparable wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans; translated at
the requests of the Marchioness of D^rchester, and the Countess of Strafford:
by E. P.

66. The History of the Golden Ass, as also the Loves of Cupid and his
Mistress Psiche: by L. Apulcius, translated into English.

67. The unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N.

68. The Rebellion, a Tragedy by T. Rawlins.

69. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N. Richards.

70. The floating Island: a Trage-Comedy, acted before the King, by the
Students of Christ's Church in Oxon; by that renowned wit, W. Strode, the songs
were set by Mr. Henry Laws.

71. Harvey's Divine Poems; the History of Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John
the Evangelist.

72. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremiah in verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas; by I. Quarles.

73. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R.
Chamberlain.

74. The admirable ingenuous Satyr against Hypocrites.

Poetical, with several other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed.
75. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those
admirable accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most
acceptable qualifications of Discourse, or Writing. An Art of Logic, accurate
Complements, Fancies, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and All-a-Mode
Letters by J. C.

76. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Poems: by Sir I. M. M. L. M. S. W. D.

77. Sportive wit, the Muses Merriment; a New Spring of Drollery; Jovial
Fancies, etc.

78. The Conveyancer of Light, or the Complete Clerk, and Scrivener^ Guide;
being an exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use; as they
were penned, and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and
great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern: whereunto is added a Concordance
from K. Rich. 3. to this present.

79. Themis Aurea, The Daws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which the
occult secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englisht by T. H.

80. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand; a prophetical Treatise.

81. Medicina Magica tamen Physica; Magical, but natural Physic: containing
the general cures of infirmities and diseases belonging to the boaies of men,
as also to other animals, and domestic creatures, by way of Transplantion:
with a description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold: by Samuel Boulton
of Salop.

82. I. Tradiscan's Rareties, published by himself.

83. The proceeding of the high Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648.

84. The perfect Cook; a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for
Pastery, or all other manner of All-a-mode Kick shaws; with the most refined
ways of dressing of flesh, fowl, or fish; making of the most poinant Sawces,
whether after the French, or English manner, together with fifty five ways of
dressing of Eggs: by M. M.

Admirable Useful Treatises newly Printed.
85. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
Practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgeous Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a Correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a Judicious
Censure of their defects; and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and ases of Simples, and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases; as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what language soever.

86. Cabinet of Jewels, Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. In
eight Sermons; with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel; with
the expediency of Marriage in public Assemblies, by I. Crag, Minister of the
Gospel.

87. Natures Secrets; or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation
of Meteors; discribing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights,
magnitudes, and influences of Stars; the causes of Comets, Earthquakes,
Deluges, Epidemical Diseases, and Prodigies of precedent times; with presages
of the weather and descriptions of the Weather-glasse: by T. Wilsford.

88. The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and
Complementing; as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide-Park, the new
Exchange, and other Eminent places. A work in which are drawn to the Life the
Deportments of the most Accomplished Persons; the Mode of their Courtly
Entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports,
Drolls and Fancies; the Witchcrafts of their persuasive language, in their
approaches, or other more secret dispatches, etc. by E. P.

89. Helmont disguised; or the vulgar errors of impercial and unskilful
practicers of Physic confuted; more especially as they concern the cures of
Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other diseases by way of Dialogue; in
which the chief rarities of Physic are admirably discoursed of, by I. T.

Books in the Press, and ready for Printing.
1* THE Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford.

2. Geometry demonstrated by Lines and Numbers; from thence, Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and
Spherical Triangles: by T. Wilsford.

3. The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar to these times:
by T. Wilsford.

4. The Fool transformed: a Comedy.

5. The History of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Trage-Comedy.

6. The chaste woman against her will: a Comedy.

7. The Tooth-drawer: a Comedy.

8. Honor in the end: a Comedy.

9. Tell Tale: a Comedy.

10. The History of Donquixiot, or the Knight of the ill favored face: a
Comedy.

11. The fair Spanish Captive: a Trage-Comedy.

12. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and incomparable
secrets of Physic, Surgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving, Candying,
distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the costliest
Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and select Experiments, as they
offered themselves to their Observations; whether here, or in foreign
Countries.

13. The Soul's Cordial in two Treatises, the first teaching how to be eased of
the guilt of sin, the second, discovering advantages by Christ's ascension: by
that faithful labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Christopher Love, late
Parson of Laurance Jury: the third volumne.

14. Jacobs seed, the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by the late reverend
Divine I. Buroughs.

15. The Saints Tombstone: or the Remains of the blessed: A plain Narrative of
some remarkable passages, in the holy life, and happy death, of Mistress
Dorothy Shaw, wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston on
Hull, collected by her dearest friends, especially for her sorrowful husband
and six daughters consolation and invitation.

16. The accomplished Cook, the mystery of the whole art of Cookery, revealed in
a more easy and perfect method then has been published in any language: Expert
and ready ways for the dressing of flesh, fowl, and fish, the raising of
pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the most poinant
Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of fare, an exact
account of all dishes for the season, with other All a-mode curiosities,
together with the lively illustrations of such necessary figures, as are
referred to practice: approved by the many years experience, and careful
industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of
honor.

17. The exquisite letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired Translater
of the volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory,
published by his dear brother Mr. A. L.

18. The so long expected work, the New World of English words, or a general
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect
Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words throughout
the Arts and Sciences, liberal, or Mechanic, as also other subjects that are
useful, or appertain to the language of our Nation, to which is added the
signification of proper names, Mythology, and Poetical fictions, Historical
relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries, and Cities of the World;
especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most memorable passages are mentioned: A work very necessary for
strangers, as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that would rightly
understand what they discourse, write, or read. Collected and published by E.
P. for the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been
assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their names are prefixed before the
book.

19. The so much desired, and deeply learned Comentary, on Psalm the fifteenth,
by that Reverend, and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Car^hwright, Minister of
the Gospel in York, to which is prefixed a brief account to the Authors life,
and of his work by R. Bolton.

20. The way to bliss, in three books, being a learned Treatise of the
Philosophers stone, made public by Elias Ashmole, Esquire.

21. Wit Restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published by Sr. John
Mennis, Mr. Smith, and others.

22. The Judges charge, delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Justice Hale, and Mr.
Sergeant Crook, Judges of the Assize, at St. Mary Overies in Southwark, by R.
Purre, M. A. Pastor of Camerwell, in the County of Surry, a Sermon worthy of
the perusal of all such persons as endeavor to be honest and just
Practitioners in the Law.

23. The modern Assurancer, the Clarks Directory, containing the Practick part
of the Law, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for
Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants,
Jointures, Indentures; to lead the use of Fines and Recoveries, with good
Provisoes, and Covenants to stand seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases,
Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use,
intended for all young Students and Practicers of the Law by John Herne.

24. Moors Arithmatick, the second Edition much refined and diligently cleared
from the former mistakes of the press: A work containing the whole Art of
Arithmetic as well in Numbers, as Species: Together with many Additions by the
Author to come forth at Michaelmas Term. Likewise

25. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the
Oval^figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first books of
Mydorgius his Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical
Sections may be easily understood, a work much desired, and never before
published in the English tongue, by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great
Level of the Fennes.

26. The Joys of Heaven, the Saints support in Gods promises on earth, Christ's
Sermons on the Beatitudes. An exposition of the fifth Chapter of St. Matthew,
delivered in several Sermons by Mr. Jeremiah, Burraihgs the last Sermons he
preached a little before his death, at St. Giles Cripple-gate, London.

FINIS.
A World of Errors DISCOVERED IN THE New World of Words, OR General English
DICTIONARY.

AND IN NOMOTHETES, OR THE INTERPRETER OF LAW-WORDS and TERMS.

By Tho. Blount of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

PROVE. 27.5. Melior est manifesta correptio, quam amor absconditus.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for Abel Roper, John Martin, and Henry
Herringman, at the Sun in Fleetstreet, over against St. Dunstans Church, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the
New Exchange. 1673.

TO THE READER.
MVst this then be suffered? A Gentleman for his divertisement writes a Book,
and this Book happens to be acceptable to the World, and sell; a Bookseller,
not interessed in the Copy, instantly employs some Mercenary to jumble up
another like Book out of this, with some Alterations and Additions, and give it
a new Title; and the first Author's outdone, and his Publisher half undone.

Thus it fared with my Glossographia, the fruit of above Twenty years spare
hours, first published in 1656. Twelve Months had not passed, but there
appeared in Print this New World of Words, or General English Dictionary,
extracted almost wholly out of mine, and taking in its first Edition even a
great part of my Preface; only some words were added and others altered, to
make it pass as the Authors legitimate offspring. In these Additions and
Alterations he not seldom erred, yet had not those Errors been continued, with
new supplies to a Second and third Impression, so little was I concerned at the
particular injury, that these Notes (in great part collected from his first
Edition) had never reproached his Theft to the World.

First therefore, this gallant Piece faces it with a pompous Frontispiece,
wherein are sculped our two famous Universities, the Pictures of Sir Francis
Bacon, Sir Henry Spelman, Mr. Seldom, Camden, and others of our most Learned
Men of the last Age, with a Scholar of each University in his Formalities. And
the Title Page affirms the work to be very necessary for strangers, as well as
our own Countrymen: As if our Author intended the World should believe his
Book to be the Fac totum of all Great Britains learning, and himself the Parent
of so immense a Production.

Soon after we find a Catalogue prefixed of the names of diverse Learned Persons
of this Age, Eminent in or contributary to any of those Arts, Sciences, or
faculties contained in the following Work. Whereby the Author would at least
obscurely insinuate, that those Learned Persons had contributed to or assisted
him in it, thereby to advance its reputation; but I believe nothing less,
having heard some of the chief of them utterly disown both the Author and his
Work.

Thus does the Book pride it self in vanity and outward form; but when you come
to the substance, you will find Dr. In his Etymologicon Linguae Angl.
Skinners Judgment, both of it and the Author most true. In one place he says
-- Et pro more Authoris exponitur absurdissime. In another -- Ridicule ut solet
omnia. In a third -- Ubi notare est miserimam Authoris ignorantiam, etc. What
then will Strangers think of it; what our own Countrymen? They will say, Canis
festinans caecos parit catulos: That such a Dictionary cannot be hudled up in
Eight or ten Months, nor without much industry and care, though the Author be
never so learned. For we read of an Italian Dictionary that was Forty years in
compiling by the joynt-labor of several Learned Men; and that Sir Francis
Bacon, after he had written his Instauratio Magna, did, year by year for Twelve
years, revise and alter it, before he would commit it to the Press.

All Writers may modestly claim the benefit of Humanum est Errare; but
certainly our Author has transgressed the bounds of that Indulgence. For, I did
not read half his Book to pick up these, with many more Exceptions. What then
would a more knowing Reader discover, that should seriously peruse the whole?
Miserimam Authoris ignorantiam.

But that which chiefly incited me to this publication, was in some measure to
redeem the Terms of the Common Law of the Land from the scandal of a most
Barbarous and Senceless Interpretation, which too too often occurs through his
Book; though all other subjects have not escaped too without their share in his
mistakes.

As first for Words of Ecclesiastical use, How grossly has he abused the two
common words, Candlemass and Ember-week? Are we not like to have an accurate
account of obsolete, difficult, or foreign words from him who stumbles so
miserably at plain Ember-week? There being a particular Devotion ordered for
those weeks in the Liturgy of the Church of England. But he still fancies
himself under a Commonwealth, and a Church without Bishops, as appears in
Sequestration, Down, Court of Peculiars -- Perhaps he has been more versed in
Military Affairs; alas no, his interpretation of Blunderbuss and Dag shows how
little he is to be trusted with Weapons. He has also given a fair specimen of
his skill in Sea-Terms by interpreting Balass and Jetson; nay, he has shown an
extraordinary endeavor and dexterity in mistaking, else he could never have
erred in those things that are common in all Trading and Commerce, as Gallon,
Pipe, Cloue, Weigh, etc.

But, to the Particulars in order as they lie.

A World of Errors DISCOVERED In the New World of WORDS, OR General English
DICTIONARY.
AMesse, A Priests Hood or Cap, which he wears in the Quire. Both the word
itself is mistaken, and the signification: The word is Amice (from amictus)
which is a Linen Cloth, with two long strings, which the Priest puts about his
Neck, and ties the strings about his middle. Amoctise, To kill. It has a more
usual and proper signification, viz. To grant Alien, or give Land in Mortmain.
Ancient Demeasn (a term in Common Law) signifying a public tribute by a
Tenure, whereby all Manners belonging to the Crown in the days of Edgar or
Saint Edward, did hold. There is nothing of a Public Tribute, nor of Edgar in
the Point. Ancient Demain is a Tenure, whereby all the Crown-Mannors in the
days of Edward the Confessor, or William the Conqueror were held: and the
number of them particularly appears in Domesday, under the title ^erra Regis.
Balasse, A Saxon word, signifying Gravel laid in the bottom of a Ship, to keep
it upright. He mistakes the word for Ballast, which is a Dutch word, nor does
it signify only Gravel, but any other ponderous substance. Balasse has a
different signification. Baronage, A Tax or Subsidy of Aid, to be levied for
the King out of the Precincts of Baronies. The word had never any such
signification till now. Rex and Baronagium suum is taken for the King, and all
His Subjects, or the whole Parliament representing them; according to Seldom in
his Titles of Honor. Bastard, Signifies, in the Common Law, one begotten out of
Wedlock -- One may be begotten out of Wedlock, yet be no Bastard, by our
Authors leave. Beacon and Beads, He derives from the Dutch, which are Saxon
words, as Dr. Skinner will inform him in his Etymologicon linguae Anglicanae.
Bigamy, The marriage of two Wives at the same time, which according to Common
Law hinders a man from taking holy orders. Here our Author speaks some truth,
at peradventure: For he that marries two Wives at the same time commits Felony,
and the punishment of Felony is Death; which (suppose it be by hanging) may
very well hinder him from taking holy Orders -- I find he does not understand
the word. Blunderbusse, A long Gun that will carry -- Here long stands for
short, by a new figure. Bordlanders, The Demeans that the Lords keep in their
hands for the maintenance of their Board or Table. He should have said
Bordlands; for Bordlanders are the Tenants that held such Lands, called in
Domesday Bordarii. Bowsing in Faulconry, is when, etc. This etc. is a new way
of explicating words. Brigandine (French) An ancient kind of Armor -- Also a
kind of Ship or Pinnace. This last is a Brigantine. Brudunsium, A Town in
Italy. Sure he aimed at Brundusium, a City of Calabria, by the Adriatic Sea.
Buckwheat, A Herb growing in Woods -- This is otherwise called French-Wheat,
and is a sort of Grain, much sown in Wales and some parts of England, and used
for feeding Swine and Poultry. Calcedon, A word used by Lapidaries, being a
certain Forbe-vein in a Ruby or Sapphire -- This was an Errata of the Printer in
the first Edition of Glossographia, whence our Author misunderstandingly
borrowed it; it should be Fowle-vein, for there is no such word as Forbe.
Camuledunum or Camoledunum, The chief Town of Essex in England, Vulgarly called
Colchester, or rather Maldon. This is most usually written Camalodunum, a name
never given to Colchester, but to Maldon, which is not the chief Town of Essex.
Candlemass, The second day of February, so called (as some think) because about
that time they left of burning Candles at Mass, which was between Four and five
of the Clock -- This is so ridiculously absurd, that ( as some think) none but
our Author ever Printed the like; if between Four and five of the Clock relate
to the morning (2 Febr.) then they must say Mass in the dark, if to the
afternoon, then it suits with Colonel Barksteads wisdom, who in the Rump time
committed a Papist for being at an Evening Mass (as he called it) at an
Ambassadors House in Longacre. Chase (French) A Warren -- He might as well have
said a Bull is an Ox; for Chase and Warren (so they are written) differ as
much. Cloue, A Law Term, the two and thirtieth part of a weight. Weight for
Weigh makes it unintelligible, yet so it has passed in all three Impressions of
his Book. Conventual Church, A Parish Church. It is no Parish Church; as most
men, exce^t our Author, know. A Cord of Wood, A parcel of Firewood, set out as
the Coal-fire, containing in measure -- How shall we understand this without an
Oedipus? Corporation (Lat*) In the Civil Law signifies a Body Politic, etc.
It is not a Civil-Law term: The Civilians call it Vniversitatem or Collegium.
Corsary (French) A Courrier. This comes from the Italian, Corsaro, and
signifies a Pirat or Pirats-ship; which the Author might have learnt from our
weekly Gazets. The Decimal Chain, A certain Mathematical Instrument for the
measuring of Land, which is to be divided into ten equal parts, each of which
contains about nineteen in length. Here we are put to a subaudi, or else it
is nonsense. Descalsas (Spanish) A sort of Friars in Spain that go barelegged.
Barefoot, he should have said, for so the word imports; and those Friars are
elsewhere, as well as in Spain. Dislodge, A term in hunting, applied to a Buck,
when you first raise him. I see our Author is no good Huntsman, for it is rowze
a Buck, and dislodge a Stag. Doublet, A precious Stone, consisting of two
pieces joined together. Nor good Lapidary; for a Doublet is no precious Stone,
but a counterfeit, consisting usually of two pieces of Glass artificially put
together, with a foyl in the midst, answerable in color to that Stone you
would have it resemble. But it is ordinary with him to take counterfeit for
right. Down, The name of a Town in Ireland, formerly a Bishops See. I doubt
our Author still fancies we are under a levelling Commonwealth; for Down is
now, as formerly, a Bishops See. Droit, Signifies in Common Law, a double
right, the right of possession, and the right of the Lord. Sometimes our
Author, when he borrows out of another Book, swallows an Erratum of the
Printer, and puts it down sense or not sense. Here he fancied an Erratum, when
there was none; for this word in our Law-Expositors is, Droit-droit or
Dreit-dreit, signifying a double right, that is, Jus possessionis and jus
dominii; which he thought to correct, by making a single Droit to signify a
double right; and by translating Jus Dominii, the right of the Lord. Ember
Week, In Latin, Cineralia, the week before Lent, wherein by the ancient
Institution of the Church, people were to fast, and the Bishop used to sprinkle
Ashes on their Heads, saying, Remember O Man, that thou art ashes, and to ashes
thou shall return: Imber signifying in the Saxon tongue Ashes, whence our word
Embers comes -- We will for once enumerate the Errors in the Exposition of
this one word. 1. He concludes there is but one Ember-week, of four well known.
2. Cineralia is Latin for Ash Wednesday. 3. The Ember-week he aimed at, is not
before Lent, but in the first whole week of Lent. 4. By no Institution, were
people to fast the week before Lent. 5. The Bishop did not sprinkle Ashes on
their Heads, but made a Cross on their Foreheads with Ashes -- 6. The words
were Memento homo, quia pulvis es -- Dust, not Ashes. 7. Imber in the Saxon
Tongue, does not signify Ashes, nor in truth is there any such word. And (8)
by consequence our word Embers cannot come from thence. Our Author ought to do
some penance to expiate these faults. Emergent, An Emergent occasion is taken
for a business of great consequence. Well guessed! An Emergent occasion, is
that which rises unexpectedly out of some other, and was not foreseen. Enquest
In Common Law, is the trial of causes both Civil and Criminal by the Jury. It
is not the trial it self, but that Inquisition which the Jury makes in all
Causes, Civil, or Criminal, touching the Matter in Fact, in order to their
Verdict and the Trial. Errant, A Justice which rides the Circuit, from the
Latin word Errare. This is an errant mistake; for it does not alone signify
such a Justice; the Latin in the Statute of Marlebridge is Justificiarii
Itinerantes, which Sir Edward Coke sometimes Englishes Justices in Eire,
sometimes Justices Itinerant; and the Mirror, cap. 6. says in French, Que sont
ore apels Justices Errants. If our Author had said, that Errant is sometimes
used for a Knight Errant, it had been more allowable. Exigent (Lat.) A Writ
that lies -- It is di^ected to the Sheriff to call five County days under pain
of Outlary. It should be to call the party five County days -- otherwise it is
nonsense. Ex part Latis, A Writ that lies -- This is an Errata in Cowels
Interpreter, whence our Author took it, right or wrong, it matters not: It
should be Ex part talis. Extrajudicial, That which is done out of Court. That
which is done in Court may be Extrajudicial. Faloque (French) A Boat or Barge,
by some called a Brigantine. Fa^oque is a little Boat with four Oars, and a
Brigantine (as our Author himself says elsewhere) is a small Ship or Pinnace.
Feversham, A flourishing Town in Kent -- Where King Steven founded an Abbey for
the Monks of Clugny, etc. This Towns name is Faversham, and the Abbey (however
at first intended) was stocked with the Monks of S. Bennets Order; as we read
in Monastichon Favershamiense, a late ingenuous Book. Franchise Royal, Is where
the King Grants to a person and his heirs to be quit, or the like. To be quit,
of, God knows what. Francis, A proper name of Man or Woman. Francis is the Man's
name, Frances the Woman's. Frank-chace, A liberty belonging to a Forester, by
which all men having Land within such a compass, are prohibited to cut down
Weeds without his view. Though we should allow Weeds for Wood, to be the
Printers fault; yet the rest is erroneous. Frithsoken, A surety or defense;
from the Saxon words Frid, i. e. Peace, and Socen, i. e. To seek. Neither is
the Explication true, nor the Derivation. The Saxon words are Frith, Peace; and
Soc, a Liberty or Power. So that Frithsocne signifies a Power or Jurisdiction
of keeping the Peace. Gainage, In Common Law, is Land held of the Baser kind of
Sokemen or Villains. Sufficiently mistaken. We never till now read of Land held
of Villains, who had no property but Ad voluntatem Domini. Gallon (Spanish) A
measure containing two quarts. Our Author had better omitted this word, since
every Alewife can contradict him. Garnishment (French) Signifies in Common
Law, the issuing forth a Writ of Scire facias against the Plaintiff, for an
Action of Detin^e of Charters brought against the Defendant. Perfect nonsense!
Garnishment, in Law, signifies a Warning: If you will know particularly how the
word is used, you had need find out a better Expositor, then our Author. Grand
Sergeanty, A certain kind of service, whereby the Lords of Scrivelby in
Cheshire held their Land, which was to come well armed, etc. If the Author had
well explicated the word, his mistaking Cheshire for Lincolnshire had been the
more pardonable. Goman (Saxon) A married man; and Gron, a Saxon word,
signifying a Fenny place. Neither of them (for ought I know) are at all of kin
to that Language. For thus the Learned Dr. Skinner on the word Goman, Author
(meaning ours) dicit esse vocem Angl. -- Sax. sed solens hallucinatur. To
Grown, The Foresters say, A Buck growneth. But what it means you must learn
elsewhere; for this is all he says of the word. Hankwit or Hangwit (Saxon) A
Theif escaped out of Custody. It is a Mulct or Fine, for hanging a Theif
unjustly. Hoc^tide, A certain Festival time, celebrated about Candlemass, for
the death of Hardiknute, the last King of the Danes; it is also called
Blazetide, in Latin Fugalia. Hocktide was celebrated the second week after
Easter, for expulsion of the Danes, after the death of Hardicanute. And Fugalia
signifies a Feast solemnised in remembrance of driving the Kings out of Rome.
Iansenism, The opinion of Cornelius Jansenus, Bishop of Tire -- For, Cornelius
Jansenius, Bishop of Ypre in Flanders -- Ichidian, A Motto or Devise,
heretofore belonging to the Arms of the Princes of Wales -- He might have
learned to have written this better from some Sign in London, viz. Ic-dien; the
old Saxon was Ic-pe^^, i. e. I serve. Ietson, The same as Flotson. They are no
more of kin, then the Land is to the Sea; for Ietson is that, which being cast
out of a Ship, in danger of Wreck, is found upon the shore; and the other is
that which is found floating upon the Sea* Innocents-day, 28 Dec. Wherein Mass
used to be said for the Souls of the Innocent Children slain by Herod.
Certainly Mass was never said for the Souls of Saints and Martyrs, who are in
glory. But in the Mass or Church* service of the day there is a particular
commemoration of those Martyred Children. Inquisition, -- The name of a Grand
Council, instituted by Ferdinand, the Catholic King of Spain -- And in the
word Dominicans, Saint Dominick is said to be the Author of this Inquisition --
So apt our Author is to forget himself, Frigida es. and nigra es, es, and non
es Chione. Ioynder, In Common Law is the coupling of two in a soite one against
another. We allow soite to be the Printers fault, yet the rest is nonsense. It
is the joining of two in a suit against a third person. Iopoena, For J^paean,
and Justices a Writ for Justicies -- Such we meet with almost in every Page.
Knight Baronet, Is a new distinct order erected by King James -- Whereas before
that time there were Baronets that were not Knights -- A Baronet (quatenus
such) being created by Letters Patent, is no Knight; nor was there ever any
Baronets before King James Institution of them. Howbeit anciently the word
Baronet was sometimes used for Baneret, and sometimes for Baro minor. Lease --
If it be in writing, it is called a Lease by Indenture, if by word of mouth, a
Lease Parcel. A Lease Parol, he should have said. Leet (Sax.) A Law-day, whence
Court Leet is a Court or Jurisdiction, containing the third part of a Shire,
and comprehending three or four Wapentakes or Hundreds -- This is an imperfect
fragment taken out of Cowels Interpreter, who says indeed, that Court Leets,
had anciently such large Jurisdictions, but have not so now. Lemstir, A Town of
Herefordshire -- Is now a days very famous for Wool, which is called
Lemster*Ore. A gross mistake, Lemster-Ore (from the Latin Ora) is a Territory
or Compass of Ground of about two miles round the Town, so called; and the Wool
had never any such denomination. Libertatibus allocandis, A Writ that lies for
a Citizen or Burgess of a City, who refusing or deferring to allow his
privilege, is impleaded before the Kings Justices. Capiat, qui capere potest;
Make sense of this that can. Lungis (French) A tall slim Man, that has no
length to his height. Quasi, A low gross Man that has no thickness to his
bulk. Lutheranism, The Doctrine of Martin Luther, who being first a Monk of the
Order of S. Augustine -- There were, nor are any Monks of S. Austins Order, but
Friars. Mac, An Irish word, signifying as much as Son in English, or Fitz in
Welsh. I see our Author is no Britain, nor Frenchman, else he would have
understood that Fitz is borrowed from the French, not Welsh. Mallevertes, The
name of an ancient Family in Yorkshire. Mistaken for Mallivery, according to
Camden. Missale (Lat.) A Breviary or Mass Book. This Error he borrowed out of
Cotgraves Dictionary. The Books are of very different kinds. Mission (Lat.) A
sending; it is also taken peculiarly, or if a power given by the Church of
Rome, to go -- Nonsense; if the Printer do not acquit him. Nativo habendo, A
Writ for the apprehending and restoring to his Lord his Villain, claimed as his
inheritance, who in Common Law is called Neif. However blundringly the words
are put together, the Author intends Neif shall relate to Villain, and Villain
to be a Man; but Neif is the Bondwoman or she Villain. Nonability (A Term in
Law) Being an exception taken against the Plaintiff or Defendant, why he cannot
commence any suit in Law. We must convert Defendant into Demandant, to make it
tolerable sense. None of a day, The third quarter of a day, from Noon till
Sunset. Where then shall we find the other three quarters? -- He should have
said from Noon till the Sun be halfway down. An Obit (Lat.) A Rental, an
Obsequy or Funeral. It signifies an Office or certain Prayers for the dead.
Oratorians, An Order of Friars, so called -- They are not Friars, but a kind of
Regular-Secular Priests. Ordeal, a Saxon word, Signifying Judgment, a kind of
purgation -- Of which there are several kinds, as Camp^ight, Free Ordeal, and
Water Ordeal. Camp^ight was none of the kinds of Ordaele, and Free Ordaele,
should be Fire Ordaele. For Ordalium suit judicium aquae, ignis, and ferri.
Ostiary, (Lat.) One that keeps the Hoasts in a Church: a Door Keeper, a Keeper.
If he had only said a Door Keeper, he had preserved the word from an erroneous
explication. For Ostiary has no relation to the keeping the Hoasts in a Church.
Pathopep (Greek) An expression of a Passion, in Rhetoric it is a figure by
which the mind. We are left to guess at the rest; for so he leaves it. And
Pathopep is an unknown word of his New World. The Court of Peculiars, A certain
Court in the Bishops time, which dealt in certain Parishes -- This is a certain
kind of Independent -- Commonwealth expression; insinuating a certain
Nonentity of Bishops at present. Peter Pence, A tribute given by Inas, King of
the West Saxons. -- It was also called the Sea of Rome. It was also called
Romefeoh and Romepenny, and was a Pension or an Alms given by King Inas, not a
Tribute. Pipe, A Measure of Wine or Oil, containing Twenty six Gallons, or half
a Tun. By this account, a Tun should be but Fifty two Gallons, which contains
Two hundred fifty two. The Prerogative Court, A certain Court belonging to the
Civil Law, in which the Commissary sits upon Inheritances, fallen either by the
intestate or by Will and Testament. This is an Ecclesiastical Court, wherein
all Testaments are proved and Administrations granted, where the party dying
within the Province of Canterbury has Bona notabilia in some other Diocese. V.
Cokes 4. Inst. fol. 335. Pownd, In Common Law, signify an Enclosure to keep
Beasts in, but more especially a place of strength, where Cattle distreined for
any trespass are put, until they be replevied or distreined. -- Where Cattle
distreined are put, till they be distreined; is suitable to the rest. Primier
Seisin, A word used in Common Law, a Branch of the Kings Prerogative, whereby
he has the first possession of all Lands and Tenements through the Realm. This
is sufficiently erroneous: The King (before the Statute of 12 Car. 2. ca. 24.)
had the Primier Seisin, or first possession only of all Lands and Tenements
holden of him in chief, whereof his Tenant died seized in Fee; which is taken
away by the said Statute. Quaver, A measure of time in Music, being the half
of a Crotchet, as a Crotchet the half of a Quaver, a Semiquaver, etc. What
fustian is here? Just so, two is the half of four, and four the half of two;
and Semiquaver is explicated by a dumb, etc. Reasonable Aid, In Common Law is a
duty, that the Lord of the Fee claims, holding by Knights Service or in
Soccage, to marry his Daughter, or make his son Knight. I doubt our Author
bears some malice to the Common Law; else he could not have maimed so many of
its Terms, which are in several Books expounded to his hand: It should be
(claims of his Tenants) to make it sense. Returns, Certain set times in each
of the four Terms -- Each Term consisting of 4, 5, or 8 Returns -- The longest
^erm has but ^ Returns, as every Almanac will show. Rosemary (Lat. Rosmarinus)
A well and most wholesome Plant -- He omits the singular use of it, in adorning
a piece of Roast Beef. Scapular (Lat.) Belonging to the Sholders; whence a
Scapulary, a Monks Hood or Cowl, reaching down to the Sholders. This Scapulary
is mis-interpreted, it being a narrow piece of Cloth or Stuff, worn by Monks
and Friars over the rest of their habit* and reaching from the Sholders to the
Ground; and is neither like a Hood nor Cowl. Sequestration (Lat.) A separating
a thing in controversy -- But it is now commonly taken for a seizing upon the
Rents of Delinquents Estates, for the use of the Commonwealth. Our Author
having Revised and Printed his Book (as appears by the Title Page) in the year
1671. is very bold, to call this Kingdom a Commonwealth; as he also does in the
word Coroner, where he speaks of the State, and Commonwealth of England.
Se^agesm Sunday, The Sunday before Shrove-Tuesday. Sexagesima Sunday, is the
Sunday sennight before Shrove-Tuesday. Sha^ment, A kind of measure containing
an hand breadth. It is from the top of the Thumb set upright to the utmost part
of the Palm, which is, by a tall man's hand, half a foot. Socinians, A certain
Sect that deny the Divinity of Christ, first spread by Faustus Socinianus of
Siena. It was first broached by Laelius Socinus, and advanced by Faustus
Socinus of Sienna. T^er^e (French) A certain liquid measure, containing the
third part of a Pipe, which is two Tuns. And before he said a Pipe is Twenty
six Gallons, or half a Tun. Strange contradictions and mistakes even in common
notions. Trestle, A Trevet or Stool with three Feet. Trevet is a Three-footed
i^strument of Iron, to set Cauldrons on -- Threstle, that of Wood, for other
uses. Tuilleries (French) So called because that Ti^les were made there. Tiles
and Titles are all one with our Author. Uerdera (Lat. Viridarius) A judicial
Officer of the Kings Forest -- This our Author will say was the Printers fault,
for Verderer. And Uncore purist (French) -- For Uncore prist. Warrant or
Warranty, In Common Law, is a Covenant made in a Deed by one man to another, to
warrant and secure himself and his heirs, against all men whatsoever, for the
injoyning of any thing agreed on between them. Surely, no man will buy any Land
of this Author, if his Warranty or Covenant shall only extend to secure
himself and his heirs. Warren (Lat. Varrenna or Vivarium) A Prescription or
Grant to a Man from the King, of having Phesants, Patridges, Conies, and Hares,
within certain of his Lands. Nor does this mend the matter; for though a man
may have a Warren by Prescription, yet Warren does not signify a Prescription
or Grant. Wolfetchsod (Sax.) The condition of an Vtlary. The Saxon word is
Wulvesheved or Wulfesheofod, Anglice Wolfeshead, and Vtlary for Vtlaw. Saint
Wilfrids Needle, A certain narrow hole in the Church of Wakeman in Yorkshire,
wherein women's honesties were in times past tried. There is no such Church as
Wakeman in Yorkshire: But Camden in his Britannia relates the same story of
Rippon Church; and the Chief Magistrate of that Town being called the Wakeman,
our Author by a new Trope, converts the Magistrates name into a Church. Xerxes,
A King of Persia -- Who with an Army of Seventeen hundred thousand Men -- Thou
Boy! I never read his Army consisted of above Ten hundred thousand, and so
Thomasius and Goldman deliver it. Other Authors say, even there is a ^ipher too
much, and that his Army was made up of only One hundred thousand men.
IN perusing this Dictionary, you may find some words twice explicated, and
those too, with different Interpretations, where one must necessarily be false.
Such are Dancet and Dansette; Dodkin and Dotkin; Jotacism and Herbert twice;
Ockham and Okum; Rere-County and Rier-County; Varry and Verrey, with diverse
others. It seems our Authors memory also failed him, or he did not understand
them to be the same.

He calls his Book The New World of Words, and in his Title Page tells us it
contains the proper significations and Etymologies of all words derived from
the Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack -- enumerating in all Eleven Languages; yet
descends to the needless Explication of many trivial words of the Old World, as
Beesom, Barm, Parsley, Rosemary, Bulhead, Buzzard, Capable, Gloomy,
Indifference, Industry, Inferior, Satisfaction, Discern, Expense, Ruinous, etc.
For example.

BEesom, A thing to sweep with, made sometimes of Broom, and ordinari^y so
cal^ed, though made of Birch, Heath, etc. We are obliged to him for this
Learned Exposition; though he does not tell us, whether it be derived from the
Hebrew, Arabic, or Syriack, etc. To have made it at all fit to take up a room
in his Book, he might have said the Saxons cal^ed it a Besm, and that in some
parts of England it is otherwise called a Broom. Barm, Yest, the flowing or
overdecking of Beer. If he had told us, that this in the North of England is
called Godsgood, he had said something.
We will observe lastly, what the Learned Dr. Skinner in his Etymologicon
Linguae Anglicanae, says of this Authors English Dictionary, which he often
cites and seldom without reproof.

COllock, An old Saxon word, signifying a Pail without a handle Engl. Dict.
Collock, Authori Dict. Angl. apud quem solum occurrit, exp. qui antiquam Angl.
Sax. vocem esse dicit, sed apud Somnerum non occurrit. Credo igitur Authorem
hic, ut fere semper, somniasse. Dr. Skinner. Calsounds, A kind of Linen
Drawers usually worn among the Turks. Engl. Dict. Colsounds, vox quae mihi in
solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, and, pro more Authoris, exponitur absurdissime, ut
ipsius verbis utar, A kind of Linen Drawers usually worn among the Turks,
revera a Fran. Gal. Calcons, Subligaculum, Femoralia interiora. Dr. Skinner.
Chestoul, Poppy. Engl. Dict. Chestoul, in Dict. Angl. mendose pro Chesbowles
vel Cheesebowles. Dr. Skinner. Corsary (French) A Courrier. Engl. Dict. --
Credo autem, si Author hanc vocem unquam legit* vel fando audivit, quod valde
dubito, ipsum in ejus expositione errare. Dr. Skinner. Cosh or Cotterel (old
word) A Cottage. Engl. Dict. Cosh, Authori Dict. Angl. apud quem solum vox
occurrit, dicit esse idem cum Cotterel, ridicule ut solet omnia. Dr. Skinner. A
Dag, A Pistol, so called from the Dacians, who first used them. Engl. Dict.
Dag, Vox quae hoc sensu in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, ubi notare est miserrimam
Authoris ignorantiam, qui tormentum bellicum manuarium minus, a Pistol exponit,
and dictum putat A Dacis, qui primi hoc armorum genere usi sunt; imo ultimi
omnium Europae populorum, Dr. Skinner. Fosset, A little long Coffer or Chest;
from the Latin word Fossa a Ditch. Engl. Dict. Fosset, Vox quae mihi in solo
Dict. Angl. occurrit. Exponitur autem Cista, Capsa: Author deducit a Lat.
Fossa, imperite ut solet omnia; Credo potius ortum ab Ital. Forciere, idem
signante. Higginio autem Adr Junii interpreti, Cista dicitur Forset, a quo
proculdubio haec vox orta est. Dr. Skinner. Goule (Old Word) Usury; from the
Latin word Gula, i. e. The Throat. Engl. Dict. Goule, Vox quae mihi in solo
Dict. Angl. occurrit. Author exponit usuram, and deflectit a Lat. Gula -- Ego
nihil nec de voce ipsa, quod unquam revera extiterit, nec de Etymo credo. Dr.
Skinner. A Marrow (French) A Companion or Fellow; also a Beggarly Rascal. Engl.
Dict. Author male, u^ solet omnia, exponit Socium, item mendic^^^ vilem, A
Beggarly Rascal. Priori enim sensu nusquam gentium occurrit, etc. Dr. Skinner.
Rigols, A certain Musical Instrument, called a Clericord* comes from the French
Regalliadir, i. e. to rejoice (for Regaillardir*) Engl. Dict. Rigols, Vox quae
mihi in solo Dict. Angl. occurrit, exponitur instrumentum music^m, quod alio
nomine Clavichordium, A Clavicord dicitur. Author somniando, ut solet, suaviter
deducit a Fr. Gal. Regalliadir, exhilarari. Sane si talis vox sit, quod nullus
credo, mallem deducere a Fr. Gal. Se Rigoler, deridere, lascivire -- Vel, quod
magis placet, a Lat. Lyricola. Dr. Skinner.
Once more to the READER.
I Had no sooner traveled over the New World of Words, but I stumbled upon a
late Book, entitled Nomothetes, or an Interpreter of obscure Law Words and
Terms, which obliged me to the trouble of another perambulation.

My Nomolexicon or Law Dictionary (being the product of many years pains) was
published in Trinity Term 1670. and within the space of Five Terms after, this
Interpreter was wholly both Written and Printed.

This Author it seems made choice of the Title Nomothetes, that it might gingle
with Nom^lexicon; but the more Learned in the Greek Tongue than my self, affirm
the word improper for an Interpreter, and to signify only a Legislator or
Lawgiver; and how fit he is to assume that title, will soon appear.

He dedicates his Book with much confidence, to a learned and very honorable
Person, to whom certainly he ought to have written at least in true Grammar.

In his Preface he says, -- I have also gleaned after the Book, entitled, The
Law Dictionary, wherein are many good things, which I have hinted, as every
ingenious Reader will discern, but withal have added some Centuries of Words,
therein totally omitted.

Though I did not expect or desire any commendations from this Gentleman, yet
he was in some sort obliged to it, for the credit of his own Work; since it is
obvious to every common Reader that he has hinted, that is, in the softest
phrase, borrowed almost every Stone from the Law Dictionary to build up his
Interpreter; yet with very disingenuous arts and subtle disguises.

His Additional Centuries of words he might, without so much as ever scratching
his head, have multiplied into Millenaries; since he has (by virtue of his
Nomothetical power) adopted many into the family of Law words, which are
absolute strangers to it. As House, Moer, Palmer, Paragraph, Paranimph,
Parathalassia, Patriarch, Tillage, Wife, Zenodochium, Zealot -- and such like.

But, it may be objected, The Law Dictionary too has diverse words that are not
precisely Terms of the Law. I grant it, but say, they are some way or other
allied to the Law, and not to be found in our common Dictionaries, and whereto
I add the Statute, Record, or Charter, wherein I found them, as my Warrant for
their insertion; one principal part of my design having been, from the ruins
of antiquity, to retrieve, as far as I was able, ancient Law-Latine, Saxon, and
Record-words, almost utterly lost, as Bescata, Juncaria, Tassum, Putura,
Rasarium, Sichetum, -- a work of labor, and may be of use; but our Author found
an easier way to the Wood.

It is enacted in the Fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, That no person
shall Print any Book or Copy, or part of any, which another, by due entry of it
in the Stationers Hall, or otherwise, has the right or privilege solely to
Print, without the consent of the owner of such Book or Copy, upon a Penalty
therein mentioned; however this evasion has been industriously found out,
That, if some little alteration be made in every Page, be it but addition or
substraction, or the misusing or change of some words, it will pass with a non
obstante; though such as practice it, are dignified with the name of
Land-Pirates: To which title our Author has undoubted right, not for this Work
only, but for other of like nature. Thus then he shows his skill.

Where I put the Citation before the Exposition, he puts it after, Et e contra,
as in Scavage, Waxshot -- Where I say, As in the Case of the Burgesses of Derby
-- He -- As in the matter concerning the Burgesses of Derby. See Thrave of
Corn. Where I say small, he says little, as in Grills; and where I say called,
he writes nominated, as in Candlemass. Where I (having cited an old Deed or
Charter) say at last Penes such a one, he says in the custody of -- As in
Assart. Where I say, The word is mentioned in such a Statute, he says spoken of
-- As in Pyker. Where I say -- Most notoriously, he more notedly. Vide Term.
Then for variety, he sometimes puts my Citation into English; and it is odds he
makes nonsense of it, by so doing, as in Pax Ecclesiae, Seneucia -- Again, he
sometimes abridges, as in Eskippeson; and sometimes wholly omits the Citation,
as in Leccator, Orgallous -- Not reflecting that I had not at all inserted
those words, but for the authority of the Citations. To some Words he adds,
others he alters -- As where I say, Balenger seems to have been a kind of Barge
or Water-Vessel; he alters it thus subtilely, A Boat or Barge to sail on the
Water. So in Blomary, I only cite the Statute of 27 Eliz. 19. He, of this you
may read at large, 27 Eliz. 19. In which Statute the word is barely mentioned,
without any thing of it at large.

Lastly, He has an excellent way of mustering words up to a Century, and
filling up Paper, by dividing one word into two, as in Couratier, and repeating
the Exposition of Synonima's, as Annats, First Fruits, and Primitiae; Romefeoh,
Romepenny, and Romescot; Heinfare, Henfare, and Hinefare.

His principal Additions are certain Saxon words in Domesday Book, said to be
expounded by Mr. Agar, and Printed in a Book ealled The Law of Conveyances: The
most part of which I rejected, as full of Errors, some of the Words being
mistaken, and more of the Expositions. So that I concluded, it either was not
really Mr. Agars, or else much abused by the ignorance of the Transcriber or
Printer, however our Author kindly entertained them, to pass muster.

I was not willing to trouble my self or the Reader, with any more of these
absurdities, though I can produce at least Two hundred, besides misalphabets
and false English in great abundance, and none of them excused by any Errata.

I have only to add, That, besides his own mistakes, he brings most of the
Authors he deals with, even the Sages of the Law, as Bracton, Dyer, Coke, etc.
to be accessory to his Errors, by quoting them falsely: But I am willing to say
somewhat in his excuse, he was set on work by some Booksellers, and enjoined to
make great expedition, some of his hasty work, having been Printed before the
rest was written, and much written before half digested: If they had allowed
their Compiler more time, perhaps he could have done better.

ERRORS Discovered in the miscalled NOMOTHETES OR THE INTERPRETER OF OBSCURE
LAW-WORDS and TERMS.
ACcessory -- Because Manslaughter is sudden and not presented. Coke, lib. 4.
fol. 44. And, under the same Title-word, he says, If a Man counsel a Woman to
murder the child in her Womb, and afterward the child is born, and there
murdered by the Woman, in the absence of him that so gave the counsel; yet he
is accessory by his counselling before the Birth of the Infant, and
countermanding it. Dyer, fol. 186. pl. 2. Here are no less than three gross
mistakes in these few lines, and Dyer vouched for Warranty. Acre -- He
concludes this word thus, -- As was adjudged in the Exchequer, in the Case
between Sir Edw. Aston and Sir Jo. B. in the Statute made concerning sowing
Flax. Wondering how this Statute came to be hauld in without any Coherence, I
found at last, our Author (who was in have) has omitted two or three lines of
the subsequent matter, which should make it sense. Aid -- In the close of this
word, the Author has this piece of nonsense. The Civil in Suits between two,
allow a third to come in pro interesse -- Allay -- The reason of which Allay is
with a better metal, to augment the weight of the Silver or Gold. I never heard
of a better metal, than Gold; but hope he intended to have said baser.
Aneestor, Antecessor. The signification is well known, but we make this
difference; that Ancestor is applied to a natural person, as J. S. and his
Ancestors; the other to a Body Politic or Corporate, as a Bishop and his
Predecessors. Coke on Littl. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 103. To what ( the other)
relates, does not appear, however my Lord Coke is injuriously represented, as
the Author of this blundering, ^ame expression. Arabant, Are they that held by
tenure of Ploughing or Tilling Ground. These Arabants were certainly a sort of
excellent Plough-men Sic vos, non vobis, fertis aratra Boves. Arsura, Things
relating to Coynage. Arsura is the singular number, and is often found in
Domesday, where (as a Learned Expositor says) Videtur esse examinatio per
ignem. The trial of money after it was coined. Assault -- Assultus est in
personam aut locum -- Vel equo aut manchinis aut quacunque alia re -- Our
Author had done well to have interpreted this uncouth word manchinis. Assise of
Mortdancestor -- This the Civilians call Judicium Possessiorum adipiscendi. The
Civilians disclaim the word Possessiorum, and so does Priscian too. Attainted
-- One Attaint, was, in former times upon his confession, constrained to abjure
the Realm, and therefore was sometimes called Abjuration. And for this is
cited, Stam. Pl. Cor. fol. 182. but abusively. Aurum Reginae, The Queens
Silver. Then let Argentum Reginae be the Queens Gold. -- But it is a good
stumble that never Horses. Bachelor -- Baccalaurei a bacillo nominati sunt,
quia primi studit authoritatem, quae per exhibitionem baculi concedebatur, jam
consecuti fuissent, etc. This studit is a quarrelsome word, and will certainly
break Priscians Head. Balenger -- Seems to be a kind of Barge or Boat to sail
upon the Water. This may very well be true; for I never heard of any such to
sail upon the Land. And note, those words ( to sail upon the Water) are added
to what the Law Dictionary says. Bane -- He which is the cause of another man's,
is said then to be Labane, a Malefactor. If our Author write no better sense;
it will be the Bane of his Interpreter; and I think the Banes may very lawfully
be forbidden. Baron -- Barons by Letters Patent or Creation (say our
Antiquaries) were first about the time of Henry the Sixth. It may well be
suspected our Author consulted none of our Antiquaries herein; for the first
Baron by Creation was in the second of Richard the Second. Berwick -- Spelman
thinks it may be Manerium majus ad minus pertinens. This is a great injury to
that learned Author, who says the direct contrary, as you may read in his
Glossarium, verbo, Berenuica. Besca -- Hence perhaps Vna bescata fodient terrae
inclusa. Mon. Angl. page 2. fol. 642. Here is a like false citation imposed upon
another worthy Author; though the words lay fair in the Law Dictionary.
Botting, Is a term of art used in Greys Inn, whereby they intend private
arguing of Cases. I have heard of Botting of Barley in the Country -- But what
our Author aimed at, is Bolting, and some Bolts are soon shot. Breve -- Quia
breviter and paucis verbis intentionem proferens exponit. Bracton, lib. 5. Nor
must learned Bracton escape, without having false Latin imposed upon him.
Bullenger, The common Petition, that some Commissioners issued to Cities, for
the preparing Boats and Bullengers, may be repealed. Our Author had a fair
Copy, from whence he transcribed this. viz. The Law D^ctionary, but his have
has shuffled it into nonsense. Burse or Colibti, A word used in Domesday --
Colibti is not to be found there, unless with a dash on the b for Coliberti;
and how Burse and Colibti come to be Synonima, is beyond a common skill to
imagine. Buzecatle, Bursecaples, or Botlecals, the same with Boatswain or
Mariner. It is much, our Author should not write one of these three words true;
but coin such as were never before heard of: Buzzard had been a more allowable
mistake. The true word is Buscarl or Buzecarl. Carucata, A Plough Land --
Skene, de verbo signif. deriveth it from the French Charon, a Plough -- There
is no such French word as Charon, nor is it so in Skene, de verborum signif.
but charrow, which is nearer the true French word charrue, a Plough, then
Charon. Cepi corpus, Is a Return made by the Sheriff, that upon a Capias,
Exigend or other Process, when he has taken the body of the party. F. N. B.
fol. 26. Here the redundant word ( when) does much perplex the sense, and make
it unintelligible. Clerk -- Subdiaconi, Cantoni, Acolythi -- This Cantoni is a
pretty word, and deserves a particular interpretation. Clerk of the Ax -- This
word, and the explication our Author took in have out of the Law Dictionary,
never looking upon the Errata of that Book, where he might have found it an
acknowledged mistake for Clerk of the Acts, and explicated accordingly. Clerk
of the Pleas -- Is an Officer in the Exchequer, in whose Official, the Officers
of the Court ought to sue -- If any Action did lie for writing nonsense; our
Author would find no Plea for himself. Collation of a Benefice -- Toward the
later end of this Interpretation, you shall find as little sense, as in the
former. Commendam -- When a Parson is made a Bishop, there is a Cession of his
Benefice by the Commotion. Our Author is very unhappy in his variations; for
Commotion marrs the matter. Common Fine -- And for this Common Fine the Lord
must prescribe, and cannot prescribe for it without prescription, as appears in
Godfreys Case, in 11 Rep. Thus my Lord Coke is again brought in to patronize
nonsense. Commotes, Signifies in Wales a part of a shire, as a Cantred or
Hundred, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 3. It is written Commoiths 4 Hen. 4. cap. 17. And is
used for a gathering made upon the people. This last is Comorth, a word of
different signification from Commote, and ought not to be confounded with it.
Count -- But Countors, by Hoens Mirror of Just. lib. 2. cap. des Loyers, (...)
such Sergeants, skilful in the Law, which serve the common people to defend
their Actions in Judicature, for their F^e; whose duty, if it be, as is there
described, and were observed, Men might have much more comfort of the Law, than
they have. This our Author transcribed from Cow^ls Interpreter; and is one of
those irreverent reflections upon the Common Law and Lawyers of this Land,
which (among other mistakes, in points derogatory to the supreme Power of the
Crown of England, and Fundamental Constitutions of Parliaments) caused that
Book to be prohibited by the Kings Proclamation bearing date the 25th day of
March, 8 Jac. Anno 1610. Yet our Author in his Preface, takes the boldness to
say, That the Groundwork, upon which he builds, is Cowels Interpreter, an
excellent Book, b^^h as to its matter and composure, and did not deserve that
severe arraignment that is has of late suffered. Courratier, A French word,
signifying a Horse. Courser, ^ Inst. fol. 719. Cou^ratier, Is a Hors-courser;
but our Author has found a new way of dividing one word into two, to make up
his Centuries. Cuth, otherwise Uncuth, Privatus vel extraneus -- Cuth signifies
known, and Uncuth unknown, yet here they are both coupled in one yoke, as
Synonima. Custos Brevium -- There is also a Custos Brevium and retulorum in the
Kings Bench, who Fileth there, and Warrants of Attorney -- This is of the same
complexion with the rest. Demurrer -- West calls that likewise a Demurrer in
Chancery, when there is question made* Whether a Parties Answ^r to a Bill of
Complaint, etc. be defective or not, and thereof Reference made to any of the
Bench, for the examination thereof, and report to be made to the Court. West
Symbol. part. 2. tit. Chancery, sect. 29. There is no such words to be found in
the Author, and place cited; nor is it probable ^o learned a Writer, as West,
could be guilty of so erroneous an Interpretation of this common word, Demurrer
in Chancery. Donative, Is a business merely given and collated by the Patron,
to a Man -- So, if it be given to a Man to be a Plagiary, that is a Donative
from his Ingenuity. Dum non fuit compos mentis, Is a Writ that lies for him,
that not being of ^ound memory, did Alien any Lands or Tenements in Fee-simple,
Fee tail, for term of life, or for years, against the Aliens. F. N. B. fol.
202. Can it be imagined, that the learned Fitz-Herbert would be guilty of such
an absurd Explication? Enquest -- The Jury finds the fact thus, then is the
Law thus; and so we judge for the Enquest in Criminal Causes. See Jury -- The
learned will see he writes thus, then is the Law thus, That they will judge him
a blind Interpreter. Farding or Farthing of Gold, Seems to be a Coin used in
ancient times, containing in value the fourth part of a Noble, viz. Twenty
pence in Silver, and in weight the sixth part of an ounce of Gold, that is, of
Five shillings in Silver, which is Three pence and somewhat more. -- Our Author
is very unfortunate in his Additionals, for these contradictory words ( which
is Three pence and somewhat more) are superadded to what the Law Dictionary
says. Ferrure, The Shooing of Horses. See Bouch of Court. In Bouche of Court
there is nothing at all of Ferrure; for our Author curtailed my Citation, not
regarding this Reference. Filicetum, A bracky ground, Ubi salices crescunt. See
Domesday. Filicetum or Filictum, Is a Ferny ground, so says my Lord Coke, 1
Inst. fol. 4. b. I suspect it not to be found in Domesday. Foreigne,
Forinsecus, may be derived of the French word Exterus, and in Law is used --
The French word ( Forain) may as well be a Latin word, as Exterus French.
Fortlet, Comes near the French Fortlet -- Yes, as near as Four pence to a
Groat; but the French word is Fortelet. Frank-pledge, Franciplegium, Is a
Compound irregular of two Languages -- It is irregularly said; for the words
are both French. Frustrum Terrae -- Domesday, tit. Haritisc. Rex Abedestone --
I dare affirm there is no such title, as Haritisc. In Domesday. Gaynage -- In
the Explication of this word, He tells us of Spokeman and Spokemen; for it
seems he did not like the word Sokeman. Gardeine del Esglish, In English
Churchwardens, and they may have an Action for the Goods of the Grounds; and
diverse other things they may do -- I would have our Author do any thing
hereafter, rather then interpret hard words. Gleabland -- The quhilke should be
free fra payment of any Feinds. Skene. This should be Teinds, a Scottish word
signifying Taxes. Instead of which, our Author brings in Feinds (God bless us)
or Evil Spirits. Hankwite -- Of the Saxon words Haginan, Pendere, and Wite,
mulcta -- By some it has been interpreted Mulcta pro homine injusti suspenso
-- There is no such Saxon word as Haginan, nor true Latin in the rest. Haratium
-- As in the Law Dictionary. If our Author had been a Master in this kind of
Learning, he might in this word have showed his skill, and my mistake. For
Haratium (from the French Haras) signifies a race or breed of Horses, which is
the only material error (besides those of the Printer) which I have hitherto
discovered in my Book. Heres^ita -- From the Saxon here, Exercitus and sliten,
to depart -- Though this be taken by our Author out of my Lord Cokes 4 Inst.
yet it is certainly a mistake, happily of the Printer, there being no such Saxon
word as sliten, to depart, but slitan, dissolvere^ Herpsac. See Frodmortel.
Where there is not a word of Herpsac, for he omitted my citation there, and so
Herpsac stands as an insignificant nullo, without interpretation. Hinefare --
Si quis occidit hominem and Reges and facit heinfaram, dat Regi xx? Domesday.
The Law Dictionary has it plainly and truly thus, Si quis occidit hominem
Regis and facit Heinfaram dat Regi xxs. Hominatio, It may be called Dominatio.
Domesday. He may as well call it Somniatio; for the word in Domesday signifies
a mustering of men, what then has Dominatio to do with it? Hondpeny, Sint
quieti de Chevagio, Hond-peny, etc. But there is a Declaration made, what is
intended by it, Ideo quaere. Here he was in the humor of adding somewhat to the
word, more then he found in the Law Dictionary; But still with ill success. He
omitted the Author of the Latin, and added the nonsensical English. Hue and
Cry -- In this word he has many errors, the French Huier, for Huer --
Flagiture for Flagitare -- Oyer for Oyes -- Men slain secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni, is a pretty position. Ignoramus -- It has a resemblance
of that ancient Roman, where the Judges, where they absolved a person accused,
did write A. i. e. Absolvimus. Supine negligence! Not to have the care or
patience to transcribe truly what lay fair in Print before him viz. It has a
resemblance of that ancient custom of the Romans, where the Judges, when they
absolved a person accused, did write A -- Justices in Air -- Were sent bu^
every seven years -- But there is a Book entitled Orig. Juridiciales, but of
what authority I know not, which says they went oftener -- Sure our Author did
not consult his own Duty and Reason, when he took the boldness thus to question
the Authority of that excellent Book, how a second time Printed; did he not see
in its Front those awful names, Orlando Bridgeman and Matthew Hale subscribed
to an Imprimatur? Names of greatest authority in this kind. Has he not heard
that Mr. Dugdales Works are of such account, That they have often been allowed
by the Judges, as good evidence in cases of great moment? Karle, A Saxon word
properly denoting a man, but with any addition, a servant or clown. Hence they
are called a Seaman, a Buscarle. Here again our Author thought himself obliged
to alter my words, though with the loss of Sense and Syntax. Knights of the
Shire -- But now Custom allows Esquires to be chosen to this Office, 27 Hen.
6.6. So that they be resident in the County for the choice of these Knights.
The first part is true, the later nonsencical. Kylyw -- Perhaps it might
signify any liquid thing, as Scoteale, and such like -- Scotale is not a
liquid thing, but a meeting at an Alehouse, where every man paid his Scot, for
the Ale he drank. He might have said Ale is a liquid thing. Legacy -- See a
Bequest, we call it a Devise. And there is no Bequest to be seen. Lenna, Lenga,
Lennides -- Domesday. For Leuva, Leuga, and Leunides. Lupulicetum, A place
where Hops grow, mentioned in Domesday. It is not mentioned there; for we had
no Hops in England of some Hundreds of years after Domesday Book was made. Viz.
till 15 Hen. 8. according to our Chronicles. But the word is mentioned in 1
Inst. fol. 5. b. Maihim or Mayhem -- But the cutting off an Ear or Nose, or
such like is no Mayhem -- This is otherwise since the Statute of 22 and 23*
Car. 2. which was in Print before ou^ Authors Book, though since the Law
Dictionary was published. Maiden Rents, Is a Noble paid by every Tenant in the
Manor of Builth in Radnorshire, at the marriage of a Daughter, and was
anciently given to them, for his quitting the Custom of Marcheta. If any one
would pretend to make sense of this; to whom shall them and his relate? Our
Author is very unhappy in his alterations. Marle, Marla is a kind of Earth or
Mineral, like Chalk, which men cast on their Land -- These two words ( like
Chalk) he adds to my Interpretation; when as Marle is as like Chalk, as Chalk
is like Cheese. Marlerium, A Marlepit* Mr. Dugdale has an old Deed by him,
wherein is mentioned this word -- This is a pretty kind of impudence, to make
the World believe he is intimately acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, and knows what
old Deeds and Charters he has by him; when as Mr. Dugdale lately told me
(discoursing of our Author) that he knew him not, nor ever heard of him till
then. And in the word Sacrafield Rents he pretends the like familiar
acquaintance with a person of quality, utterly unknown to him. Mediterranean,
Is any that passes through the midst of the Earth. Whether he means any thing*
as Bull, Bear or Horse, I know not. Mile, Miliare, is a quantity of a thousand
Acres -- This I confess is a Mile of a large size; perhaps according to the
measure in the Isle of Pines. Minstrel, Minstrellus, from the French Menstrel
-- There is no such French word; it is Menestrier. In Misfeasans and Mistrial,
Cokes Reports are cited for Crokes. Multa or Multura Episcopi, is derived from
the Latin word mulcta, for that it was a Fine given to the Kings, that they
might have power to make their last Wills and Testaments -- 2 Inst. fol. 491.
Our Author by miswriting my words, has made nonsense; yet boldly cites Cokes
Institutes. Nihil or Nichil, Is a word which the Sheriff answers, that is
apposed concerning Debts illeviable, and that are nothing worth, by reason of
the parties from whom due. See the Law Dictionary on this word, if our Author
have not, by his blundering alteration, made it less intelligible at least.
Occasiones, Are Assarts, whereof Manhood speaks at large. See Spel. Glossary
verbo Essartum. That learned Glossary says the word is in some Authors false
written, for Occationes* from Occo, to harrow or break Clods; but our Author
had not time to read him out. Open Law -- Imperfection for Imputation. Such
smalnesses are frequent with him. Oyer and Terminer -- A Commission of Oyer and
Terminer is the first and largest. Thus it ends abruptly, leaving out two or
three lines, which should make it sense. viz. Of the Five Commissions, by which
our Judges of Assise do sit in their several Circuits. Pais, A Country or
Region, which Spelman in his Glossary says, Non intelligendum est de quovis
populo. Here the Learned Spelman is false quoted, for he speaks not these words
of Pais, but of Trial per Pais, which our Author omitted, as being obliged to
make alterations. Pannage or Pawnage -- Is most properly taken for the Woods
within the Forest -- Which ought to be, For the Mast of the Woods -- Pax
Ecclesiae, Is said, when all the Privileges and Immunities of the Church, her
Servants and Ministers. Vide Leg. Edw. Co^f. cap. 8. Here he pretends to
translate my Citation, being the very words of King Edwards Law, and makes this
nonsense of it. In Pedage and Peers, he cites Baldus in veribus Feudorum, and
Bartilayus de regno. There is no such Book as the first, nor any such Author as
the last. Pervise non ad tyrocini^ juris, quas motas volant, exercenda, says
Spelman. Another false quotation, for vocant. Poleine, was a sort of shoe --
not utterly laid aside till the Reign of Hen. 8. in which time they were
increased to that excessive length, that in Rich. 2. time, they were tied up to
the knees with Gold or Silver Chains. And forbidden by Edw. 4. under great
penalty. Does our Author think, Rich. 2. succeeded Hen. 8. which his words seem
clearly to intimate. Possession -- If the Lord purchase the tenancy held by
Heriot-service, then the Heriot is extinct by verity of possession. -- We Will
suppose he intended to say unity. Proporcitas, Skene de verbo signif. Latins
it Propertio Assisae. -- Skene calls it Proportatio Assisa -- in his de
verborum significatione, not verbo signif. as our Author often mistakes it.
Pudhepec, -- But the Learned Spelman thinks it is miswritten, for the Sax.
pu^hepec, i. e. wudhepec. This Saxon is Rudhewec, as here written, Spelman
writes it better, I Will secure you; but our Author has very ill luck in
transcribing, even from fair printed Books; and it seems understands not the
Saxon Characters. The Law Dictionary begins the Letter Q. with Quadragesima
Sunday; but our Author was not willing to begin so, lest it should look too
much like alter-idem, Therefore prepones Quadrans and Quadranta terrae; and so
poor Quadragesima has lost his due place in the Alphabet; but (Quack had he
thought on it) would have done his work better, and been as able a Law-word as
Quadrans. Quietantia Assisarum super Assisam -- Quod non ponantur in Assisis,
jurat nec magis Assisis -- For Juratis nec magnis Assisis. Realty, -- Sometimes
it is taken for Royalty. Never* for they are two different words. Recordare
facias -- It seems to be called a* Recordare, because the form that it commands
the Sheriff to whom it is directed to make a Record -- Of our Authors mistakes.
Renegeld -- infra hundred de Maulestria. There is not such a Hundred in all
England. Rescyte -- As if Tenant for years brings, he in Reversion comes in and
prays to be received -- The Tenant it seems may bring what he will. Rogus --
Constabulario Castri de Divis and Custodi Forestae de Cippeham -- I see our
Author, by his writing it, does not understand this Divis which should be
Divisis or Divis. with a Period* for the Divizes in Wiltshire. Scandalum
magnatum, -- And has given name, to wit, granted to recover damage thereupon.
Then it seems to give name is to grant. Scyre-gemot -- In this word Seldens
Titles of Honor is misquoted. -- Sea-rover, See Privateer. Anno 16. Car. 2.
cap* 6. Quere if not the same with Pyrate. You must know all this, except the
Learned Quaere, is in the Law Dict. where Privateer was misprinted for pirate;
but our Author neither makes Errata's to his own Works, nor reads others.
Selda, -- In the conclusion he adds to what the Law-Dict. says, thus -- Selda
also in Doomsday signifies a Wood of Sallows, Willows, and Withyes. Which
addition had been better omitted, the word being no where used in Domesday for
a wood of any kind, as I confidently believe, and our Author cites no place.
Serjeanty, Serjeantia, signifies in Law a Service that cannot be due from any
Lord to his Tenant, but to the King only. This is a new Service due from a Lord
to his Tenant. Severance, Is the singling or serving of two or more that are
joined in one Writ -- here Severance is Permittance. Nor is this any better
sense. Soke, -- Clamat cognitionem Placitorum -- infra suum 40 s. -- Suum for
Summam. Solidata terre, -- Breve Regis Johannis vicecomitatus Angliae. -- This
Vicecomitatus for Vicecomitibus, was an Errata in the Law-Dict. and noted at
the end of the Book; but out Author did not design to correct, but augment
Errors. Sullings, In Domesday Book, according to Mr. Agars interpretation, are
taken for Alders. I have so great a respect for Mr. Agar, that I am not
satisfied this Interpretation is his; no question but it is the same with
Swolings, i. e. Carucatae, Plough-Lands. Team -- With their Childrens Goods and
Chattels in his Court -- So it is in the Law Dictionary, but in the Errata, he
might have seen it thus corrected, With their Children, Goods, and Chattels.
Tenure -- What may make a Tenure, and what not. See Perkins Revelations 70.
Perkins, the Learned Lawyer, had no Revelations, that I ever heard of. Theft --
These from the Prison, or in presence of the owner, is properly called Robbery.
Prison for Person, makes a wide difference. Thwertnick -- Absque alieno
capiendo pro executione facienda -- For absque aliquo -- Tolsester -- Though
this Word lay fair before him in the Law Dictionary, yet he has committed
three Errors in transcribing six lines. Trial -- He concludes with Pat. 3 R.
Joh. m. 3. In fidelitate Leulini. Omitting what follows in the Law Dictionary,
and is most to the purpose, viz. In fidelitate Leulini statuitur de triatione
differentiarum dicti Leulini, etc. Tylwith -- Familia, tribus -- Doctor Davy's
Welsh Dictionary, from whence he had this word, would have furnished him many
more, as able Law-words as this. Uassal -- Skene verbo Lignantia says -- Skene
has no such word in his Book, as Lignantia. Uerdetor, Uindarius -- Is a
Judicial Officer of the Kings Forest -- Both the words mistaken, for Verderer,
Viridarius. Ui laica removenda -- Until the Bishop of the Plea, where such
Church is, has certified. Any one may certify this to be nonsense. Uillaine
-- Our Villains Regardant to Manors were Glebae Abscriptitii, tied to Turk --
What had our Villains to do with the Turk? Walkers -- There are Foresters,
assigned by the King, who are Walkers within a certain space of Ground to their
care. Somewhat omitted to make it sense. Warscot -- Immunis liberi and quieti
-- For Immunes, liberi and quieti -- Westminster -- Epist. ejus ad din Edwardum
-- For divum. The word in mine is abbreviated thus ad Div. Edw. which our
Author it seems did not understand.
IF our Author have any further occasion to make use of the Law Dictionary, he
may take notice of these Additional Errata's.

In Chron. Table of Hen. 8. for 1059. read 1509. Gleab, read vel terra -- dele
a* Gildable, for aliqui read aliorum qui. Grossome, for Titles read Tiles.
Harratium, read from the Fr. Haras, a (...) of Horses and Mares kept for breed.
Honor, for Mardstone read Maidstone. Kings Swanherd read Cignorum. Miskening,
for Mistzeninge read Miskening. Prepensed -- dele yet. Stoc, read Malefactor
pro -- Tassum, read duobus Tassis. Tolt, for Juris read Curiae -- Wardwite,
read Castro -- Xenia, read omnia --


FINIS.

