The Holy Choice: OR, FAITH'S TRIUMPH OVER ALL Worldly Pomp and Glory. A SERMON
^reached in St. Mary's in Scilly, Oct. 14. 1677.

Nich. Phillips, Twice Chaplain to His Majesty's Garrison there.

And Tendered at the Council Table, Jan. 23. 1679.

^allem me Miserum Sanctum, quam Prosperum Peccatorem. Aug. (...) that takes
not up his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.38.
^^^^on, Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Stationers Arms in the Piazza under
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1679.

TO THE PATRONAGE OF THOSE Pair of Sacred Sisters Truth and Justice.
THough the one of you be strong and invincible, and never fails in the end to
get the Conquest and Prevail, yet by reason of the slackness of the other in
affording you Succor and Defense, you seem many times quite vanquished and laid
in the dust.

That my Doctrine is grounded on the Foundation of Truth and Verity, will
appear most plainly by the Sacred Records thereof, the Holy Scriptures. And I
have Faith to believe that I shall in due time, and when Patience has
Perfected her Work, have Justice to Relieve and Right me; And that from him
into whose Hand God has Committed the Sword of it, our most Sacred Soverign,
whom God preserve long to Reign over us; and still mightily and miraculously
Protest and Defend from all the Devilish Plots and Conspiracies of His Enemies.

THE Garrison Soldiers at Scilly, when they received their pay, used always to
give something toward the relief of the Poor; which Money, as appears by their
several accounts, was delivered unto the Churchwardens, and disposed of by
them.

After Lient. Crudge came to Command the Garrison,

The first pay day, it was paid unto the Warden, and disposed of by them.

The second, it was taken up by Lieut. Crudge, and employed by him to pay for
working up his Majesty's Iron, to make Harth-grates for the Guard-houses.

The third, the Play Master of the Garrison, Sir William Godolphin's Agent
there, happened to be Warden, and having the Money in his Hand refused, upon
the Command of Lieut. Crudge, to d^liver it unto him; telling him that it was
the Poors Money, and that he being Warden^; would employ it to the use of the
Poor, and give an account of it to the Parish, as his Predecessors had done.

Upon the Wardens refusal to deliver up the Poors Money; to be employed
contrary to the intent of the Donors, and former practice, the Lieutenant sends
a Guard for him, puts him into the Dungeon, or Hole belonging to the Garrison,
there kept him two Days and Nights to the great danger of his Life; and would
not let him out till he had delivered up the Money.

Nich. Phillips Minister there, hearing of these differences about the Mon y
given at the present pay-day, took an occasion to inquire how the Money given
at the precedent pay-day was bestowed; and was told that a small parcel of it
was put into the Poor Man's box, and that the rest was employed as is aforesaid.

Whereupon meeting as he went to Morning-Prayer, Saturday, October 13. with the
Sergeant, who was ordered by the Lieutenant to require the Money from the
Play Master, and to pay with it the Smith that wrought up the Kings Iron:

He told him, that he heard he had put Money into the Poor Man's box, and asked
him what Money it was? He answered, That it was the Poors Money, the Money
given to the Poor on such a pay-day. He demanded of him again, what was become
of the rest? He answered, That it was employed about the use aforesaid.

Thereupon the Minister endeavored to make him sensible of the unlawfulness of
such an act, and how great a sin it was to employ unto Secular, what was given
to Sacred and Pious uses. All that he could say, was to allege the Command of
his Officer, and that he could not help it; if he had not done it he, should be
punished. To whom the Minister said no more at present, than that he had been
better taught.

After Evening-Prayer, that day, the Smith that wrought up the King's Iron, and
received the Poors Money for so doing, came unto the Ministers house, with whom
the Minister began to expostulate about the unlawfulness of such an act. He
replied That he had several times denied the Sergeant to work up the Iron, and
that he did not meddle with it, till the Lieutenant himself came down into his
Shop and Commanded him to do it.

The serious Consideration of the great danger men would bring their Souls
into, by yielding obedience unto unlawful Commands, for the preservation of
their Bodies; kept the Minister restless that Night, and made him rise at
midnight to add to his Sermon which he had prepared for the next day, this
seasonable Paragraph so marked [* in the Sermon at large.

Which though it has drawn upon him infinite Trouble and Vexation, and caused
him to be Traduced and Slandered to the whole World almost, yet would be not
have left it unsaid for a thousand Worlds. And he does glory more in it than he
does in any thing that ever he did, or said; it having freed him from the guilt
of the Blood of those South which by the contempt of the Doctrine delivered in
it has been spilt.

The Holy Choice. etc.
Heb. 11.15. Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the people of God, than
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
FAith, though challenged by some to be the peculiar Treasure of Gods younger
Sons, is notwithstanding the general portion of all his adopted ones; and not
only under the Gospel, but under the Law; yea, and before the Law too, was this
Grace given to the Sons of men.

Abel and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham are by the Apostle in the precedent
Verses said to have walked by Faith, even before the Law. And Moses the
Lawgiver himself, is here in the very precedent Verse, said to have walked by
Faith. By Faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son
of Pharaohs Daughter.

Among all the noble Chieftains of Faith that preceded the Law, Abraham has
the first place assigned him. He it was that gave Believers a just Title to the
promised Land, and has the Honor given him to be called The Father of the
Faithful.

Among all the faithful Worthies under the Law, Moses stands foremost, He, he it
was that brought up the Household of Faith from out of the House of Bondage,
Conducted them in safety through the Perilous Wilderness, showed them the
Promised Land; and gave a peerless and an unparalleled Testimony of his Faith,
by choosing rather to suffer Assliction with the Children of God, than to enjoy,
etc.

But before I proceed to speak of this peerless and unparalleled Pattern of
his Faith, manifested most clearly by this his seeming foolish and miserable,
but indeed wise and happy Choice; I shall first, by God's Gracious Assistance,
show you the History and Manner of his Life, before he come to Years of
Discretion, to make this Choice for himself.

His Life was no sooner given him by a Gracious God, than it was sought to be
taken away from him by a Cruel and Merciless Man.

His tender Nonage, though it wanted not a heart to receive Danger-daunting
Faith; yet it wanted a Hand to wield so massy and weighty a Shield: Some other
ones Buckler then must now protect and defend him, or else the same hand that
delivers him from the Womb, must also lay him in the Tomb: For thus says
Pharaoh to the Hebrew Midwives, Exodus 1.16. If it be a Man-child, kill him.

[* And here from the Piety and Courage of the Hebrew Midwives, who feared more
to offend God than Man, and who would not upon the Command of a Tyrannous,
Oppressing King, act against the express Command of God, and imbrue their hands
in innocent Blood, must I (if I will deliver my own Soul from Blood-guiltiness)
take the Courage and Boldness to tell you, That it is not lawful nor safe for
your Souls, in all Causes to obey the Commands of your Lawful Superiors.

Indeed in things not forbidden them by God, no Souls are more subject unto the
higher powers, than are God's faithful Servant^s and such as fear him. But when
men's Commands clash with Gods Divine Precents, and they enjoin what he forbids,
they must then stand more in fear to offend him who can kill their Souls, and
cast them into Hell, than them who can but kill their Bodies, or cast them into
some dark Dungeon or Hole.

And a President for so doing, we have not only given us in the Gospel, by the
Apostles of our Lord and Savior; who being forbidden by the Jewish Sanhedrim
of Priests and Elders, to speak unto the People in the Name of Christ, boldly
told them to their teeth, that it was better to obey God than man, Acts 5.29.
but also several Presidents for it in the Law.

1. By these Hebrew Midwives, Exodus 1. who refused, when commanded by King
Pharaoh, to kill the Hebrew Male-Children.

2. By the Soldiers of King Saul, 1 Samuel 22.17. who refused upon his Command,
to fall upon the Priests of the Lord, and chose rather to expose their own
throats to the fury of an incensed King, than imbrue their hands in the Blood
of Gods Priests.

3. By Shadrach, etc. Dan. 3. who refused, when Commanded by King
Nebuchadnezzar, to fall down and worship the Golden Image which he had set up,
and that under a heavier penalty than casting into a dark Dungeon; even of
being cast into the midst of a burning fiery Furnace; and chose rather to be
cast into the midst of the burning fiery Furnace, than to worship any other God
but the True and Living one.

4. By Daniel, Chap. 6. who, when forbidden by King Darius, to present a
Petition to any other, either God or man, than himself, for the space of thirty
days, under the penalty of being cast into the Den of hungry Lions, obeyed him
not; but thrice every day on his bended knees presented his Supplications and
Prayers unto God.

And if the Commands of Kings, who are the supreme and highest Powers on Earth,
may not, when unlawful, be performed by those who will manifest themselves to
be Gods faithful Servants, and such as fear him; then much less may the Lawless
Commands of those that are of inferior power, and subordinate unto them, be
obeyed of them.

And though Beggars (as says the Proverb) when set on horseback, will ride --
and men (says Experience) not used to it, will grow giddy and lightheaded,
when set on high places. And though none are more apt to take more power unto
themselves, than of right belongs unto them, than those that have least
comcommitted unto them, and are of the lowest and most inferior degree of
subordinate Officers; yet to fear more to offend such, than to offend God, is
the lowest degree of Baseness and Cowardice; yea, to manifest our selves to be
more weak than Women: for there are higher than they, and several degrees above
them here on Earth, unto whom, when wronged by them, we may have recourse for
Justice, and need not let our Faith put our Patience to the trouble to wait
till the last great Day of Judgment come, for Redress,

For as far as the power of God exceeds the power of the King, so far does the
power of the King exceed the power of his subordinate Officers; and as when
oppressed and burdened by the King, we may make our Appeal unto God, who though
he has allowed no power on Earth to call him to an Account for his Actions,
and to punish him; yet has reserved to himself a power so to do; and has, as
says the Prophet, Isa. 30. ult. provided a Tophet hereafter, a Prison large
and strong enough to hold and punish the greatest Monarch that ever was upon
the Earth: so when wronged and injured by his subordinate Officers, we may make
our Appeal unto the King, who will undoubtedly right us and punish them, if
they exceed the Bounds and Limits of their Commissions, and usurp more power
over us than he gives them.

And though no subordinate Officers are wont to usurp more power unto
themselves, and to exceed the Bounds and Limits of their Commissions, than
those that are employed in Military Commands, who usually take an Arbitrary
Power unto themselves, make their Will their Law; and when questioned with a
Quo Warranto, clap their hands on their Swords, as if the wearing of them,
would bear them out in whatever they do.

And though none are usually more cowardly and base, and ready to obey unlawful
Commands, than those that should be most courageous and valiant in defense of
Truth and Innocence (Soldiers) who ignorantly think, That because they are
bound in the course of their Military Duty and Service, to be obedient to the
Commands of their Superior Officers, they are bound to obey them in all
things; to do and say whatever they will have them, be it never so false and
unjust; and stand more in fear to he cast into a dark Dungeon or Hole, than
into the Fire of Hell.

Yet Officers and Soldiers sure, if they will manifest themselves to be
Christian ones, have better Presidents given them in the Holy Scriptures.

And taught are all Officers by the Third Captain of Fifty, which K. Ahaziah
sent to apprehend the Prophet Eliah, 2 Kin. 1. not to behave themselves as did
the two former Captains, arrogantly and insolently, but meekly and humbly, in
the execution of their Office.

And taught are all Soldiers, by the Soldiers of King Saul, 1 Samuel 22.17. not
to obey the Commands of their Kings and Generals, much less of their inferior
and lowest sort of Officers, when they are unlawful, and contradict and oppose
those of their God.

And, if praised upon Record in Scripture, are those Jewish Officers and
Soldiers, who behaved themselves reverently and respectfully toward the
Priests and Prophets of the Lord, and refused to lay violent hands on Sacred
persons, and such as were Consecrated unto Gods Service; can a Priest or a
Prophet choose but condemn such Christian Officers and Soldiers as make no
conscience of laying violent hands on Sacred things, and such as are Dedicated
to pious and Charitable Uses, and in so doing, dare presume even to (...) God
himself?

Whatever is (...) poor, is lent to the Lord, says Solomon; Prove. 19. (...)
^wer is Dedicated to Pious and Religious uses, is, (...) Hep. 13.16. Unto God a
Sacrifice well pleasing and (...) And therefore to take away that which is
given to the poor, and to employ in Secular, what was Dedicated to Sacred Uses,
must of necessity be a defrauding, and robbing of God, a thing most unpleasing
and abominable unto him.

Lawful I grant it is for men to do what they will with their own; and when
they have Money, they may employ it as they please. But when they have once
Dedicated it unto God, and given it to pious and charitable uses, to reassume
it again, to command, employ, or give consent to have it employed in any
secular or profane use, is the very highest point of Robbery and Injustice, no
less Crime sure than Sacrilege.

And that I preach now no new Divinity, and such as is forged in mine own idle
Brain, but on Ancient, Catholic, Apostolic Truth, you will most plainly
perceive, if you will be but pleased to look into the 5th. Chapter of the Acts of
the Holy Apostles; there you will find it written, That when Ananias had
dedicated a certain portion of Money to the Service of God and his Church, and
afterward taken away a certain part of it to employ otherwise, he was most
sharply reprehended, and most severely and exemplarily punished for it. And
thus does the Apostle St. Peter rattle him for it: v. 3, 4. Ananias, said he,
why have thou given such way unto Satan; and suffered him so far to work upon
thy heart, as to draw thee to the committing of so heinous a sin, as is the
Lying unto the Holy Ghost; and the seeking to cozen and defraud God, by keeping
back part of that Money which thou pretendest wholly to dedicate to his
Service? Before thou did sell thy Land, was it not in thine own power to do
with it what thou would, to sell it, or not to sell it, to give it, or keep
it? Nay, after thou had sold it, was it not in thine own power to do what
thou would with the Money thou made of it? But after thou had once
dedicated it unto God, to be employed in the Service of his Church, and toward
the Relief of his poor distressed Members, than to reassume it again, and
employ it in any other use; was, I must tell thee, a most heinous provoking
sin, and will not fail to draw down a sudden and an exemplary Judgment upon
thee.

And sure the sudden, and the most severe Judgment we here find to be executed
upon Ananias, for keeping back part of that which he pretended to dedicate
wholly to Gods Service, and the Relief of his Distressed Members, should make
all those that have in any kind been guilty of this most heinous sin (and
either by commanding, acting, councelling or approving, have had a hand in
employing of that to Secular which (as appears upon Record) was given to pious
and charitable uses, even for the Relief of the poor) to tremble and quake, and
fear, wherever they are, that some sudden, fearful and exemplary Judgment will
fall upon them; and by a timely and speedy repentance and satisfaction, to
endeavor to prevent that which is worse than the putting into a dark Dungeon
or Hole, even the casting into the bottomless Pit of Hell.

Having thus from the great Piety and Courage which the Hebrew Midwives showed,
in refusing upon the Command of King Pharaoh, to become instrumental in taking
away of Moses's life, taken the Courage and Boldness to deliver unto you this
Ancient, Catholic, Apostolic Doctrine; That it is not lawful for you in all
Causes to obey the Commands of your Lawful Superiors, and given you these most
seasonable Soulsaving Reproofs, Cautions, and Admonitions; I pass now to speak
of the Faith and Courage of those that were Instrumental in Saving and
Preserving of Moses life.]

Faith, though it follow not Generation, but Regeneration, is begotten in us,
not by the Father of our Flesh, but of our Spirit: Yet it is no small benefit
sure to be born of Faithful and Pious Parents. Our Fathers Faith, Though it
bring us not to Heaven, will yet protect us from many dangers here on Earth;
and blessings are promised, Psalm. 112.2. to be entailed in the Generation of
the Faithful.

Never had Isaac had a Being, had not the quick and lively Faith of his Father
Abraham, assisted with that of his Mother Sarah, quickened their dead and
decrepit bodies to beget and conceive him. And Mose's Being, had soon been at
an end, had not his Father Amram's Faith, assisted with that of his Mother
Jochebed, stirred them up Courageously, and sans fear of the Kings displeasure,
to use their best endeavor to preserve his Life. By Faith Moses, said our
Apost. v. 23. when he was born, was hid three Months of his Parents, because
they saw that he was a proper Child, etc.

Amram being sprung from that Tribe, unto whom God had committed the keeping of
his Oracles, the Tribe of Levi, and keeping in good remembrance the Promise
that he had made unto Abraham, Genesis 15.13. viz. that after four hundred years
bondage in a strange Land, he would bring up his seed, greatly enriched with
substance. And knowing that this time drew nigh, yea, being told, said
Josephus, That he who would break Egypts yoke, and eale Isreal's shoulders from
bearing of heavy burdens, should spring from his Loins.

But looking, as said a better Author, and our Apostle here, v. 23. with the
Eye of Faith on the goodly and well proportioned Limbs, on the Sweet and
Majestic Face of this newborn, squaling, sprauling Infant, he began to
conceive in his Mind, That God had not not made this curious Cabinet, but for
the holding of some rich and precious Jewel, and that this fair and well
proportioned Body, was to be but the case of a more fair and well disposed
Mind. And some small sparks of hope began hereupon to kindle in his Breast,
that this was he whom God had appointed to break Egypts yoke, and to bring up
the Children of Israel from the House of bondage. And therefore he is resolved,
notwithstanding the Kings express Command to kill, to use his best endeavor to
preserve his Sons life.

Abraham is said by our Apostle here, v. 17. to have manifested his Faith, by
resolving to kill his Son: and Amram is here said, v. 23. to have manifested
his Faith, by resolving to preserve the life of his Son. So variously, and
after such diverse manners, does the same good Spirit of God work by one and the
same instrument.

But Amram's Faith which at the first charge fearless stood the shock of the
Kings fury, after a three months Seige, begins to faint and craves for a Parley.
And thus Reason begins to shake the Fort of his Resolution, and to persuade him
to yield. Further, O Amram, to defer the Execution of the Kings Command, the
killing of thy Son, will but increase thy fear, and prolong his misery. The
searching Eye of the Kings Inquisitors, or the tatling Tongue of a false
Friend, or treacher ous Servant will shortly discover him, and then with his,
thou will hazard thine own life also; at least wilt loose that which most men
count the life of their life, thy Goods, and Estate, and have them Confiscated.
Better then to put an end unto his miseries, and thine own fears, by his speedy
Death, then to prolong both by a concealed, and little better than dead Life.

Thus Reason assaults, and with such good success, that Faith is fain to
retreat, and leave the Field: And Amram notwithstanding his first brave
defense, is resolved to yield, and no longer to conceal his Son.

But though Amram's Faith has left the Field, yet she has a small Citadel in
his Heart, which she still straightly maintains; and though Amram be resolved no
longer to conceal his Son, yet he will not so speedily kill him as Reason
persuades: His Faith had still so much life left, as to assure him that the
Child had another Father, who had a larger share in him than he had, and was
able to do more for him than he could. And councels him, since he distrusts his
own Power, as too weak to preserve him, to cast him wholly upon Gods Care and
Providence.

Thus Reason, notwithstanding his first good success is forced again to retire,
and Amram is resolved to deliver his Son from out of his own Hands into Gods.
His curious and Gold-enameld Cradle, he changes into a rushy and dirt-dawbed
Ark. And Moses is cast out from his Natural Fathers House, and his perfumed
upper Chamber, into the great Lower House of his Spiritual Father, and laid
among the Flags by the River.

In the History indeed of which Moses himself was the Penman; the contriving
and executing of the means for his persecution are wholly ascribed unto his
Mother, and there is no mention at all made of his Father. But though his
Mother appeared Chief in the Execution, yet his Father doubtless sat President
of the Council and chiefly contrived the means for his preservation.

In perilous times wherein Tyrants make their Will their Law, and it is no less
than a man's Life and Liberty is worth, to cross their Decrees: Women (as being
less to be feared) take more liberty to act in public than men dare do. Though
his Mother Jochebed then appeared most in the execution of the means for her
Sons preservation; yet Amram was not wanting in contributing his utmost
endeavors thereunto. I am sure the Apostle has made them joint partners in
their Sons preservation; and tells us, v. 23. that he was preserved by the
Faith of his Parents. By Faith Moses, etc.

To Amram therefore, as the Head and Chief (since he is now past the fear of
Pharaoh's Anger) do I ascribe the using of the means for Moses preservation.

But does not Amram's Faith in placing his Son among the Flags, by the River,
seem to be quite vanquished and overcome? What? Could he deliver his Son into
the Hands of a more cruel Executioner than Water? And could he expect any pity
from so merciless an Element?

His Faith, I confess, was now fallen into a deep Swoon, but yet it was not
quite gone. The Pitch and Slime wherewith he dawbed over the Bulrush Ark,
wherein he put his Son, to fence it against the taking in off watter, and that
little Girl which sits yonder so sadly under a bush, to watch what would
became of him, plainly testifies that his Faith was not quite Dead; and that he
had still some small hope left that his Heavenly Father would see to, and
provide for him.

And lo God, who never fails to provide for such Children as are by faithful
Parents cast wholly upon his Care and Providence, and who takes them up faith
David, when their Fathers and Mothers forsake them, takes up this simple Soul
from out of the dust, and lifts up this poor wretched Infant out of the mire,
and sets him among the Princes, even among the Princes of Zoan.

For whilst Moses lay thus forlorn in his Ark of Bulrushes, squaling among the
Flags by the River; Pharaoh's Daughter, attended by her Maids of Honor, comes
down to wash herself in the River; and espying this Ark among the Flags, she
sends for it, and having opened it, she was by the Tears of the sweet Babe that
lay in it, moved to tender Compassion toward it, and gave Order to have it
tenderly Nursed; called him, from the Place out of which she drew him, (Moses),
and afterward adopts him for her own Son. Thus Moses has changed his poor
enslaved Parents for a Noble Princely Dame; his Thatched Cottage for a stately
Palace; and instead of being brought up, as the Hebrews were enforced to bring
up their Children, in hard and servile Labor, he is Princely educated, and
instructed, says St. Stephen, in all the Wisdom and Learning of the
Egyptians, Acts 7.22.

But though Moses be now Heir to a Crown, the Sun, unto whom the Egyptians pay
the tribute of their Adorations and Devotions; yet before I present him with my
humble Duty and Service, he must give me leave to pay it first where it is most
justly due; and to fall down and adore the incomprehensible. Wisdom and Power
of that God, who so frustrateth and fools all the Designs of worldly wise
Politicians; that he causes the very same Means which they propose to
themselves, as the surest and safest way, to bring to pass their desired Ends,
to be the very Instruments of their Destruction and Ruin; and brings his
determinate Councils and Purposes to pass, not only against their minds, but
even by the very Means of those that are his greatest Enemies and Opposers.

What surer Plot could the Devil with his Jewish Consistory of Priests and
Elders contrive for the keeping of Jesus from being King of the Jews, than to
accuse him of Treason against Caesar, and to deliver him up into the hands of
Pintius Pilate, the Roman Governor of Judea? And yet this very Plot of theirs
does God by his all-working and all-ruling Providence convert unto Christ's
greater Glory, and caused his Dominion thereby to extend not only over the
whole Region of Judea, but over all the Kingdoms of the World, and to have the
Heathen given him for his Inheritance, and the ^ttermost Parts of the Earth for
his Possession.

What better course could Joseph's Brethren have pitched on, for the preventing
of their foretold Homage unto him, than to make a Slave of him, and to sell him
to the Ishmaelites? And yet this enslaving of their Brother, does God by a
strange kind of Providence, convert to his Honor and their Shame; brings him
hereby to be Lord of all Egypt, and them to come and bow down and kneel before
him.

What more Mischievous way could Haman invent to be revenged on Mordecai for
contemning his Honor, than to procure a Decree from the King for the utter
Extirpation of the Jewish Nation? And yet does God by a wonderful and an
unparalleled piece of Providence convert this Design of his to Mordecai's
Exaltation, and his own Destruction.

What wiser Course could Pharaoh and his Princes of Zoan have lighted upon, for
the prevention of Isreal's Deliverance from out of their Bondage, by one that
should spring from their own Stock, (as was foretold them by their Magieians)
than by issuing such a Command, That all the Hebrew Male Children should as
soon as born, be slain? And yet does God by his Wonder-working Power and
Wisdom, cause that very Hebrew Male-Child whom he had made choice of, for
Isreal's Savior, and Egypts Scourge, to be adopted by his own Daughter, and
bred up in his own Court.

So foolish are the wise of this World, when they fit in Council against Wisdom
it self, that their own Politic Engines undermine and blow up themselves. And
so weak are all the Mighty of the World, when they come to grapple with the
Almighty, that their Swords drop out of their hands, and run into their own
Bowels; and he makes them become the fatal Executioners of their own
Destruction and Ruin; and hence is, as it is written, Prove. 21.30. no Wisdom,
nor Counsel, nor Understanding against the Lord. He purposes, and who can
disanul it? He stretches out his hand, and who can turn it back? demands the
Prophet, Isa. 14.27.

Surely these strange and wondrous Works which God brings to pass, not only
against the Minds, but even by the very Means of those that seek to hinder and
oppose him, are able to make a profane and blasphemous Atheist turn holy
Anchoret, and spend his whole Life in admiring and adoring his incomprehensible
Wisdom and Power; and should make a Christian and true Believer, such an one as
owns him for his God and Savior, confident, in all dangers, of his Almighty
Protection, and assured that all things, even the most Malicious Plots, the
Devilish Devices, and the most Injurious Actions of his most Spiteful Enemies,
shall in the end turn to his Gain and Advantage.

Having thus paid my Homage and Duty, where it was most justly due, unto that
Almighty Three in One, who thus wondrously advanced Moses, from the Margin of
the Grave, to the Skirts of the Throne:

I come now to pay it to this young Prince, the Adopted Heir of Egypts Crown.

But be not mistaken, Moses, it is not to the Tissued Suit, and Purple Robe that
thou wearest on thy Back; but to the Golden Soul that harbors in thy Breast,
that I come to pay my Dutiful and Loyal Respects unto. Let thy Egyptian
Subjects praise thy comely Feature, thy Majestic Look, thy Princely
Deportment, and thy Heroic Acts: It Is thy Faith, thy Faith, which I have
chosen for my Encomium and Pancgyrick.

And O thou Almighty, Three in One, so enable me to sing of it, that I may make
thy Moses as famous among Christians, for his Righteousness of Faith, as ever
he was among the Jews for his Works of the Law. The Jewish Rabbis report of
Moses, that when the Courtiers of Pharaoh were on a time sporting with the
Child in the Bedchamber of his Daughter, they presented to his choice an Ingot
of Gold in the one Hand, and a burning Coal in the other; and that the Child
snatched at the Coal of Fire and clapped it into his Mouth, and therewith so
singed and parched his Tongue, that he ever after stammered in his Speech.

The clapping of the burning Coal into his Mouth, might, I grant, cause the
stuttering of his Tongue, and the flowness of his speech; for he was by his own
Confession, Exodus 4.10. no ready Spokesman. But, sure I am, that his preferring
in his choice the burning cole before the Ingot of Gold, was a most evident
prediction of his contempt of Worldly wealth and glory. And of that fiery zeal
which toward the glory of God, and the good of his Church, burned in his
Breast.

No sooner was Moses in Pharaohs Court come to years of discretion, but he
begins to call to mind that he was by nature, and Nation, an Hebrew, one that
had right by Faith to the Promises of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven; and was
only by Adoption the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and Heir of Egypts Crown, and
seriously considers with himself whether it were not better for him to suffer a
light and momentary affliction, with his natural Brethren the Hebrews for a
while here, and to be made partaker with them of an everlasting weight of glory
hereafter: than with his Adopted Brethren, the Egyptians, to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, and afterward to be cast into a Lake of
everlasting burning and torment.

Had this choice been put to some profane and unbelieving Atheist, to one who
looks not beyond the Moon, and has no hopes of joy but only in this present
World; he would soon have concluded that it was better to side with the
prosperous Egyptians, than with the afflicted Hebrews. That a bird in the Hand
was worth two in the Bush. The possession of a Cottage to be preferred before
the reversion of a Kingdom.

Had it been proposed to some greedy Epicure, who is all for present pleasure,
and has his Stomach so sharp set, that he cannot stay till the banquet be
prepared and all the guests come, he would without any demur have given in his
verdict, That it was much better to enjoy Egypts present portion of Pleasure,
than to wait for Isreal's future one.

Had it been proposed to some delicate tender-singred Courtier, one that hates
Labor and loves Ease and Idleness, rises against Dinner, plays till Supper,
drinks till Midnight, and whores till Morning; he would soon have satisfied his
Judgment, that it was much better to sit frolicking in Pharaoh's Palace, by a
warm Fire, or Wine, and Junkets, than to stand smarting in a Sulphury
Brick-kiln, among the enslaved Israelites, with bitter Taunts and more bitter
blows.

Had it been proposed to some fickle complying Time-server, who
Weather-cock-like beaks always fair toward the Wind, keeps still on that
warm-side of the Sun, holds ever with the strongest Party; and is resolved to
keep his Goods and Body safe, what ever becomes of his Soul: he would soon have
been won to deal with the afflicted Israelites, as Demas did with the
persecuted. St. Paul, have forsaken them, and embraced the society and
fellowship of the prosperous Egyptians. Such timorous Time-serving, complying
men, may I grant, love God, and Godliness well; but they love Women, and Gain
much better; and there when it comes to the push, they will rather part with
God, and a good Conscience, then loose any thing by them.

But Moses was otherwise Principled, and having an Eye in his Head that looked
beyond the visible things which are Temporal; a Heart in his Breast, which had
respect unto the future Recompense, and great Reward, that is laid up for all
Faithful and Pious Souls in Heaven, he abandons all his Earthly Titles and
Honors, and prefers the style and Title of God; Son, before that of Pharaohs
Daughter; forsakes all the glittering Pomp and Vanity of the World, the sinful
Lusts and Pleasures of the Flesh; And chooses rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God, etc.

I know, if you look upon this act of Moses with a natural Eye, you will be apt
to censure him for a man besides himself, and little better than Mad; but
though Moses seemed to be Mad in so doing, yet he seems Mad as David did at
Gate, Regi Achis, to none but Fools and Madmen.

Surely they who have the Eyes of their understanding enlightened, to see but a
glimpse of that exceeding weight of Glory, which God has prepared in Heaven
for those that suffer patiently, and with an humble submission to his good
pleasure and providence, a light and momentary affliction here on Earth; and to
behold that Kingly estate and dignity, unto which Christ will exalt all these
in Heaven that suffer with him, and for his sake here on Earth; will not for so
doing condemn him for a Madman and a Fool, but highly applaud him for a
Wiseman, and a Faithful. For by so doing he plainly manifested that he looked
not on the the Temporal things which are visible, but on the Eternal ones which
are invisible. And it was, says our Apostle, through Faith that Moses when he
came to age, etc. Choosing rather, etc.

But did not Moses in this his voluntary choosing of affliction, and running
himself Headlong into danger, tempt God, and Sin? Is not Man a weak frail
Creature, unable of himself to withstand the least temptation, or to stand
under the lightest Load of Affliction? And has not our great General (...)
Jesus, not only taught us by his own Example John 8. ult. to Shun and Avoid
danger? But also enjoined us by his Precept, to Pray that we be kept from
Temptation, and to be delivered from Evil?

Though to run Headlong into danger and wilfully to draw trouble upon himself,
be not the part of a Wise and Prudent Man, yet bravely to own and bear
Affliction when it is laid upon him, is the part of a True Christian man, and
good Soldier of Jesus Christ.

Basely to deny his Master when the owning of him was the way to bring him into
trouble, was not the Wisdom and Piety, but the Folly and Sin of St. Peter, and
that which cost him a Flood of Tears to Lament, and it was by their hold owning
of Christ, when Persecutors Thirsted as greedily after the Blood of Saints, as
ever did hungry Evening Wolves after Lambs Blood, that won the Noble Army such
Honor and Renown.

When Gods People are in Bondage, his Church under Persecution, it is not then
put to our Choice, whether we will suffer with them; but whether we will be of
them. For if we be of them, we cannot choose but suffer with them. It being with
the Member of Christ's Mystical Body, the Church, as with the Mmbers of a
Natural Body: If one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it: That Member
of the Natural Body is Dead and Putrified, which is not sensible of the Blows
and Thrusts which are given to the rest of the Members; and that Member of
Christ's Mystical Body, is like the Church of Sardis, has a name that it
lives, but is indeed Dead; which is not moved to Compassion and Passion, at
the Sorrows and Sufferings of his Brethren.

It is for a Profane and Unnatural Edomite, to stand Laughing at the Calamity,
and to help to set forward the Sufferings of his Brethren. A true Israelite
always Sympathizeth in Suffering with his Brethren; is forry for the Affliction
of Joseph, and Weeps with them that Weep.

Moses therefore in choosing Affliction with the People and Church of God, when
Afflicted and under Perfecution, did not Tempt God, but plainly manifested
himself to be a True Son of God, and a Faithful Member of his Church.

In time of Peace, when the Sunshine of Prosperity Graceth the Church, when
Piety grows into Fashion, and is in great Esteem in the World; every one will
be a Professer of it; but when it grows out of Fashion, is esteemed the great
Crime of the World, the Sect that is every where spoken against: then then to
be a Professer, and Practiser of it, is to manifest a man to be Pious indeed,
and the True and Faithful Servant of God.

But why is Moses here said by the Apostle to have chosen Affliction? Since it
is plain in the History, Exodus 2. That he did not Voluntary quit, but was
forced through fear to forsake Pharoahs Court?

Though his leaving of Pharoahs Court, seem indeed to have something of
Compulsion in it, yet his going to Visit his Brethren, and his looking with a
Pitiful and Compassionate Eye on their Afflictions and Sufferings was a free
and Voluntary act, and no other thing Constrained him unto it, but the Motion
and Inspiration of Gods Holy Spirit, for it came into his heart, said St.
Stephen, Acts 7.23. to go and Visit his Brethren.

Had Moses been Egyptianized, he would when he came and found the Hebrew and
the Egyptian a Fighting, have sided with the Egyptian, and not with the Hebrew.
It being as it were Natural to all Renegadoes, and Apostates, to be most cruel
toward those of their former Sect and Profession. Mos^^ therefore in Smiting
the Egyptian and Rescuing the Hebrew, gave a most Evident Testimony of his
Affection toward his Natural Brethren.

And in that particular deliverance he gave them a sign, that he was come to
give them a general Gaol deliverance from Egypt's Bondage, and supposed, says
St. Stephen. Acts 7.25. That his Brethren would have understood by that
particular. Deliverance, That God by his hand would give them a general Goal
Deliverance.

And surely had the Israelites been as willing at that time, to receive him for
their Prince and Savior, as he was forward to offer himself, and had they not
scornfully thrust him off, with a Who made the a Judge, and Ruler over us? He
would have made it most Evident, That he was not Constrained and Enforced, but
Voluntarily, and of his own free Will did choose rather to suffer Affliction,
etc.

You have seen, Brethren, how Moses manifested his Faith, even by preferring
the future and Eternal Joys of Heaven, before the present Transient Honors,
Pleasures, Contentments of an Earthly Crown.

I dare not now oppose him unto you as a Pattern to follow and Imitate, I know
your high flown and Gospel Faith, will scorn to stoop to this Low and Legal
President.

But sure notwithstanding the great boasting that is now adays made of Faith,
my Faith tells me, that the most Faithful man amongst us, comes far short of
Moses, and that there is Sca^ a man to be found in those bright Sun shine Days
of the Gospel, that is able to give such an evident Demonstration of his Faith,
as Moses did here under the Law, In thusing the other, etc.

Though we talk much in this Age of Faith, of Faith, and of our Dependence on
Future good things, yet it is on Sight, on Sight and in the Enjoyment of the good
things that are present, that all (...) Felicity is Placed, and rather then we
will suffer a light and Momentary Affliction here to be made partakets of an
exceeding weight of Glory hereafter, we will choose rather on the Wing of a
Short-lived Pleasure, and Pro^^, to be carried into the Infernal Pit of
Everlasting Torments.

And though we boast much of the goodness of our fight, and opened eyes, yet
that we are blind and cannot see a far of, even beyond this present World, we
plainly manifest by our Loathness to part with our Earthly Goods and
Possessions for the gaining of a Heavenly Crown and Kingdom.

So far are we from manifesting our Faith, as did Moses, by Choosing rather,
etc. that we esteem no man to be a Child of God that is Afflicted and
Persecuted: We usually measure men's goodness, now a days, by their greatness;
their Saintship, by their success, and faithlesly think that God loves none but
such as he suffers to flourish here in all Worldly wealth and felicity.

Surely did we believe the Holy Scriptures, which for the main are nothing else
but a History of the Churches Persecution, but a Martyrology of the Saints
Sufferings: And had we hope as we profess, to be Saved by a Poor, Despised,
Mocked, Scorned, Scourged, Crucified Savior: We would encertain a more
Honorable Esteem of the Cross, a Nobler Opinion of those whom he is pleased so
far to Honor, as to make them his fellow Sufferers and would not with those
Barbarians. Acts 27.4. Condemn all those for wicked Men, on whose hands we see
the Viper of danger to fasten.

Did we believe indeed that there is another World, and were thoroughly
persuaded that after the Dissolution of our Earthly Tabernacles, there is a
House not made with hands, prepared for us in Heaven, we would not by balking
the Cross, by complying with the Times, humouring of Men, and making our
Religion a State one, seek to prolong our Life and Liberty here on Earth; but
would be ready with St. Paul, to run through Persecution of all sorts; yea, to
die daily, in expectation of that great Reward which is promised, Matthew. 5.10.
to all that suffer for Righteousness save; and would esteem the Reproaches and
Scorns that are cast on us for Christ's sake and his Gospel, the greatest Honor
that can be done us.

Did we make Gods Word our daily study, read and remember how it is written
there, That Gods People the Jews, were after a long and hard Servitude in
Egypt, set at Liberty, and brought into the Promised Land; and how Pharaoh and
his Jovial Courtiers, that afflicted and kept them in Bondage, were all either
consumed by those heavy Plagues which God sout on their Nation, or drowned in
the Red Sea, we would wish rather, with poor naked and pained Lazarus, to be
carried into Aaraham's Bosom, than with rich, dainty and delicate Dives, to be
cast into Hellfire; yea, would choose with Moses, rather, etc.

Were we indeed true believing Christians, we would not only rejoice in hope of
the Glory of God, but would also with our brave Leaders the Blessed Apostles,
glory in our Tribulatious, esteem our Sufferings for Christ's Cause, to be the
very Marks of the Lord Jesus, as termed, Gal. 6.17. our Persecutions for
Righteousness sake the Earnest of the Heavenly Crown and Kingdom, Matthew. 5.10.
our Chastisements for our Sins, to be the very tokens of our Heavenly Fathers
Love and Affection toward us, Heb. 12.6.

Though he be esteemed a happy man, unto whom God gives Riches and Honor, and
gives him also power to eat thereof, and Comfortably to Enjoy them: yet he is
indeed a happy man, unto whom God gives Trouble and Afflictions, and gives them
withal Grace to make good use of them, and to improve them to his Spiritual
advantage. And what ever men think of worldly felicity, there is assuredly no
Life so profitable, as that which is a little sprinkled with the Salt of
Crosses; and though Egypt, and the House of Bondage, be no place for Gods
Israel to dwell in and inhabit; yet will the serving of an hard Apprenticeship
here, make them more highly to prize and esteem the promised Canaan.

I know not what cause others may have to hate and hurt their Taskmasters and
Oppressors; but I find that I have great cause to love and pray for them; yea,
in in some sort to prefer them before my Friends. My Friends often entice me out
of the Heavenly Rode, into the slippery path of Pleasure; but mine Enemies,
Persecutors and Slanderers, make me careful to keep the right way to Heaven,
and to take heed that I suffer not my feet to turn either to the right hand or
the left from the Path of Gods Holy Commands; for if I do, I shall be sure to
hear of it from them. Though to flow in wordly wealth, to be pointed at with
the finger, and to be croucht to by every one, be an estate, which flesh,
rebellious flesh would sometimes make me ambitious of; yet when in my Midnight
thoughts and secret retirements, I seriously consider the deadly poison that
lies in the honied Cup of Prosperity, and the wholesome healthful Potion, that
is contained in the aloed one of Adversity, it makes me earnestly beseech God,
rather to give me a bitter Pill, and to purge me with Hysop that I may clean;
than to give me a sugared Potion, and to suffer me to roull in all wordly
Felicity; till with Jesurun I grow wanton, and kick against him: humbly to beg
of him, rather to restrain and keep me from future presumptions and sins, by
his gentle Chastisements and Corrections, than to let me run headlong into all
licentiousness, by his seeming sweet, but cruel Indulgence: yea, it makes me
wish rather with poor naked and pained Lazarus, to be carried into Abraham's
Bosom, than the rich, dainty and delicate Dives, to be cast into Hell Torments;
and makes me to choose rather with the faithful Moses to suffer affliction, etc.

Credit me, my Beloved Brethren, the Love and Favor of God, is infinitely
better than the love and favor of the world: and the Joys of Heaven are as far
above those of Earth in worth as they are in height. And all truly faithful
Men, such as have their eyes enlightened to see things afar off; have esteemed
it much better to be chastned of the Lord here, and spared hereafter, than
spared here and reserved unto the day of Judgment to be punished hereafter;
halt and maimed to enter into Life, than whole and sound to be cast into Hell.
To swim through a boiling River of Brimstone to be eternally happy, than to
dwell in a Paradise now, and after death to be damned.

It was the Prayer of St. August. Lord, here cut, massacre and burn me; so thou will hereafter spare and save me. And it was the Opinion of our late Glorious
Kingly Martyr. Chapter I. That our afflictions were infinitely better with Gods
Grace to sanctify and improve them, than our prosperity with an unlimited
appetite, and the Reins let loose to all Licentiousness. And it was the choice
of the faithful Moses here, rather to suffer affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season amongst the vicious Egyptians.

And thus to do like true Sons of Faith, whenever occasion shall be offered us:
God give us his Grace, and to him be all Glory, now and for ever Amen.
HALLELVJAH.
FINIS.

