Speculum Crape-Gownorum: OR, AN OLD Looking-Glass FOR THE Young Academicks,
new Foiled: WITH REFLECTIONS On some of the late HIGH-FLOWN SERMONS*

To which is added, An ESSAY toward a SERMON of the Newest Fashion.

By a Guide to the Inferior Clergy.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

-- Ridentem dicere Verum Quis Vetat? --

LONDON, Printed for E. Rydal. 1682.

WE find there are a so^t of people very much troubled to behold their
deformities in this Looking-Glass, and have therefore hired that Musty-brain'd
Fool Heraclitus, to bestow some of his Carman like^ Thames Street Raillery upon
it. But in re^ard that all unbyas^ed Readers, cannot but perceive that the
thing was never intended to be otherwise than what it is, a mixture of old and
new; since the mixture of ^olly and extravagance in the Young Clergy is still
the ^ame; therefore that Iack-Pudding to the Bear-Garden, Heraclitus, might
have spared his bank-side yest and froth till he had met with something^ that
he might have done more prejudice to* than he can do to this Looking-Glass, a
Porter like-Droll, whose.

-- ^riste Caput fastidia vespillonum
Et miseri meruit tedia Carnificis.
IT IS a mistake -- They that should Guide and Conduct the Conversation of
others, run in shoals to learn Loyalty from the heavenly Discourses of Roger
L'Estrange; and happy is he that can nearest approach to his directions in
their Pulpit Harangues. There is no question to be made, but that all who
understand the excellency and perfection of Church^ Discipline, must confess
the Church of England, under its present Constitution, to be the most Orthodox,
the most pure, without the Phylacteries of Hypocritical Ceremonies, and the
closest to primitive Institution of any Religion in the World. And this is
further to be said for the Protestant English Clergy, that you rarely hear of
any that fall under those public Scandals and Reproaches, for which the Romish
Clergy, from the highest to the lowell, are loudly and so generally taxed, so
tha^ they sin more out of Vanity than Wickedness.

But the Nation is so overstocked with Crape Gowns, that it is impossible but
that in such a number there must be failings among them, subject to great
Remark and Observation: An ill Omen of sick Divinity when it comes to be
mantled in the shrouds appropriated for the dead. Now these men in Crape, as
they are generally young, so they are generally very highly conceited. A
character which they will much more advance, if they refuse to receive the
Admonishments of others, as they undertake to be the Instructers of others
themselves. And therefore they will do well kindly to accept of this Mirror
here presented them, new foiled and furbish'd up, to be placed in their
Studies, and looked in every morning, by which means they will be able to find
the reason why some of their Churches are so empty, others so numerously
thronged, and by reforming their own contemplated blemishes, gain an esteem,
both of their persons and their Doctrine, more operative upon the good Opinions
of the People. No P^agiary Looking-glass, as that Coxcomb Heraclitus has with a
debauched, and ridiculous mummery intimated to the World.

It Is most certain then, that there is something which does lessen the value of
many of our Clergy, and render them less serviceable to the Church, than might
be reasonably hoped for: And this may be referred to two very plain things, the
Ignorance of some, and the Poverty of others.

This proceeds in part from the old fashioned Methods and Discipline of
Schooling itself: by virtue of which Lads are kept till Sixteen on Seventeen
Years of Age* in a pure slavery to a few Latin and Greek words, tormented with
a tedious story how Phaeton brake his Neck, or how many Nuts and Apples Tityrus
had for his Supper; and instead of being ^nticed and charmed into a Love of
Learning, are well lashed into an abhorrency of their Studies.

Add to this the inconsiderate sending of all sorts of Lads to the
Universities, let their par^s be never so low and mean, the Instructions they
have been ^u^ored withal never so Pedantick and contemptible, and the Purses of
their friends never so bare and^ short to maintain them there, if they have but
the commendation of some lamentable Soul, or pitiful const^uing^ Pedant, it
passes for a most undoubted Approbation of the Striplings Learning, and that
they will prove persons very eminent in the Church: as much as to say, if a
Lad* though otherwise a Jo^thead, have but so much memory as to sing over to a
lamentable Tune Three or Four Scanzas of Lilly's Poetry; if he be quick and
ready to tell what is latin for all the Implements in his Fathers Shop, or his
Mothers Kitchen, if he can but tell a Sponde from a Dactyl; lastly, if he can
give ready answers to the usual Catechism, of What is his n^me? Where went he
to School; What Books he has learned? I profess a Notable Wit, cries the
Pedagogue: a hopeful Youth, it is a Thousand pities but he should be a Scholar;
he will prove a brave Clergy man, and an excellent Preacher I warrant ye. Then
away with him presently to the University, where he learns a little Logic, and
a little Ethics, and to speak Truth and shame the Devil, a very little of
every thing else, and then the next time you meet him, whip! he is got into the
Pulpit.

Well, when they have him at the Universitie, what do they do with him there?
There, if he be of the inferior sort, that he may not over-heat his Brains with
Study, he is put to Bed making, Chamber-sweeping, and Water-fetching, which are
no question great preservatives against vain Philosophy.

However, the Fellow whom he serves, cannot but in pity, if not for Conscience
sake, let him glean some small morsels of his Knowledge, which costs him no
more then only the expense of that time while the young ^^zar is pulling off
his Masters Stockins, or warming his Nightcap: From thence he learns, Quid est
Logica? Qua sunt Virtutes morales? and to number the Predicaments in their
order. This being done, he takes his leave of the University, and by the first
Carrier, upon a Pack, away he goes by ^low Marches into his nown Country, with
a common place Book, and a Medulla Theologiae, and then have at a Parsonage;
for the Gentlemen is put to his choice, either of Preaching or Starving. Now
what a Champion for Truth can we expect from such a one as this? What a Raiser
of Doctrines, what a Confounder of Heresy will he be? What an expounder of
difficult Tex^s? What a Resolver of Cases of Conscience? And what a prudent
Shepherd to his whole ^^ock?

Now as there are some who think that Two or Three Years continuance at the
University, to be time sufficient to fit a young man for being a great
Instrument in the Church, so others we have so moderate, as to believe, that a
solemn admission, and the paying Colledge-Duties (without the trouble of
Philosophical Discourses and Disp^tations, and the like) are virtues that will
influence as far as Cumberland, and improve though it be as far as St.
Michael's Mount. So strangely are some People possessed, with the easiness and
the small p^^parations required for the undertaking of the Ministry, that
though in other Professions they plainly see what considerable time is spent by
young Students, before they have any hopes of at^aining to experience and
Knowledge enough to practice; yet to preach to ord^nary People, and govern a
Country ^^ock, is usually deemed such an easy Task, that every one thinks
himself fit for the employment; and that as for the knack of Preaching, as they
call it, it is a perfection so easily attained, that he is esteemed a Dunce
indeed, that is not able at a very small warning, to fasten upon any Text of
Scripture, and to ^eize and tumble it for an hour, till the Glass be fairly run
out, without the Clerks jogging* Though indeed a man had better commit himself
to the Instructions and Teaching of an approved Cobbler or Tinker, whereby he
may be duly respected according to his Art and Condition of Life, than to live
only a disesteem'd Emperick in Divinity.

To supply this want of Education, many of our Youngsters seek to advance their
Reputation by affected words or affected and obscure Notions: Believing either
out of simple, fantastic, vain Glory, and a great ambition of being admired
at, as if getting into the Pulpit were a kind of Staging, that nothing is more
to be by them considered* than how much the Sermon procures them the gaping and
staring of the People; or else to gain a respect and Reverence from the
Auditors, think it convenient to puzzle them, and carry them as it were into
the Clouds: Judging, that should the Ministers words be such as comes to the
common Ma^ket, plain and practical, he might pass probably for an honest and
well meaning man, but by no^means for that thing which he would be thought to
be, a Scholar* Whereas if he give a spring now^ and then in high Raptures
toward the uppermost Heavens, dashing here and there an All^ amazing word if
he soars aloft in bombasti^^^ Huffs, preaches Points de^p and mystical, and
delivers the^ as dark and Fantastical; This is the way to be admired, and
accounted a most able and profound ^nstructer.

Others there are that spice, and besprinkle their Harangues with Greek, and
Latin Sentences. In doing of which, though they seem by their ready naming
their Authors, to be very conversant with them, yet it many times proves but
the gleaning of a quotation happened upon by chance; and sometimes it appears
that they are better acquainted with the Character than the sense, like the
Parson that being to Preach before his Diocesan, and aspiring to be more
learned then ordinary at such a great time, thunderd forth in the middle of his
Sermon out of Museus* an amorous piece of Courtship between Hero and Leander*
quite from the matter. A strange piece of ostentation to jargonize before
Farmers, and Shepherds, or the Patron of the Parish specially if invested with
his Lac'd-coated London Visitants; as if plain words, useful, and intelligible
matter were not as good for an Esquire, or one that is in Commission of the
Peace* as for him that holds the Plough, or mends Hedges. Another sort there
are that stuff their Sermons with frightful metaphors; fly to both the Indies,
ransack Heaven and Earth; down to the bottom of the Sea; romage all the Shops
and Ware^houses, spare neither Camp nor City, but they will have them. Nay so
injudicious and impudent will they be sometimes, that the Almighty himself is
often in danger of being dishonored; but then to make amends for their
unhallowed expressions, they screw in an as it were, or as I may so say: or
else they come in hobling with their ^ame Submission, or with Reverence be it
spoken, as if it were not better to leave out what they foresee will be
interpreted for extravagancy, than to utter that, for which their own
consciences ^ell them they must be forced to lay in an Excuse before^hand.

Some there are whose metaphorical Knack is all for the Sea, and then you shall
hear of nothing but Star-board and Larr^board; Stemms, Sterns and Forecastles,
and such sort of Salt^water Language. Another supposes himself to be some great
General, and he divides his Text into the Right and Left Wing; then he Rears
it, ^lanks it, I^trenches it, S^orms it; then he musters all again, to see what
words we^e lost in the Skirmish* and so falls on again, charges through and
through, routs, kills, takes, and then Gentlemen as you were.

Others there are that are all for lacing their Discourses with Simili^udes,
which are not only of little force in Argument, but very trifling and
childish; especially if you consider the choiceness of the Authors out of which
they are furnished. There is the never to be enough commended Lic^sthenes*
There is that exquisite and most elaborate Piece, The Second Part of Wits
Commonwealth (mind it I pray, the Second Part, not the First.) There is besides
a Book wholly consisting of Similitudes, ready fitted and applied to all
Preaching Subjects, for the help of young beginners, which nevertheless they
make to hit but very odly sometimes.

It Is reported of a Tree that grows by the River Euphrates, the Great River
Euphrates, which brings forth an Apple, to the eye very fair and tempting, but
inwardly is filled with nothing but tempting and deceitful dust: Even so dust
are we, and to dust we shall go.

Our Souls gape after thee, O Lord, even as the O^^ter gapes.

God has knit the hearts of his People in a holy Conspiracy to besiege Heaven.

God has taken off the Bridle of Restraint from the Lips of the People.

God was never so tempted to bow the Heavens and come down to rescue his People.

Others drop into Obscenity like Him, who was always comparing the sinfulness
of Man into Menstruous Clouts.

Others fetch their Similitudes from the Skies. The mercy of God in sending his
Son into the world* was a signal mercy, it was Zodiacal mercy. I say, it was
truly Zodiacal. For Christ keeps within the Tropicks: he never goes out of the
Pale of the Church. But yet he is not always at the same distance from a
Believer* Sometimes he withdraws himself into the Apogeum of doubt, ^orrow and
despair; but then he comes again into the Perigeum of Joy, content and
assurance: but as for Heathens and Unbelievers, they are Arctic and Antarctic
Reprobates.

A true Believer, my Beloved is like a Cat, throw a Cat up, throw her down, she
will still light upon her Legs: So let Affl^ctions ^oss a Believer any way, he
will still light upon the Legs of Faith. The blots and blurs of our (...) must
be taken away by the Aquafortis of our tears; a most Chemical expression.

Can any man imagine how the People sighed and cried, when the Parson made this
Metaphysical Confession for them? Omnipotent All, Thou art Only, because Thou
art All, and because thou Only art. As for us, We are not; for we are but
Mites of Entity, and Crumbs of something. As if the Common People were bound to
understand Suarez, and the School Divines.

Did not he do well who taught that Christ was a Shopkeeper, a Treasury of all
sorts of Wares and Commodities, and thereupon tearing his wide Throat, cried
^ut, Good People, what do you lack, what d' ye buy? Will ye have any Balm of
Gilead, any Eye salve, any Myrrh, Aloes, or Cassia? Shall I fit ye with a Robe
of Righteousness, or with a white Garmen^* see here, what is it you want* here is
a choice Armory* Shall I show you a Helmet of Salvation, a Shield, or Breast
plate of Faith? Or will you please to walk in, and see some precious Stones, a
Jasper, a Saphyr, or a Calced^n; what do you buy?

It would be an endless thing to reckon up all the follies that have been
Preached and Printed of this kind. Yet th^re is one of a Person that pretended
to great Eloquence in his time, who advising the People to run to the Lord,
told them, they could not run to the Lord, much less go without feet. There are
therefore two feet, to run to the Lord: Fai^^, and Prayer. It Is plain that
Faith is a foot, for 2 Cor. 1. By Faith we stand; and that Prayer is a
Spiritual ^eg* appears from Jonah 2. 7. My Prayer came into thy Holy T^mple.
Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore go unto the Throne of (...): there being no
coming, and going to the Lord without the Leg of Prayer. The same Person added,
now that these feet may be able to bear us thither, we must put on the Hose of
Faith. For the Apostle says, Our feet must be shod with the preparation of the
Gospel. Was it not elegantly observed, That Goodness was the milky way to
Jupiter 's Palace. But that which follows was far more neat and curious, full
of fancy, and worthy imitation upon those words of St. John; These things I
write unto you, that ye sin not. The observation was, That it is the purpose of
the Scripture to drive men to Heaven, which he made out thus; The Scriptures
contain Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, and Histories. Now take
these five Stones, and put them into the scrip of the heart, and throw them
with the sling of Faith by the hand of a strong resolution, against the
forehead of sin, and we shall see it fall before us like Goliath. Now if these
things flow naturally, or that a young Levite can blow'em out of his Nose, how
happy is he that can s^oop in his Pulpit, and make use of his Hankerchief, how
easy a thing is it to drill out an hour in tickling the Auditors Ears with
Parables. But it they come hard, Heavens bless us! how does that poor man
labor to make an Ass of himself? for Similitudes without Judgment are the most
ridiculous things in the world: as for example, the Round Earth cannot fill the
Triangular Heart of Man. A most pithy expression to set forth the ambition of
Mankind. An Error to be laughed at by the Butchers Boys, who know that the
heart is no more triangular than a Town-Top.

The next Ornament of modern Preaching is, Chiming of words, as Faith, Hope and
Charity, Hope, Faith and Charity. Or thus, like the second Peal-changes at St.
Pulchers, Revelation's a Lady, Reason the Handmaid, Revelation's the Esquire,
Reason the Handmaid, Revelation's the Sun, Reason the Moon: Then by and by
Reason leads, Reason is good, but Revelation much better; Reason is a
Counselor, Revelation is a Lawgiver; Reason is the Candle; Revelation the
Snuffer. Not unlike this was the jingling determination between the old
Covenant and the new. The old Covenant was of works, the new one of Faith; the
old Covenant was by Moses, the new by Christ; the old Covenant was before, the
new one afterward. The old was first, the new one was second. All which being
undeniable Truths, there was an end of the business.

To come now to the method of Preaching, you would think they came into the
Pulpit to vent their whimsies and conceits, rather than to Preach sound
Doctrine.

First, before the division of the Text, there must be a Preface, wherein it is
of great consequence to make the Text like something or other, according to the
dictates of his ingenious fancy. One simpers upon his Auditory, and now
methinks, quo he, My Text, like an ingenious Picture, looks upon all here
present; in which both Nobles and People may behold their sin and danger
represented. This was a Text taken out of Hosea; but what if it had been taken
out of any other place? why still it might have been an ingenious Picture, had
the Gentleman so pleased. For it was a conceit calculated for the meridian of
any Text. And truly in my opinion so were all these that follow. Says one, I
might compare my Text to the Mountains of Bether, where the Lord disports
himself as a young Heart, or a pleasant Roe among the Spices. And there was no
question but he did so; for it is to be supposed there was no body so unmannerly
as to hinder him. Says another, My Text is like the Rod of Moses, to divide
the waves of sorrow; or like the Mantle of Elijah, to restrain the swelling
floods of Grief. The first man's Text for my money; what say you? I say this
man's -- no, you are out -- the first man's allusion runs higher. You shall
have another climb up to his Text, as thus; As Solomon went up six steps to the
Throne of Ivory* so must I as^end six degrees to come to the high meaning of my
Text. Cries another, as Deborah arose* and went with Barak to Kadesh; so if you
will go with me and call in at the third verse of the Chapter I will show you
the meaning of my Text. I assure ye, very pretty conceits, both; it would
gravel a man which to choose. There are besides these several other sorts of
Texts; and truly it is well there are, for store is no sore. One like an Orchard
of Pome-Granates. Another like St. Matthew sitting at the receipt of Custom; a
third like the Dove that Noah sent out of his Ark. There have been several
Texts like Rachel and Leah* there is one Genesis more wonderful, like a pair of
Compasses stradling; and another much more wonderful then that, Like a Man
going to Jericho.

The Text being thus chosen, and ascertained what it is like, must in the next
place be divided, and by and by you shall see an Orchard of Pome-Granates so
strangely transinogrify'd, that you would never think it the same thing, and a
man going to Jericho so mangled and minced that 't would grieve ye to see it.
Nevertheless you must know there is a great difference in the nature of Texts,
for some naturally fall asunder, some drip asunder, some dr^p asunder* and some
melt. There are some Texts that untwist; and in others the words are so willing
to be parted, that they divide themselves. On the other side sometimes they
meet with a sort of Texts, so like Logwood, that they are forced to divide 'em
six or seven times before they can make 'em split to their minds.

But then, O then, there is the delight of their Souls, when the sentence ends
with a jingling Rhyme, and cries clink in the close; as accusatio vera
comminatio severa: D^i Amor, Diaboli clamor; miraculum in modo, miraculum in
^^do. These were Ticklers: But commend me to him that took these words for his
Text. Mat. 12. 43. 44. 45. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, be
walks through dry places, seeking rest and finding none; Then he says, I will
return, etc. In which words wonderful things were found out almost past
imagination, first there was a Captain and a Castle. Then there was an Ingress,
an Egress, a Regress, and Reingre^s; all these things followed of consequence,
in regard of the Castle. But then there was unroosting, and unresting; for the
Castle was taken. Then there was number and name; that was in reference to the
Garrison. Then their was Manner, and Measure, Trouble, and Trial* Resolution
and Revolution, Assault, and Assassination, Voydness, and Vacuity. Thus you see
by the lucky finding out that Captain, and that Castle, what a world of other
business fell in course. This it is to have an exuberant fancy, and to have one
Eye in the Air, and another upon his Text.

But more to be admired was he, that out of these eight words, Weep not for me,
but for your selves, spun out no less then eight parts. 1. Weep not, 2. But
Weep. 3. Weep not, but Weep. 4. Weep for me. 5. For your selves. 6. For me, for
your selves. 7. Weep not for me. 8. But for your selves. This Gentleman had a
strange Command of his tears, Nay he could weep and not weep, he was Weeping
Master General of England. Every Man to his calling: the Soldier to his, Prime
your Pan, cock your Match, blow your Cole, Present, etc. The Weeper to his,
Weep, weep not, weep not for me, for your selves, weep and not weep; Who would
not go to this Gentleman's grieving School for an hour or so, to hear how
prettily these words of command run?

Nor was he to be less respected, who taking his Text out of Genesis 48. 2. And
one told Jacob, and said, Behold thy Son Joseph ^ometh unto thee, presently
made it out to the People that his Text was a Spiritual Dyal For said he, Here
are in my Text twelve words, which do plainly* represent the twelve Hours*
Twelve words and one told Jacob, behold thy Son Joseph comes unto thee, Here
is farther, behold, which is the Dyal that turns and points at every word in
the Text. Behold And, behold one, behold I told, behold Jacob, Again behold,
And, behold Said, behold, behold, which is the reason that this word behold is
placed in the middle of the twelve words, indifferently pointing at each.

Now for the Doctrines, Observations, and Inferences raised from their Texts,
they are without all Compare.

One takes for his Text, that of Isaiah 41. 14, 15. Fear not thou worm Jacob,
etc. thou shall thresh the Mountains. Whence he observed that the Worm Jacob
was a threshing Worm.

A second from the Text Genesis 44. 1. And he commanded the Steward of his house,
saying, fill the men's Sacks with Corn, as much as they can carry, played this
division upon the plain song, That great Sacks and more Sacks, would hold more
than few Sacks and little Sacks: For look, said he as they came prepared with
Sacks and Beasts, so they were sent back with Corn. The greater and the more
Sacks they had prepared, the more Corn they carried away, the lesser and fewer
they had, the less Corn they carried away* Let the World judge whether this
Gentleman was not resolved to speak truth.

No less careful of uttering truth was he, that upon John 2. v. 15. And when he
had made a Scourge of small Cords, he drove them all out of the Temple, made
this Discovery; 1. That a Scourge might be made in the Church or Temple, And
when he had made a Scourge. 2. That it might be made use of,^ he drove them out
of the Temple. Upon Matthew. 4. 25. And there followed him great multitudes of
People from Galilee, he proved another Columbus, thus, I discover, says he,
when Jesus prevails with us, we shall leave our Galilees. 2. I discover also a
great Miracle, that the way after Jesus being straight, that such a multitude^
should follow him. But never was Hawk more quick ^ighted than he upon Matthew. 5.
1. And seeing the multitude, he went up into the mountain; where he discovered,
1. That Christ went from the Multitude; 2. That it was safe^ taking warning by
our Eyes; for seeing the multitude he went up. 3. That it was not always fit to
be upon plains and flats with the Multitude: Then upon the latter part of the
words, And when he was set, his D^sciples came unto him; he discovered, 1st,
That Christ was not always in motion. 2dly, That he did not walk upon the
Mountain but ^at; from whence, in the 3d place, he raised this Admonition to
the People, That when they were teaching, they should not move too much, for
that was to be carried away with every wind of Doctrine: unheard of
curiosities! O these University Wits! there are no men in the World like 'em.
Will ye have a short and witty Discovery? mind this upon Mat. 6. 27. Which of
you by taking thought can add one Cubit to his Stature? The Discovery was* That
whilst the Disciples were taking thought for a Cubit, Christ thought fit to
take them down a Cubit lower. How divinely was he inspired, that made the
following Discoveries upon Matthew. 8. 2. When he came down from the Mountain
great Multitudes followed him. 1. That Christ came down, as well as he went up.
2* That the Multitude did not go hail fellow well met with him. Such a man as
this deserved a good Living; for he spoke nothing but upon solid grounds. But
now here is a discovery deserves to be recorded in History. Matthew. 12. 47. Then
one said unto him, behold, thy Mother* and thy Brethren stand without; but he
answered and said, who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? upon which he
discovered, that Jesus was upon Business.

Others there are, who being appointed, or choosing to preach upon some point of
Divinity, avoid the plain and easy places, tending or relating to that
Subject* and fetch it in by Head and Shoulders out of foreign Texts nothing at
all to the purpose; which shows a great Master piece of Learning; for then the
People cry, I could not Imagine what Mr. such a one drove at; but yet at length
how cunningly he brought it in. -- He Is a quaint man. Suppose for Example, that
a young Gentleman were to preach up Episcopacy, you shall have him baulk all
other Texts and take this, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? For the Greek
word for Sirs, being Lords, therefore they were bishops that were spoken to.
Another being to preach up Kingly Government, forsook all other Topics, and
chose that of the Evangelist, Seek first the Kingdom of God. From whence he
proved that Kingly Government was most pleasing to God* And indeed, but that
some men are not so apprehensive as others, the thing is plain; for the Text
does not say the Commonwealth of God, nor the Aristocracy of God, but the
Kingdom of God. But what could be more quaint than this? Suppose I were to
preach against non Residence; I would scorn the common road^^ Why? What would
you do? Oh! I have it i'my head already, I would choose that of Matthew. 1. 2.
Abraham begat Isaac. For (and I wonder how a man could miss it) had Abra^am
gone a gadding abroad, and not resided with Sarah, he had never done his
business, he had never begat Isaac.

If there be any who think I enumerate these things out of disaffection, they
have as little Charity for me, as they have for themselves, there being nothing
more frequent among them, than Envy, Passion, Repining, and supplanting of each
other. There is certainly a most profound and awful Reverence to be paid to a
true, ^ound, and Orthodox Teacher and Expounder of sacred Writ; but for every
Whiffler in Divinity to arrogate that esteem to himself, merely for his Habits
sake, without intrinsecal worth, is a mere presumption. They should labor by
imitation of their betters, to gain that esteem, which would be then their due.
But instead of following their Studies, as they ought to do, you shall find
some idleing away their time in Coffee Houses, and chattering State Affairs,
which nothing belong to them. Others you shall meet handing young brisk Ladies
in the street; a most unseemly ^ight to see long Gowns and Petticoats together;
as if there were not laced Cravats and Ruffles enough about the Town for that
amorous employment: To say truth, we have too much pratin^ in England,
especially in great Cities, where the Bells never lie still all the Week long,
from Six a Clock in the morning, till Five at night. And all this to feed the
Qstentation of our Pulpit-Thrashers. And yet all this while even Preaching
itself, is, without all doubt, not to be accounted so essential a part of
Divine Worship, as Prayer is. In which assertion I take the greater boldness,
knowing that Sermons are only well studied Exhortations, and methodiz'd
Instructions, whose chiefest end is but to incite men to the duty of Prayer, or
^each 'em the right use thereof. An Exercise confined within the narrow limits
only of Industry and sound Learning; of which great Perfections there are but
^ew of your common Hackny Sermon-makers, that are too too much guilty. Were
Sermons therefore less frequent, they would be much more valued: For then would
men have time to meditate, and their abortive Irreverences would not drop so
often from their Mouths, without Soul or Life, as not having staid their time
in the Womb of Meditation. I will appeal^ to the reason of any man, whether it
be within the Verge of Mortality, for a person to Preach at Six of the Clock in
the Morning in Cornhil, by Ten at St. Martins Outwich, and in the Afternoon to
be posted out of Town Six or Seven Miles with a Job of Journey work, to please a
Benefactor in the Country. Nor is this all, three or four casts of his Office
on the Week days, and his hand always open at an hours warning for a Funeral
Fee besides* Surely such a one must have a large stock of ready cut and dry^d
to set up withal, or must be a great Conner of other men's works, or else it is
impossible that such a superabundance should be other than the riff^raff, and
quicquid in Buccam venerit of a mercena^y Brain. Neither is this one single
Doctors opinion. I find that Reverend and Learned Prelate, Bishop Andrews,
confessing his own insufficiency to Preach twice in one day, and giving to his
Afternoon Exercises the severe appellation of Prating. Which shall we follow
then? The light of such a Star of the first Magnitude in the Firmament of the
Church of England? Or the Clouded Reflections of mere Divinity Meteors, that
run whisking up and down to vent their undigested conceits, as the Wind of
their Fantastical Doctrines agitates 'em? What a strange piece of ridiculous
Devotions it is, that half a Score Astrologizing Conjurers cannot meet over a
Leg of Mutton^ and Colli-^lowers, but they must have a pickled Sermon to
prepare their Stomachs. A Usurer cannot die, a man perhaps that got the very
Reward of his Funeral Oration over the Devils Back, but he must have a Sermon
forsooth, in praise of what he never had, his laudable Virtues.

But these are accounted helps, or additions, to an ordinary living. And truly
if double diligence were a Trade, this double Diligence and carking good
Husbandry might be excused, to satisfy the clamours o^ a Wife for a new Gown,
or a fine Petticoat. But it is not for those unjustifiable expenses, or to
maintain the Pride of Parsons Wives, that there should be a due, and competent
maintenance allowed the Clergy, but to preserve them from that contempt that
falls upon poverty. For, Nil habet inf^lix paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. --


It Is a sad thing to see so many young Officers in Divinity sneaking in several
Villages of the Nation with a lamentable exhibition of ten or fifteen pounds p.
Annum, and either teaching the meanest of the Parish, or learning themselves to
drink Ale, and smoke Tobacco in the Chimney-corner at old ^ammer such a ones
House, while he that enjoys the larger profits of the same Parish, is taking
his pleasure in some place of more benefit, and better a dorn'd with pleasing
Society. And indeed there is nothing can be thought to have more hindered the
People from a due estimation of the ^ommon-Prayer or Liturgy of the Church,
than the employing so many pit^^ul striplings, and illiterate old mumblers to
read those sacred Forms of Prayer: Not does any thing more keep back the
dissatisfied People of the Nation, from coming to Church till the Service be
over, than that it is hurried over by some underling twelve pound a year
Disciple, with whose Education they are so well acquainted as to know him
scarce able to read the Lessons without conning them over. For though the
Office of a Reader be only to read word for word, yet People love he should be
a person that understands what he reads. But if such a one ventures into the
Pulpit, it is then a hundred to one but he pra^es all the Congregation asleep;
for it is a hard matter for the people to believe that such a one can talk any
thing to the purpose, that wants ordinary food for his Family, whose best meal
all the week is the Tanners Beef and Pudding for his empty Sermon on ^unday* or
that his advice and admonitions can come from Heaven, of whom Providence seems
to have taken so little care. Were true virtue and right Judgment reigning in
the hearts of men, such idle prejudices would vainly be supposed, and the
Doctrine that proceeded from the most tattered habit, would be as acceptable as
the sayings that flowed from he mouth of one clad in Silk. But in regard the
world is not so absolutely perfect, it is never to be questioned whether the
Alms-Man-Teacher of a Parish can be respected by those to whom he is beholding
for his daily Bread. Whether the that cant look out of his Pulpit into the
Church but that he spies one or other, upon whom he depends, and for want of
money has not confidence to reprehend his Sex^on, can utter with courage any
thing that can be so benefical to his people, as to render them his diligent
hearers, and hearty respecters.

The Divine Service it is true is the same, whether read in a Cathedral, or a
Thatched Church; whether read by an Archbishop, or the meanest of his Priests.
But as the Solemnity of the place has a great influence upon the peoples
devotion, so likewise the condition, and quality of the person that reads it,
whose circumstances, as to this life are so bad, and low in this world. Nor do
they delight to confess their sins, or sing praises to God with him who sighs
more for want of money, and Victuals, than for his trespasses, and offenses.

Nor indeed can this well otherwise be. For where the Minister is hard pinched
as to the tolerable conveniences of this life; the chief of his care must be
spent, not in considering what Text to take, what Doctrine to Preach, what
Authors to make use of; but the chief of his though^s must be how to live, and
provide for his Family. He is musing when the next comfortable, and seasonable
Goose, or the next Basket of baked Pears will come to cherish his forlorn
Stomach: and how he shall hold out till his small offerings come in. He is
pining after the consolations of the next Christning Cakes, and the comforts of
the next Marriage, or Funeral. In the midst of these fears, disasters of great
consequence attacque him. The uncompassionate Kite surprises two of his
unfortunate Chickens out of the number of three: his only Sow miscarries: His
Neighbors Horse breaks his Hedge, and devours the sustenance of his si^gle
Cow. To him the los^es of a Spanish Merchant, and far more distracting; nay
we'll suppose him sometimes forced to mount his slow^pac'd Pegasus, between a
pair of Dossers, to carry his brace of Geese to Market, for the return of a
brown Loaf, and a hard Cheese: Cares which are altogether incompatible with
Study. The other are considerations befitting a poor man's thoughts. For a
Family cannot be governed by Texts and Contexts* not will the Infant that lies
crying in the Cradle be satisfied without a little milk, and perhaps a little
Sugar too, though there should be some short System of Divinity in the House.

But grant that our Diminutive Divine be at somewhat more rest in his mind, and
that he have some kind of competency to answer the cravings of Humane Nature;
yet not being able to purchase the necessary helps of good Books, it is
impossible he should eve^ attain to those accomplishments which are requisite
to gain him that esteem which should give him credit in his Preaching* For it
is not a small six^peny Concordance, nor a Latin Book of Sentences, no^ Caryl
upon Pin^da, nor Dod upon the Commandments, not Clarks lives of Famous Men,
wherein many things are taken upon trust, that will do the work. Divinity is a
copious study; and there are so many great men that have writ upon the Subject
in all its parts, as require the purchase of more Languages than one: so that
they who are disenabled from the purchasing part, are no way to be entrusted
with the teaching part. A great pity no doubt, that thus it should be, for
there are certainly no doubt, several in this condition, whose better parts and
ingenuities are curbed and depressed by these Domestic necessities. For, Hand
facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --


But such is the eagerness, and ambition that some people have of going in^o
Orders, that though the Churches, and Chapels we have, are enough, considering
the bigness of the Nation, yet in respect of that infinite number that are in
holy Orders, there is a very great want* Now whether it be most convenient to
make Ministers for Churches, or Churches for Ministers is the Question. But the
Proverb is, talk of any thing but building of Churches. For if we build more
Churches, we must make more Land for their endowment: which cannot be done
without drying up the Sea, and that is a very difficult Task.

However they will get into Orders* come what will of it, though perhaps they
understand neither their message nor their business. For some are hugely in
love with the mere Title of a Priest, or Minister; others fancy tha^ a^long
Crape Gown and Cassock is a handsome garment, though it be in the Winter, and
never paid for. But if they get but a Scarf about their Necks, by virtue of a
Chaplainship in some Noble Family, then how big they look in an English
Booksellers Shop? for the Latin ones they ^eldom haunt, as being out of their
sphere. From thence they cluster to the Coffee House, there to order the
Government, and rail against the Dissenters, men of far more understanding than
themselves, and show an equal composition of discretion, learning, and Charity,
of each two drams; their discretion in meddling with those things that nothing
concern them* their learning in the management of their Arguments, and their
Charity in the continual invectives against they know not who themselves, and
of whom they know no more by due proof, but that they are their fellow
Christians. 'Twas a happy invention for the Crape Gown Men this setting up of
Coffe^Houses; For to drink in Taverns was scandalous, to be seen in an Alehouse
more unbeseeming; but to sit idling away their time in a Coffee^House, like the
Disciples of H^ly and Mahomet, till it be time to go to farthing Lantralew with
a young Gentlewoman, that is an employment without the verge of reprehension:
Especially if they can be heard to rail loud enough, like the Popes white
Boys, against Heresy, Schism, and Fanaticism. But what is become of Rome, and
the so much exclaimed against Babylon? Those are Airy Notions now, Fanaticism
and Dissenterism is the mode now, and as they are modish in their Habits, they
think it more convenient to be modish in their Sermons. Besides the Papists are
a sort of cunning Fellows, they argue shrewdly, they dispute Philosophically
and Metaphysically. And there be many knotty points in controversy between
them and the Church of England, which cost King James, Archbishop Laud, and
several others, much pains and labor in those days to re^ute, and of late have
put Bp. Gunning, Bp. Barlow, and Dr. Stilling fleet to look to their Hits: And
therefore our Crape Gown men think it more convenient to let them alone, than
to betray their folly and their ignorance. But for the Fanatics, they are more
easily dealt with: It Is but going into a Pulpit and calling a man Fanatic, and
he is presently confuted with a jerk; it is but calling a Dissenter Schismatic;
it is but calling Religion Division, and there is an end of the business. The
Observator's learned half Sheets come easily at a Penny a piece; but Grotiu's
Works will cost Four Pounds odd money, and that will go far in a new Crape Gown,
and a narrow brim'd Hat, with a Perriwig to boot. And therefore who would not
choose a lazy Coffee^drinking Life, with the pleasure of good Company, and
suffer themselves to be deluded back to the vomit of Popery, though to their
own destruction, than undergo the labor of a studious Life, and improving
themselves in the soundness of that Doctrine which they outwardly profess? But
let them consider how vainly they contend to suffocate what God has so
miraculously detected; let them consider the inconveniences of being led astray
by mercenary Scriblers against the discoveries of Heaven; let them consider how
wonderfully Providence has protected the Church of England, of which they
pretend themselves the Sons and Children, against all the various and bloody
Machinations of Popery against it, ever since the first dawn of Reformation;
and upon these considerations let them at length give over their cologuing
adherence to the Fascinations of Rome, bearing in mind that assertion of sacred
Writ, That there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against
Israel, the lot of Gods Inheritance, and his peculiar care.

But then again, how strangely conceited are they, that after a long
consideration, serious meditation, and recollection of mind, are so vain as to
put their Conumdrums, their Quibbles, and their Quibus's in Print? I met the
other day with the quaintest Raptures and Ecstasies in a Bathonian Sermon,
Preached and Printed by a Golden Minister, that certainly the Wit of Man never
invented spr^cer, 'Twas a Plot upon himself, to make himself the Chrysostom^ of
the Age. You shall see how he plays with the Greek, as a Cat plays with a Mouse.

Have thou a Kepha^algia, does thy Head ache? Have thou an Opthalmia, are thine
Eyes infl^m'd? Have thou an Aphonia, is thy Speech taken from the? Have thou an
Osphyalgia, do thy Loins chasten thee in the night season? Mark* my Beloved,
that Seraphick Interpretation of the word Osphyalgia. Have thou a Volvulus
Inte^^^^orum, a Miserere me^, and forced to cry out, Oh, my Bowels, my Bowels!
Have thou a Kakocroia, is thy Body turned black and sallow? Have thou a
Paralysis, is the use of thy Limbs taken from thee? This is called playing at
Shittlecock with Greek words. What man of sense could have refrained from
laughing in the Church, to have heard such a piece of Pulpit Buffon^y.

The same Person from Job. 26. 21. undertakes to prove that the Bill of
Exclusion was contrary to Scripture, and that the Parliament were a Company of
hot Headed fellows, for reprimanding and making Thompson kneel at their Bar.
Now would I fain know what Job had to do with the Bill of Exclusion, or the
Parliaments severity. But Heavens bless us, when some men get into a Pulpit,
they are so rampant, so hoytie toytie, they know not where their Tails hang. In
the next place commend me to that incomparable and admirable Translation of a
piece of Latin, printed by the Ludgate Excommunicator, Nunquam nec Albiani*
nec Nigriani, nec Cassiani* inveniri* potuerunt Christiani: that is, Never was
true Christian found a Traitor to his Prince. This it is to have a sharpness and
accuteness of Wit beyond the common reach of Mankind.

Now lastly, I cannot but admire at that delicate Inscription that* was printed
upon the Portigo of a Nuptial Harangue. The Royal Merchant, or a Sermon, by
which you are to understand, that the two married couple were to take a Trading
Voyage to Matrimony, and that Matrimony is a Trading Voyage.

Whether what has been said will have any operation upon our Crape Gown men*
or no, I know not; But that they may see how ridiculous they are when they
stand fretting, and fuming, and heating themselves about State Affairs in their
Pulpits, they are desired to read the short Sermon that follows, which if it be
not altogether their own words, I am sure is altogether their own sense.

The SERMON.
RABLAIS, Chap. 32. Virtue nescio quo.
The Grandgousier sending to know what the matter was, found that some of his
people had taken certain Simnels from the Subjects of Picrochol.
MAn of all Creatures is the only creature that proposes to himself an Aim and
an End in what he does. For Man is the only Creature that Thinks. Yet there be
some that say the Beasts do think as well as he. Rorarius for one: Who that
Rararius was, I cannot tell: I must confess I never read him, but I have heard
say so, and that is enough. Neither do I believe a word he says: And my great
Argument is this; for that it is impossible that a Beast should have Reason.
You Will say perhaps, What is this to the purpose? I come not here to extol my
own parts, as being the meanest of my Tribe. But the sight of so many Worthy
persons as I behold in this Assembly, inspi^es me, methinks, with higher
thoughts. Therefore it is that I have led ye out of the way, that I might have
the happiness to lead ye into the way: therefore it is that I have carried ye
afar off, that I might have the opportunity to take ye all by the hands and
lead ye home again to my Text. My Text, that is like a shady gloomy Wood;
where, as I may say, a man cannot see Wood from Trees. Here is in my Text a
certain Meaning and profound Sense to be found out, that lies concealed among
Bushes and Underwoods. And thus it is a frequent thing among us, after a long
hunting to start a Hare in a Wood; and then we pursue the little Animal with a
full Cry. And thus, my beloved, as I have brought ye into a Wood, so I must
endeavor to help ye out again. Here is a certain person in a brown Study,
pondering, and meditating, and considering with himself; and at length, after a
serious exercise of his Thoughts, he found there was something in the Wind: And
therefore he sent to know what was the matter. So then* my beloved, here is the
Hoti, and the Dioti. Here is the Hoti, because he found there was something in
the Wind: And here is the Dioti, therefore he sent to know what was the matter:
Then Grandgousier* sending to know what was the matter, found, etc. Here is
then the Person, Grandgousier: Here is the person that sent: Here is the person
that sent to know: Here is the person that sent to know what was the matter.
Then here is the person that found: Here is the person that found out, the
person that found out that some of his Subjects; that some of his Subjects had
taken away the Simnels from Picrochols people. Then here is Grandgousier the
King; a King that sought, a King that sent, a King that found, a King that
found out what was the matter: In a word* a King that made a great discovery.
He was a King, for he had power: He sent; he sent and found out; he did not
send by the Penny-post-men of little value, he sent persons of Wisdom and
Discretion; persons that sought* persons that sought and found. Verum enim vero
quando quidem dubio procul quoniam ita certain res se habet, quoth St. Bernard;
and therefore in the management of State Affairs, as it behooves a Prince to
have wise and discreet Counselors about him; So that Prince who has not, shall
never make those Discoveries which otherwise he might. For it is plain from my
Text, that a King did, and a King may make a Discovery. But forsooth, we have a
sort of people in this Nation that will have the King make no discoveries; that
would have him be altogether in the dark: I have 'em in my eye, and I shall
have a touch with 'em presently. Well then, here is a Discovery made by
Grandgousier, that his Subjects, that his Subjects had taken away, that they
had taken away the Simnels from Picrochol's people: Then Grandgousier, sending
to know what the matter was, found that some of his people had taken certain
Simnels from Picrochol's people. Leaving therefore the first part of my Text, I
shall come to the Discovery, the Discovery made of the Simnels being taken away
by Picrochol's people. Of all which in their order.

The word Discovery, in the Hebrew Ietour, in the Greek Apocalypsis, in the
Latin Detectio, signifies the disclosing of a thing concealed: and indeed we
have had of late years strange Discoveries. Discoveries of Popish Plots,
Meal^tub Plots, and Presbyterian Plots. As for the two first, I believe nothing
of them: For Rome and we are agreed: And why the Pope or the Papists should
plot against us, I neither can nor will understand. And besides it is contrary
to the Doctrine of Sam's Coffee-house: But for the Presbyterian Plot, I believe
it from my heart: For the Presbyterians, my beloved, are the Subjects of
Grandgousier, and so are all the rest of the Dissenters, and Fanatics.
Grandgousier signifies Rebellion in the original: and therefore says that
Famous Origin, Sufficit nobis quod cognoscimus Patrem Ga^agantuae, and
abolebitur nomen eju^. Now then Grandgousier's Subjects are discovered; and so
there is the first thing made out, that is the Discovery. And here I must tell
ye, my beloved, that there is a great contention between the Subjects of
Grandgousier* and us that are the people of Picrochol, concerning the
Succession. Now we have disputed and argued the Case among our selves, and we
find the Succession to be as plain as the Sun at noonday: For David begat
Solomon, Solomon begat Rehoboam, and so onward, and still you see they
succeeded one another. And though I will not be so severe as to blame every
particular Parliament man; yet this I dare be bold to say, they carried the
business higher than they needed to have done: For Loyalty is Loyalty,
according to the words of St. Cyprian; Toyaute taute Foberot^ton Hapantoon tan
tan toon toon. Neither can Loyalty be Disloyalty, not Disloyalty be Loyalty.
Now as there are signs of Grace, so there are certain ^igns of Loyalty. In the
first place, for a man to wear ^ Scarlet Twist under his Hat-band, is a great
^ign of Loyalty: For there is a strange Sympathy between the Heart and the Hat.
As the Heart moves, so the Hat moves: If the Heart be dutiful and respectful,
off goes the Hat. A disloyal Heart, a disloyal Hat: Which we find too true by
the Quakers themselves; who will neither put off their Hats, nor Swear before a
Magistrate, Two great marks of Disloyalty. I remember, my beloved, that
Pantagr^el dreamt a Dream, and his Dream was this: he dreamt that he was
beloved and caressed by a fair ^ady; but at length, that he was metamorphos'd
into a Drum, and the Lady into Madam Madge Howlet. So it is with the Quakers,
while the Lady Faction caresses them in their fond Dreams: but the time is
coming, and I hope to see it, when they shall be turned into Drums; that is, be
ratled and thumped till they roar again; and Faction shall be turned into a
Female. Buzzard, according to that of the Poet; Hystero^, tantomen megalopton
otera whyon. Again, my beloved, Scarlet is a Royal Color: The Robes are
Scarlet; and therefore they that wear Scarlet Twists in their Hats, must of
necessity be true blue, as they say. For the Twist signifies Allegiance; and
Scarlet signifies Cordial, as being the color of the Heart. So put both
together, the Twist and the Scarlet, and there is Cordial Allegiance.

The second mark of Loyalty, is to drink the D.'s health, and cry Huzzah -- If
you stamp upon your Hat at the same time, it is still a sign of a more
transported Loyalty. For by tra^pling upon your Hats, you show you readiness to
throw your Lives and Fortunes at his Feet. But to return to the word Huzzah --
It is a word of a most sublime signification -- It was invented for the use of
the Knights of the Order of St. Dive Bo^^eille, as you may read in Iosephus's
Antiquities of the Jews. Some derive it from the Hebrew word Hoz, which
signifies Wealth or Riches, to show that when you drink the D.'s Health, and
cry Huzzah, you drink it out of the abundance of your Loyalty. Others derive
this Seraphic Huzzah from the Hebrew word Hazah, to snore or be sleepie; and
then it carries with it this signification: That no man ought to snore or sleep
when the D.'s Health is drinking; or if he do, that he ought to be waked in the
Devils Name with a Huzzah. --

There is one more sign of Loyalty, and that is when you hear a quaint Notion
stream from our lips, or the Fanatics run down with a powerful Sa sa, and a
whipping, quipping jerk, to cry Hum, -- hum, -- hum, -- We love Humming
mightily -- nay, we'll give you liberty to cry Huzzah, -- in the Church too, so
it be out of a cordinal affection to Humming.

Thus you have the Discovery, and the Discovery made. And now I come to the
Third part, and that is the Sim^els, or the taking away of the Simnels.

Upon the opening of these Words, the Cabinet of my Text discloses unto you
three things. First, That the Simnels were taken away. Secondly, The persons
that did take them away, viz. The Subjects of Grandgousier. And thirdly, from
whom; from the people of Picrochol.

And first of the first, That is, of the taking away of the Simnels. Here it is
plain, from the Words of my Text, that there was a wrong and injury done; the
Simnels were taken away. Not willingly, you may be sure; for else there had
been no c^use of complaint; but by force, by violence, against Law, and against
Reason these Simnels were taken away, Violentia extra modum est violentia
Carnalis, says Origin; the fittest Author in the World to be quoted upon this
Subject. For as he made himself an E^nuch and guelt himself; so would the
Subjects of Grandgousier, the Subjects of Rebellion, geld us of our Simnels,
take away our Simnels by ^orce and violence. Now, my beloved, me thinks I hear
you asking me what these Simnels are? These Simnels, my beloved, are the Rights
and Privileges of us Churchmen.

These are the Simnels which the Subject of Grandgousier, the Fanatics and
Dissenters, men that will not cry Huzzah -- nor wear Scarlet Twists in their
Hats, would take away from us. There is our Simnel of Bowing at the Altar:
There is our Simnel of the Surplice: There is our Simnel of Eccles^astical
Jurisdiction, and that has many Plum^ in it. The Plums of Commendation: The
Plums of Excommunication: The Plums of Endictments, Fining and Imprisonment for
Conscience sake. Then there is our choicest Simnel of all, the Simnel of our
Livings and Tithes. And lastly, there is our Simnel of Succession: For the
Dukes Case is a hard Case, my beloved; the Scripture tells us so. All these
Simnels, my beloved would the Fanatics, the Subjects of Grandgousier, take
from us by force and violence. Now if the King and the Council, and the Lord
Mayor, and the Justices of the Peace, will not mind these things, we are to put
them in mind of their duty, and their neglect of the Church. And then again, if
the State do think the Fanatics to be ill Members of the Nation, disturbers of
the Government, and do prosecute them for that reason, then are we to encourage
the State, to bring Texts of Scripture for the State; then are we to run with
the Stream of public business, to Gloss and Flatter like true Politicians, and
all this that we may not lose another Simnel of ours, which is the sweet Simnel
of Preferment. Were I now to preach before a great Magistrate that had the
Power in his hands, I would say, My Lord, you bear not the Sword in vain -- The
Fanatics, the Fanatics, the Subjects of Grandgousier, the Sons of Rebellion,
my Lord, would take our Simnels, our Rites and Privileges from us. Where are
all your Penal Statutes, your Fines, and Imprisonments? Let Them be fined and
imprisoned, nay hanged my Lord. Let Them be excommunicated. Do you send'em to us,
and we'll excommunicate 'em, and then we'll send'em to you again, and do you
send 'em to (...), my Lord. What Is the reason we have not Juries and
Common-council-men for our turn? The Land mourns for the sins of Juries and
Common-council-men. And it is your, and other Magistrates duty to look after
these things. Now if my Lord should say, Trouble not your heads with these
things that nothing concern ye; Do you endeavor to refute and convince them of
their Errors by sound Doctrine and good example of Life: Then would I say, No,
my Lord, they will never be convinced by us; for we have not Wit nor Learning
enough to do it, neither can we take so much pains. It Is easier to talk an hour
about State Affairs, and make Satyrs against the Fanatics, than to preach
convincing and sound Doctrine. The Fanatics therefore must be confuted by
Bolts and Shackles, by Fines and Imprisonments, by Excomunications and
Exterminations; And therefore pray, my Lord, let (...) be scourged out of the
Temple; let them be whipped out of the Nation; and let us not lost our Simnels
through Os^itancy and Spanish Consideration. And so I come to the last part of
my Text, the People of Pi^rochol. Who are they? The People of Pi^rochol, my
beloved, are our selves: Picros in the original signifies bitter, slingie,
sharp; and Ko^e signifies anger. And have not we reason to be bitte^ly angry,
stingily angry, sharply angry with those that would take away our Simnels? So
have I seen, when a young Child has carelessly held a piece of Bread and Butter
in his hand and looked another way, that a Grandgousier Dog has come and
snatched away the Child's Bread and Butter, the Child's Simnel, and run away with
it. Thus we are not to hold our Simnels carelessly in our hands; but we are to
watch and take care that our Simnels, our Rights, and our Privileges be not
taken away. Fears and Jealousies; Jealousies and Fears: Strange Fears, strange
Jealousies are among us. The City is ill principled; our Sheriffs are Whiggs;
our Common Council and Jurymen are rotten at Core. Hence our Fears, hence our
Jealousies; hence our Jealousies, hence our Fears; our Simnels are in danger.
But (...)

In the mean time, you have heard what Loyalty is. Do you continue your
Loyalty; Remember Forty One; wear Scarlet Twists; cry Huzzah. -- and Hum in the
Church. And leave the rest to our care.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Pleasant Conference upon the Observator and Heraclitus, etc. by the Author
of this Speculum.


