Proteus Redivivus: OR, THE Turner of Turners-hall Truly Represented; And the
ABUSES and FALSEHOODS OF George Keith's Fourth Narrative, So far as they
concern the Author, EXAMINED and DETECTED.

By Daniel Phillips, M. D.

Proverbs 24.8. He that devises to do Evil, shall be called a mischievous
Person.

Can any thing be spoken or written in words, so clear from Ambiguity, which a
Perverse or Prejudiced Mind shall not be able to vex, and force to another
Meaning?

Archbishop Tillotson 's Works, P. 680. Qui aliquid statuit, part inaudita
altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aeqitus fuit.
Sen. Tragoed. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, 1700.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
WE are so far from affecting Obscurity in our Credenda, that could there be
found a way to render our Principles as easily obvious to thy Understanding, as
there is of our Actions to the Eye, we should be extremely well satisfied; not
doubting but thou would have as favorable an Opinion of the first, as of
the last. But if thou do only see with other Men's Eyes, and judge by other
Men's Understandings, even those whose Interest, it may be, is, to put a Bears
Skin on us, I am no ways surprised, if thou have ill Sentiments of Quakerism,
so called. Did I believe that People held such Tenets as their Adversaries
insinuate, I should abominate it from my very Soul; but I do certainly know,
they are grossly misrepresented, and so may thou, if thou have but so much
Patience, or can spare so much time, as to read and consider their approved
R. B 's Apology. W. P 's Key, etc.
Authors, as many have done (since G. K. the Snake, etc. began their Malicious
Clamours against them) to their entire Satisfaction; saying, What False Stories
have we heard of the Quakers! We could not have believed that they are so Sound
in the Christian Faith, had not we discoursed them about their Principles, and
read their Books; therefore for the future, we are resolved never to credit any
Reports concerning them, till we have examined the Truth of them. This
Examination of our Principles, and reading of our Books, has been of singular
Service; for many thereby have been lately convinced of the Truth, amongst
which numbers, are several Ministers, and other Learned Men, of diverse
Professions. By this it is evident, that what our Enemies designed for an
Obstruction to the Truth, through Divine Providence is turned extremely to the
Advantage of it.

Had G. K. or any other of our Adversaries, that have lately written against
us, intended it only in order to reform us in such Tenets, as they imagined, we
were Erroneous, they should, in my Opinion, have considered our Principles, as
explained by our selves, and our words, in the Sense we use them; and in that
Sense have demonstrated their Opposition to the Doctrines contained in the Holy
Scriptures. Had they done thus, we might have acknowledged their Kindness
toward us; but if they think, by their false Inferences, to persuade us, that
we hold Principles, whereof we were altogether Ignorant, till they affirmed
that they were our Tenets; or to alter our Sentiments, by the apparent Glosses
and false Turns they give our Sayings, they will be mistaken, because we are
satisfied, this is a Method calculated by some designing Persons, rather to
raise Heats and Animosities, and to excite the Magistrates to Persecution, that
to reform our Judgments, wherein they suggest we are Erroneous.

To leave the Truth of their Allegations against us, to the Decision of some
Moderate Men, that are either Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents, or
Baptists, has at the first glance some show of Fairness: But if we seriously
consider the Proposal, nothing is more Unreasonable, than to expect that we
should leave the Determination of our Cause, to those Men that are, or have
been, our Accusers, and have long since pre-judged both it and our selves. Will
the Episcopalians stand to the Award of the Presbyterians, Independents, and
Baptists, whether there were any Lord Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, (as an Order Prior to Priesthood) Archdeacons, etc. or any
Common Prayer Book, Sprinkling of Infants, Signing of them in the Forehead with
the Sign of the Cross, and the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers, as they call
them, in the Apostles days? Or any Fonts, Surplices, Organs, Choristers, etc.
in their Times? Will the Presbyterians stand to the Arbitration of the
Episcopalians, whether Bishops are an Order distinct from, and superior to
Presbyters, Jure Divino? Will the Baptists abide by the Determination of the
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Independents, whether Water Baptism ought to
be administered by Dipping only, and not by Sprinkling or Pouring also? Or
whether Adult Persons only, ought to be admitted to Water Baptism, upon
Profession of their Faith, and not the Infants of Professing Parents? If none
of these will admit one Party's Judgment conclusive against the Opinion of the
other, what reason then is there for the Quakers to admit Men of another
Persuasion to be their Judges, as long as they submit their Doctrines to the
Test of the Holy Scriptures? I confess I see none; what thou may, Reader, is
difficult for me to determine.

Possibly, Reader, thou may be one of those, whose Opinion is, that we
should Retract some Passages in our ancient Friends Books, (as G. K. has done
in his) and then all would be well, not doubting but thou will allow, as one of
the Norfolk Priests as West-Dereham did, that the Quakers of this Generation
are Orthodox; and that thou desire nothing more of the Quakers, but that they
should Retract some Expressions in their old Writings, and then thou would
recognize them as Protestant Dissenters. To thee I reply, That as long as most
of the Sentences oppugn'd by our Adversaries, and justified by us, have either
been sufficiently explained already in some other part of the same Author's
Works, or in some other Books of our Friends, there can be no need of an Index
Expurgatorius.

And as G. K. has vindicated most that has been formerly objected against us
as Erroneous, so I am confident the latter pretended Discoveries may be; if our
Opponents will but grant us the same liberty to defend our deceased Friends
Writings, that Bishop Kidder takes, to defend the New Testament against the
Objections of the Jews. If this may be admitted, as it is presumed no Christian
will deny it, then it is not doubted, but a Sense Analogous to the Doctrines
contained in the Scriptures, may be given to all our Ancient Friends Writings.

What concerns G. K's Retractations, whereof he now makes a great Noise, I
imagined that the Bishop which Ordained him, would have obliged him to a more
particular Recantation; especially as to his former Severe Censures of that
Church, whereof now he is a Pretended Member, ever he would have employed him
as an Itinerant Preacher; because, should they be but superficially surveyed,
his particular ones, which are but few, would appear little more than
Explications adapted to his Private Designs; and his general one ( Retrack. p.
42.
I submit all that I have at any time given forth, in Word, Writ or Print, by
way of Doctrine in Religious Matters, to the Test, Touchstone and Rule of the
Scriptures -- Renouncing, Revoking, Retracting, Disowning and Denying, whatever
is contained in any of my former or latter Books, that does not perfectly agree
with the Holy Scriptures,) is no more, as I verily believe, than any Quaker
will readily do.

Had G. K. been really convinced, he had acted the Part of a Sophister, in
defending the Quakers Opinion, by putting false Glosses on the Scriptures, or
by using any inconclusive Arguments; he should (as I conceive) have been as
particular in his Retractations, as he was in his Vindications of them; and
ingenuously have demonstrated, wherein each particular Perversion of the
Scriptures, and every Numerical Sophism did consist. Till this is done, his
former (now the Quakers) Arguments, are as good a Defense for them, against
him, or any other Adversary, as formerly when he was one of them. It Is not
enough, in my Thoughts, for G. K. (when his own Arguments are urged against
him) in general, to say, I have Retracted, I have Retracted them; and that it is
great Impudence in any, to object against me, what I have long since Retracted.
We do not consider them now, only as G. K's, but as our own Reasons; and might
have used them, had he never been known, nor any of his Books seen by us; and
we may presume to use any, or all the Arguments (which he has formerly
Printed) in our Defense, let him mutter never so much, till he, or some of his
Adherents, shall show their Inconclusiveness.

I am sensible, Reader, that many are (perchance thou art also) of opinion,
that G. K. has discovered monstrous Errors amongst the Quakers, that were
never detected before; and indeed he seems to insinuate as much, in his
Advertisement to his Fourth Narrative, by saying, It is my purpose to detect
and discover Gross Errors, and Antichristian Principles, etc. Whereby thou
might be apt to infer, he was an Original, and not a Transcriber. To
undeceive thee in this matter, I shall subject to thy Consideration, what one
(though I might, what one Hundred) of their Opposers said of them, above Forty
Years since, conceiving thou can discover Ex ungue Leonem. And that thou
may the more easily perceive the Harmony (not to say Plagiasm) of G. K. with
one Jonathan Clapham, (who writ a Book, styled, A Full Discovery, and
Confutation, of the Wicked and Damnable Doctrines of the Quakers, etc. and
dedicated it to Oliver Cromwell, then Lord Protector, Printed Anno 1656.) I
shall set Eight of G. K.'s Ten Calumnies, as they are Printed in an
Advertisement prefixed to his Fourth Narrative, in a Column opposite to what J.
C. also falsely affirmed, that their Agreement may the easier be perceived.

J. C. in the abovesaid Book, pretends to prove the Quakers guilty of,
1. Being Enemies to the Holy Scriptures. 2. Denying Christ come in the Flesh,
his Death, Resurrection, etc. 3. Denying the Doctrine of the Trinity. 4.
Holding Equality with God, and the Soul to be one Being with God. 5. Corrupting
the Doctrine of Justification. 6. Denying the Resurrection of the Body, last
Judgment, Heaven and Hell. 7. Being Enemies to all the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ. 8. Being no Friends to the Lord's day, making all days alike. 9.
Pretending to Miracles. 10. Being no truly Mortified Persons, notwithstanding
Pretenses thereunto; and how Popish Monks have out-stripped them therein. 11.
Destroying the True Doctrine of Sanctification. 12. Being the common Sink of
all the Heresies of our Times; and how they agree with former Heretics in many
Particulars; and are Enemies to all Civility and good Manners; and to avoid
them, as Pernicious Enemies to the Souls of Men, and to have no Communion with
them, etc.
G. K. Insinuates, that the Errors he intends to discover the Quakers guilty
of, In his Advertisment to his 4th Narrative.
are,
1. Concerning the Scriptures. 2. Concerning Christ's Incarnation, his Soul,
and Body, and Blood, his coming to Judgment at the last day. 3. Concerning the
Holy Trinity. 4. Concerning the Soul. 5. Concerning Justification. 6.
Concerning the Resurrection. 7. Concerning Outward Baptism and the Supper. 8.
Concerning doing Servile Work on the Lord's day.
The Analogy that here is between the Contents of G. K's Fourth Narrative, and
J. Clapham's Book, is so conspicuous, that some may be induced to think, he
borrowed a great deal of his Darkness from this Book, in composing his last
Narrative: But waving that, it is undeniable that the Principal Errors
pretended, which G. K. and others now advance against the Quakers, are mostly
contained in this Treatise of J. C. If so, it consequentially follows, that
they were forged long before G. K. was a Quaker. How then it should happen,
seeing these Objections were so publicly Printed, that he should live (as now
he pretends) Thirty Years in Ignorance of them, is so surprising, that it gains
little Credit with me; how much it does with thee, I shall not determine.

In fine, It may be obvious to any, that have the Opportunity of reading our
old Adversary's Books, that there is little now objected against the Quakers,
but what is a Reiteration of things falsely affirmed of them, and answered by
them, Thirty or Forty Years since. If G. K. (who is, by some, thought to have
made the greatest Discoveries of their Errors) should have his Writings
deplumed of all the Feathers, which his Envious Predecessors have made use of
against them, his Circumstances would not be much unlike that of the Crow in
the Fable; and under the same Predicament, may be comprehended most of the
Modern Writers against them: As can be demonstrated by thy Sincere Friend

D. P.
London, September. 4. 1700.
Proteus Redivivus: OR, The TURNER of Turner's-Hall Truly Represented, etc.
THAT Persons who have been Banished a Society, whether Civil or Religious, for
their Irregularities, should afterward use their utmost Efforts, to excite the
Enemies of such a Communion, to disturb its Peace; is (as History relates) so
natural to Exiles, that I am subject to imagine, few will be surprised, either
to hear, or see G. K. so Sedulous in perverting the Quaker's Books, violating
their Sense, and ridiculing their Persons; when they have a true Idea of the
real Motives, which induced him to be so maliciously Clamorous against them.

It was not my Design, to have concerned my self in this public Controversy;
(neither do I now intend to go much farther than I am actually concerned) would
G. K. have answered my Letter delivered to him, or given me a Meeting as he
promised, or Personally acknowledged he was Mistaken, and had not designedly
misrepresented my Words: But seeing this could not be obtained, to undeceive
his Reader, I shall here expose to his view and consideration, a brief Account
of the Substance of the Discourse, that passed between G. K. his abetting
Ministers, and my Self, at Turner's Hall, with some Observations on his Fourth
Narrative, relating thereunto. And that I may not be altogether Immethodical. I
shall consider every Paragraph (wherein I find my Name specified) in the same
order as they are printed in his Narrative, beginning with p. 21.

Fourth Narr. p. 21.
A Quaker, called D. Phillips, standing by, near where I stood, said, That Book
(i. e. The Way cast up) was approved by the Second-Days-Meeting at London,
which was a great Untruth. I told how I wrote that Book in Scotland, and from
Scotland sent it to a Correspondent in Holland, who printed it there; and when
it come over to London, in the Year 1678. it met with great Opposition from
diverse of the Preachers of the Quakers, at London; as Steven Crisp, William
Shown, William Mead, and Samuel Newton.

Obser. I could deny what he asserts of me here to be True, because of some
Additions. This Mistake I would rather impute to that Officious Person, that
gave him the Relation of what I said, than to any design in G. K. to
mis-represent my Words; being well satisfied, he cannot say, he heard me speak
any thing like it. For, when I spoke to some that were by me, concerning that
Book, I stood in a Corner behind him; so that he could neither conveniently see
or hear me, because he was then directing his Discourse to his Auditory, that
was before him.

But, admitting it for granted, that I did say his Book, called, The Way cast
up; was approved by the Second-Days-Meeting at London: I am apt to think, no
unprejudiced Person will assert I am guilty of a great Untruth ( i. e. great
Lie) for saying, that That Book was approved by the Second-Days-Meeting at
London; when he has Read what G. K. says concerning that very Book, in the
Defense of the Snake, and duly considered the Reasons advanced by him, here to
prove it.

The First. Reason whereby he would insinuate, that I am guilty of a great
Untruth, seems to run thus; That Book was Writ in Scotland, Printed in Holland;
and therefore could not be Censured by the Second-Days-Meeting at London. Is it
not possible, that a Book may be Writ in the East Indies, Printed in the
West Indies, yet may be approved or disapproved of in London? The
inconclusiveness of this Argument is so obvious, that I am of Opinion it would
be nauseous to the Reader, to detain him any longer thereon: Therefore shall
proceed to his

Second, When it (i. e. The Way cast up) came over to London, in the Year 1678.
it met with great Opposition from diverse of the Preachers of the Quakers, at
London. Under this extensive term, Diverse, only Four are here included, and
that is the greatest number that I have heard, did then object against any of
the Expressions contained in that Book. Should all that he asserteth on this
Subject be Credited as Truth, (though at the same time, I have great cause to
suspect his Sincerity in this Matter, because in other Relations he has Printed
Notorious Falsehoods) it would affect the whole Body of Quakers no more, than if
any should prove there were Four Ministers of the Church of England, so called,
that were Socinians, would affect the whole Episcopal Clergy in England;
neither do I conceive he would have continued Fourteen Years after this,
Strenuously defending their Principles as Orthodox, or have said, as he does in
his Preface to his Serious Appeal, Printed in Pensilvania 1692. which is
Fourteen Years after the Conference about this Book was managed, viz. Preface
to the Serious Appeal.
It never yet has been proved, nor ever will be, that the Religion professed
by the Sincere and Faithful People, called in Scorn Quakers, is either
Paganism, or any other thing than real Christianity, had he not been Convinced;
that they held no such Errors, as by wresting of their Words he would now
insinuate.

Had he deserted their Society immediately after this Conference, it might have
had some shadow of Reason, to induce some to Credit this Story concerning our
above-nominated Four Friends; but I can scarce have so hard Thoughts of him, as
to imagine he would have tarried amongst them so many Years after this
Conference, had these Men Opinions, as here related by him, been the avowed
Principles of the Quakers, as now he seems to assert. I am so far from an
Opinion, that he deserted them on this Account, that I believe, had he not been
Expelled their Society, he would not have divested himself of the Title of a
Quaker to this Day; because several Years after he was Exiled their Communion
for some Irregularities, he owned himself to be a Quaker; which is almost a
Demonstration to me, that he did not think Antichristian Doctrines Essential to
Quakerism, so called. My Sentiments are, that he kept that Title as long as he
was in any hopes of gaining a Party of them, or any others, to side with him;
but finding his greatest Endeavors to divide them Fruitless, and it may be his
Necessities very pressing, partly out of Revenge, and partly through the Charms
of a good Stipend, he makes his Intentions known to some of the Church of
England, so called, who willingly received him; not, as I am subject to
believe, out of any great Esteem of his Sincerity; but having a design against
the Quakers, etc. they thought him a Tool, as well qualified, to stir up
Persecution against them, as any.

But to return, to what more immediately concerns my self, viz. to prove that
Book (i. e. The Way cast up) was approved of by a Meeting of Friends, I could
produce a Cloud of Witnesses; but doubting the Narrator will insinuate his Old
Friends are now become his Enemies; and therefore their Evidence against him is
not to be Credited; I shall omit theirs, and only recite what G. K. says
(conceiving he will not eat his own Words) concerning this Treatise, in the
Defense of the Snake: his Partiality therein I shall not now determine, but
shall suspend till I have seen his Opponents Answer; his Words are, Defense of
the Snake, p. 25.
In the Conclusion (after there had been two Meetings about it) the Persons
that had accused me, were desired by the Meeting, to desist from their Charge,
and say nothing against the Book (i. e. The Way cast up;) and whereas some
Friends that were dissatisfied at my Book, had forbidden the Stationer in
George-yard to sell it, because it was Unsound: Order was given by the Meeting,
that the Stationer might be encouraged to Sell it, that it might have its
Service in City and Country, as according was done. It is to be observed, that
there is but one Meeting amongst Friends, that does actually concern themselves
about Printing, etc. of Books; if this Relation of G. K. is true, how am I
guilty then of a great Untruth, I leave to the Consideration of the
Unprejudiced to give in their Verdict.

I shall conclude my Observations on this Paragraph, with one Argument, ad
hominem, whereby I am induced to believe, that if one of G. K's. Inferences is
conclusive; it will undeniably follow, that all the Orthodox Doctrines, etc.
contained in any of his Books, that have been Countenanced by the
Second-Days-Meeting at London, and have been allowed to be sold by the Quakers
there, are to be Esteemed as their Principles from these following Words:
Ancich. and Sadd. p. 5.
Seeing the Second-Days-Meeting at London has Countenanced his (i. e, Caleb
Pusey 's) Book, and the Quakers generally at London, allow it to be sold next
Door to their Meeting House in Grace Church Street; they make his Ignorance,
Unbelief, Sadducism and Antichristian Doctrine, to be theirs: Then with a
parity of Reason, all the Knowledge, Orthodox Faith, and Christian Doctrine,
that is contained in G. K. or any other person's Books, that have been
Countenanced by the Second-Days-Meeting at London, or are generally allowed to
be sold next Door to their Meeting House in Grace Church Street, are theirs.

I asked D. Phillips what he said to my former Question, Fourth Narr. p. 58.
Did Men by their Sins really wound God in them, as some of their Preachers
have affirmed? After some demur, he said, he would not give a positive Answer,
but take it into further Consideration; whereupon some of the Auditory did
commend him.

Obser. My Answer to his Query, is here mis-stated, whether Designedly or
Accidentally, I shall not positively affirm; but this I can say, He has not
related one Sentence in Terminis, as it was delivered by me: Therefore to
undeceive his Reader, I shall give him a Summary Account, why a Priest did
speak favorably of an Answer I gave, which was on this occasion; G. K. holding
a little Book in his Hand, read a Passage in it; as soon as he had done reading
it, he asked my Opinion thereof: I replied,

D. P. I must take time to Consider it.

Minist. That is Modestly said.

Another Minister, But you should either have owned or disowned it.

D. P. Would it have been Prudence in any Man, either to Justify or Condemn a
Book, merely on the reading of one or two Lines of it, without considering the
Context, Scope, or Drift of the Author?

Minist. But you should have considered this Book.

D. P. I do not know where to procure it.

Minist. You may have it at Mrs. Sowle's:

D. P. I am satisfied of the contrary; because most of these Books here
produced, were out of Print before I was Born; and if I would give Ten times
their value, I do not know where to buy them.

If thou will but oblige us so far, as to give us the same liberty to defend
our Ancient Friends Books, that Bishop Kidder takes in defending the Holy
Scriptures against the Jews; I doubt not, but we may easily defend our Ancient
Friends Writings against all the Cavils of our Mercenary Adversaries.

Minist. But who can tell where to have you, seeing you may hereafter see cause
otherwise to Word the Matter, and yet your Intentions the same?

D. P. Yes indeed, we can sometimes use Neco, other times Occido, and yet
intend the same thing; conceiving Neco and Occido to be Synonymous Terms: and I
am apt to think, that variety of Synonymous Expressions, is acceptable to most
Readers.

Obser. I always was, and yet am of Opinion, that it was, and also is a great
hardship, for any Subject to be tried as a Criminal, without a Copy of his
Indictment, even for a Fact that he himself has Committed: But a Barbarity,
nay, a Tyranny not to be Paralleled, to impeach a Man, and try him as an
Offender for a Fact, his Ancestors, or some Friend of his Communion
perpetrated, and it may be before he was Born, without favoring him with the
sight of what he is in particular, not in general Terms to be tried for. This
was the State of the Case of the Poor Quakers at West-Dereham; they were there
to be Tried, Judged, and Condemned by their professed Enemies, for pretended
Blasphemies, which their deceased or absent Friends were affirmed to be Guilty
of; and most, if not all, their pretended Proofs, were to be taken out of
certain Old Books, and Manuscripts: A Copy whereof was often (and in the
Opinion of very Judicious Persons, justly) by the Quakers desired, nevertheless
it was as often by the Arbitrary Priest denied. To this Method of indicting
People in general Terms, G. K. is no Stranger.

How easy is it for a Critic to pick and cull a Sentence, or by splitting it
in two, to render it thereby Obnoxious to the Ears of an Auditory; to which as
I conceive, it would not be Prudence for any Man to give a present Answer,
until he had maturely considered the Context, Scope, and Intent of the Author?
How Unjust, how Illegal, how Arbitrary then is it for G. K. or any other, to
demand a direct Answer, to a particular Sentence picked out of a Book, which
his Respondent never saw before; I leave to the Determination of every moderate
Man.

Would our Adversaries grant us that favor, which I am confident they would
expect (if not demand) from their Opponents, being as it appears to me, nothing
but a right. All Authors are Entitled to, viz. where a Writer treats on any
Subject Concisely or Dubiously, if the same Person Writes on the same Matter,
more Prolixly and Perspicuously in some other part of his Works, that is to be
the Standard, whereby the former is to be regulated.

If this would be admitted, I doubt not but to demonstrate, that all our
Primitive Friends were sound in the Christian Faith, even in express Terms, as
worded by themselves; but it has been our Lot, to have our Writings wrested by
our Enemies, to the worst (whereas Christian Charity should have given them the
best) Sense they will bear, and many times directly contrary to the Scope,
Intent, and formal Expressions of the same Author, in some other Page of his
Writings. The very Errors of the Press, I am satisfied, are imputed to us, as
often as they render the Sense Obnoxious.

Should any without Prejudice, seriously consider that noted Expression of G.
F. which was objected against him as a vile Error, about 45 Years since by his
Adversaries; and as I am subject to believe, has been Reprinted against us,
with the greatest Aggravations imaginable, a Hundred times as a most horrid
Error, viz. Readiness Errand, p. 8.
He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is equal with God;
may easily by considering the Context, and the Text of Scripture, there cited
in the Margin (Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the Dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also
quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you) determine what
he meant, and that there is a word or two, either Redundant or Deficient; take
away what is Redundant (i. e. he that has) and it will read thus, The same
Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ, is Equal with God; or supply the Deficiency
with the Addition of (has what) and it will run thus, He that has the same
Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ (has what) is Equal with God. I am induced
to imagine, that there rather is a Deficiency than a Redundancy, because the
Book is very ill Printed, and I observe there are several Words omitted in it,
to make the Discourse Sense; in the Line precedent to this, is a Quotation out
of the Scriptures, in which there is a word omitted, which could not be
designedly, because it does not any ways alter the Sense of the Text; that G.
Fox attributes an Equality with God, to nothing in Man, but to the Holy Spirit,
is obvious to any unbiassed Person, that will attentively read, Readiness Errand,
p. 5.
and duly consider the drift of his Discourse in this, or any other of his
Books; look back to p. 5. of the same Treatise, and there, ex professo, he
answers the same Objection. He being then accused by the Lancashire Petition,
that he professed and avowed that he was Equal with God; His own Answer there
is, It was not so spoken that G. F. was equal with God, but that the Father and
the Son is One. Six Lines under this G. F. says, The same Spirit, where it is,
is equal with God. And in p. 10. he repeats again almost the same words, near
the foot of that Page. Being accused of the same thing, i. e. That he was equal
with God, by one C. Wade. His Answer was, Great Mystery, p. 248.
All that have the Son and the Holy Ghost, have that which is equal in Power
and Glory with the Father. And by the Text of Scripture cited by G. F. in the
Margin, and these Quotations out of his own Writings it is undeniable, that he
attributed Equality solely to the Spirit of God and Christ in Man, and not to
any thing in Man, simply considered as Man, without the Indwelling of the Holy
Ghost. They that have been concerned in Printing, will not think it impossible
for an Error to happen in a Book; the Printed Errata's are an undeniable
Witness thereof, either from the unfairness of the Copy, or from the
heedlesness of the Corrector, especially in the absence of the Author; and it
is not unknown to many, that G. F. was generally in Prison, or in the Country,
when his Books were a Printing.

I see no occasion to deny, that some of our Writings may be Elliptical, seeing
the Scriptures are also under the same Predicament, if we may credit Bishop
Kidder in his Demonstration of the Messiah; Part II. p. 129.
where he produces some Quotations out of the Holy Scriptures, where he says,
the word only is vertually included, though not verbally expressed: If the
Quakers have in like manner, in some places omitted the word only, I hope they
are not guilty of an unpardonable Error: Neither is a Book to be rejected (if I
were to give in my Verdict) because there may be some Difficulties, or seeming
Inconsistencies in it. Where is that Author, even amongst the Learned Rabbis
of this Age, that has so Clear and so Logical a Head, as to be able to word
his matter so nicely, that a Critic cannot observe a Flaw in his Writings? If
they that have all the advantages of Education, are liable to have their words
wrested to a Sense they never Dreamed of; who then can imagine that the
Illiterate Man's Sayings will be exempted from the like Inconveniences?

Are the Scriptures (which by all Christians are allowed to be dictated by the
eternal Spirit) totally free from Difficulties or seeming Inconsistencies? For
deciding this Matter, Let us hear what the Learned Bishop Kidder says: Demon.
Mes. P. II. p. 129.
They are very weak and foolish Men, who will renounce the whole Religion,
because there are some things said or taught in it, which they are not able to
comprehend, or give an account of. There are many Difficulties in the Old
Testament, and seeming Contradictions, and yet both the Jews and Christians, do
with great Reason receive those Books with great Veneration. It were a very
casie thing to perplex a learned Jew with many Difficulties, to be found in the
Books of Moses, of Samuel, the Kings and Chronicles -- but he will not
therefore doubt of the whole, because he is not able to give a clear account of
those difficult Passages which are found therein. What he says here of the
Old, he grants the same of the New Testament.

That lately common (though in my Opinion) silly Objection i. e. That I may see
cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet my intention be the same; Were they
only illiterate Creatures that Objected this as an Heretical saying against the
Quakers, I should not be surprised at it: but for Men of Letters, who have been
Educated at the Universities (as most of the Ministers of the National Church
have been) to recite this as a Notorious Crime in them, is a sign of a
disingenuous Nature, if they are found tardy in the same thing.

G. K. to expose the Quakers, or Himself, in his late Broad Sheet, Entitled, A
Serious Call to the Quakers, etc. under the head of Vile and Monstrous
Doctrines, Principles, and Uncharitable Sayings, has cited this saying of G.
W. viz. Count. Conv. p. 12.
I may see cause otherwise to word the Mat, and yet my Intention be the same;
Is this a Vile and Monstrous Doctrine? Is this a Vile and Monstrous Principle,
or an Uncharitable saying? Under which of these three Heads to reduce it, I do
confess I am at a loss; and if G. K. would so far oblige me, as to tell me
under which of them it is to be placed; I shall acknowledge it as some part of
a Satisfaction, for telling his Auditory at Turner's- Hall, That I was a Fool.
A few Lines under this Citation, G. K. (it may be fearing his single
affirmation would not be Credited) borrows the Names of Three Doctors, and Five
Masters of Arts, of the Church of England, so called, to Co-attest the Truth of
this, and some other Citations.

I am satisfied, the Quakers will never see Cause to retract this saying of G.
W. viz. I may see cause otherwise to word the Matter, and yet my intention be
the same: if wording a Subject differently is an Antichristian act; how Guilty
then are your Schoolmasters, etc. who daily teach their Scholars not to use
the same Term, or reiterate the same Phrase in any Epistle Theme, Copy of
Verses, or Declamation they Compose; but as often as they are barren of
Synonymous Terms or Phrases, to fertilize their Mind, they are ordered to have
recourse to Gradus ad Parnassum, Winchester Phrases, etc. which are Books
Composed only for that intent. If these Treatises are Pernicious to the
Christian Religion, let them be exiled the Schools; and let those that presume
to Print them be Excommunicated. But should we view G. K's Writings, or these
Eight Minister's Sermons; I am subject to believe they will be found Wording
their Matter differently, when they would represent the same Notions to their
Auditory. I am far from Censuring them for it, because in my Opinion it is a
qualification necessary for all Authors and Orators. I doubt not, though they
reprehend this as an Error in the Quakers; yet they esteem copiousness of
Expressions commendable in others: But why that which is a Virtue in some,
should be a Vice in others; or that which is Laudable in a Churchman, should
be culpable in a Quaker, is so absurd a Notion, that I think it needless
farther to consider it here; But shall proceed to p. 63.

Here a Quaker D. P. Objected, That Disputants might differ about the Subject
of the Dispute, so as the Opponent might mean one thing, and the Respondent
another: But I answered, They might so, when the Matter is intricate and
obscure by ambiguities of Words: But it could not be so here, the Subject of
the Dispute being so clearly proposed, that none but a Sot or Cheat could, or
would mistake the Subject.

Obser. These Words were not repeated here by G. K. as they were delivered by
me; nevertheless I shall not much blame him, as long as he gives my meaning,
though not my Words. I was then, and am now of Opinion, that Disputants might,
and often did differ, more through the Equivocalness of Terms by them used,
than through any real difference in their Sentiments, when the precise
Signification of their Words was once settled; and G. K. here grants, That
Disputants might differ about the Subject of the Dispute, when the Matter is
Intricate and Obscure, by ambiguities of Words: But says, It could not be so
here. For which Reason, it will be necessary to consider the Subject of the
Controversy, between G. Fox and Magnus Bine, and then the Unbiassed Reader may
Determine, whether there is any Obscurity in M. Bines Words; and whether there
is not a possibility they might be taken in several Senses, which are, There is
a kind of Infiniteness in the Soul, which is not Infiniteness it self. If the
Term Infiniteness is not Obscure and Ambiguous, I know not what is; who is
there amongst the Sons of Men, that can say he has a clear and comprehensive
Idea of Infiniteness, or of the Soul of Man? If any have, let them Demonstrate
it in intelligble Terms; if they grant they have no determinate or clear Notion
of either of them, consequently they must acknowledge they are Obscure Terms;
and I doubt not, but he that duly considers the various Subjects the Word
Infiniteness may be predicated of, will not deny that it is Ambiguous, viz. of
God, his Eternal Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and also of all his other Attributes;
besides these, the Schools talk of the Infiniteness of space, number, duration,
divisibility of material Substances: And M. Bine here speaks of another kind,
or species of Infiniteness, viz. in the Soul; but how properly, I shall not now
Determine.

If G. K. intends, by saying Disputants might differ about the Subject of a
Dispute, when the Matter is Intricate and Obscure by Ambiguities of Words, that
there is no possibility for them to differ about the Subject of a Dispute; but
when there is a perceptable Intricacy, Obscurity, or Ambiguity in the Terms, I
shall take leave to dissent from him in this Matter: for I am induced to
believe, that Opponents oftener disagree about the Subject of the Dispute, when
they use common Sounds, whereof the Hearer it may be imagines it almost as an
Affront, to suppose that he has not the same precise determinate Idea in his
Mind, that the Speaker has in his, when he uses this or that familiar Term;
whereas did the Hearer observe any Intricacy, Obscurity, or Ambiguity in the
Speaker's Words, no doubt but the Respondent would have the precise meaning of
such Terms, as appeared to him Obscure and Ambiguous, settled, before he would
proceed any further: But after the Disputants had once agreed, what determinate
Notions this or that Articulate Sound, did or should for the future represent,
it would be Morally impossible for them afterward, to differ about its
Signification.

Should we nicely examine the Disputes now on Foot, I am apt to think a great
number of them would be found to be merely Verbal; amongst which I am
satisfied, several Objections that have been lately revived by G. K. and others
against the Quakers, may be enumerated. For Example, The Quakers say, The
Scriptures are not (their Opponents say, They are) the Word of God. Let us but
once settle the precise Conceptions, the Term Word excites in the Quaker's
Minds, and what Ideas it represents to their Adversary's Intellect, when they
read, or hear it pronounced; for the best way to determine this, is for all to
explain the determinate Sense they take it in; because Word, signifies any
Sound that is formed by the Organs of Speech, Account, Command, Doctrine, Jesus
Christ, the Eternal Word of God, etc. This Monosyllable being liable to be
taken in such various Significations, it is no ways surprising to me, that
Disputants should endlesly Jangle about it, till they do actually explain the
limited Sense they take it in; when that is once determined, it is not doubted,
but the Difference will soon be adjusted.

For which Reason, it will not be unnecessary for me to determine what the
Quakers mean, when they deny that the Scriptures are the Word of God, being
Conscientiously concerned, not to attribute that to the Scriptures, which
properly belongs only to Jesus Christ their Savior, whom they (as the
Scriptures) do term the Word of God; their Sentiments being, That the
Scriptures Collectively taken, are no where, in the Old or New Testament,
called the Word of God; neither can that Term, in their Opinion, properly be
Predicated of any substantial Being, but of Christ Jesus.

Their Adversaries in Opposition to this, Affirm; That the Scriptures are the
Word of God: but when they are desired to demonstrate, what they mean by the
aforesaid Terms, their Answer generally is, That the Scriptures are the Words
or Sayings of God, delivered to us by Holy Men Livinely inspired. By this and
what follows, I hope it will be evident that we agree in Substance, though differ
in the form of Expressing it; for we always have, and now do own, That the
Scriptures are the Words of God, viz. Great Mystery, p. 18.68, 75, 2^6, 302.
And in Robert Pa^clay's Works, p. 747. We also Sincerely believe, that they are
of Divine Authority, that they are a Declaration of the Will of God, and that
they were Dictated by the Holy Ghost, speaking through his Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles: this we attribute to them in a formal Sense, i. e. as
they contain the Doctrines of Truth; yet in a material, Acceptance, i. e. as
they are Composed of Ink and Paper, we do not deny, but they are subject to
Corruption.

Before I proceed any farther, I conceive it may not be impertinent for me to
consider here, the Reasons G. K. advances to prove the Scriptures are the Word
of God; because in reading his Fourth Narrative, I met with a Passage, where he
positively asserts, p. 22. The Scriptures are the Word of God, Fourth Narr. p.
22.
and the Word most frequently so called in Scripture: To confirm his Reader in
a belief, that he had good Authority to prove so bold an Assertion, he cites
Three Texts of Scripture out of the New Testament, viz. 1. These. 1.5. John
15.25. Acts 1.1. May I presume to look into the 7th. page of G. K. Presbyterian
and Independent Visible Churches in New England, printed Anno 1691. I doubt not
but I shall find George there in, Opposition to Parson Keith; because in that
Book he positively says, That Logos, 1 These. 1.5. Signifies word of talk or
discourse. Now by Logos there, is meant Doctrine; and that Logos, Acts 1.1.
Signified Treatise, but now it signifies Word; how to reconcile these seeming
Contradictions of this Weathercock, I profess I am in a Quandary. On the other
hand, should I say (as it appears to me) that he is Guilty of a perfect
Contradiction, he might thereby imagine that I did Insinuate, That he was stark
Mad, and Crazed in his Understanding; because he lays it down as a Maxim, in
his Preface to his Exact Narrative, That none but stark mad Men, and Crazed in
their Understanding, will hold perfect Contradictions.

That things may be put into a true Light, and that the Reader may be capable
to judge for himself: I shall here subject to his Consideration the original
Texts, and their Translations into Latin, Dutch, French, and English, whereby
it may be the more facile for him to determine, whether G. K. has not, to
serve a turn, given them a Sense different from all others; nay, from himself a
few Years since; is not this in effect to make a Nose of Wax, a Lesbian Rule,
of the Scriptures, by giving them this Year one signification, the next a
different one? What advantages this may give to the Enemies of Christianity, I
shall not now Demonstrate. The first of these Texts is, 1 These. 1.5. (...)
Quoniam Evangelium nostrum constitit apud vos non locutione dunt^^^^, sed etiam
Virtute and Spiritu Sancto. Want ons Evangelium en is onder uniet alleen in
Woorden gheweest, maer oock in Kracht, end in den Heyligen Grest. Car nostre
Predication de l'Evangile n'a point este en vostre endroit seulement en Parole
mais ausi en virtue, and en Saint Esprit. For our Gospel came (or more properly
was) not unto you in Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost. It
may be observed, that (...), is not Translated came, in the Latin, Dutch or
French Versions, neither in the Bible that was Printed in Queen Elizabeth's
Time, Anno 1578. Should I confine my self solely to the Modern English
Translation; I do not perceive any advantage, that G. K. will get thereby,
seeing the Apostle Paul's Sense of this Verse, is (obvious to any unprejudiced
Person) that the Gospel which he Preached to the Thessalonians, was not only to
be believed, because of the perswasiveness of the Word, Talk or Discourse he
made use of, when he Preached the Gospel to them; but principally, because the
Power and Efficacy of the Holy Ghost accompanied it; that this is the literal
Sense of this Text, I conceive none will deny: By what figure then, this 1
These. 1.5. proves that all the Books of the Old and New Testament, are the Word
of God, I confess my self Ignorant, and am likely so to remain, unless G. K. or
some of his Disciples, can inform me better.

The Second Text of Scripture (that I shall consider) is, John 15.25, (...).
Sed oportet ut impleatur, Sermo qui in lege ipsorum Scriptus est. Maer (dit
gescheit) op dat het woort vervult word, dat in hare wet geschreven is. Mais
c' est a fin-que soit accomplie la parole, qui est ecrite en leur Loi. But this
comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their Law.
It is evident from all these Translations of the Greek Text, that G. K. has
seen cause otherwise to word the Matter here, than either the Latin, Dutch,
French or English Translators have; but whether his Intentions are the same, I
shall leave that to the uninterested to determine.

As G. K. in his former Proof, gave us only the English version of the Text, so
here he omitteth that, (being little for his purpose) and favors us only with
a scrap of the Original, viz. (...), and translateth it Written Word, should it
be admitted for a Genuine interpretation (though different from all others) of
the Original, it would only prove that Sentence in their ( i. e. the Jews) Law,
was called the written Word; yet it is altogether insufficient to prove the
Bible collectively, i. e. as it contains all the Books of the Old and New
Testament, to be the Word of God: because the Evangelist restricts it here to
Four Words, which are (...) they hated me without a Cause. The Controversy
between G. K. etc. has not been, whether one particular Sentence in the Bible,
but whether all the Books therein contained, are the Word of God; all Citations
of the Scriptures that do not prove that, are in my Opinion, far remote from
the subject of this Dispute: and till this is proved in express Scripture Terms
by him or some other, I hope he will be so favorable to us, as not to
Stigmatize us with the Name of Heretics, especially if he has not forgot what
he lately said, viz. Retract. p. 34.
I still adhere to my former Advice, that nothing be required by one sort from
another, as an Article of Faith or Doctrine in common to be believed, but what
is expressly delivered in the Scriptures, in plain express Scripture Terms.

The Term Logos is variously used, and translated in the New Testament; G. K.
recites Presb. and Inde. Vis. Chur. p. 7.
Ten different Significations it has. Had (...) been translated in John 15.25.
as it in 1 Cor. 15.54, the saying that is written, there would be scarce any
shadow of an Argument to be deduced from that Citation, to have proved that the
Scriptures are the written Word of God; unless wheresoever the Term Written is
to be found in the Scriptures, he will say Word is there meant, though not
expressed. Perchance G. K. may have so much Effrontery, as to deny that Logos
signifies Saying; because he has not given that Sense of it, in the Book and
Page above cited: If he will but please to Read Bishop Kidder's Demonstration
of the Messiah, p. 11. p. 251.
there he may see the Bishop affirming, that Legos signifies Saying or Thing,
and translating the very Words (...), the Saying that is Written, or the Thing
that is Written; though the Quaker's Affirmation may be now of little Authority
with him: Yet I conceive, he will not presume to contradict his Right Reverend
Father in God, so called; but allow his ipse dixit sufficient to Patronize this
Interpretation.

The third and last Quotation (which I shall now examine) to prove the
Scriptures are the Word of God, is brought by him from Acts 1.1. (...), primum
Librum, het Eersse Boetk, Le premier Traitte, the former Book; but in the
Greek, says G. K. it is Word: He might even as well have said, but in Greek
it is Christ, it is Communication, it is Utterance, it is Reason, it is Preaching or
Doctrine; for (...) is taken in all these and several other Significations, one
whereof I remember G. K. makes mention of, and that is, Treatise; and quoted
Acts 1.1. to prove it (in a Presh. and Inde. Vis. Churches.
Book he writ about ten Years since) notwithstanding G. K. the Episcopalian now
asserts the contrary, which brings to my remembrance an old Saying, Conveniet
nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.

Cato.

Before I leave this subject concerning the Equivocalness of words, I shall
concisely Anatomize one Query G. K. exultantly relates he put to John Whiting,
which was, Fourth Narr. p. 41.
whether he was of G. Whitehead 's and Edward Buroughs 's Faith, who said,
Christ was not in Heaven in our Nature; or that of W. Penn 's, who said, Christ
took our Nature, and triumphed in our Nature. 'Twill be necessary here, before
I proceed to explain, at least summarily, a few of the many Senses the
ambiguous Term Nature is used in, because on the Equivocalness of that Term, is
hinged the Opposition that G. K. would insinuate there is between G. W. E. B.
and W. Penn.

The word Nature is variously sensed.

By the Schoolmen it is used as a Synonymous Term with God; and is called by
them, sometimes, Natura Naturans; by Seneca it is affirmed, to be one of the
Names of God.

By Physicians it is considered as an Aggregate of Powers existing in a living
animal Body, as when they say, Nature is strong, or weak; or that the Morbifick
Matter is by the strength of Nature expelled from the Center to the
Circumference, as in the Eruption of the Small Pox, Measles, etc. and also for
an Essential Property, as Alees naturally Purges, Creeus Metallerum naturally
Vomits.

By Natural Philosophers, the settled order of things is understood; as Fire
naturally burns, the Blood naturally circulates out of the Arteries into the
Veins, after a Summer naturally follows a Winter, the Children of all Women
have their solid parts naturally organized alike; and in the texture of their
Fluids, naturally there is no visible difference.

The Terraqueous Globe is also comprehended under this Term, as there is no
such thing in Nature, as a Salamander, Phoenix, etc.

By Theologists, the State our first Parents, by disobeying their Creator, fell
into, wherein the Unregenerate Man now is, is typified, as the Ungodly Man is
in the State of Nature, but the Godly is in the State of Grace. Besides these
here recited, there are several other Significations of this ambiguous word
Nature, too long here to be enumerated.

By what has been said, it is certain that there is a possibility the Term
Nature may be variously considered, and it is as clear as the Sun at Noon, from
G. Keith's Quotations out of their Books, that when G. Whitehead and E.
Buroughs said, Christ was not in Heaven in our Nature, (as G. K. would infer
from their words) they spoke it of sinful, wicked, Devilish Nature; but W.
Penn, when he said Christ took our Nature, and triumphed in our Nature,
considered him as the Son of Mary, a true and perfect Man, having a Body
organized like other Men. That this was their meaning, is demonstrable from
their own words, as cited by G. K. in his P. 39.
fourth Narrative, where G. Whitehead (as the Narrator affirms) does severely
blame John Horn and Thomas More, in his P. 11, 12.
He Goat's Horn, etc. for saying, Christ took upon him, their ( i. e. Sinful)
Nature. Ed. Buroughs is very plain, in distinguishing the subject of the
Controversy, by answering his Opponent as follows, E. B's Works, p. 301.
Thou say in that Answer, that Christ ascended to the right hand of the
Father in your Nature: Mark now thy Nature, and your Nature, who are one with
thee, is sinful and wicked, and of the Devil, for so are all Liars; and it is
Blasphemy, to say sinful wicked devilish Nature -- is at the right hand of God
in Heaven. If G. K. has different thoughts of Christ being in Heaven, than E.
B. here demonstrates he has, let him plainly declare it: I do acknowledge I am
not of opinion that Christ is in Heaven, in the Nature of Liars, which is the
thing E. B. here opposes.

W. Penn says, That Prim. Christ. p. 85.
Jesus Christ took our Nature upon him, and was like us in all things, Sin
excepted. What Shadow of a Contradiction is here in these Proofs, even as cited
by G. K. he that can perceive it, must have a more penetrating sight than I
pretend to? I acknowledge, that I see nothing but a perfect Harmony. G.
Whitehead blames some for saying, Christ took their ( i. e. sinful) Nature on
him: E. Buroughs says, Christ is not at the right hand of God, in that Nature
which Liars are in. W. Penn faith, Christ took our ( i. e. as he was the Seed
of the Woman) Nature upon him, and was like unto us in all things, Sin
excepted. The two first consider Nature as it is predicated of the
Unregenerate, as they are in a State of Enmity to God: The last considers
Nature, as it is predicated, of a Being that has the Essential Properties of a
Man, and a Body organized, as our Bodies are.

Note, G. K. did not propose his Question to John Whiting in the terms of G. W.
who said their Nature; nor of E. B. who said your Nature, thy Nature, his
Nature; the alteration of a material word in a Proposition, savours very much
of Sophistry.

If G. K. had demanded an Answer of me to this Query, I am subject to believe,
that I might have given him the same Reply, that J. W. did, though it may be with
a distinction, viz. That I was of the Faith of both, for I do not favor any
Opinion, that would insinuate that Christ was, or is, in Heaven, in sinful
Nature: Yet I do believe that he was a true and perfect Man, not imagining Sin
to be Essential to our Nature, or deducible from the abovesaid Premises, as G.
K. would Narr. p. 40.
infer, and then cry out from a false Consequence, this is a most vile and
gross Heresy.

If G. K. thinks I have, by saying that I am of J. Whiting's Faith in this
matter, rendered my self very Ridiculous and Obnoxious to the general Censure of
his Auditory; he may rest satisfied that I am not ambitious of his Favor,
experimentally knowing, that it is a discredit to be praised by some. And as
for the Censure of his Auditory, some of his Associates that understood
Philosophy, were ashamed of his Definition of Substance, etc. as I have been
informed. But as to the Judgment of his ignorant Mobb, he may depend on it,
that I never have, nor will court their Applause. Having said thus much of the
Ambiguity of words in a formal Acceptance, I shall pass on to his Page 92.

I asked D. Phillips who was present, 4th Narr. p. 93.
and sat near. where I stood, (this is false, for I stood amongst the Crowd,
when this Query was proposed to me) and is one in Unity with the Quakers,
whether that Blood (that was let out of Christ's Side by the Spear) was in
being, etc. -- but he gave no reply.

Obser. I do not remember what Answer I gave to this Query, because sometimes
G. K. would ask me one Question; at the same time one or two of his Ministers
would ask me another; and sometimes I answered one, sometimes the other; but if
I dis-respected him so far then, as not to oblige him with an Answer; if he
will not be Angry, nor call Names, I will do it now. My Opinion is, that the
Blood which was let out of Christ's Side by the Soldier's Spear after he was
Dead, is not now existing under the same form of Blood, as then it was:
Nevertheless, I do not conceive, that any Particle of it is Annihilated, though
it may be wonderfully changed, as to those parts the Schools term its Accidents.

Ibid. I asked him (i. e. D. P.) again, Whether he believed that the Blood that
was outwardly shed was Meritorius to Justification, 4th Narr. p. 92.
and that True Believers were justified by it? He said, he knew not what I
meant by the word Merit or Meritorious; I told him, It was a Shame for him to
pretend to be so Ignorant of the Signification of the Word, that an ordinary
Schoolboy did know, seeing he was a Scholar, and did not long ago Commence
Doctor of Physic at Leiden, and had there a Latin Oration.

Obser. The Narrator here is guilty of two Untruths, the First, is in saying,
that I said, That I did not know what he meant by Merit or Meritorious: The
Second is, That I had a Latin Oration at Leiden. As to the First, I am
satisfied he has designedly altered my Words, by what he has since told me;
whether the Second is to be attributed solely to his Ignorance of the Method of
that University, I shall not determine.

Ibid. I asked again, Were Believers justified by the Merit of the Blood that
was outwardly Shed? He answered, It was a part of the Offering.

I do conceive, that that Act of the Soldiers piercing our Savior's Side, and
letting out his Blood by the Wound made by the Spear, abstractly considered, is
not the Meritorious cause of our Salvation; but that it is the whole Offering
whereby Believers are justified.

Ibid. I farther asked him, what he did mean by the Offering?

Observe. By the Offering I mean, what the Author to the Hebrews has left on
record, Chap. 9.14, 15. in these words, How much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without Spot to God,
purge your Consciences from dead Works to serve the living God? And for this
cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of Death, for the
Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
which are called might receive the Promise of the eternal Inheritance.

P. 93.
And on this Head also I queried D. Phillips, Whether Christ's Body was the
same in Substance now in Heaven, that it was on Earth? And whether it was, when
on Earth, a terrestrial Body? He said, he did not know what I meant by
Substance.

Observe. Here were some things by him said, which I am apt to think some of his
Friends have since acquainted him with, and showed him the Absurdity thereof,
which has inclined him so notoriously to vary the state of the Query; to
undeceive the Reader, I shall give him a more particular account thereof, which
was after this manner.

G. K. Daniel, has Christ now in Heaven, the same Body that he had when here
on Earth?

D. P. I do desire to know, whether thou would have me give my Opinion,
whether I do believe that Christ has now in Heaven, the same Flesh, Blood and
Bones, that he had when here on Earth; because here is a Minister of the Church
of England, that told me, he did believe that Christ has now in Heaven the
same Flesh, Blood and Bones, Stomach and Guts, that he had when here on Earth.
To this he gave no answer, but Queried:

G. K. Is the Substance the same, though its Accidents are changed?

D. P. I have no Notion or Idea of Substance, without Accidents, therefore
prithee give me a Definition of such a Substance.

G. K. Substance is a Being, or thing that does depend on God Almighty, and is
the subject of Accidents, etc. As he was going on, and making an Harangue
concerning Substance, I stopped him, by saying,

D. P. George, this is little to the purpose, I only desire a Definition of
Substance.

G. K. Thou art a Fool.

D. P. If I am a Fool, few will admire thee for proposing thy Queries to me.

G. K. It Is a Shame for a Doctor of Physic to be ignorant what Substance is.
Here he run into a Passion, and showed his Admirers what a Man of Temper he was.

Min. A Minister reproving him, said, Personal Reflections are not commendable.
Another Minister endeavoring to divert me from the Subject under debate, said,
The Definition of Substance is little to the purpose.

D. P. How can any Person positively determine, whether any Substance is the
same, when all its Accidents are changed, unless he can have a distinct Idea of
Substance, separated from its Accidents? Here G. K. having a little moderated
his Passion, replied,

G. K. Substance is a created Being:

D. P. So are Accidents created Beings.

G. K. They are produced Beings. And presently desisted Querying, and went on
another Subject.

Observe. Here are three things that I shall briefly consider: First, The
Absurdity of this Clergy-man's Resurrection. Secondly, How G. K. treats his
Opponents. Thirdly, The Learnedness of G. K's Definition of Substance.

As to the first, Those that do assert, that Christ has now in Heaven, the
same Flesh, Blood and Bones, that he had when here on Earth; do consequentially
grant, that every Man, at the Resurrection, shall have the same numerical
Particles vitally reunited to his Soul, that he had at the time of his Death:
If this is admitted, then it necessarily follows, that he that died an Infant,
shall rise in Stature like an Infant; he that dies Hydropical, shall rise with
a Belly not much less than a Tun; he that dies of a Consumption, shall rise
extremely emaciated, resembling a Skeleton; he that dies without his Legs and
Arms, shall arise without them; and he that dies Gibbous, shall arise
Hunch-back'd. This is so gross an Opinion of the Resurrection, that I am
subject to believe G. K. does not incline to Patronize any such Carnal Notions
of the Resurrection of the Dead, though he did not condemn it in his Brother
Priest, who said, at Turners-Hall, that he believed Christ was now in Heaven,
with the same Stomach, Guts, etc. that might be out of Policy, not being
willing to disoblige any of them, into whose Society he daily expected to be
initiated.

Secondly, As to his Civility toward his quondam Friends, if he dislikes their
Discourse, being, perhaps, better Orators than himself, he orders his
Janisaries to pull them down, if they do not do it without a Command; as soon
as they are down, they are hurried out of Doors with Violence, scarce admitting
them to speak a word in their own defense, although it may be he bespatters them
at the same time with some personal Reflections. Thus Thomas Kent was served at
Turners-Hall, a partial account thereof may be seen in the ninth Page: Other
times, though (it may be) he was the Aggressor, he will complement them with the
grateful Titles of Fool, Madman, Liar, etc. especially when he is foiled by his
Opponent.

He will not be more Civil when he invites them into his Friends House: In
confirmation hereof, I will give the Reader a brief account, how he treated me.
A few days after his pretended fourth Narrative came out, I writ to him,
intimating, that he had grossly misrepresented me, desiring his Answer; but with
none could I be favored to his day. Some time after, I accidentally met him in
Cornhil; he told me, that he had received my Letter, and if he had done me any
Wrong, he would give me Satisfaction; inviting me into his Bookseller's Shop;
without any Hesitation I followed him, where some of his Fraternity were, who
would have; Catechized me. I replied, I am come in with G. K. in order to
receive Satisfaction from him, for some things he has Printed concerning me,
in his last Narrative. I charged him with misrepresenting me first, in Page 21.
concerning his Book, called, The Way Cast up; and showed them what he said
concerning it, in the Defense of the Snake, how that Book was approved by a
Meeting of Friends, and that by his own Concession then, there was no Meeting,
but the Second-days-Meeting, that did authorize Books; consequentially it could
be no great Lie in any Person (that had read his Books) to say, that his Book,
called, The Way Cast up, was approved by the Second-days-Meeting, they assented
to it. I also there told him, That I did not say, that I did not know what
Meritorious signified. He replied, He thought I meant so. I told him, If he had
done heartily by me, he should have given my own Words, and not his Conjectures
of my Meanings. Insisting a little warmly on this Subject, to clear himself of
this apparent Forgery, he said, He did verily believe that I spoke as 'twas
Printed. I replied, 'Twas abominable False: He fell into an Exorbitant Passion,
calling me Madman, Liar, etc. One that belonged to the Shop, seeing the little
Man in so great a Disorder, and People gathering about the Shop-door, pulled me
from the place I stood, and with violence thrust me into the Street. Perchance
some may have so favorable Opinions of him, as to say, he did not order his
Friends to abuse me: To them my Answer is, Neither did he reprove them in my
hearing, for their Incivilities, which in some Men's Judgment, is a tacit
Approbation.

Thirdly, What concerns his Definition of Substance, it is deficient, having no
differentia specifica, whereby, one Classis of Beings, is discriminated from
another. But why should I spend time in anatomizing the Defectiveness, etc. of
his Definition, when it is obvious to all that know the Nature of a Definition:
I could not have imagined, that G. K. who would be esteemed a Philosopher,
would have entertained his Auditory with such a nauseous Dish of Philosophy.
Perhaps some, may think I am too Censorious, that are of Opinion he is
introducing a new System of Philosophy, from his saying at Turners-Hall, My
Philosophy teaches me this, and my Philosophy teaches me that. Whatever
Sentiments any of his Admirers may have; of his Philosophy, I shall have a mean
Esteem of it, till I have seen a Vindication of his late Definition of
Substance, etc.

Ibid. I asked him ( i. e. D. P.) again, Was our Lord's Body Earthly when it
was on Earth?

D. P. It was like unto ours in all things, Sin excepted.

G. K. But was it Earthly or Terrestrial?

D. P. The Scriptures are very plain in this matter, for which reason I do not
conceive there is any necessity for me to use any Unscriptural Terms;
nevertheless I do sincerely believe, that it was (as the Scripture says) like
ours in all things, Sin excepted.

Min. By his confessing it was like ours, he has confessed it was an Earthly
Body.

G. K. To them that are Sound in the Faith, it is so, but not to the Quakers;
for they will not allow, that an Earthly Body, and a Heavenly Body, can be the
same in Substance; or that a Natural Body, and a Spiritual Body, are the same
in Substance.

Obs. The unsettled Sense of this Term Substance, is, as I conceive, the sole
Cause of several Differences that arises amongst them, that Discourse about it:
Those that have not been Tinctured with the Notions of the Schools, concerning
Substance, consider it as a material Being, having Length, Breadth, Thickness,
Figure, Color, and as a thing Cognizable to the External Senses. G. K. and the
Schoolmen talk of it, as a Being that has neither Length, Breadth, Thickness,
Figure, Color, nor as an Object perceptible by the Eye, etc. but only as a
Substratum of certain Qualities, commonly called Accidents: But what this
Substratum is, I never could yet meet with any that could give me a clear
distinct Idea of it.

If G. K. has a clear, distinct, and comprehensive Idea of the Term Substance,
and would communicate it to G. W. it is very probable their Notions about it,
might easily be reconciled; but if one talks of it as a Creature of the Mind,
invented by the Schools, to support their Notions of Accidents, actually
existing, per se, no where, unless it does in the Mind, as Substance distinct
from all Accidents really does not: And the other considers it only as a
visible material Being, as the Scripture does, Genesis 7.4. They may endlesly
dispute about it, till the precise Signification of that Term is settled, when
that is done, this Controversy may then appear to be a Strife, merely through
the Ambiguity of words.

Ibid. I told the Auditory, how the Quakers Ignorance, and False Notions of
Philosophy, destroyed their Faith, and hindered them to believe that necessary
and Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, that Christ's Body that he had
on Earth, is the same in Substance it was in Heaven -- for if it is not the
same in Substance, it is in no respect the same.

Obs. We are not of the Opinion of a great Man among the Romans, who said, If
they had been deprived of Aristotle's Philosophy, they should have wanted
several Articles of their Faith. We do not esteem Heathenish Philosophy
Essential to our Religion, neither do we matter how Ignorant we are in that,
our principal Care being to make our Calling and Election sure. That the
Quakers Ignorance, and false Notions of Philosophy, destroyed their Faith, G.
K. dogmatically asserteth; but how does he prove it? Why he says, They do not
believe that Christ's Body, that he had on Earth, is the same in Substance it
was in Heaven. How does he make out, that the Sameness of a Spiritual Body,
which was once a Natural Body, consists only in its Substance; may not his ipse
dixit (when supported with a great Assurance) be credited? Then he has another
notable Argument, which is reserved till last, and probably, as he thinks, the
most conclusive, viz. If it be not the same in Substance, it is in no respect
the same. How precarious is this Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith (as
G. K. terms it) if it has no better a Foundation, than an If to support it?

I have two Queries to propose to G. K. on this Head, to which I shall expect
his Answer, when he thinks fit to reply.

First, I desire him to demonstrate, Wherein the Sameness of a Natural Body
does consist? Because, if he cannot demonstrate wherein that consists, I shall
give little heed to what he magisterially asserteth, concerning the Identity of
a Spiritual Body.

Secondly, Whether he does apply the Term Substance, to God, finite Spirits,
and Body, in the same, or different Significations? If it stands for the same
Idea, when it is predicated of so different Subjects; Whether it will not
follow, that God, Spirits and Body, agree in the same common name of Substance?
Which, in my Opinion, is a very odd Doctrine. But if he says, it stands for
three different Idea's; for one, as God is said to be a Substance; for another,
as an Angel is said to be a Substance; and for a third, as Matter is called a
Substance. Then I shall desire him to make known, how we may distinguish these
several Kinds of Substances, because, without knowing what precise Idea's
Substance stands for, it is impossible to discourse about it intelligibly.

Whatever G. K. and his Associates falsely insinuate, the Quakers sincerely
believe, that the same Jesus Christ, which died without the Gates of Jerusalem,
is risen from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven, from whence he will, at the
last day, come with Glory and Majesty, and Judge the Living and the Dead,
according to their Deeds done in the Body. The Substance of this, I told G. K.
at Turners-Hall, was my Faith. To this he replied, Thou art no more a Quaker
than I am; to say Thee and Thou, and not to pull off the Hat, makes a Quaker.
This Passage I do not find in his Narrative, whether it was omitted designedly,
or accidentally, he is best able to inform the Querist.

We likewise believe the Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just, and of the
Unjust; though we do not positively determine, what Qualities, etc. are altered,
or what remains the same, when a Natural Body is changed into a Spiritual Body;
therefore we determine nothing magisterially, concerning the Change the
Resurrection Body shall receive at the Sound of the last Trumpet; but what the
Holy Ghost has been pleased to reveal in the Scriptures, viz. That this
Corruptible, shall put on Incorruption; that this Mortal, shall put on
Immortality.

How great an Alteration there is in a Corruptible Body, when it has put on
Incorruption; or in a Mortal Body, when it has put on Immortality; I am not
ashamed to acknowledge my Ignorance therein.

With what Body shall the Dead arise? was a Query in the Apostle Paul's time:
What Answer he gave the curious Inquirer then, may be seen 1 Cor. 15.36, etc.
and may also serve G. K. now, 1 Cor. 15.36, etc.
Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bear grain, it
may chance of Wheat, or of some other grain. But God gives it a body, as it
has pleased him. An Answer, that, in my Opinion, should deter all Christians
from determining any thing Dogmatically, wherein the Sameness of the
Resurrection Body, does, or does not consist; conceiving that, we should rest
satisfied in what the Scriptures say on this subject, which is, That the Dead
shall arise.

In this Chapter the Apostle discourses very largely concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.
yet seems very cautious here in wording his matter about it; neither in this
Chapter, nor in any other place of his Writings, affirming, In totidem
terminis, the Resurrection of the Same Body: But where he speaks of the
Resurrection, he does not say, of the dead bodies, but simply of the Dead, as
(...), the Resurrection of the Dead; 1 Cor. 15.13.
not (...), the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Dead; (...) (not (...))
(...), Ver. 16. Ver. 18. Ver. 22.
if the Dead are not risen; (...) (not (...)) they that sleep (...) (not (...))
(...), all shall be made alive: Here is (...), two Adjectives and an Article,
all three of the Masculine Gender; if they had any reference to (...), Bodies,
they must have been of the Neuter; whereby it demonstratively follows, the
Apostle did not predicate these Terms of Bodies; neither do I find in any place
of my Bible, in express words, the Resurrection of the Same Body affirmed.

It has always been our principal Concern, to word our Discourses (especially
when we speak of the Principles of our Faith) as much as may be in
Scripture-Terms; if others did the like, we are inclined to believe, there
would be more Love and Unity amongst the Professors of Christianity, than now
there are. We think it a great piece of Presumption, and Arrogance, in any
Mortal, Dictator-like, positively to determine, wherein the Sameness of a
Natural Body, when it is changed into a Spiritual Body, does, and wherein it
does not consist. As G. K. confidently affirms, that P. 93.
the Change was not in Substance, but in Accidents: For (says he) Take away
the Substance of any thing, and no Accidents can remain of any thing. Suppose I
should say, Take away all the Accidents from a Material Substance, and what
remains, G. K. may put in his Eye, without injuring his Sight, not doubting to
prove this my Supposition, when G. K. in intelligible words, demonstrateth the
Truth of his Assertion? But wherein to place the Sameness of a Spiritual
Substance, that was once a Natural One, we suspend dictating any thing
positively concerning it; conceiving that we shall never have a certain,
adequate and comprehensive Notion, of the Qualities of a Resurrection-Body,
till the last Day, we actually experience it in our selves.

Nevertheless, though we do not affect School-Terms, which have been Midwiv'd
into the World by Heathen Philosophers, as Substance and Accidents; nor
Magisterially determine, wherein the Identity of the Resurrection-Body shall
consist; yet we do unfainedly believe, as our ancient Friend J. Crook, in his
Treatise, called, Truth's Principles, Printed Anno 1663, says, The Dead, shall
be raised with the same Bodies, as far as a Natural and Spiritual, Corruptible
and Incorruptible, Terrestrial and Celestial, can be the same.

Having thus answered what is said concerning me in G. K.'s Fourth Narrative, I
submit to the unbiassed Reader's Determination, how great his Victory is, and
what Reason he has so Boastingly to say, Page 92.
That in all his Answers he (i. e. D. P.) gave on this, or other Heads, he
greatly foiled himself. In the Opinion of some, this Boast had been more
becoming a Man that had put off his Armor, than one that is putting it on.

POSTSCRIPT.
BEsides what is related by G. K. in his Narrative, concerning his Discourse
with me, there are several things omitted; and I remember, among other things,
he told his Auditory after this manner.

G. K. It is a Custom among the Quakers, to advise their Proselytes to read
none of their Adversaries Books.

D. P. That is False, George.

Min. How long have you been a Quaker?

D. P. My Parents were Quakers, and I may denominate my self one from my
Cradle, being always educated in the way of Truth; and in all my Life, I never
heard any such Caution given to me, or to any other Person.

Obser. Had this been a General Maxim, I am confident, I should not have lived
so long in Ignorance of it, having had the Curiosity for several Years, to read
most Books that were Printed against the Quakers, not privately, but publicly,
even in the presence of some of their Chiefest Preachers; but never was blamed
for so doing, nor advised to the contrary by any of them. G. K. would not
oblige me a little, if he would favor me so far, as to tell me, how many he
had advised, not to read Adversaries Books, in 25 or 30 Years that he was
amongst them; it is not to be doubted, but if it was a common Method, he (who
thought himself not one of the least of their Advocates) can remember some of
them by Name, to whom he gave such Advice; if he does not give us the Name of
one of our Friends, now in Fellowship with us, it will be reputed by me, as a
Fiction of his own Brain.

As G. K. was giving his Auditory an account of the extraordinary Success he
had, in reclaiming the Quakers from their Gross Errors, as he falsely calls
them, I put one Query to him, he having proposed several to me before; and this
is the only Query, as I remember, that I started all the time I was there,
after he had been glorying in the number of his Proselytes about Reading.

D. P. Now thou have given us an account of thy Proselytes at Reading, Prithee
let us know how many thou have in other places?

G. K. About Huntington there is Robert Bridgeman and Margaret Everard, who was
a noted Preacher amongst the Quakers.

D. P. Now thou have given us a Catalogue of thy Country Proselytes, Prithee
give us an account of thy City Converts? Here he demurred, and though urged to
give an Answer; yet would not name one, being ashamed (as I am subject to
believe) publicly to own, that he had not got one Quaker (who was in
Fellowship with Friends, when he came to England, and had not forfeited it by
some Irregular Act) to join with him in exposing of their quondam Friends in
this populous City.

Obser. The number of his Proselytes are in reality (whatever he Bounces) very
small, if such only as were in Fellowship with the Quakers, and owned by them
as such (when he came into England) were enumerated; all these, I am fully
satisfied; will not exceed the number of his Narratives, which are but Four:
But if all those who have been ejected their Society, for some notorious
Immoralities, etc. should be included, the number would be greater, by his
carrying away those rotten Branches, they freely acknowledge; and are apt to
think, he would have no great cause to boast, if he could persuade more such to
unite themselves to his Lax Communion; because by their Scandalous Lives, when
amongst Friends, they brought a public Disrepute to their Holy Profession. I
saw one of G. K.'s chiefest Converts at his right hand, on the Stage at
Turners-Hall (when G. K. was Comically delivering his last Narrative) who had
been banished their Society, for Actions that were extremely Scandalous.

Though G. K. omits reciting the Number and Names of his new Adherents in its
proper place, yet in the Postscript I observe, there is mention made of Two
Men, and as many Women, that he has been instrumental in reconciling to the
Church of England, so called, viz. Robert Bridgeman, Margaret Everard, William
Mather and his Wife; the two first we shall not deny, that they were once
reputed as our Friends: But as for William Mather, we have not owned him as one
these many Years, long since he appeared publicly in Print against us. It is
much, that he, who has been so Industrious these five or six Years, to Sow the
Seeds of Dissension amongst the Quakers, in all that time, should not be able
to nominated Four of that Communion by Name, who were once reputed ones; but to
fill up that Number, should be forced to crowd in William Mather, an elder
Adversary, than himself.

Should the Benefit and Prejudice be weighed in equal Scales, wherewith G. K.
has affected the Quakers; I am well satisfied, the former will considerably
out-ballance the latter. He did them a notable Service, First, In dividing the
Separate Meeting in Harp-lane, whereby it was dissolved; upon its Dissolution,
several of its Members, that were honest and well-meaning People, returned to
Truth and their former Friends. Secondly, By carrying away some scandalous and
disorderly Persons, whose Immoralities, etc. were a daily Exercise to them.
Thirdly, By freeing them from some turbulent and unruly Members, that did too
often disturb the Quiet of their Meetings. Now these are become Nominal Members
of another Society, they presume that their Immoralities will never more be
thrown in their Teeth. Fourthly, By his Clamours, he has excited a Curiosity
in some, to read their Books; who probably without them, would never have been
so Inquisitive: And in others, to go to their Public Meetings, to hear and see
for themselves; who have thereby been so entirely well satisfied in their
Principles, that many lately, of several Professions, have united themselves to
their Communion.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, 1700.
TRuth and Innocence Vindicated; and the People, called Quakers, Defended, in
Principle and Practice, against Invidious Attempts and Calumnies. Being a Just
Examination of two Books against the said People, Entitled, I. A Brief
Discovery, etc. by three Norfolk Priests. II. Some few of the Quakers many
Horrid Blasphemies, etc. Being a Scandalous Libel. Containing also many of the
Repeated Abuses in John Meriton's Antidote, and Francis Bugg's Pilgrim's
Progress. Examined by G. Whitehead, a Servant of Christ. Price Stitched 9 d.

The Rector Examined, About his Book Scandalously styled, An Antidote against
the Venom of Quakerism, By John Meriton, who calls himself A. M. Rector of
Boughton in Norfolk. And his Observations Remarked, and the Christianity of the
People, commonly called Quakers, Re-asserted and Vindicated, from his
Perversions and Assertions. By George Whitehead. Price Stitched 6 d.

A Rambling Pilgrim, or Profane Apostate, Exposed: Being an Answer to Two
Persecuting Books, Falsely Entitled, I. The Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to
Christianity. II. A Modest Defense. With an Epistle Dedicatory to his Bountiful
Benefactors. By G. W. a Servant of Christ. Price Stitched 6 d.

The Creed-Forgers Detected, in Reply to a Pamphlet, Falsely called, The Quakers
Creed, containing Twelve Articles, Published by some, who have not joined with
Geo. Keith in his Pride and Contradiction, but Testify against both him, and
them that join with him therein. Price Stitched 2 d.

Some Observations on the Remarks upon the Quakers: Or, the Busy Priest's Envy
Detected, and Folly Manifested; and his poor Ability for his Languishing Church
proved Ineffectual. Price Stitched 3 d.

The Weakness of George Keith's Reasons for Renouncing Quakerism, and entering
into Communion with the Church of England, etc. Manifested, and Replied to. By
John Field. Price Stitched 3 d.

Robert Bridgman's Reason for leaving the Quakers, (upon Examination) proved
Unreasonable; being only a Demonstration of his Envy. By W. Rawlinson. Price
Stitched 3 d.

The Trial of Spirits both in Teachers and Hearers. Wherein is held forth the
clear Discovery, and certain Downfall, of the Carnal and Antichristian Clergy of
these Nations. Testified from the Word of God, to the University Congregations
of Cambridge. Whereunto is added, a plain and necessary Confutation of diverse
Gross Errors, delivered by Mr. Sydrach Sympson, in a Sermon preached to the
same Congregation at the Commencement, Anno MDCLIII. Wherein (among other
things) is declared, that the Universities (according to their present Statutes
and Practices) are not (as he affirmed) answerable to the Schools of the
Prophets in the time of the Law; but rather to the Idolatrous High Places. And
that Humane Learning is not a Preparation appointed by Christ, either for the
right Understanding, or right Teaching the Gospel. With a brief. Testimony
against Divinity-Degrees in the Universities. As also Luther's Testimony at
large upon the whole Matter. And lastly, The right Reformation of Learning,
Schools and Universities, according to the State of the Gospel, and the Light
that shines therein. All necessary for the Instruction and Direction of the
Faithful in these last times. By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and
Master of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambrige. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Defense of the People called Quakers: Being a Reply, to a Book lately
published by certain Priests of the County of Norfolk, under the pretended
Title of The Quakers Challenge. And containing some brief and modest
Animadversions upon the Book it self. Several Certificates, which Detect the
Errors in those of West-Dereham, and Clear the People called Quakers of the
said Challenge. The Letters that passed between Them and the Priests. Price
Stitched 6 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse, showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ. By W. Penn. In Two Parts. The Fifth Edition. Price Bound 3 s.

The Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, Demonstrated in sundry
Declarations on Variety of Subjects. Preached at the Quakers Meeting in London,
by Mr. W. Penn, Mr. G. Whitehead, Mr. S. Waldenfield, Mr. B. Cool, Taken in
Shorthand as it was delivered by them; and now Faithfully Transcribed and
Published for the Information of those, who, by reason of Ignorance, may have
received a Prejudice against them. By a Lover of that People. Price Bound 1 s.
6 d.


