Some Helps for the INDIANS; Showing them how to Improve their Natural Reason,
to know the true God, and the Christian Religion.

1. By leading them to see the Divine Authority of the Scriptures. 2. By the
Scriptures, the Divine truths necessary to Eternal salvation.
BY ABRAHAM PEIRSON Pastor of the Church at Branford.

Examined and approved by that Experienced Gentleman (in the Indian Language)
Captain JOHN SCOT.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed for Samuel Green, 1658.

To the Reader
WHO have occasion to make use of this Book, may please to observe, that the
accute; or, long accent thus noted (a) signifies that the syllable over which
it is placed is to be pronounced long; the rest of the words be short, till the
like, or a circumflex do regulate the sillables following. Words of two
sillables most frequently be not accented at all, being commonly of equal
measure, and hardly, mispronou^ced. Also, s^^dry times the prepositions in,
with, for, from, ^^^^^^c: be set after the Substantives in the Indian ^^ed
before them in the English, that so no harshness (this caution remembered) may
sound in either.

^ewise sometime a phrase is used in the Indian, which word for word can hardly
be rendered in the English; but then, and ever, care is had that in every
sentence, and within the limits of every stop, the Indian does truly answer
the English, The Lord pardon, accept, and give (...), that this may be an help
toward the sp^^tual good of Indian souls.

So prays A. P.

POshshe Airenamawetouwungash wutche Eansketambawg, Okkekoodemunganauwaus ten
auwarchan nejek arumbawe penauwuawunk wauhean webe waugh wauwerhummat Mando
Jehovah, quah werramauwe Christianauwe routasowank. Negonne spe pummooawarranau
nejek kenawmen Mandowe touhkretassowunk wutche God wuskwhegansh. Neeseetetauwe
spe God wuskwhegansh mandowaious werramauwungansh querauhikkamuks re micheme
kejahiitawunk.

Some helps for the Indians, showing them how to improve their natural Reason
to know the only true God, and the true Christian religion. First by leading
them to see the divine Authority of the Scriptures. Secondly by the Scriptures
the divine Truths necessary to eternal Salvation.

Nattoohtemauwetoowunk.
TOohgodje kor amen neh atta Mandouh

Anasquet auweten.
Wutche wewinnakommuk quah yeiache werrawauwunk wutche wame arkees, quah
skeetambawg mittauhkuk terre, owwannak matta sauwaiooguk wutche sompaio
penauwauwuk quah renoowunk.

Wutche ai akquiiks chawgwunsh wekakontamooawk skeje nanse eawk renwawk
roytammoungansh quah warramaw oytammoungansh matta werramattauoomuks wutche
wame renawawk, quah wegonje assowunnamanoosh: webe (youh coytammoounk) neh
Mandoo nannarwee re wame renawawk matta assowunun ooanas^spe assowunnamoungansh
quompaious; negouche youh paughke mouche songeme wutche chawgun noweta
wequa-ai, teou nannarwe re wame rennawawk. quah youh wequa-ai pahke mouche
nukquddee wutche as-hiewunk wutche pommochawashshauwas wutche negoniek
oushwawog renawawk re wame nejek wuttansewungannooawk wutche antfeunganak, re
antsunganak, ouwannak matta peperruwagup re mukkrassoowunganoas rame
ischauwunganak terre wutchio rio shaio sharamauwunganak; ux wutche ramiouk
wequaai ramekezekekozzo ramee utteoitummoounganoo wutche wame rennawawk spe
Iehovahnagum. Quah neh nenar wequaai utteamopetanguanau wame rennawawk
renampauwe; mous keme spe wez-sassawungansh teous utteam wame rennawawk
pokkatche rehit chawgun waughtassoowawk matcherewunk, mukko renna matta
waughtammoan, quah skeje chechege moncharawanunguotush aharremuks', arra
Paddaquahhum, Quequansh, mazzenunguottush kesesuk terre, squarrug arraksak etc:
youh kakkoodumchamo neh nejek wauhtannau mouche mi^kissoowunk ausin
keizhittishannuk, mukko matta nauwah, ouwun bitch arroutautak matcherewunk,
quah om uttren hanrukkeque roytaks. Quah youh mutche God Jehovah Nezetatauwe,
waske noujaiitch wame aiakquiiks, teous uttahhenau rambatsen pummaiawunk.
Wutche aiakquiiks teous noujaiiggishhansh, matta hom waje pummaiawunganoo,
wutche ne matta pummaynook matta hom remanoo chaugun, matta hom chaugun
pummaaio, askam pummaay noshan, newutche paughke [mouchh] outahheamo
noujaiewunk wutche chaugun noweta perrewawhjaioohittit teou matta outchinoh,
[meh chu noujaiewunk] quah ne-wutche negonne pummayawunk quah kezhuwan waje
wutche wame unkatagganakpum mayawungansh.

Moh negonne ren, quah negonne kerequabus, quah negonn rame wame
achabwehittawunk wutche pumpamantajek kezhittshaunak, webe youh negonne ren
quah kerequabus, quah ^oujek negonnijek wutche wame attchabrehittewungansh
pumpamantejek kezhittishanak matta hom kezhuwawk hoggauwawwo: negauche moh
negonne pummayhuad, youh sunkaio [sambio] quah webe negamo tse wutcha^o, quah
matta chetamssennomanah chaugun, noh moh a kam wame nejek, quah kezhuwushan
wanne wame, quah skeje youb wame kattaggansh pummayawugansh korchetamsenak.
Quah youh atta God Jebovah.

Ob: Ten hom kuttawauhtaun ne atta Mando maetax kekenauwah, matta hom nauwo?

An: Nouwauhtaun no wadjanaman penaunauwe mittachonkq, mukko matta ne nauw. w
matta hom nauwo. Mittachonkq matta hom rashawrandowe pummayawunk hom nauwit spe
hoggauwe skesuks, quah rio matta outachonq. Rio God matta rashauwandoo, om
nauwit spe hoggauwe skesuks; quah rio matta Mando.

Ob: Webe matta howan noweta hom taba^e wauhtawn Jehovah riewunk [arandoit]
negouche matta Mando?

An: Youh matta noskommoenah, wutche womarremuggeree arrumauit hommatta tabaie
wauhtawn aiakquiiks wutche sharamuggesee quah arwenungesee arrumbauit, ause
nagamo hoggunk. Oppish shamok hommatta wauhtauounau chawgun ren atta, share
okkossisse ten reokkechan, quah soudamotauoan kortasoodo moungansh; ux
koodamanchan wnskwhaganakre, ux seboghomman akkommuk kathans etc: Wutche yous
aiakquiiks [remuks] arrooka wauwaunk nejek wauhtammawunganoo rio ren nauwun ewo
hogga kezhean wutche arwenuguot arrumbauwunk aufinre oppishimmok, quah youh
matta wutche nagum hogga, pauhke moushe pakadoowan ne howan kezhuwus uwaio
arrookawah oppishim, ewo ausinre arrookawah renook arra ren arrookawant
oppishshim; quah ^egouche ne tabaio wauhtawunk wutche uwio arrandoit
[arrumauwunk] ausin errookawah renna kitchshantammoowunk.

Q. Sharaog Mandouk? ux webe atta papasaguun wah werramat Jehovah?

An. Matta sharaou Mandoak, atta webe pasuk wah werremat Mando Jehovah.

Q. To gouje koramen ne webe pasuk wah werremat J^hovah?

An. Wutche waiaiewunk tohodje nansaiewok aiakquiiks wutche ansejekmuche nenar
kokkoodishaheawk matta misskommauwauoan rame arumbauwunk [arandoit] wutche God;
wuche wajaiewunk tohodje arsoauk aiakquiiks kokkoodishheauk atta wutche
hokkissegowunk wutche wajaiwunganooas: webe God matta outahe wajaiewunk wutche
uwaio pummaiewunk, webe wutche nagum hogga negouche papasaqun.

2. Newutche nansaioaks aiakquiiks wutche nenar arak nantsejek
kokkoodrishshahettit, achabissoheawawk yarauwe nagamauwo hoggauwo weeche nejek
nanseas artumbauhittaw ungansh webe much hom matta skowah unkatak Mando
achabizhean wutche youh spe chawgunsh arraious achabissewungansh [arrambamuks.

3. Newutche webe mohtantammin re Jehovah utteein hanharroytaks; hom sharehit
Mandoak hom opperreworrantammock, quah nejek hom wowotamhittawawk rean chawgun
rio matta hom re kaddauwereatteou hom matta toukranah weeche
wame-keiztauwunganuk quah arrandoit Jehovah.

Ob. Webe hom matta sharoog Mandoak: narraio ne pasuk negonquassik quah oussewe
kerlkwutche wame?

An. Matta, wutshe negonne pummayhuad pauhke mutche nagamo utse ousewe
quonunguoso [sqonguoso wutche matta rambatsenno chawgun, much matta howane
kachetamsenno webe wame tabbaio re nagamo hogga quah wame re aiakquiiks; quah
wame aiakquiiks rambats'nnetankq' chawgun noweta matta nagamo utse negonquasik,
quah arroukasso wame matta hom Jehovah.

2. Wutche Mandowaious pummayauwous arwenunquesoungansh Jehovah nearrious ar
matta hom merittonoush unkatagganak re ause pasuk.

Qu. Chaugunsh yous arwenunguesoungansliteous moutantamminoush Jehovah webe ise?

An. Pharitchch' nen swanch mishom teous miunamok unkataggansh.

1. Neh wame arwenunquesoungansh uttamous rame ewo negonne, quah wuna shiauwe
arh' rame negonne wajaiewunk, ten wutch kesukq' quah ohke quah wame aiakquliks
rame nejek uttummonummok nauweta chawgun warreguk uttahehit neh wame
arwejanuaguefoungansh uttamous rame Jehovah wame arroukawawe wajaiewunk to
hodie pummayawunk quah wurregowunk wutche wame keihigwushannak
sachwhungankauwo, atta wutche waiaiewund spe teou poummaiomuauk maugamous
youche re neiek quah matta wunk, quah keisheous neiek tabe attumminummin youche
quah matta wunk, webe Jehovah matta attminummo chawgun wutche unkatak, webe
Rashshauunk pompemantammin nagamo ewo terre, ux nagamo utse negauche Jehovah
matta sachwhungankauwo ewo milkissewunk wame arron kassomo hanharroytaks
uttereen kesukuk quah okkeak-terre ewo wewaughtauwunk wame arroukassomo
waughtaun wame aiakquiiks; padak wame ruwauwungansh, quah wonaumen wame
reungansh wutche wame renouh wame mittaukuk tere, ouraiewunk wame arrokassomo
oussewe werrego, ar^oukan wame wahworregewunganak terre wauhwerrereat rak'que
wame keishcaus-hannak, tautereit Jehovah wame arroukassomo wampsin wame mittauk
remassen wame ahapummuks, quah matta ahantse au, arra rehit keizhittishannak
uppomantammewunk wame arroukassomo, ewo much Micheme, matta nenoujaaious, qual
matta eakquino.

3. Neh wauh werramat Mandouh much sonks wauwerrehea nagamo utse, Wame tabaio
nagamo utse, matta queraubikquo airananamamauetounk paiuwutche, Wutche,

1. Waughtunk wame aiakquiiks, passukutte quah nappe wawa mittaukuk terre,
matta keketokauanak terre, spe wame arroukawauwunk wutche ewo Pummayawuk.

2. Worrantammo oussewe narrauwe chawgun noweta warreguk, quah asonkkasouwe neh
chawgun werrantammo much warreguk, rikqueque arroytak, quah wutche
warrantammen, Wutche Jehovah saioo quah wame-arroukovvauwe werrego.

Q. Ten hom wutche koramen neh kesuk' quah ohke, quah wame aiakquiiks rame
nejck out ahhenan noujiewunk wutche nejek pummayawungano wutche Jehovah?

A. Yowh noskonfomo wutche chawgun arwamacup negonne, wutche norramananas neh
Jehovah uttahe ewo pumma yawunk nagamo utse, quah webe pasuk: negauche wam^
unkatagganoush aiakquiiks uttah-heauk nukqutte rame nejek hoggauwauwo, ux rame
nejek waujaiwungano pummayawungano ewounk wutche.

2. Nannarwe wewauhtauwunk renouh mouche mouskinnaman youh, hom nattauantammokq
poshshe keizhittishannak tsaie, wekontammowunk ren hogga rame quah paquodjok,
ten wame achabehittewungansh ren hok, nux akkossissous achachaberekataunauous,
quah oustaunauauus yous aiaiewunganakre, matta spe pepenauwantammewunk ux
assagasowunk wutche oushshawawog, narra weeche rio wawantammewunk neh ause
kokkekoudamauetishannak quah arwe wawantammok renou ausinre mozsantaminau youh.
Matta nawun wawantam hom roitammoan neh m'sansh quah p'tuks terreginsh wejammuk
re, heanje, ux wutche nagamauwo, webe neh auwun noweta nartauewewhekachad
[arwebene] wustauwus, wezshatauwus, quah wonappenumnash-hansh; rio, naumokq'
kesukq' quah okke rio wekekekozzous quah rawwe wame keizhittishannak, pasuk
wertauwe unkataggan quah wame aiakquiiks wajekeiztammakus ouwarchanish,
newauwun hom matta webe pakkaddawamen neh oussewe wawantam nartauintantak
wutche mittaukuk, quah wame aiakquiiks mittaukuk terre, qnah youh hom mutche
matta unkatak webe wah werramat Mando Jehovah.

Ob: Weep oussawadj matcherewungansh pakodje ahremuks mutaukuk terre quah
utteamope tanguan au renawauk mittahhauk terre moh mutche Jehovah
negonquashshauanush ux waje yous matcherewungansh wuthio?

An: Matta wutche Jehovah nagamo utse sonke werrego, mukko milkissowunk wutche
remuk mutche Jehovah wutchio, narra nianchtauwunk wutche youh milkegowunk rean
matcherenag attamo wutche nagamauwhoggauwauwo. Jehovah keizheauwus Angelok quah
renauwok weeche motantammewunk wutche ahremuk; youh matta mnmatcheremuk, narra
youh hom spe nagamo milkissewunk padah chawgun noweta match remuk moh wutche
aianchtauwunk wutche nagamauwo motantammoungano neh teaksejek angelok eo
mamatchhuadjiek quah Adam quah Eve, quah rame nejek wame renawauk
matcherewunhasnak.

Ob: Mukko Jehovah matta waje macherewunk narra weep matta nesuog
negonquashadjek, pasuk werrego quah wajaiunk wame werregunsh: katak matchere
quah negonquashal quah waje [wutchiamuk] matcherewunk?

An: Matta erana, wutche hom nesuog risoak pomparrerejek negouquagidjek yeiache
hom aioutoak neoutche aiskomhittawunk 'om noskossomo.

2. Matta chawgun rio matchittoo [matchere] arra God nagamo utse werregit
wutche matcherewunk mutche tupacha chawgun querauhikkowunk, [noushamowunk] youh
hom matta mutche webe rame chawgun noweta pummay amuk, quah pummayne mutche
chawgun warreguk.

3. Wah werremat God uttahhe wame milk^ssewunk quah shajosshawugansh; mandoak
eansketambough hokkissenegoak quah matchegoak, Ewo weremattawn kesukq quah
okke, quah warrpsk wame mittauk.

Hom kattagganak mandoak chaukik appoak?

Q. Mukko Jehovah keistaunas kesukq' quah okke, quah wame aiakquiiks rame
neish, eo wunnagottammin nejek, quah matta nouse anambattammoan nairrene arra
nartauoukachad nokodtuk wejo keistankqc?

An: Matta, wutche nattauoukachad matta nousse ambatammoan wejo keiztankq',
matta nagum wutche, perrere, keistashan nagum wutche yeiache nousse
auwambattammen. Rio God keiztau was wame aiakquiiks matta wutche kattak, webe
nagamo wutche, quah negauche konkedjheants, quah uttoukretawah nane waje
keztangushansh, quah waje pakkadows nane, quah nousse perrerambanungansh
merauwus nanne; Poshshe spe penauauwunk, arra renawauk; unkattagganak nouse
nagamauwo arrun arra wauwayomuks keizheoushannak; unkatagganak spe nejek
arrumbauwous achachabehittawungansh arra ront' ematshamo, quah nip'p'
wamtchawasha.

Q. To gouje koramen neh Jehovah wokomhuwuunk toukretauwah wame mitt auk?

An. 1. Spe pompemomowunk wutche ^i^kquiiks tautapokkacha uejek nagamauwo
arrnmbauit wutche werregowunk wame weewinnakomu wutchio; nenar naumenan yout
ditch wompshamo, quah nip' wamitchchewashsha perrewerampaomous assanum
fauaaioowunk wutche werregowunk wame weewinnakommuk wutebio.

2. Spe arrumbawe nemarrewungan teou matta webe renauwank wawantajek, quut
nanak ^ppi and im quah oppishshauk teouiek querauhikkoa^k penauwau wunk utta
eauk wutche neiek wunnaianawauk: youh much chaippaio werregowunk much pahke
mishnomminauwo [werremuttamauwo] Jehovah wutchio; oussewaie rakque wame ewo
keizhittishannak mittaukuk terre: quah ause wutche wampsin wame mittaukuk quah
wautawn wame aiakquiiks, quah how nukkomme pakkadaway nanne waje kezheants.

3. Jehovah toukretauwah kezous, nenepomsha quah arraxsuk quah wiguilquats
kesakuk wutcheoutambazsowungan keizhittishannak sketohke, moucheke wutche ren.

4. Newutche Soudamowungansh wadchanazzous, konkeoitazzous, panquatazzous quah
azxa wunua manoush spe warrantammowunk wutche Mando Jehovah.

5 Wutche wame renou shaious unquonunquatouganak terre terranauunganak quah
siagutush utterumbauwe mauouwok Jehovah re wutche airenamauwetoowunk youh
kokkoodamung queakq' neh wauhtauwunk Jehovah wokomhuwawunk rakque wame
sketambough quah aikquiiks sket-okke rame okkekekozzo [pokkoddekekozzo] rame
rambauwous mittash wutche wame ranawauk.

Qu. To goojt koramen neh wame nansaious aiakquiiks toukretauauk spe Jehovah
wokamhuwawunk?

An. Wutche nansaious aiakquiiks pakkadwandammenush quah koodemantammenush waje
yous keiztangus Jehovah.

2. Wutche Jehovah wampsin wame weewinnakommuk, quah ewo wawantammoowunk quah
milkegowunk wame-arroukamooak.

3. Waje, wame schish utteamopetanguanau rame nansaiamuks: quah newutche hom
nansaiamuks matta wadchanazzous spe Jehovah wokomhuwawunk wame schish
homsaviouwe aiakquiyous weeche nanne.

Ob: Hom rakq; ten wutche artak neh matcherewunk rio oussewarrat mittaukuk
terre?

An: Nux matcherewungansh yous oussewar retush mittaukuk terre mous kinnamauok
neh Jehovah wokomhuwawunk toukretauwah wame aiakquiiks skejeokkeak. Newutche,
neh we che uttereungansh macherewunganoas womkauouwok, sachwhungaukaauk
kopehommenush quah uttamkekairoush chaugo hom kokkoodreshahuwauk rio rikkaque,
arra kaddawe werrantammok pauquatauunganak re wutche souda mauwungash quah aia
matta pasuk hom pompemantammoan weeche unkataggan.

2. Wutche Jehovah wunna toukretawah uttereunga^sh renou matcher^ewunganoa
(teous tapatchch' mattaoussambamauoan) auwerreganak re, nukquudde tataggaman
pasukq mamattambauit weeche kattaggan, ux tataggaman ewo nagamo wusketambamh
wauwannawahittit wutche wussunkkowbauous pakkadtawauwungansh. ux kutchtauwun
werramattammewunk tokauasounk quah yeiachewunk warremattajek massambaujek
werrittepantammewunganak terre.

3. Newutche mukko God tupacha matta oussambamauoan mamattambaureatch
kokkoodreweaweghittit youh mittaukuk terre wutche quompaio; narra uttajiauche
nannuppohittit, Jehovah tatachauwe werrantammowk bitch keiztazzo skeje nejek,
auwannak matt werrantammoanau rean Jehovah pokkotchim-mau rovtammewunk quut
mattawewezammoguk ewowunk re.

4. Wutche rio Jehovah uttantanah renowauk utteambattammen tsaio wassimiddewunk
wutche askam poamo nau uttakgutche youh pompemantammewunk youh terre God bitch
merah wame rennawauk nousse nagamauwo wuttarkassoungash youh mittaukuk terre

Qu. To gooje koramen neh ^mittachonkawawk rennawauk pomphmmantammok hoggauwo
pokkothche nuppeat', quah neh uittaehonkp' quah nihok bitch nappinnauauk
mouskeane arquabit God you wassimidde wunganrk terre?

An. Spemilkegowunk rambauwe mittachoak wutchio wame rennawauk mammachewahuwa
nejek werreehittit, quah monskisshassowan wassemoan, quah keiappenassowan nejek
matcherehittit, chowonche kishke nuppoungano, teau kokkoadumchamo neh
askwhontammok wassemiddewunk you bitch peamo.

2. Spe rambauwe chowoutammewunk wutche micheme pompemantammewunk teou
utteamopetanguanau wame rennawauk.

3. Spe rambauwe roytammengansh quah askwhontammewungansh, you Eansketambough
uttahhenau wutche pompamantammewunk peroukon sauanaiouk pokkache
pomantammowushannak yowh terre: naumenan p'tuks pabouks antaumous werregowunk
quah se quoks kejamous rambe.

Qu. Ten God toukretasso ren?

An. Spe maugun quah negonne wuskwhontammen pakkadtawauwank re nagum, quah
pakkaddawan neh arra reunawauk attumminummok youh pakkadtawa^wunk micheme bitch
pompemantammok Jehovah wom^rre^ounganak terre; ux^arra apokeitamhit youh
nakkadtawaunk bitch miche're koakeja penauwauk tabe ne penauauwe keizhittis
restauwun nouse wuttezzowunk wutche God mutche rio toukretazzo mao uk terre
micheme kejanwung anak re.

Qu. Chawgun pakkadtawauwunk ^ch God negonne wuskwhommenas renouk? quah took
negonne wuskwhommenas ewounk re?

An. Pakkadtawauwunk negone wuskwhommuk moh ne renawauk mouche pompem
antamminau mousse Jehovah nouskinamuk werran tammowunk: God mouskinnamauwus
renon youh werrantammewunk nah rowat, chanchepaiewe, ramaie, spe wuskwhontammen
ewo pakkadtauwunk rame ren uttahhok' terre; chanche paiewe pokotchkaie spe
ranjemokantammen chawgun ewo werrantammen [pokkotchaimoa] ne ren pauhke uttein,
quah wunnagattummen, milketawun youh pakkadtaway renouk spe noremittassoungansh
quah wezzamwauwuugansh, quah mouchewoprean ren wauweztammawunganak re spe
quosetammin werrawawunk.

Qu. To hodje God ranjemokassis ewo utteoitammeasunk, quah ourantammewunk
renouk re spe arrizzons pokotchekaious ahrewatchchamuks, narraga toukr etauwah
unkatagganok keizhittishanak nouse perrere.

An. Wutche ren youh pompemantammewunganak terre waughtawn spe wauwaiowungansh
arra spe naumuk quah petammuk, negowaje God utteranjemen ewo utteoitammewunk
redouk re pekotchiequiouk, chanchepalewe spe keketokantammin ewo tauakok re spe
ruwawunk hompetammauwo, ne ren hom petammin quah waughtaun chanchepaiewe spe
wuskwkoshitten ewo werrantammowunk wuskwhegannak-terre, ne ren hom naumen,
okkekkenaumen quah ^aughtaun chawgun God werrantammo ne ewo wautawn quah uttein
ne hom wauwerrehea [chadchemo].

Q. Moh werrantammowunk wutche God mouskeuazzo renunk re aiache nah quompaious
spe wuskwhazzen wuskwheganak terre?

An. Yeiache moh querauhikkomuk ne werrantammowank God much wauhtauhcwanaz
renunk re spe keketokauwunk, wutche God mutche matta wusserawauh-hean
[werzshahean] chawgun noweta nokommounk ux routassewunk renouk wutche, webe
chawgun moh nouse ewo keketokauwunk, teou keketokauwunk mutche webe
Kekrassowunk wutche wauweztammewunk wutche rennauwauk rakque Jehovah. Webe youh
keketokauwunk matta wuskwhommomuk yeiache, waje, wutche Adam re Moses, God
mouskinnassoas ewo werrantammewnnk spe kemenaumhewawungansh,
uttenoquomoungansh, quah man -- dowaiousattabbawauungansh re akkossissoak, quah
soenummis youh wutche nejek rimsharoauk re, oushi koodumauwun uttaium, quah
pasuk waughtauhuwan quah koo -- damchaawauhhuwan kattaggan werrantam -- mewunk
wutche God tabanah mauwewheko -- muk moh bophammine rame akkossissoak
Wauweketajek.

Qu. To hodje uttuwauwunk God wutche uttaj^ ^^^^iche wuskwhommuk wuswheganak
terre?

An. Tabanah mauwewhekomunk moh kokoodreshanchh' quah noujewus
merrammemoujereause unkouwea, quah nanak perrewoytammeungansh
werreroutasseewunganak terre kokoodreshamewudih' quah Jehovah ousketambamh
wejioumekonasnannak weeche perreaiarrotaussejek nejek ause nukkommeheawushannak
perrerauweehittewunganak re nene moh querauhikkomuk ne Jehovah uttuwawunk
pauhke wusk whazzen wusk whegannak terre.

1. Assannaman wunnoytammewunk.

2 Nokottummen perrewoitammewungansh quah poquauttawne werremauwunk wutche God
wutche matchereahittawunk [aiantekomboujek] wame antlewunganak terre, webe
pasuk errano quah sonkkumbamuk kekrassowunk youh spe wassetummen werremauwunk.

3 Milketawn wame rennawauk youh ischauunganak terre ne Jesus Christ (rame
auwanhe norremattammokq') youh artak kekejabuad, auwunlie terre wame
kroudamauwetoungansh quah negonnious ahruwamuks wutche nekonne nokottammaueten
moh immartauauk youh wauhtazzik fpe tophatonquawunk weeche yous chawgunne
wuskwhazzit wutche ewo, skaio nokothommauwetounganak terre, quah negowaje ne
matta wunk wezzawunk merrittenaz ramuk kesukq', teouspe neauwun hom
kedjhitchamen.

Qu. Chawgun youh wuskwheak teounkterre yous aiakquiiks wuskwhazzous?

A. Youh mutche wuskwheak asswedamon the Bible, Jehovah wuskwheak, Jehovah
attuwauwunk, Jehovah werramauwunk, youh werramashshatawn [miashshatawn]
pakkadtawauwunk, wuskwazzit spe Moses, quah negnnijek ahruajek. Quah ske
nokothommauwetounk teounk terre neauwun noutahhenan rematta quah sonke
mouskinnamawunk wutche peaio kemewunk wutche Jesus Christ.

Qu. Togooje koramen ne youh wuskwheak werremashshatawn uttuwauwunk wutche God?

A. Newutche, maiashshatawn wawantammowunk werrena ause wame youh hom
missennamauwo spe Sachemauauk, [kot ta soodamauok] ux oussewe kokkoodamauiek
quah wawantejek wutche youh mittauk.

2. Wawantamhuwamo Jehovah mamukkinnamasseiek miche ne keiauunkanak re.

3. Waje negonne ruwamuks copehammauous Jehovah wuskwheakgannak terre sonke,
quah kitche keztaunauauushansh.

4. God pompio wutche quompiewunganakre, konkejappennachawus poqauwe
mattekarrekuts nagamo wuskwheakgansh wutche, quah mattekarrekuts wutche youhjek
auwunum werramatahewushannak quah uttenauwushannak peantammewunk quah
routassawunk wutche God, okkekoodamamuk youh terre.

5 Newutche, wame rennawauk wame mittaukuk terre pokodjemoauk routassen God
nouse youh uttuwawunk. Kottasoodamauwauk wutche youh mittauke uttaheauk nejek
sachwhungansh. God matta outahe chawgansh.

Ob: Jehovah uttuwawunk moh merritten rouwat, Togooje pokkodjemoamo [wajai]
youjek eo pompemantammok keseque?

Ans. Jehovah uttuwawunk mouskeshaddawn nagamo micheme quah matta
assawunnamomuk werrantammowunk, wutche wame aiakquiiks querauhikkomuks
werramattauwun quah uttenauwun spe wame auwunnum kittechowonta -- mok kejahean
wame antseunganak terre; quah newutche moh wuskhommanauwo neauwun wutche nenar
wutche youhjek pompomantammowushannak rouwat eo poope. Rom: 15.4: 1 Cor. 10.11.
wame wunnejannak wutche nenar negonnijek oushewawok Adam quah Eve. God
keiztaunkq' wutche pasakun nepuk wame arkeiz renawauk wutche, Adam wutche
okkeik quah Eve wutche ewo pechaugun quah rio passogun ren rikheaus kataggun,
quah ne ren katak, quah ne ren katak; quah ahantse rikheoushannak, rio wame
rennauwauk arra papechewekeiek wutche Adam wutchappuk, wame rennauwauk
arrambauauk: wame aharsoak hogkauwunk keoununguanak, wuttauauks, skesuks,
wuttoan, quah meran terre.

Ob: Jehovah wuskwheak moh merrittonaz unkataggchauk re tennene pakkodje-moamo
eansketambough.

An: Jehovah uttawawunk moh negonne maugamuk Jewsak re webe. Psalm. 147.19.20:
Rom: 3: 2. askam paiaant Jesus Christ God moh konkokanaio wame arkeis pummean
[matchean] (nejek paaijawunganak terre Acts 14:16. kittaman Jesus Christ
paiant' renambauunganak terre ewo moh negontua uttuwawunk re wame arkeis wutche
mittauk. Mat. 28.19. Acts. 17 30. nouse negonne ruwamuks wutche Jesus Christ.
Esa. 49:6. quah wutch Gentilloag Esa. 65.1. Ne uttuwawunk ne ek missennamanau
poshe negonne poshe utta a^che

Ob Hom ea^ske. a nbough missinnamanau Jehovah wuskwh^ak [ittuwawunk] matta
youh bitch mammo an hokkreztawauwunk quah pau^ssoungansh wutche Sachemau^uk,
quah motantammewunk eansketambough?

An. Moh mutche matta erano. Nux youh mutche charaque arrousha hokkreztawauwunk
quah pauasowunk Sachemauauk. Pro. 8 15 to 20: Cap 22.4. Spe womarromou k^ quah
wez^rrakounk wutche God pauasounk h^kkrezta wauwunk, quah ke^auunk, quah youh
bitch arrousha motantammewungansh eansketambough, Spe motantahuwan nejek wutche
misneghittewunk matcherewunk quah mamatchhuadjek wutchio.

NEzzeshitta chippio okkekoodemunganauans spe wuskwhegansh wutche God
mandowaious werramauwungansh querauhikkomuks re micheme kejahittewunk.

Q. Chauket attamo sketambough woweriewunk?

An. Matta pompawoytammowunganak terre, matta shajosshewunganak terre wutche
youh mittauk.

Qu. To hodje?

An. Waje kokkejauungan taioquiah, neauwun hom webe n'tahenan yous namach. Jam.
4:14: Luk: 12:19: Psalm. 49.11: 12. 2 Yous aiakquiiks matta hom
kattabrawahikkonanansh eo sakkepompomantammokq', matta kowejauungan nuppoan.
[ahquesketamb miten]

Qu. Ten artah nene missin wowerriewunk?

An. Renna wower^iewunk artah wadchanamauunganak terre wutche Jehovah narrauwe
womarretewunk spe Jesus Christ, archewontammuk warreguk, teou howan noweta hom
natchkok ux umskommen.

Qu. Iohoje?

An. waje youh womarretounk attab wutche micheme quah michemewunganak re, matta
eakquino. Jer. 31.3. 2 Wuna narrauwe Hos. 14.4. 3 Wame womarretoungansh arche
mesi. Joh. 3: 16. 4 A^chetabrawahikkomuk. Psalm. 63.3.

Qu. Ten terre Jehovah arche waughhew awun Sketamboughre?

A. Uttuwawunganak terre teou mouskeshaddawn rennawauk; chawgun pahke
petah^^nah, warramattammanah, quah utteeinah ne ne ek hom wossera wahenah God
pomantamminah ewounkre nux pompamantaminah micheme weeche ewo. Romans 10.8, 9, 11.

Qu. Howan God?

An. God Rashshauwunk micheme wamewaughhean, wame naumen arwe-kittamanchasko
arwe sunkkumbaugh wutchio nagum hogga, quah wutche nagum hogga. Ex. 34.6, 7.
Ex. 3.14.

Q. Chossoak mandoak?

An. Webe pasuk waugh werramat God rame swe personoag swenapssha pasuk, oush,
woamon, quah peaio Rashauonk. Mat. 28.19. nenar rame ren worrantammewunk
waughtauwunk quah memequantammewunk yows swe, narra webe pasuk ren: Rio
mandoowunganak terre, swe personoag, narra webe pasuk God. Youth arwejanunquat
peaio keonewunk, teou Jehovah bitch koodremouskenasso re ousketambamh takque
youh, quah rame ausseqnamuk etanterre.

Q. Chawgun waugh werramat Mandoh kekeztangus wutche ke?

A. God nekezhuiggus, ewo nenowadchannakq' quah ewo hom nenokedi huikq'. Psa.
119.73. Psalm. 121.4, to 9. Esaias 63.1.

Qu. Ten God keteoushikquenas?

An. Rame negonne neghikqueoushannak perambauhuiggus, quah sonkkombouhuiggus
quah rizzo nagum hogga wauhtauwunganak terre, Genesis 1.26.27 Ecl. 7.29.

Q. Kinspe negamus perambaugh quah Sonkkombough.

An. Matta negonne nousha matchereoushan quah nenteramopetangun. Es. 43.27. To.
5.19. God wusheawus Adam negonne ren tupacha wuttchoppuk wutche wame rennauwauk
quah meawus Adam, quah ewounk terre wame re^nou wame waugh worreg^x a^akquiiks.
chawgun Adam missinnamanis waske keiz heant God, mattax nagum webe wntche
missinnamonis, weche nagum sketambough mutche wame missinnamanauwushannak: quah
chawgun tantauanush antauanush matta nagum wutche webe, wame tantauanauwush
rennauwauk ewounk terre chawgun Adam arretch netatuppe wame rennawauk
wuttenauaus; ewo matcherewus newutche wame matchereoushannak.

Quest. Keko negamus mamatcheret?

Answ. Spe wampaquaanas mamattambauwunganak terre, quah spe negamus
matcherewunganak terre, Psalm. 51.5. quah rio spe neen terambauwunk netatup
matchenunquoso matchemunguoso munguoso keizheak quah nehoggok wutche
nomatcherewunk chishanttammuk re Jehovah.

Q. Chawgun kinspe neg-matcherewunk?

An Matcherewunk wutche Adam nummianamauhikquemuk, quah matcherambauwunk
utteamopetangun. To. 5.12, 12.14. Ephesians. 2.12

Q. Chawgun Adam matcherewunk kummianam auhik quemuk?

An. Meetsin quotetemuggus p'tuk wutchio.

Q. Chawgun komatcherambauwunk?

An. Nomatcherambauwunk sauaioo wutche werritta pantam mo wunk, upssquauwemo
matcherenag re webe matcherewunganak re, quah ne yeiache. To. 7.7, and 18,
verse. Genesis 6.5. matta keizheak sketokkeak outahhe rio mahme huwamuk rambauwunk
arra wame rennawauk uttaheauk.

Q. Chawgun matcherewunk?

A. Matcherewunk poakquinnamounk wutche Jehovah pakkadtawauauwungash 1 Ioh. 3.4.

Q. Chosshinch Attak pakkadtawauauwungansh?

A. Paiaguotush. Deuteronomy: 4.13.

Q. Chawgun negonshik Pakkadtawanwunk?

A. Matta bitch komandomo unkatagganok mandoak webe Ne. Exodus 20.3.

Q. Tah ruamo youh Pakkadtawauwunk?

An. Ne neauwun pahke keterroutauwaumen webe werramat God. Mat. 4.10. Jehovah
webe-waugh werramat God, matta unkata ganok mandoaog, mandoaog, wutche
okkeajwauhtammejek mamatchhuwadjek quah renou-nanschadjek.

An. Chawgun neztaushik pakkadtawauwunk;

A. Matta bitch koushea mis-seanwuskwhossen tuppacha mandouh keunk re, ux
nearrak wutche chawgun noweta, teou kesukkuk skeje terre, ux okke ramuk terre:
ux nippe ramuk okke terre. Matta kekupsquawush wamaiouk kehok re nejek, matta
ke bitch tarroukassomah nejek: wutche ne Jehovah ke God moussit-chamo
[aharrachamitch] God, aharroutant matcherewunk koushwawok wutchio skeje
wonnajannawauk [mukkraauk] re-swot quah youwot antsewunk wutche nejek
chishsharamoqueanak ne: quah kittemancherachan re mamattinunguesoak wutche
nejek womarrequeanak ne quah wadchanjek ne Pakkadtawauauungansh. Exodus 20.4, 5.
Joh. 4.24. Lev. 25.1. Ezekiel. ^6.17.

Q. Tah ruwamo youh Pakkadtawauauwunk?

An. Ne neauwun pahke nokkommoukauwun wauhwerramat God weeche werramamuk
nokkommowunk, nenar God pakkadasowamoas [pakkaddawanas] matta nenar renou
arroytamhit. John. 4.24. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Mat. 15.9.

Qu. Chawgun nashwe Pakkadtawauwunk?

An. Matta ke bitch mishommoan tah-nooche wezzawunk Jehovah ko mandouh: wutche
Jehovah matta bitch wussomooan parrewauhhuwa ouwannouweta mammo nagamo
wezzewunk tah-nooche.

Q. Tah ruwamo youh wezzewk wutche ke God?

An. God nagum, quah waughwauwerregix aiakquiiks wutche God, teouspe God
wauhhea netatup ren waughea spe nagomo wezzewunk nenar uttarwejanunguesoungansh
nokkommo -- wunk, uttuwauwunk quah wuttarkassowungansl 1 King. 9.3. Psalm.
138.2. Job. 1.21

Q. Chawgun ruwamo youh matta bitch kom -- ammean ewo wezzewunk tahnooche?

An. Ne wame rennauwauk pahke ruwauauk wutche God nagum, quah wauwerregix
aiakquiiks wutche God, wutche uttarwesanunguesounk unk quah wutche nejek
worregaungano, matta tahnooche; matta uksschauwe, matta uttambasioungane, 2
King: 1: 3: Levit: 10: 3* Job: 36. Deuteronomy. 8.18: Jer. 2.30. Levit. 26.2: Heb: 4:
2:

Q. Chawgun youhwe pakkadtawawunk?

An. kommequantush nokkommowunk, [keweenauwunk] wauwertauun, [perrtauun]
nkkuddaskshe kesequauwe katarkas, quah keiztaus wame katarkassoungansh: webe
nezense shugane mutche nokkommounk wutche Jehovah ke God youh shuganeterre
akquerishq' chawgun noweta arkassowunk, ke matta-kenaumoan, matta kattane
kowadjan-ren, matta nannootenuksqua, matta kekopompetunganak matta ke
pecouchauk rame ke squonta wutche rame nukkuddaskshe kesequauwe Jehovah
keiztaunas kesukq', quah okke, kathannabaug quah wame arakquiiks rame nejek
appoop, quah akquarkazsons [wuwusinnawus] nezzense shugane: newutche Jehovah
uttchadchimmoas nokkommowunk, quah peirtawanas ewo. Ex. 20.8, 9, 10 11. Esa.
58.13. Ne. 13.16, 17.

Qu. Tah ruwamo youh pakkattawauwunk?

An. Ne wame pahke wuusiunamanah wutche arkassounk quah ause wutche
momarrawassowank rame Jehovah kesekut, ne neauwun hom notanchemen re God rame
wauwerregix arkassoungansh. Esa. 58.12, 13. Jam. 4.8.

Q. Chawgun nappachossit pakkadtawauwunk?

An. Hokkreztaus [konkreztaus] koush quah kenoununk ne kokonkeseketush hom
quonaious skeje okkeik teou Jehovah ke God kummequun. Exodus 20.12.

Q. Auwannak asswerauk koush quah kenoununk?

An. Wame toukretassejek ten chippakommukutchaug, tahatterre koodammochawunk
rame mauwewhekomunk nux asoudummauwunganak terre 2 Chro. 29.18. Pro: 23.22. 1
Kin. 5.13

Q. Chawgun kokkrezt auotounkre toukret assejek?

An. Wawhungachamuk wauweztammewk quah [ne tabasean] rambe maugawunk newutche
Genesis 4.20, 21. Mal. 1.6. Heb. 12.9 Ephesians: 6.1.

Q. Chawgun akkommedj chossit pakkadtawauauwunk?

Q. Tah ruwamo youh pakkadt awauwunk?

An. Ne neauwun pahke matta taiuquetauounan pompemantammewunk ux assummassowunk
wutche neauwun hoggananak ux unkatagganak webe konkedjtaunan nese. Mat. 5.22. 2
Cor. 7.10. Mark. 3.4. 1 Samuel 26.20.

Q. Chawgun nesausuk pakkadtawauauwunk?

A. Matta komammoso. Ex. 20.14. Gone. 9 10. Levit. 18.24.

Qu. Chawgun matcherewunk youh quoteten?

A: Matchtawn hoggananak, ux unkatagganak weeche wapasquawe chisshegewungansh

Q. Chawgun youh pakkadchimmeden?

A. Mianumbauunk, konksanttawn neauwun hoggananak peaiowunganak quah
hokkreztauetouuganak terre. Titus. 2.5. 1 Pet. 3.2. 1 These. 4.4, 4.

Q. Chawgun swankshit pakkadtawauauwunk?

A. Matta kommootakon [matta kekommooto] Exodus 20.15

Q. Chawguukommootewunk youh quoteten?

A: Mamman unkatak ren mamachise, mata waughtauoukq', matta maugaukq', ux
okketawn komammachinansh matta wutche kotambasiooianansh, ux unkatagganak
otambasionanauush. Luke 19, 8. 1 These. 4, 6. Pro. 21, 20. Netatup mamttambaujek
eansketambaugh okketawnau mamatteinch nootch-squahahittit quah okkezhittit:

Q. C^twgun youh pakkadchimmeden?

A. Wauwerre mesinnaman nomamachinash wauwerre wadchanaman quah wauwerre ainas
yoush: Pro, 13.11. John, 6.12. Luke, 19.16.

Q. Chawgun pasakogunshe pakkadtawauauwunk?

A. Matta ketaianteki aw aughua kechanchetammuk re. Exodus: 20 16:

Q. Chawgun matcherewunk youh quoteten?

A. Okkejauskin aiantekampauwe, roytammin nux ruwan chawgun matta werramamomuk
wutche neauwun ux unkatagganok. Ephesians. 4.25. Jer: 9.4, 5. Joshu: 9.22. Pro. 13.7.

Q. Chawgun youh pakkadchimmeden?

A. Werramawunk quah mutchisunkombane [sonkkombauunk] Ephesians: 4.25. Mat: 23.23.

Q. Chawgun paiak she pakkadtawauauwunk?

A. Ahque kittechowontammis tahnooche week wutche kechanchetammuk, ahque
kettechowontammis werogen wutche kechanchetammuk, matta ewo wajan-ren matta
waian-squah, matta wutoximoh, matta wutassimoh, matta chawgun noweta wutche
kitchame Ex. 20 17

Q. Chawgun kattauachossowawunk youh qu^teten?

A. Kattauachowawunk wutche unkatak ren mamachise: quah querauhikkowunk wutche
tatabrawahittewunk weeche neauwun nomamachinansh. Heb. 13.4. To. 7.7

Q. Nammuk pahkoje kattabrereanas wame neish pakkadtawa auwungansh?

A. Matta, ne quah wame rennawauk mamatcherejek. To. 7.14. To. 3.23.

Q. Chawgunhe unquat auwetounk wutche matcher ewunk?

Ans: Nuppounk quah micheme konkejappenauwunk. Romans 6.23. and 2.8, 9.

Q. Tennene kosambattamen kejahean?

Ans. Webe spe Jesus Christ.

Q. Auwunnah assowe Jesus Christ?

A. Micheme wonnejon wutche God auwun wutche neauwun hoggananak moh reuoowus,
ne ewo hom mannohikquenan quah kejahikquenan.

Q. Tunre Jesus Christ manuohikquenan quah kejahikquenan?

Ans. Spe nagamo sonkkombough kejawunk quah wesekun nuppowunk quah arwenunguat
rambe ompkewunk wunk kejauwunganak re. gal: 4.4. Mat: 5 20, 28. Psalm: 2.7, 8.
Romans 4.25.

Q: Tun gooje ko^ahean chanchepauwuuk, quah chanchiawunk weeche Jesus Christ
rame ewo nuppounk quah ewo rambe ompkewunganak terre?

Ans. Spe milkegowunk wu^che ewo kekatokauwunk quah Rashauwunk, youh
passouhikquenan re Jesus Christ, quah quowadchanhikquenan rame ewunk terre.
Joh: 17.20. 1 Cor. 6.17.

Q. Chawgun nagamo kekatochauwunk?

A. Peaious wuskwhegansh Jehovah wuskwhazzous spe negonnoijek abruwajek wutche
ewo uttuwauwunk asswerauk Prophetts and apostles, nahnekonne quah wuski
Nokothommaueten, pakkadtawauauwunk quah werranjemokauweten. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

Quest. Tenre attabawauwunk wutche pakkadtawauauwunk kepazouhikqun rakque Jesus
Christ?

Ans. Arra nopazouhikqun waughhean nomatcherewunk quah wezkesowunk wutche God
ne rakque ne wutche. Romans 7.9.10.

Qu. Tenre waught auwunk wutche komatcherewunk kopazouhikqun rakque Jesus
Christ?

Ans. Youh spe ne nope mequinneman ne nannapummuk arrachossewawunk, quah
queraubikkowunk wutche kekejahuad. Gal 3.10.24.

Quest. Ten re attabbow awunk wutche werranjemok auweten ketatnamungqun rame
youh tattaainuppooiret ammuk arrachossewawunk?

Ans. Womarrun hikqun nar ause, quah nene tomkehikqun wutche youh
konkejappenamuk arrachossewawunk. Luke 3.4, 5, 6.

Qu. Ten re kokkoudumchauwunk wutche werranjemok auweten kowomarrumhikqun wunk?

A. Spe mouskinnamowunk wutche narrauwe womarretounk wutche Jesus Christ 2 Timothy:
11.10. Waje nuppous kejahean mamatcherejek: Ioh. 16.7, 8.6.44. Quah narra
nowautauhikqun wutche nomatcherewunk, waje matta nenostammoan skeje ewo, quah
micheme nomonunquesowunk peauwun ewounk re; Luke. 19.10. Quah ^io nenon
equinnaman ne hok micheme tanhich.

Q. Ten nene kokkouaum^^auwunk wutche werr anjemokauwunk kotantamtamhikqun
wutche youh anhemuk arrechossewawunk pean re Jesus Christ?

Ans. Nenar nekokkoodummohikqun rauweto quah milkesewunk wutche nuppowunk
wutche Jesus Christ, quah pauasoungansh wutche ewo narrauwe womarretowunkre
anhejek mamacherejek Joh. 12.32. 2 Cor: 5:19, 20. mouskeshaddawn
kroudemauwetowunk wutche werrittepantammewunk re youjek, quah merah peaio
ras^auwunk wutche werrettepantammewunk missinnamaw auhuwan Jesus Christ, quah
nagamo kroudan auwetounk wutche werrettepantammewunk re nean hok, quah
nowadjanhikqun rame nagum. 2 Pet: 3.18. Luke 19. 10, Mat: 9, 13. Gal. 3.5. To.
10.17. with 1.16.

Qu. Ten re peaeo Rashauwunk wutche werrittepantammewunk kutamauhikqun quah
pazoubikqun re Jesus Christ, quah missinnamahikqun nagamo kroudamauwetounk,
quah kowadchanhikqun ewounk terre?

Ans. Sperikhean [tikhean] rame ne waremattammewunk attummanah ewo: To: 10.
17.10.14. Zec: 12.10. Attabbowawunk wewhekum skeje ewo: ambantoetammewunk
mouwun rakque ewo, quah w'skio weztammewunk kretammin ewo. To. 16.25.26 2. Cor.
10.4, 5.

Q. Chawgun atta Warremattammewunk?

Ans. Warremattammewunk arta wenrrittepatammewunk wutche peaio Rashauwunk;
Phil: 1.29. 2 Cor. 2 4.12. Nahwutche hokkejewaughtam ne hok quah warremattam
skeje Jesus Christ wutche sunkkombauwunk quah micheme kejauwunk;

Quest. Chawgun attabawawunk?

Ans. Attabowawunk wewhekechaumewawunk wuskeje God rame wezewunk wutche Jesus
Christ spe ainamauetowunk wutche peaio Rashauunk nousse utteoitammewunk wutche
God. Mat. 6 9. Ioh. 16.23. To. 8.26, 27. Joh I

Qu. Ten Jesus Christ kokoodumchauwas ewe nannawunnakuts attaboan?

Answ. Rio.

Noushin ausequamuk terre werrettepantammunatch [woweztauonatch] kowesewunk
Peamoutch' kukkussootummowunk, korantammowunk neratch sket'okke nenar ause
quamuk terre, Mesonah ea kesuk konkesekatush nomeetsounk, [petukkeneag]
Akquantaminah nomatchereunganansh nenar takquantaminan ewojek nomatchereh
eaqueaguk, Asquonsakkongonan rame-re mitchchemouretounk, webe
kuppoquohwheriggaminah wutche madjk' wutche kekatah ketassootomoonk, quah
milkessowunk quah aittarwejanunguesowunk micheme quah micheme: Ne ratch.

Qu. Chawgun Ambantoietammewunk!

A. Ambantoietammewunk werrittepantammewunk wutche peaio Rashauunk nah wutche
ne nezkontum nomatcherewungansh quah nezkarraman m'hok yous wutche, quah
norremahitch neish arquabit Jehovah, quah nomauwetepaz nouse Jesus Christ
wutche akquantemaueten wutche neish, quah wutche werrittepantammewunk
wuttusomoan rame skiawunk wutche kejauwunk. Acts 5.31. John 24.20. Levit.
26.40, 41. Pro. 28.13.

Qu. Chawgun youh wuskio kejauwunk, ux waweztammewunk?

A. Wuskeawunk wutche kejauwunk arta werrettepantammewunk paio Rashauwunk nah
wutche nenogottummonush ne negonne chachishseungansh, quah akouwa chanchiawunk,
quah pummean arquabe Jehovah rame wequaai wutche ewo uttuwawunk, quah
wauwerrechanchiawunganak terre wutche paperrissejek. Psalm. 51.1, 2.30. Rom:
7.6. 1 Pet: 4.2, 3, 4 Psalm. 116.9.119.9. Psalm. 119.105.1, 15. Psalm. 16.3.

Q. Chawgun wauwerrechanchi^wunk wutche paperrissejek?

A. W^uwerrechanchiawunk wutche mauwewhekomunk Rashauwandowe wauwereganak
terre, wutche werrawauunk wutche werrittapantammowunk, quah wohpretammowungansh
youh wutchio. 1 Cor: 1.2. Phil: 1.5. Act 2.47. Rom: 9.4 1 Cor: 12.13.

Q. Chawgun mauwewhekomuk?

A. Mauwewunk wutche paperisseiek wauweiossemuk nappe rame wohpretewunk wutche
wetampaddawunk, routassen Jehovah quah kokkekoodamauwetummen rame wame ewo
werreganak pakkadtawauwunganak terre. Psalm. 89 5. Ps. 50.5.16. Ezekiel. 20.37.
Act. 2.42. 1 Cor

Q, Chawgun wopretounk wutche wetampaddewunk rame youh Mauwewhekonunk
wauwejassemuk nappe?

A. Warremahittewunk wutche youh wetampaddewunk teou God keiztaunas weeche ewo
sunkombaueritch sketambamh ne ewo bitch omando Jehovah re nej k quah re nejek
antsejek. ez Cor: 8: 5 and 9: 13 Gen: 17: 7

Q: Re chawgun Jehovah wopreant wuketambamh rame youh wetampaddawunganak terre?

Answ: Mauganau hoggauoush quah neiek antseiek, negonne re Jehovah ne hom neiek
ewo wosketambamanak, Josh: 24.15, 21, 24, 25 quah nene toukretasseiek re quah
memattiddewoak wutche mauwewhekomunk negonshiddawn routauauwunk wutche God quah
neiek kokkokoudemauetummechawunk: Nehe. 9.38

Q. Ten mauganau neiek hoggauwauwo quah neiek antseiek re Jehovah?

An. Spe attummemimmewunk spe warremattammewunk Jehovah John 1.12. quah ewo
watampaddewunk, re hoggauauk quah neiek tanseunganak re Gen: 17.9, 10. quah
nenar wotterainainauh hoggauwo, Isay 56.6, 7 quah koudamauoak omukkramuk
maiawunganak terre wutche ewo wetampadewunk. Gen: 18.19.

Q. Ten mauganan hoggauauwo quah nejek mukkraauk re toukretassejek quah
wemattiddewoak wutche mawewhekomunk?

A. Spe sunkowauwunk wutche neiek match cherewugansh, Mat: 3.6. quah
wauwerremahittewunk wutche youhiek warremattamewunk 2 Cor: 9.13: quah wutche
neiek nousserewahuwawunk re morraniemokau wunk wutche Jesus Christ quah rio
neiek quah neiek mukkraauk attummonummoauk rame re chanchi awunk wutche
mauwewhekomunk quah wopretoungansh youh wutchio.

Qu: Chawgunsh wopretoungansh wutche wetampaddewunk eo. rame akquinnagatte
wutche werraniemokauwunk wutche Jesus Christ?

A. Kitchessumounk quah peaio nenepompomuk wutche Jesus Christ To: 14.11. with
Col

Q. Chhawgun kekeistansh kitchessumounganak terre?

A. Rame Kitchessumounk kitzsummodean weeche nippe arta wauwanunquot quah
woh^^etounk wutche nukkitzsommachauwunk weeche nepuk quah rashauwunk wutche
Jesus Christ, Romans 6.2. Act. 22.16. Quah youhspe wutche ne ankwhotewunk
[allequatauwuuk] ramere Jesus Christ: wutche akquantemauetounk quah
kitzsimmoden wutche nomatchereungansh: Luke 3.3. wutche ne tompkewunk wutche
sewaytammoungansh: 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Quah nanak wutche ne rambe-ompkinnawunk
wutche nabbajek attajauche kesekutt. 1 Cor. 15.29.

Q. Chaugun kekeistaush rame nenepompomuk wutche Jesus Christ? asswedam the
Lords Supper.

Ans. Rame peaio nenepompomuk wutche Jesus Christ tinnamounk wutche petukqunneg
quoquasquenaman, quah wine sokenummen, 1 Cor: 10.16. Mat: 26.26.28 Joh. 6.55.
much wauwenunquat quah wohpretounk wutche ne tinnamounk wauwerrechanchine
wutche hok wutche Jesus Christ sukquunnaman [quoquasenaman] wutche ne, 1 Cor:
12.13. Quah ^tche nagnm nepuk poke-shinnaman wutche (...); quah youh spe wutche
ne anchegowunk ra^^^ Jesus Christ wutche akquantemaueten quah (...) dihittewk
wutche nomatchereunganoas; wut^^^ wau werrechanchiawunk wutche ewo peaio
ashauunk wueche ne milkechauwunk [milke^^uauwunk quah tauchegowunk
werrittepan^^mmewunganak terre: quah wutche ne nap^^wetappomowauwunk weeche
Jesus Christ ske^^ewo arwenunquat ahapappomuk wutche at^^rwejanunquesowunk
uttajauche wassummo^^ ^^auwunganak terre.

Quest. Chawgun rambe ompkewunk wutche uppounganak, teou moh wohpretowauwus
[milke^uwauwus] keunk re kitchessumowunganak terre?

Answ. Jesus Christ peant' nagum uttatauche ^^assimiddewunganak re, Joh. 5.28,
29 Wame warrekassejek bitch rambe ompkewunk, takq^^ sonkkumbaujek quah
mamattambaujek. Act. 2 ^

Q. Chawgun uttajauche wassummowawunk te^ milketauwo [wohpretauwo] ke rakque
rame (...) nepompomuk wutche Jesus Christ asswedam Lo^^ Supper?

A. Uttajauche kesuk keauwen wame bi^^ mouskemen arquabe wassemiddemuk abappo^^
muk, wutche Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 5.10. me^^ okkeehtassowunk wutche neauwun
airkasso^^ ganansh quah missinnaman neauwun unquet^tounk yous nousse. [nenar
rauato arriit wuto Mat. 12.36. 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccl. 12.14.

Q. Chawgun unquetauet ounk teou bitch merriten?

A. Sunkombaujek bitch aug micheme^k^^^ unganak re, quah mamattambaujek bitch
po^^^ nauauk rame re micheme rowtag weeche (...) quah ewo Angelloag. Mat.
25.34.46.

Question.
How prove you that there is a God?

Answer.
From the universal and constant agreement of all nations. and persons in the
world who are rot void of right reason and humanity.

For the things which are grounded upon particular men's fancies and opinions
are not acknowledged of all men, and are often ch^nged but this rotion that
there is a God is common to all men, nor is it changed by the changes of times;
therefore it must arise from some light which is common to all men, and that
light must be either from tradition which has fl^^wed from the first p^repts
or mankind to all their posterity from age to age who would not lie to their ch
ld^^n in a m tter of so great importance; or from an inward light implanted in
the minds of all men by himself. And that such a light is in every m^n
naturally appe ^^eth by the f^ares that are in all men when they have done yt
which they know to be evil, though no man knows and upon extraordinary
accidents, as Thun^er^ liarthquakes* sights in the Air, blasing Star etc:
which shows that they know thereis a power, above the creatures, though they
see him not. who will punish sin, and can do it when he will. And this is
Secondly from the beginning of all* things that have a dependent being For the
things which had a beginning could not be cause of their own being for^ that
which is not cannot act, nor could any thing be before it was therefore it
must have its beginning from some other cause which is without beginning, and
therefore the first being and efficient cause of all other beings.

There was a first man, and a first woman and a first in every kind of living
creatures but that first man and woman, those first of all kinds living
creatures could not make themselves therefore there was a first being which
ab^o^ute and in dependent and rests upon nothing that was before them ad, and
made them all, and upon whom all other beings depen^. And this is

How can you know that there is a God, seeing you never saw him, nor can see
him?

I know I have a reasonable soul, though I never saw it. nor can see it. The
soul were not a spiritual substance if it could be seen with bodily eyes, and
so no soul in like manner were not a Spirit if he could be seen with bodily
eyes and so no God.

But no man can fully know Gods nature therefore no God?

It follows not, for an infer our nature cannot fully; understand the things
of; an higher and more excellent nature, then, it self. Be^^^ cannot understand
what man is, much less how to plant and govern Common-wea^es, or to become
earned o^ sail over the Seas etc: For these things exceed their capacities in l
ke manner man seeing himself to be made of a more noble nature ^^en beasts, and
that not of him self: must needs infer that he who made him superior to
beasts he modes above man. then man is above beasts and therefore that ye full,
knowledge of his nature excceeds man's capacity.

Are there many Gods? or is there but one true God?

There are not many Gods, there is only one true God.

How do you prove that that there is but one true God?

Because the reason why singular things of the same kind ^re multiplied is not
to be found in the nature of for the reason why such ke things are multiplied
is from the fruitfulness of their causes: but has no cause of his being but
^is of hi^se f therefore he is one.

Because singular things of the same kind when they are multiplied, are
differenced among them selves by their singular propertyes; but there cannot be
found another God differenced from this by any such like propertyes.

Because its proper to God to do whatsoever he wills; if there were many Gods
they might will contrary things, and one might be hindered by another, ^o y he
could not do what he would* which can not stand with the Omnipotency and nature
of God.

But may there not be many Gods: yet s^ that one as the chiefest and greatest
of all?

No, because the first being must be absolutely Supreme because he depeudeth
upon nothing, he rests not upon any person but is alsufficient to him self and
to all things; and ^ll things depend upon him that which is not absolutely
chiefest and above all cannot be God.

Because the Essential propertyes of God are such as cannot be given to any
more then one.

What are these Properties which are peculiar to God alone

There are many I shall instance in three which include the rest.

That all perfections are in him originally, and eminently as in the first
cause, from which heaven and earth and all things in them receive whatsoever
good they have that all perrection are in infin^^^^ the reason why the be ng
and goodness of all creatures is limited, is because the cause whereby they
exist has co^^^ic^ted so much to them an^^ no more, and has made them capable
of so much and no more but receives not any thing from another but is a Spirit
living in him self, or of himself therefore God is not limmitted his strength
is Infinite whatsoever he wills he does in heaven and earth his Knowledge is
Infinite he knows all things; he hears all the words, and he sees all the
works of all men in all the world his Goodness is Infinite he is ^^ce^^i^^y
good, he go^s beyond all in goodness he does good toward all creatures, the
presence of God is infinite, he is every where in all the world f^lling all
places and goes not from p^^^e to place, as does the creatures his life is
Infinite, he is Eternal, without beginning and without end.

That the true God is perfectly blessed in himself, A^sufficient of himself, he
needs not supply from an other For,

He knows all things at once and together in all the world, without discourse
by the Infiniteness of his Essence.

He wills most freely whatsoever is good and so perfectly that whatsoever he
wills is good so f^tr as he wills it, and because he wills it, For is
simply and Infinitely good.

How do you prove that heaven and earth, and all things in them have the
original of their being from

This follows from what was said before, for we have proved that God has his
being of himself, and is but one therefore all other things have either in them
selves, or in their causes their being from him.

The common understanding of men does evince this, if we consider any of the
creatures particu^^^^y the framing of man's body within and without how all the
parts of man's body, yea the least have their several uses, and are fitted to
those uses, by no study or industry of their parents, yet with such wisdom that
the more learned and the more wise men are the more they admire it. No wise man
can imagine that stones and timber grew into an house, by chance, or of
themselves, but that some skillful artificer fitted, placed, and joined them
together; so, when we see heaven and earth so framed and among all creatures,
one thing fitted to another and all things to their proper uses, we cannot but
conclude that there is a most wise maker of the world. and all things in the
worlds and this can be no other but the true God.

But many evils are done in the world, and are in men's hearts is the author or
the cause of these evils?

No for is of himself perfectly good, though the power of acting be of yet this
abuse of that power to ct sinfully is of themselves. God made the Angels and
men with a liberty of acting which was not vi^ious yet it might by its own
power produce something that is vicious, it was from the ^buse of their free
will that fallen angels now devils and and and in them all mankind sinned.

Though be not the cause of sin, yet are there not two active beginnings, the
one good; and the author of all good; the either evil the author and cause of
evil.

That cannot be, for if there were two such contrary acting beginning they
would always be fightings one against another whence destruction would follow.

Neither is any thing so evil as is of himself good for evil is a kind of
defect which can not be, but in a thing exitlent, and to exist is some good.

The true has all streg^th and the sures; the gods of the heathen are weak and
poor He fills heaven and earth, and is every where in all the world.

If, there be other gods where are they

Seeing made heaven and earth, and all things in them, does He now leave them
and no more look after them as a carpenter does leave an house he has built?

No, for a carpenter looks nor after the house he has built, not for him self,
otherwise, if he made it for himself, continually he does look after it. So
made all things not for an other but for himself, and therefore does preserve
them and govern them for the ends wherefore he made them and to which he
appointed them and according to ye several natures he has given them; Some by
Reason as men others by ^h i^ natural (...) as Sensitive cratures: others by
their natural pro pertyes, as the fire asscends and water descends.

How do you prove that Gods proevid^ce does* govern all the world*

By the motion of things against their proper nature for the good of the
universe as we see fire will de^cend and water ascend 01 contr ry to their
natures to prevent emptiness for the good of the universe.

By the na^ural care which not o ly men endued with understanding, but al o
be^sts and fowls th^^ wa ^^lon ha e o^ their young: which being a part of
goodness must he acknowledged to be of God em^nently toward all his creatures
in the world: and the rather because he is present every where and knows all
things, and can easily order them to the ends wherefore he made them.

orders the Sun, moon and stars and clouds of heaven for the benefit of the
creatures on earth, principally of man.

Because Commonweals are kept, saved, destroyed and changed by the will of God

Because all men in great difficulties, distresses and exigents naturally do
cry to God for help which teaches us that the knowledge of Gods providence
toward all persons, and things upon the earth is implanted in the natural
hearts of all men.

How do you prove that all singular things are governed by Gods Povidence?

Because singular things are ordered and directed to those ends whereto God
made them.

Because God is present in the whole world, and his Wisdom and Strength are
Infinite.

Because gener^l^s ^o subsist in lingu^^^s: and there^^^e if singulars were not
preserved by Gods providence the generals would perish with them.

If it be so; how then comes it to pass that Sin does so abound in in the
world?

Even the sins that abound in the world do manifest that Gods providence does
govern all things on earth. Because thereby the effects of finne are kept under
limmited restrained and hindered least they should proceed so far as otherwise
they would to the overthrow of Commonweals and that one man should not live
by another.

Because, over-rulein the effects of man's sins which he permits to good
ends either to Punish one wicked-man by another, or to correct his own people
when they wander from his righteous Rules, or to try the faith patience and
constanoy of believers eminent in grace.

Because though permitts wicked men to prosper in this world for a time; yet at
last when they die Gods punishing will shall ^e done upon them who would not
Gods Commanding will but were disobedient thereunto

Because thus God draws men to look for the great Judgment before it come
after this life wherein will render to all men after their works in this world*

How do you prove that the souls of men live when their bodies be dead, and
that soul and body shall be joined together to appear before in that Judgment?

By the power of the natural conscience of all men comforting them when they do
well. and accusing Judging and tormenting them when they do evil, especially
near their death, which sh^wes that they expect a Judgment to come.

By the natural desire of immortality which is in all men.

By the natural motions and expectations, that Indians have of living in an
other country to the southward after they have lived in this: we see treas in
winter loose their beauty and in the spring live again.

How does govern man?

By giving and prescribing a law to him, and by ordering that as men do receive
that law they that live for ever in Gods love; or as they reject that ^^w they
that ^^raal^y (...) misery its meet that a reaaonable creature made after the
Image of should be so governed in way to everlasting life.

What Law did prescribe to men? and how did he prescri^e it to him?

The law prescribed was that men should live after Gods revealed will revealed
to men that his will of old partly inwardly, by writing his law in man's heart;
partly outwardly by declaring what he wuleth that man should do, and avoid,
confirming that law to man by promises and threatenings and binding man to
obedience by a solemn covenant.

Why did reveal his mind and will to men by such like outward means seeing he
governs other creatures after another manner.

Because man in his life understands by his senses; as by seeing and hearing,
therefore reveals his will to men outwardly, partly by spe^king to his ears
by an audible voice, that men may hear and understand partly by caesing his
will to be writt^n in a book, that man may see, read and understand what
wills that he know and do that he may be blessed.

Was the will of made known to man at all times by being written in a book?

It was always necessary that the will of should be made known to man by a
word, for would never ac^ept any worship or service from man, but what was
according to his word, which word is the only Rule of the Obedience of men
toward God but this word was not written at a^^ times for from to revealed his
will by visions dreams, and Oracles to few and spread it from them to many the
father teaching his son, and one making known to and teaching another the will
o^ when the Church was shut up in few families.

Why was the word of afterward written in a book?

When the Church was enlarged and began to spread it self into a greater
compass, and also errors in Religion increased, and Gods people conversed with
Ido^ l^ter^ they were more subject to be misled then it was necessary that Gods
word should be written in a book.

1. To prevent forgetfullness.

2 To avoid errors and preserve the Truth of from corruption in all ages
there being but one true and righteous Rule whereby to judge the truth.

3 To settle all men in this point that in whom we believe is that Savior. in
whom all the promises and Prophesies of the ol^l Testament were fulfilled which
is known by comparing with them what is written of him, in the new Testament
and therefore that there is not another ^^me else given under heaven where by
w^^ may be saved.

What is that book wherein these things are written?

It is that book called Gods Book Gods word, Gods Truth, which contains the
Law, written by and the Prophets. And the new Testament in which we have a
full and manifest discovery of the mystery of

How do you prove that this Book contains the word of

Because it contains a wisdom f^rr above ^ll that can be had by P^inces, or
the most ar^^d and wise men ^f this world.

I^ makes wise Gods Elect to (...) salv^tion.

Because (...) Prophesies contained in the Scriptures (...) have been exactly
and ^^^^^^lly fulfi^^ed.

has from time to time t^rmented the manifest enemies of his Book, and
^^^^^^ies of those who have prof^^^^^ and p^^ctised the Religion and wor^^p of
taugh^ there in.

Because all men in all the world are required to worship according to this his
word. The greatest princes of this world have their lipits has none.

Gods word was given long agee, How then does it concern (...) th^se who now
live in these days?

Gods word does hold forth his eternal and unchangeable. Will, concerning all
things necessary to be believed, and done by all who would ^ee said in all
Ages; and therefore was written forius as well as for those who Lived long ago
all being children of he same first parents and made of one blood all nations
of men of the earth and of this rib, and so one man ^e^rt another, and that man
^n^ther, and that man another; and one generation begat another, so all men
are as branches of the Root all men are of the same nature: all are like in
their bodies their heads, ears, eyes, mouth, and tongue.

Gods word was given to other nations, how then does it concern the Indians.

Gods word was first given to the Jews only. till the comeing of suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways but when came in man's nature he s^nt his
word to all Nations of the^ wor^^ according to the prophesies of and of the
Gentii s which his word they receive some sooner so^^ ter then ^^^er

If the ^n^^ ^s receive Gods Word will it not take away the ^^^^ur and Riches
of (...) the sac^^^ms, and Li^erty of the Indians?

No, in noe wise. yea this would quickly incre se the honor and Riches (...)
the S chems By humility and the fear of are Riches honor, and life. and this
will enlarge the liberty of the indians by freeing them from the bon^^ge of sin
and Satan.

The second part showing them by the Scriptures of the divine truths necess rye
to eternal Salvation.

Wherein stands man's Happiness?

Not in the pleasures, nor in the treasures of this world.

Why so?

Because our life is short, we can but possess them a little whi^^ These
things cannot satisfy now while we live, nor will they accompany us when
^e^dy.

Wherein then ^^anas man's happiness?

Man's happiness consists in the fruition of his free Love by the chief
desirable good, that any can seek for or find.

Why so?

Because this Love is from everlasting and to everlasting it ^ea^^th not. Most
free of all Loves its the greatest most ^^^tisfying.

Wherein is chiefly made known to men?

In his word which shows men, what they ought to avoid believe, and ^oe that
they may please live to him yea live for ever with him. (Tit. 2.12 Deuteronomy. 29.29

Who is?

Is a Spirit eternal all knowing, al-seeing, most merciful most righteous of
himself, ann himselves. (Joh. 4.24. Psa. 90.2. 2 Chro^. 6.30

How many Gods see there?

Thereis but one very true in three persons three in one, the Father, the Son,
and the hol^-Ghost. as in man there be his will understanding, and memory
those three, yet but one man: So in the Godhead, there are three persons, yet
but one. this is a glorious mystery which will reveal more fully to his people
both her^ and ^n heaven hereafter.

What has the true God done for thee?

has ma^e me, he does keep me. and he can save me.

How did make you?

In my first patents he made me holy, and righteous and like himself in
knowledge.

Are you then born holy and righteous.

No. my first father sinned and I in him. made the first man as the r^^^ of all
m^^kind, and gave and in him all men all ood things what rec^ived in the
b^g^n^ing when God made him, he received it not for ^^^^e^f alo^^ with him all
men received i^ and what he lost he lost not for himself alone all men lost
it in him what did as if all men did it; he sinned therefore all sinned.

Were you born a sinner?

I was conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, and so by my nature am as a
^^^thy loathsome some creature and in my self by reason of my sin obdious to

What is your birth sin?

They sin of imputed to me and a currupt, nature dwelling in me.

What is Adams sin imputed to you?

The eating of the forbidden tree. Genesis 3.11.

What is your corrupt nature?

My corrupt nature is empty of grace, bent unto sin, only unto sin, and that
continually. not a creature upon earth has So an infected nature as all men
have.

What is Sin?

Sin is a breach of Gods Commandments.

How many Commandments are there?

Tenn.

What is the first Commandment?

Thou shall have no other gods but Me.

What is the meaning of this Comm^ndement?

That we should worship the only true. Is the only true there are no other
gods the gods of the insi^^ells are Devils and man-Slayers.

What is the second Commandment?

Thou shall not make any graven image unto thee or the likeness of any thing,
which is in heaven above or in earth beneaah, or in ye water under the earth.
Thou shall not bo^^ down, thy s^^f to them, thou shall not serve them: for I
thy am a ^^^^ous visiting the iniquity of the ^ath ^s upon their children to
the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me and showing mercy unto
thousands of them who love me and keep my Commandments.

What is the meaning of into Commandment?

That we should worship The True with True worship, such as has ordained not
such as men do invent

What is the 3d Commandment?

Thou shall not take in vain the Name of thy God. for will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain.

What means here the Name of thy?

Himself, and the good things of whereby is known as a man is known by his name
as his At^^^^utes worship Word and Works. Deua. 28.58. Ex. 30 19. with. 34.6

What means that shall not take his name in vain?

That all men should speak of himself, and of the good things of for his glory
and for their good not vainly, not unreveren^ly, not unprofitablely, 24. 1 Cor
10.31. Job: 5: 27:

What is the fourth Commandment?

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Six days, shall thou ^abour, and
do all thy works. but the ^ev^^th day is the Sabbath of thy on that day thou
shall not do any work, thou nor thy Son nor thy daughter manservant, nor m
id-servant, nor thy cattle nor thy stranger within thy gates for in S x days
made heaven, and earth the sea and all things that in them be and rested the
seventh day wherefore blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

What is the meaning of this Commandment?

That all should Rest from work and much more from play on the Lords day* that
we may draw near to in good works.

What is the f^fth Comm^ndement?

Honor thy father and thy mother that thy ^^^es may be long in the l^nd which
thy gives thee

Who are called thy father and mother

All Rulers whither in families the school in Church or in the commonwealth.
(2.12. 1 Cor. 4.15

What is the honor to Superiors?

Reverence Obedience and when I am able recompense. 1 Timothy 5.1. 1 Samuel 25.8.

What is the fixed commandment?

Thou shall do no murder. (1 Timothy 5.4.

What means this commandment?

That we should not shorten the life or health of our selves or others but
preserve both.

What is the seventh commandment?

Thou shall not Committ Adultery.

What is the sin here forbidden?

To defile our selves, or others with unclean lusts.

What is here Commanded?

Chastity to preserve our bodies in holiness and honor.

What is the eight Commandment?

Thou shall not steal.

What is the stealth here forbidden?

To take away another man's goods without his knowledge without his gift, or to
spend our own goods without profit to our selves or others gain As Bad Indians
do spend their estates when they hant where is and play at strawes.

What is Where Commanded?

Well to g^tt our goods well to ^e^^ and well (...) them.

Whai ^s the ninth Commandment?

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

What is the sin here forbidden?

To ^y falsely to think or speak that which is not truth of our selves or others.

What is here Commanded?

Truth and faithfullness

What is the tenth Commandment?

Thou shall not covet the house of thy neighbor, Thou shall not cover the wife
of thy neighbor, nor his manservant nor his maidservant nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

What is the coveting here forbidden?

I^st after other men's goods* and want of contentment with our own est

Whether have you kept all these Commandments?

No, I and all men are sinners

What is the wages of sin?

Death and eternal torment.

How then look you to be saved?

Only by

Who is ^alled

The eternal Son of who for our sakes became man, that he might redeem and
save us.

How does he redeem and save us?

By his righteous life, and bitter death and glorious resurrection again to
life.

How came you to have part and fellowship with in his Death and his
resurrection?

By the power of his word and Spirit which b^i^gs us to and keeps us in him.

What is his word?

The holy Scriptures penned by the ^n^ient ministers of his word ^^^lled the
old and N^w Testament, the L^w and Gospel.

How does the ministry of the Law bring you toward

As it brings me to know my sin and the wrath of to wards me for it. Romans
3.20. Gal. 3.10.24.

How does the knowledge of thy sin bring you to wards?

Thereby I come to feel my eurie^ estate, and need of Savior.

How does the ^^^^r^e of the Gospel help you in this cursed estate?

It humbles ^^ee yet more, and then rayses me out of this miserable estate.

How does the ^^^^^rie of the Gospel humble you more?

By ^^vealing the free love of Because he dyed to save sinners: and yet
convincing me of my sin, because I believe not on him, and of my ^trer
insuffi^i^ncy to come to him And ^o I fe^e my self utterly lost.

How men does the ministry of the Gospel raise you up out of that lost estate
to come (...)

As it teaches me the value and the virtue of the death of and the riches of
his free love to lost sinners: v^a^^s the promise of grace to such and
ministers the holy Spirit of grace to aply and has promise of grace unto my
self, and keeps me in him.

How does the holy Spirit of Grace help you and bring you to and cause you
improve his promise and keep you in him?

By begetting in me faith to receive him. prayer to call upon him. Repentance
to mourn after him, and new obedience to serve him.

What is Faith?

Faith is a grace of the holy Spirit; Whereby I deny my self and believe on for
righteousness and everlasting life.

What is Prayer?

Prayer in a calling upon in the name of by the help of the holy Chost acc^^^ng
to the will of (5.14?

How did teach his disciples to pray?

Thus.

Our father in heaven Hallowed be thy Name, Let come thy Kingdom, thy Will be
done on earth as in Heaven Give us this day our daily food, Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, and the power,
and the Glory for^^er and f^^ ever: Amen

What is Rep^nta^ce?

Repent^nce ^s a grace of the holy Spirit, whereby I loath my sins an^ abhor
myself for them, and confess them before and mourn after for the par^on of
them, and for grace to serve him in newness of life.

What is this new life, or O^edience?

Newness of life is a grace of ye holy Spirit whereby I forsake my former lust
and ^^in com^^^y and walk before in the light of his word, and in the C^mmu ^^n
of the Saints.

What is the Communion ^f the Saints?

It is the fellowship of the Church in the spiritual good things of the
Covenant of Grace, and the Seals thereof.

What is the Church?

A Congregation of Saints joined together in the Bond of the covenant, to
worship and edefie one another in all his good ordinances 14.23.26.

What is the Bond of the covenant in which the Church is joined together?

It is the profession of that Covenant which has made with his faithful
people that he will be a God to them and to their seed.

Unto what does bind his people in this Covenant?

To give up themselves and their seed first to that they may become h s people.
(2 Cor: 8.5 and then to the Elders and brethren of the Church, to set forward
the worship of and their mutual edification. (with 10.28, 29 to 24

How do they give up themselves and their seed to

By receiving through faith and his Covenant to themselves and their seed, and
accordingly walking themselves and trayning up their children in the ways of
his Covenant,

How does they give up themselves and their children to the Elders and brethren
of the Church?

Sy confession of their and profession of their^ faith, and of their subjection
to the Gospel of and so they and their children are received into the
fellowship of the Church, and the seals thereof.

What are the Seals of the Covenant now in the days of the Gospel? of

^a^^ism* and the holy Supper of (2.11.1. to 11.25

What is done for you in Baptism?

In Baptism the washing with water is a sign and s^^l of n v w^^^^ng with the
blood and Spirit of and, thereby of my ingrassing into of the pardon and
cleansing of my sins: of my rising up out of affliction. and also of my
resurrection from the dead at the last day

What is done for you in the supper of called

In the holy Supper of the receiving of bread broken, and poured out is a sign
and seal of my receiving communion of the body of broken for me, And (...) of
his blood shed for and thereby of my growth (...) of the pardon and (...) of my
sins; the fellowship of his holy Spirit^ of my strengthening and quickening in
grace and of my sitting together with up his throne of glory at the last
Judge^ent.

What is the resurrection from the dead, which was s^aled up to you i^
Baptism?

When shall come to his last Judgment: all that are in the grave shall rise
again, both the just and the unjust.

What is the last Judgment which is sealed up to you in the Supper of called
(...)

At the last day we all sha^^ appear before the Judgment se^^^ of to an
account of our w^^^ and to receive our (...) ward according to them.

What is the reward that shall be given?

The righteous shall go into lasting life, and the wicked shall cast into
eternal fire with the D^^ and his Angels.

FINIS.

