A FULL RELATION Of the taking of ROCHE CASTLE, Together with St. Patricks
Cathedral, A place of great strength, wherein were put to the Sword Seven
hundred Rebels, and many Priests and Friars.

AS ALSO The taking in of many other places, all which was performed by the
Army under the Command of the Lord INCHIQVIN, Lord President of the Province of
Munster in Ireland.

SENT In a Letter from Colonel Alexander Pigot to a Commander of note in this
City.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Tuckey at the Black-spred Eagle in Fleet Street,
1647.

Noble Sir,
BY this opportunity of your Brothers going over, I could not omit to let you
know some particulars of the proceedings of this Army, and of the successes
that it has pleased God to give us, since we marched against the City of
Cashel: On the 12. of September the Soldiers Garrisoned in that City, being
terrified with the sudden taking of Chair Castle (a place of very great
strength, and importance on the River of Sewer) and with the storming of Roches
Castle upon that River, and putting the Warders to the sword, being 50. in
number, and with the burning of much corn, and diverse Towns thereabouts, they
deserted the City, and retreated to the great Rock adjoining, whereon the
Cathedral Church (called St. Patricks) is situated, being a large and stately
Pile, and the Church yard fortified. In this Church and Churchyard they had
six full Companies of Foot, and diverse Townsmen and Gentlemen, in all 800. or
there abouts, besides women and children, and all the goods they could in so
short a time get together, conceiving they were able to make it good against
any opposition, that could be made against it.

My Lord president gave order for the summoning of it, and upon consideration
of the strength of the place, and of our want of bread, and want of convenient
means for storming the place, the Counsel of War resolved to grant quarter unto
them with bag and baggage, if they would by an hour surrender, which they
refused, and stood on very high terms, but soon after propounded other terms
which my Lord refused to accept, and willed the Drum, and two Officers that
came with him to return, for that not one man of them should come forth alive,
and declared unto us his will to storm the place, though it seemed a very
difficult work; whereupon Sir William Bridges, Major Wearden, and other horse
Officers, cheerfully offered to unmount their men, and join with the Foot in
storming the place, and both Horse and Foot were very willing to proceed
therein, preparations being made with all possible diligence: on the 15 day of
September, my Lord gave command, and we began the storm; Sir William Bridges
led up above 150. unmounted men with their swords and pistols, four Majors of
Foot led up 200. a piece as a Forlorn hope to each post, and were seconded by
four Lieut. Colonels, with 300. men a piece, and the Lord President marched up
with the body of the Army, with their Colors flying, and Drums beating: the
remainder of the horse (for the encouragement of the Foot) marching up within
half Musket shot of the Rock. We fell on about three of the clock, and in an
hour we were absolute matters of it, having but eight men slain in the service,
besides almost an hundred hurt, whereof it was my fortune to be one, having
received a thrust with a pike behind my right ear, but I give God thanks I am
well recovered of it, and so are most of the rest, though they were sorely
bruised by the throwing of stones from the wall before we could enter; we made
almost all their pikes unserviceable by cutting off their heads. In the Church
we killed above 700. men, whereof many were Priests and Friars, besides some
women that perished in the action: I am confident so many men were not seen
slain in so small a compass of ground these many years; they lay five or six
deep in many places, not one Officer or Soldier escaped, but one Major and the
Governor, who as I hear is since dead of his wounds: before the Storm began,
diverse of the prime gentry being come upon license to speak with my Lord about
rendering some other places, my Lord caused them to stand by, and see the
storming performed, which you must think was to them no pleasant object: as
soon as this was done the Soldiers fell to plundering, and many of them got
good store of booty, among which were diverse Pictures, Copes, Chalices and
Vestments of the Priests, and the Mitre of the Titulary Archbishop (who was
lately fled to the supreme Counsel leaving his Coach behind him) 600 Arms,
good store of Powder, and also diverse Colors with the Sword and Maces of the
Mayor of the City, and some of the Aldermens Gowns that were brought to this
City on the Soldiers backs, and here sold. In the Church was found a Letter of
the Lord Taffe General of the Rebels forces to encourage Lieut. Colonel Butler
their Governor to hold out, taking the place to be impregnable.

I may not omit to tell you that the Rebels called on St. Patrick for help all
the time of the storm and before, and some of them rung the bells in a very
doleful tune, which our Soldiers told them was their knell, and so it proved,
and diverse of the Town and Country told us afterward, that they would never
trust St. Patrick more. Before the storm we understood by many in the Town that
on new years day 1644. the Citizens of Cashel murdered 120. Protestants whom
they had kept in a dungeon to the knees in dirt a month before because of
their Religion only, which is now paid home to them by the Providence of God.

From hence my Lord President sent a strong party and entered the walled Town of
Fethard, six miles distant, and having sent the Foot home to refresh them, sent
from these parts a strong party of horse under the command of Sir William
Bridges into the County of Kilkenny with directions to do what spoil, and to
bring away what cattle he could. Sir William Bridges pretended to quarter at
Fethard, and gave orders accordingly, but used very great diligence in marching
as near Kilkenny as he could, where he understood a great part of Owen R^^* O*
Neals men were to defend the Supreme Council (as they call themselves) the
sudden march of Sir William being noised at Callin an ancient Corporation, and
a strong walled Town, lying within six miles of Kilkenny upon the river; the
Suffrain and Burgesses thereof fled toward Kilkenny with what they could
carry, and left the Town open, whereof the Troopers made as good use as they
could; and having burnt all the Corn thereabouts, Sir William Bridges and that
party brought away 4000. head of cattle toward Fethard, but that night proving
stormy, and the Troopers wearied with their march, they lost near two parts of
them, and the rest they brought home to this Garrison: In all this march we
went over as rich and goodly a Country, as ever I saw in England.

My Lord is now taking his Musters of the Army, and intends to be suddenly
abroad in the field again, having this Summer burnt corn from the gates of
Limerick to Chashel, Clomnel, and Callen near Kilkenny which terrified the
Inhabitants exceedingly, and gave such an Alarm to the Supreme Counsel at
Kilkenny, as they never had the like since the war began; and were it not that
our Soldiers were almost naked, and much wanting means and medicaments, I am
very confident you would have an account of some Winter service meriting
thanks, as we think our former service does; having not been in Garrison these
six months, but only to get a little bread or bisquet, which if we had had,
and Carriages in any reasonable proportion, we had scarce seen our Garrisons
all this while; and therefore I beseech you, as you tender the service of the
Parliament, and reducing of those bloody wrongs, labor to get us (over before
Winter) clothes for our men, and some means to encourage the Officers and
Soldiers, and to comfort them in sickness after a hard and successful Summer
service: so, Sir, praying for the good and happy success of the Parliament, and
for your safe and speedy return unto us with some to supply our wants, I remain

Your very humble servant, Alex: Pigot.
Cork, October. 6. 1647.
Imprimatur

G. M.

FINIS.

