AN ACCOUNT OF K. Williams Royal heading OF THE Men of Inniskillin. And of His
Victorious March from Dublin to Athlone, With the LATE K. James's Taking, etc.
His way to that Place.
JUST now an Express is arrived from Our Royal Master's Camp, giving an Account
of the Affairs in Ireland, as follows:

That the late King James, after his grand Defeat at the Boyne, finding his
Affairs in a desperate condition, retired from Dublin, with his Followers, on
Wednesday Morning by two a Clock, taking his way directly by the great Road for
Athlone, which is some Miles from Dublin, leaving Orders for the Keys of the
Castle, and Gates of the City of Dublin, to be delivered upon Summons; which
was accordingly performed the next Day to the Duke of Ormond, whom the King
sent with Six Hundred Foot, and Three Hundred Dragoons, to take Possession of
it, having Orders to release all Protestant Prisoners, and to make a strict
search for Mines, etc. Which Orders, His Grace the D. of Ormond, immediately
upon his entrance into Dublin, put in Execution, but after a very strict search
was made in all suspected places throughout the whole City, there was not the
least appearance of a Mine found.

The Irish Garrison in Dublin were so fearful, that they clapped up all the
Protestant-men into the Churches, as soon as their King went to the Boyne; but
on Wednesday-morning hearing of the Defeat, they discharged them, and scowred
off, and all the Mischief they did, was to cut the Bell-Ropes, that they might,
in some measure, prevent their Friends rejoicing there.

As soon as King James left Dublin, taking the Irish Inhabitants with him, our
English Friends entered the Popish Houses that were deserted; and thence took
Arms that they had left: With which, they went six Miles from the City, to meet
the King, being led by Lieut. Genesis Roger Moore. The King on Thursday-night lay
encamped in the Park, two Miles from Dublin 3 and early on Saturday-morning his
Majesty entered the City; and it is hardly to be expressed with what expressions
of Joy he was received by the poor Protestants, the Particulars of which, would
contain a whole Sheet.

Our Army followed the Irish Rebels to Munster: The King designs to set forward
from Dublin toward Athlone, on Monday-morning.

The famed Town of Droghedah, though Garrisoned by Three Thousand Irish
Soldiers, finding the Late King's Army was beaten from the very Pass that
should cover the Town, on which account they could have little hopes of Relief,
capitulated on Friday, The Officers to go out with their Swords only, and the
common Soldiers to go home with their Hand in their Pockets, leaving their
Arms behind them.

His Majesty was pleased to tell the Inniskilling-Men that He had heard a great
Character of them, and therefore would do them the Honor to Head them Himself,
which accordingly he performed; for aftet they had passed the Foard, He Charged
at the Head of them, and they faught like Tigers, during the whole Action, His
Majesty encouraging them by his own Example; and most that were killed were of
that Party, they losing above a Hundred Men.

The Irish, assisted by the French, fought above Three Hours after their King
ran from them to Dublen; for after their Ranks were broke at the Foard, the
late K. James ran; but they got together in several Bodies, and made a small
Resistance; and the French of the Irish Army behaved themselves extremely well,
forming themselves into a Body, so as the Horse could not break in on them,
till some Fieldpieces were brought to bear on them, which put them to the Rout
also.

Yours T. Pierson.

London, Printed for T. Church, near Smithfield, 1690.


