Bath Memoirs: OR, OBSERVATIONS IN Three and Forty Years Practice, AT THE BATH,

WHAT CURES Have been There Wrought, (both by Bathing and Drinking these Waters
by God's Blessing, on the Directions of Robert Pierce, Dr. in Physic, and
Fellow of the College of Physicians in London, a constant Inhabitant in Bath,
from the Year 1653. to this present Year 1697.

BRISTOL: Printed for H. Hammond, Bookseller at Bath, and the Devizes; and are
to be Sold by most Booksellers in London, and the Country, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
DID not the Tyranny of Custom compel it, nor the daily Examples of those that
put out any thing in Print, encourage it; yet would the small thing to which
this is promised, necessarily require some Reasons to be rendered, for the
publication of it.

I can safely say, it was not Ambition to be seen in Print, that put me upon
it; I have often blamed others, for their forwardness in that kind, and have
observed, that some who would not be advised, but have persisted in the Vanity
of putting out their Works (as they call them) have got little or nothing by
it, not so much as the applause they aimed at, much less the Gain they proposed
to themselves. And as very few have advantaged themselves, so have some as
little benefitted others, or so much as satisfied the expectation of their
Readers.

I have therefore hitherto, contented my self (as many greater, and more
Learned Men then I have done) with a fair and cleanly Reputation without Book,
and should still have so done, had not the great, and not to be denied
importunities of Friends (both Patients and Physicians) press me so long, and
so much that I could no longer withstand their Solicitations.

Besides, it has been very often proposed, and desired (and by many wondered
at, that it was not done, if for no other end, then for the Benefit of the
City) that a Catalogue of Eminent Cures should every Year be Printed, which
though it has been by some attempted, yet is the thing hardly Practicable (if
possible to be done) for these following Reasons.

First, Very few will be contented (especially in some Cases) to have their
Names mentioned (so publicly at least, as is putting them into a Printed
Paper) least it spoil their Preferment, or make them a common talk. And to put
out a Rehearsal of Cures, without naming the Persons on whom they were wrought,
(that enquiry might be made of the truth of it) might be looked upon as a
Deceit, nor much better then a Quack's Setting up a Bill, at the corner of a
Street, and one without a Name might probably call in question the truth of all
the rest.

A Second Reason is, where one finds present Advantage, whilst he is here ^t at
least a perfect Recovery, or such as will be sure to hold, which time only can
try) there be many that go away little altered from what they were when they
came hither, and yet afterward recover by degrees, of which not one in Forty
gives an account, nor do we hear of them again, unless it be by chance.

And then thirdly, some are so horridly unworthy, that they industriously
conceal (what they can) the Benefit they receive, for fear of being more
obliged to gratify those that have taken care of them, of which great
ingratitude many instances might be given, were it to any purpose.

Fourthly, (and what is indeed of as much Concern as all the Rest) They that
need much, and long Bathing, especially if they come in the hottest Season of
the Year, (which is not always their own, but sometimes their Physicians fault,
that will not part with them whilst they can take Physic, or give Fees,) are
so enfeebled with long and much Bathing and Sweating, that till they have
Recovered that Fatiegue, they cannot be sensible, what-Benefit they have
received, which some do sooner, and some later, but scarce return back any
account hom they speed.

And here may justly be reprehended those that, either upon their own Heads, or
by the advice of the Bath-Guides, or out of lucre to have as much for their
Money as they can, (though to their hurt) stay too long at a time, or go in
twice a day, or more frequently then will well consist with their Strength, or
present Circumstances. If a Physician advise against it, he shall be censured,
as if he did it for his own end, to ke^p them longer in Town.

By these means, some have gone away, to all Appearance, as Bad or Worse, then
they came, and yet (after resting at home a while) attain by Degrees, the end
they came for.

Fifth, There is another impatient sort of People, that if they are not
presently well, after so many times Bathing or Drinking (the number of which
they propose to themselves, or others for them) enter presently upon some new
Course, or take some trivial Medicine, which comes under the specious Character
^f ^n approved Receipt, though perhaps may signify no more then Chips in
Pottage, and then imputs the Advantage they receive, to what they took last,
though the Bath or Waters had wrought it before, and they would not allow time
to expect the Success. Which thing has made me very often give this Advice,
not to enter upon the use of any other Remedy (unless great Necessity compel)
till after a Month or six Weeks time.

I do the rather mention this, because I find a Physician of great Name in his
time, blaming the Bath (in some of his Observations) without Cause, and indeed,
not without just Suspicion of some Self-endedness; I am sure, without allowing
sufficient time to try, whether the Bath were Blameable or no, or did not
rather deserve the Reputation of that Recovery, which was afterward (too
partially perhaps) ascribed to his own Method.

These are some of the Reasons, why a Catalogue hitherto, has not been made
public. Now if (instead of that) there be a Manual fitted to every ones Price
and Pocket (which is one, and a chief design of this Undertaking) that shall
give some instances upon every considerable Head, what Cures have been here
done for more then Forty years past, and the Persons named (where it is
convenient so to do) that either, from themselves (if living till this time) or
their surviving Friends, and Relations, (if since Dead) the truth of what is
here related) may be enquired into; I think it may at once, attain all those
ends, that a yearly Catalogue, could any may pretend unto.

And in doing this, I shall only relate Matter of Fact, not meddling much with
Theories, or setting up new Hypotheses. He that does that, does (as it were set
up a Shrove Tuesday Cock, for every one to throw at, without so much as paying
Two Pence for Three Throws.

The Age we live in, is a Learned and rathe Ripe Age, and many think they know
more, and sooner then those that lived before them, and indeed they are, and do
so, if they are not mistaken. I am sure if they do, they have had more
Advantages for it, then many of their Predecessors. Therefore I solemnly
declare, that I mainly design this, not to instruct Physicians, but to direct
Patients, where and how to seek for Remedy, by the Examples of those that have
here found it, in the same or like Cases with theirs. And I shall not (in the
least] Forestal, or prejudice the diligent endeavors of well designed Men of
our Faculty, baving not given the Copy of any one Prescription, used in any
Case, in this my long Practice here, but have only hinted (in the general) what
course I usually took in the several Diseases therein mentioned, and what the
success was, whether Good or Bad, and have declared one, as well as the other;
that as one may supply the place of a Land Mark, the other may do the Office of
a Buoy.

I do also solemnly averr, that I will not (as others have done) set down any
Recovery, barely upon Report, or what has been done by others, but only such
as I my Self have been alone concerned in; or joined with another Physician, or
Physicians, or by and with the Communicated Advice of Him or Them, that
Recommended the Patient to my Care, whose Names also I have in some, if not
most Instances inserted.

Now though I have declared against Theories and Hopothesis, yet I may ( I
think) without Breach of that Promise, say something in Answer to a Question
that has been some Hundred of times asked me, since I came to live upon this
Place, viz. What is the Reason of the Heat of the Bath-Waters? I never did give
a positive Answer to it, that it was thus or thus, and no otherwise, nor shall
I now, but as I usually returned to those Querists, so shall I now declare,
what best satisfied me about it. Most I know, ascribe the warmth to
subterraneal Fires, others to the Fermenting Heat of imperfect Minerals, and a
late Author to an Acid Spring running upon the Alcali of Freestone Sand and
Snail Shells. Let every one abound in his own Sense, much may be said against
either Supposition, if one had either Will or Leisure to undertake the
Controversy, or were it likely to be to any purpose Considerable.

The Fermenting Heat, I should like best, were it likely that Minerals were so
long imperfecting. Vid. Mr. Jones Baths Aid. page
We have an Account of above Two Thousand Years, near Three Thousand, that this
City has been Built, and the Baths were discovered some time before; no doubt,
for the City was probably Built for their Sakes only, and doubtless, the
Springs were long before they were discovered; and if Minerals will not be
within that time perfected, and consequently that Fermenting Warmth cease, the
World must be much Older, then it is generally held to be.

Were the Story well vouched, that Dr. French relates in his Art of
Destillation, (with me, the Second Edition, Printed at London, 1653. in 410.
Page, 155] it is of Monsieur de Rochas's Demonstrative Experiment, as he calls
it, which can no where else be made, but in an unhabited Place, such as was
that (on the Alps) where this Monsieur found his Hot Spring.

Were the Truth of this well asserted, I should easily give up my assent, that
ours might come from the same, or a like Cause. The Book is not in every Bodies
Hand, and therefore it may not be unacceptable to some Readers to transcribe
the Story out of Dr. French's Book, his Words are these.

As I was with some of my Companions, Monsi. de Rochas
wandering in Savoy, I found in the Valley of Luzerne ( betwixt the Alps) a hot
Spring, I began to consider the cause of this Heat, and whereas the vulgar
opinion is, that the heat of Fountains, is from Mountains fired within, I saw
Reason to think the contrary, because I saw Snow unmelted upon a Mountain, from
whence this Hot Spring came, which could not possibly but have been dissolved,
by the hot Fumes of the Mountain, had it been fired within. Whereupon being
unsatisfied, I with my Companions, and other Laborers (whom I could very
hardly persuade to undertake such a Business, by reason they were afraid, that
Fire would thereupon break forth out of the Ground and consume us) got Tools,
and set upon digging, to find out the true cause of the heat of this Fountain.

After we had dug Fifteen Days, [having perceived before, the Water to be
hotter and hotter by Degrees, as we came nearer to the source) we came to the
Original of the Heat, where was a great Ebullition. In three hours more, we
dug beyond this place of Ebullition, and perceived the Water to be cold, yet
in the same continued stream with the other that was hot. Upon this, I began to
wonder much at the reason of these things. Then I carried to my Lodg^ng some of
this hot Water, (which was both Saltish and Acid) and evaporated it, and of
Forty Ounces, I had in the bottom five Drachms of Saltish Matter, which I then
farther purefy'd, and extracted thence three Drachms of pure Nitrous,
Hermetick, Salt, the other two Drachms, being a slymy Sulphurous Substance. Yet
with this I was not satisfied, but with my Laborers, went again to the Place,
and dug twelve Days more, and then we came to a Water which was insipid, as
ordinary Fountain Water, yet still in a continued Stream, with the Saltish Hot
Water.

At this I wondered much, whereupon I digging up some of the Earth, where the
cold and Saltish Stream runned, and carried it home with me, and out of a
Hundred weight thereof, I extracted a good quantity of Nitrous Salt, which was
almost Fluxile. When I had extracted as much as I could, I laid the Earth
aside, and in twenty four Hours, it was all covered over with Salt, which I
extracted, and out of a hundred weight of this Earth (which I call
Virgin-Earth) I had four Pound of this kind of Salt, which it contracted in the
aforesaid Twenty Four Hours, and so it would do constantly.

Now this satisfied me concerning one Doubt (for before I was unsatisfyed) how
there could be a constant supply of that Salt, which made the Water Saltish,
seeing there was but a little distance betwixt the insipid Water, and the Hot
Water, and the constant stream of Water washed away the Salt that was in that
little space. For I perceived that this kind of Earth, attracts this Universal
Salt of the World, partly from the Fire, in the Cavities of the Earth, and
partly from the Vapors, that pass constantly through the Earth.

After this, I took some of that Earth, where the Ebullition was, and carried
it home, and proved it, and I perceived it to be a Sulphur Mine, into which the
former Acid Saltish Water penetrating, caused an Ebullition (as do Salt of
Tartar, and Spirit of Vitriol mixed together, and also Water poured on unslackt
Lyme.) After this, I began to question how it was, that this Sulphur-Mine was
not consumed, seeing so much Water passes from it daily, but I began to
understand how all things in the Earth did assimulate to themselves, whatsoever
was of any kind of Affinity to them (as Mines convert the Tools of Miners into
their own Substance, in a little time, and such like Experiments of that
Nature) I was satisfied. And after all this, I understood how this Universal
Salt of the World was to be had, and I could at any time mix it with Water, and
pour that Water upon Sulphur, and so make an Artificial Hot Bath, as good as
any Natural Bath whatsoever. Since this, reading Monsieur Blondel of the Baths
at Aix-la-Chapelle, I find that Henricus Rochas Medicus, had written a Treatise
de Aquis Mineralibus, whence (I suppose) Dr. French had this Story; Dr.
Rochas's Book I never saw, if I had, I should rather have quoted him then Dr.
French.

It seems Monsieur Rochas, was a Virtuoso, and Chymically inclined, and if the
Relation be to be depended upon, it seems less liable to difficulties, then the
other Hypothesis.

Something like this, probably it must be to continue warmth to the Waters of
the Bath so long, without interruption, or considerable Alteration. And why not
then.

Two Channels in the Bowels of the Earth differently impregnated with the
Streams, Vapors or Substances (it matters not much which) of different Salts,
or Mineral Juices, continuing a while their single course, and at length
meeting together in a common Channel, as we see the Veins in a Man's Body do,
in the return of the Blood to the Heart, for as it is in the Microcosme, so may
it be in the Ma^rocosme also; and probably it is under Ground, as we see it to
be above Ground, two little Rivulets meeting, make a bigger, which thing has
denominated several Villages, as Meetford near us, and Twyford near Reading:
These Channels thus meeting, and being (as before supposed) differently
impregnated, fall a fermenting together, and acting one upon another, produce
this actual Heat, and so deliver the Waters up warm at the Springhead.

That several Liquors are known (and more perhaps upon Trayal may be found)
that being cold whilst asunder, Vid. M. Blondels Thermiae Aquis Gra.
become hot when mixed together some of our shop Preparations do testify (as
in making Tartar Vitriolate, and Butter of Antimony, etc.) And if I remember
well, Mr. Boil, in one of his Philosophic Treatises makes mention of Two
Limpid Liquors of his own Preparation, with which be used to divert himself,
and those that came to visit him, which being apart in several Glasses, seemed
(to a tender Finger) rather colden then ordinary Water, but being put together
in one Glass, became presently so hot, as to heat the Glass soconsider ably, as
to affright one of the timorous Sex so, as to hazard the breaking of it.

Now it may easily be Granted, that Art being but the Ape of Nature, there is
nothing in the former, but what was first in the latter, and that the great
Chemistry, governed by the greatest Artist in the vast Laboratory of the Earth,
comes not short of our small Processes here, even amongst the most Adepti.

That which confirmed me in the Opinion, that the actual Heat of these Waters,
is from this or some like Cause (for I have already sufficiently declared
against Dogmatizing) was an Experiment I made, when William Lord Viscount
Stafford, (of whom you will find mention made under the Title of Lumbago, or
Duplex Sciatica, Lib. I. Obs. 4th.) continued most part of the Winter at the
Bath, and lived in my House, and Bathed three or four times a Week in the
King's-Bath (when the Weather was calm) from the beginning of November forward.

He was in the Bath on Christmas-Eve, and took no Cold all that time. He had
indeed, the Convenience of a Gallery in my House, (which was the Reason that
his Lordship chose those Lodgings) through which he went into the King's-Bath,
under Covert, without exposing himself to the open Air, till he came into the
Bath, when Stormy and Windy Weather was (for Winds are always more a hinderance
to Bathing, then Rain, nay, then Frost it self.) I got His Lordship a Bathing
Tub, which hela about Two or Three Hogs-heads, and placed it in the Pump-House.
This Tub was pumped full about Five in the Morning, and between Seven and
Eight, his Lordship came as at other times, to Bathe in it, but finding it (by
trying with his Hand, as his Custom was) too hot, he commanded the Guides that
were there to lave it for Half an Hour, with Hand-Pails, as People cool their
Pottage with Spoons) when it was cool enough, he entered the Tub, and stayed his
Hour, or Hour and Quarter, as at other times.

At my Lord's going off, I commanded the Serjant of the Bath, to lock up the
Doors, and not to let run the Water, till I came at Night, which I did after
Nine of the Clock, and found the Water warm, though there was (if I remember
well a Frost that Day, and a large Window open upon the Tub.

Now the Experiment is easily tried, whether Water boiled to the greatest
height that may be, will keep its Warmth so long as Seventeen Hours, or more*
if it will not, it may be concluded, that this proceeds not from any extraneous
Heat (as that of Underground Fires) but from some Mineral Particles, rather
within it self, which till they are wholly evaporated, continue the Water more
or less Warm. And these Mineral Particles, probably, stick closer to the little
Globules, that make up the Consistence of Fluids, then those, communicated by
Fire, can possibly do.

And now although I have already (more then once declared against insisting on
Theories, and new Hypothesis, yet I do again assure you, that I assert not this
farther, then to tell you what best satisfied me in this Enquiry, and what I
usually answered others, that proposed the Question to me, recommending only
the Farther Consideration of it, to more ingenious, and more industrious
enquirers, and proceed to what I mainly proposed, which is to lay down plainly
what I have observed of the Waters themselves, and the effects they have
produced, both in the outward, and inward use of them, in those Diseases, the
particulars of which you will afterward find mentioned in the following
Observations; which I shall soon proceed unto, when I have given you some short
account of the Occasion of my coming to live in this Place, which thing I
should easily have been convinced to be needless, had not I my Self been one
(and that perhaps not the most inconsiderable) instance of the Recoveries
obtained by the use of these Waters, it being for my own Healths Sake, that I
first came hither.

For as my own Sickliness and Tender Constitution, was one of the main Motives,
that prevailed with me to bend my Study toward Physic, for I suppose it might
otherwise be intended by my Father, when he first sent me to the University, he
being himself a Clergyman, and Bachelor in Divinity, but Died in the 49th.
Year of his Age, before I took my first Degree in the Arts) so my great Illness
at that time, was the chief Reason that brought me to live at Bath.

It may be needful to let you know that after a weakly Childhood, I had at Ten
Years of Age, a Dropsy, an Ascites, and Anasarcha, together, of which I was
(with difficulty) recovered, by the Advice of Dr. Ralph Baily of this City, a
New-College-Man, whose then Wife, was a Relation of my Mothers a Hungerford.)
At twelve Years old, I had the Smallpox, which did not (as it was hoped it
would) much mend my Sickly Constitution. At Fourteen (being then at School, at
the College near Winchester) I had a Severe Tertian Ague, which held me Six or
Seven Weeks. Many accidental Illnesses, between whiles I had, and seldom or
never free from a Headache, which sometimes would be so violent, as to enforce
me to give of all Business for a time.

Besides, I had very frequent Defluctions of Rheumes, to my Teeth and Jaws, to
the Palate of my Mouth, and Glandules of my Throat, even to the hazard,
sometimes of a Suffocation.

At One and Twenty, breeding the Measles, I bled so excessively at the Nose,
for two days together, or longer, that some despaired of my Life, my Blood was
so exceeding thin and sharp, as well as in a great Ferment, upon Breeding that
Disease.

At this Rate I rubbed on, till Thirty* when living Westward, near the Moors
and Mashy Country, I was seized with an Epidemick Fever (a Disease usual in
those Parts, about the end of Summer) which upon my ventring too soon abroad
(to visit a good Friend, as well as a beneficial Patient) determined in a
Quartan Ague (a common Distemper in that Country, and lasting seldom less then
Six Months, sometime Twelve or Eighteen; nay I have known some in those Parts,
to have kept it Two or Three Years, and one that had it Seven Years.) It is a
scandalous thing in that Country, for a Physician to be Sick, much more a
Reproach is it, to the whole Faculty, for him to die. The Scandal I could not
avoid, the Reproach I kept free from, for I was recovered of it in Three
Months, without Jesuit's. Powder (scarce known at least in those parts then or
any other famed Febrifuge, only with a plain Alterative and Aperitive Course
(sedulously followed, and for five or six Weeks continued) in which a
Preparation of Steel and Aaron Roots prepared, had a considerable share.

In the midst of this Course, Nature offering a Discharge, by Swelling the
Hemoroid Veins, I caused Leeches to be applied, and Bleed plentifully, from
which time I apparently got Ground of my Adversary, every day. This Quartane
(though so soon removed) and the Preceding Fever, together with the ill
steams of that Marshy Country, left many Scorbutical Symptoms upon me; for
which (resolving not to trust a crazy Carcass, to that rotten Country, another
Autumn) I removed hither, not only because it was near my Native Air, (which
some advised, every one yielding me to be in hazard of a Consumption, even
Physicians as well as Friends) but also for the assistance of the Baths, and
Bath Waters.

And being now for my Healths Sake settled here, I could not reasonably propose
to my Self any Advantage of Practice, where there were three well reputed
Physicians, constantly residing, besides several interlopers, both from Oxford
and from London, and other parts of the Nation, some with, others to look for
Patients, (as still there are, and will be, for where the Carcass is, there
will the Eagles be gathered together.) But it was not Profit that I mainly came
for, but Health, which (I desire Solemnly to Bless God for it) I found to
increase daily, and therefore determined here to continue, though I had Advice,
Encouragement, and Persuasions (particularly from my Friend and Countryman,
and Fellow. Collegiate, at Lincoln-College in Oxford, Dr. Christopher Bennet)
to remove to London, as the likelyest place for a Beneficial Practice, but
doubting whether a close City [having tried Bristol, before I went Westward,
and finding that not so agreeable) would well consist with my Constitution,
which always best suited with an open Air, I set up my Staff here.

And contenting my Self with that little Business, that fell to my small Share,
and demeaning my Self to my Seniors, with that Difference and Respect, that did
(I thought) become me, (very different to what some since have shown to me) I
was often desired by them to go in their stead, to Patients in the Country,
when they were hindered by a full Bath Practice here, by which means, in process
of time, I had the Riding Practice for Ten or Twenty, sometimes Thirty Miles
about, which I submitted to the Trouble of (which is not little, considering
the very ill ways we have in these Parts) till those Elder Physicians dropping
off (and some younger Ones too) a considerable share of the Bath Practice
devolved upon me, and here I have continued a constant Inhabitant ever since,
from the Year, 1653, to this new begun Year of 97, and to the Age of 75,
without Gout, Stone, Asthma, Dropsy, or any other great Disease, incident to
Old Age, and not without some Considerable Success, as to the Health and
Recovery of others, as well as my Self, and a far greater Advantage, then I
could reasonably have hoped for. All which I desire Solemnly and Publicly, to
ascribe to the Mercy and Goodness of the Great God only.

Now before I conclude this Prefaratory Discourse, (though I am very sensible
that it is already of the longest) I thought it requisite to let you know also,
that at my first coming hither (as ill as I was I was not altogether idle, but
having little or no Practice, I had more Leisure to Read and Think, then I had
in many Months I may say some Years) before. And determining to fix here, at
least for a time) I applied my Self to those Books that treated of Baths and
Mineral Waters, and was not backward in making [at least) ordinary Experiments
upon these; such as Evaporation, mixing various Things with them, etc. I must
Confess, I was not so curious, as some have since been, to how much purpose,
let the World judge, to spend Years about it, nor so wise as to enquire how
many Hogsheads, Gallons, Quarts and Pints, each Bath held. There being no
impost upon the Water, I though it needless to employ an Excise Man to Gauge
the Ponds. It sufficed me, that there was enough to cover a de^ay'd Limb, or a
Leprous Back, and that there was Water to be had immediately from the Spring,
without mixing with that, which People Bathed in, to Drink.

And indeed I was (even then of the Opinion, that the useful knowledge of a
Mineral Water, is sooner and better had a Posteriori, then a Priori, that
Experience and long Observation, is the best and surest way of acquiring that
Knowledge. In which Opinion, I have been since much confirmed (and have
applauded my Self for thinking so formerly) when I found so great a Man as Mr.
Boil (then whom no Man in this last Age, nor in some past ones, has been more
industrious, and no less Successful, in trying Experiments, and laying
Foundations for new Theories) to be of the same, and that in a Book, which he
designed as a Direction to a Physician, to enquire effectually into the
constituent parts of Mineral Waters, and to declare himself there of the same
judgment, it is in his Memoirs, for the Natural Experimental History of Mineral
Waters, addressed by way of Letter, to a Friend, its in 8vo. Land. 1685. In the
Second Paragraph of the first Section, and the Third Page, in which Book he
has these Words,

But here I must ingeniously own to you, that notwithstanding the many ways I
propose of discovering the Natures, or Qualities of Mineral Waters, yet I think
the surest way of knowing them, is a long and sufficient Experience, of their
good and bad Effects. For I strangely suspect (and it may be partly known) that
there are beneath the Surface of the Earth, diverse Mineral Substances, some
Fixed, and some Volatile, some in the Form of hard Bodies, some of soft ones,
some of Liquors and some of Fumes, diverse of which, the Generality (even of
Learned Men) are altogether Strangers to, besides those that (though Men may
chance to have some) have their Nature so little known, that they have not so
much as Names assigned them. So that when I consider that of the ingredients we
are acquainted with to pass by all the rest, that the Earth may conceal the
proportions wherein they are mingled, may be numberless, and the Qualities
resulting from the commixture, may be very differing from those of the separate
ingredients, I am apt to look upon the difficulty of Securely determining the
effects of Mineral Waters, a Priori, as little, if at all less then insuperable
to human Understandings.

This was that great Man's Opinion of this Thing, and if a Person of his
unparalleld Parts, and indefatigable industry and Ability, to be at the Charge
of Experiments, looked upon these nicer Enquiries so difficult and uncertain,
how easily may I be exensed, if I as indeed I did mainly gave my Self to the
diligent Observation of the eff^cts of these Waters, some of which you will
find faithfully communicated, under several Head of of Diseases, in the
following Papers, to which many more Particulars might have been added, had it
not been for fear of Swelling the Volume too large a Bulk, it being intended
only as a Pocket Companion, for those that need (or would make Trial of the
Bath and Bath-Waters.

If this be received well, and an Enlargement be thought useful, (if it please
God to continue me Life and Health) I shall not bethink my Pains in doing that
also. But in this (as it is) you will sind of those many Instances, that may be
given of great Recoveries obtained here, by the use of these Waters, under my
Directions, even when great Means and long Methods of Physic have failed.

If any in the same or like Cases, are encouraged by this to come hither, and
take the same course which others havr done, and find the same Advantage by it,
I shall think it a sufficient Compensation, for all the Trouble and Pains have
been a, in looking up my old sca^^er'd Papers, of many Years standing.

Such as it is, accept it, as it is meant and designed, an Advantage to those
that need it, and a Direction to the Sick and Lame. If any one read it out of
Curiosity, and think the Descriptions of the Distempers I give instances of, be
not acurate enough; let it be remembered, that I have already said, that this is
done for the information of Patients, and not Physicians, and for the
Satisfaction of the Necessities of the former, and not the Nicities of the
latter. And I have (for that Reason) chosen such Terms as are most vulgarly
known, and commonly used, and where I have been necessitated to use a Term of
Art, or a less known Expression (which is not often) I have endeavored to
explain it so, a^ every ordinary Apprehension, may know what is meant by it.

Some perhaps, into whose Hands this may come, may wonder that it was not
written in a Language, more becoming the Education I have prentended to. Though
I have out lived my English Teeth, yet I have not (as old as I am quite forgot
my Latin Tongue, and had I designed it for Foreigners, or Scholars only, it
might have spoken that Language. But this was, and is intended, for the
Information of those that know no other then what their Mothers taught them.
And for the Advantage of that fair Sex, that usually are skilled in but one
Tongue, and whose greatest Honor it is, to use that well.

If this plain English may be of Advantage to either, or both, (but especially
to the latter) I shall not repent me, though others Censure it, of the Trouble
in Writing, nor will they, I hope, of theirs in Reading it, at least I shall
satisfy my Self in the Presumption, that both will kindly accept the candid
Intentions of

Their very Faithful Servant, Rob. Pierce.

The Contents.
That the Reader may the more easily turn to any Chapter or Disease. I have
added this short Direction to both.
BOOK I. Of Bathing.
CHapter I. Of Wandering Pains. Page 1 Chap. II. Fixed Pains Sciatica. p. 15
Chap. III. -- in the Arm. p. 41 Chap. IV. Numbness and Palsy. p. 58 Chap. V.
After the Colic. p. 83 Chap. VI. Scorbutical Palsy. p. 101 Vertibrae
started. p. 122 Chorea St. Viti. p. 133 Quarterly Palsy. p. 136
Chap. VII. Lameness from Accidents. p. 138 After Mortifications. p. 139
Strains. p. 141 White Swellings. p. 152 Poison. p. 151 Mercurial Ointments. p.
15^ Wounds and Ulcers. p. 159 Bruises and Falls. p. 162 The Gout. p. 16^
Chap. VIII. Cutaneous Diseases. p. 171 King Blaudud's Story. p. 172
Chap. IX. Women's Diseases. p. 187 Green Sickness. p. 188 Barrenness. p. 195
Conception removed. p. 198 Miscarrying. p. 2^1 Women with Child may Bathe.
p.20^ Uterine Fluors. p. 214
Chap. X. Childrens Diseases. p. 222 Chap. XI. The use of the Pump. p. 237
Bath-Mudd. p. 248

BOOK II. Of Drinking.
CHap. I. Of Water-Drinking in general. ibid Chap. II. Observations in Pectoral
Caeses, p. 263 Chap. III. Palpitation of the Heart. p. 287 Chap. IV. The
Dropsy. p. 296 Chap. V. The Diabetes. p. 310 Chap. VI. Caechexies. p. 322
Chap. VII. Diseases of the Stomach. p. 342 Chap. VIII. Of the Urinary Passages.
p. 363 1. Sharpness of Urine. p. 364 2. Stone and Gravil. p. 367 3. Bloody
Water. p. 374 4. Unlcers. etc. p. 376 5. Old Gonorrhaeas. p. 380

map of Bath THE CITY OF BATH
Places Observed by Letters A St James Church B the Abbey Church C St Michaels
Church D the Town Prison E the Free School F the Kings Bath G the Queens Bath H
the Hot Bath I the Cross Bath K St Katherines Hospital L St John's Hospital M
Bridivel and Bridivel Lane N Vicarage Lane O Cock Lane V. the Meeting house P
Nowhere Lane Q Gascoin's Tower W. Bear Corner R the Cock Pit S Guild Hall T St
John's Chapel





Bath Memoirs. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of Wandering Pains.
ONE of the Anglo-Saxon Names by which this ancient City was formerly called,
was ACKMANCHESTER, or the City of Aches and Lame People, from the Concourse of
such Infirm Persons, that came hither in Bathing Seasons. Were it to have a new
Name given it now, upon the same consideration, it might be called
CRIPPLE-TOWN; as Cripple-Gate was from the Cripples that used to lie there
begging.

As there has been every Year since, so that year, especially, that I came
first hither, many, it not most, of those that came to use the Bath, were for
Aches and Pains in several parts; and that which I was first, and most
concerned in, was the Arthritis vaga Scorbutica, which Gregory Horstius says
the West-Phalians and Fryseans call DIE VAREN, and LOPEN DIE VAREN, which my
good Friend, Dr. John Northly, of Exeter, (who has lived in those Parts, and
understands the German Tongue) tells me that in their Idiom signifies the
GRIEF, the LEAPING GRIEF: In the West Country they call it the Wind-Gout, and
in some Places the Joynt-Ague.

One of those Scorbutical Symptoms, which my Quartan left upon me, (as I
mentioned in the Preface) was this Wandering Pain; together with a Spontaneous
Lassitude, and a Ca^he^tick Habit of Body, and sometimes a Swelling, and a dull
Pain, with some Spots on my Legs. Of this sort of Infirm Persons, (and indeed
those that had these Symptoms, in far greater degree than I had them) many then
came to the Bath, and some were under my Care; I therefore begin with Aches and
Pains in the Limbs, and first of those that are Wandering, Transient; and
Uncertain, afterward of those that were settled, and fixed in any one part.

OBSERVATION I.
Amongst those, I may very well begin with my self, (the first Patient that
ever I ^ad.) It goes ill with a Physician when he must exercise his Patience,
in bearing his ^wn Illness, instead of employing his Care and Skill about
Patients, to endeavor to ^ecover theirs.

But this was my Case then; I had sometimes a Pain in my Right Hip, Thigh, Knee
and Ancle, which would soon move to my Left Shoulder and Arm; in both so acute,
as ^o render them for the time almost useless; (...) had a dull, heavy, and
well-nigh constant Pain in my Legs, with a little Swelling, and small Spots,
etc.

After due Preparation, by Purging and Bleeding, and for a time, renewing the
Opening Course I mentioned in the Preface, I Bathed for this, at Spring and
Fall, seldom oftener than three times a Week, and not at all in the Summer, not
being able to bear the Heat of both (the Bath and Season too) without excessive
F^intness: I used a Decoction of Sarsa and China, Lignum, Lentiscinum, with
Cephalicks, Neureoticks, and Antiscorbuticks, and a Sacculus for a Diet-Drink,
of the same Ingredients. The Waters I used at first, no more than would quench,
or prevent a Thirst, in, and after Bathing, nor so often, nor so much as others
do, they seldom passing with me without the help of Pills; and when they did
not pass well, they left Superfluous Moistures, which increased in me Rheums
and Catarrhs, to which I was always subject from my Infancy: Yet in the
Intervals of Bathing then; and Spring and Fall since, (before Business comes
in, to interrupt my Attendance on them) I yet drink them for some time, and
bathe also for prevention.

So that to God's Blessing on both, and an orderly Course in Diet, and
Medicines, and the good Air upon the Neighboring Hills, must I impute the
Recovery which I had, and that was not inconsiderable; for within a year or two
after my first settling here, I was engaged in a Riding Practice almost all the
Country about, which I bore (...) though oftentimes wet and weary) beyond
Expectation. The Air and Exercise in Riding contributing I think, greatly to
the Confirmation of that measure of Health, which the Bath and Waters had
restored me to; so that I had little or nothing left of the Symptoms above
mentioned, unless sometimes upon Accidents, in taking Cold. And now whilst I
write this, (which is in my 74th. Year) I bless God I have neither constant
Cough, Asthma, Gout, Stone or Propsie, nor any Remainder of the Scurvy, but
want of Teeth.

But, at this time of day, it is not to be expected, it should long continue so
with me; Young Folks may die, but old Folks must die. May I provide for the
worst, the best will help it self; the Will of God be done, by, and on, me, and
mine.

OBSERVE. II.
Mrs. Score, aged 42 (from Linton, near Porlocke, upon the edge of Devonshire)
came to the Bath in May, 1654. She complained of Wandering Pains all over her,
from Head to Foot, occasioned (as I judged) by Indigestion in her Stomach, and
long continued Obstructions; she was withal Hysteric, and Scorbutical: After
previous Purgings she entered upon Bathing, and drank of the Water in the Bath;
at other times she took of a Bocket of Sarsa, Lignum-Lantiscinum, Sassaphras,
the Opening Roots, Hysteric and Neureotick, Herbs, Seeds and Flowers, etc.
gently purging once a Week. She continued this Course a Month or five Weeks,
when (being considerably freed from the Pains she complained of) she returned
home, with Directions for a peculiar Diet, and Physic, amongst which was a
Sacculus (to be hung in a Barrel of Beer) consisting of Aperitives,
Antiscorbuticks, and Hystericks; by which means she past the following Winter
much more at ease than formerly (for she had been for some Years before subject
to this Illness.) She came hither again the next Summer, and (if I remember
well) some Years following, to continue, and preserve the Ease, Health and
Strength which she got the first year, till at length, being confirmed in a
perfect Recovery, she gave over her coming any more to the Bath.

OBSERVE. III.
William Hedges, a Farmer, of Hinton St. George, in the County of Somerset,
about 50 Years of age, being greatly afflicted with these vagrant Pains, and
also highly Scorbutical (insomuch that his Disease might very well deserve that
barbarous name of Gingipedium) his Gums being flaccid, his Teeth loose, and
ready to drop out, his Breath fetid, and his Legs and Feet not only pained and
swelled, but the Joints relaxed, loose, and useless withal; upon them many
black, yellow, and blue Spots, very large, from Knees to Toes. This helpless
Man, after some Months (if not Years) trial of other means in the Country, was
at ^ength brought to the Bath, in June, 54. And presently (as is the custom of
those that look upon the Baths as a Pool of Bethesda, that cures by Miracle,
(as many of higher quality, and more ingenious Education than this honest
Countryman was, have done, and yet frequently do) was put into the Bath,
without Advice, or Preparation: Upon which, finding some of his Symptoms to
increase, rather than (what he expected) to abate; I was at length called in,
and supplied (what had been before omitted) by duly preparing him, and
prescribing Antiscorbut ck Alteratives, with an orderly course of bathing, by
which, in a Fortnight or three Weeks time, having obtained Ease, and some
Strength, his Patience would hold out no longer, (though the sault was laid upon
the Purse) but home he would go, and did, with Directions for Antiscorbutick
Juices, to be put in all the Beer he drank, and Gargarisms for his Gums and
Teeth. And though this Man did very well, and (for ought I ever heard) continued
so, yet may it be here observed (and let it be once for all) what I have many
Instances of; That the Impatience and Parcimony of sick Persons, have hindered
as many great and good Cures as the Bath, and best Methods of Physic have ever
performed; so that the French may be very well excused that say of the English,
that they are guilty of two great Errors in reference to their Health; They do
not own themselves sick soon enough; and they think themselves well too soon.

OBSERVE. IV.
Mrs. Fane Chase, (of Yartee, beyond Charde, upon the Borders of Devon and
Dorsetshire, but in the County of Somerset) a Maiden Gentlewoman, of an ancient
Family of that name, aged about 24 or 25 Years, was seized about Michaelmas,
1655. with sharp Pains in her Joints only, which ran from place to place, by
quick and sudden Removes; sometimes Inflaming, sometimes Swelling, always
severely paining the part it moved into; this Illness held great part of the
Winter, and so much enfeebled her Limbs that she was not able to go, or stand
upright; for which Lameness of hers she was brought to the Bath the Spring
following, to wit, April 56. She had (besides these Infirmities in her Limbs)
several other Scorbutical Symptoms, such as a Spontaneous Lassitude, want of
Appetite and Digestion, Palpitation of the Heart, and sometimes the Returns of
those Arthritick Pa^^s, but not altogether so violently, or frequently as at
the first Seizure.

After convenient Preparation she was pe^nitted to bathe, and in bathing we
were fo^^ed to support her with Cordials, her Spirits being very low, and her
Strength exhausted; nor could she bear a temperate Bath, at first, more than
twice a Week, or every other day: But by degrees she grew stronger and
stronger, and greatly more at ^ase; so that in six Weeks or two Months time she
got considerable Strength and Stomach, and the Tumors on her Joints began to
subside; the Palpitation of the Heart remitted, and she was (in all
particulars) so well recovered, that she that came hither in a Litter, went
home on Horseback, and continued the Autumn and Winter following free from a
Relapse; but came again (whether the next, or second Summer following, I cannot
well remember) to confirm what she had got the first Season.

This Gentlewoman at her first coming drank the Waters no otherwise than to
quench Thirst in the Bath, and sometimes ^o keep soluble; her Case then
requiring rather Cordials, to which being accustomed the Waters were not so
agreeable; a^ the second coming she drank them more freely.

She continued after this, many Years very well, and free from this painful
Distemper; taking Spring and Fall such things as I then ordered for her, which
were some gentle Purgatives, Antiarthriticks, Antiscorbuticks, and Cardiacks.

OBSERVE. V.
Mrs. Green, of Stratford, upon Avon in the County of Warwick, aged 40 Years
came to the Bath in July, 1677. She had in her younger days (when about 19 or
20) a Wandering Scorbutical Gout; of which (after a great deal of Pain and
Trouble) she was recovered, and married, and had four Children; but in January,
167^. was again seized with the same Distemper, which at first tortured her
between the Shoulders, upon the upper Vertibrae of the Back, and those of the
Neck; whilst it stuck there, upon rising up (or any ways stirring) she would be
very faint, ready to swoon away; after it had thus severely afflicted her there
for a time, (and perhaps upon the use of outward Applications) it dispersed
into all her Limbs, one after another, and was exceedingly painful where ever
it went. This stubborn Distemper yielding to no Re^edies in four or five Months
time, she at ^^ngth came hither at the time abovesaid, and was commended to my
Direction, in p^eparing her for, and advising her in, the ^^se of the Bath and
Waters.

What she mostly then complained of ^as Weakness, as well as Pain, in Hipps,
^hees, and Soals of her Feet, which disabled her from standing long together,
much less was she able to walk. After one or two Days rest (her Journey having
not a little disordered her) I prepared her with a gentle purging Potion; after
that put her upon taking of an easy Pill (which I usually gave in those
Arthritick Cases) over Night, and drinking the Bath Waters next Morning, which
she continued to do three or four Days, or a Week.

Being thus prepared she was put into the Cross-Bath, as the more temperate, it
being then a very hot season. Thus she continued drinking and bathing by turns
for five or six Weeks, and returned home (at ease, and able to walk
considerably well) with some familiar Directions how to manage her self, to
prevent another Return of this Illness, which I never heard but that she still
kept free from.

OBSERVE. VI.
Mrs. Martha Greswold, aged 23 Years, (from Solyhill, in Warwickshire, a comely
Gentlewoman, and of excellent Humor) was brought hither in May, 1663. so weak
as not able to use Hand nor Foot, nor so much as to lift her Hand to her Head,
but was carried from place to place, and lifted into, and out of, her Bed. Her
Head also was concerned in this her general Weakness; she apprehended every
thing that was said to her, but remembered little or nothing.

At 13 Years of Age, by lying on the Ground, in, or soon after a
Scarlet-Feaver, she had first a Rheumatism, but not so painful as at this
second Seizure; yet then it left a great Stiffness at her Joints. At 17 Years
of age she had the Green Sickness, and being obstructed (yet having hot and
sharp Blood) frequently blead at Nose; in other respects continued well till
this second Seizure, which happened from home at Chester. After taking cold,
this Wandering, Arthritick Pain took first one Knee, after a while the other,
and so leaped from Joint to Joint till it had gone over all her Limbs. Dr.
Burlace was her Physician there at that time, who caused her to be let Blood,
Purged, Fomented, Sweated, etc. after which (at eleven Weeks end) he dismissed
her, and gave her advice to come to the Bath, (which after a whiles stay at
home) with no small difficulty, she did, in the Condition above described.

Her Weakness first required Cordials, which were ordered for her; afterward I
gave her Antiscorbuticks, Chalybeats, Cephalicks, etc. with necessary
Preparatives for drinking the Waters, and bathing; by which, in little more
than a Weeks time she had Ease, and by degrees, got Strength also, though under
the fatigues of bathing and pumping, and sometimes purging; insomuch, that at
seven Weeks end she rode homewards 40 Miles the first day, and that after ten a
Clock.

She got home well, and kept free from this Distemper another ten Years, within
which time she was married to a Sergeant at Law, (Serjt. Flint, near Coventry)
and was quickly with Child, but the Sergeant her Husband died within twelve
Months.

She has since that time had (at some Years distances) very severe Fits of the
Gout, by which her Fingers and Toes have been distorted, and the Joints have
contracted Nodes: for which she has often come hither to drink these Waters,
and to bath^ sometimes, by which she always has Respite and Advantage: She was
here last Summer, then aged 53.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mrs Kent, of the Devises, in the County of Wilts, Wise to Mr. Thomas Kent, the
Town Clerk, and one of the Masters (as they there term them) of the
Corporation, aged 49; she came to the Bath in September, 1655. having long
before been greatly afflicted with this Wandering Scorbutical Gout. After due
Preparation she bathed, the Pains being then the most urging Symptom: And
because she had formerly been troubled with Heats in her Back, and Gravel, and
therefore feared the Stone in the Kidneys: A cooling Liniment was ordered for
the Reins, to be gently rubbed in before she entered the Bath: In bathing she
drank of a Bocket of the Woods, Sarsa, China, Hermodactyls, etc. with
Antiarthriticks, and Antiscorbuticks. The first Week or ten Days gave her Ease;
the rest of her Month, (for so long she stayed, and no more) gave her
considerable Strength, and great Hopes of a perfect Recovery, which a like
Direction home for a Diet-Drink, and some easy Alteratives, and a good Diet,
consummated, and continued to her dying day, which was many Years after: She
drank little of the Waters, having some aversion to them.

OBSERVE. VIII.
Mrs. Mary Huntly, an unmarry'd Lady, near 30 Years of Age, came to the Bath in
May, 1656. in much like Case, with some of the former, chiefly that of Mrs.
Chase, only in this different (if I well remember) that with the Wandering
Arthritick Pains, she had Heats and Pimples in her Face; a Cough, and Shortness
of Breath, and was greatly obstructed: All which required a longer time of
Preparation, and more drinking of the Waters, but at last she was permitted to
Bathe, which had on her the desired Success.

She endured it better, and bore a longer Stay at a time, and oftener bathing
than Mrs. Chase could do, and therefore spent here somewhat less time; but had
altogether as much advantage, or more; and was returned home with like
Directions, only by reason of the heat of her Liver, I ordered her the more
cooling Antiscorbuticks, Pectorals, and Hepaticks; by which means she kept free
from a Relapse, and (for ought I ever heard to the contrary) remained well
several Years after.

Many more Instances might be given, but these may suffice.

Of late these kind of Illnesses have gone under the name of Rheumatisms; but
whatever they are called, all remaining Pains and Weaknesses after (either
this, or the Gout) have certainly been recovered by moderate and regular
Bathing, and Relapses have been prevented by Drink^ng these Waters.

CHAP. II. Of Fixed Tains.
HAving given some Instances of the cure of Wandering and Erratick Pains in the
Limbs, I come now to do the same of Fixed and Settled ones; the chief of which
will easily be allowed to be the Sciatica, (as vulgarly called) or Hip Gout;
the Ach in the Hip, for there is the chief Seat of it, though by consent of Parts
the lower parts of the Back; the Loins, (whence called, when upon both sides,
the Lumbago) the Groin, the Thigh, and outside of the Leg and Foot also have
their share of Pain, and ^re sometimes convulst withal. And here, ^y the way
(for Cattle are subject to this Distemper as well as Men) I think that ^iece of
Beef which the Butchers call the Ach-Bone (which by some is looked upon ^s a
choice piece) is thence denominated, ^art of the Hip-Bone being cut into it.

The Gout in this part is not only as ^uch, if not more painful than that in
^he Hand or Foot, but is usually of longer Continuance, and with more
difficulty r^moved, and has more severe Accidents attending it. It is not so
easily pal^^ated or cured, because affluent sharp Hu^ours, lie deeper upon the
Bone; and thick and large Muscles intervene, and therefore (...) outward
Application can so easily reach (...) as in a less-fleshy part. It is liable
also (...) more, and more afflicting, Accidents; (...) the Matter being long
imprisoned there, ^^rrupts more, grows more Acrimonious, ^^d becomes at length
corrosive, and de^^nerates into a Vitriolick, if not an Arse^^cal Poisonous
Sharpness, which in Process ^f time, penetrates the Bone it self, as ^ell as
the Periostium, as some of the fol^^wing Observations will more than
suffici^ntly demonstrate.

Then again, the too much Moisture ^^ere relaxeth the Ligament, which should
hold in the Head of the Thigh Bone, into the Acetabulum (the hollow of the Hip)
and then by the weight of the Limb it sinks out of its Socket; and when it is
thus sunk, and the lame Person endeavoring to go, and putting stress to it,
it is sometimes struck back into the Buttock, or into the Groin, or to the
Outside; and the Leg i^ shortened, when thus thrust back. Whilst it relaxeth the
Ligament only, that Leg is longer than the other, but weak; when thrust back
amongst the Muscles, it is shorter than the other; and when it is come to that
pass, the Hollow is either sill'd up with a Callus, or (in growing Persons, it
becomes less and less, having nothing to keep it out, and this, while the Roun^
Top of the Thigh Bone increasing in bigness, renders it impossible to be
reduced though some bold (because ignorant) Bone setters have here undertaken it,
to the great Pain and Injury, as well as the Cost of the poor crippled Patient.

Sometimes the Vessels that should convey Nourishment to that Leg are
compressed by the dislocated Bone, and then the Thigh and Leg wither and decay.

In others the conflux of Matter cames a Phlegmon, or Abse^sse, which if at
length it finds a vent, it becomes a F^s^ula, o^ Cavernous Ulcer, (hardly to be
cured, if ^er, if it foul the Bone) or the Matter ^akes to it self a Cystis.

Instances of most of these Cases I shall ^ve you in the following
Observations; ^r (as I promised in the Preface) so I shall ^ve an Account of
what was not, as well (...) what was, cured by the Bath, and Bath ^aters.

OBSERVATION I.
I shall begin with an eminent Personage, and a great Prince in his Country,
^uke Hamilton, recommended to my Care by one, or both, of his Countrymen, Sir
Alexander Fraysier, chief Physician to King Charles the Second, and Dr. Bruce,
(my much honored Friend,) His Grace came hither in the year 1674. in July,
very ^^weell (as he himself termed it) by reason of a Pain in his Hip, which
caused him to go very lame, and disturbed his Rest at Night, and had done so
for many Months before.

Having rested some days after his Jour^^y, and due Preparation made, he
entered the Bath, and sometimes drank the Waters: (...) the Bath, only to
prevent Thirst; when (...) omitted bathing, in larger quantities, expecting
Operation by them, which was mostly by Urine, but somewhat by Stoo^ also. After
a Week or ten Days bathing* his Grace was pumped upon the affected Hip
beginning (as I remember) with 200 strokes and rising 100 at a time, to 7 or
800, o^ a thousand. This course was held on for a Month or five Weeks; in which
time his Grace found considerable Advantage being much more at ease, and able
t^ walk without much favoring that Leg His Grace had afterward, upon new
Col^^ or some other Accidents, a minding of th^illness again, and was here, I
think, twic^ after, at some Years distances, and was a^ length perfectly
recovered.

OBSERVE. II.
Coll. Mildmay, of Essex, aged about five or six and forty, came hither in May
1667. for the same Distemper, but is much worse Circumstances than was my Lord
Duke; for his had been (if I well remember) of longer continuance, and ha^ much
more violent Pain; nor could he move, or suffer himself to be moved from place
to place, without great Complaints* after some days Rest, and due Preparati^^
by Bleeding and Purging; he also bath^ ^^st in the Queen's, and then in the
King's ^^th, and was, in due time, pumpt also. In ^^thing he took a
Sarsa-Drink, and conti^^ed thus to do six Weeks, or two Months. after the last
bathing, to strengthen and ^^mfort the part, there was put on a large Plaster
of Oxycroceum, and Sticticum Para^^lsi, etc. and so returned well recovered.

OBSERVE. III.
Sir John Clobery, of Hampshire, about 40 years of Age, had been a Colonel in
Scotl^nd under General Monk, and was greatly Instrumental with him, in bringing
in King Charles the Second, for which he was greatly respected by him, and
honorably rewarded.

Having undergone great fatigues in that business of Scotland, lying in the
Field in the Snow (which lies long and deep in those Northern Parts) and being
frequently frozen to the Ground (as he himself re^^ted) might probably be
disposed to Aches in his Limbs; but about the thirty-fourth ^ear of his Age, by
lying in a wet Bed, was first seized with a Sciatica, and recovered ^t again,
and held well about three Years; when, in a very hard Winter, the severe ^old
Weather searching his Body, which had been before weakened by the same
Distemper, he was seized by this last, and most tormenting Fit, which held him
two Years. It not only affected both Hips with violent Pain, but hindered the
motion of those Joints; insomuch, that he could not erect his Body, nor go, nor
stand upright, though before a straight and proper Gentleman, as he afterward
was, after his Recovery.

About the latter end of the two Years, which this Distemper held him, and
after the trial of several Means, and Methods for Ease, and for Recovery in
London, where he then lived (in Hatton Garden) he, a^ length, came to the Bath
1666. and was committed to my Care by some of the London Physicians, I cannot
certainly say who, but think it might be Dr. Michlethwait*

He was let Blood as well as Purged (if I well remember) in Preparation for hi^
bathing and pumping, which he followed close for six or eight Weeks, at the end
of which time he went away, not much advantaged for the present, but after two
or three Months was well at ease, upright and straight, as before this Illness.
So true is it, that the Benefits of the Baths appears not always presently, but
some time after they have been used; and therefore needful it is to allow time
for the Expectation of it, and not to be too hasty in the trial of other ^eans,
but to give Nature leave to work ^^ter such an Assistance. Had this Caution
^een well observed, the Bath had had more ^eputation, and Patients had saved a
great ^cal of Expense and Trouble.

Sir John continued free from this Di^emper to his dying day, which was not
^any Years ago, of a Dropsy, and in the ^xty-third Year of his Age. He was so
^xperienc'd a Soldier, that King James thought himself not safe without his
Assistance in Monmouth's Business, and therefor commanded him to raise a
Regiment, which he did; yet in all that Fatigue had ^o Return of his Sciatica.

Many of the Particulars of this case I (...) we to the favor of his own Lady,
(yet living) and to my Lady Noell his youngest Daughter.

OBSERVE. IV.
William, Lord Viscount Stafford, (of whom mention is made in the Preface to
these Observations) was affected in both Hips, and in the Lumbal Muscles also;
and therefore his Distemper might well be called a Double Sciatica, or Lumbago.

Though Mr. Guydott, in both this Books, (the English and Latin one) calls it a
Palsy, which he never had, nor any thing like it; nor is this the only
Mistake, and Untruth, in those Books: So inconvenient it is to print things
upon the relation of Chair-men and Bath-Guides, and to prosecute Malice and
Envy rather than Truth.

His Lordship came first hither in July, 1668. but stayed not then past five or
si^ Week, and lodged by, (and bathed only in the Cross Bath.

Amongst many other questions his Lordship asked me (when he came to my House*
and from my Gallery viewed the King's Bath) one was, what we did with the Baths
at Winter? I returned to his Lordship. That we of the City had then only
Leisure to use them our selves. If they may be used in Winter, (said my Lord)
with the same Efficacy and Safety, as in Summer, I will be here in Winter, if
you will let me have a Lodging near this Gallery, that goes down into the Bath;
which I promised his Lordship he should have, but did not then think he spoke
in earnest. His Lordship received some advantage by what he did then at the
Cross-Bath, and went hence about the end of August into Glocestershire, where
(in Right of his Lady, who was Daughter and Heiress to the chief of the Family
of the ^^eat Stafford, once Duke of Buckingham) (...) had an Estate; and from
thence into ^^ropshire, where he had an Estate of his ^wn.

Returning about the middle of October ^y Inglesfield, the Lord Marquess of
Winche^^ers, (who married his Lordship's eldest ^aughter) and there finding
(upon the ^pproach of Winter) his Pains renewing, came directly hither, without
going to London, and arrived here the 4th. of November; but so ill, and (by
Fits) so violently pained, that he would cry out in the Night, ^o the
Disturbance not only of the same House, but the next Neighbors also, and
thought nothing eased him more than rising out of his Bed, and walking the
Chamber; (so far was he from having a Palsy.)

Having found Ease the time before, he soon entered upon bathing again, which
the did either in the King's- Bath, or in a Tub, (which was provided purposely)
at least four days in a Week: When the (Weather was calm, or any way
tolerable, his Lordship would not be kept out of the Bath; when it was stormy
and windy, he bathed in his Tub (as has been mentioned in the Preface.) His
Lordship was that year in the King's- Bath, on Childermas-eve, and in all that
time had not so much as a Cold; but it rendered him very tender, insomuch, that
he was very sensible of Cold, the next hard Frost, which happened that year to
be very severe about Twelf-tide; yet he weathered it very well by a more than
ordinary Care of himself, and daily got Ground of his Pains and Weaknesses, and
about the middle of February went for London, and never had such violent Pains
afterward.

His Lordship came frequently afterward to the Bath, but more to continue the
advantage he then received, than upon any new emergent necessity, and sometimes
drank the Waters, and sometimes bathed; and sometimes both, and sometimes
neither, but barely for his diversion.

In his violent Pains I was forced to give him Anodynes: I would willingly have
confined him to a Pill (for in that form I directed it) once in two or three
Nights; but he having once found the advantage of it, he would not be kept to
that Allowance, but would take it (as I then thought) much too often. It was a
peculiar Preparation of Opium, which I ordered my Apothecary to make, and his
Lordship was very earnest to see the Preparation of the Mass, and it was
granted him; but he had clancularly provided a Silver Box, (like a small
Tobacco Box) which held more than an Dunce, and filled this Box out of the
Mass, and carried it always about him; pretend^ng that he might not get it made
so well ^lsewhere, and that he would use it only when gone from hence. But (as
his Lordship confessed afterward, when he was recovered) he did often
(sometimes more than once in a Night) aim at the ^igness of a Pill (such as was
at first given him) and take it, when not so much ^s his Page knew of it; which
indeed made me ever after bolder in giving Opiats, being, perhaps, before too
timorous in prescribing such Medicines, and I mention it here that this
instance may lessen the dread that most People have, of giving or taking sleepy
Medicines. It is too publicly known (if it had pleased God to have had it
otherwise) how well his Lord-ship was afterward, to the time of his Death.

OBSERVE. V.
Robert Grierson, Esquire a hopeful young Gentleman, aged Eighteen Years, out of
the Kingdom of Scotland, was sent hither for a Sciatica about the beginning of
October, 1666. after all Ways and Means had been tried in his own Country, both
by Physicians and Chyrurgeons, and I think by some Bonesetters too; for (by
reason of the Relaxation of the Ligament that holds in the Head of the
Thigh Bone, into the Cup of the Hip) that Joint was dislocate, and probably had
been long before he was put upon this tedious Journey from Scotland to the Bath.

He had most exquisite Pain, upon the least stirring of him, especially when he
was lifted into, and out of his Litter, or his Bed. He was a great while upon
the way, (three Weeks or a Month) being able to endure but very short Journeys.
When he came hither, which was late in the Year, as has been said, besides his
weakness from the long continued Pains, and Want of Rest, and perhaps from
frequent taking Colds in his Journey (and it may be before) he had a
consumptive Cough, and a Hectical Indisposition; raising a very fowl Phlegm,
heavy and discolored, insomuch, that he was in no wise fit to be presently put
into the Bath, if his other Circumstances would have permitted it. He was
forced therefore to rest a Week or more before we durst attempt it (which his
Uncle that came with him, and his Tutor, and Chaplain, were very hasty, and
earnest for, coming, as they pleaded, purposely for it:) And when it was
attempted, it was with great difficulty; laying him upon a kind of a Cradle,
bottomed with Girse-web, letting it down, by degrees, into the Bath; and even
thus it was not without great Pain to him, and Trouble to his Attendants; and
this was done but six or seven times, before Winter came on so far, and his
Pectoral Distemper so much increased, that we were forced to give it over, and
apply our selves wholly to the Consumption, and Hectic, and inconsider the
Sciatica; for the former threatened his Life, the latter but a Limb; but all
that was attempted, signified not, for in February following he died Tabid.

Upon the opening of him (for he was Embalmed, wrapped in Cerecloths; those
about him knowing no other, but that his Corpse was to be carried back into
Scotland to be interred there) it manifestly appeared that the decay of his
Lungs, was the cause of his death. At length order came to bury him here, which
was accordingly done, in the Church of St. Peter and Paul, and a Stone laid
upon him; which little Circumstances I mention, because what I chiefly describe
this Case for appeared fourteen Years after, when the Sexton opening his Grave;
to interr another, I happened to be walking in the Church, and reproved him for
uncovering, this Corpse so soon; but he defended hismell by saying, That Ground
would consume a Corpse in less time, which proved very true, for there was not
so much as a Hands-breadth left together whole of the Cerecloth, and nothing at
all of the Flesh. Observing the Bones, I took notice, at a distance, of a
manifest difference in their color; all of them, except those of the lame Hip
and Leg, being as white and as smooth, as if prepared for a Scelliton, that of
the infirm side was shorter by some Inches than the other, and of a dark brown
color, toward a blackish, which excited in me a Curiosity to take a more
exact notice of them; and looking upon them more narrowly, I found them
carious, eaten in, to a considerable depth, and those erosions as close one to
another, as they could stand by each other, so that it looked like a
Honeycomb, only the eroded Cavities were not so regular.

These things I mention, not only in performance of my Promise in the Preface,
(not to omit unsuccessful Trials of the Bath) but that it may be also observed
and considered, that such Distempers as these in growing Persons, hinder the
Increase even of the most solid Parts; and that the matter that causes them,
degenerates even into the most deleterious Cor^sives; Oil of Vitriol, or
Aquafortis, could ^ave done no more to those Bones, than ^^e Morbifick Matter,
that caused the Sciati^^, had done.

OBSERVE. VI.
Another Instance, very like this, (and in some particulars, more instructive)
was that of Sir Thomas Malevorer, with whom Dr. Bynard and I were jointly
concerned, here at the Bath; (but neither of us before he came hither.)

He was brought hither in July, 1687. very weak and ill, as well as lame;
swelled from Head to Foot, especially on the lame side. He was Stomachless,
nautiated every thing they offered him to eat, and what was forced down was
usually returned again by Vomit.

He could not stand upright, much less attempt to go; for he could put no
Stress to the Left Leg, nor much to the Right; and when lifted by others, was
ready to faint away; which Circumstances rendered it very difficult to put him
into, or take him but of the Bath; which (after two or three Trials) we were
forced to give over, and ^o support him with Cordials.

Long before he came hither, he had had the Advice and Assistance, of both
Physicians and Chyrurgeons, who still treated him as in a Sciatica; though we
were informed, that the beginning of his Illness was from a fall from off his
Horse, in Hunting, and then probably received a Bruise on his left Hip, to
which fell a Flux of Humor., and (having an ill habit of Body before) they
became sharp and virulent, as appeared afterward.

They had tried all Methods and Means, even to Salivation it self; and at
length (as the last Remedy, and as is too usual^ sent him to the Bath; but
under so ill Circumstances, that it was no wonder tha^ whatever was done for
him took no place, all being to little, or no purpose; for after a Fortnights
painful languishing he died, about the beginning of August.

His Body was opened the same Night, there being present at the Dissection, Sir
Richard Malevorer, his Brother, and Heir; Dr. Baynard my self, and Mr. Chapman,
his Apothecary: In the Corpse were these Observables.

1. Outwardly, at the first view, the lower part of the Abdomen, the Inguina,
Scrotum, and Left Hip, where his all began^ appeared not only greatly tumify'd
(as were ^^th the Legs and Thighs) but discolour^^, black and bluish, and clear
Bladders ri^^ upon those parts (certain signs of Morti^^ation) nay* the whole
Abdomen was spha^^lated. 2. The lower Region being laid open, ^^ere were no
Remainders of the Omen^^m. 3. The Stomach and Guts (especially the ^^lon and
Ileon) flaccid and thin as Paper, and in some places discolored. 4. The Liver
large, livid, and rotten. 5. The Spleen small, and no sounder than the Liver.
6. The Right Kidney large, loose and rotten; the Left indifferently sound. 7.
But what was most observable, and to our present purpose, was, the Musculus
^soas was totally absum'd to its common Coat; within which was (or perhaps
rather the Matter had made to it self a large strong Cystis) such a suppurated
Abscesse, as well nigh filled the Cavity of the Left ^ide, near as high as the
Spleen; which at ^^rst view looked of the color of an un^oyl'd Lobster; and
when opened (nor ^id it easily yield to the Knife) there spout^d out at first
some Quarts (two or three ^^s we judged) of a Whea^^ faetid Matter, (...) hich
was followed by a Cheesy Curd, as in a Steatoma; of which Matter there lay also
between the Muscles of the Left Thigh, almost to the Knee, and close upon the
Bone, which Matter was of that Corrosive Sharpness and Virulency, that it had
eaten off more than the Cartilaginous part of the Head of the Os Femoris, with
its Ligament, and Acetabulum, and Coxa; so that there appeared nothing to hold
them together, after the Matter of the Abscesse was discharged; and what
remained of the Thigh Bone, (at least the upper part of it) was all carious and
eaten into Holes, as is described in Mr. Grierson's Case.
In the middle Region;

1. The Diaphragma was black, thin and rotten. 2. The Heart small, and flaccid,
and without any Water in the Pericardium. 3. The Lungs large, but discolored,
and grown (mostly on the Left Side) to the Pleura.
In short, both the middle and lower Region, Scrotum and all, were one entire
Sphacelation, and Gangrene.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mrs. Boswell, a comely young Gentlewoman, newly married, about 20 Years of
age; she was Daughter to Serjc. Trynder, (of Oxfordshire by Birth, but lived
mostly in London) by taking Cold, was seized with a Pain first in the outside
of her Left Leg, afterward in the Hip of the same side, and thence round her
Back, to the other side, and was violently pained in both; she was contracted,
and bowed together, not able to stand or sit upright, or lie straight ^in her
Bed. She was carried from place to place in Arms, and that not without frequent
Complaints of twinging Pains.

She had tried all sorts of Means, to give Ease, and remove the Distemper, by
the advice both of Physicians and Chyrurgions (and I was told, that Salivation
also was attempted) but all in vain: She was brought hither in April, 1687. and
stayed till the end of June, or the beginning of July; in which time she was
first (in preparation to her bathing) let Blood, Vomited and Purged; and whilst
she bathed ^for alteration) took a Bocket of the Woods, Sarsa, China,
Hermodactyls, Chamepytheos, etc.

She had so accustomed he self to Anodynes (for present ease) that she could
not quickly be taken off from them, having taken to 30, and 40 Drops at a time,
of ^^quid Laudanum, and that twice or thrice four and twenty Hours. I at length
pre^^vail'd with her (though with difficulty) (...) lessen the Doses, and not
take them so often, and this was done by degrees.

Whither it was by the violence of th^^ Pain, or the too frequent use of these
S^^pifactive Medicines, or any former Inclination to Hysteric Fits, it was not
ve^^ appa^ent; but she had (every now and then) very severe ones, not much sh^^
of Epileptick Fits: She bore moderate bathing well enough, and was pumped upon
tho^^ parts, where the pain afflicted her most.

This course in a Month or two's time gave her so much Ease, that she was
co^^tent to be confined to her Anodyne Med^cine, but every other, or every
third Nigh^^ and could put some stress upon her Legs and lie straight in her
Bed. Being th^^ considerably advantaged, and the heat (...) the year coming on,
she returned home and there, not only continued what Bench she had got, but in
some measure improv it, and past the following Winter without great relapses;
but was (by Fits) mo^^ or less pained and weakened in her lo^^ Limbs; and
therefore came hither the ^^cond time, in May or June, the next ye^^ and staid
seven or eight Weeks, in wh^^ time she perfected what she had before (...) ^^n;
and not long after (if not whilst she as here) proved with Child.

I visited her in London, in April, 1689. ^^d found her very well, and Mother
of a ^^sty Son. She continues yet so, I think; ^^r in December, 1694. whilst I
was collect^^^g these Observations, my Apothecary, Mr. ^hapman, being in
London, was to wait upon her from me, and gave me that Account ^hen he came
home; and that she ascribes ^^r being so well to what she did at the ^ath.

OBSERVE. VIII.
The Lady Dowager Brook, (Mother to ^he present Lord Brook, and Sister to the
^ow Duke of Bedford) some Years before ^er Son Robert, Lord Brook, came to
drink ^hese Waters for his Diabetes; either in Lon^on, or at her House near
Hackney, was seized ^ith a Lumbago, or Double Sciatica; insomuch, that her
Honor not only suffered violent, and long continued Pains, but was contracted,
and drawn together by it, and could neither stand upright, nor extend her self
strait on her Bed.

Her Honor had the Advice of the most Eminent and Learned Physicians, about
Town; as Dr. Michaelthwait, Dr. Weatherly, Dr. Willis, etc. who all (by joint,
or separate Advice) had held her in several Courses of Physic, from the Spring
to September, without considerable Amendment. At length Salivation was
proposed, which her Ladyship utterly refusing, her self first mentioned coming
to the Bath: But this Proposal of her was not approved of by any of the
forementioned Physicians, and fiercely declared against by the last of the
three; insomuch, that when he saw her Ladyship resolved upon it, he told her
plainly it would kill her, and came to take a solemn leave of her, telling her
Ladyship that he should never see her more; and since she would go, contrary to
the Opinions of her Physicians (for none of all that were consulted with,
consented to her coming, bu^ Dr. Stubs) she should blame her self if what he
prognosticated should come to pass; but withal sent a Basket of Medicines from
his own Apothecary, which held near a Peck; and of which her Ladyship never
took an Ounce, and indeed, not much of any other Physic; but (her Pain being
violent, and her lower Limbs almost useless, by reason of Weakness, and
Contraction; and the Winter hastening on) she entered presently upon hathing in
the Cross Bath, and drank sometimes of the Waters. Both which, (...) a few days
time gave her Ease; in the ^^^st week she could stand upright in the ^ath; and
in a Months time could walk her Chamber; and was at length perfectly re^over'd.
I had the Honor to wait upon ^er Ladyship, to advise about the Time and Manner
of her Bathing, and using the Pump, which also she did, as late in the year as
(...) was;) by all she had not only Ease, but ^trength, and returned home well;
past ^^at Winter without a Relapse, and lived many Years after free from that
Distem^er; and died afterward of a Fever at her ^on ( Robert, Lord Brook) his
House at ^remmer.

OBSERVE. IX.
A Smith's Wife, of Cosham, in Wiltshire, by name Simon Hooper, alias Edny)
aged ^2, came hither in April, 1680. for a settled Sciatica; she was not only
violently ^ain'd, but the Hip and upper part of the Thigh were very much
swollen, and that Joint so stiff and tender, that she could not ex^end that
Leg, much less stand upon it, and scarcely suffer it to be touched. However
having been informed that many had been ^here cured of Sciatica's, into the
Bath she would go, and did, more than four or five times; and out of too much
good house wifry, to make haste home, stayed very long at a time, and went in
(some days) twice a day; but instead of easing her pain, and abating the
Swelling, it increased both, and then (and not before) she thought fit to ask
advice; her Husband's Sister (at whose House she lay) having been my Servant, I
was consulted, and Mr. Chapman was to be her. Apothecary, and was afterward
her Chyrurgeon too. At first view I perceived it to be a Phlegmon, and told her
that there was Matter anderneath; and that there would be no discussing of it,
but it must break, which perhaps the bathing might hasten; and the sooner it
was done the better, least (by the long imprisoning of that corrupt Matter) the
Bone should be foul'd; therefore all Means was used to maturate, and open it,
which at length was done by Caustic.

Much Matter was discharged at first, and at every dressing, for a long time
after, two Months and more, but with great Diligence and Care in Dressing, and
a vulnerary Drink, Anodynes, and Paregoricks; (for, by much Pain, long
Watching, and no Stomach; a Cough, and Hectical Indispo^^ion, she was brought
very low, even to a ^^^^^on) she was at length recovered, but the Leg remained
crooked; which by Bathing another Season; and using some mollifying
Applications, and extending it by degrees, it was, it was at length reduced to
its Pristine Straitness and Strength, and she to her Health and Vigor, and had
several Children after; and is yet alive, to testify it.

Such Instances as these might have been multiplied to a very great number,
there being no one Distemper that brings more People to the Bath every year
than this does, and has done ever since I came to live upon this place.

But these few are sufficient to inform those that are thus affected, where to
find a Remedy, if they delay it not too long.

CHAP. III. Of Fixed Pains in the Arm.
IT is not the Hip or Hips, and Loins only; that this sharp Humor exercises
its Tyranny upon, but almost all other parts are liable also to the same
trouble from these Defluxions; particularly the Shoulders and Arms, one or
both, I have observed in several Persons to be severely afflicted by it, and
for which many have come hither for Cure; and by bathing and pumping upon the
part, have received Advantage. Of which, I think it not amiss to give some
particular Instances, and I shall begin with a worthy Prelate.

OBSERVE. I.
The Right Reverend Father in God, the now Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
who (some Years past, when he was Dr. Floyde, and Minister of St. Martin's) had
such a Pain, and Weakness withal, in the Right Shoulder and Arm, that it became
very troublesome to him, and interrupted his Rest, and hindered his Study, and
disenabled him to discharge the Duties of his place, which he always (till thus
hindered) was well known to be assiduous at. He then came to the Bath for it, I
think it was in the year 1679. and received a great deal of Advantage by it,
and continued well of it for ten or twelve Years after; but then returned upon
him (when Bishop of St. Asaph) with greater Violence than before; insomuch that
the constant Pain would scarcely suffer him to take sufficient Rest to support
Nature, and that disordered him all over; the whole Limb not only useless but
burdensome to him. His Lordship had so yielded to that side, by reason of the
Pain and Weakness, and weight of that Arm, that he seemed to be grown crooked
by it, though straight before, and is since his Recovery. That Shoulder was
fallen manifestly lower than the other, and therefore probably the Ligament was
relaxed also. Upon what accident this Relapse came, or whither on a sudden, or
by degrees, and what Prefaces there were to it, I have not had particular
Information.

His Lordship having received Ease and Recovery, as is abovesaid, when first it
afflicted him, he returned to the same Remedy (after the trial of several Means
at home) and came hither in July, 1692. when I had the honor to attend his
Lordship, and to advise in the Use of the Waters, Bath, and Pump; all which his
Lordship used in their turns, and but little inward Means besides the Waters,
only an Electuary, and some gentle things, which his Lordship had been
accustomed to, to keep his Body soluble (for of himself he was very apt to be
Costive, but more upon Bathing.)

By all which his Lordship found great Ease, and some Strength. But an Accident
happening, which called his Lordship away before his Cure was perfected, (for
he stayed but a Month that time) he had still some remaining trouble from that
part all the following Winter. To make Amends for which his Lordship came again
the next Summer, 1693. much sooner in the year than before, in the beginning of
May, and stayed out two full Months, and followed the like course as before,
which perfected what was begun the proceeding Year, and had the wished Success;
perfect Ease, and Use of his Arm, and continued so the Winter following, and
had nothing remaining of his former Complaints; only the Forefinger, and Thumb
of that Hand, had sometimes a little Stupor, or Numbdness upon them.

This Account I had by Mr. Chapman, the Apothecary, December. 30. 1694. who had
it from his Lordship's own Mouth, with an offer to attest the Truth of it,
under his own Hand, if it were thought needful.

OBSERVE. II.
Major Arnot* a Scotsh Gentleman, of the County of Fife (but very well known in
England) came hither in April, 1693. recommended to my Care by Dr. Hacket, a
Physician, in Edinburgh, (to whom I was known only by name the Major was upward
of 60; he complained of a very great Pain and Weakness fram his Left Shoulder
downwards, to his Fingers end. It began to be very severe about eight Months
before he came from home.

As to the occasion of it he thought it might be this. He delighted much in
Hawking, and imputed this Infirmity to his long and often carrying his Hawk
upon that Fist, in all Weathers, and the frequent Colds that he had taken in
the Pursuit of that Game. He had had (as he told me) about the Musculus Biceps
of that Arm, a Swelling as big as an Apple, which was dissipated with
Ointments. Taking Physic for this (with little Advantage, but scattering the
Humor) he had Pain also in his Right Hip, Thigh and Leg: And whether by Cold
in his Journey hither (for he was a considerable time, coming from Scotland to
this place, not being able to bear long Journeys, and sometimes meeting with
very ill weather) or by what other accidents I know not; he had withal a
violent Cough, and discharged much and fowl Spittle; he had little or no
Stomach, and sometimes cast up what he had eaten. He was subject to the Stone,
and had formerly voided much Gravel, and several small Stones; one whilst he
was here.

Making too much haste to be well (as too many do) he went presently into the
Bath, and was ill after it, and (not till then) sent for me.

After due Preparation I put him first upon drinking the Waters, because of the
Nephretick Distemper; and withal to correct the Acrimony of this Defluxion to
his Arm, Hand and Hip, etc. and then permitted him the Bath (to ease his Pain,
and recover Strength in the weakened parts,) but defending the Kidneys with a
cooling Liniment.

He found not quickly a considerable Alteration to the better, but went on
sometimes drinking the Waters, (which after a while, with some Assistances,
past very well with him) and sometimes bathing. At two Months end, or
thereabouts, he went back perfectly recovered, both as to Cough, Stomach and
Sciatica, and had Ease and Strength in, and use of his Arm; looked fresh, and
better in his Countenance; was fuller and fatter much than when he came hither.
Since that time I have not had any Account of him, or from him, but would have
been very glad to have received it, though I had paid Postage for a Letter out
of Scotland,

OBSERVE. III.
Mr. Cherry, (a Gentleman of Maidenhead, belonging to the Law, aged 40, or
more) came hither in August, 1679. the Christmas before, by a fall from his
Horse, he had his Left Shoulder put out of Joint, and after two Days it was
well set; but from that time remained pained and weak, and sometimes numbed; so
that it became not only less useful, but troublesome, and uneasy to him.

After Preparation he was put into the Bath, and after a Week or ten Days
bathing was put under the Pump; all which was continued for about three Weeks
or a Month, and he was well recovered by it, both as to Ease and Strength, and
Use of that Arm and Hand, and yet so continues, I think.

He was here in August, 1691. with a Daughter of his (that came to drink these
Waters by Dr. Brown's Directions) and his Son, and his Son's Wife. He then
assured me that he had continued very well at ease, and had the Use of that Arm
as well as of the other, and ascribed it to what he, at first, did at the Bath

OBSERVE. IV.
In a Case much like this did the Honorable Thomas Coventry, Esquire since (and
now) Lord Coventry, come to the Bath in August, 1684. But his Lordship's Pain
and Weakness in his Arm was after a Fracture, which was well reduced in little
time after the Fall by Mr. Pledwell, of Oxford, the Chyrurgeon, who waited on
him to the Bath.

The Arm and Hand were both swelled, as well as weak, and pained, and all the
Use and Motions of both imperfect, and with Trouble. His Lordship was pleased
to take my Direction and Advice in Preparation for bathing, and using the Pump*
all which his Lordship submitted to, and continued the Use of, for five or six
Weeks.

He bathed near a Month before he used the Pump; first in the Cross-Bath,
(because the more temperate) afterward in the Ho^^ath, (because more
strengthening) both near his Lordship's Lodgings: The Queen's and King's- Baths
are so used, to the same Intentions.

Infine, His Lordship returned home very well recover^d, and so continued,
without coming a second time, which was designed and talked of, (as I was
informed by a Servant of his Lordship's, Mr. Cooks, whose Wife came several
Years following for a Palsy, and found great Advantage by it, and (by turns)
used all the Baths.)

OBSERVE. V.
This next Observation I insert, not altogether so much to show the usefulness
of the Bath, and Pump, in pained and weakened Limbs; but as thinking it
somewhat instructive, in reference to the nature of Defluxions, and perhaps
somewhat directive to their Recovery, at least to a present Alleviation of Pain.

Sarah, the Wife of Robert Pain, an honest Farmer, of the Parish of Hutton,
near Banwell, in Somersetshire, aged 40, or more; in the year 1675. came to the
Bath for a violent Pain and Weakness in her Right Shoulder, Arm and Hand, from
a sharp Defluxion to those parts, from her Head, (as is probable, having,
before that, been often troubled with severe Fits of the Headache, and Rheums
to her Teeth and Jaws.) There appeared no Swelling, and little or no discolor
upon the Parts affected; but for some Months before she came hither, they had
been exceeding painful, both by Day and Night, but chiefly at Night; and in
moist and wet Seasons.

She had used several Applications, such as that Country would afford, and what
her Neighbors could advise, but to little or no purpose, which put her upon a
Journey hither; as soon as she came she would go into the Bath, and (hastening
to be well, as she at least thought) stayed sometimes longer than ordinary in
it, which rather increased, than lessened her Pain, (probably, for want of due
Preparation, the Humors were heated, dilated, and exasperated by it.) Under
this great Trouble and Disappointment, she came to my Wife (who was her Country
woman, born in the same Parish, and whom she knew (when she kept her Father's
House) to make, and give to her Neighbors a white Plaster, in cases of Squats
and Bruises, and Pains in the Limbs) and was importunate with her, to give her
one of those Plasters for her Arm. The Plaster was made of Burgundy-Pitch,
Frankincense, Beeswax, etc. My Wife willing to gratify her Countrywoman, and
to save her what Charges she could, gave her a large one, which covered
Shoulder, Arm, and all, to (or below) the Elbow; telling her withal, that if
she expected Benefit by it, she was not to move it till it sell off of its self.

On she put it, and wore it two or three Days, with some Abatement of the
violent Pain; about the fourth day she comes to her Doctoress, and shows her
the Sleeve of that Arm, as wet, as if it had been dipped in the Bath, and
dropped at her Fingers ends. They being both startled at it, I was called in to
the Consultation; the Plaster being moved up, there appeared no broken Skin,
no sheere Bladders, no discolor, (therefore, probably, no danger of
Mortification) but this sharp Serum forced it self through the Pores of the
Skin, dilated by the Plaster, and attracted from the Bone, and Inward Parts.
The Pain decreased daily upon it, and this Running continued a Week or ten
Days; and when it began to cease running, the Matter crusted upon the part,
half an Inch thick, like a Scabies faeda humida; which Crust was at length got
off, by lomenting it with the Bath-Water, and some Mollifying Cooling
Ointments, and left no Erosion of the Skin at all. It is not to be imagined
what a prodigious quantity of this sharp Ser^m was vented at that part. But
this Discharge not only eased the Pain effectually, but lessened her Headache
also, and Rheums, to which she had been a long while subject to. Some Weakness
was left upon the Arm, but a little whiles moderate bathing recovered that
also; so that she returned home eased, and well, and continued free from this
Symptom as long as she lived, which was many Years after.

OBSERVE. VI.
Mrs. Booreman, (Widow to Dr. Booreman, formerly Minister of Fromeselwood, in
the County of Somerset, and Prebend of Sarum) aged 43. She was Daughter (or
Grandchild) to Sir John Lamb, of Coulston, in Wiltshire. She had been for a
long time highly Scorbutical, and Rheumatical; her Blood Salt, Sharp, Hot and
Thin; an unusual Testimony of which appeared upon her, some Months before she
came hither, (which was in July, 1663.) For having a seemingly slight Ulcer in
her Left Leg, (but of long Continuance, and not easily cicatriz'd, by reason of
the Conflux of sharp Humors to the part) as she was one day walking about her
House, and entertaining some Friends, a Vein opened of it self, in, or near,
the Ulcerated part (possibly the sharp Matter had eroded the Vein and blead
profusely; filled up the Stocking and Shoe, she her self being no way sensible
of it, till the Company that ca^^e to visit her, took notice of it, by the
Blood spilt upon the Floor of the Room.

Upon taking off the Shoe and Stocking, the Blood streamed out as if the Vein
had been opened with a Lancet; so that they found no way to stay it, but by
holding a Finger hard upon it, till a Chyrurgeon (that had had that Ulcer of
hers in Cure, for some considerable time before) was sent for from Salisbury,
(which was two or three Miles distant) who, by opening a Vein in the Arm, to
divert the course, and allay the ferment of the Blood, and by Stipticks
outwardly applied, at length stopped it. From this sharp Blood she had frequent
Fits of the Rheumatism, which at length settled in the Right Shoulder and Arm,
and both became by it very painful, weak, and useless, for which she came (as
is already said) to the Bath.

Bathing she indeed needed, for the Pain and Weakness in her Arm; but the Heat
and Sharpness of the whole Mass of Blood, made me, (to whose Care she was
committed) not easily to consent to it.

And indeed, Complications of Distempers, and Contra Indications are the Puzzle
of Physicians; but the most urging Symptom must be first set upon. She her
self, and some Friends that were with her, were very fierce for bathing, but I
did not agree to it, till by Bleeding, Purging, and Drinking the Waters, and
taking some of the cooler Antiscorbutick Alteratives, she was so prepared for
it, that I thought she might bear (without Prejudice) the Cross-Bath (the most
temperate, and therefore most agreeable to her present Circumstances, at that
season of the year) which Bath she did chiefly use for some considerable time,
with so much Advantage, that she went away cased, and in some measure
strengthened; and, by degrees, perfectly recovered upon it.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mr. Robert Britten, a Londoner, aged 45, having received (some Years before) a
great Bruise in the Right Shoulder, by a Fall out of a Balcony; the part
remained very weak after it; and, in Process of time, a Defluxion of sharp
Humors fell to it, which gave him exquisite Pain, and enfeebled the whole Arm,
much more than the Fall had done.

Many more such Instances might be given upon this Head, but that it would make
what is intended only for a Pocketbook, to be of too great a Bulk.

OBSERVE. VIII. SPINA VENTOSA.
I have seen of these Fixed Pains to be on some part of the Thigh, Leg, Arm,
etc. so small as to be covered with ones Thumb, (as is the usual Saying) but
have caused great Uneasieness, Want of Rest, and Trouble, which have been
removed by pumping, and drinking the Waters between. Some Patients I have had
here for that odd (but stubborn and afflictive) Distemper, which some call by
an odder name, The SPINA VENTOSA; but I cannot say that I have seen very great
Success upon the Use of the Bath, or Bath-Waters in this nice Case.

The name of Spina I like well enough (for the Pain is not unlike that of a
Thorn, strongly forced upon a very sensible part) but for the Ventosa, I like
it not at all; for (if I have considered it well) it sticks too long to be
barely Flatulent, it must probably be more than Wind that is the cause of it.
Perhaps a thin sharp Matter, degenerated into a corrosive Poison, which frets
upon the Periostium, or some Branch of a Nerve; till the Access of some new
Lympha dilutes it, and makes it less, or not at all, corrosive for the present,
and then there is an Intermission (at least an Abatement) of Pain; till it be
exalted anew, and gather Head again, and then another Fit returns: For its
usually has its Paroxysmes, which with some has longer, with others shorter
Intervals; sometimes it is almost constant. If this conjuncture hold, it might
be called Spina Venenosa, instead of Spina-Ventosa.

Four I can remember to have had under my Cognizance in this Condition, that
(after all other means used) came hither to try what the Bath would do for them.

1. Sir Harbottle Grimstone's Lady was one, who had it in one of her Jaws,
toward her Throat. Her Ladyship had some Alleviation of the violent Pain the
first time, which encouraged her to come a second time, and (if I mistake not)
a third time; but I cannot say she was recovered.

2. Mr. Pooley, Minister of Wrinton, in Somersetshire, (but, for this
Distemper's sake, living mostly in London, where he has had the Assistance of
the ablest Physicians and Chyrurgeons, (as well as Mountebunks) and has tried
almost all means for Cure, even to Salivation, and the Actual-Cauterie, but all
to little effect, as I was last Sum^er informed by a very worthy Lady, his
^elation, and my very good Friend, of whom I made enquiry concerning him) ^e
came hither some Years ago, and drank the Waters for a considerable time, and
bathed, and I think pumped too, but with little Success. His was more in the
Roof of his Mouth, toward the Right Side.

3. A third was the chief Apparator belonging to Wells Court, Mr. Morris. He
had it near the upper Jaw, of the Right ^ide; where, at long run, it ulcerated,
and Matter was daily discharged into his Mouth. His Cheek had been opened by
^ncision, in hopes to have made more effectual Applications outwardly, than
could be done inwardly; but the course of it could not be diverted, but the
quitture still ^ssued out into his Mouth.

He at length came hither, and was under my Directions for a Month, or more, ^o
no great purpose; the Pain was somewhat lessened. At length, upon drawing of a
Tooth (which I advised to have done) and drinking these Waters for a long time
together (for after he went from hence he sent for them to Wells, and drank
them there) and using cleansing and healing Lotions, he was perfectly cured.

4. A fourth was a Gentleman, recommended to my Care by a Letter from my very
good Friend, and old Acquintance, Dr. John Lawson, then Treasurer of the
College of Physicians in London, and since that, President.

This Gentleman after some Preparation, both drank the Waters, and bathed; and
was pumped upon that side of the Head, and Face, and Neck, where the violent
Pain used to afflict him, and continued the Use of this means some considerable
time. He had a pretty large Interval (longer than usual) whilst here upon the
place, and using the means; but whether it continued after he was gone hence,
or whether the Pains returned again, I have not had any Account, either from
him, or his Physician, that sent him hither.

CHAP. IV. Of the Dead-Palsie.
HAving in the former Chapters given Instances of most sorts of pained
Patients, that have received Benefit by the Bath, I now come to those that had
little or no Pain, but had a Stupor, Numbness, Deadness, and Uselessness of the
affected parts, (...) though I have known some Paralyticks, that have complained
of Pain, when they could not stir the Limb; and we usually look upon such, as
most likely to receive Benefit, and soonest to have Recovery.) Amongst these
the (...), or half stroke (vulgarly called the Dead Palsy, or Palsy of one
Side) is most frequent, and therefore ^ustly challenges the first place.

Whether it be from Obstruction, or Compression of the Nerves, hindering the
^rradiation of the Animal Spirits, or too much Coldness, damping the Explosion,
or Excess of Moisture relaxing (and consequently hind'ring the Vibration of)
the Nerves? What part of the Nerve is mostly affected, and how? and to what
degrees, when both Sense and Motion is lost, when Sense remains, and Motion is
lost, and e Contra? These nicer Enquiries we (at present) leave to Theorists;
but to be sure in Practice, we find this to be one of the most stubborn
Distempers that we have here to do with, and is longer in curing; and few there
be that have so enlarged a Patience, as to attend this means so many Seasons,
as are requisite for the Recovery of so obstinate a Disease. Many give it over
at once or twice trial, and despair of ever being recovered; whereas, if the
Bath were followed Year after Year, many more might be cured of it than now
there are.

And now I speak of Recovery, I hope it is not expected that I should instance
in many that have no remaining little defect in Speech; Arm, Hand or Leg, (and
by the way I have observed, generally speaking; that the Hand and Fingers, but
chiefly the Thumb, in most Paralyticks, are the last parts that recover to any
considerable degree of Strength, or Motion). It Is not to be expected that the
great Shock the Fit of an Apoplexy makes upon the nice, and curious Structure
of a Humane Body, should presently be set to rights again; (and truly those of
all other Animals, even to the meanest Infect, are not less curiously wrought;
and then what a wonder is it, that any considering Enquirer into Nature should
be indeed an Atheist?)

Such a shake, I say, must needs make great Disorder, where so many small
Cords, Wheels and Pullies, serve for the several motions of every part; so
admirably stupendous, as to make a great Master, and one of the Fathers of our
Faculty, and one, whose Birth and Education was amongst Heathens ( Galen in his
Book, de usu Par^ium) break out into a Hymn (...) the most adorable Wisdom that
contrived them.

No, it is not to be expected, that after such a Concussion, every thing should
be set right again in its place, but that some of those fine Parts (as it is
with a Watch, after a fall to the ground) must be either broken, or put into
great disorder. It is enough (and as much as can be reasonably hoped for) that
a Mute for Stammering Tongue should be made, in the least measure,
intelligible: That a dead Leg should be made again moveable at Will, and able
to support (though totteringly) the Body; that a useless Hand may be made again
fit, and able to carry a Cup, or Spoon, to the Mouth, though with some shaking;
that a lost Memory should be so far Retrieved, as to recollect what Stupor was
upon it, and to give God the Praise for the Alteration.

This, methinks, should be enough to satisfy the most forward Expectation; and
if this may suffice (though you will find Instances of more than this, here done
by God's Blessing upon the Baths) go on; and I will be responsable for the
truth of every Relation hereafter given. And first,

OBSERVE. I.
Coll. John Sayer, of Luddingeton, near Wellingborough, in Northamptonshire,
(where there is a (once famed) Mineral Water, such as that of Astroppe and
Tunbridge) he was more than forty Years of Age, and had a Command in the King's
Army, when the unhappy Difference was between the King and Parliament; and
after the War was ended, the latter prevailing, and having under them the whole
power of the Nation; He having made his Composition at Goldsmiths-Hall (as all
the Loyal Gentry and Nobility were forced to do) returned to live (as he hoped)
quietly upon his own Estate; but in one of Oliver's discovered, or pretended,
Plots; he (as many other worthy Gentlemen were) was taken out of his House by a
party of Horse, and carried a Prisoner to London in very ill weather, and with
worse usage; for he was presently clapped up in a damp dirty Prison, wet as he
was after a rainy uncomfortable Journey; where, the very first Night he was
seized with an Apoplectick Fit, which determined in a Palsy of the Right Side.
Whither his Disease, or his Innocence (to be sure not the Compassion of his
Adversaries) prevall'd for his Freedom, (...) was not declared; but he being
disabled ^y the former, to do any thing against the ^resent prevailing Power,
he was discharg^d without any Trial, and then returned ^o his own Home, where
he was, for a consi^erable time under the Care and Con^uct of Dr. Bowls, a
then eminent Physi^^an at Oundle, in the same County; who, after a long trial
of all the usual Means and Methods in Paralytick Cases used, rather permitted
him to come, then sent him, ^o the Bath. He first came in June, 1659. and still
finding Advantage, every Year ^ore and more, though but by slow degrees, ^ame
almost every Year, till 1670. He ^eldom stayed less than six Weeks at a ^me: He
was always prepared for bathing, ^y Purging Cephalic Pills, let Blood
some^mes, and used Alteratives all the time he was here, such as Cephalic and
Antiscorbutick Tlectuaries, and after them some Spoonfuls of a Cephalic Julip.
He drank the Waters ^o more than to quench his Thirst when he bathed, and
pumped the lame Side and Head, and to keep his Body soluble. From the very
first seizure, it took away the ^ight of one of his Eyes, if I mistake not, the
contrary Eye to the lame Side, which ^ould never be recovered; though when he was
pretty well of his Palsy, and some Years after his first Seizure, he used
Means purposely for it; sending for Dr. Turbervil^ hither from Salisbury to
consult with him about it. At his first coming hither both his Arm and Leg were
useless, and his Speech very imperfect, as was his Memory also. He recovered
(in all these Particulars) something the first Year, which encouraged him to
follow it on, and he afterward, apparently got Ground ever^ Year more and
more; he would walk i^ my Garden (for he lay every Year in my House, except the
first, being then place near the Bath, where the Noise disturb'^ him, which was
the Reason of his comin^ the next Year to lodge with me) he would walk; I say,
without tripping, or stumbling, or dragging the lame Foot upon the Ground, but
when, at the end of the wal^ he came to turn the Giddiness in the He^^ (which
indeed should have been mention'^ amongst his first, and severest Symptoms not
being then able to guide himself (...) all) would sometimes mind him, and cause
him to stagger; but that abated also by degrees.

In short, by his diligent following of thi^ Means for Ten or Eleven Years
successively, he recovered so much Strength, that he lived well and healthily
to a considerable Age; but of what Disease he at length died, (...) have not
had the opportunity to learn.

OBSERVE. II.
The first Instance upon this Head has given an Account of a sudden Seizure,
that gave no warning at all, this second made some Previous Attempts a great
while before it became an exquisite Palsy. It was in a very worthy Gentlewoman
in our Neighborhood, within four Miles of the Bath; ^hen, and now, Wife to
Joseph Langton, Esquire ^f Newton Park. She was Daughter to Sir John Burlace, of
Bockemore, in the County ^f Buckingham, Knt. and Barronet. After ^he had had
several Children (of which, ^ne, if not more, died of Convulsion Fits) ^eing
again with Child, and in the three and ^wentieth Year of her Age, in the year
1670. ^alking, to pay a Visit to a Neighbour-Gentlewoman, upon a sudden her
Speech ^il'd her, so that she could not bring out ^er Words; She spoke one Word
for another, yet had no Giddiness in her Head, ^o Failing of her Limbs, of
either side. Thus she continued to be till her time came ^o be delivered, which
was about six or se^en Weeks after this first Assault upon her Tongue: In
January following, presently upon her Delivery, it seized her Head violently,
insomuch, that she could not speak at all, nor apprehend things well for the
whole Month, all which time she would not admit of either Physician or Physic;
but in the Spring following she was let Blood under the Tongue, which restored
something her Speech, and took some Physic, and came to the Bath in May, 1671.
by which she then recovered so much Strength, as to be able to go without
Crutches, and recovered to a great degree; only now and then (about the Periods
of the Moon) some little Mindings she had, which appeared chiefly by the
Alteration of her Speech. Thus she held for five Years, had Child, or Children,
or miscarried within that time, but no Child lived any considerable time, till
being with Child again, of her Fifth, I think; and within six Weeks of her time
she was suddenly seized by an exquisite Palsy, disabling immediately all her
Left Side, but her Speech not altogether so bad as in her former Fits. She was
now as willing to use Means, as she was formerly averse to it, and consented to
whatever was proposed, even Blistering-Plaisters, etc. all which succeeded so
well that she got some Ground before the time of her Delivery, in which, she
^as beyond Expectation well, and speedy, and was safely delivered of a
Daughter, which is now a proper young Gentlewoman, and was the first Child of
sive that ^^v'd beyond three Months. As soon as it ^as fit, after her Childbed,
she was brought ^ither, and used the Bath and Pump, and ^nward Means, for six
or seven Weeks, and recovered apparently, so that she laid ^y her Crutches
again, and could go with ^^ttle help, and use her Hand, though im^erfectly.

She came several Seasons after this; ^ad several Children since; there are now
^ur living, a Son and three Daughters; one ^y'd in September, 1694 at 15 Years
of Age, ^f that sort of Convulsion, which is known ^y the name of Chorea Sancti
Viti, and the ^verest I ever saw, there being not one ^uscle of her whole Body
that was not ^onvulsed, and in continual Motion; but when she slept; which was
not often, nor ^^ng together; and yet her Mind and Me^ory sound till toward the
last; it yielded (...) no Means; she died about the 15th Day.

This Lady yet drinks these Waters eve^^ Season, but has not of late Years
bathed, (...) is so well, that whilst I am collecting these Observations, she
is at my House, it order to a London Journey with her Husband (who was a
Burgess in Parliamen^ for this City) and assists me in recollecting these
Particulars of that her Recovery, which she still ascribes to the Use of the
Bath.

OBSERVE. III.
In the Preceding Observation you have an Instance, of some Previous
Disposition to it, but the Palsy it self not seizing til^ five Year after. The
first I mentioned gave no warning at all, but was the be^^ Effect, that could
be hoped for, from a^ Apoplectick Fit, for it always kills, or forth most part
leaves one Side useless.

I shall now give you, in this third, a^ Instance, different from both the
former* (I could wish that I could have told you that the Bath had been as
effectua^ in this, as in the two former Cases.) (...) is of a Palsy,
consequent to Epileptick Fi^^ It was in a Reverend Divine, Dr. North, Master of
Corpus-Christi College, in Cambridge, Son, and Brother, to the Lord North and
Brother to a Lord-Chief-Justice of that Name. He had been many Years subject to
Fits of the Falling Sickness, which would take him, sometimes oftener, sometimes
sel^omer, but at length brought upon him a Pal^^e on one Side, whither Right or
Left I cannot ^ell remember. If the Paralytick Distem^er had superseded the
Epileptick, it had ^een an Advantageous Exchange, but both ^ontinuing, it made
his Case the more Deplorable; Bathing having seldom done any great thing (that
I have observed) ^n Epileptick Cases, but hither he was, at ^ength sent, and
recommended to my Care. He arrived here in the beginning of May, 81. And after
due Preparations, both by Vo^^iting, Purging and Bleeding too) for he was of a
Sanguine Complexion, fresh-co^our'd, and full of Blood) he began with ^he
Waters, and after a while bathed, and ^owards the Conclusion, was pumped also
upon the weak Side; the pumping his Head we did not adventure.

The Issue of all was, that he seemed to ^ave some Relief to his lame Side,
till the ^ext Epileptick Fit, and that put him as much ^ack, as he seemed to
have been forwarded before; so that after six Weeks Trial of ^his Means, he was
returned with Directi^ns for a Diet and Medic nes, chiefly Antie^ileptick, though
some Regard was had to the Palsy also.

He lived some Years after, but still subject to the Falling Sickness, and
consequently never recovered his Palsy; but (if my Information fails me not)
was at last taken off by an Apoplexy.

OBSERVE. IV.
Having in the last Observation given an Instance of a Palsy, consequent to
the Falling Sickness; I shall now give an Account of some that became
Paralytick after Convulsions; and those in Children, who came hither, and used
the Bath with better Success.

A Daughter of Sir Thomas Bludworth's, (about that time Lord Mayor of London)
about Three Years old, after several violent Convulsion Fits, had the Use of
her Left Side wholly taken away, and her Mouth drawn to one Side; but after
this Seizure freed from the Convulsion. Sir John Gell, a great Friend, and
intimate Acquaintance of her Father's) coming hither usually once a Year, to
prevent a Palsy (of which he had had some Previous Symptoms, and of whom I may
have occasion to say something before I dismiss this Subject) This pretty Child
was sent down with a Maid to attend her, in his Company, and was by him
committed to my Care and Directions, having the Honor of being Physician to
him, after the Death of Dr. Venner. She came hither about the middle of June,
1661. and (after such Preparations, as her Aversion to every thing but Bread
and Butter, would permit) she was put into the Queen's-Bath; and after a whiles
bathing in that moderate warmth, was suffered to be carried into the
King's-Bath; and bearing the Use of both very well, without any ill Accident,
she continued so to do; using withal some Alteratives in what she eat and
drank, as were not very distasteful, she manifestly got Strength; so that at
six Weeks end she returned apparently amended; which Amendment increasing, even
in the following Winter, she was sent down again the next Summer; and a third
time, in 1665. still improving in her Recovery without Interruption.

She was here again in 1683. and sent for me to advise about some other thing,
and was then a proper comely Gentlewoman, having not the least Remainder of her
former Weakness; only the Fingers and Thumb of the Left Hand could not be kept
out strait, but were not altogether useless, but her Mouth, Face, Arm, Foot and
Leg, as shapely, strong, and trigge, as on the other Side, that never ailed any
thing.

OBSERVE. V.
Mr. Powell, a Gentleman, that did live (at least had a considerable Estate)
within few Miles of Oxford, was sent hither, with an old Nurse to attend him,
at about six Years of age, in July, 1667. He also had an exquisite Palsy after
Convulsion-Fits. He took Purges and Alteratives, as the Nurse and I could
persuade, and bathed as his Strength, and the hot Season of the Year would
permit, sometimes three times, sometimes four times a Week, for Two Months
together, or more, getting Ground upon his Distemper apparently, after the
first Month; which Advantage improved, after his Return to his Friends, and
that encouraged them to send him again the Year following, and so for several
Years, one after another, till he was perfectly recovered; and afterward grew
a strong lusty Man, and was married to a Derbyshire Gentlewoman, Sister to Mr.
Dormer, of that Country.

He and his Lady, with Mr. Dormer, her Brother, were here at the Bath, in 1691.
He came for a Tettery Eruption in his Neck and Chin, but had no Remainder of
the Palsy, nor sign of it, only (as was Ma^am Bloodworth's) the Thumb of his
lame Hand not so shapely as the other. Whilst (...) am collecting these
Observations, I am ^old that he is (not long since) dead of (...) Fever.

OBSERVE. VI.
In this next Observation I shall again perform what I promised in the Preface,
viz. ^ive an Account of the unsuccessful, as well as beneficial Trials of the
Bath, and ^t is in one of our own Profession, Mr. New^on, of Swell, in
Somersetshire, near Somerton. ^he County Town. He was an ingenious Gentleman,
and bred a Scholar at Oxford, and not a mean Proficient in Learning.

Being born to a competent Estate, he ^id not quickly settle to any Profession,
^ut married, and had a numerous Family of Children; and his Father living too
long for him; and giving up to him, in Marriage, but a small part of his
Estate, ^e set himself upon the Practice of Physic to mend the Commons, and
was not ^nfit for it, nor unsuccessful in it, and had (...) good Reputation in
reference to his Pra^tice in those parts. But having been generously bred, and
being of a cheerful Temper, and in a Country, much given to Good-Fellowship, he
gave himself more than enough to that sort of Jollity, and would drink with his
Patients when recovered, as well as prescribe for them, when sick. This (as it
was thought and said) was the occasion of a sudden, and violent Seizure in his
Head, which took away both Speech, Understanding, and Memory, and left one Side
Paralytick. The Wife being greatly concerned for a Husband she loved, and
having many Children, who had the greater part of their Maintenance from what
he got by his Practice; and having heard o^ great Cures done at the Bath, in
Paralytick Cases, brought him away much too soon, before the Matter of his
Disease was settled, where Nature endeavored to lodge the Burden; and before
it was in any considerable Measure lessened, either by Bleeding, Womiting, or
Purging. When she was here, and applying her self to an antien^ Physician that
then lived constantly upon the place, but had formerly practiced Physic in
Dorsetshire, and had been Physician to some of her Relations (she being a
Gentlewoman of that Country) he, after (...) slight Purge or two, permitted him
to be put into the King and Queen's-Bath; where the poor observant Gentlewoman,
quickly perceiving that he grew worse and worse, began to be dissatisfied in
the Ad^ice she had hitherto followed, and sent ^o me, to whom alone she would
have re^err'd the Management of her Husband's Concern; but I (having still a
Regard ^o the Reputation of the Faculty, and a ^ue Respect to my Seniors in the
Professi^n) refused to be concerned alone with ^im: And because I knew the
Infirmity ^f Age had rendered this old Gentleman a ^ittle Pettish, and
Self-conceited, I was not willing to be concerned with him neither, without a
third, especially the Case appearing to me very doubtful in the Issue, and very
hazardous at best.

This Proposal prevailed, and there was called in for a third, (to make up a
complete Consultation) one of the College of Physicians, in London, who happened
to be here that Summer. It was in July, 1663. that (upon my Proposal) he was
called in, and we met all three. It was quickly concluded that he was brought
from Home too soon, that he needed much larger Evacuations before he had been
permitted the Bath; and therefore by joint Consent, a sharp Clyster, Bleeding,
Vesicatories, Vomiting, and smart Purging, etc. were ordered.

Some of which being done, and meeting again the third day after (before all
that we had first agreed upon could possibly have been tried) the Gentleman
from London proposed Salivation, as a certain (and by him often experienced)
Remedy in this Case; to which the ancient Gentleman quickly assented (so great
an Influence has a London Physician upon us poor Mortals that practice Physic
in the Country) but I begged leave in that particular, to dissent from them
both, lest dying in the Course (as it seemed to me most probable that he would)
so Famed and Experienced a Remedy might be disreputed, and we get the
Reputation of Killing, instead of Curing, the Patient.

This did, at length prevail, and we went on with the first-directed Course,
but to no purpose; for, though the Medicines wrought with him, as expected, yet
he declined daily, and in a Week, or thereabouts, died.

OBSERVE. VII.
A something-like Case to this I had in one Mrs. Frisby, of Coton, near
Bosworth, in Leicestershire, aged 45. She was (about a Year and a half before
she came hither) seized in her Bed with a Palsy; and finding ^^o Advantage by
what Means she used in ^he Country, was, at length, sent hither about the
middle of June, 1677. by the Advice of Dr. Harrington, of Baggeworth, ^n the
same County. Though she had been ^repar'd by Bleeding, Purging, etc. both before
and after she came hither, yet upon Bathing she apparently grew worse,
especially in her Speech, which very much discouraged her in proceeding
farther; and ^ndeed I was not very importunate with her ^or her longer Stay,
lest the great Bell should huve rung out for her here; for then Enquiry would
have been made whose Pa^ient she was? not what Distemper she had? or whither a
due Method had been used for her Recovery: But with the Vulgar (who measure all
things by the Success) the Physician that does not Cure shall be sure to have
the Reputation of Killing the Patitient that dies; be the Disease (or the
Patient) never so much uncurable. I returned her back therefore to him that
sent her hither, with Advice to use Antiscorbuticks and Cephalicks, and never
since heard any thing of her.

OBSERVE. VIII.
But where I have met with one Example of this uncomfortable sort, I could name
you twenty that sped in their Errant; amongst which is one, long since made
public (but upon another Occasion) in the Philosophica^ Transactions, N. 169.
Page 944.) by Dr William Musgrove, then of New-Colledge, in Oxford, now living
in the City of Exeter. to whom I sent the Relation, upon his Request, by
Letter. It is of one that had not only what she came for, a Cure of her Palsy,
but also what she did not then think of nor hope for: Having been twelve Years
married, and never was with Child till after her second coming to the Bath;
(when she stayed the whole Season out, from March to Michaelmas) as soon as she
returned Home to her Husband (at least within a Month after) she conceived with
Child, and had five strong, and lusty Children, at a Year, or a Year and a
halfs distance one from another, four Daughters and a Son. Her Husband's Name
was Duffewait, an Attorney at Law, and lived then in Wiltshire, but afterward
had an Employ for the Cathedral Church at Wells, to keep their Courts, and
therefore lived there; where I spoke with the Mother, and ^v four of the
Children (the Son dying ^^ung, of the Smallpox,) likely to make ^^^per Women.
The Mother died of a ^^nsumption Twenty Years after her Reco^^ry from the
Palsy.

OBSERVE. IX.
I shall only mention two more; who, ^^o I cannot say they had Children, as
^ell as Help in a Palsy, yet I suppose they ^^d their Endeavors for it; for
they were ^^th married out of my House, whilst ^^ey lay here, perfecting their
Cures: The one a Widow, between Thirty and ^^rty Years of Age, the first Year
of her ^^ming for Remedy: The other a Virgin, ^^d a modest comely one, aged One
or ^wo and Twenty, in the second Year of ^^r coming to the Bath. Whether the
con^^nient Situation of my House contributed any thing to it, (having on one
Side a Gal^ry, and a Door that goes into the King's^ath (the best for
Paralytick Persons, if at l^ast they can bear the Heat of it) and on ^^e other
Side, out of my Garden, a pri^ate Door into the Church, entering by which, less
notice might be taken of a limp^ng Bride.) I leave to the curious to determine.
But to be sure it goes well with the Individuum, when Care is taken for
propagating the Species. I must beg the Reader's Excuse for not naming the
Persons; I forbear it, for fear of incurring their, or any of their Relations
Displeasure. But if any body question the truth of it, and be so curious as to
desire to be farther satisfied in it, I can inform them; for I have their Names
by me, and the times when they were here, using the Bath.

OBSERVE. X.
I shall conclude this Chapter with telling you, that it is not only for Cure,
but for Prevention also, of Palsies, that many resort hither; when, by some
Previous Symptoms, they have had great Reason to apprehend the Palsy
threatening them. Amongst such (and indeed he may excuse the mention of any
more) Sir John Gell, of Hopton, near the Peake, in Derbyshire, Knt. and
Barroner: a great Friend to the Bath, and indeed the Bath was so to him) for
Twenty Years together, was a constant Frequenter to this City, for the life of
the Bath, but mostly of the Bath-Pump.

His usual Custom was (in Dr. Venner's time, before I was concerned with him)
after a Purge or two, to go into the Queens-Bath, for a quarter of an Hour, and
then immediately to the Pump, where he seldom took less than Seven or Eight
Hundred Pumps the first day, upon his bare Head, and increased every day Two or
Three Hundred, till he came to Fifteen Hundred, at last to Two Thousand, and so
went on to do three or four days in a Week, sometimes more, for Five or Six
Weeks, (the usual time of his Stay here) abating toward the Conclusion, by
degrees, as he increased at the beginning, but seldom had he sewer than Five or
Six Hundred at a time; after which he Purged again at Conclusion, and went
hence, to his own House, to Hawk (after the Harvest was in) for a Month or Five
Weeks, and then returned to his House in St. Martins-Lane, to Winter; and
stayed there till he came again next Summer to the Bath, and again into
Derbyshire, as above. Thus did he Year after Year, as long as he was able to
take Journeys, and till Age, and a Scorbutical Dropsy, confined him to his
House in London, where he died in the Eighty-second Year of his Age, and had no
Symptoms of the Palsy (more than what at first brought him hither) to his
dying day.

I do not remember that after I had the Honor to serve him as his Physician
(which was the first Summer after Dr. Venner's Death, and that was in March,
1660.) that he Drank often or much of the Waters, and before to be sure he did
not; for that old Gentleman was no Friend to Waterdrinking. I persuaded him
sometimes to a Bocker of the Woods, and Cephalic Herbs, of which he would
drink very regularly, and take sometimes (though rarely) of an Antiscorbutick and
Cephalic Electuary. That which made Sir John to fear an ^mpending Palsy, and
to come hither to prevent it, was, A Stupor and Dullness sometimes in his Head,
and a seeming Clout about his Tongue, and a kind of Creeping, and Sleepiness as
they call it vulgarly) upon Arm or Leg, sometimes one, sometimes another, and a
kind of Clomsiness whilst it remained there. But all these Symptoms vanished,
after he had a while used himself to the Bath; and he died at longth, as is
already said.

CHAP. V. Palsy after the Cholick.
THere is another sort of Palsy, besides those that are consequent to
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, or Convulsions, and that is what follows after Bilious
Cholicks, Rheumatisms, and sometimes Fevers, but most frequently after the
first; of which, Fran^iscus Citesius, Physician to the King of France, and his
great Cardinal Richlieu has written a Treatise ex professo, and calls it Dolor
colicus Pictonicus, in his Opu^cula Medica, in 410. Parisiis, mecum, Page ^67.
and of which, Sennertus, Crato, and ^ll, or most, that have written a Praxis of
Physic, or Observations, have made frequent mention. This is allowed by all to
be caused by a (...), or Translation, of the Morbifick Matter, from the
Intestines, ^o the Nervosum Genus, or at least, to the Original of some of
those Nerves, that Branch from the Spinal Marrow. I have ^een in some Patients
the Arms only, and ^ot the Legs rendered useless, and e Contra; ^t least one
part more enfeebled than another; in others, all parts, from Head to Foot,
altogether Relaxed, some with Pain, some without it; but in most a
Colliquation, even of the Musculous Flesh, which (by the way) seems to
countenance the Opinion of those that assert the Conveyance of Nourishment to
all parts, to be by the Nerves, and not by the Arteries and Veins; these latter
supplying only Oil to the Lamp of Life, and continuing the Stream that drives
about the main Wheel that keeps the (...), (the Machine of an Animal Body) in
Motion. Whither this Bilious Matter relaxeth only the Nerves, or by its being
Coagulated, stops the Passages that the Animal Spirits cannot find their way to
irradiate them, or how otherwise affected, is already referred to the nice^
Enquirers into Theories It is enough to ou^ purpose here to give some Instances
amongst many (for I find no one Distemper mo^^ frequent among my Adversaria,
non^ more eminent Recoveries than in this) of Person thus disabled, to have
been restored by the Assistance of the Bath, and the Bath Waters.

OBSERVE. I.
I begin with a Minister of Lincoln-shir^ ^ne Mr. Pi^kin^or, aged 33, who came
hi^ ^^er in May, 1666. He lived near the ^enns, to which Uliginous Air, was
ascribed ^he beginning of his Illness. After such a ^ollick he was Crippled,
and Emaciated all ^ver; his Legs were in some measure, re^over'd before he came
hither, for he could ^o, though but feebly, and had not much Pain, ^ut his Arms
and Hands were whloy useless, and hung like Flayls. He could not lift ^ither of
them to his Head, nor grasp any thing with his Hands; the great Muscle of ^he
Thumb (wherein chiefly consists the ^trength of the Hand) was quite wasted. He
could not feed himself, much less put ^ff and on his own Clothes.

After Preparatory Purging, I put him upon Drinking the Waters, to prevent the
Re^^rn of his Chollick, (for he had had some Threatenings of a Recidivation) and
a Chaly^eat Course, and Bathing between whiles, as ^is Weakness would bear it.
The first In^tance of his being better, (with much Joy, (...) show his
Improvement) coming to my House, he put off his Hat to me; for though he was a
Clergy man, his Disease had made him so much a Quaker, that he could not
^erform that accustomed Civility to any ^ne, till after a whiles Bathing.
Before ^e went hence he could write his Name ^^mpetently well, that could not
hold a Pen in many Months before: He stayed Six or Seven Weeks, and then
returned greatly advantaged, and directed to the Use of Antiscorbutick and
Neurotick Alteratives; and to return the next Year, which he did, and perfected
what he had so well begun the Year before.

OBSERVE. II.
A young Gentlewoman, not long married to one Mr. Kenricke, (afterward Sir
William Kenricke) came hither in July, 1663. from her Father's, Mr.
Kilblewhites, in Berkshire, in the Vale of White Horse, about Ten or Twelve
Miles from Oxford; which I mention, because she had been a long time a Patient
to Dr. Willis, and (if I mistake not) carried thither, and Lodged there, for
the greater Convenience of his daily seeing her.

After some Months, finding little or no Ease or Strength, by his most
industrious, as well as knowing, Prescriptions, came against his Will, and
Approbation, hither, (and indeed he never was a Friend to the Bath, as was
intimated in the Preface, and is mentioned in my Lady Dowager Brooke's Case,
which may also be gathered from some of his Observations, and (if I mistake
not) in this very Gentlewoman's Case. She was violently pained in Bowels and
Limbs, both Joints and Musculous Parts; and so tender, that she could not
endure to be touched, but would cry out; she had Convulsion, or Hysteric Fits,
withal, and was wasted and emaciated even to a Skelliton. She was with no small
difficulty, and trouble to her Attendants, as well as Pain to her self, brought
hither in a Litter; and when permitted to bathe, let down into the Bath in a
kind of a Cradle: She had some ease by the Bath, but no Strength nor Stomach;
she was therefore put upon drinking the Waters, and used Chalybeats,
Antiscorbuticks, and Cephalicks, and (as her necessities required) Anodynes,
Cordials, and Hystericks: She used first the Cross-Bath only, some decrying the
King's and Queen's, as too hot and fierce, (for in this place there are those
that would set the Baths at Variance, as well as the Inhabitants, several
speaking, as their Interest leads them) but the Truth is she had Ease by the
Cross-Bath, and drinking the King's-Bath-Waters, but no Strength till she
bathed in the Queen's and King's-Bath, and that would not be permitted to be,
till her second or third coming hither.

She came three or four Years following, at first; and then at four Years
distance, and at Six, and had Children between, which hindered her coming.

One thing peculiar I observed in her, The Optic Nerves (as well as all the
rest of the Nervosum Genus) bore a great share in this her Universal
Enervation, for it impaired her Sight very much; which also was by degrees
restored, as the rest of her Body increased in Strength. The last time she was
here (if I remember well) was in the year 1675. She had several Children in,
and after, this great Illness, and left some when she died, (which was at
length, (as I have been informed) of a Consumption.

OBSERVE. III.
A comely young Gentlewoman, not much above Twenty, (whose Name I must beg
leave not to mention, she having declared an utter Aversion to it) was brought
hither out of Suffolk; I should have concealed even the County too, but that it
is of moment to mention it, that it may appear, that even in clear Air, and dry
Soyles, these kind of Distempers sometimes seize, as well as in Marshy, and
Fenny Places.

She was in so weak a condition when ^e first came hither which was in July,
^^89.) as not to be able to help her self in ^^e least. The beginning of this
Illness was a ^^eumatism; she was first taken with a ^eakness in some of her
Joints only, and after two or three Days, was wholly disabled, not capable to
stir Hand or Foot, after ^^at, most violent Pains seized sometimes ^^e part,
sometimes another, so that she lay in very great torture. By the Advice of her
Physicians there were taken at several ^^mes above forty Ounces of Blood; she
took also Abundance of Medicines, such (...) Antiscorbuticks, the Sarsa-Drink,
etc. at length, when she had some little ease, so that she was able to bear the
being held (...) in a Coach, (for she was not able to help her self in the
least, with Hand or Foot) she was brought to the Bath, where (by the Blessing
of God, upon these Waters, and other Means used here) she received Benefit the
first Year, which encouraged her ^^iends to bring her a second time, and was
able then to use Hands and Arms, and to walk, though feebly. She apparently
recovered more Strength, whilst she was ^^re this second time, but did not
think fit (...) come the year following. The account ^^her first Seizure, and
Proceedings, I had from a very kind Brother of hers, almo^^ Verbatim; and with
it her Reasons why she would not have her Name published the chief was
pretended to be because she was not perfectly well, having still some Weakness
in her Limbs, especially in he^ Ancle Joints, and walked with some Diff^^ently
and Pain. If it be so, it is certainly her own fault; for that Means, that (b^
using it at two Seasons only) recovered her thus far, would certainly, in a
litt^^ time, have perfected the Cure, had (...) followed it (as she ought to,
and other^ have done) Year after Year, till she ha^ been, (as she desires to
be) perfectly Eas^^ and Strengthened.

I mention thus much of this Case, (the I have been desired not to mention the
Nam^ in Hopes that this Book may fall into (...) or some of her Relations,
Hands; and (...) her in Mind how much she has been wan^^ing to her self; and
to warn others not (...) give over the Use of the Means, that th^^ have had the
least Benefit by, till they ha^^ attained the wished Effect.

OBSERVE. IV.
A very Honorable Lady, and a Person (...) great Quality, whose Name and
Title, ^^ppose I may (without fear of Reproof) ^^ture to insert, because she
has been ^^ased, Frequently and Publicly, to ascribe (...) Recovery to these
Waters; and has fa^^ur'd me with a particular Leave so to (...).

It was the (then) Countess of Mull^^ve, now Lady Marchioness of Normanby.
(...) was sent hither by Dr. Lower, in May, ^^88. and by him recommended by
Letter (...) my particular Care (as he had done ma^^ before, that he could not
persuade to (...) to Tunbridge). Her Honor's Conditi^^ was somewhat worse than
the Persons ^^t mentioned; for besides that her Lady^^p was altogether as
helpless, after a Bi^^us Cholick; she was more Emaciated, Sto^chless, and
frequently in Pain. The ^^ps, Knees, Ancles, Feet, Arms and Fin^^s, Contracted;
the Morbifick Matter be^^g wedged into the Porosities of the Tendons, which was
almost all that remained of ^e Muscles of every part) insomuch, that ^^en they
were endeavored to be (though ^^ntly) forced out, as was Reason to attempt often
to do, her Ladyship would cry out, as if cut with Knifes.

Her Ancles were so much drawn inward, that when it was endeavored to set her
upon her Feet, the Soals could by no means be made to come flat to the Ground;
but the weight of her Body would thrust out more her Ancle-Joynts, so that we
were forced to desist from that Attempt. Her Ladyship began here with drinking
the Waters, (having taken Purges before she came down) and sometimes of the day
some Spoonfuls of Dr. Lewer's Bitter Infusion with Steel, which was brought
down with her. She was continued in this Course a Fortnight, or Three Weeks
before she was put into the Cross-Bath (for her Ladyship used no other) and
then but a little while at first; not past half an Hour at a time, and that but
once in Three or Four Days, or every other day when most, for the first Month,
or longer; the days between drinking the Waters, and continuing the
Alteratives. This recovered something, an Appetite, but little Alteration made
upon the Infirm Limbs the first Six Weeks. Her Ladyship had, by reason of her
violent Pains, so accustomed her self to Laudanum, that we had something to do,
to take her off from it; but, at length, it was, by degrees pretty well done,
and after that she apparently got Ground. She would ^t length suffer her Legs
to be laid straight, and be set up upon her Feet, when we had ^ot for her flat
single-soal'd Shoes; nor would ^er Ancles then turn out so much: Her La^yship
could hold a Plate in her Hand, and ^ring a Fork to her Mouth, to feed her
self, which at first she could no ways do, nor suffer to be done, for a long
time before. These little Improvements were the most we could bragg of, after
almost Three Months stay here, at which time (the Sea^on being then very Hot,
and therefore ^nfit for her farther bathing) her Ladyship returned, lying on a
Bed in the Coach as ^he came hither; but endured the Journey back much better
than when she came down, and improved daily after her Return, till ^he arrived
at a considerable pitch of Health and Strength, and Activeness; which I was an
Eyewitness of, the Spring following, when I was to wait upon her Honor, at
her Lord's Lodgings, in White Hall, my Lord, her Husband, being then
Lord-Chamberlain. And I have, several times since, heard that her Honor has
continued, without any Relapse into the like Condition, to the time I write
this Account of her Case.

OBSERVE. V.
The next Case I instance in, seems to be a Complication of Rheumatism and
Chollick, (or rather Antritio Ventriculi, as Sennertus calls those violent
Stomach Pains) and to be sure a high Mixture of the Scorbute withal: But the
Weakness and Decay of the Limbs, the same, if not greater than either of the
former; but the Prefaces to those Weaknesses, and Decay of the Flesh in the
Limbs, were, at first, more Rheumatick than Collical; the Pains seizing (after
that of the Stomach) the Musculous Parts, as well as Joints; and last of all,
mostly in her Heels, especially when warm in her Bed; and in all these Parts
the Pains very acute; and after which, followed the Weakness in all her Limbs,
and wasting of all the Musculous Flesh.

It was the Wise of Thomas Bear, Esquire a Devonshire Gentleman, but Daughter to
Robert Long, Esquire of this County, and a Neighbor to the Bath.

She was past Forty Years of age when this Illness came upon her; she had (by
Fits) Pains also in her lower Bowels, and (what was peculiar in her Case) did
sometimes avoid Blood by Stool, in considerable quantities: After the Pains
ceased, she complained that her Belly seemed to be bound about as ^^th an Iron
Hoop, (it was her own Ex^ession) yet no hardness appeared to the ^uch in those
parts; the disorder of the ^^rves had so much depraved her sense of ^eling.

Yea, the Totum Nervosum Genus was so feebled, that all Parts bore a Share; it
^s trouble to her to breathe; her Lungs ^^v'd so heavily, that it was Pain and
La^ur to her to speak; nor could she well bring ^t her Words; a little Talking
would quite spirit her. Her Stomach had neither Ap^tite nor Digestion; and all
her Bowels ^^re benumbed, and seemed tied as with Cord.

She could not lift an Arm to her Head, ^r grasp any thing in her Hands, nor
sup^^rt her self with her Legs and Feet, her ^eakness being most in the lower
Parts; ^^d the Muscles of all Parts quite fallen flat. (...) this deplorable
Condition was this poor ^entlewoman brought to the Bath in May, ^690. Dr.
Musgrove, then of New-Colledge, (...) Oxford, now living in Exeter, was joyn^^
with me in Consultation about this Pa^ent, here at the Bath; but when at home
^e had the Assistance of old Dr. Dyke; ^ar Taunton, and Dr. Osmond, an
ingenious ^hysitian, of Exeter. By Dr. Musgrove's Advice and mine she was first
put upon gentle Vomitings; Carduus-Posset-Drink, i^ large quantities, and
Oxymel of Squills, (...) Wine of Squills, was the strongest Vomiti^^ we
ventured at, and those urged no farther than her present small Strength would
permit; after that she began upon drinking these Waters, at first in small
Quantities* increasing by degrees: After a whiles drinking she was put into the
Cross-Bath; where* at first, she stayed but half an Hour; bu^ finding Ease
there, she ventered to stay longer at a time, and bathed every day, f^^ Three
Weeks together, contrary to the Opinion of her Physicians, yet was not (as was
feared) fainted, or more enfeebled by it, but rather got Strength, as well as
Ease by it. And whereas, with others, bathing usually takes off the Appetite
from every thing but Drink, hers increased upon it. She was advised, in all
this time, Chalybeats, and a Bitter Wine, and Antiscorbutick Julips, and now
and then a Solutive, rather then Purging Medicine; but she took but little of
the former. Thus she continued to do till the hot Season came on, when it was
thought advisable, to give her some Respite, by returning her to her Father's,
who lives near this City; where she stayed till toward the and of August;
about which time she returned again, and followed the same Course for a Month.
She recovered in her Recess, both ^s to Stomach and Strength, in some measure;
but more apparently at this second Coming, and continued so to do the following
Winter; only subject to frequent Vomitings, of Viscous Phlegm, and Acid Juices,
^n which Case she found nothing so advan^ageous to her as Sherry, mull^d with
Sper-^int.

She came again the Summer following, and so a third Season, but more to
Confirm ^^e Health, and Strength she had got by the ^^rst, than to enter upon
any new Course, ^^r to repeat the old. She held well, and ^er Stomach returned:
her Muscles were re^or'd Plump and Full, and was at length, in all
Circumstances) as she had been for ^^me Years before this Sickness seized her;
^et since was threatened with a Relapse into ^^e same Weakness, though she had not
violent ^ains, but some Decay of Stomach, and ^eebleness of Limbs, for which
whilst she (...) at her Father's) she drinks the Bath Wa^^rs, not without
considerable Benefits.

OBSERVE. VI.
The Right Honorable Nicholas, Earl Thanett, aged between 50 and 60; came
hither in August, 1677. very ^eeble in all his Limbs, but especially in Arms
and Hands; he had scarce a Muscle upon either, left visible; not able to help
himself in any respect. The Ligaments at his Shoulders were so relaxed, that
his Arms hung like Flayls, and he threw them forward and backward, rather than
moved them; with this Weakness of Limbs he had Decay of Appetite too, and
Digestion; nautiated every thing, and was fallen away, even to a Skelliton; and
all this the effect of a Bilious Cholick which continued long upon him.

After the Translation of the Matter to the Nerves, he was, by Fits, at ease in
his Bowels, but thus weakened in his Limbs, for which he came to the Bath. I
had the Honor to advise him, having been Physician to the Lady Dowager his
Mother, who was sent hither by Sir John Micklethwait, to prevent a Palsy, to
which she had many Previous Dispositions, and at length died of an Appoplexy.

My Lord both drank the Waters, an^ bathed, took Alteratives, Apperitives, and
Antiscorbuticks, and by Degrees, got Stomach, Ease and Strength, but stayed Two
(...) Three Months for it. His Lordship came several times after to confirm,
what he (...) first attained; of what his Lordship died afterward, and when, I
have not been ^^form'd.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mr. Pettit, of Reading, came hither, May, ^681. as weak, or weaker than any in
this Case beforementioned, and was here re^over'd by the like Methods. Dr.
Baynard and (...) were jointly concerned in directing for ^^im, and managing
his drinking the Wa^^rs, and bathing.

It would be too tedious to give a parti^^lar Description of every ones Case
that (...) have to instance in upon this Head; let (...) suffice then that I
name only some Persons, and the time of their coming, and ^^e Success they had,
since there was but ^^ttle difference in their Symptoms, and Me^^ods of Cure.

I. From Ireland, whence I have had very many in this Condition; as namely,

1. Sir William Davis, then Recorder of ^^ublin, afterward Lord-Chief-Justice
of Ire^^nd; he came first in July, 1686. and was recoverd. 2. Sir William
Tychborne, whose Estate ^^y near Lymrick; he came first in June, ^674. and was
here several Years after, and had perfect Recovery. 3. Sir John Cose was here
in the same Errant, in June, 1671. and several Year after, and at length,
recovered also. 4. Alderman Best, an Alderman of D^^lin, came in June, 1680.
and several time after, and was restored to Strength. 5. Capt. Harrison, a
Gentleman, th^^ married Bishop Taylor's only Daughter had lost the Lise of his
Hands after the Cholick, and here recover d them. 6. Mr. Lawrence Hodson, with
mar^^ more, which I omit, for fear of being (...) tedious.
II. From the Isses of Guernsey a^^ Jersey, many have been sent to me ^^der
these Weaknesses of Limbs, by M^^sieur Sallanoue, an eminent Physician (...)
Chyrurgeon of the Isle of Jersey, (...) were sent back recovered; by name, (...)

1. Madam Patriarch (a Kinswoman (...) his) came first in June, 1672. and
ser^ral Years after. 2. Mrs. Martyn from Guernsey, in Ju^^ 1679. had a
remarkable, and speedy R^^covery. 3. Monsieur Peter's, a Chyrurgeon from the
same Island. Cum multis aliis, etc.
III. From the American Plantatio^.

1. Coll. Hallet, from the Barbados. 2. Capt. Richard Hallett, his Brother. 3.
Mr. Bond, an eminent Planter, and (...) ingenious Gentleman. (...) All, and
many more, for the same Loss (...) Limbs after the Belly-ach, (for so they ^^m
this Pictonic Cholick in those parts) ^^ere here relieved; if not perfectly
restored (...) Strength.
CHAP. VI. Of a Scorbutical Palsy.
BEsides those already mentioned in the foregoing Chapters, there was ano^^er
sort of Enervated, or Paralytick Patients; ^^any of which sort have been under
my ^^are also, and have found no less Advan^^ge than those already instanced
in. These ^^ing like Palsies in many particulars, I ^^ink it not improper to
bestow a Chap^^^ upon them, and here to insert it, as ^^arest of Kinn to
Palsies.

Though the Cases following may, in many ^^rcumstances, seem to differ one from
a^^ther, yet all agree in this, that the ^^mb or Limbs affected are rendered
less use^^, if not altogether useless. These (for ^^stinction sake, if for no
other reason) I call Scorbutical Palsy; not seizing of a sudden, but coming
on by degrees.

1. Sometimes enfeebling the Totum Genus Nervosum, and then the Head it self,
and all parts from thence downwards, have had a share in the Enervation: the
Head tottering, and unsteady; sometimes dosed, and stupid; subject to
Giddiness, no^able to guide the Feet, which too, but frebly, if at all, support
the rest of the Body.

2. The Arms and Hands in some force^ to odd Motions and Gesticulations, like
those of Changlings, and referrable (I think to that sort of Convulsive Motion,
which goes under the name of Chorea Sancti V^^^

3. Sometimes one Side only, Arm a^^ Leg weaker than ordinary, and numm^^ but
not altogether useless.

4. Sometimes the Arm of one Side, a^^ the Leg of the other.

5. In others the lower parts only, the upper remaining not at all debilitated.
Persons thus affected have had manifest Scubutical Symptoms upon them long
before these Weaknesses began. Some har^ had Previous Headache, and Virtigoes;
other have thus declined in Strength, in or after Fevers; and after Concussions
and Contus^^^

6. Some have been thus affected in their lower Limbs, from some of the
Vertebra (...) ^^e back or Lo^ns started out, and from ^^ence downward have
had, no Sense nor ^^otion. These generally speaking) have ^^ot been altogether
so long before they re^^eive Benefit, as those that have been seized ^y a
sudden Stroke; though this also requires ^ime and Patience; and more than once
^oming to the Bath; and strict Use of In^ard Means, Cephalic and
Antiscorbutick.

To give many Instances upon every one ^f these mentioned Particulars, would be
to ^nlarge too much what was intended only ^or a Specimen. Let it suffice
therefore, that I give two or more upon each of the more remarkable ones: And
first,

Of those that have been Relaxed all over, from Head to Foot.

OBSERVE. I.
I begin with an only Child, and Daughter of my Lady Colchester's, (Daughter to
the then Countess Dowager of Derby) aged 13. She had been under the Care of Dr.
Burlace, of Chester, and had the Advice also of Dr. Berwick, at a distance. The
former gave her, for the most part, Cephalicks, and made her to use an
Artificial Bath. The latter by Letter (for he saw not the young Lady, but had
an account of her Case, in writing from her Lady Grandmother) advised the
Testacious Powders, and the Bitter Infusion.

After a long times Trial of this, and other Means, my Lady her Mother came
with her to the Bath in June, 1681. She had a perpetual Stupor, and Dullaess,
in he^ Head, and lay as if always asleep, and spoke not but when forced to it,
and then both unwillingly and imperfectly; the could not feed her self with
Hands, nor support her self with Legs and Fe^t: She had not Strength in her
Neck, to keep her Head upright, when she was held up between two, but it fell
(by its own weight) to one side or t'othe^

After some Preparation (for her Lady-Mother was against taking much, saying*
She had been cloyed with Physic before, to (...) purpose) she was put into the
Bath: For though her Case had been judged to be an Impos^hume in her Head, yet I
thought it rather to be In genere Paralytic, and proceeded accordingly. After a
whiles bathing (by which she was, to all Appearances, neither better nor worse)
I urged her Lady-Mother to have her let* Blood in the Jugulars; to which her
Ladyship did not easily incline* and the Daughter was very much afraid of a
Lancet, and therefore very averse to it. I at length obtained of both, that (at
least) Leeches might be applied there, which was ^^ne effectually enough; for
they all filled ^^emselves sufficiently; and when they fell ^^f, by Sponges
dipped in warm Water, the ^^rifices of the Veins were kept open for ^^me Hours,
till the was tired, by being held so long u^right; then a Plaster being
applied to each place that bled, she was laid down to her accustomed Repose.
About the middle of the Night the Nurse awaking, and looking toward her,
observed ^^e Pillows, on which her Head and Neck ^^sted, to be very bloody;
which sight ^^eatly affrighting her, the People were ^all'd up, and the
Apothecary that applied the Leeches, was sent for; and I was (with difficulty)
excused from being disturbed also. She had indeed bled very much, but ^o ways
faint, or dispirited by it, but rather ^elieved. Nature having this Vent given
(...), discharged that Burden which had a long time oppressed the Brain.

From this time she apparently got Ground, ^eing better able to bear bathing,
and with ^ess Regret, took Alteratives, which were (...) mostly) Cephalicks,
and Antiscorbuticks, and if I remember well) some Chalybeats. ^he Purged
between while, and was, at ^ength, perfectly recovered of this Distem^er, and
lived healthily, and cheerfully, some Years after; yet the poor Lady her Mother
was (after this joyful, because almost unhoped for, Recovery) left at last
Childless, by this her only Daughter's dying of the Smallpox, or Fever; I
remember not well which, but die she did, in some Years after, as I was
informed.

OBSERVE. II.
Katherine Jenkins, from Cowbridge, in Glamorganshire, in South Wales, aged 23.
after a long continued Ague, which was, at length, put by, for a time, with the
Jesu^t^ Powder; and (after its second and third Return, wholly put off by the
same; had all her lower Parts, from the middle of her Back downwards, wholly
Relaxed, that she could by no means, stand upright. She was brought to the Bath
in July, 1691. Madam Windham, of Dunneraven, (Sergeant Windham's Lady) lodging
then in my House, for a Lameness, of which we may hereafter have occasion to
speak) desired me to go and see her, and to give her my Advice; for she had
been a Servant (and I think, was again, after her Recovery) to her eldest Son's
Wife.

I sound her at the Inn, newly brought to Town, greatly enfeebled indeed. I p^^
her (after Preparation) upon drinking the ^aters first, and then bathing, and
inward ^leans withal; by which (in a Month, or ^ive Weeks time) she perfectly
recovered, ^o' some Physicians in Wales had greatly ^iscouraged her from coming.

She held well all the following Winter, only had, by Fits, some Pains in the
Small of the Back, Thighs and Knees. In March those Pains began to increase,
and black ^pots, like Stripes and Pinchings, here and ^here appeared; the
Weakness also, in the ^ower Limbs beginning to return, she came ^gain to the
Bath in June, 1693. and stayed ^ot past a Fortnight, and was very well
re^over'd, and held so; for in July, 1694. she ^ame (in other business) to this
City; and (...), by chance, met her trigg and lusty, in ^he Market-Street, and
did not presently know her, till she spoke to me, and told me who ^he was, and
thanked me for my former Advice to her, and owned that she was perfectly well
of all the Weakness and Pain that she formerly came to the Bath for.

OBSERVE. III.
Whilst (at my leisure Hours) I am recollecting these Memoirs, to fit them for
the Press, there is a young Lady, about 13 Years of Age, brought to the Bath in
much the like Case. My Lady, her Mother (a Person of considerable Quality, but
I have not leave to mention her Name) being very sollicitous for her Recovery
(it being (if I mistake not her only Daughter* and of which she has hitherto
almost despaired; desired my Advice, and utmost Assistance in the Case. It was
a Lameness from a more than ordinary Weakness in the Back, so that she could
not so much as sit upright in a Chair, much less stand, or suffer to be held
upright. The Lumbal Muscles, and perhaps the Vertibrae of the Loins, (thoe they
did not start out) being Relaxed and Enfeebled. Moreover, when she was forced
into an upright Posture, or put into a Swing (which also was sometimes done
whilst she used the Bath; for my Lady, her Mother, was greatly apprehensive of
her her growing aside) she complained of a Pain and Streightness all athwart
her Belly; the Muscles of the Abdomen being probably, contracted, by her so
long leaning forward, and yielding to the Weakness of her Back; and when forced
out, by a more erect posture, it was painful to her.

The beginning of this Lameness was a violent Fever, which after some few Days
very great Illness, settled upon the lower Parts, and remained there, with the
Inconveniences abovementioned, many Months after the Fever was removed, even
to the time that she was brought to this place.

After due Preparation, she began with drinking these Waters, and then was
permitted to bathe, which she did a Fortnight or more, before any considerable
Alteration to the better was discoverable; but from that time, upon her
drinking some days together, and bathing other some (in their turns) and
Purging between whiles, she, at length, recovered so well, as to be able not
only to go alone, and very straight, and upright, but very nimbly also, up and
down Stairs; without any the least Pain or Disquiet, or the least appearance of
Crookedness, which was her Lady-Mother's chiefest Fear.

She bathed in all Thirty times, and drank as often, and went from hence well,
October. 7. 1695.

OBSERVE. IV.
Mrs. Budghill, of Exeter, a comely young Gentlewoman, about Five and Twenty
Years of Age, was much in the same condition as was the first mentioned, only
her Head was not so much dosed, had but little Alteration of her Speech, but
all parts else enfeebled and benumbed, but especially the lower parts, so that
she could neither stand not go, and he sense of Feeling was depraved in all
Parts.

She had been under this Weakness some Months, and had tried several means by
the Directions of Dr. Heal, a worthy Physician of those Parts, who married her
Sister) and of Dr. Davy, and Dr. Bidgood, both eminent Physicians of Exeter,
and some others of meaner note in that Country. She was, at length, brought
hither in June, 1682. by her Mother, and that Brother-in-law of his, Dr. Heal;
and after due Preparation, by his Advice and mine, was first put into the
Queens-Bath, afterward into the King's; and after a whiles bathing, was
pumped, and taking Alteratives withal, ( viz. Cephalicks and Antiscorbuticks)
she, at length, very well recovered the perfect Use of, and Sense in, all her
Limbs.

OBSERVE. V.
Mrs. Pierce, of the Devises, in the County of Wilts, (Wife to a near Relation,
and good Friend of mine) aged Thirty-three. In the beginning of the year 90.
being then with Child of her fourth or fifth Child; and having been usually
sick at Stomach, as many breeding Women are; when she had gone about half her
time, ^n excessive Vomiting seized her, insomuch, that, for a time, she could
not keep any thing within her. When that ceased, a Numb^^ess in her Limbs
ensued, accompanied with violent Pains, which never left her, till it had
wholly deprived her of the Use of Arms, Hands, Legs and Feet, and rendered her
utterly unable to help her self.

Her very kind Husband called in to her Assistance two Physicians that lived
upon ^he place; sent also for me, and had Advice, by Letter, from two
Physicians in Bristol; we all prescribed what her present Circumstances would
safely admit, without the hazard of procuring an Abortion, but all to no great
Advantage, till she was delivered of her Child, which was in November
following, and then seemed perfectly recovered, and continued so till the
latter end of 92. when (being again with Child) the Numbness began with it, and
the same Stomach-Sickness as before, nor could she then go without help. The
same, or the like, Means was used again, but with as little Success, till she
was delivered, and then (after her Month was out, and she in a fit Condition to
endure a Coach) I having formerly advised her Coming to the Bath, she was
brought hither, and stayed here Six or Seven Weeks, from July, 93. till
September following; and by drinking the Waters, and bathing (by turns) and
using Cephalic and Antiscorbutick Alteratives; and, toward the Conclusion,
pumping upon the most weakened Parts, and by God's Blessing upon all, she was
very well recovered, and has so continued to this time, which is March, 96.
though since she was here she had a Child, and was not so sick in the breeding of
it as formerly; but had a sore L^g upon her first being with Child, which
continued running till she was delivered, and then it healed of it self; to the
Discharge, probably at which part, may be ascribed the Exemption she had from
her former Illness; and therefore I advised an Issue, as near that part as
could conveniently be made. She bread this Child more healthfully than any she
had done before, and so continued to be Six or Seven Months after her Delivery;
but the Child had Convulsion-Fits, and at length died in a sudden, and violent
one, on the 18th. of February, 1695. This was the third Child they so lost,
since she was first seized by this Distemper.

To prevent her own Relapse, and the same Fate to what Children she may yet
have, I earnestly pressed the making of an Issue, which she had not then
submitted to, and perhaps the more backward in it, because she her self was
then so well as ever she was in her whole Life; though it had fallen severely on
the Children she bore, whilst under this Nervous Distemper.

OBSERVE. VI.
My Lady Ingolsby, of Yorkshire, brought ^ither a Daughter of hers, of about
Four^een or Fifteen Years of age, in April, 1684. Relaxed from Head to Foot; I
think, after a ^ever. When set upon her Feet, she was no ^ore able to stand
than a Cloth, but sunk, and gave off, at every Joint.

She was prepared for bathing, took Alte^atives, ( Antiscorbuticks, and
Neuroticks) ^^ank the Waters, when she intermitted bath^^g. In Three Weeks or a
Months time she ^ot so much Strength as to be able to stand, (...) set upright
against a Wall; at length ^ould walk her Chamber between two Maids, and before
she went away (which was at Se^en Weeks, or Two Months end) could ^o, though
feebly, without leading. She went ^ff at the heat of Summer, and my Lady, ^^r
Mother, sent her back (with a Maid on^^ (...) to attend her) about the latter
end of August, or beginning of September, and she bathed on as long as the
Season would well permit, and was so well recovered before she went hence, that
she danced at our Mayor's Feast, and not with the least Applause of any of the
young Company that were then dancing with her.

She was, in a few Years, married to Sir John Arderne's eldest Son, of
Cheshire, whose Wife she now is (if both living). They were here in my House,
in the Summer, 1693. with a pretty Daughter of theirs, about Two Years of Age,
all in good Health.

He came to drink the Waters (by Dr. Bateman's Directions) to prevent the
Return of a Rheumatism, of which he had, the Year before, a severe Fit; but
neither the Mother nor the Daughter needed either drinking or bathing. In the
like Case;

One Mrs. Booth, of Cheshire, brought a Daughter in July, 1688. She was about
Eleven or Twelve Years old; she also drank the Waters, and bathed, and
recovered in Five or Six Weeks so well, as to dance a Jigg with great Applause,
at a Ball, which the Gentry met at. A knotted Cane of her Fathers, which she
used to try to go with, was hung up as a Trophy, upon the new Marble Structure
in the Cross-Bath, erected by John Earl, of Melford, in Memory of Queen Mary of
Modena's Bathing there the year before; it was the first, of that kind, that
was hung upon it, and it continues there to this day.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mrs. Elizabeth Waller, (Daughter to the Famous Sir William Waller, Lieut.
General of the Horse in the Parliament Army, in the time of the late Civil War)
aged Three and Twenty, was brought hither in August, 75. so Weak and Lame, that
she was in no measure able to help her self, no more then a newborn Child.

She was carried in Arms, could not bring a Hand to her Mouth, nor stick a Pin
in her Clothes; so Weak and Dispirited, that they durst not adventure her in a
Litter, because there could be no Body by her: But a Bed was laid in a Coach,
and she laid upon that, and her Apothecary's Wife on one side, and her Woman
and Maid on the other, with Cordials in their Hands, to support her. They drove
but slowly, so that she was four or five Days in coming down. She was reduced
to this Weakness after a Fever, which ended in some Cholick Pains, and those
in a Diarrhaea; all together reduced her to a Skelliton, as well as took away
her Stomach, and Strength of all her Limbs, from Head to Foot; she had been in
this weak condition four Months before she was brought down. All her Relations,
and Physicians also, despaired of her Recovery, and gave her off as one that
nothing farther could be done unto: Yet under all these Discouragements, having
heard what great things had been done at the Bath, she was very importunate to
be brought hither; but every Body was against it, concluding that she would die
by the way.

It was, at length, permitted that she should have her Will; and part with her
they did, not expecting to see her alive again: But it pleased God to order it
otherwise; for she was not worse upon her Journey, and came at length hither,
under the Circumstances above described; and being recommended to my Care by
Sir John Michlethwait (who was one of her Physicians). I indeed wished her safe
back again, doubting whither she would ever be made sound here; but I conceal*d
my Suspicions from her, and put her quickly upon drinking the Waters, but in
very small quantities, lest her Looseness should be increased by it; so that it
was for the Alteration of the excessive sharp Matter, more than Evacuation,
that I prescribed them to her.

And whereas we gave to others Soluble Tartar, Sal Prunell, or Crystal Mineral,
etc. ^o make them pass the better, I ordered her ^o take prepared Coral,
Crab's-eyes, and Pearl, ^n the first Glass. This answered the Design; for the
Diarrhea abated upon it, and ^he got some Stomach, insomuch, that in a
Fortnights time, or thereabouts, (she great^y importuning it) she was put into
the Bath; the most moderate one (to be sure) ^t first, and not suffered to stay
past a ^uarter of an Hour, at most but half an Hour, at a time. She went on
thus bathing and drinking by turns, about two Months, or ^ine Weeks, and got
Strength by degrees, and at length a perfect Recovery; for she ^^ent back
cheerful, and well, in a Hackney ^oach, and lived ten or twelve Years after,
and died, at length, of the Stone in the Kid^eys, as I was informed.

The Care and Kindness of her Relations ^ould not trust her with Servants
alone, ^ut sent down with her (as is before said) ^er Apothecary's Wife (a very
kind, and ^areful good Friend) who had been married ^ven Years, or more, and
never had a Child; ^or had she been told of the Efficacy of the ^ath, in making
Childless Women Fruit^^l, at least she had not Faith enough to ^elieve it, or
Courage to come purposely to try it: Her Concern only for the Safety and
Welfare of this young Gentlewoman, would not let her trust the Bath-Guides
alone with her, but she would, and did go in with her, her self; and, for the
reward of her Kindness, as soon as she came back to her Husband she conceived
with Child, and at nine or ten Months end had a Son, and after that, a Child or
two more. The Apothecary's Name was Biscoe; he lived at the Unicorn in
King Street, in Westminster, over against the Gate House, near Pallace-yard.

OBSERVE. VIII.
Jane Mosely, of Clack, in the Parish of Lyneham, in North Wilishire, aged 22;
in September, 97. fell ill of a Fever, which ended in a Pain of her Left Leg;
and after that, a Stupor or Numbness, insomuch, that when a Pin was thrust into
it, she was no ways sensible of it; in a Fortnight after it began to swell, and
to look blue and blackish, as if the Blood stagnated in it. In the beginning of
November following, I being at Sir Robert Buttons, at Tockenham-Park, (which is
in the same Parish) I was desired by my Lady Button to see this poor Girl, and
to give her my Advice, which I did; and by a Purging Electuary, (which I
prescribed, and my Lady paid for) and some Antiscorbutick Alteratives inwardly;
and a Bath of warm Cephalic, Neurotick, and Antiscorbutick Herbs, for the lame
Leg, outwardly; Life and Color was brought again into the Limb, and Strength
returned by degrees. She continued pretty well, so as to work, (for she had
nothing else to depend upon for a Livelihood) till March 81, when the same Leg
began to grow weak again, without any previous Sickness, and the same Swelling,
Tingling and Numbness affected; not only that Leg, but the other also, Arms and
Hands, and all parts of her Body, insomuch, that she became a Charge to the
Parish. The Overseers of the Poor (willing, by laying out a present small Sum
of Money, to save a constant Weekly Charge) sent her to the Bath, with a Letter
from my Lady Button to me, in which she desired my Advice to her, and Care of
her; what I prescribed before for her, having been so successful. I put her
upon drinking the Waters, and bathing; but the Allowance of the Parish was so
scanty, that she could stay but a Fortnight, yet in that little time had some
Advantage, but not enough to enable her to work; therefore (upon the good
Lady's Rebuke for not supplying her sufficiently to stay longer at first) they
sent her down a second time; and in a Fortnight more was so well recovered, as
to go to her Work again, and excused the Parish from farther Expense. I had the
worthy Lady's Thanks, and the Parishes also. This Maid came to my House, July,
95. being waiting on her Mistress here at the Bath, to return me Thanks for my
former Advice to her; she was then healthy and well; and had continued so,
except some aptitude to Scorbutical Distempers.

OBSERVE. IX.
Mary, the Daughter of Mr. Rawlins, of Litchfield, aged 13, was brought to the
Bath by her very kind and careful Mother in July, 77, and withal a Letter for
me from Mr. Watson, of Sutton-Cofield, who had been of Lincoln-Colledge, in
Oxford, when I was there also; he practiced Physic, as well as exercised his
Ministry; and this young Woman had been some time under his Care, as she had
been before under Dr. Higge's of Coventry, and several others, who had tried
all Means, both Outward and Inward; Unguents, Plasters, Artificial Baths,
Purgings, Vomitings, etc. and all to no purpose, for she remained a Cripple for
a Year and a half.

The first beginning of her Illness was a ^^ld, taken by lying on the Ground,
upon which a very violent Pain seized the M^seles ^^d Tendons above the Right
Knee, and after ^^at the Left also; and then both the Hips, ^^th Pain and
Stiffness, and the Right Thigh ^^sted; she could put neither of them out
^eight, nor suffer her self to be set upright, ^^ch less erect her self; she
could not suf^^ her Knees to be parted one from ano^^er; so greatly was she
every where con^^cted.

The first Year she got Ease, and some ^^se of her Limbs, tho endeavoring to
go, ^^e Knee would rub against the other so ^^rd, as to fret off the Skin, and
cause Pain (...) well as hindrance in going. She came ^^ain the next Year, and
was perfectly re^^ver'd; and some Years after married, and ^^th since been the
Mother of several Chil^^en. She both drank the Waters, and bathed, ^^d used
Inward Medicines also.

In September, 93. She was in this City, ^^d knew me, though I had forgotten her,
and ^^lped my Memory in some of the Particu^^s above mentioned. She was then,
and I ^^nk is still) Wife to one Mr. Handcocke, Brasier in the Pall Mall,
London, and had ^n no Remainder of her former Lameness (...) all.

OBSERVE. X.
In the beginning of the sixth Chapter I told you, that some thus affected in
their Limbs, had two, three, or more, of the Vertibrae of their Backs started
out; I now com^ to give a few Instances of these; and first,

I. Philip Brown, from out of Ireland aged 14, Nephew to Capt. Carpenter, who
had a Foot-Company in Garrison, in the Castle of Dublin: He took Care of this
h^^ Sister's Son, and sent him over with a So^dier (his Servant) to attend him.
They came in July, 66. He had been under they Directions of Dr. William Currer,
Physitia^ to the then Marquess (afterward Duke of Ormond, and Deputy of
Ireland, and Physitian-general to the English Army there He had tried all
manner of Methods an^ Medicines for his Recovery; and perhap^ the more, because
a Chemist, and the Captain being his very good Friend; but all wa^ in vain,
which made them, at length, dete^mine to send him to the Bath, which they did,
and by Letter committed him to my Care, the Doctor and I having been formerly
acquainted at Bristol, as he past to and from Ireland, when I practiced in that
City.

I was sorry to see him come in so weak and ^eplorable a Condition, expecting
no other ^han that he would have died upon the ^lace: For besides the great
Weakness of ^^l his lower Limbs, (which they sent him ^ither for) he had so ill
a Voyage, that he ^ook Cold, which brought upon him a vio^ent Cough, with which
he discharged very ^oul Phlegm; he had a Diarrhaea; both the ^ypochondria were
greatly distended; he was ^ithal Hectical; so that I was forced a while ^o
neglect the Lameness, and apply to the ^ore urging Symptoms.

His Case, for which he was sent to the ^ath, was, that after a long Sickness
(the ^eginning of which was, as I remember, an ^pidemick Fever) he had all his
lower Limbs, ^om the middle of his Back (where four or ^ve of the Vertibrae
were started out, by reason of the Relaxation of the Ligaments, which should
hold them together) were not ^nly useless, but senseless, insomuch, that when
he was nipp'd or pinched, though very ^ard, or pricked Pin, he felt it not: ^t
would have been the same probably, if a Nail had been driven into his Foot or
Leg. He was no way sensible when he had occasion to ease Nature, by Stool or
Urine; bur ^^t a usual time of the day they set him upon (...) hollow Chair,
and both came from him, but when or how, he knew not. He had often Cramps, and
Convulsive Motions in his Legs and Thighs, which would violently draw them
upward, whither he would or not, but of himself could never stir them.

After I had mastered a little those other Symptoms, I permitted him to bathe,
(and indeed sooner than I otherwise would, upon the Importunity of the Soldier
that came to attend him) he endured it better than I expected, and went on so
to do till toward Michaelmas, but without any manifest Advantage to his Limbs,
insomuch, that the Soldier pressed earnestly to be sent back again, seeing no
Good was to be done, and that the Winter approaching, they might probably have
as bad, or a worse Voyage than when they came over. I was for his longer stay,
and writ both to the Doctor and the Captain, what my Opinion was, and the
Reasons of it; in answer to which they left him wholly to my Disposal,
despairing of ever having him cured, if this Means failed, and concluding, that
if he had such another Passage back as he had hither, it must infallibly kill
him: so that if I thought fit to try him another Season, I was desired to
assist the Soldier, in placing the Lad for the whole Winter, and send him back
to be mustered with the rest of his Company, which was done; and the young Man
left ^o the Care of a Woman, that very well ^ischarged her Trust; I ordered her
to put ^im into the Bath, when ever the Wind was not turbulent, or the weather
excessive ^old, though it was Winter; which she con^antly did; and the first
Alteration that ^ppear'd was, that when he was rubbed after ^is Sweating, he
begin to be ticklish. A^out Christmas, (I having for some time ^een out of
Town, with a Patient in the Country, for I then attended a Riding, as ^ell as a
Bath-practice) calling to see him ^s soon as I came home, he told me (with
^reat joy) that he could wagg one of his Toes; and pulling off his Shoe and
Stock^n for me to see it, he was better than his lord, and moved two or three,
and in few Days after, all of that Foot, and not long after, those of the other
also.

In less than a Months time, after that, ^oth Sense and Motion of all the lower
Parts ^turn'd by degrees; and he could first crawl about the Room by the
Chairs, after that ^uld use Crutches; so the Soldier return^g in March
sollowing as was agreed when (...) sent him back) found him (to his no ^mall
Admiration) at the Door of the House ^y himself. After one Month's bathing that
^pring he left off his Cratches, and could walk three Miles in a Morning; but
the Vertibr^ still kept out. And indeed I never saw those Subluxations well
reduced, though some bold (because ignorant) Bonesetters, have here pretended to
do it, particularly a Rakemaker, who boldly undertook to recover,

2. Mrs. Unite, a Daughter of Capt. Scudamore's, in Herefordshire, a fine
Woman, and of excellent Temper, who came hither in May, 90. almost in the same
Condition, as is in the last described (only the sense of feeling was not quite
lost in her useless Limbs.)

She came hither by the joynt-advice of Dr. Cole, then of Worcester, and Dr.
Williams, of Hereford, and Mr. Powell, the Chyrurgeon of Abergavenny; she was
by some of them recommended to my Care.

After Preparation, she had not bathed past five times, but, by this Fellow's
Persuasion, she left off bathing, and our Directions, wholly submitted to his
Cure; who confidently warranted to recover her; and in order to it pretended to
set some Bones in her Feet, where there were none out; and to reduce the Bones
in her Back, applied Plasters, and bound them up, and kept her in Expectation
of a Cure, a Month at least, but none appearing, she returned home never a Jot
the better, b^t came again the next Year, and drank ^^e Waters, and bathed, and
found some Ad^^ntage, as to Motion and Strength: How (...) has been since I
have not heard; but by ^^^ident, and at great distances I have learnt ^^^t she
yet continues weak and lame, but ^^^h not thought fit to try this Means
far^^^r, which I think she ought to have done; (...) if ever she be cured, it
must probably be (...) bathing, year after year, till it be per^^^^ed.

3. A case exactly like the first of the ^^^ee was in a Daughter of Colonel
Wal^^^'s; he being one of King Charles the I.'s ^^^ges, forfeited Life, Estate,
and all, so ^^^t the Children lived upon the Exhibiti^^ of Relations and
Friends.

She came hither for Cure in April, 65. and (...) Advice was desired, which I
was not ^^nting in. The Alterations toward a Re^^^ery were not sudden, and
consequently (...) Expenses were enlarged with her Stay, (...) that she ran in
Debt with her Landlady, (...) was forced to send her Sister (who ^^^e to attend
her) to try her Friends for (...) ^ecruit; which she not quickly speeding (...)
the Year was so far gone, that she was ^^^^ed to stay the following Winter, but
(...) kept on bathing, and used a Swing, and ^^^etimes drank the Waters; and
all this as the Weather and her Strength would permit. With long lying she was
galled upon her Hips and Back, from whence came Ulcers, which when dressed by Mr.
Chapman, the Apothecary, (in pure Charity, for she had nothing to pay for
Advice or Medicines) she was not at all sensible of it, though he was forced to
use hot, and sharp Applications to prevent Mortification: But before her Sister
returned (which was not till toward the Spring) she had recovered some Sense
and Motion in her Limbs, and (by that time she had made out her Stay to a
Twelvemonth, or more) went back to London, much advantaged, though not perfectly
recovered, as to Ability to go nimbly; but her Landlady going up about
Michaelmas following, about hers, and some other Debts (for her Sister had not
brought enough to pay off all Scores, and to continue here longer too) she met
her walking in London-Streets, as briskly as ever she did in her Life.

I have been the more particular in the first and third of these Observations,
not only for the remarkableness of the Recoveries, but that it may be again
observed, that The Effects of the Bath do not presently appear, and that the
Impatience and Parcimony of Infirm Persons spoil more Cures, than ordinarily
the Bath, or the best Me^hods and Medicines d^ perform: For had not these two
(the first and last mentioned) been necessitated to stay ^onger than they were
willing, they might ^ither have remained still lame, or the Cures ^ight have
been imputed to some trivial thing they might have done, or taken, after their
going from hence.

4. Michael King, a Soldier, from Tedbury, ^n Glocestershire; by a Blow on his
Back with (...) Halbert in Flanders, going upon a Party ^o guard Pioneers, was
disabled for farther ^ervice,; and had his Discharge, and re^urn'd to his
Friends in Tedbury aforesaid. ^e had three or four of the Vertibrae of his ^ack
started; and by reason of that could ^ot stoop, nor go steddily, but was forced
^o wear Iron-Bodices, without which he ^ould hardly sit, much less go, upright.
He ^as sent to Bath in April, 1692. and being ^oor, as a disabled Soldier, was
admitted in^o the Hospital for Strangers, where it is ^y Province to advise
those, whom the ^ayor for the time being, commits to my ^are. I ordered him
some Preparations for ^athing, and sometimes drinking the Waters, ^y which, in
a Month, or five Weeks time, ^e recovered so much Strength, as to leave ^ff his
Iron-Bodices, and to go without 'em, ^ompetently well; but the Vertibrae still
kept ^ut, and will do, I suppose, as long as he ^^ves.

The Bath infallibly strengthens a weakened part, and gives Ease to a pained
one, but usually (without other Assistances) leaves it in the posture it finds
it. Young People by this help have out-grown great Deformities of Limbs; but I
have seldom (or never) seen any grown Person to have this part reduced; nor
would I ever consent to have it endeavored by force, lest the Spinal Marrow be
comprest by it, and the Passage of the Animal Spirits wholly intercepted. For
better it is to have an imperfect Motion and Sense, than to be totally deprived
of both.

I should now here have ended this Chapter, but that in the beginning of it I
mentioned some, thus generally weakened, that had also inordinate Motions in
some, or all, parts of the Body; referrable to those Convulsive Motions, which
have obtained the name of

OBSERVE. X.
Chorea Sti Viti; of which I shall give you some few Instances, and those short
ones, and then proceed to some other Subject.

1. Thomas Neale, Nephew to Mr. Hind, (Minister of Grettleton, in North
Wilishire, near the Fesse) aged 13, was brought hither by his Uncle who took
care of his Sisters ^hildren, their Father and Mother being ^^th dead) in
August, 85. He had been (...) long time before) subject to various and ^^ange
Fits, which the Vulgar imputed to ^^itchcraft (as usually they do, whatsoever
^^^not common). It seemed to me to be a ^omplication of Convulsion, Epilepsie,
and ^^orea Sancti Viti, and (to be sure) a high ^^orbute affecting chiefly the
Brain, and the ^^rvosum Genus.

Out of the Fits he would be greatly dis^^der'd in his Head; sometimes talked
at ^^^dom, sometimes could not speak at all; (...) had, for the most part,
Irregular Moti^^s in his Arms and Hands, Legs and Feet; ^^tered so that they
could not trust him to ^^e (scarcely stand) alone. His very kind ^^d careful
Uncle stayed with him a while (...) see him settled to his Business here, and
^^en left him to my Care and Direction, ^ith Servants to attend him) five or
six ^eeks, or more; in which time, by drink^^^ the Waters, and bathing, and
using Anti^^^butick, Antiepileptick, and Chalybeat Altera^^^es, was so
recovered as to walk, talk, and ^^rry himself composedly, and to ride home
^^^ne, and continued from that time well, ^^thout any Relapse, and is since (as
I hear) ^^come a healthy Man, and married; but where he lives I cannot learn;
else I would have signified his present State of Body, from his own Information.

2. A Son of Mrs. Gould's, from London, (then a Widow, since married to a
Doctor of Physic of the same Name) about ten or twelve Years of Age, could
neither sit, nor stand still, but some part or other would be in continual
Motion. His careful Mother (having tried several Means before) brought him to
the Bath in August, 1688. to try what that would do for him, and called Dr.
Baynard and me to his Assistance; we put him upon drinking the Waters, and
bathing, and several Alteratives, but to little or no purpose.

He was at length, cured, by plunging him several times in very cold Water, and
this was done by Dr. Bay^ard's Advice.

3 Richard Tannor, of Longcly, near Chippenham, in the County of Wilts, aged
about 24, had a Giddiness in his Head, and an Universal Feblen^ss from the
Relaxation of hi^ Nerves, went to^tering as if he had been alway^ falling; his
Hands and Arms seldom out o^ Motion. He came to the Bath for it: an^ finding
some, though but little. Advantage by i^ the first year, got to work Journey-work
to (...) Shooemaker in this City (^or he had serv^^ an Apprentiship to that
Trade) and b^thi^^ and drank the Waters, by my Advice, between whiles, and used
ordinary Caephalicks, and Antiscorbuticks, and was, at length, perfectly
recovered. It was eight or ten Years ago that he first came hither, and for
many Years following he worked in Town, purposely for the Benefit of the Bath.
I ^aw him many times in the Street, and in ^he Church, standing and going as
steadily as any Man that never had such a Distemper.

Had others taken the course that this ^oor Fellow did, in coming every Season,
^or settling themselves upon the ^lace, or ^ear it, till they had been (as he
was) ^erfectly recovered, there might have been (...) larger Volumn of such
Instances as th^se; ^ut this may suffice to show where, and ^ow they may have
Help, if they will be so wise, as to do as others have done.

4. Since I came to live upon this Place (...) the Year, nor the Man's Name, I
cannot ^ecollect, but there are here yet living ma^y, and sufficient Witnesses
of it) there was a seemingly, lusty and well-limb'd ^ellow, brought hither for
Cure, that could ^un, but not go; nor stand, unless leaning against a Wall or
Post. He had been (as ^e said) a Soldier, but whither Wounds, ^r lying in the
Fields, or what other thing ^rought this Distemper upon him, I cannot well
remember. When he would remove^ from one Place to another, he would se^ himself
a running, and run against a Wall o^ Post, and there stop a while, and then se^
his Face to that quarter that he designed t^ be at (for he could not turn at
the corne^ of a Street, but must move directly forward and thus he saved the
Charges, of being carried, or lead. He used the Bath I a^^ sure, and I think,
drank the Waters, an^ was recovered here.

The Unusualness of the thing drew together many Spectators, and, amongst them
some compassionate ones, which gave him their Charities, on which he lived he^
(for he brought little or nothing with him till his Cure was well perfected,
which w^^ not done presently.

5. I shall add one Instance more, n^^ for the Recovery, for she was not cure^
here, nor did she use the Bath at all, at lea^^ not long enough to try what it
would have done for her; and, if she had. I doubt whither that or any thing
else would have availed: But I mention it, to show ho^ many, and strange
Infirmities, our crazy Ca^casses are here liable to; and also to she how
ngenio^s an Instructrix Necessity is.

It was a Maid of Priddy, upon Mendip, ^ear Wells, in Somersetshire. She came
hither in Summer, 94, and was then more than ^20 Years of age. She had (from
her Childhood) a Weakness in her Right Arm, and Hand; but to appearance, both
were near as full, and as fleshy as the other was; but when she endeavored to
move it any way, especially upward, or to lay hold of any thing, such odd and
antic Motions would be in that Arm and Hand, as if she went about to act the
Changeling. If it were a ^ight thing she took hold of, it would (by the Motion
of her Arm and Fingers) be thrown at some distance from her; but if ^t were of
considerable weight, she could grasp and carry it, hanging downwards, a good
way together. This Infirmity rendered her unfit for Service, to help therefore
toward a Livelihood (for her Friends were poor, and wrought for their own
Living) she learnt to knit (Stockin-making being the chief Trade of that
Gountry) and that with one Hand; which they that understand the Mystery of that
Manufacture, will conclude a very hard thing to do, especially with the most
unhandy of the Hands, the Left.

She came hither in hopes to have been admitted into our Hospital for
Strangers; but the Founder of it (Mr. Billett) had no kindness for the Infirm
of that Sex (whatever he had for the sound and trigg) but ordered it for twelve
Men only, and that but for three Months in the Year, two in the Spring, ( April
and May) and one in the Fall (September) so that she went back without trying
what the Bath could have done for her: But it was not very likely (after so
many Years Continuance, and its being perhaps born with her) to have removed
such an unusual Infirmity.

6. There has been mention made in the beginning of the Chapter of the Palsy,
of another irregular sort, of which a Herald would have said that he bears his
Infirmity Quarterly, Lame and Sound. When the Arm and Hand on one Side, and the
contrary Leg and Foot have been affected; I shall only give two Instances of
this, and then proceed to a seventh Chapter.

1. William Louell, of Shaftsbury, in the County of Dorset, Buttonmold-maker,
aged 40, was seized in the Night with a Giddiness, and Amazedness in his Head,
in the year 91. Being about to rise, next Morning, his Left Arm and Hand failed
him, and became useless; within three Days after, the contrary Leg and Foot
failed, as the Arm and Hand had done before, and both became unserviceable to
him, for which he came to the Bath; and though he stayed not more than twenty
Days (not having wherewithal to maintain him longer) yet he received apparent
Benefit, but not a perfect Recovery. I therefore advised him what to do when he
came home, and to come again the next Season, when poor Strangers were admitted
to the Hospital, and I would get him in for one, but he came not till April,
95. when I found his Left Arm, and Right Leg and Thigh, greatly Emaciated, but
had more Strength in them than when he came first in 91.

I recommended him to the Mayor as an Object of Charity, and as one likely to
receive Benefit by the Bath; and he was, by him, permitted the advantage of the
Hospital, which is a Lodging and Seven Groats a Week) for some time; and by
bathing, and some Inward Means (of which the Waters were a part) he got
considerable Benefit.

2. Thomas Holmes, of the Marine Regiment, aged 24, born in Friezland, had an
English Man to his Father, a Chyrurgeon; he was set sick ashore at Portsmouth,
and sent to St. Thomas's- Hospital, Paralytick, of the Right Arm, and Left Leg;
and discharged from thence to come to the Bath in July. 95. under the Governors
and Stewards Pass; he here bathed, and found Advantage.

Many such Mortifying Objects have I here seen, and every Year do see; and the
best Use that I can make (and would have others do the like) of the
consideration of them is, to bless God that it has not been (nor yet is) the
case of me, or mine: For it is a distinguishing Mercy only that has made the
Difference.

CHAP. VII.
BEsides the Cripples already mentioned in the foregoing Chapters, there have
been many here under my Care, disabled in their Limbs upon accidental
Occasions; and these also have had remarkable Recoveries by bathing and
pumping, and drinking these Waters: And these are to be the subject Matter of
this seventh Chapter; I shall referr them to seven or eight chief Heads, and
give two or three Instances upon each, and so dismiss the Lame.

Accident 1. The first sort are those, that after violent (perhaps Malignant)
Fevers, by a Critical Discharge of the Morbifick Matter upon a Limb, have had a
Phlegmon, o^ Inflammation, with Tumor, and that (either by ill-management, or
the Virulency of the Humor) has turned to a Mortification (a thing not
unfrequent, to those especially, that have been Scorbutical, and had Plethoric
Bodies) and of these I shall give three Signal Instances.

OBSERVE. 1.
Sir John Austin, of Kent, more than 40 Years of age; after some Days Sickness
of an Acute Fever, by a Metastasis of the Putrid Matter from the more noble
Parts to one of his Legs, had first great Pain, afterward Tumor, and Discolor
there; after a while it suppurated, and broke (whither of it self, or opened by
Incision or Caustic, I do not well remember; that being done some Months
before he came hither) afterward it became a Gangrene, and great quantities of
Mortified Flesh were taken out at several Dressings; but by diligent and due
Applications, the Procedure of the Mortification was stopped, and at length the
Wounds were Incarnated, and Cicatriz'd; but there remained upon that Part, not
only great Weakness, but Pain also (at least by Intervals). From the Hip
downwards the Limb was greatly wasted, so that it was well-nigh one half less
than the other: He could scarcely walk his Chamber with Crutches, nor be at
Ease when his Leg depended; and was therefore forced to spend most of his time
in, and on the Bed. He was brought hither in May, 88. and applied himself to me
for directions, how to manage himself in the Use of the Bath.

After due Preparation, and a whiles drinking the Waters, he entered the Bath,
and in a Weeks time had Ease; in a Months time changed his Crutches for a
Staff, and sometimes walked the Streets; at six Weeks end I saw him run without
Staff, or any Assistance, to get shelter from a shower of Rain; and at two
Months end went away perfectly eased, and trigg; by degrees the Limb recovered
Flesh, as well as former Strength.

OBSERVE. II.
Sir Herbert Crofts was so much under the same Circumstances, both as to Cause
and Effects, that it would be but to waste Time and Paper to give a particular
Description of his Case. He came hither in August, 92. after a long and tedious
time spent, under the Directions of Physicians and Chyrurgions. He had hardly
left off the Applications to the Calf of the Leg, and still feared the falling
down of new Matter to the Part; so that he (besides Purging, and other
Preparatory Means) drank long of the Waters, and bathed his Leg in Bath-Water
in his Chamber, before we durst adventure him to go into the Bath; which at
length he did with excellent Success, so that he was at Ease, got Strength, and
left his Crutches, and was perfectly recovered.

He came again the next Year, but rather to confirm a Recovery, than to seek
one. His very excellent Lady, who was greatly assistant to him the year before,
was left behind, expecting every day to ly in, which (by the way) was no small
Testimony of his absolute Recovery the first time.

OBSERVE. III.
Mrs. Hales, Wife to James Hales, of Foleshull, in the County of the City of
Coventry, aged 50. was about December, 1687. seized with a Malignant Fever,
and in few Days was delirous, and continued so near a Month. Within a Fortnight
after the Fever had seized her, a Mortification appeared upon the lower part
of the Os Sacrum, extending it self on the Right Buttock; it was near sixteen
Inches round; great quantities of dead Flesh was taken out at several
Dressings, and the other Ulcer was three Months in curing; but when cured, the
Use of her Right Leg was altogether taken away, for which, the Summer
Twelvemonth following, she was brought to the Bath (to wit, in June, 89.) and
was committed to my Care. I found her Right Leg and Foot not only useless, but
Cold, Dead, and Senseless. After some Preparation she made Use first of the
Cross-Bath, not being able to bear a stronger, she being but weak in Body, as
well as Infirm in Limb. She afterward used the Hot-Bath also, and continued
Bathing (as her Strength would permit) about five or six Weeks, in which time
she recovered Warmth and Sense, but little Strength in her Leg. She came again
the next Year, in July, 90. and stayed as long, if not longer than before. By
both times using the Bath she recovered the perfect use of her Leg, and now
walks very well. The Confirmation of this, and the Description of her first
Illness, I owe to the kindness of Mr. Septimus Bott, an ingenions and diligent
Apothecary and Chyrurgeon, of Coventry, to whose Care and Skill she owed that
Strength she had to come to the Bath, for farther Cure of her lost Limb. His
Letter to me bears date, Aug. 28. 1695.

Though what I am about to add to these three last Observations be not in every
Circumstance the same; yet because they concern the same Limb, and a like
Translation of Matter to it (though it proceeded not ^o Mortification) and
impeded, in great measure, their going; and the Cases not being common, I
thought fit to insert them ^ere: And first,

OBSERVE. IV.
Mr. Andrew Chaplain, a Minister, out of ^reland, aged 38. came hither in May,
80. having the Right Leg three times (at least) ^s big as the other, not very
painful, unless ^y Fits, sometimes; but heavy and cumber^ome to him in going.

It came to him after a Fever, which ^etermined in an Ague, that held him some
^onsiderable time, the Leg increasing more and more by degrees; but no
Inflammation, ^o Suppuration in any part of it; but the ^kin thickened and
hardened to a great de^ree, as if crusted over, and rough, more ^han in an
Eliphantiasis.

It was chap'd in some places very deep, ^ot unlike the rugged Bark of an old
Tree. ^ut of these Chapps sometimes (upon ta^ing Cold, and in moist Weather, or
any disorder) some moisture came, but not often nor much, but it would then
Itch and Smart, more than at other times. Upon going on Board, it was presently
better, and after landing in England it ran less, as if the Alteration of the
Air had made a Change upon the Distemper. He took some Means, both Purgative
and Alterative; used the Bath five or six Weeks, but with little present
Advantage more than that it seemed to be lightsomer to him; but it was not
considerably less. How it did afterward I never heard, though I earnestly
desired it.

OBSERVE. V.
In a very like Case to this was one Mrs. Edwards, who came hither out of
Wales; She was about 50 Years of age, and after a F^ver had one Leg most
prodigiously swollen; rough, cracked, and crusted, as was the former, from the
Knee to the Toes; but hers had this Peculiar in it, that every Night the Linen
Cloths she wrapped about it (which were not a few) would be in the Morning as
wet as dirt; so wet, that a quantity of Water might be wrung out of them; and
those Cloths, and this Water had the exact smell of Urine, and tinged the
Cloths yellow, as if they had been all Night in the Chamber Pot. She staid not
long enough ^o make any considerable Trial of the Bath, ^r the Waters; being
impatient, and dis^leased, that she was not presently well after three or four
times going into the Bath; and being withal too parcimonious, valu^ng her
Wealth beyond her Health, she ^astned home, and what became of her af^^rwards I
never heard. Guilielmus Fabri^^us Hildanus, in his Observations, Cent. 4. ^^bs.
69. has the Relation of a monstrous ^^ig Arm; but, in most Particulars,
different ^^om these. It is well worth Enquiry from ^hence, and by what
Passages, this Uri^^us Serum (if not Urine its self, for she ^ade little, or
none, the while) should ^ome to be discharged there.

Mr. Chaplin Urin'd in Proportion to what ^e drank, and for the most part had a
con^ant Benefit by Stool; but when Costive, (...) was worse in his Leg. Cooling
Hepa^^ks best agreed with him: His other Leg ^^d sometimes a great Itching in
it, but (...) Swelling, or Discolor. He had observed ^^at he had not sweated
considerably be^^re this came, for some Years before.

Accid. 2. The second Accidental Lameness shall instance in, is what happened
after ^^ains, either by too long neglecting them, (...) ill-managing of them
when regarded; which way ever it be, they have at length occasioned great Pain
and Weakness, and sometimes wasting of the whole Limb, (but Swelling the
Strained Joint) nay, some have been forced (after long, painful, and redious
Endeavors for Cure) to have a Foot cut off, when the Strain has been on the
Ancle-Joynt. Here have been many of this kind recovered; I shall instance in
but a few, contenting my self to have but named some others.

OBSERVE. I.
My Lady Strodes Daughter, near Senn^^^, in Kent, Mrs. Katherine Strode, (a
pleasant humored, and, till then, brisk and active young Gentlewoman) was
brought hithe^ by her Lady Mother, in April, 84. no^able to set that Foot to
Ground that (long before) had been strained; and much mean had been used by
Surgeons, as well a^ Bone-setters, (how timely, or how aptly I do not know)
but all proved unsuccessful and was therefore (as to a last refuge brought to
the Bath. My Advice was des^red in the manner of using it, and for the greater
Convenience, she was lodged i^ my own House. After Preparation, she began by
Degrees, putting her Foot in Pail of the Water Evenings only, before she went
to Bed, at first, afterward both Morning and Evening; and after a whiles thus
using it, she went into the Bath, continuing so to do some time, before it was
pumped upon, and toward the Conclusion she bathed in the Morning, and was
pumped upon the Infirm Joint at Night, and carried immediately from the dry
Pump to her Bed, a Flannel being wrapped about it as soon as they had done
Pumping. This way of Proceeding took Effect; she had, in a little time, ease,
afterward abatement of the Swelling, then a beginning of Strength, so that
leaving off Crutches, she could go by a Staff, and put some Stress to the Lame
Foot. She stayed six Weeks or more the first time, and came again two or three
Years following, and was at length perfectly recovered.

OBSERVE. II.
Going some Years after to visit a Sister of hers, that was married to Mr.
Sergeant Windham's eldest Son of Dunraven, in Glamorganshire, in South Wales,
she encouraged Madam Windham, the Serjeant's Lady, (who was then, by an
accident, in the like case) to come hither, which she did with like Success, in
the year 91, in July, and has been here several times since; having renewed
that Infirmity by new Accidents, and never failed in going back, recovered. She
has since drank these Waters also for an illness of Stomach, with very
considerable Advantage.

OBSERVE. III.
Mr. William Prusean, of Hornechurch, in Essex, about 16 Years of Age; and a
Neighbor Gentlewoman, a Relation of his, one Mrs. Bonham, both in the same
condition differing only in degree, his much the worst came hither in August,
88. after a Consultation of a Doctor of Physic, and three eminent Surgeons
of London; at which Consult it was agreed (after many Trial before, of other
Means) that they should both come to the Bath, which accordingly they did. They
had both Weakness, ^ai^ and Swelling in the Ancle-Joint, with wasting of the
whole Limb, from the Hip dowe wards; oceasion'd long before by Strains not
heeded timely enough, or ill manage afterward.

The Young Gentleman's Case was much the worse of the two. He had been under
the Care of a very ingenious Chyrurgeon who belonged to one of the chief
Hospitals in ^^ndon, where they have Opportunities of see^^g, and being
concerned in, much, and good ^^actice. He had both with Inward, and ^utward
Means, taken a very Methodical, ^^d likely Course for his Recovery; but find^^g
all to fail, (for his own Satisfaction, as ^^ell as his Patients, and his very
good Mo^^er's) he called in two other eminent Chy^^geons, who approved of all
that he had ^^ne, and proposed some Alteration in the ^pplications; but that
increasing the Swel^^g, he returned to his former Method; but ^^at not
availing, it was (as is said) agreed ^^at he should come to the Bath. At his
^^ming away the Gentleman that was first ^^ncern'd with him, gave me by Letter
a ^^ry full, and ingenious Account how he ^^und him, what Method had been used,
^^d his Distrust of the Success of the Bath, ^^o' he consented to have it
tried, and ^^at he did almost despair of saving his Leg. ^he Gentlewoman's he
was not so distrust^^ of, and indeed the Event proved the later ^^e, for she
was much sooner recovered ^^an he; she came but twice, and was per^^ctly well;
he was forced to come oftener, ^^t succeeded at last. His Pains abated the ^^st
time, and the Swelling did not increase ^^on bathing, which was feared; and
some small Advantage he had the first year, which encouraged him to come Year
after Year for several Years following, and got some Ground every Year; so that
the Leg was saved, and he enabled to go competently well upon it, without great
need of a Staff, or much halting, only in favoring of it, at first, he had
settled it in a very ill posture, throwing out his Foot, and not being very well
able to move his Ancle-Joynt, but in great measure that also is recovered, and
I am told that he now walks much, and limps very little. He has not been here
these three Years past, but I here now and then of him, and am still informed
that he recovers every year more and more.

OBSERVE. IV.
The Reverend Mr. Robert Parsons, then Minister of Adderbury, in Oxfordshire,
since removed to Odingeton, near Stow, about eleven Years since, in May, 1684.
came to the Bath very Lame, and that Lameness came upon him very oddly, and
suddenly. He was (about six Months before he came hither) very Healthful, Lusty
and Strong, but going up a steep Hill (when he had been wearied in going
before) an intolerable Pain seized him on a sudden in the Calf of one of his
Legs, insomuch, that (hearing no Gun to go off) he thought that some Body had
shot him with a Cross-Bow; but being convinced of the contrary by a Friend of
his that came immediately after him, he concluded that he had broken something,
by overstraining: He fell presently to the Ground, not being able to go a step
farther, and the Acuteness of the Pain made him sweat and faint, and very sick
at Stomach; but that went off in a while, and something more at Ease he was,
but not able to go. He was carried home, and continued weak and lame for a long
time, though he had the assistance of the most considerable Physicians and
Chyrurgeons in England, many Applications were made outwardly; much Means was
used inwardly; but with very little Success, which put him upon coming to the
Bath, where he applied himself to me. I directed such Preparations as I thought
needful; after which put him upon bathing, and pumping, the Infirm Limb, and
sometimes drinking the Waters, which he continued to do for five Weeks; yet
there appeared no great Alteration to the better, whilst he was using the
Means; yet it disposed him to, and very much facilitated, his Recovery; for it
brought Warmth and Heat into the Part, which it was altogether destitute of
before; it took off the Convulsive Motions which were before frequent, and
violent, (especially by Night, and when he was first falling asleep).

His Thigh and Leg began to get Flesh again, for they were very much Emaciated,
and always cold. After he went from hence he recovered by degrees, and could
walk five or six Miles an end without a Staff, and so continued several Years
after.

Accident 3. A third sort of Accidental Lameness that has been here cured,
has been from white Swellings on the Knee, or Knees; with Pain, and
Contraction, and Stiffness of that Joint, but without Inflammation; of which I
shall give two Instances only.

OBSERVE. I.
Mr. Bouy, a Spanish Merchant, aged more than Forty, came hither in July, 78.
and was recommended to my Advice by his Physician and Neighbor, and my very
good Friend, Dr. Croone. He was very lame, and much pained in his Right Knee,
when he put any Stress on that Leg.

It was greatly swollen, but nothing discolored, and the Joint contracted, so
that he could not put out straight that Leg; it was pufft up above the Knee,
and below, as ^ell as in the Joint, and what thus distend^d the Part (whither
Wind, or Vliginous Matter, or both) upon pressing of it on one ^ide, it would
manifestly be moved to the ^ther. After Preparation he used the Bath, which
gave him some Ease, but lessened not ^he Swelling; then it was pumped upon;
after that the Mudd of the Bath was applied; ^ll which Attempts at length
succeeded, and ^e became apparently better. He came a ^econd, and a third
Season, and was, in the and, perfectly well; so that there was no Remainder of
Tumor, Pain, or Lameness. He was here in Summer, 1693. with a Friend, for
Diversion only, and this last Sum^er, 1695. without any Return of this ^llness.

OBSERVE. II.
Mrs. Hull, a Packer's Widow, in Berry^treet, London, between Thirty and Forty
Years of Age, came hither in July, 1690. ^ad the same part affected, but not
altoge^her after the same manner: Hers was a ^h te Tumor on the Patella, as big
as an Egg, nor very painful but when she kneeled, ^^r pressed it hard against any
thing, that did ^ot easily yield unto it. She both bathed pumped, and applied
the Mudd of the Bath, and had Patience to stay till the Tumor wholly subsided,
which was not in a little time, and went well away after Michaelmas.

Accident 4. There has been here cured a fourth sort of Lameness, which has
seized those that have taken Poison, especially that of Arsenicke; (commonly
called Ratsbane) for after the violent Vomitings, and Torments of the Stomach
and Bowels, have ceased, either by the Strength of Nature, or the Assistance of
Remedies, the Joints of all (or some at least) of the extreme Parts, are
usually Contracted, and rendered uselefs, and are with difficulty, if at all,
restored.

Two Instances of such here recoverd, I shall give.

OBSERVE. I.
The Wife of Mr. Anthony Neat, of Chippenham, in Wilishire, about Seven or
Eight and Twenty Years of Age, after the Loss of two (and all her) Children,
near upon one another, (as I remember) in the Small Pox, grew very Melancholy,
and was in a Desponding, if not in a Despairing, Condition; which the great and
profess Enemy to God and Man, taking the Advantage of, tempted her to destroy
her self; which she determining to do, goes to an ^pothecary's Boy (which knew
nothing of ^^r Discontent) and desires him to let her ^^ve as much Ratsbane, as
would be sure (...) poison a Mastiff-Dog, that used to get to her Buttery, and
do Mischief, for she ^as resolved to dispatch him, and therefore ^arged him to
give her, rather too much ^an too little. He lets her have a large ^^ose; she
pays for it, and upon the next ^^nday Morning (after she had sent all her
^amily to Church) takes it; when they ^^me home, they found her vomiting
vio^^ntly, and terribly Gripped in Stomach, and ^^wels: They (in a little time)
suspected that, upon Enquiry at the Apothecary's, ^^ey found too true, and
called in a Practi^^oner of Physic, who lived upon the ^^ace; but he (thinking
the Case despe^^e, or not well knowing what to do in it) ^^fused to be
concerned, and I was presently ^^nt for, though at Ten Miles distance. I ^^me the
same Night, and caused them to ^^omote (all they could) her Vomiting; ^^d
giving her afterward Oily and Unctu^^s things, and some Specificks to resist
^^at sort of Poison; by all which (in some ^^w days) the Vomitings and violent
Pains ^^re mitigated; I left her, with this Prognostic, that she must expect
the use of some of her Limbs to be taken away, in some little time, but they
believed it not till the Contraction of her Ancle Joints, Knees, and Hips,
began upon her: Then was I again consulted (but well nigh^ half a Year after
she began to be lame) what was to be done for that also. I advised the Bath,
but it was a great while before they could persuade her to come; and all that
while she remained a helpless Cripple; at length she was prevailed upon to be
brought hither, though late in the year; yet that little Stay she then made gave
her some Advantage, and that encouraged her to come again the next Spring; when
she stayed long enough to perfect her Recovery, in Mind, Body, and Limbs.

She was very well afterward, and had several Children more before she died.

OBSERVE. II.
Captain Hatch, from out of Ireland, aged 45, was sent hither in June, 71. by
Dr. Betts, (my old School-fellow, at Winchester) and recommended by his Letter
to my Care. The Captain had (for more than Five Months before) been suddenly
seized with violent Vomitings, and Torments of the Stomach and Bowels, from the
same sort of Poison (as he supposed, and said) of which he took but very
little; yet that small quantity continued his Vomitings (by Fits at least) for
three Weeks; and the Pain of his Stomach and Bowels, five, or more, with some
Intermissions. About Nine Weeks before he came hither, a sudden Fit seized him,
which disordered his Head, and the Night after, by little and little, the Use
of his Hands and Arms failed him; and two or three Days after that his Legs
became as useless, and so continued till he arrived here.

He was, after some time of Rest, and fitting Preparation, put upon drinking
these Waters, and using the Bath, and taking peculiar Antidotes, against that
particular sort of Poison; by all which Means he got great Advantage, and at
two Seasons (or three at most) recovered the Use of all his Limbs.

Accident 5. A fifth sort of Accidental Lameness, that I have had under my
Care, and has been here cured, is, what has ^hapned after Mercurial
Ointments, and Quicksilver Girdles, used for the Itch; of which, I will give
you two Instances of many.

OBSERVE. I.
A Daughter of one Mr. Rogers, of Shepton-Mallett, in the County of Somerset,
about Eleven or Twelve Years of Age, wa^ brought hither by her Mother in May,
74 Crippled in all her Lower Limbs, and Contracted, as is described in Mrs.
Rawlins he Case; Chap. 6. Observe. 8. This Lamenes^ (as her Mother related to
me) came after her being anointed for the Itch, with a Ointment that had
Quicksilver in it. (...) could not understand, by her, that it at a^^ inclined
her to Salivation (though I have know some, after such Anointings, to Salivate a^
if designed) but perhaps where it spends (...) self that way, it falls not so
much upon the Limbs: But this young Woman had first Pai^^ from the Hips
downward; after that, Stiffne^^ and Contraction, but no Swelling; I o^der'd her
both Inward and Outward Mean^ ( Purgers as well as Alteratives) and t^^ Use of
the Bath; by which (at long ru^ she was well recovered, but slowly, a^^ after
several Seasons coming hither. S^^ was afterward married to Mr. Rus, a
Sho^keeper in Castle-Cary, and has had seve^^ Children. She was here in
Summer, 9 and used the Waters and the Bath for Scorbutical Distemper, but had
no Remain^ of that former Lameness.

OBSERVE. II.
A Buttery-Maid of Mr. John Eyres, Little-Challfield, in the County of Wilts,
about Two or Three and Twenty Years of Age, a straight, comely, Country Girl,
till this happened to her. She had got the. Itch by some Means or other, and
making too much have to be rid of it; without due Purg^ing, Bleeding, etc. gets
a Quicksilver-Girdle, (a thing too frequently, and too indiscreetly used in the
Country) and after a whiles wearing of it, the Eruptions vanished, but she fell
off at the Waste, and was a Cripple from the Loins downwards, but had no
Contractions in the Joints. I being then Physician to their Family, she was
sent over to me, and by Inward Means, and bathing, she was well recovered in
much less time than the former, not having suffered it to settle so long upon
her, before she came hither, as the other did.

Accident 6. A sixth sort of Accident that has rendered a Limb useless, and
brought the Infirm to the Bath for Recovery, is Wounds (or Ulcers that have
been forced to be laid open); whither in Hand, Arm, or Leg; of which, very many
Instances might have been brought, but let it suffice that I mention two or
three.

OBSERVE. I.
The Honorable Coll. Sackevile Tufton, Brother to the Earl of Thanett; came
hither in May, 74. He had, in a Sea Fight, received a Wound with Contusion and
Fracture, upon his Right Hand, by a Splint, that broke the Bones of the Thumb,
and Forefinger, and Lacerated the Muscles and Tendons of that Part; a Conflux
of Humors falling to it, in the healing, it was forced to be laid open by
Incision, more than once, and thirteen Bones, and Splinters of Bones, were
taken out at several Dressings; which put him to a great deal of Pain, and very
much retarded the Cure; but it was at last perfected, but his Hand left
altogether useless till he came to the Bath; after it was healed up, and the
Wounds Cicatriz'd, he was very much pained in it, by Fits, upon Change of
Weather, or any small Disorder. After Preparatory Means, he both bathed, and
pumped upon the Lame Hand, which quickly eased the Pain, and recovered some Use
of the other three Fingers. Be followed this Means at several Seasons, and at
length, even the Forefinger and Thumb became in some measure useful, tho^ a
whole Joint of the latter is quite lost and the former remains very crooked;
the whole Hand is as serviceable to him, as a maimed Forefinger and Thumb will
permit. He was here in 94, and 95, but to drink the Waters only; but neither
bathed, nor pumped, or but very little if at all.

OBSERVE. II.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Peterborough, from a Wound (as I remember) in
his Right Hand, came lame hither for a Remedy in July, 81. His Lordship
proceeded in the same, or like Course, and received Advantage also; and came a
second time, and I think no more; but the Colonel oftener.

OBSERVE. III.
The Son of Mr. Wind, of Tewksbury, about 13 or 14 Years of Age, was sent
hither, with a Maid to attend him, in May, ^3. He had a Lame Hand also from an
In^^mmation, and Abscesse, caused by a Flux of ^umours to that Part in a
Sickness; which ^eing necessitated to be frequently laid open ^y the Chyrurgeon
that dressed him, his ^and after it was healed up, not only be^^me useless to
him, but several Attempts were made of Return of like Matter to the Part; to
prevent which, I caused him to bathe but little; purged him now and then; made
him to drink constantly of the Waters, and bathe his Hand, and Lower Part of
his Arm, in the Bath-Water at Nights, going to Bed only; or receive it at the
dry Pump upon the Lame Part, as often as the Pump was going, to supply the
Water-Drinkers; by the Continuance of which Course, for Six Weeks, or
thereabouts, he was so well recovered, as not to return again another Season.

Accid. 7. A Seventh and Last Accidental Lameness, is what followed upon Falls,
with, or from, a Horse; of which I shall (for Brevity sake) give but two
Instances, but those very considerable ones.

OBSERVE. I.
Thomas Andrews, Esquire of Halson, in Northamptonshire, came hither in June, 82.
battered and bruised from Head to Foot: by a Fall which he had some time
before; his Horse not falling only with him, but lying some while upon him. He
came hither in a Weak, Painful, and very ill Condition, recommended to my Care
by Letter from his very careful-Physitian, and Neighbor, and my very good
Friend Dr. Danuers, of Northampton.

By the Fall he had, some Bones dislocated, but, I think, none fractured; they
had been well set again, and he let Blood, though late; he was wrapped in warm
Sheepskins; kept a while to a Milk Diet, took Balsamic, strengthening things
Inwardly, as well as used Outward Applications; last of all he took Goddard's
Drops, which was supposed to do him most Good. Yet after all this he complained
greatly of Weakness, and Pains in his Back and Hips, but most of all in his
Breast, insomuch, that he could not breathe ^reely: His Stomach also, and Lower
Belly, ^^ad a share of the Contusion. He being wholly left to my Management,
after necessary Preparation, I put him upon drinking ^hese Waters; after that,
upon bathing, and toward the conclusion, upon pumping the most pained and
weakened Parts

Some things he took Inwardly, but not much, more than the Waters, and at Five
^r Six Weeks end was much at Ease, got ^onsiderable Strength, and returned
greatly ^dvantaged, which encouraged him to come ^gain the next Summer, to
confirm what he ^ad got the Year before; and so several ^easons after, but at
some distances. He ^as here in 94, very well, and lusty; and that to drink the
Waters, rather than bathe.

OBSERVE. II.
Much in the same Circumstances, and from a like Cause, and in the same Summer,
was a young Gentleman, brought hither by his very tender Mother, who was in
great Affliction for him, lest it should bring him into a Consumption, or leave
him a Cripple all Days of his Life; Mr. John Hollworthy, a Gentleman since, and
now, ver^ well known at the Bath, and coming almo^^ every Year, more for
Diversion than Necessity; and to drink these Waters. He ha^ over and above Mr.
Andrews his Complaints (which were from the Contusion) a Paralysis o^^ one Side
from the Concussion of his Brai^^ (as was judged by the Physicians that se^^
him hither) and therefore took often Vel^tile Salts, and Spirits, and many
Cephalick^ He was indeed very l^me, and in a weak Condition when he came first
hither; yet b^ the Means abovementioned, and drinkin^ sometimes the Waters;
bathing and pumping as his Condition would permit, he g^^ Ground by little and
little, and came some Years following, till he had recovered (...) better
Health, and a readier Use of (...) Limbs; there still remains a Stiffness in
o^^ ^nee and Hip, which makes him limp a ^^ttle when he goes, which Mr. Andrews
does ^^ot at all.

OBSERVE. III.
And now, for a Conclusion to this Se^^^nth Chapter, and to anticipate an
Objec^^^n, that I foresee may be made by those ^^at envy the Reputation of the
Baths, I ^^all add an Observation or two more, though (...) intended here to
conclude it. The Ob^^ction is;

Object. They will say that most of those ^me, enfeebled Persons, brought by me
for ^stances of Recoveties here, were either ^oung, and Growing, People, or at
their ^e Age, which might greatly assist this their ^emedy (though amongst the
Recited Cases, ^u will find some (and those not a few) (...) a considerable
Age, and others much de^ining) therefore I shall give you one In^ance of a
Gentleman, past Fourscore and ^hree; who, after a most severe Fit of the ^ut,
which had run all over his Body ^^m Joint to Joint, till at length it set^^d
upon the lower Parts, and rendered them ^^together useless, so that he could
not so ^uch as use Crutches, unless a Servant or ^^o went by him.

It was my Wife's Father, Mr. David Tryme, of Wooky, in the County of Somerset,
near Wells. He had, from between Fifty and Sixty, been subject to Fits of the
Gout, but at great distances; sometimes a Year or two, or three, between the
Fits; though he hunted, and now and then drank cheerfully with his Friends (as
the Gentlemen of that Country did then, and still do) and rode in all Weathers.
When he had a Fit, his main Care was to get Ease as soon as he could, and in
order to that, he had (or rather his excellent Wife, (who was more than half a
Physician, and Chyrurgeon, to her poor Neighbors) procured diverse Receipts for
Plasters and Ointments; with a Probatum est at the end of them. These he
ordinarily used when the Pains were violent, and if one answered not, went on
to another. This did well enough when Strength and Vigor lasted, but at the
Age, I but now mentioned, 83. When that good Wife of his had been long dead,
and his, no worse, Daughter (who supplied her place in those Charitable
Offices, as well as keeping her Father's House) was married to me, that lived
at sixteen Miles distance; and a severe Fit of the Gout seized him; first, at
his Toes and Fingers, and he (impatient under the Pain) causing those that were
about him to apply what gave him most Ease in the last Fit; not considering
whither it was repercussing or no; this moved the Distemper still upward, and
they followed it with the same Applications, till he fell into Fainting Fits;
out of which he was, with Difficulty (and but for a while) got out, with strong
Waters. Then, and not till then, was I and his Daughter, my Wife, sent for.

I quickly perceived what Error had been committed, and gave him brisk
Cordials, that moved, a centro ad eircumferentiam, from the Heart to the Limbs:
This threw out the Gout so violently upon his Hips, Knees and Feet, that he
was, for some days, in most excessive Torment, but free from Faintings. He
chose rather (as old as he was) to bear that, then to run the risque of Dying,
by applying again his Plasters. In a little time Patience and Posset Drink
conquered the Difficulty, for the Pain ceased by degrees, but left so great a
Weakness that he could neither go nor stand, and such a Stiffness at Hips,
Knees, and Ancles, that he could not move a Joint, to extend his Legs, but was
lifted up and down by main Strength by his Servants. This was in July, 1659.
and he held thus all the following Winter, about the latter of which, calling
to see him, (as I used to do, riding that way to some Country Patients, to whom
I was sent for) enquiring of him how he did, He answered me that he was free
from Pain, and as well as he could hope to be; I eat well, and sleep well, but
I am a Cripple; what shall I do for that? I told him that I knew no Remedy for
him unless he would come to the Bath; which it seems he had formerly been
frighted from, for fear of bringing a Fit of the Gout upon him. I told him that
if he would use such Preparations as I would advise, and come at the Season
that I should appoint, and use the Bath as I did direct, I would undertake it
should not bring the Gout upon him. He consented to it; I sent to him in April
following; he came; and after Preparation, used the Queen's and King's Bath;
but lifted in and out by two strong Guides; drank some (but not often, nor
much) of the Waters, (for he thought Sack more agreeable to his Age. After
three Weeks bathing, going one Morning to see him in the Bath, (which is a
usual Complement we pay our Patients here) I found him walking between his two
Guides, without their Help, and wishing he could go as well by Land as he did
by Water: By and by he bid his Guides stand off, saying, I could swim once; he
set himself a swimming, and swam twice round the Cross in the King's-Bath; so
much had that little bathing loosened the stiff Joints, as well as strengthened
the weakened Parts; He went on to recover; left his Crutches behind him; hung
them up for a Trophe, and had no severer it of the Gout all his Life after,
which was five Years or more, to the 88th. Year of his Age, if not somewhat
beyond. And had he not made too much Haste to recover his Eyesight (which was
almost lost by Cataracts) he might, probably, have ^iv'd many Years longer.

For, contrary to Dr. Turbervile's Advice, (who counseled him to stay till he
had been quite blind, when the Cataracts would have been ripe, and then he
would not have questioned but to have h^lpen him to a Guiding Sight, at least,
by Couching of them). He hearing of one in London, in whose House Stephkin, the
famous Occulist, formerly lodged (Father to my Lady Juy, who also professed
Eye-mending).

This Fellow having seen Mr. Stephkin often perform that Operation, thought
himself very able to do it, and set up for himself, (when his Lodger was dead,)
and had a considerable Reputation for this Operation. This old Gentleman made a
London-Journey at 87 Years of Age, or more; submits to this Fellow's Cure; who
without any kind of Preparation, of bleeding, or purging; both which should
have been done, and he could well have borne, as old as he was) performed the
Operation, without any Regard, whither the Cataracts were ripe or no: This
brought such a Flux of Humors first to that Eye, (for he had Couched but one)
then to the other, afterward to the whole Head, that he could never after have
it wholly diverted, but caused him to lead a miserable Life the remainder of
his Days, which was not very long; about a Year and some Months, after his
Return from that London Journey; and that ill timed, and ill-managed Operation.

OBSERVE. IV.
Whilst I am reviewing my Papers, in order to the making of them public, I
have the happy Opportunity of adding a Fourth Observation, almost of equal
Concern with that immediately foregoing.

Robert Long, Esquire of Prior-Stanton, in the County of Somerset, in the 89th Year
of his Age, being greatly enfeebled with frequent, and severe Fits of the Gout,
as well as with the Decays of an Age, to which, scarce one in Fourscore
Thousand attains; being weak in his Limbs, and tender in his Feet, and stooping
under the Burden of so many Years, came to the Bath in July, 95. and stayed
here three Weeks, and in that time was put in the Cross-Bath 14 or 15 times;
which he not only endured well, retained a good Stomach, and had no Return of
his Adversary, the Gout (of which truly I was not unapprehensive, and gave him
Caution of) but he returned home manifestly refreshed, went much more erect and
nimbly, and with less assistance, retains a smooth, fresh, and florid
Countenance, and is as likely to pass another seven Years, as he was three
seven Years past.

Not many more of the sort of these two last Instances (though I assure you I am
not without some) but very many of those Accidental Lamenesses, might have been
here added, but I hasten to another Subject; CUTANEOUS DISEASES, which will be
the business of

CAHP. VIII.
AND now, at length, we are come to what indeed had the best pretense to have
been first mentioned, and that is Distempers of the Skin, Eruptions, or
Breakings out, as they are commonly called. For if we give any Credit to the
received Tradition, the first Cure that ever was wrought here was of this sort;
and upon him that first discovered these Waters, which was the reason of
(afterward) building a City in this place. The Story, in short, is this,
believe as much of it as you think sit.

BLADUD, eldest Son to Lud-Hudibras, (then King of Britain, and the eighth from
Brute) having spent eleven Years at Athens in the Study of the Liberal Arts and
Sciences (that City being in those Days the chief Academy, not only of Greece,
but of this part of the World also) came home a Leper; whither from that hotter
Climate he had conversed in, or from ill Diet, or Infection, it does not
appear, those unlettered times giving down little or no Account of things
(though of greater moment) then transacted; but a Leper he was, and for that
reason shut up, that he might not infect others. He, impatient of his
Confinement, chose rather a mean Liberty than a Royal Restraint, and contrived
his Escape in a Disguise, and went very remote from his Father's Court, and
into an untravell'd part of the Country, and offers his Service in any common
Employment; thinking it (probably) likelier to be undiscovered under such mean
Circumstances than greater. He was entertained in Service at Swainswicke (a
small Village, two Miles from this City) his Business (amongst other things)
was to take Care of the Pigs, which he was to drive from place to place, for
their Advantage in Feeding upon Beach-Masts, Acorns, and Haws, etc. the Hills
hereabouts then abounding with such Trees, though now few, of the two first,
remain. Yet there is a Hill, close upon the South Part of this City, that still
retains the name of Beachen Cliff, though there is scarcely a Beach-Tree left
upon it.

He thus driving his Swine from place to place, observed some of the Herd, in
very cold Weather, to go down from the Side of the Hill into an Alder-moore,
and thence to return, covered with black Mud. Being a Thinking Person, he was
very sollicitous to find out the reason why the Pigs that wallow in the Mire in
the Summer, to cool themselves, should do the same in Winter; observed them
farther; and following them down, he at length perceived a Steam and Smoke to
arise from the place where the Swine wallow'd. He makes a way to it, found it
to be warm; and this satisfied him, that for the Benefit of this Heat the Pigs
resorted thither.

He being a Virtuoso, made farther Observation; that whereas those filthy
Creatures, by their foul Feeding, and nasty Lying, are subject to Scabs, and
foul Scurss, and Eruptions on their Skin, some of his Herd that were so, after
a while, became whole and smooth, by their often wallowing in this Mud.

Upon this he considers with himself, why he should not receive the same
Benefit by the same Means; he trys it, and succeeded in it; and when he found
himself cured of his Leprosy, declares who he was; his Master was not apt to
believe him, at first, but at length did, and went with him to Court, where he
(after a while) was owned to be the King's Son, and after his Father's Death
succeeded him in the Government, and built this City, and made these Baths. An
old Manuscript Chronicle that I have by me, (though it has much larger Stories
of other Kings before, and after, him, even from Brute himself) has this only
of King BLADUD.

When Lud-Hudibras was ded, BLADUD his Son, a great Nigromancer, was tho made
King; and he made the Wonder, and the Mervils of the Hot Baths by his
Nigromancy, and he Reigned xxi yer, and after he died, and lith at the New-Troy.

How true the Story above may be I ^ow not, but I am sure there is nothing
^^possible in it, nor very improbable, and very Jot as likely, as that Charles
the Great should find the Baths at Aix-la Chapel by ^^e Tread of his Horse,
when he was ri^^ng a hunting, as Monsieur Blondell relates: and it may be the
Pigs had a Share also (...) discovering the Neighboring Baths, at ^^orcett,
the same Author saying that they ^^re called Thermae Porce^anae, from the wild
^^igs frequently coming down from the ^eighbouring Mountains; perhaps to warm
^^emselves, as ours did into the Alder-Moore. ^ut whatever be thought of this
or that, I ^o know that for more than forty Years ^^at I have lived here, there
has not one ^ast, wherein there has not been more ^^an a few Iustances of
very great Cures one upon Leprous, Scabby, and Scurfy Per^^ns; and more perhaps
might have been at least sooner) done, if they had bathed, ^^s he did in Mud
and Water together. But ^^e nicety of our Age is satisfied with nothing but
fresh Baths; whereas in many ^ases (and this particularly) the Mud is as
effectual (if not more so) than the purest of the Water.

So many Cures on these kind of Distempers are yearly done, that this Virtue of
the Bath is so well known, that it seems almost Superfluous to bring many
Examples of it. However, that this Head may not be alone, without its
particular Instances, I shall give some few Eminent ones, and proceed to the
King's Evil; which though it does not always break the Skin, yet sometimes it
does; and when it does not, by swelling the Lips, and Glandules of the Throat
and Neck, and sometimes the Joints of the Fingers and Hands, it becomes a
Disfigure, and therefore not altogether improperly brought in, in this Chapter;
and indeed is of equal (if not greater) Difficulty to be well cured, with any
of the other, and requires as much Time and Patience, for the Performance of
it; and yet I have seen several recovered by bathing and drinking these Waters,
and using some Specificks withal; and many more alleviated, and put in a better
way of Recovery, if not perfectly restored; three or four Instances of which I
shall add also; but first of the Leprous kind.

OBSERVE. I.
Thomas St. Lawrence, Esquire (for he was known here by no other Title, though he was
^^ndeed a Baron of Howith, and therefore Lord How^th in the Kingdom of Ireland)
a ^oung Gentleman of about fifteen or sixteen Years of Age; he was sent hither
in May, 79, by Dr. Meara, an ancient Physiti^^n, then practicing in Dublin, but
had for^erly lived (for some Years) in Bristol, and had great Practice all
about this Coun^^y, and in this City too, when I came first (...) live here.

He recommended this Patient to the Use (...) the Bath, and my Care, and
Directions, ^ith this Description of his Case: 'That for seven Years past, he
had been afflicted with a perverse Scabb, tending to a Leprosy, which had
hitherto yielded to no Methods, nor Medicines; and therefore was ^^sent to
experience this as a last Refuge; advising withal a diligent Preparation by
Bleeding, Purging, and a cool attempering Diet, and drinking the Waters, and
bathing in their Turns. I first caused him (...) be let Blood, then purged him
with Ca^^lanos, and made him drink the Waters for Week, or ten Days; then
purged him as before, and blead him again; after which; he was put first into
the Cross-Bath, then into the Queen's and King's. In the mean time he used
Alteratives, wherein the Powder of Vipers bore a considerable Share. He was let
Blood, in all, three or four times, purged as often, or oftener; drank the
Waters, and bathed in their turns, for five or six Weeks, and was prescribed a
regular Diet, Cooling and Attempering Salt, and sharp Humors; I cannot say he
kept very strictly to it, for he took those Freedoms which young People are apt
to do, that consider not of what Value Health is, and therefore are readier to
gratify their Senses than their Reason; yet, for all this, he was perfectly
recovered, and held well many Years after, as I was informed by some Friends of
his but of those Parts of the Country, where he lived.

OBSERVE. II.
A poor Fellow from Coleshill, in Warwickshire, came hither in the year 84, and
wa^ permitted to use no other than the Leper's Bath, (which is filled with the
waste-Wate^ of the Hot-Bath, and not so often change and cleansed as the other
Baths are; an^ therefore, perhaps, having some of the M^^ mixed with it (as was
intimated before) cures these Eruptions more effectually and speedily than the
others do. He was allowed a Covert (rather than a Lodging) close by, where they
lie upon Straw, and have no Allowance to maintain them, but what the Charity of
well-disposed People gives them. This Man was so much a Leper, that I never saw
any come nearer to the Description of that Disease in Leviticus, than this Case
did. As most Physicians that have written of Psoaras, distinguish Leprosies
into that of the Greeks, and that of the Arabians, so we may, I think, add a
third, that of the Jews too, for it seems to me (as there described) a peculiar
Distemper; it could never else have infected Walls and Houses. It was the
Advantage of this poor Fellow, that he was so very bad; for at that time there
lodged in my House, and was my Patient, a very worthy Person of Honor, the
Earl of Plymouth (formerly Lord of Windsor) who discoursing me one day at his
own Table, about Cures done at the Bath, asked me if I had ever seen here any
one that was truly a Leper, as is described in the Old Testament.

I told his Lordship that I never saw any one that suited with all the
Particulars there mentioned, but there was one, now in Town, at the
Leper's-Bath, that came the nearest to it that ever I had seen any. His
Lordship desired that he might see him; in the Afternoon I sent for him; and
after much Enquiry how it began, and how long he had been in this Condition,
etc. he gave him Half a Crown, and so weekly for six or eight Weeks, in which
time, by drinking the Waters, and bathing, and some cheap Alteratives, he was
greatly recovered, and went back so well, that the Summer following I had a
Letter of Thanks from the Parish, written by the Minister of the Place, Mr.
Gresill, (a Reverend Divine, and a Prebend of Litchfield,) wherein they thanked
me, not only for assisting him with my Advice, but also for laying him in the
way of my Lord of Plymouth's Charity; without which, he could not have stayed
long enough to have perfected his Recovery: For Continuance in the Use of
Means, is absolutely necessary to the Cure of all Stubborn, and Inveterate
Diseases; but especially those of the Leprous Kind, as will be evidently
manifested by the following Observation.

OBSERVE. III.
A Woodmonger of Stanes, (his Name I cannot recollect) brought a Son hither,
about Twelve or Thirteen Years of Age, who from his Infancy was subject to a
Vitelligo, (...) upon first sight of it I judged it to belong to that kind of
Eruption). It would be out sometimes more, sometimes less, but always
something, in greater or lesser Splotches; but mostly upon the Neck, Elbows and
Knees, sometimes in the Face and Head, Arms and Thighs. A branny white ^curf
fell aways, more or less from it, and (...) was no small Disfigure to him;
which ^with the fear that it might at length be^ome an exquisite Leprosy) put
his Father upon bringing him hither for Cure. He ap^lying himself to me for
Directions (being ^dvised so to do by some that had formerly ^een my Patients
(perhaps) in the like ^afe) and resolving to stay here with him ^ll he was
well, desired me to hasten his ^ecovery what possibly I could. I told him ^^ch
Distempers did not use to be quickly moved, especially when it was born which
^^e Patient, as this seemed to be with his ^n; and for that reason he ought not
to ^pect a sudden Recovery. Cleanse him probably it might, by a Week or two's
bathing, for the present (though with some it brings it out more at first) but
the whole Mass of Blood must be altered, as well as the Skin healed, before
there could be Hopes of his continuing well.

The Father stayed a Month or more, and then would have taken back with him his
Son, in Hopes he might have been better after he had been gone hence. There
still remained Signs of the Spots, though the branny Scurf did not rise so much,
not so often, as before. I asked his Father whither he did not put his Son to a
Boording School? He told me he did: Why may not you then, said I, do that here
as well as in Surry, or Middlesex? And if you will (...) do, I will order it
so, that his taking the Waters, Physic, and Bathing, etc. shall no^ much
hinder his Schooling; and do not doubt but that if you return (or send for him)
this time Twelvemonth; or rather Michaelmas next come Twelvemonth, you will see
him perfectly recovered, beyond the fear of a Relapse, which I can not premise
now, if you take him away presently. He considered of it, took my Advise, le^^
his Son here a Twelvemonth; and though I could not keep him regularly to the
drinking of the Waters, (but bathe he did every Night, almost, after he had
done Schooling, and willingly took Physic sometimes, because that gave him a
Play-day) yet he returned recovered, and had been so some Months before he went
hence, and continued (as the Proverb says) as whole as a Tench, and as sound as
a Trout.

OBSERVE. IV.
Mrs. Dorothy Beddingfield, about Twenty Years of age, having had a Scrophulous
Tunour under her Chin for some Years, but never brake, nor was discolored, was
sent hi^her in June, 75, by the joint advice of Sir Thomas Brown, Sir Thomas
Wetherly, and Dr. Edward Brown, and by them recommended to my Care, and to
lodge in my House. She had, before this, taken of the Decoction of Guaicum,
Sarsa, Scrophularia, Rad. Chelidoniae, Min: Gladiolae, etc. and ^ometimes
Chalybeat Medicines, as I understood by Dr. Browne's Letter, which he ^ent with
her; which also told me, that at ^^ken, in Germany (where he had been in his
^ravels) they drank the Bath-Waters in these Cases with Success; and therefore
proposed ^er drinking of these, as well as bathing.

After purging she began upon drinking ^he Waters, and with them took Diuretic
Alteratives, wherein the Powder of Millipedes was an Ingredient. After a whiles
drinking she bathed also, and washed the Tumors with the Bath-Waters, at
Night, those days that she drank them. She continued this Course a Month or
five Weeks, in which time the Swelling manifestly abated. Whither it went on so
to do, to her perfect Recovery, I could never hear.

OBSERVE. V.
My Lord James Butler (then eldest Son to the Earl of Ossory, and since, (upon
the Death of my Lord Duke, his Grandfather and at this time, Duke of Ormond
came hither in June, 77, with a Chyrurgeon to attend the dressing of his Wound,
which was upon the last Joint of one of his Thumbs: it was by all judged
Scrophulous. He drank the Waters mostly, but sometimes bathed, (at least that
Hand, both Night and Morning in his Chamber). His Lordship continued here five
or six Weeks, or more; the Wound digested better upon it; afforded a more
laudable Quitture; was more disposed to healing; all which encouraged his
Coming another Season, and was at length perfectly cured.

I have not had the Honor to see his Grace these many Years, but have been
informed that he holds perfectly well, of that Distemper.

OBSERVE. VI.
Mr. Benjamin Mildmay, aged Ten or Eleven Years (second Son to the Lady
Fitz-Wal^er) out of Essex, was brought hither by the good Lady his Mother in
June, 81. He had then (and some Years before) several Sores running upon him,
and discharging a clammy Viscous Matter, with some Blood, seldom any white, or
well digested, Quitture. After a fitting Preparation, he both drank the Waters,
and bathed, and took peculiar Alteratives, Traumaticks, and Antiscorbuticks,
and found considerable Advantage the first Year, which encouraged my Lady his
Mother to send him a second time, in July, 82. (with a Neighbor and Friend of
her Ladyships, that came to use the Bath for a Lameness) and that rendered him
in a manner well. Whither he hold the Advantage he received here, I have not
had the Opportunity to know, having not seen, or heard of him these many Years.

OBSERVE. VII.
In much the like Case (but upon the Hand only) was a pretty Boy of Monsieu^ Du
Puy's (then Servant to the Duke of York) he was about Nine Years old. His
Illnes^ first came after a Sqat upon his Hand; to which fell a Humor, and made
it a Running Sore, which yielded to no Chyrurgery, and therefore was judged
Scrophulous. He had been touched more than once, which he could not want the
Opportunities of living so near the Court. His Father came do^^ with him Two
Years following; he both drank the Waters, and bathed; took Vulneraries, and
other Alteratives, and was greatly advantaged by his first Coming, and a^^ the
second, perfectly cured; and (as I have been informed) without Relapse: But
(...) have not seen him since he went from hence for he was immediately sent
over into France, where (if living) I suppose he ye^ continues.

CHAP. IX.
HAving thus dispatched those Distempers, that have had Cure here, to which,
both Sexes are equally liable; and having given Instances of both upon each
Head, we now come to those Maladies that are peculiar to the Female Sex.

And here, I hope, it will not be expected, that, in every Case, I should name
the Persons, as I have done hitherto, for the most part. The Modesty of their
Sex, and the Respect we owe them for it, challenge an Exemption from publishing
their Names, at least in some of their Infirmities. And since God and Nature
has given them the heavier end of the Staff, in bearing the Burdens of this
Life, we ought (in good Manners, as well as in Justice) to make it as easy to
them as we can. Where it will well consist with Decency, I shall adventure to
name some, but in some other Cases I shall desire to be excused; for I do not
forget I had a Mother, a Wife, and two Daughters, to whom I owed, and (I hope)
paid, Duty, Respect, and Love, and can hardly forbear to perform it to their
Memories: I would therefore publish nothing, concerning that Sex, that I did
think they would dislike, if they, or any of them, had lived to read it. And
farther, as old as I am, I would not, in the least, offend any of that Fair
part of the Creation, but would die, as well as live, in their good Opinion.

Women's Diseases are either such, as they are subject to when they are young,
or when more adult; when married, or when unmarry'd; when Childless, or when
they have had Children.

I shall therefore divide this Chapter into five Sections, and give some few
Instances upon each. The first of,

SECT. I.
The Virgin Disease, the Green Sickness, where will be occasion to speak of the
want of the Catamenia, and with this is many times joined the Hysteric
Passion, or Fits of the Mother, and of which I have seen very many here
recovered, when all ordinary and usual Methods and Means have failed. Nay, the
same Apperitive Medicines, that have availed nothing before, have here, with
moderate bathing, and sometimes drinking the Waters, been very effectual. Of
this I shall give a few Instances of many that I could produce. And since it
has been their Misfortune, rather ^han their Faults, to be thus affected, I
shall venture to name their Names; and first,

OBSERVE. I.
Mrs. Elizabeth Eyles, from the Devizes, in ^he County of Wilts, aged 16, being
very ^ar gone in the Green Sickness; and having Mother-fits withal, was sent to
my House by ^er Relations, for Cure. I had then consi^erable Business in those
Parts, when I at^ended a Riding Practice, and was consult^d for her at her
Father's House; and I pre^crib'd several things, but nothing prevailed; ^or
which Reason she was sent hither, to try what they would do, with bathing, for
without it they signified little; though the same Means had been very beneficial
to others, that seemed to be under the same Circum^ances.

She came hither in June, 57, Pale, Thin, and Stomachless, Faint and Tyrie,
upon ^^e least stirring, and very often Hysterical. ^ut under all this of a
Meek, Governable, and Excellent Temper, and would chear^^lly take, and do,
every thing that was pre^rib'd her; which (as to Medicines) was ^ery little
different from what she had taken before, viz. Peptick-P^wders,
Anti-Ca^hec^cks, and Hystericks: These, with bathing, (for she drank little of
the Waters) in a^ Month, or Six Weeks time, restored her to a good Stomach, a
fresh Color, and to those Customary Benefits which young Women of her age
ought to expect, and hope for; and upon which the Mother-Fits wholly left her.

She was, afterward, married to a Kinsman of mine, Mr. Samuel Pierce, now of
Alston, near Kings-bridge, in Devonshire, and lived several Years with him; as
good (...) Wife as she was a Patient, and left him Three Children when she
died, which a^^ still living; the very kind Husband, and Father, continues a
Widower, though it be more than Twenty Years ago, that he sadly parted with her.

OBSERVE. II.
A Daughter of my Lady Berisford's, o^ of Ireland, aged 19, was brought hither
b^ her Lady Mother in June, 93. My Lady (...) chief Business into England was
her sa^^^ Daughter's Recovery, which she despair^ of in Ireland* She called,
(and took Advice) in London, but stayed not long there but hastened to the
Bath; for (besides other Symptoms, that usually accompany the Virgin Disease)
she had a great Weakne^^ ^n her Arm wrists. This the modest young Lady easily
acknowledged to me, but would ^dmit of no farther Discourse; I was fain
therefore to apply my self to my Lady her Mother, from whom I understood that
she ^ad her Catamenia very early (at Twelve Years of Age) and that they seldom
whol^y failed her (at least for any long time together) from the first; but in
color, and ^uantity were not as they ought to be. Besides the usual Discolor
of the Face, Want of Appetite, Spirits, and Strength, etc. ^s have been
described, in the Preceding Observation: She was more than ordinari^y troubled
with Vapors, and strange Fits, (...) doubtless Hysterical) which would swell
^ut the Sternon as big as a large Fist, by ^egrees, and fall again accordingly,
as the ^it went off. I put her first upon drinking ^^ese Waters, with
Apperitives and Hystericks; ^fterwards bathed her, and interchanging ^etween
whiles, drinking and bathing, she ^ay'd Seven Weeks, and at the end of that
^^me went off so well, that she seemed to ^eed nothing more to be done for her,
by (...) Physician. I hope my Lady, her Mother, (...) by giving her to a good
Husband) pre^ented a Relapse.

OBSERVE. III.
Mrs. Elizabeth Wait, about 20 Years of Age, having a great share of this
Tyrie Distemper; came hither in August, 82, with a Sister of hers, to be
helpful to her, as well as to keep her Company. Besides that she looked Pale,
Yellow, and Black under the Eyes, etc. with the Green Sickness: She seemed also
to have the Jaundice, Scurvy, and Dropsy (for her Feet and Legs swelled) and
she had Itchings upon her Arms and Legs, was short-breathed, had distended
Hypochond^rs (especially the Right) was Hot and Dry, inclining to a Hectic.
Upon any Disturbance (from little sudden things) apt to Tremblings, and
Palpitation of the Heart, and Giddiness in the Head, etc. This Illness began
Five or Six Years before, not being well purged after the Smallpox. She cou^
not now walk the length of her Chamber, without panting, and sinking under the
Burden of her own Emaciated Body. She greatly complained of the Palpitation of
her Heart, a Symptom incident, more or less, to all that labor under this
Virgin-Distemper, and indeed all Cachexies, and great Obstructions; whether in
Men or Women; whither Young or Old.

Of which I shall have occasion to speak particularly in the second Book, when
I come to treat of Drinking of these Waters chiefly.

This young Gentlewoman was so dispirited by her long continued Illness, that
she could hardly bear the working of a gentle Purge, which was given her as a
Preparation for drinking the Waters, and bathing. She began with the first, and
that in small Quantities; afterward bathed in the Cross-Bath, and took
Deoppilatives and Anticachecticks, and improved so well upon them, that in Five
or Six Weeks time she could walk the Town, and into the Meddows, and at length
^ecover'd a good Stomach, and a fresh Co^our in her Face, and some Flesh upon
her ^ones, and all her Swellings fallen. See^^g her a Year or two after, I
found her as ^ump, and as brisk, as any of her Sisters, which were all comely
young Women.

OBSERVE. IV.
I shall add a fourth Observation upon this ^^bject (though I thought to have
given it off ^re) because there is something in it dif^ent from the former,
which is a depraved ^^petite. For I am apt to think that it is ^^t so much the
eating of Oatmeal, Wheat, Salt, Mortar, and other such Trush, that usually
brings this Distemper upon young Girls, but the Diseases rather depraving the
se^ment of the Stomach, puts them upon longing after uncouth things, as
breeding Women sometimes do. This seemed to me to be apparent from the
following Observation.

A French Man (and French Merchant Mensieur La Chamber, his Wise coming to the
Bath, for a great Lameness, in August, 88 (of which Infirmity, she was at two
Season^ very well recovered) brought with her a Daughter, of about 13 Years of
Age, which looked much of the Complexion of the things she used to caress her
self withal and was faint, and tyrie, and heavy-headed, etc. Her Mother
(willing to stop (...) Gaps* with one Bush) as I came one day (...) visit her,
told me her fault, (for the Distemper showed its self) and asked my Advice,
which I gave, and she followed. After a Vomit, and some Purgings, I put he^
upon drinking these Waters, which she stuc^ to very close, and they passed
exceedingly we^^ w th her; I caused her to bathe too, toward the Conclusion;
and in a few Weeks time she would rejoice more to see a Shoulder of Mutt^ well
roasted, than a Handful of Mortar o^^ of the Wall, or a Plate of Oatmeal, the
usu^^ Viands she formerly delighted in. In short, the Waters washed the ill
Ferment out of the Folds of her Stomach, which depraved her Appetite, and
renewed the true Genuine Acidity, or Dissolvent-Menstruum, which causes
Hunger, and promoteth Digestion: or, if you would rather have it in the terms
of a late Author, Dr. Coward, the Spiritus Volatilis Oleosus, which he takes to
be the true Instrument of Concoction, and Nutrition. And the Bath getting new
Life and Vigor into her Limbs, she became better colored, active and strong,
and fed upon what prod ced good Nourishment: For when I called, a Year or two
after, to visit her Mother, at their House, in Fanchurch street, in London, she
was become a Healthy young Woman.

SECT. II.
Thus much for Virgins, we come now to Married Women, and we begin with those
which never had a Child, till rendered fruit^ul by the Bath: And this is an
Effect of ^athing, so very well known already, and ^o generally assented to,
that when any one ^omes hither that ^s Childless, they pre^ently say that she
comes for the common Cause. (...) instance, in all that have sped in this
^rrant, since my coming to live here, were to fill a Volumn, bigger than all
these Observations were intended to make.

I have given an Account of two already, that having no such Design in their
Coming hither, have, praeter spem, unexpectedly, proved fruitful afterward.
One was Mrs. Duff^waite, Chap. 4. Observe. 8. the other Mrs. Biscoe, in Chap. 6.
Observe. 7. in Mrs. Waller's Case, to which I referr, and shall add two or three
Instances more, and so pass on to the next Section.

OBSERVE. 1.
Mrs. Hawkins, of Marlborough, in the County of Wilts, Forty Years of Age,
having been married Thirteen or Fourtee^ Years, and never had been with Child,
i^ all that time; and probably giving ove^ the hopes of ever being made a
Mother was Lame and Ill, and came to this Plac^ for Cure. Her Case required
long, ar^ much bathing, which she patiently endured and had not only Recovery
of the Distemper she came for, but also, afterward, ha^ five Children at some
Years distances.

OBSERVE. II.
My Lord Blessington's Lady, Daughter to ^he Countess of Montwroth, from the
Kingdom of Ireland, a very weakly and sickly Person, having been some Years
married, and never had a Child, came to the Bath in June, ^0. for Health, as
well as for Children; and ^^d both drink the Waters, and bathe; and sed
Remedies suitable to the Symptoms she ^omplain'd of; and, by the Blessing o^
God upon the Means, she not only recovered a ^etter State of Health, but
afterwads be^ame a Mother of Children.

OBSERVE. III.
Madam Heskinstyles, a Dutch Merchant's ^ife of Amsterdam, but Daughter to Sir
^ohn Eyles, of the Devizes, in the County of ^^ilts, having been some Years
married, and ^^t Conceiving with Child* being of a ^^t, and Plethorick Habit of
Body, (which ^^ually is not the aptest to have Children) (...) me to the Bath
in June, 86, and drank ^^e Waters, though not altogether so regularly (...)
others did, and bathed about Five or Six ^eeks. Not long after she returned
home, (...) proved with Child, and had a Daughter, which lived, and was here
with her Mother in 93. What Children more she has had, I do not well know.

SECT. III.
The third sort of Women's Cases proposed to be spoken to, is of those that have
had a Child, or Children, but have left off bearing for some time, and have
renewed Conception upon using the Bath. Many and great Instances have been here
had of this particular Cases. I shall content my self to have mentioned a few
that may be inquired into, and po^sibly may be believed; the rest must be
silenced.

OBSERVE. I.
Mrs. Clement, a Citizen's Wife of Brist^l, about Forty Years of Age, had been
a Mother of Children, but was so unhappy as to see them all buri^d; and after
Nine Years ceasing, to conceive with Child, and giving over the Hopes of it;
being afflicted with Rheumatic Pains, came to the Bath, in the year 87. She
lodged in my House, for the Convenience of a Gallery, which I ha^^ leading into
the King and Queen's-Bath the fittest for most Purposes, because in one or o^
^her of them, you find the several degrees ^f Warmth, which best suit with all
Cases and Tempers of People.) She followed her ^athing diligently, for a Month
or Five Weeks, (till she found Ease of her Pains) ^hen returned home; and though
she had so ^ong intermitted being pregnant, and depair'd of ever being again a
Mother, yet, (...) a little time, she conceived with Child, and had, at her due
time, two Boys at a Birth.

OBSERVE. II.
A worthy Gentlewoman, of the Family ^f the Guises, in Gloucester-shire, but
Wife to Thomas Horton, Esquire of Comend, in the same County; after Seven Years
interval, from ^aving a Child, and concluding that she ^ad done breeding,
having past the Two ^nd-fortieth Year of her Age, came to the ^ath for a
Lameness, occasioned by a Fall ^om a Horse; she stayed a due time for the
^ecovery of such an Infirmity; went home, and quickly Conceived upon it, and
had a ^on, who lived to be a proper, hopeful, young ^entleman, but died at
Twenty-five Years (...) Age (a Student at the Inns of Court) (...) (the fatal
Distemper to young People) ^^e Smallpox.

OBSERVE. III.
Mrs. Dorothy Davers, of Monks, in the Parish of Corsham, in the County of
Wilts, aged 38; having had eight Children before, and staying Six Years from
being with Child, and seldom well in all that time; and being now more than
ordinary ill of a Scorbutical Cachexie, (insomuch, that she was judged to have
both Jaundice and Dropsy) with some Pains and Weaknesses in her Limbs) came to
me for Advice, and to be here under my Care and View, in order to her Recovery.
Amongst other things, I ordered her the Use of the Bath, and with it
Deoppilatives, and Antiscorbuticks, upon which, she greatly recovered, went
home well, and was soon after with Child, which she brought to perfection; and
it was a Son, which lived about Three Months. A Year or two after that, being
very ill again, and fearing a Relapse into her former Sickness, came hither a
second time to take my Advice. I ordered her some Physic; and because her
Blood was Excessive Salt, and Sharp, put her upon drinking the Waters mostly;
upon her Return home she was again with Child, and had a Daughter, though a small
and weakly one, but lived, and is ^ow Thirteen or Fourteen Years of Age. This
Gentlewoman had (after this) two Miscarriages, and last of all, at the
Forty-^ourth year of her Age, had a lusty strong Child, which yet lives, and
has outgrown ^er Bath-Sister, at Ten Years old. The first ^f these is Mrs.
Margaret, the other Amie ^avers.

You have, in this one Gentlewoman, a ^ouble Instance of the Efficacy of these
^aters; that is, both Outwardly and Inward^y used, in reference to the Case in
Hand, ^oth ways producing the same Effect.

SECT. IV.
The Fourth Section will be taken up with ^he Enumeration of some Instances of
Wo^en, that have often been with Child, but ^ave as often Miscarried, and at
length (...) by the Use of the Bath, and such Appro^riate Means, withal, that
best agreed ^ith the Constitution of those that suffered ^bortion; and the
Reasons of their not re^aining to the due time, their Conceptions) ^ave been
afterward enabled to go tho^ough with their Burdens, and bring forth ^^ving,
and life like Children. And this also (...) already so well known, that it
seems a ^eedless thing to give particular Instances of it; but (to continue the
Method already begun) I shall annex three or four.

OBSERVE. I.
Mrs. Sherrington (a Grandchild of an Eminent Person of our Faculty, and a
Fellow of the College of Physicians, in London, Dr. Sammon) after very many
Miscarriages, was sent to the Bath, and committed to my Care, by a Letter from
her Physician in London, Dr. Slare; whose Opinion it was, that she would hardly
go thorough with any Child, because she had very weak Nerves, which appeared by
a Trembling of her Hands; and thence he concluded, tha^ all Nervous, and
Membranous Parts, were equally enfeebled (the Womb amongst the rest) and
consequently not well able to persorm their Offices: A probable Conjecture
enough; and indeed it becomes an honest, prudent Physician, to fear, and
foretell the worst of Events. She came hither with her very kind Mother, Madam
Willett, in September, 89, took needful Preparations for the Waters, and the
Bath, with some strengthening Alteratives, and continued this Course Five or Six
Weeks; returned to Fullham, where they then lived, and was quickly with Child
after, which she brought to perfection, it proved a Daughter. But within a Year
after that, had a Son to her Daughter; and, in little more than another Year, a
second Son.

The Son's died quickly, one or both of the Smallpox; the Daughter is yet
living, as I am informed by her Mother whilst I write this; she being now in my
House with her Husband, Will. Sherrington, Esquire drinking these Waters for a
Scorbutical Atrophy, joined with Hypochondraick Melancholy, Jan. 96.

OBSERVE. II.
The Honorable Cravon Howard, Esquire his Lady (formerly Madam Ogle, one of the
Maids of Honor to the Duchess of York, at her Highnesses first coming into
England) after she was married, was frequently with Child, but never could
bring any to perfection, but at the end of three, four, or five Months, did
still miscarry; so that though she had been Nine times, or more, Impregnated, yet
never carried any to the full time. She was at length told, that many in the
like Case had found Remedy by using our Baths; to which, at long run, she came,
and used them regularly a Month or Five Weeks, and by them recovered so much
Strength in those weakened Parts, that she retained the next Conception (which
was soon after she returned home and brought it to perfection, and it was a
Daughter; which lived, and became a proper young Woman. What Children, between,
she had, I was not informed, but that she had afterward a Son born alive, but
(by what Distempers, or Accident, I know not) both Mother and Son died within
the Month.

OBSERVE. III.
Something the like Case, was that of my Lady Killmurry, (now Countess of
Huntington, formerly a Vennables, and nearly related to the Barons of
Kinderton.) Her Ladyship, upon her first Marriage, was subject to Miscarry, and
did three times at least, but did not delay so long her coming to the Bath, as
did the Person last mentioned. She was sent hither, and recommended to my Care,
by Dr. Hollins, and Dr. Fowke, two worthy Physicians of Shrewsbury, and my very
good Friends: Her Ladyship used the Bath but one Season, and that but for a
Month or Five Weeks; and presently upon her Return home, Conceived with Child;
went out her full time, and became a Mother of a living, and a lively Son, who
was (after his Father's Death) and yet is, Lord Killmurry, now about 14 Years
of Age. Her Ladyship, after this Son, miscarried again twice or thrice, and
then came a second time to the Bath, and had the same Success; for in a while
after was with Child, went out her full time, and had a Daughter, which yet
lives.

SECT. V.
Before I quite dismiss this Subject, I must beg leave to make a small
Digression, which will take up a Fifth Section, of the Women's Concerns.

It is to give some few Instances, that they that have occasion to use the
Baths, need not forbeat coming (though with Child) for fear of an Abortion; many
having used them under those Circumstances, and found no Inconvenience by it.
The occasion of this Digression, is a Passage in Mr. Guydott's Thermae
Britannicae, amongst his Nocumenta Thermarum Bathoniensium, Page 361. where he
gives a great Caution to Women, newly with Child, not to bathe, lest they
presently miscarry; and gives an Instance (out of Dr. Maplett's Epistles, as he
says; but that Epistle was never made public, (though he himself caused some
others of his to be printed) in my Lady Bassett, of Clarton, and had the
Confidence (out of Malice, or Ignorance, probably the former) to put my Name in
the Margin, as that Alter Medicus mentioned (as he says) in the Epistle,
wherein he is so unhappy (as well as unjust) in taking up Relations upon Trust
(as he does other things) that there is nonothing of all of it true: For that
Lady Bassett was never with Child, nor was Dr. Pierce her Physician, till some
Months, if not Years, after that time: For Dr. Highmore, of Shirborne, advised
her Ladyship, at that time, to the Bath, and prescribed Remedies for her, as
Mr. Chapman, the Apothecary, and his Bills (which I have by me, taken off from
his Fyle) can testify. He giving this needless Caution, by which, some, which
may have present Need of the Bath, may be discouraged from using of it; I think
it worth the while to give some Examples of Women with Child, young with Child;
in the first Month, and Months; that have both bathed, and drank the Waters,
without any likelihood of Miscarrying; and have gone on with their Reckonings,
and have not only brought forth lusty Children, but have been better in
breeding them, and in their Month, than they have been with former Children.

OBSERVE. I.
Mrs. Howard (Daughter to Sir Francis Blake) out of Yorkshire, a comely, and
excellently well humored Gentlewoman, came hither with my Lady her Mother, in
May, 1690, for a Weakness in all her lower Limbs, from the Loins downward,
occasioned (as was supposed) by taking Cold in her Lying in. I was sent for to
advise her in the Use of the Bath, which (after due Preparation) I put her
upon; not without Enquiry, how it was with her, in reference to her being, or
not being, with Child; that I might (as is my usual way to do) manage my
Direction accordingly, as to her manner of bathing.

Both she her self, and my Lady, her Mother, confidently asserting, that they
had no reason to think her a breeding, she began, and went on, to bathe as
others did, that had so much Need of it, as she had; but at three Weeks, or a
Months, end, coming to visit, as I used to do, my Lady asked me, what if her
Daughter should be young with Child? I answered, if there were reason to think
so, she must, in some things, after her manner of bathing, but wholly to give
it off, she needed not. She went on to use the Bath and sometimes oftener in a
Week, and longer at a time than I advised her, till she ha^ completed Six or
Seven Weeks, and ha^ recovered the Weakness, which she cam^ for. She went
strong and well from hence and continued so, and was (as I understood by some
of her Relations here, the Summe^ following) delivered of a lusty Girl at he^
due time. It appeared by her Reckoning that she had newly Conceived when she
came from home.

OBSERVE. II.
Mrs. Floyer, (a Brother's, or near Kinsman's Wife of Sir John Floyer's, a
Doctor o^ Physic, in Litchfield, was sent to the Bath by Dr. Slare, in May,
91. chiefly to drin^ the Waters, but sometimes to bathe withal having often
miscarried, and being miserably Hysterical; insomuch, that in the Letter to me,
wherein he describes her Case, and delivers her up to my Care; he gives a great
Caution about her taking Purging Medicines, lest they should raise Vapors, he
not daring to give her any thing stronger than Lenitives for that reason. She
was young with Child all the while she was here, drinking the Waters, and
bathing, as appeared by her Quickening, and Delivery of a Son, one of the
strongest Children she ever had. She past her Month better than formerly she
had done, which was all imputed to the Benefit she received by these Waters.
She came hither about the latter end of May, and was delivered of that Son,
about the latter end of January following.

OBSERVE. III.
My Lady Cook, Wife to Sir Thomas Cook, ^n East India Merchant, from London,
came ^ither in June, 91. with several of her Children, and Relations, who used
the Bath ^hore for Diversion than Necessity. My Lady had a great Mind to bathe
also, not ^or Company only, but for some Pains her ^adyship used to have in her
Limbs; but ^he was doubtful to do it, knowing her self (...) be young with
Child. Her Ladyship ^^erefore sent for me, to have my Advice (...) the Case. I
told her if she pleased to ^se the Cross Bath with that Moderation, as (...)
the frequency of going in, and time of ^aying there, as I advised, she might
safely (...) it, and not be in Danger of Abortion, which Advice her Ladyship
took; bathed more than fifteen times, after she was about Two Months gone (as
appeared by the time of her bringing a fully-ripe Child into the World.) Dr.
Slare, who saw it at Three Months old, thought it as healthy, strong, and as
likely to live, as any her Ladyship ever had before, which were not a few.

OBSERVE. IV.
My Lady Scarburgh, (Sir Charles his Lady) came several times to the Bath for a
Lameness after Rheumatisms, Gout, etc. and was still committed, by my old
Acquaintance and Friend, the Doctor, to my Care and Advice. She once came when
she was with Child (as appeared afterward) but she would not, by any Means,
believe her self to be so, though it was suspected by the Doctor, her Husband,
my self, and others; Her Ladyship therefore bathed on, even to Excess; being
earnestly set upon the Recovery of her Lameness. She had been some Months gone
with Child, before she came hither, and would hardly believe it when she
quickened, and felt the Child stir pretty strongly within her, but imputed it to
Wind. She continued bathing some time after she thus felt it, and yet
Miscarried not.

She being something relieved in her Limbs, went back to London, and at her due
time was delivered of a Daughter, which they called the Bath-Girl. She may be
yet alive for ought I know, having never heard any thing to the contrary.

OBSERVE. V.
Mrs. Hinchman (Wife to a Merchant of that Name, Son to Dr. Hinchman, first
Bishop of Salisbury, afterward of London) being very ill; greatly pained, and
indisposed, came to the Bath in the year 75, and stayed most part of the
Winter. Though she had been the Mother of several Children, and might have had
Reason to suspect, that some of her Illness, at least, might have been from
breeding; yet (having been better with all her former Children, which were
four) she imputed all to a more than ordinary Distemper, and came to the Bath
for it; bringing her Directions, and much of her Physic with her. She purged
once a Week with extractum R^dii, and blead every now and then. She purged with
those strong Pills, but the Sunday before I was sent for to her, and was let
Blood the Monday to Nine or Ten Ounces, She had bathed ever since she came to
Town, three, four, sometimes (when the Weather served) five times a Week, and
mostly in the Hot-Bath, where she was Tuesday near Two Hours; Wednesday she
went in again, but had not been there past Half an Hour, but her Pains came
upon her (which she called Collicks) and increased so fast, that they took her
out of the Bath, and sent for me in all haste. I finding the Pains very
different from Colic Pains, asked her if she was sure she was not with Child?
at which Question she was very angry, and importuned something speedily to ease
her Chollick. That, I told her, I would do, but begged leave to send a Woman to
her, that might inform me how Affairs went in those Parts, where it was not fit
for me to try. I sent that Woman, which happened to be almost next door to her
Lodging, and went directly to my Apothecary's, with Intention to prescribe a
Clyster, and an anodyne Draught, which I presently went about; but before I had
half done, there comes up a Messenger to me, to tell me, that I might save my
Pains, for the Gentlewoman was delivered of a Daughter, as well as of her
Colic; a lusty Child* and at the full time; who, for ought (...) may be yet
alive. Two or three Years after, going to see them in the Bishop of London's
House in Aldersgate street, she was well grown of her Age, and healthy. I have
not since heard what became of Mo^her, or Daughter.

And no wonder that the Cautions and orderly Managery of Women with Child, in
bath^ng, and drinking these Waters, have such ^^fe and successful Effects, when
our Women Bath-Guides (for they are not all old Wo^en, and past Childbearing)
go daily into ^he Bath, from first to last, to attend their ^adies, and
Mistresses, and to carry about ^eak Children; and take no Hurt by it.

I have known some of them to have stayed ^ive or Six Hours at a time; nay,
some to ^ave stayed Eight or Nine Hours in a Day, (...) Five Hours in the
Morning, and Three or ^our at Night) and seldom or never any ^^e of them
Miscarried, unless their Hus^ands chance to quarrel with them, and ^row them
down Stairs.

So that you see that this Caution was not (...) well grounded as to be
conclusive against ^^e bathing of those that were (or thought ^emselves to be)
with Child; and yet, for ^her Reasons, needed the Use of the Bath; ^^t that it
may (by good Advice, and careful Management) be as safely done, as when free
from being so.

SECT. VI.
And now we return from this Digression, to the last (and I think worst, and,
of late, most frequent) of Women's Cases, which will be the Business of this
sixth Section.

Well might Hyppocrates say in his Book De Locis in Homine, that in Women's
Distempers, (...) Omnium morborum causae sunt Uteri. If those Parts in Women
are not the Cau e of all Diseases incident to that Sex, to be sure they are
greatly their Aggravation; and the Diseases of those Parts are the worst they
are liable to: and some of those we are now upon, will easily be co^fest to
exceed all others in point of most Dismaying, Uncomfortable, and Painful
Circumstances, and are (too frequently) more difficult to be cured (if at all
curable and for which they are truly to be pitied; and the rather, because it
is not always their Faults, (too frequent and various Venery; Lascivious
Thoughts and Imaginations) that bring upon them the Beginnings of these
Distempers; but it is their very frame, and make that, lays them liable to it;
Nature making that part a Sink, and Drain to the rest of the Body, which is
manifestly evinced from this, that some very young Girls, that never
experienced Venery, nor ever entertained the Thoughts of it (at Eight, Nine,
and Ten Years of age, in which Cases I have been sometimes consulted) have been
severely afflicted with, and long kept under, this enfeebling, and troublesome
Symptom, we are now about to treat of, which is the Fluor Uterinus; to which
they usually affix that milder Ep^thite of Albus, but with some may have that
of Luteus, Viridis, etc. The most innocent of these Colors has but bad
Effects, to wit, a Decay of Strength and Color; Aptitude to miscarry; the
Falling down (sometimes falling out) of the Womb; but when it changes Color,
and becomes Acrimonious, fretting, and corroding; nay, virulent, (as often
times it does, it excoriates the Part, causes Uleers, which often degenerate
into Cancers. All which I have had here under my Care, and in some of them
these Waters (together with other Means* have proved effectual, to their
Palliation at least, if not their perfect Cure. It is not expected, I hope,
that in giving I^stances in any of these Cases, I should name the Persons, as I
have done in others, describe them I will as near as I can, give a true Account
of the Process in their Cure, and the Success of it, and trust to your
Courtesy to believe me, without a particular Enquiry.

OBSERVE. I.
A Gentlewoman of Three and Forty Years of Age, a Neighbor, within Five or Six
Miles; of a Sanguine Complexion, but had a Salt Scorbutical Blood; which
appeared some Years before, by the breaking out of a Vitelligo, at some
Seasons, chiefly upon her Elbows, Knees, etc. She had about Midsummer, 1679, a
Sudden and Violent Eruption of the Whites, which exceeded in quantity her
Customary Benefit. This continued very troublesome and excessive, all the
remaining part of the Summer, and the Winter following; though she took all sorts
of Astringent and Strengthening Medicines, which are usually well known by those
of that Sex, especially Midwives, and Nurse-keepers, who recommend them, one to
another, with the Stamp of a Probatum.

It would be sometimes, for a while, les^en'd, but it never wholly ceased: In
the Winter she had Pain, Weakness, and Stiff^ess at Knees, Hips and Ancles. Her
Bones ^lso seemed to be sore, tender, and weak; ^^e seemed tired after Rest,
and was, seem^^gly, more weary in the Morning when she ^rose, than when she
went to Bed at Night.

The Pains and Weaknesses of her Limbs ^rought her to the Bath in May, 1680.
and ^^e applied her self to me for Advice.

I first put her upon drinking the Waters, which did her great Service, in
taking off ^^e Sharpness of the Matter that came off, and something lessening
her Pain; though it ^^ttle abated the first, in Quantity, yet in Quality it made
great Alteration, for it ^nder'd the Parts less smarting, and ten^er.

For the Pains and Weakness of her Legs, (...) well as the Eruption upon her
Elbows and ^nees, there was a necessity for her to bathe, ^^d that pretty
frequently, but she drank the ^aters between whiles. The bathing (as ^^e
ordered it) did not increase the Fluor, ^^ho' some have forbidden it in that
Case) ^^t rather by moderate Sweating, (lessen^^g the quantity of Humors) that
also ^as lessened, in some measure; but neither ^^at, nor the peculiar Remedies
she took withal, did wholly stay it. Upon her going off therefore (which was at
the end of Six Weeks, when the Cutaneous Eruptions, and the Scorbutical Pains
and Weaknesses of her Limbs were removed, I put her upon taking a strong
Decoction of Woods, Ivory, Hartshorn, etc. which she kept close to, drinking
no other Liquor for Seven Weeks o^ Two Months, after she came home; which
perfectly recovered her, so that she remain^ well to this day; and of which she
yet retains so grateful a Remembrance, that every Year, about Christmas, she
sends me a Present, such as her Dairy and Orchard afforded the Summer before.

OBSERVE. II.
Another, in the like Case, as to the Whites (but having nothing of the
Vitelligo, no^ Pains, nor great Weakness of Limbs, about Five and Twenty Years
of Age, and no^ long married, but complaining more o^ Smarting in those Parts,
especially upon making Water, (which argued Excoriation in the Vagina Uteri)
came and drank the Waters, but bathed but little, and took Balsami^ Astringent
Pills withal, used Injections of the Bath-Water, Three Weeks, or a Month, an^
received considerable Advantage by it.

OBSERVE. III.
A Citizen's Wife of Bristol, aged 37, ha^ing, for a longtime before, been very
ill of ^his Distemper, as was last described; but ^ndeed worse than either of
the former: For what was at first white only, was af^erwards yellow, then
greenish, after that ^uskish, toward a black, and now inter^persed with red,
which manifestly declared ^n Excoriation at least; and approaching to, ^f not a
confirmed, Exulceration. She having tried various Means and Methods at ^ome,
came at length to the Bath in June, 61. where she heard I was then settled; she
having formerly been my Patient in Bristol, (where I began my Practice in the
Year 1646.) She sent for me; I enquiring what she had already done, would not
put her upon the same things again, but made her to drink these Waters, and
sometimes moderately to bathe; and in the Bath, to in^ect the Water with an
Instrument I got purposely for her, and taught her the Use of; and which (in
many Cases, but this especially) I have since caused to be used by many. This
did something toward her Recovery, but not enough. I therefore advised healing
Balsamic, and gently* Astringent Means, to be taken Mornings with the Waters,
and in the Evenings, Mel-Rosarum, an^ sometimes Mel Elatines, with some of the
Bath Water, to be injected warm, with a Metrencheta. This (after the other)
did the Business, and in about Two Month^ time, she returned well to her Family.

OBSERVE. IV.
A Tradesman's Wife, of Cirincester, aged 30; Twelve Weeks after her being
delivered of a Child, came to the Bath in September, 66. applying her self to
me for Directions what to do, gave this Account of her Case.

About a Fortnight after her Delivery, she was taken with a violent Pain in her
Right Flank, with some Swelling, which increased for Two Months, and in that
time became a large, and a hard Tumor, and at last very tender to the Touch;
at the end of Ten Weeks, a green and very faetid Water was discharged per
pudenda; and this continued when she came hither. It seemed therefore, manifest
to me, that (whither by any Injury done her in her Delivery, by the Midwife; or
any thing left behind, that should have been brough^ off, or Cold taken after
her being laid; or a Conflux of Humors from ^he rest of the Body, to that,
(then enfee^ed) Part, or from what other Cause it did ^ot then appear but) an
Inflammation, ^hirrous Tumor, and Abscesse there was; and very great Cause was
there to fear, lest (...) would become Cancerous. I caused her ^o be let Blood
both in the Arm, and by ^eeches in the Haemorrhoid Veins, I prepa^ed her for
the Use of the Bath, and Waters, ^^y a Purging Apozeme, which she continued
(...) Week or more.

I then ordered her first to drink the Wa^ers for some Days, afterward to
bathe; and at last to the Injections of Bath-Water, and Mell-Rosarum, and
Mell-Elatines, (as in ^he former Case) and continued her, by Turns, thus to do,
till the Hardness abated* ^he Tumor subsided, and the Gleete ceased, and she
perfectly recovered; all which was ^n about Two Month time. She had seve^al
Children afterward; she is yet living, (...) Widow, and a lusty strong Woman
of her ^ge; which is now on the wrong side of Threescore.

Many more Instances of this kind might ^e given; but it may suffice to have
men^ion'd one of each degree of these Uterine Fluors. The first is bad; the
second worse; ^he last is worst of all; yet all received Advantage here. I
dismissed the two latter, wit^ Directions for a Drying, Vulnerary Drin^ which
they continued for some time afte^ they went home; and after that hung, (...)
the same Ingredients, in a Barrel of middlin^ Ale, and drank no other Drink for
a time but afterward returned to their accustom^ Diet, and held well with it.

CHAP. X.
THE Women having in the Precee^ing Chapter, been taken Care so we now come to
those we enjoy by the^ their Children, which (next to their M^thers) become the
greatest Happinesses, Afflictions of this present Life: Whi^ well, alive, and
Virtuously inclined, the greatest of Comforts; when sick, dead, (...) (which is
worse than either) Lewd and D^bauch'd, the greatest of Discomforts. Wh^^
concerns them with the Bath, is referrab^ to very few Heads, viz. Lameness and
Il^ness from a bad Nurse: The Rickets, a^^usual Consequencies of it, which are
Bac^wardness in Growing; Weakness, an^ Crookedness of Body, and Limbs, an^
Hardness and Bigness of the lower Belly. (...) shall give some few Instances
upon these Heads, and so conclude this first Book, which treats chiefly of the
Outward Use of these Waters; Bathing.

And first of the Inconveniences of an ^ll Nurse. It is not the Healthiness,
and fresh Looks, and good Consistence of the Milk only, that should direct in
the choice of a Nurse; but the Honesty, Faithfulness, and Veracity, that would
oblige her to deal truly and faithfully with those that pay her Wages; and
timely to declare it, if she chance to be breeding, whilst she suckles a Child.
The want of this true, and plain, Dealing has been to me a great Care and
Trouble: For the only Grandchild that ever (...) had, or am like to have, who
was born ^n my House, and solemnly given me, ^y my only remaining Child, my
dear Daughter his Mother, and put out to as likely a Woman, to breed it up
healthily and well, as this Country afforded, was well-nigh spoiled, by her
being with Child, and concealing it Three Months or more, before she would own
it; though she was often assured by the Grand mother (my Wife) and my self, that
if she had the least Reason to suspect her self to be breeding, she should wean
the Child, and should still go on to keep it, and should have the same weekly
Pay for it, a^ if she still suckled it; but it seems she had no^ Faith enough
to believe us, but for fear o^ having it taken away, and her Pay to cease she
kept on giving it suck, till she had gon^. Thirteen, or Fourteen, Weeks with
Child^ with two Children, (as it appeared afterward;) this so corrupted the
poor Child's Blood, that it put him into frequent Fevers* out of which he
narrowly escaped more than once, brake out all over his Body, especially Head
and Face; at length the whole Matter was discharged upon his Righ Hip, Thigh,
and Leg, which swelled it a^ big as his Middle; offered to break at several
Places, being hot, inflamed, and discolored. The best that we hoped for was
that it might not break on a Joint, and so leave him a Cripple: But with
Pultesses, and other Applications, and some gentle Purgatives (such as a Child
of his Age was capable of taking) it was at length discussed, and in great
measure carried off* but the Leg rendered so weak, that he could not move it,
but as he lifted it up with the other; and whereas it was much bigger than the
other before, whilst swelled, it was now gone much less.

It continued a long time so weak, that ^ll he was four years old, and more, we
^^uld not venture him to go alone.

This while some concluded him to have the ^ickets, others the Consumption; but
very ^eak and valetudinary he still was. An ^ssue was made in his Arm, at a
year and (...) quarter old. We often thought him ^owing aside, one Shoulder
thrusting out ^^ther than the other; to remedy which, ^^d to prevent its going
farther out, we got ^^m a Neck-swing, which being constant^^ used after Bathing
(for we began to bathe ^^m, as soon as his Swelling was well off) (...) is took
off those Fears, and rendered him ^ry straight, and in time, he got strength
(...) his Legs also. As soon as his Inflam^ations ceased, we began, and
continued ^^s Bathing Spring and Fall, as his Strength ^^uld bear, till he
perfectly recovered. In ^^e Seventh, Eighth and Nine Years of his ^ge, he had
three great and acute Diseases; ^^st the Scarlet-Feaver, next the Measles, ^^d
thirdly, the Smallpox, which last, ^eing very well purged after it) cleansed
^^n effectually, and gave him a new habit (...) Body. At ten years old he was
sent (...) a School, and had no considerable illness ^ere, in five or six Years
time; though ^out the latter end of that time, he suffered his Issue to heal
up, without giving any notice to me (or any Body else) of it, an^ (Blessed be
God) without any alteration i^ point of Health. He has now been a^ Oxford
these two Years, and has not ha^ any considerable Sickness, since his goin^
thither, and has more than completed h^^ Eighteenth Year, and is likely to
become (...) Man, though not a tall one; yet, I hope Virtuous one.

OBSERVE. II.
Miss Jeppe, the only Child of a dea^^ and tender Mother, a particular goo^
Friend, and Patient of mine. This Chi^^ was left Father-less and Mother less,
whe^^ not much above two years old; but to the Care of an excellent
Grandmother, by t^^ Fathers side. Mrs. Baber of Sutton-Cou^^ within the Parish
of Chew-magna, in the County of Somerset, who perceiving th^^ her (then, only)
Grandchild, very we^^ in the Limbs, far gone in the Rickets, a^^ enclining to
grow aside; after the trial (...) various means, sent her to the Bath,
committed her to my Care, and placed her (...) my House, in the year, 166^. She
w^^ then so weak and ill, that we could put (...) into the Bath but very
seldom, and use b^^ very little Inward means.

Such as she was capable of, and could (without much disturbance) be made to
take, she had; Aperitives, Hepaticks, and Pectorals. What was wanting in her
frequent Bathing, was supplied by her longer stay, continuing here till the
approach of Winter; in which time she recovered so much Advantage, as to
encourage her careful and tender Grandmother, to send her again the next
Summer; and so a third, if not a fourth. Whilst she Bathed, we used her to a
Swing, which recovered her Crookedness: Her Legs (as she got Health and
Strength) became more and more straight and strong; and the hardness and
distention of both the Hypochonders, especially that of the Right Side on the
Region of the Liver (which Symptoms should have been mentioned before) fell by
degrees, and became laxe and equal. In short, she at length perfectly
recovered, and became competently healthy and well; grew indifferently tall,
and was at length Married to Edward Clarke, Esquire of Chippely, in the lower part
of Somersetshire; and by him has many Tall, Strong and fine Children of both
sorts, and is yet alive, and will I hope continue so to be, and to see them as
well disposed of, as she her self was.

OBSERVE. III.
Madam Skippewith (Wife to a Gentleman of that Name, that lived in Chancery
Lane, London, afterward, Sir Thoma^ Skippewith brought hither a Son about Te^
Years old in July 68; he had had the Rickets in his Infancy, most severely, but
wa^ now) as to his inward health) much recovered, only there remained great
Crookedness in his lower Lymbs, so that he wen^ very odly, not only throwing
out his Legs and his Knees striking one against another by reason of their
looseness, and that o^ the Ancle Joints; but the very Shin-bone were crooked,
bending outward like a Bow or rather, wreathed or twisted. After du^
Preparation, he was put into the Bath (...) which he bore very well, being
otherwise lusty and strong, and continued the use of (...) a considerable time.

He learned here to Swim, by my Advice that he might the more effectually
stretc^ out his Lymbs, which thing, I think, contributed a great deal to the
good effects h^ had by his being here. He apparentl^ got strength whilst he was
under these means went much better, his Joints being not (...) loose: He, in
time, by these helps, gre^^ ^ut all that Weakness, and very much the
Crookedness too; insomuch, that coming ^ither ten or a dozen years after, to
see his ^ister, the Lady Williams (to whom I had ^he Honor to be Physician) I
knew him ^ot, till I was told that he was the same Person that had been under
my Care here ^t the Bath.

OBSERVE. IV.
A Son, and (if I mistake not) the only ^on of Sir Joseph Ash, was brought
hither ^y my Lady his Mother, in 77, in a very weak Condition, both Inwardly
and Outwardly; in Body, and Limbs. My Lady ^onsulted first an eminent, and
worthy Person of our Faculty, Dr. Highmore of Shir^ourn, who happened then to
be in Town with a Person of Quality that used the Bath. He finding the Child to
be so very weak, and (as he judged) Hectically in^lined, dissuaded my Lady from
bathing of ^im, and advised her to go speedily out of Town, for the Bath would
kill him Her Ladyship hearkened to this Advice, and in ^rder to her removal,
comes to Mr. Chap^an the Apothecary, to pay him for some ^ittle things that
were had from his Shop, and told him what Dr. Highmore had advised: He replied
to her, Madam, Dr. Highmore is a very worthy Person, and a great Man in his
Profession, but understands no^ what may be done at the Ba h, so well a^ they
that live constantly upon the place and have seen, and observed, the successe^
that have been had by it, in very strang^ and weak Cases, and some not unlike
thi^ of your Sons; therefore, before you leav^ this Country, pray advise with
Dr. Pierce, who came hither for his own Health, an^ has been a constant
Inhabitant here, for more than Twenty Years past. Her Ladyship not well knowing
what new Course t^ take next, having tried so many before and this being a last
Refuge, and willing to d^ the utmost to save an only Son, hearkene^ to his
Advice; and after she had diverte^ her self a while at Mr. Samuel Ashes, (a
Brother of Sir Joseph's) and perhaps sent, the while to have her Husbands
consent, cam^ back again to Bath, and then I was call^^ in to the young Man's
assistance, and foun^ him not only seemingly Consumptive Thin, Pale and
Hectical, and (if I misre^^ member not) in a Diarrhaea, but also relaxed in his
Joints, growing aside in his Body and crooked in his Legs; to help which they
had put him all in Armor, Cap-a-Pe^^ Iron Bodise, half Boots, with a Sprig of
Ir^^ ^o keep in his Ancles from turning outward, and the same at Knees, from
turning inward, with a device, to allow for the bending of each Joint, both
braced on with Leathers, which being drawn together with Laces, were brought to
what Straightness they thought fit, or he could bear; without which, he could
neither stand nor go; nor with them but feebly, though at that time he was Seven
or Eight Years old.

In this deplorable Condition, and under that uncomfortable Prognostic; after
some fitting Preparation, did we venture to bathe him, but very moderately at
first, and in a very temperate Bath; increasing the time of his Stay, and the
frequency of his going in, and the Strength of the Bath, as we found he was
able to bear it. It pleased God so to succeed this bold Adventure (for such
every Body thought it) that he got Ground upon it, and stayed Six Weeks by it,
that Season, till the Winter came on; which he passed very well, and not only
kept what he had here got, by his bathing, but in some measure improved it; so
much, as to encourage his Lady-Mother to bring him again the Year following,
and several Years afterward, till he recovered Strength, got a better Habit of
Body, and State of Health, and needed this Means no more. He was here in
Summer, 94, to all Appearance a healthy and indifferently well-grown Man, and a
Barronet. I think he has his Father's Name as well as his Honor, and is Sir
Joseph Ash, of Norfolk. He came then for Diversion only, with his Sister's Son,
Mr. Windham, of Norfolk, and stayed but Four or Five Days.

OBSERVE. V.
In a very like Case to this (as to Weakness and Distortion of Limbs, although
not altogether so much indisposed, inwardly) was the Son of a Scots Gentleman,
that belonged to Duke Hamilton, Gershom Carmitchell, whose tender and careful
Mother brought him hither in September, 78. supported with Irons, as is above
described, and very weak, and crooked in his Shins, Ancles, and Knees, and had
been long under the Care and Management of those Body-menders, that take upon
them to make the Crooked Straight.

He was something older than Mr. Ash; taller I am sure, and bigger he was, and
needed not so much Caution, altogether, in entering upon, and continuing in, the
Baths, but after Preparation was put into the Queen's and King's-Bath, and
continued it for a considerable time the first Year, with no small Advantage,
and Alteration to the better; and this caused him to come a second, and a
^hird, and I think a fourth Year, till he was so well recovered, by outgrowing
his Weaknesses and Distortions) as to leave off ^^is Irons, and to be settled
at a School, and ^fterwards was sent to the University of Glas^oe, where he
remained in good Reputation ^n this past Year 95, as I was informed by ^y Lord
Arran, and the Countess of Dun^onnald, (Son and Daughter to the now Duchess of
Hamilton) on whom I had the Honor to attend, as their Physician, whilst ^hey
were then here at the Bath.

OBSERVE. VI.
Miss Adison, from White-Haven, in Cumber^and. very lame in the Lower Parts,
from ^he Hips downward, in which she had not ^he Sense of Feeling, much less
the Power of Motion, when she was first brought hi^her by her Mother to the
^ath, (which was ^ome Years ago) but by slow degrees, being brought hither
several Years following, ^^e got Warmth, Sense, and some Strength ^n them, so
much as to be supported with ^rons, which she was not capable of using ^t first.

She was (by often bathing, and some Inward Means withal) at length enabled to
leave them off, as well as to put them on, and to have no farther Need of the
Bath. What afterward became of her I do not know, but her Father, I heard,
removed from White-Haven, to some Employment in London. The last time I saw her
at the Bath, was in 91.

OBSERVE. VII.
A little Son of Coll. Farwells, of the Tower, about Five or Six Years of Age,
was sent to the Bath, and recommended to my Care by Dr. Gideon Harvey,
(Physician to the Tower) in May, 91. Being sent for to him, by the Nurse that
came with him, when he first came to Town, he was sitting upon a Table, when I
came in, and appeared to me so well, as if nothing ailed him; he looked so
plump and fresh, and very well colored; but when the Nurse set him down, there
appeared not only a Weakness at the Small of his Back, but Contraction of all
his Lower Limbs, from the Hips downward* insomuch, that they were so far from
supporting him, that he could not, of himself extend a Leg, nor suffer it to be
extended to its due length, by another. He would crawl up and down upon a
Table, or the Floor; being active enough, and willing to play; but, not having
a ready Use of his Lower Parts, could not, but was Scramm'd, drawn up
altogether. He eat and drank, and slept pretty well, and seemed to be recovered
of all Inward Illnesses, and other Remainders of the Rickets, except this of
his Lower Parts.

After a whiles rest, and some Preparation, we put him into the Bath, at first
twice a Week, afterward every other day; at length four days in the Week, and
sometimes every day, except Sundays; (when the Baths are shut up) and all this
was done without any great Disturbance to him. In the first Month or six Weeks
there was very little sensible Alteration to the better; at length we observed
that he could erect himself a little (and truly but a little) more than at
first, and suffered his Legs to be drawn out, in the Bath (which we made the
Guides do) with less Complaint than formerly. After Ten Weeks Stay he returned,
and got Advantage by degrees, insomuch, that when he came hither the second
time (which was with my Lord Lucas, in August, 93. he was able to run about,
and to play at Trap, and Top and Scourge, with the Boys. He bathed then also,
and took Physic between whiles, and continued it till my Lord's Return, which
was not till October following. He manifestly got Ground this second time,
whilst he was here, recovering a more expedite Use of his Lower Limbs, and
standing more upright. What Improvement has been made since I have not heard,
but do presume, and hope that (if no accident, or other Illness intervend, and
that he went on as he began here) he may, by this time, be perfectly recovered,
and I the rather think so, because they have not sent him hither a third time.

Many great, and remarkable, Instances more might be here given, of Children's
Recoveries, by the Help of the Bath, out of these, and other such Weaknesses;
concomitant with, and consequent to, the Rickets, and particularly that which
they Vulgarly c^ll Liver-grown; when they are tought, and big-belly'd, and
Hardness remain upon the Region of the Liver, Spleen, or Mesentery. Many in
such Cases, by bathing in the Cross-Bath, and taking Inwardly some Aperitives
the while, have been perfectly recovered of these Distempers, as well as
Lameness, and Crookedness in Body, and Limbs.

Many have been sent hither, with Success, to promote their Growing only.

Her Grace, my Lady Duchess of Beaufort, has formerly sent several of her
Children hither upon that very score, and one of her Grace's Grandchildren, my
Lord Marquess of Worcester's eldest Daughter, was here two, if not three
Summers following, by Her Lady-Grandmothers Encouragement.

CHAP. XI.
WIth this Tenth Chapter, I should have ended this first Book, but that I find
it needful to add an Eleventh, though a short one. There having been (in the
preceding Observations) frequent Mention made of pumping, and applying the
Mudd of the Bath, it is necessary that something be said of both these, before
I go on to the Inward Use of these Waters, by drinking them, which will be the
business of the Second Book. And first of Pumping.

SECT. I.
Before Pumps were erected, they use^ Bucketting, which was performed, by
taking up Water in Buckets, nearest the Springs by the two of the tallest, and
strongest o^ the Guides, who stood close upon the largest Spring, and lifting
up the full Bucket as high as they could, they let the Wate^ fall leisurely
upon the Part affected, by which it was thought that greater Impression was
made, and the Warmth, and Virtue of the Water, reached farther in, tha^ bathing
alone could do, even in the hottes^ Places of that Bath. This they usually did
in Sciatica's, Palsies, Cold and Withered Limbs; Stupors, Dullness of the Head,
Deafness, etc. After the Pumps were brought into Use, this way of Embrocation
ceased the Water coming by them more immediately from the Spring, and therefore
hotter* and with more entire Virtue, and falling with equal, if not greater,
Force upon the Part affected, and consequently penetrating farther, and
carrying in the Efficacy and Virtue of the Water into the most Innermost Parts.

After Pumps had been for some Year^ used, in the Baths only, it was found
inconvenient for those that had hot Entrals, and were subject to Gravel and
Stone in the Kidneys, and to Women that were apt to Vapors, to bear the Heat
of the Bath, and Pumping together; therefore an Expedient was found, by raising
the Water somewhat higher, to pump the Extreme Parts (the Head, and from the
Knees downwards) without going into the Bath at all; and this was called
Dry-Pumping, because the rest of the Body remained dry, whilst the Head or
Feet, etc. were at the same time sufficiently embrocated. In what Cases it has
been, and is usually, thus employed the foregoing Observations, have in some
measure already shown. But in Cases of violent Headache, removable by no other
Means; Deafness from Colds, taken in the Head, etc. it may be convenient to add
some few Instances; and first of the long-continued Headache.

OBSERVE. I.
The Lady Viscountess Stafford, (a Descendent of the great Duke of Buckingham,
of that Name) came hither in August, 68. with my Lord her Husband (of whom
mention is already made, both in the Preface, and in Chap. 2. Observe. 4.)

Whilst my Lord bathed for his Lumbag^, my Lady, after due Preparation, pumped
her Head for a most inveterate Headache* which had (for many Years before) been
very afflictive to her; being seldom, long together, free from it. Her Ladyship
first tried it in the Bath, but both at a time was more than could well be
borne by a Person of so weak and tender a Constitution, as was her Ladyships.
She usually therefore drank the Waters in the Morning, and sat under the dry
Pump at Night; and thus she continued to do three or four times a Week, all the
time they stayed here, and was greatly advantaged by it.

OBSERVE. II.
A second, in the same Circumstances, was an excellently good (as well as a
fine) Lady, then Lady Roberts, afterward Countess of Radnor, and now Wife to
the Lord Cheynie; being greatly afflicted, came hither with my Lord her
Husband, in August, 73. and then tried what the Pump would do toward her
Recovery; but my Lords Business calling him away too soon, her Ladyship could
not use it long enough, to produce any considerable Effect, and therefore came
again the next Year, and had ^en but a Fortnights time, (whilst my Lord ^ank
the Waters at Castle-Cary, for the Re^ainders of a Colica-Pictonica). This very
^orthy Lady (to dispatch her Affair the ^oner) drank the Waters every Morning,
and ^^mp'd her Head at the Dry Pump every Night which her Ladyship bore better
than I ex^ected, and had great Alleviation by it.

OBSERVE. III.
Mrs. Bowler, of the Isle of Wight, a very ^eak and infirm Woman, came hither
in ^ugust, 88. and had (among many other, and great Complaints) so violent a
Pain and Weakness in her Head, that she could ^ot endure the least Noise or
Motion in ^er Chamber, without great Disturbance; ^er Head seeming to fly in
pieces, as she sually expressed it. her kind and tender ^usband, who with no
small Difficulty, and Trouble, brought her hither, sent for ^e to advise
concerning her, being encou^g'd thereunto by his very good Friend, and mine,
Sir Robert Holms, then (and long ^^ter; to his dying day) Governor of the ^le
of Wight, I was not a little troubled that Course to take with her; she needed
both drinking, bathing, and pumping, but had not Strength to comport with
either. By gentle degrees therefore was she put upon all, but stuck mainly to
the latter, pumping* upon her Head, first in the Bath, afterward at the Dry
Pump: She not only bore it well, being thus managed, but, at long run, received
so much Benefit by it, that she returned home (for that Season) so much
advantaged, that she came again a second, and a third time, and was at length
recovered to a great measure of Ease and Health, though her Life was often
dispair'd of, in this long continued, and deplotable Illness of hers.

SECT. II. Pumping for Deafness.
So much for Headache, I shall now give an Instance or two of Deafness, from
Cold Causes, cured by Pumping, and then proceed to the last thing, proposed the
Use of the Mudd.

OBSERVE. IV.
William Warner, Esquire from Bandon-Bridge, in the Kingdom of Ireland, came hither
in May, 82. to take Advice, and use the Bath, ^^r several Distempers, but
chiefly for a very ^^eat Difficulty of hearing, which was (for ^ome Years
before) settled upon him, and ^ad, of late, greatly increased; insomuch ^^at he
could hardly hear at all.

He first used Means proper for the other ^ymptoms he complained of; and at
length ^uck to the Pump, both in, and out of the Bath; ^y which he manifestly
recovered, and con^nued to hear much better, till after a Re^^rn a while into
his own Country; and ^assing there one Winter or two, the Deaf^ess returned, as
he afterward told me in ^89. when the Dispersion from Ireland was so ^reat,
that he, with many others, upon ^nall warning, were forced to fly into Eng^and
for Refuge; and so ourning with a Gentleman, near this City, all the time of
his Banishment, was so kind, as sometimes to ^isit me.

OBSERVE. V.
Mrs. Hughs, a Gentlewoman, from ou^ (...) Wales, between Thirty and Forty
(...) Age; came hither in June, 91. so very (...) that they that conversed with
her were for^^^ ^o do it by Signs, and to have (...) Tongues at their
Einger-ends. She used (...) Pump a great while, before she found any kind of
Alteration to the better, but a length, (using Inward Means withal) she got, by
degrees, a Competent Hearing, bu^ then though her self well too soon, and
returned home with half her Errand.

Whither she improved in it afterward (as was her Hopes, and many, in diver
Cases, do) I never had the Opportuni^ to know.

Thus much of the Use of the Pump, the^ remains nothing now, to finish this
fir^ Book; but to say something of the Mu^^ of the Bath, which also has (in
some Cases a considerable Use, besides that of Gildi^ Silver, and making
Bath-Guineys (as the^ call them) of new Milled Shillings, which also it
effectually does. In many Case this Mudd is applied by way of Catap as^^ (as in
some of the foregoing Observatio^^ is in imated) but chiefly in hard whi^^
Swellings, and Contractions of the Limb (where it may be conveniently applied
or where a Cullus or Slimy Matter is wedg into a Part or Joint; or when Wind
(...) stends it, and so causes a painful, and hi^ders a due and ready Motion of
that Limb

It has been useful also in Scurfs, an^ Scall'd-Heads (as they vulgarly call
them when a hard, and scaly Scab over-runs t^^ whole (or part of the) Scalp;
the Appli^tion of this Mudd, like a Pultesse, till it ^ow dry, and then washing
it off with the ^ath-Water, and applying fresh warm Mudd; ^r some considerable
time, greatly promotes ^e Cure of these unseemly Distempers.

To be more particular in the several Cases bove instanced in, would be to
leave no ^om for a second Book, which is designed ^r like Instances of Cures
done, chiefly (...) drinking these Waters. To which we ^ow hasten.

The End of the First Book.
Bath Memoirs: OR, OBSERVATIONS IN Three and Forty Years Practice, AT THE BATH.

WHAT CURES Have been There Wrought, by Drinking these Waters, (chiefly) by
God's Blessing on the Conduct and Directions of Robert Pierce, Dr. in Physic,
and Fellow of the College of Physicians in London, a constant Inhabitant of
Bath, from the Year 1653. (when he came thither for his own Healths sake) to
this present Year 1697.

The SECOND PART.

BRISTOL: Printed by and for W. Bonny* and H. Hammond, Bookseller at Bath, and
the Devizes; and are to be Sold by most Booksellers in London, and the Country,
1697.

Bath Memoirs, BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of Water-drinking in general.
HAving, in the first Book, given Instances of Diseases cured here, chiefly by
Bathing, I come now to do the same, of Distempers ^emov'd chiefly by Drinking
these Waters: Though many (and most that now come hi^her) usually do both, yet
have I known ^ome (and those not a few, of late Years) that have drank the
Waters several Weeks ^ollowing, and not entered the Bath at all, and have gone
hence well recovered of the Distemper they came for.

Now because many People (and some very knowing Persons too) have looked upon
it as a new thing, and but of late brought into Use; I think it not
inconvenient to premise some Account, when, and how, and how long, the
Bath-Waters have been drank; and next, briefly to recite (i^ general) what may
be expected from a^^ orderly, and regular, Course of Drinking (...) them here,
upon the place (which two thing shall be the Business of this first Chapter)

Afterward I shall proceed to give Instances of particular Recoveries, in
severa^^ D^stempers, that have been had, in m^ time, under my Conduct and
Directions by the drinking of these Waters, chiefly as I have done in the first
^ook, by thos^ attained by backing (...) and first.

1. Water-drinking i^ general has bee^ more used in this last Age, then it was
i^ many before; and indeed Medicine, an^ Medicinal Processes, have been liable
t^ the Change of Fashions, as well as Cloath^ and Coaches, Meats and Drinks.
The^^ is scarce a County in England, that has n^^ now a Medicinal Water, that
is not, at some Season of the Year, frequented; and some there are that have
been formerly famous, an^ are now neglected, and scarcely any mention is made
of them; witness the once famous Water of Wellingeborough, in Northamptonsh^re,
whose Reputation has been indee^ the more lessened, by having Astrope, near
^^o Oxford; which last was found out, or ^^rst reputed, by Dr. Willis; and is
since ^rown so Famous as (almost) to Emulate Tunbridge its self.

There is, Eastward, from hence ten Miles, (in Wiltshire, three Miles from the
Devizes) at Seen, a Chalybeat Water, fully ^^s much (if not more) impregnated
with ^he Mineral, as is that of Tunbridge, yield^ng as deep (if not a deeper)
Tincture, as that, with Oaken Leaves, and Bark, or Gauls. and for Two Miles
Eastward, from thence, ^here is scarce a Spring (and some Ponded Water also in
the little Ditches, on the South ^de of the Hill, as far as Poulshott and
Pot^ru) but Partakes of the same Mineral; and give a like, but fainter,
Tincture.

We have also Southward from us (about ^6 or 18 Miles) a Purging Water, not
in^^riour to that of Barnet, North-Hall, or Ep^me; it is at Awford, near
Castle-Cary, in the County of Somerset, which was first disco^er'd by Mr.
Thomas Earl, Minister of that ^lace, and communicated to me in the year ^670,
by Letters; which Letters I have still ^y me. Upon his Request I made trial of
(...) and encouraged the Use of it. I made (...) known first to (my good
Friend, and Fel^w-Labourer in the Drudgery of a Riding ^ractice) Dr. Highmore,
of Sherborne (which is within Seven or Eight Miles of the Well) as we met
abroad with a Patient, with whom we were jointly concerned, and who needed such
a Purging Water. He and I both sent several Patients'to it; and he sometimes
went thither himself, at the Drinking Season; so that it became, for a time,
very Famous, and was, (and is sometimes, to this day) sent for, and sold
publicly, as low as Exeter and Plymouth, even to the Lands end; for they bear
Carriage very well, and keep (in an open earthen Vessel) a considerable time;
but stopped close, they stink in a few Days.

At length the Promiscuous Use of it, in all Cases, without due Preparation,
Care, and Caution, rendered it injurious to some Consumptive Persons, who dying
(almost upon the spot) lessened the Reputation of it, though very good Use, has
been since, and was before, and is, and may be still, made of it. It has been
often sent for hither, and great Advantage has been found by it, especially in
Bilious Gholicks, and the usual Effects of them, Loss of Limbs: These Waters a
while drank, and the Bath regularly used after them, never yet failed to
perfect a Recovery in that Case.

But it may be thought, by some, that the mention of these last Waters may be
foreign to our present Business; but when they consider that I do it, to show
how possible it is that a Water once famous, may lose its Reputation, and the
Use of it be discontinued, when others creep up in the room of it; and that it
is as possible that any one so defamed, may again recover its lost Reputation,
and may become as famous, if not of more Use, than it was formerly; they may
alter their Opinion.

Indeed I think this to be the Case of the Bath-Waters; for that they were
drank above an Hundred and Twenty Years ago, appears by a Book of one Jones, a
Physician; (which Book I have by me in 4to. Printed at London, for Will. Jones
in he year 1572, entitled the Baths of Bathe's Aid; and dedicated to Henry,
Earl of Pembrooke) in the 28th. Page of the day; the Manner and Quantity, etc.
to which Book I referr the Reader, that desires farther Satisfaction in this
particular. I heartily wish it may not (but I am much afraid it will) be so
again; that the Irregular, Unseasonable, and Unadvised Use of them, (which too
many are already guilty of) and Drinking of them at distance, do not again
diminish their Reputation.

But as to the Antiquity of their inward use, this I know (and did at my first
coming to live here) by the Information of the ancientest People that were upon
the Place; and that were Born and Bred here, (and there were two, a Man and his
Wife, one or both of them, Bath Guides to the King's- Bath ( Newmans by Name)
that made Ninescore between them; for what one wanted of Fourscore and Ten, the
other exceeded.)

These People lived, and were conversant about the Bath, long before any Pump
was set up; they, and many others of great Age asserted, that these Waters had
been drank time out of Mind, for two Purposes, (i.e.) to quench Thirst, and to
keep Soluble. They that used the Baths for cold Distempers, as Palsies and
withered Limbs, etc. were forced to continue long in them, and to sweat much,
which rendered them both Thirsty and Costive; to both, which the Waters were a
known Remedy; for it had been long observed, and is now very well known, that a
draught or two of the Bath Water quenches Thirst better, and more effectual
then double the quantity of Beer or Ale, or any other usual Beverage; and when
by spending the moistures in long and much Sweating, the Bowels were heated,
and dried, and rendered Constipate: a large draught of ^his Water, with a little
common Salt, would infallibly give a Stool or two. This was then (and long
before had been, ^one could remember when it began) the ^ommon custom of
Bathers, which I my self ^ave been an Eyewitness of, above three^core years
ago. (being a Schoolboy here ^ome time, before I was sent to Winchester) (...)
have seen others Drink, and have drank ^^y self of it, not from the Pump, nor
from ^he Water that People Bathed in, but from (...) Contrivance which had been
erected, ^ime out of Mind, before any Pump was ^hought of; and no Body then
living could ^ell when it was first set up.

It was a Pyramidal Stone, ho low in the ^iddle, artificially placed over one
of the ^arger Springs, on the South-East part of that Wooden Convenience, now
standing in the King's Bath, and was taken away to make ^om for that Structure,
(and great Pity it ^as that ever it was removed.)

A Square Wall was made about this ^pring, the hollow of which was about 18
^nches Diametre, and near upon the same Depth. The Top Stone had a Mortice
^roportionate to the Tenant of the Pyra^idal Stone which went in, and held so
close, that none of the Extraneous Water* could get into its hollow; and the
Strength of the Spring was so great, that it forced its self up thorough the
Cavity of the Pyramidal Stone, which was a Foot and more above Water, when the
Bath was at fullest. This Water discharged its self a^ a Copper Spout, about
three Inches above the highest Water-mark, and to this Spout some set their
Mouths; and drank; others pu^ Cups, and received the Water sincere from the
Spring, and used them to the purpose^ before mentioned.

This was the chief, and usual, Inward Use the Waters had been, and were put to
when I first came hither, for my own Health sake, in the Year 53. But there
were some Physicians, even then, (chiefly those tha^ had traveled, and had
been at Aken, in Germ^ny, Aquisgrane, ( Aix la-Chapell, the Fren^^ call it) and
at Bourbon, in France, an^ some that had conversed with them, tho^^ they
themselves had never traveled) tha^ encouraged the Inward Use of them, (...)
sweeten the Blood; but the Advice wa^ taken, and followed then, but by very few

Sir Thomas Brown, of Norwich, my worthy good Friend, with whom I had the
Honor to correspond by Letters; after the Death of those autient Physicians I
found here (many Years before he himself died) ^n a Letter to me, bearing date,
July 12th. ^677. in which he recommended to my Care, Mrs. Bridget Read, of
Suffolk, and ^roposed her Drinking the Waters, as well ^s Bathing, for a
Chlorosis, Cachexia, etc. had ^hese Words.

'If my old Friend Dr. Bave had taken more Notice of my Counsel, the drinking
of the Bath Waters might have been in Use long ago; for above thirty year
since I writ unto him, to bring the drinkinge of them into Use, according to
the custom of many other Baths Beyond Sea, which he very well knew, but would
not hazard his Credit in such a new Attempt; which notwithstanding had not been
an Innovation, but rather a Renovation, or renewing a former Custom.

Amongst others, that greatly encouraged ^he drinking of them, was Sir
Alexander Fray^er, chief Physician 10 King Charles the II. He waiting upon His
Majesty, and Queen Katherine, in 63. (whose Court was then ^t my House, the
Abbey, in Bath) I had the Advantage of being first known to him, and it was the
first time that ever he had been here. He then made several Enqui^ies
concerning these Waters; and writ to ^he afterward about them, to which
Letters I gave answer; he at length concluded, that they were from the same
Mineral, with those of Bourbon, where he had formerly been waiting on the
Queen Mother, and whither he had sent many Patients; but now resolved to send
all that needed such a Remedy, to this Place, and save them the Expense, and
Hazard of a Voyage by Sea, and a long Journey afterward by Land; for that he
was fully convinced, that these Waters would do as well as those, and perhaps
better, because in our own Climate, and therefore, probably, more suitable to
English Bodies. He from that time sent several Persons (and some of great
Quality) hither, and recommended them to my Cate, and came at length himself
with his Countryman, the Duke of Loutherdale (purposely to drink these Waters)
in the year 73. The Duke, for more than ordinary Corpulency, and Scorbutical
Distempers; and he himself for an old Cough, and Cachectick Habit of Body, and
both went off much advantaged; the Duke loosing a large Span of his Girt; and
Sir Alexander getting more Breath, and a fresh, and better colored
Countenance; being pale, and sallow, and black under the Eyes, when he first
came down. It was he that occasioned the erecting of the little Drinking Pump,
in the middle of the King's-Bath, but done at the Charge of the City, from
whence most, if not all, of the Water, that was, about that time, drank, ^as
for. But afterward (the number of ^ater-Drinkers greatly increasing, and the
^enefit by it being more remarkable) the ^^y Pump (as it was till then called,
but ^^ce the drinking Pump) was fitted purpose^^ to that use, and the Pavement
made be^^re, it, for the Reception, and better Ac^^mmodation of the
Water-Drinkers, as it is (...) this day.

And here by the way it may be observed, ^at these Waters were thus drank long
be^^e Mr. Guydott came to the Bath, or ever ^^w it; though he Arrogates to
himself the ^inking of them (in his Epistle to the Pre^ent, and Censors of the
College, prefixed to ^s Thermae Britannicae in these Words; 'Me^thodum bibendi
istas aquas Thermales, secun^dum Artis and Rationis regulas primitus a me
^excogitatam (verbis absit invidia) where it ^^uld have been said, Verbis abest
Verritas. ^t this En-passant.

2. The second thing I promised, before came to particular Instances, is
briefly to form what (in the general) may be ex^cted from an orderly* and
regular Course (...) drinking of them, and in what Particu^s, they seem to have
the Advantage of the cold Waters, that are now, mostly, in Use.

They do, then, all that the Cold Waters can do and somewhat more; they
correct all Saleness, Sharpness, and Sowreness of the Blood, and Nervous Juice;
they open Obstructions; and therefore are useful in all Cachectick and
Scorbutic Habits of Body; in Co^lick Pains, Rheumatisms, and Couts, of all
sorts; Sharpness of Urine, and Eruptions on the Skin. In short, it sweetens the
Blood, and Nervous Juice, in all Cases effectually, and Attempers both; any way
degenerated from what naturally they ought to be.

Their usual Operation is betwixt those of Epsam and Tunbridge; for whereas the
former purges most, and the latter passes chiefly by Urine; this commonly
gives two or three Stools extraordinary, and passes the Remainder by Urine.
Yet they have a different Operation upon different Bodies with some it purges
most; for I have had some Complaints, that they have wrough^ too much by Stool;
with others too little but there is great odds in the manner o^ drinking of
them. If they are drank very fast and come not up again, they purge most and
pass soonest; if taken slowly, they ar^ longer ^n passing, and are discharged
mostly by Crine.

When the Stomach and Bowels are chiefly in fault, a quick Passage is best;
when the whole Mass of Blood is to be altered, a slow Passage does most good;
so that if the whole Quantity drank in a Morning, be either, or both ways
discharged before more be taken, it may better answer the end it was drank for,
than a quicker Passage would do.

Next; these warm Waters have three considerable Advantages over the Cold
ones. First, Their actual Heat makes them more agreeable to the Stomach; and
Secondly, They have a Balsamic Healing Virtue, which none of the cold Waters
can have; and Thirdly, They may be drank at all Seasons of the Year.

They help (with other Means) to cleanse, and open the Obstructions of all the
Intrals, particularly the Spleen, Liver, Pancreas, and Mesentery, and therefore
fit to be used in Hypochondraick Melancholy; Jaundies, Scurvy Schirrous
Tumors, lest after long Agues and Fevers, (vulgarly called in these Parts,
Ague-Cakes.) Their Balsamic Virtue makes them useful in Inward Ulcers,
Erosions, and Excoriations. And they certainly strengthen the Nerves, and
Nervous Parts, Inwardly taken, as well as Outwardly applied, and therefore in
Nervous Asthma's (as well as humorous) very useful.

There is this also considerable in the Bath-VVaters, which makes them fit to
be drank at all Seasons, and in all Weathers that they are always the same; the
greates^ Glut of Wet does not make the Spring larger, nor the longest Drought
lessen it So that it may be from thence argued, tha^ the Mineral is not more
diluted by Rains and consequently the Water made weaker nor heightning by
Droughts, and thereby made stronger, which is the Case of man^ of the cold
Waters, of both sorts; bot^ the Purging, and the Diuretic ones.

I have lived in this City constantly no^ more than three and forty Years, in
which time there have been many and great Alte^ rations of Seasons, and
Excesses both as t^ wet and dry; by the first frequent Floods and Innundations;
by the second, such sear city of Water, that Cattle have been forced to be
driven some Miles to a River, to b^ watered; all Ponds, and lesser Rivulets,
being dried for some Months together, and some Springs, and Bucket-Wells within
few Miles of this place have failed, that were not known to want Water in many
Year^ before; yet in neither of these immoderat^ Seasons, by the strictest
Observation I could make, or could be observed by the Bath Guides, whose
Business it is to empty and cleanse the Baths, and stop them, that they might
fill again) there did not appear the least Difference, but in the wet Seasons,
the Bath was not filled a Minute sooner, nor in Droughts was it longer in
filling. A manifest Demonstration, that the Source of these Waters (whatever
other Springs have) is not supplied from Rains, or any Extraneous Moistures,
and therefore not likely to be considerably altered by them. I have known them
drank, as well in the midst of Winter, as in the height of Summer, and with
equal Success; as will appear in some of the Cases hereafter mentioned, upon
which I think it is now time to begin.

CHAP. II.
OBSERVE. I.
AND that I do with one so singular; that I hardly knew to which of the
following Heads to referr it: It best suits indeed with that of the Palsy, and
should have been there inserted, but that this Cure was performed by drinking
these Waters, and not by bathing.

The Case is that of Capt. Oliver Nichlis, (afterward Lieut. Coll. and
formerly (when very young) Page to the Duke of York, and after that, one of the
Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber, when he came to be King James II.) He
was Captain of a Company (I think) in Queen Dowager's Regiment, when he was
first committed to my Care, which was in July, 1680. by a Letter from his
Father, my very worthy Friend, and old Acquaintance, Maj. Nichlis, of Awborne,
in Wilishire, and then Governor of Portsmouth. I may spare mentioning the
Causes of his Distempers (though the old Gentleman did not in his Letter to me)
and give only the Effects, viz. in what Circumstances he was when he came first
hither.

His Left Arm and Hand were numbed and deadish, and therefore well-nigh
useless; and all that side, indeed, more Infirm than the other. His Mouth was
drawn to one fide; his Left Eye almost sunk into his Head; his Memory decayed;
his Speech imperfect; insomuch, that few could understand him, nor could he
write legibly. He had not Strength in his Right Arm and Hand, to throw the
Jack-Bowl half over the Green; not could he get on Horseback without help. All
these Weaknesses were the Effects of very strange and violent Fits (between
Epi^^tick and Convulsive) of which he had had ^^ry many, and was still liable
to the Re^^rns of them.

One thing in those Fits was peculiar (and ^ay excuse the placing of it before
the Pec^ral Distempers) that one side of the Thorax (...) I think the Left
side) would be lifted up ^onsiderably higher than the other, and so ^ontinued
till the Fit went off (which was ^ot quickly) and no sign of breathing all ^^at
while. He had been under the En^avours of several Physicians before he ^^me
hither; first, and chiefly, Dr. Wallgrave, ^^terwards had a Consultation of
four more, ^yn'd with him, Sir John Michlethwaite, Dr. ^^ower, Dr. Short, and
Dr. Stockeholme, whose Directions were brought down with him, for ^^y better
Information; which I perused; and after a Fitting Preparation, put him upon
drinking of these Waters; which he did ^ixteen Days following, they agreeing,
and ^assing, well with him all that while; he ^covering some Strength, as well
as Sto^ack. The Weakness of his Limbs (he ^inking it long before they were
restored) ^ut us then upon bathing of him, but that ^o way agreed with him,
taking away that little Appetite he had before recovered, ^^y drinking the
Waters; so that we gave it off, after he had been but twice or thri^^ in, and
returned to the Inward Use of the^^ again, which he kept steady to; and taki^^
some Alteratives, and gentle Evacuatio^^ between while; in Three Weeks or a
Mon^^ longer found a manifest Advantage; getti^^ Ground of all his Symptoms.

He could get on Horseback without help; and left us with a Resolution to
^^turn to the same Means the Year follo^ing; but finding himself daily better
a^^ better, deferred it to the year after that, a^^ came in July, 82. He came
the third ti^^ in July, 83. the fourth time in September 8^^ and in September
again, 85. and in Augu^^ 86, and in May, 87. All which times (...) drank the
Waters three Weeks, when lea^^ sometimes a Month or more. He on^^ drank them
One and Thirty Days follo^ing; and very seldom bathed, unless som^times for
half an Hour, to wash himse^^ He was here twice in 87. with the Ki^^ and Queen,
in October, being then in Wa^^ing; whither he then drank, I cannot say.

Seven several Years I am sure he dra^^ them; and always upon the place; and
st^^ improved more and more. He had a pe^^fect Exemption from his Fits the
first tim^^ and recovered his Strength by degrees a^terwards: Insomuch, that he
was at leng^ married to the Lady Moneux, and was here with her Ladyship in
July, 92. (for her Reason only, and not his) he himself being so ^ell as to
tell me, he wanted but two things ^n all the World; of which, Health was not
^one. I was told by a Kinsman of his, last Summer, that he then continued
healthy and well, and lives now at Greenwich with his Lady; who (though she had
Miscarried more ^han once, and for that her Ladyship came then to the Bath) had
not yet brought him a Son, which was one of the two things he wanted.

And now having begun our Water-Drinking with this Exemplary Cure, (for ^indeed
it deserved to be one of the first upon that very score) we now proceed to the
(more properly) Pectoral Distempers, the Diseases incident to the Parts
contained in the Thorax, the Middle Cavity, and there first those incident to
the Instruments of Breathing, the Lungs; such are old Coughs, Asthma's, etc.
and afterward what more immediately concerns the Heart, to wit, its
Palpitation, etc.

In my more than Forty Years Practice, which I have exercised in this Place, I
have had several under my Care, in all the three Degrees of Difficulty in
Breathing, the Dysp^aea, Asthma, or Orthopnaea; and these, some Humerous, some
Nervous, some mixed though most that we meet with, are of the last sort, viz.
partly Nervous, partly Humerous. In all these the Waters have bee^ very
helpful; and it is not without reason that, probably, they should be so; for i^
the Humerous Astma, when tough and vi^cous Phlegm, inpacted in the Bronchia
Pu^monum (whither falling from the Head, a^ some suppose, or strained through the
Bloo^ Vessels in the Lungs, as others think.) For though Defluxions have been
exposed under the harsh Title of Deliramenta Catarrhi, because our most
accurate Anatomists (with which this last Age indeed has not greatly abounded)
have not found a direct Passag^ for those Rheums from the Head, to the Lung^
yet there are no mean Men that think, tha^ the whole Texture of the Body is
Vascular; to which Opinion, the great Father (...) our Faculty, Hyppocrates,
encourages, when he says, (...) (transpirabile, and transfluxibile) In a
living Body, all Parts are permeable by Wind and Water) were it not so, how can
we account for the sudden Metastasis of Morbifick Matter, which we often see?

If we allow the first Matter of this tong^ Phlegm, not to come from the
superiou^ Parts, but to be strained through the Bloo^ Vessels in the Lungs, by
the Laxeness of those Vessels, and the Acrimony of the Blood: ^r whither the
Nerves that serve for the ^otion of the Lungs, be Relaxed, or other ^ays
enfeebled, or Convulst? Which of ^hese ways ever it be, those Waters may do
^onsiderable Service, by rectifying the blood, and Nervous Juice; by diluting
that ^ough and Viscous Matter, impacted in the ^ungs, and consequently fit it
for easier Ex^ectoration. And in the Nervous Case, when either from Weakness,
or Convul^ive Motions (as in a Suffocating Catarrh) of the Nerves, the
breathing is depraved, or impeded; then by strengthening those Nerves and
Nervous Parts (which cer^ainly these Waters do, both Inwardly, and Outwardly
used) they become advantageous also, and if so they cannot but be helpful two,
when from a mixed Cause.

These are, I think, the usual Causes, assigned for Pectoral Distempers; yet
before I end this Chapter, I think I shall give an Instance of an Asthma (and
one of the highest Degree I ever yet saw, at least by Fits) that proceeded from
neither of these Causes.

Reciting the Observations I have in these Cases, made (where (as in all the
rest) you are to expect bare Matter of Fact, but in true, though plain terms) I
shall begin with an Honorable and Worthy Person.

OBSERVE. II.
The Lady-Dutchess of Ormond, (Grandmother to the present Duke) aged more than
Sixty, when recommended to my Care* by Sir Alexander Frayser, and Sir Charle^
Scarborough, in September, 73. Her Grace came hither for a long continued
Cough, and Asthma, and bore her Journey down but ill, insomuch, that she could
not begin the Use of the Waters in some Days after she arrived here, but was
forced to be set upright in her Bed, Day and Night, in which Place and Posture
she at length began upon them, and that but in small Quantities at first. But
bearing them well, and with some Advantage, we increased the Dose by degrees;
and passing them better than was expected, she drank them on, for a Month at
least, with little Intermission, and with so much Relief, that she expectorated
more freely, and could lie down in her Bed; her Appetite increased, she rested
pretty well, and could, sometimes, walk the Chamber, and into her Dining Room,
long before her Grace went hence; and bore her Journey back without great
Complaints.

Passing the following Winter (the Sea^^n in which such Distempers usually
re^^rn and increase) much better than others ^^fore. Her Grace came again the
Sum^er following in June, 74. and several ^^^es afterward; in August 76, and
in the ^^me Month, 77. Her Grace was here a^in in 83, still to continue, and
improve that Advantage she got at her first coming.

OBSERVE. III.
Mr. Comin, from Chelmsford, in Essex, ^ged more than Forty, was recommended ^o
my Care, and sent hither for Cure in July, 72. by one Mr. Swallow, a Physician
^f those Parts. He was highly Scorbutical, Hydropical, and Asthmatical. He was
very ^ike to die upon the Road; forced to stay upon the way at several Places;
first, at Lon^on, where (if I remember well, he told me) ^e consulted Dr.
Brown. Next, at Braynford, and there sent for Dr. Bedingefield, of
Thistleworth. He stayed also at Reading, where he had the Advice of Dr. Meara.

They all diswaded him from coming forward; one telling him that the Bath would
kill him, being pernicious in a Drop^ie, and not beneficial in the Asthma.

He was indeed prodigiously swelled from Head to Foot, but maugre all, he would
proceed, and did; and at length (though wit^ great Difficulty) got hither, but
under suc^ Circumstances, that I wished him back again doubting that he would
disrepute the Plac^ and Means, by dying here. However, after Vomiting, and
Purging him, and supporting him with Cordials, (wherein Aq^ Asthmatica
Quercitani was a chief; and Aq^ Raphani composita bore a sh^re also) I p^^ him
upon Drinking these Waters, which passed sooner, and better than could te^ have
been expected, considering that he could use little or no Exercise wit^ them,
by reason of the Shortness of h^ Breath, the Weakness and Bigness of h^ Limbs
and Belly. But beyond Expectat^on he got Ground daily, of all his Symptoms,
insomuch, that having caused h^ Clothes to be taken less, and procuri^^ Shoes
of a smaller size than those he brough^ with him, he could walk, and breathe
fre^ly: He got an Appetite, even upon h^ bathing, which usually lessens it, for
the pr^sent; he therefore interposed that wit^ Drinking the Waters, and was by
both manifestly relieved; so that in Six Weeks, (...) Two Months time, he went
back, recover'^ to a miracle. He came a Season or tw^ afterward, but rather to
confirm what he had got, than upon any new occasion.

OBSERVE. IV.
The Lady Mary Kirk, about Forty Years of Age; for many Years past subject to
a most severe Asthma, even to the highest Degree of it, an Orthopnaea (being
often forced, many Days, and Nights following, to keep up in a Chair, or to be
bolster'd upright in her Bed) she drank the Waters here upon the Place, several
Years following, with great Advantage, insomuch, that in the Winter, 93. her
Ladyship had few or no Returns of those severe Fits, which usually ^eiz'd her
in Cold, and Wet Seasons. She came down ill indeed in Summer, 94. but ^t was by
an unhappy Accident; a Fire happening in, or near the Inn where her Ladyship
lay in Marlborough, which forced ^er out of her Bed in the middle of the Night;
which Fright (for she was subject to Hysteric Fits also) and Cold together,
^ut her into a great Disorder; yet after a Weeks time she recovered it, and set
upon ^he drinking of the Waters, as formerly, and ^athed sometimes by my Lady
Elizabeth ^ittleton's Encouragement, who said ^^e was recovered of an Asthma,
chiefly by bathing, which few else (that I have bee^ concerned with) can say;
she did well, and went away that Year also much advantaged And now whilst I am
looking up these scattered Observations, to put them into some Method, in order
to the publishing o^ them, Jan. 21. 1695. I received a Lette^ from her
Ladyship, in which she says, tha^ for the whole Winter past, (which to ever^
Body else has been very severe, and a^^ complain of, but her self) she had not
so much as felt an Oppression at her Breast, much less a Cough, that kept her
from sleeping or a Meals Meat: that she went out in a^^ Weathers, and stayed
sometimes till Nin^ a Clock at Night, and rests not the worl^ for it.

Her Ladyship came last Summer also, 95^ and stayed till the latter end of
October, an^ bathed, even in the H^t-^ath, as well as dra^ the Waters, and did
very well with it.

OBSERVE. V.
Sir Edmund Vallers, Knight-Marshall aged 62. was sent hither, and recommended
to my Care by Dr. Shert, and Mr. M^lens, the Chyrurgion. He had an Ulcer upon
his Leg; upon the well nigh healing u^ of which, he became Inwardly indisposed
was Scorbutically affected, and Asthmatick. He came first in June, 82. and
drank the ^aters with no small Success, both as to his Inward Indispositions,
and the Eruption of that ^ot and sharp Humor in his Leg. The ^^^matick Fits
returned not so often, ^or so violently as formerly, and the Ulcer ^as less
painful, and almost skinn'd over, ^o it had been a Trouble to him for ma^y
Years before; the drinking of these Wa^rs abating the Acrimony of the Humor,
^^d lessening the Quantity (they passing ^ell both by Urine and Stool.) He
bathed ^^so his Leg in his Chamber in some of the ^^th-Water, every Evening,
after the first ^eek; and this disposed the Ulcer to ci^^trizing.

He that year, returned very much better, ^^t as his second Coming, for he was
^^re Two or Three Years following ha^^ng drank the Wat^rs (and done as at the
^^t time) for a Month or Five Weeks, ^^th like Success, as we all thought.
Whi^^t the Humor formerly discharged at that ^^uption in his Leg, returned
upon his Lungs? ^^o' he was purged between whiles:) Or ^ther the drinking of
the Waters had in^ased the quantity of his Blood (though what (...) discharged
seemed proportionate to wh^^ (...) drank, or whither (which is most likely) his
taking a more than usual Freedom with (...) Friends, at going off? (for he had
determin^ his Return the next day.) He was seized (...) the Night with a
violent Asthmatick Fit, so much, that I was called up in haste; a^ other
Endeavors not succeeding, a Chyr^^gion was sent for, who took from his A^^
about Twelve Ounces of Blood, and (...) (with what Means he had used before
brought him out of that Fit, and rend^^ him so well, that he prosecuted his
Jo^^ney next Morning, and got safe, and (...) home, without any Return of the
Ast^^ by the way.

OBSERVE. VI.
A very worthy and good Lady (wh^^ Name I conceal, because I have not (...)
Ladyships Leave to make it public) ^^^tween Thirty and Forty Years of A^^ came
hither in August, 93. very much disposed; being (from Troubles and (...) quiets
of several sorts and from an H^^ditary Disposition to such Distempers) a little
Scorbutical, Hydropical, and A^^matical.

Her Ladyship had been under the D^^tions of a very worthy Person of our
session, in her own Country, as we^^ (...) several of the College of
Physicians in ^ondon, but still remained liable to the Re^rns of the same
Symptoms, under which (...) had, for some Years past, labored; ^^d therefore
came to drink these Waters, as (...) a last Refuge.

Her Ladyship quickly began upon them, ^^d as soon perceived Benefit by them.
After Fortnights Drinking, I permitted her Lady^ip to use the Cross-Bath, which
agreed so well ^^th her, that she was troubled that she had ^^t gone in sooner.
It had indeed a diffe^^t Operation upon her, than it used to ^^ve upon most
others; for whereas with ^any it hinders (next day at least) the ^^ssing of the
Waters (by heating the Bo^^, and diverting the Serosities to the Pores (...)
the Skin) it promoted it in her, and gave (...) much more Lightsomeness, and
Free^^m, in breathing; so that henceforward, (...) the whole time of her Stay
(which was, ^deed, too little; but a Month in all) her ^^dyship drank and
bathed Alternis vicibus; ^^d found so much Advantage by it, that (...) came
earlier the next Year, about the ^ginning of May, and stayed longer (Three
^onths, or more) and had greater Advan^ge by it. I have observed the same
Ef^^cts, from moderate bathing, the better pas^^g of the Waters by Urine, in
some others, (...) not in many.

OBSERVE. VII.
Mrs. Mary Whitaker, a Virgin, aged Thir^ty-nine, from Potterne, near the
Devizes, (...) VVilishire, came hither, May 2. 1681. She had been troubled all
the Winter before with a violent Cough, insomuch, that ^^spit Blood; in January
she was seized wi^^ the Falpitation of the Heart, to a great degree so violent,
that she inconsider'd all her oth^^ Symptoms, and looked upon her Difficul^ of
Breathing to be the Effect of that, whe^^ as it seemed to me to be more likely,
th^^ the Nervous Asthma, for such I think he to have been caused the
Palpitation, ^^ther than the Palpitation caused the Asthm^* The Cough continued
still, but became mo^^ violent in April, but with little Expect^tion. When she
came hither she was ^^ceedingly short-breathed, and wheesed, (...) they
vulgarly term it here, when the VV^^pipe makes a Noise in Breathing. Upon
stirring never so little, especially up Sta^^ she looked black in the Face like
one h^^ strangled, and her Heart beat, as if it wou^^ come out of her Body.

She was always Hot and Feverish, sw^^ much, and had a quick and laboring P^^^
Most of these Disorders were upon her bef^^^ ^ame from home, but they were
greatly in^reased in, and after her Journey, (though ^ut a short one, of 14 or
15 Miles) so that ^^e was not fit for any, but refocillating ^leans, to
palliate the most urging Symp^^mes) till after two or three days rest.

She had been let Blood before, and therefor would not permit it to be done a
second ^ime; though I thought she needed it very ^uch, and therefore urged it,
with some ^arnestness.

I began with gentle Pills over Night, and caused her to drink the Waters next
^orning. The Pills, after Three or Four Days, were left off, and the Waters
taken ^lone, on with Sal-Prunella. This she con^^ned to do, but with Pectorals
between ^hiles, and Raregoricks, for her violent Cough, and Weakness, a Month
or Five Weeks, and was by it perfectly recovered, and is ^ive to this day, for
ought I know; I am ^re she was in October, 94. when I had a ^^tter from her,
and I have since, by enqui^^ heard, that she was alive, and well.

OBSERVE. VIII.
Sir Robert Cravon, Knight, Nephew to (...) Earl of Cravon, Master of the Horse
to ^e Queen of ^^^mia, in the 40th. Year of his Age, came hither in September,
72, for a stubborn Asthma, that had eluded sever^ rational Courses of Physic.

He was a comely Gentleman, of a middling Stature, well shaped, large chested
fresh and well colored (except when in (...) Fit, of a Ruddy Countenance, and
in the Intervals of his Asthmatick Fits one would have judged that he had ailed
little or nothing. He had been under the Care of the most eminent Physicians,
both at the Haga^ and at London, and was at last sent hithe^ to try what these
Waters would do for him. There was sent with him a State o^ his Case, which I
have still by me, but no^ Name to it, nor can I recollect, if he did tell me,
who it was from. He soon began upon drinking these Waters, and had dran^ them,
with little Interruption, Three Weeks or a Month; and, as he and we all thought
with no small Advantage; for he had seldomer his Fits, and could walk a Mile o^
two. Presuming upon this seeming Amendment, his Lady and he walked one day to
the farther end of Lansdowne, which is Two Miles from this City, and were
surpised with an Approaching Storm; to avoid which, they returned home ward
faster then ordinary; he put himself, by it, into a great Heat, but brought not
presently his Fit upon him. He was wet also with part of the Storm, which ^ell
before they could reach quite home; his gave him a Cold; that renewed his Fits,
and put him into a Fever, of which he died, after Ten Days, or a Fortnight, I
was ^orced to leave him to the Care of another ^hysitian, being sent for to a
Patient in the Country. His Case being very unusual, and ^aving puzzled most of
the Physicians that ^ere concerned with him, I was, at my Re^orn, which was the
same day he died, very importunate to have him dissected, which, (...) length,
I very hardly obtained, of his La^y, leave to do.

What was most remarkable in the open^ng of him, in reference to the business
in and, was as follows.

1. It was the fattest Corpse I ever yet ^aw opened; cutting near an Inch thick
in ^at, all down the Breast and Belly: All ^he Intrals prodigiously Fat, yet
was he not ^^t all Ventricose.

2. The Heart, and all the Vessels from it, over'd with Fat.

3. But what was chiefly observable, as (...) our purpose, was that upon
throwing ^ack of the Sternon upon his Face, the bet^^r to examine the Pectoral
Parts, there ap^ear'd a large flap of the Glandulous Flesh, and Fat,
intermixed, of more than a Hands breadth, and half, in length, and of the
breadth, and thickness of an ordinary Plum^ Hand. This Flap lay upon both Lobes
o^ the Lungs, and covered them, at least where the Lobes divide. Raising it up,
I found i^ did not adhere to the Body of the Lung^ but seemed to be the Thymus
enlarged.

4. There was also about Two Inches above the Heart, round the great Ascending
Artery, a Substance which (at first view) looked like another Heart, and almost
as big but upon farther Search was found to be a Callous, as well as Clandalous
Substance, interspersed with Fat, (as was the former) a^ big as Three or Four
large Wallnuts, which after it was dried in a Paper in my Pocket for I kept it
a long time to show it, and (...) at last, by lending of it, lost it; It
weighed, after it was thus dried, and looked like Glue, above an Ounce. This
encircled the great Artery, without compressing it, and seemed to be an
Accresceney to it; for when it was so dried, there remained a Cavity in the
Mass, through which the Artery passed, and all looked, almost transparent, like
so much Glue.

Riverius (in his Praxis Cap. de Palpitatione Cordis) says, that such like
Tumors, and Tubercles, upon the Arteries, are one cause of the Palpitation of
the Heart; and instanceth out of Galen de Lacis affectis, that such a ^e was
found in Antipatrus, the Physician; ^^d says farther, that Dodoneus also
observed ^^e like upon the great Artery. It is worth ^^nsidering whither the
Unequal part of this ^^bstance might not compress something the ^^onchia, where
they divide, and so add to ^^is Asthma.

In short, I at last cut off the Trachea Arte^^a as close to the Throat, as was
possible, and took out the Lungs and Heart, and all ^^gether, and with a small
pair of Bellows, ^ew up the Lungs; which when I did mo^erately, that Flap kept
equal upon both ^obes, but when I gave a greater Blast than ^rdinary, it fell
in between the two Lobes ^f the Lungs; which I thought gave reason ^o
conjecture that to be the Cause of his (otherwise) unaccountable Asthma; which
^y Fits he had to the highest Degree ima^inable, not only upon taking Colds,
but upon talking carnestly, or laughing, or any ^udden Commotion, and would
look black ^n the Face, like one more than half strangled.

I once dined with him, in my own House, ^at Sir James Long's Table, when in
the midst of Dinner, upon talking freely, and laugh^ng, he fell into a Fit, and
rose from the Table. I went out with him into the Hall, whence (after a little
whiles striving, without out any considerable Expectoration) he returned back
into the Dining Room, as well as when he first sat down, and made an end of his
Dinner.

Could this have been known to have been the reason of those Fit, nothing but
often Bleeding, and Purging, and half Starving, could have been his Remedy.
There were more (and those considerable) Observables in the opening of this
Body, that manifested too much nourishing, but they appertain not to the
present Subject we are upon.

OBSERVE. IX.
Sir Henry Andrews, of Laftsbury, near Newport-Pagnal in Buckinghamshire, aged
71, came first to the Bath in 87, for a Scorbutical Asthma. His Lady had
formerly been here, and drank the Waters with Advantage for an old Cough, and
more than an Inclination to a Consumption; of which she, at length, died. The
Relief she had, for a time, put him upon the Trial of this Remedy; which he did
the first year with so much Success, that he came again year after year for a
considerable time, and would have gone on so to do (having still had Relief by
it) had no other accidental Illnesses rendered him weak, and unable te bear so
long a Journey.

He was alive (but very feeble) in November, 94, as I understood by his
Servant, whom he commanded to see me, he then sending him into these Parts.

He bathed as well as Drank the Waters; his Lady drank only. He had, besides
his Asthma, the Morphew, upon his Back, Breast, and Shoulders; and some
Weakness in his Limbs also.

OBSERVE. X.
The Lady Marchioness of Antrym, in the Kingdom of Ireland, aged 62, was sent
hither in July, 92, and recommended to my particular Care by my good Friend,
Dr. Theodore Collidon. Her Honor had been troubled many Years with a Cough,
and Shortness of Breath, and was, (in many Circumstances) as the Lady Duchess
of Ormond (before mentioned) but not altogether so bad.

Her Ladyship drank the Waters mostly, bathed but seldom; continued here Five
or Six Weeks; and being much advantaged, went back to London, and was so well
the following Winter, that she was encouraged to come a second time, which her
Ladyship did in May, 93. and prosecuted the like Course she had done the year
before, with equal (if not better) Success.

Her Ladyship went directly hence into Ireland, to her own Seat at Antrym, from
whence I had the Honor of her Rement brances, and an Account of her continuing
well, by a Servant of hers that came h^^ there in Summer, 94. to drink again
these Waters in a Pectoral Case also (a confirm'^ Phthisis.) He assured me,
that her Honor continued the Benefit she here received the Two Years before;
and acknowledged he^ better Health to be from the drinking o^ these Waters.

OBSERVE. XI.
A worthy Citizen's Daughter of London Mrs. Sherwin, a Virgin, between Thirty
and Forty Years of Age, having lain under a Complication of Distempers, many
Years before, came at length more that once, to the Bath. She was here in May
79. and took the joynt-advice of Dr. Baynard, and my self. She was Scorbutical,
Asth matical, Hydropical, and Hypochondraick. But the Pectoral Distemper, at
length urged most, and became a manifest Vomica Pulmonam. She discharged, by
the help of these Waters, vast quantities of Corrupt Faetid Matter by easy
Expectoration, which for a while greatly palliated, but could not cure, her
Disease; for in October, 83. she died near London, under Dr. Baynard's Care,
who as at the Dissection of her Body, and gave ^^e some Account of the
Observables in it, amongst which chiefly, the monstrous big^ess, and the
corrupt State of the Liver, and the total Decay of the very Substance of the
Lungs (which was one Bag of Puru^ncy) appeared to be the Cause, both of ^er
tedious Sickness, and her deplored Death.

Many more Instances might be given upon (...) this Head, but it would then
enlarge too ^uch what is intended only for a Specimen ^f Recoveries here gained.

CHAP. III. Of the Palpitation of the Heart.
THE next Distemper of the middle Region, (the Cavity of the Breast) that our
Water-drinking has been concerned ^ith, is the Palpitation and Trembling of
the ^eart; of which Disease, Physicians have ^onjectured very different Causes.

1. Some thinking it to be from the unqual Consistence of the Blood; for when
^he Grumous Parts are passing thorough the Ventricles of the Heart, in the
Circulation, there is more struggling required, than wh^^ that which is
thinner, and of equal Co^stence, is carried on, without Interruptie^

2. Others referr it to Vapors, affecti^^ those Nerves that are more
immediately co^cern'd in the moving of that noble Muscle.

These two Causes may probably a count for the occasional Tremblings, a
Inordinate (and seemingly Convulfive) M^^tions, of the Heart, and the
intermitting the Pulse, or the Irregularity of it.

3. What is constant, and more freque^ has been ascribed to a Polipus, ^enerat
in one or both of the Ventricles; whi^^ way ever it be, I have had very signal
I^stances of this Symptom; and some ha^^ had considerable Recoveries here,
thou^^ others have not been so successful, yet sh^^ I not forbear to mention,
even them al^

OBSERVE. I.
I shall begin with one of the worst ^o^ (I think caused by a Polipus) who had
n^^ much Advantage whilst he was here, a^^ his Relations gave me little, or no
account (...) him, after he went hence. It was the S^^^ of one Mr. Potterell,
an Apothecary of Okeha^^ in Rutland-shire; who (...) about Four Yea before they
thought fit to send him hithe was seized with a violent Pain in his Head; from
whence it fell into his Knees, and other Joints, and sometimes into his Bowels;
it would, in a moment, move from Place to Place; at length, a strange and
unusual Palpitation of the Heart seized him, which held him a considerable time
before he came hi^her. This Symptom had altered the shape of his Ribs,
(especially on the Left Side) and Sternon very strangely; for they bulged out
to a great bigness, as if designedly done, to enlarge the Cavity for the freer
moving of the Heart, being confined before; the Motion indeed was very
inordinate and strange.

It was not chiefly for this that his Pa^ents brought him hither, but for the
Weak^ess of his Limbs, which the Rheumatism had seft upon him. He was about 14
Years of Age, and came in July 74. After Preparation he bathed, but that did
not agree so well with the Inordinate Motion of his Heart, as it did to the
Feebleness of his Limbs, it rather increased it; I therefore put him upon
drinking of the Waters, which did not do so very well neither, because he could
not use due Exercise after them, yes some allay it did give to that (I thought
the more considerable) Symptom.

They had tried all manner of Means before to no purpose, and therefore allow
him the longer time of Stay here, to try the utmost of this; which he followed
for Fiv^ or Six Weeks, as his small Strength would permit, but I cannot say,
with much Apparent Success nor can I remember well wha^ (or whither any)
Account was afterward given me of it. But the Motion of his Hear^ was so very
great, and so surprising (as (...) if had been a Dog or Cat pent into a Room
and forcing a way out) that I could not for bear the mentioning of it.

OBSERVE. II.
Likest to this was the Case of Mr. Georg Harrison, (Son to Dr. Harrison,
Master (...) St. Crosses, near Winchester) aged 18 or 19 His Father and Mother
came with him hi^ there in Summer, 92. He was then a Stu^dent in Oxford, of
Corpus-Christi-College He had been from his Infancy subject t^ Coughs, and
Asthmatick Distempers, occasioned (as I was informed since by some o^ his
Relations) by his Nurse, her patting upon him a Quicksilver-Girdle for the Itch
which she her self had (or suffered other to do it) infected him with, when
ver^ young, and sucking at her Breast, and probably without acquainting his
Mother, or any of his Relations with it. This laid the Foundation of a great
deal of Illness; in his Pectoral Parts, especially, which renewed every now and
then upon slight Occasions. At this time (and for some Months, if not Years,
before) he had a great Palpitation of the Heart, and Difficulty of Breathing,
especially upon any Motion of his Body, more than what was very easy; he could
not bear the Agitation of a Coach, much less endure the Trotting, or Ambling,
of a Horse, but had often chosen to perform large Journeys on Foot, rather than
adventure the Disturbance of either. In this Condition he arrived here; and my
Advice being desired, I put him upon drinking of these Waters, after due
Preparation, which he went on with for a Month, or more, with that Advantage,
that his Breath was freer, the Palpitation well-nigh ceased; he could ride
home, and did, and from his Father's House to Oxford in a day, from whence he
wrote me a Letter of this his Recovery, which continued the following Winter,
and till he came a second time, the Spring following; and after that a third
Season, to confirm rather the Advantage he at first obtained, than upon any new
Occasion, or Relapse.

OBSERVE. III.
Richard, Earl of Tyrconnell, in the King dom of Ireland; was advised to come
hithe^ to drink these Waters, by Sir Thomas Wither^ly, and Dr. Wallgrave,
(afterward Sir William.)

His Lordship came hither in April, 86. and by a Letter, from the last
mentioned recommended to my House for Lodgings and to my self for Advice. He
had been a long time, Hypochondraick and Scorbutical, but for some Months past
(especially in the preceding Winter) was seldom free from the Palpitation of
the Heart, and an intermitting Pulse, and a decayed Appetite, and ill
Digestion; which greatly dismayed him. After the trial of several Remedies
(particularly a long Chalybeat Course) they sent him hither to drink the Bath
Waters; and the earlier in the Year, because his Lordship was appointed to go
for Ireland in Two or Three Months for which reason (that he might lose no
time) I presently ordered his Lordship Quercitan's Tartar Pill, over Night, and
to drink two Quarts of the King's Bath Water next Morning. He did this Three or
Four Nights following, which proved a sufficient Preparation for his fatther
drinking of them alone, without Pills, which he did, but increased the
Quantity, by degrees, to Five Pints; and at last to Three Quarts. His Lordship
continued thus to do (interposing now and then a gentle Purging, and but Two or
Three times bathing) Five or Six Weeks; and at the end of which time he went
hence cheerful and well, and with a good Stomach; the Palpitation almost wholly
abated, and the intermitting of his Pulse scarcely discernable.

OBSERVE. IV.
Coll. Charles Norwood, aged 66, having been, to a considerable Age, a strong
and healthy Man, and jolly enough; was in the King's Army in the time of the
Civil War; and after the Return of King Charles II. employed abroad; was
Governor of Tangier, for a while; but not long after his Return from thence,
gave over Marshal Employment, and lived upon his Estate. Whither by his living
in Africa, (a hot Country) or some other Accidents, he had several
Indispositions upon him, amongst others, this of the Palpitation of the Heart
in a very great measure, so that it became very troublesome to him, and he
applied himself to several Physicians for the Removal of it; and was at length
advised (or inclined of himself) to drink these Waters. He came hither in
Summer, 78. and desired my Assistance, in directing him how to manage himself
in the Use of them.

After due Preparation (by Bleeding, Purging, etc.) he began upon them, and
drank them about Ten Days, and would then needs try how the Bath would agree
with him, having some uneasiness in his Limbs, (at least as he pretended, being
willing to try all things.) Bathe he did, though I foretold him, it would rather
increase than diminish that Symptom for which, chiefly, he came hither. He
found it too true; gave it quickly over; and returned to his Water-drinking;
which in a Month, or Five Weeks time, removed the Palpitation; got him a better
Habit of Body, which was continued for some considerable time: But at last he
was seized by a Quartane Ague, which stuck long upon him, and at length left
many ill, Scorbutical Symptoms behind it, for some of which he made an Issue in
his Left Arm, to which a very great Quantity of Sharp and Virulent Matter
tended, much more than could be discharged at that small Orifice; and therefore
brake out all round about it; for which also he came again to this place, but
to little or no purpose; it became at length Chyrurgeon's Work, and he often
went from one to another, till at long run, it mortified and ^ill'd him.

OBSERVE. V.
Though Mrs. Mary Whittaker, and Mrs. Elizabeth Wait, have been both already
mentioned, the first in the preceding Chapter, of the Asthma, Observe. 7th. The
other in the first Book, in Chap. 9th. Observe. 3d. where instances are given in
Green Sickness, etc. yet may they both be deservedly mentioned again, having
both (with other Symptoms) this also in a very high Degree.

Mrs. Whittaker had it so violently, that to this day, she believes it to have
been her chief Distemper; and made her to inconsider Cough, Asthma, and all
other her Complaints, and to lay the blame upon this only; and though Mrs.
Wait was not unsensible of her Tyryness, and Dispiritedness, and want of
Stomach, etc. yet would she very often, and much, cry out, upon this
Troublesome, and dismaying Trembling, which she always had at her Heart, but
especially when she stirred never so little. However they both (as has been
already in due place said) were very well recovered by these Waters, of this
Symptom also, with the rest they then labored under.

More particulars might be here also added, but these few may suffice to show
what these Waters have done in this Case, as west as in many others. We
therefore proceed to a

CHAP. IV. Dropsy.
HAving dispatched the Diseases incident (...) the Parts contained in the
Breast, (...) come next to those of the Lower Region, the Parts contained in
the Abdomen, and there first of the Infirmities of the Liver, the chief of
which will easily be allowed to be the Dropsy.

Though Physicians have always forbidden Spoon-meats, as well as much Drink;
nay suspected even Liquid Medicines in Hydropical Cases (which, by the way,
gave occasion to the humorsome Dr. Butler of Cambridge, (as is storyed of him)
to give the following (then thought extravagant) Advice to a poor Patient, that
had not wherewithal to pay his Apothecary's Bill, that he should go home and
not drink in a twelve-^onth; the poor Fellow being willing to ^^e well, did so,
and at the years end came ^erfectly recovered, and thanked Mr. Doctor ^or his
good Advice.) Though, I say, Li^^ids have always lain under a Suspision, in
^ydropical Distempers, yet I am not without ^ome instances of profuse Dropsies
recovered ^^y drinking these Waters, and bathing, mode^ately, between whiles.

OBSERVE. I.
I shall begin with a Tippling Butcher of ^his City, one of the first Patients I
had, af^et my coming to reside here (for young Beginners in the Practice of
Physic, must ^ay the Foundation in Charitable Cures.) His going too often to
the Alehouse, rendering him unable to go longer to the Market, to buy fat
Cattle, he turned Sherriffs Bailiff, and then drank on upon the poor Prisoners
Cost, till at length he had distended his Carcass, as much as he had before
extenuated his Stock. He was swellen from Head ^o Foot, by an exquisite
Ascites, and Ana^arca, and (as is not unusual in that Distemper) was excessive
thirsty; the more he ^rank, the more he craved for Drink, and the less he
discharged by Urine. I prescribed first some cheap Hydragogues, among which you
will easily Guess Jalope to have born a considerable share; after thus Purging
(indeed chiefly to save the Charge (...) an Apothecaries long Bill, as well as
t^ quench his Exorbitant Thirst, which the Bath water infallibly does in all
Cases beyond any other Liquor.) I put him upon drinking these Waters, which
past so we^ by Urine, that in Ten days he apparent^^ got Ground, by loosing
Girt; and thus r^^ peating, once a Week, his former Purg^^^ in about six or
seven Weeks time, he wa^ reduced to his Pristine Shape. Then o^dering him some
(not very chargeable) Bi^ters, to strengthen his Entrals, dismissed hi^^
perfectly Cured. He held so a Year (...) two, if not more, I think two or three
But Oh! The dear love of Drink, he we^^ on with his beloved Tipple, till he ha^
brought himself to the same pass as before and without consulting me again, the
Apothecary and he repeated the same things and was recovered the second time;
and after that a third, if not a fourth, till a^ length he had (with his
continued drinking and some Bangs, and Bruises, to which Bailiffs are liable
when they arrest Debtors so corrupted his Entrals, that he dyed o^ an inward
Imposthumation. His Nam^ ^as George Russel, he has some Relations ^^t living
here, he was upwards of Forty ^^en he became my Patient.

OBSERVE: II.
Though Mr. Comin of Chemlsford in Es^^x. be already mentloned amongst the
Asth^^tick Patients, yet he cannot well be here ^ft out; for indeed it was a
moote Point, ^hither he was more Hydropick or Asthma^^ck, only it may be said,
that the Dropsy (...) his Breast might aggravate, if not cause ^^is Asthma.

He was indeed exceedingly swellen from Head to Foot, and was recovered by
Ba^hing, and Drinking these Waters (as is ^lsewhere more at large related)
beyond all Expectation of those he came from, and of ^s he came to; and sooner
then his, or our, ^orwardest hopes could have suggested to us. He continued
free, a great while, from any Relapse, and may be yet alive for ought I know.

OBSERVE. III.
Mr. Treagle a Grocer in Tanton, about Forty Six Years of Age, having been a
long time Hydropical, Scorbuticai, ^a^hectick, and Nephratick; and finding no
Advantage (...) the Courses he had been put upon at hom^ was Counseled to come
hither, and R^commended to my Care, by a Friend (...) his, a Gentleman of those
Parts, one th^^ had the Year before, been my Patient h^^ and was then High
Sherriff of the Coun^^ He accordingly came in May, 55, with h^^ Legs and
Thighs greatly swellen, and (...) weak as hardly able to support himself (...)
He had large, red, and livid Spors in both (...) made very little Water, and
that highly Ti^^ctured with Cholar, as in the Jaundice. Hi^ Countenance, and
Whites of his Eyes, sharing in the same discolor, and under all thi^ horribly
Desponding, and Melancholy. I^ these Circumstances, I scrupled at his Bathing,
fearing his Liver was not sound, i^ which Cases the use of the Bath is not s^^
justifiable a Remedy. But he coming (as he, with some earnestness, urged)
purposely for it, was in haste to be admitted to it. And for Drinking the
Waters (which I as earnestly pressed) he had been too much used to Strong Ale
and Cider, (and sometimes Wine and Hot Waters, I doubt, to keep up his
Spirits,) to be casily persuaded to so insipid a Liquor. However I did at
length, with some Difficulty prevail for a Weeks Deliberation upon Bathing, and
in that time, purged him, made (...) to take of an opening Apozeme, Cha^^^^ats,
Hopaticks, and Antiscorbuticks, and the ^aters between whiles.

These Things changed his Countenance ^^d the Color, and quantity of his
Water (...) some Measure; and then (though some^^^ng sooner then I would) into
the Bath (...) would go, and did, but not into the ^^^it^st parts of it, and
thus (continuing Al^^^atives, and Deoppilatives, and now and ^^en a Purge,)
Drinking and Bathing be^^een whiles, he mended also the Shape ^^d Color of his
Legs; got Strength in ^^em, and returned (at Five or Six Weeks ^^d) to his own
Home, very much advan^^ged in all Respects. To continue the Be^^fit already
received, he carried some of ^^e same Remedies with him, and Directi^^s for a
Diet-Drink, which he thanked me ^^r some Years after.

OBSERVE. IV.
Much in the like (if not a worse) Con^^tion was one Mr. Appletree, an
Innkeeper (...) Crookhorn, in the South part of Somerset^^^re, commended to my
Care by Dr. Tur^^rvile, the Famous Occulist. He was about ^0 Years of Age, and
was brought hither in May 56. He had, besides the Sympto^ mentioned in the last
Observation, a viole^^ Cough, and his lower Lymbs were more (...) nervated,
insomuch that he could not sta^^ upright; much less go at all. He bo^^ Drank
the Waters and Bathed; took Pect^rals, as well as Antiscorbuticks and
Hepa^ic^^ He returned after Five or Six Weeks, wi^^ some Medicines with him,
and came aga^^^ in September following; the better to (...) cure his Recovery,
before the approach (...) Winter, which he past, not only without Relapse, but
even then got more Grou^^ of all his Symptoms; whereas former (...) they
usually increased, and were more a^flictive to him, at that Season.

Whither he came hither a third time, (...) cannot well remember; but I had
sever^^ times Information, that he continued w^^^ enough to go about his
Business, in a^^ out of his House, and probably to Drin^^ with his Guests,
which he was not backward in, when well, and too much (...) which was thought
to be the cause of th^^ his Distemper. How many Years after h^ Lived; and of
what at length he dyed, have not been informed.

OBSERVE. V.
A poor Frenchman, whose Name, Age, ^^d other Circumstances, I could not get
^^e knowledge of, (at least did not mind to (...) it down in the Papers, out of
which I ^^ck these Observations) came hither in Ju^^ 61,) far gone in an
Anasarca and Ascites) (...) to a last, (at least a cheaper) Remedy ^^en others
he had tried before; for when (...) came to him, he complained how much (...)
had cost him, and in how many Hands ^e had been, and to little or no purpose,
^^d so sued, in Forma Pauperis, for further ^dvice. Before this he (as many
others of ^eater Abilities, to give Fees, and to pay an ^pothecaries Bill,
often have done, and still ^o; how discreetly let the World judge) ^ad put
himself upon Bathing, which did ^im more hurt then good, till I assisted him
with my Advice, to which I was called by ^ome Charirable Persons that pityed
his ^odiscretion, as well as his weak Condition. For since the Death of Dr.
Venner (...) which was in 60) I have had the Honor, as well as the Trouble, to
be the Physician to poor Strangers (a Charity of a Pr. decessor of the Present
Lord Scudamores) Yearly chosen by the Mayor and Aldermen of this City, on the
15th. of April, to who^ continued Kindness I owe my more the Thirty Years
Election to that Province.

When I came to him, I soon found (...) Error in Bathing first, and pre^ently
p^^ him upon Drinking the Waters, to co^^ him, for he had greatly inflamed
himse^^ and augmented his Thirst. I also orde^ed him an Hydragogue Powder; upon
a C^py of which I find this Marginal Note (f^^ in those days, and sometime
since, I ke^^ Copies of some Prescriptions) Cujus (...) abunde d^jecit serosum
humorem, and illico det^ merunt manus, Pedes, and totum Corpus. (...) short, he
went away recovered; and it (...) no wonder that I never heard of him sinc^
when so few of our own Countrymen thoug^ but at small distance from us) scarce
giv^ any account what Benefit they receive, (...) how long they retain it,
which I think t^ be a Fault, that deserves a Reproof, an^ has been no little
hindrance to the Printing of an Yearly Catalogue of what Cure have been done
here, which has been s^ often talked of, even by some of those tha^ have been
guilty of this Omission I wa^ going to say Ingratitude.

Mr. Warner (then Mayor of the City of Winchester) aged 50, came in June, 77,
recommended to the Bath, and me, by Sir Robert Holms, then Governor of the
Isle of Weight, and Burgess in Parliament for that City. He himself had often
experien^ed both, these Waters, and my Advice, ^n almost all the Cases already
(and to be) mentioned.

He had been here when swelled in a Scor^utical Dropsy, and when extenuated by
an Atrophy, when battered and bruised in Sea Fights; when disabled in all his
Lymbs by (...) Colica-Pictonica, etc. Having both Bathed and Drank the Waters,
and found Advan^age to himself by both, he now advised ^his his Friend to the
same Means, and As^istance. He came hither greatly infeebled ^y a Fit of the
Gout or Rheumatism (to which he had been, for some Years subject) ^nsomuch,
that he neither stood upright, ^or endeavored to go, but with Pain and great
difficulty; his Legs and Thighs were much swellen, and discolored with large
Scorbutical Spots. He made a Lixiviate Wa^er, and that in small quantities; had
little (...) Appetite to Meat, but drink he could more then enough.

I began with some gentle Purgatives, then put him upon drinking the Waters,
and after convenient time, permitted him to Bathe; his Legs and Feet first in
his Chamber, after that, suffered him to go into the more moderate Bath, the
Queens, the Heat of the King's being apt, sometimes when indiscreetly used to
inflame the Blood, and heat the Bowels, and sometimes to cause a Fit of the
Gout, to those that are subject to it, by stirring the Humors, and exasperating
the Blood, and Nervous Juice, but by duly preparing him, and moderately Bathing
and interposing the Drinking of the Waters, he escaped that Danger, and his
Swellings abated, his Pains were assuaged, and strength in his Legs and Feet
were in great Measure restored, so that in less then two Months time, he went
back greatly advantaged in all Respects, and continued so to be the next time
Sir Robert Holmes came to the Bath, which was (I think) the next Year after. I
have since heard (by enquiry) that he is still Subject to Fits of the Gout, if
yet living.

OBSERVE. VII.
Madam Mompesson of Upton near Batcombe (...) Somersetshire, aged near (if not
more ^^en Fifty, being naturally of a tender ^onstitution, and a thin and
slender habit (...) Body; from her Childhood subject (...) Rheumes, Catarrhs,
and Coughs, and high^^ Scorbutical; her Blood hot, sharp and thin. ^he was in
Winter 88 seized wi^h a sudden and exorbitant Bleeding at the Nose, which ^ould
not be stopped by any outward Appli^^tions, though several were attempted,
in^^much, that they that were about her (to ^^vert the course of the Blood were
forced (...) Bleed her frequently in the Arm, and ^oot, etc. hoping by taking
some Blood else^here, to save the loss of a greater quan^^^y at the Nose.

It was at length, this way stayed, but the ^^ss of so much, both by the
Distemper and ^^e Remedy, had so enfeebled her Liver; and to continue the
Circulation the Ves^^ls had admitted so large a quantity of ^rude Juices, that
in a little time, she be^^me H dropical; for which (in April ^^llowing) she was
brought to this ^ace, and I was Consulted for her Reco^^ry. With this Ascites
and Anasarca she had a constant Cough, and that (by Fits) was violent, not
unlike to a suffocating Catarrh, so that we often feared, from thence a return
of the Haim rhage; but by palliative Means it was prevented* and afte^ some
Purgings, she began to drink the Waters, and took Chalybeats, and Hepaticks
with them, which course she continued till he^ Swellings began to abate, and
that in (...) Months time was considerably done, the Waters passing sometimes
by Urine more then she Drank. With the Preparation o^ Steel were given milder
Antiscorbuticks, and some Pectorals, which apparently lessening al^ the
Symptoms, and rectifying her Blood (which appeared by the change of her
Countenance, she was at Five Weeks end) permitted the Cross-^ath, at first but
half a^ hour at a time, then increasing by Degrees) to an hour, but I never
suffered hi^ to stay longer then that, at any time. Thi^ occasioning an easy
Diaphoresis, her Swellings wholly subsided, her Cough abated, her Appetite
increased, and her Strength renewed. So that she returned home for a Month or
two (in the hot Season of the Year,) and came again about the latter end of
August, and renewed the Co rse above mentioned, with some Alterations, and
prosecuted it for another Month; then returned home, and past the following
Win^er without any Relapse; and the Husband ^ave me the Reputation of an
excellent Doctor, for a Joynture-Wife.

She came again the two following Sum^ers 90 and 91, to confirm her Recove^y;
after that she came no more. But in February 93 (after Seven or Eight Days
Ill^ess) dyed of a Pectoral Distemper, suppo^ed an Abscess in her Lungs. I was
sent for ^o her, but it being late in the Day, and ^t Sixteen Miles distance,
and the Ways and Weather bad, and not being well my ^elf, I sent my Apothecary
with Directions, ^ut she was dead before he came; dyed ca^ting up the
Imposthume.

I might here add several other Instances of this kind, but I forbear, least
the Book be enlarged beyond its intended Bulk.

CHAP. V. Diabetes.
THE Distemper next of kin to the the Dropsy, is by all acknowledged to be the
Diabetes, and therefore called Hydropad Matulam, the Piss-pot Dropsy. In both
one and the other an Inundation of Water overflows the Microcosme (as Noah's
Floo^ did the Macrocosm) but with this difference that in the former, by reason
of its clamminess, the superfluous moistures are not easily carried off, and in
the latter, by reason of their thinness; they run out too fast, and carry off
with them, not only what should turn to nourishment (as a Land Flood does the
Compost from a decliving Ground) but (as that also does sometimes, the Mold i^
self, even to the bare Rock) this Pissing Evil Dilutes and Colliquates even the
Flesh and Solid Parts, and with them (in little time too, sometimes) runs out
even Life i^ self. (...) I do not remember that in any of the Works of the
Founder of our Faculty (the Divine Hippocrates) any mention is made o^ this
Disease: and no wonder, for in the Age he lived, great Abstinence and Modesty
was used, and unmixt Diet, and Milk and Water their chiefest Beverage. What
comes nearest to this Distemper in his Works is in the third Section, De morbis
popularibus, whose Title is Constitutio Temporis Pestilens; where he says, that
some (in that Disease he was describing made more Urine then they Drank, not by
a Critical Evacuation, but with Colliquation, Disturbance and Pain, and yet no
judgment of the Disease followed. This therefore seems to be a Symptom only of
that malignant Fever he there treats of; and not the true Diabetes.

Our Father Galen, acknowledges that he never saw but two in this Distemper,
and therefore did not think it worth his while to write of it, in his Book de
Locis affectis. The Disease being so unfrequent, it would be of little or no
use to young Physicians, for him to treat of it. Few others of the ancient
Physicians say much of it; but we in our Days especially in great Cities, where
various Viands, high Gusts; and forced Meats, much Wine (and that for the most
part adulterated) are in use and frequent Debauches (with Women as well as
Wine) are indulged; we have found more frequent instances of this, once rare
Distemper. (...) in my time, have seen, and have been concerned with some, and
heard of others; and (what concerns more our present Business) these Waters
also have been used (even in this Case) with no mean Success in the Palliation,
at least, if not the perfect Cure, of this (otherwise suddenly) melting
Distemper, as may appear by these few following Observations.

OBSERVE. I.
The Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook (whose Case has been talked of, all
the Nation over, and on which, all the Physicians then living (of any
considerable Note) in this Nation, first and last were consulted about) fell
into this Distemper about 72, and was under the Care and Counsel, of the, then
most eminent Physicians in, and about London; two or three, and sometimes more,
together in Consultation about him; yet by Intetvals, it returned upon him with
great Severity, insomuch that in three or four days time, he would not only be
Faint, Weak, and Dispirited, but manifestly fallen away in his Flesh, and the
Palms of his Hands would be as hard, dry and starky, as if he had wrought for
his Living, at cleaving of Wood, or ^hrashing, so soon would all the moisture
^f his (at other times succulent) Body, be ^^ained, and an unquenchable Thirst
left upon him; which last Symptom was (at ^^ngth) the reason of his Lordship's
coming ^ther; not by the advice (hardly with the ^nsent) of (some at least of)
his Physicians. ^ut his Lordship remembering, that having ^rmerly been at this
Place, and by Bathing ^or possibly by Drinking bad Wine over ^ight) he had been
very Dry and Thirsty (...) the Morning, a draught or two of the ^ath-Waters,
would infallibly quench the ^ost importunate Thirst; he proposed and ^etermined
of himself, to come hither, which ^e did in July 73, and brought with him
Copies of most of the Prescriptions, for ^ose Medicines his Lordship had, from
^me to time taken, since his first Seizure, and committed them to my perusual,
and himself to my Care and Conduct, in the ^anagement of these Waters, and
those Di^ections he brought down with him. His ^ordship's chief Design in
coming hither ^eing to quench his Thirst, it was not long before he called for
the Waters; even the ^me Evening he came in, and so the next Morning, and so on
twice a day; two pints ^f the Cross-Bath-Water, (because nearest his Lordships
Lodgings) usually in the Morning, and one Pint at four of the Clock i^ the
Afternoon. They did not fail hi^ Lordship in what he expected from them but in
two or three days they manifestl^ lessened his Drought and inward Heat. Bu^ his
Lordship still continued to make va^ quantities of Water by Fits, it was thin^
pale, and Crude, void of any Urinous taste^ or smell, they were daily brought
to m^ by a Footman, or set in a Window at hi^ own Lodgings, till I came down to
observ^ them more strictly, whether we got or los^ any advantage in color,
quantity, taste, o^ consistence.

One thing I observed in a Urine of hi^ Lordships, brought at that time to my
House, which I thought very unusual, an^ is perhaps well worth farther
Consideration When the Fit was upon my Lord, he seldom made less then an Urinal
full at a time^ (and they held more then Pints a piece (...) some near a quart)
there would be severa^ of these sent up in a day, by a Footman^ to my House,
and I usually let them stan^ in my Study Window, for some considerable time, to
observe what alterations, tim^ would make in it. After two days standing (or
thereabout) one of the Urinals had a^ the top of it more then an inch deep) a^
^ily transparent Substance, like a clear ^arts Horn Jelly, manifestly
distinguisha^^e from the Urine that was under it; it (...) as slimy also, and
clung to my Fingers ^hen I touched it. It recalled to my Re^embrance what I had
formerly read in ^^me Institutions (particularly Senertus Lib. I. Chap. IX. De
Nutritione, and Augmentatione) ^f four degrees of Matter made in the Ca^illary
Vessels, out of the Blood, before ^t be assimulated to each part, Humor
nino^inatus, Ros, Gluten and Cambium, and ^hought that this, possiby, might be
some ^f these Substances washed off from the so^id Parts, by the Torrent of this
Colliqua^ing Distemper, at least the Flower of the Chyle (as Cream is of Milk.)
That others have not taken Notice of the same is, perhaps, because they have
not had Patience to wait so long, and observe what further appearances would be
in Vrines, if kept some time. But this by the way only. His Lordship's Thirst
was in few Days quenched, and the quantities of Water by Degrees abated; and
the Medicines prescribed by the London Physicians, were sometimes used, and
upon emergent Occasions, I Corresponded with all, or with one of them (as his
Lordship appointed me) and gave an account from time to time, what effects the
Medicines and Bath-Water^ had. When he found himself pretty wel^ of that great
and formidable Symptom, hi^ Lordship retired sometimes to his House a^ Bremmer
(six Miles beyond Salsbury) bu^ carried the Waters with him, and sen^ for them
thither once a Week. He did the same when he went to Warwick-Castle and to
London. But found not that advantage by them after Carriage, and at a distance,
as when drank warm, even at the Nose of the Pump, which he commonly did when he
was here. Thus doing, he had still longer and longer intervals, between his
Pissing Fits, and at length thought himself perfectly Cured, and imputed his
Recovery to the Drinking of these Waters. He finding himself thus freed from
this first and great Symptom, came seldomer to this Place, but sent every now
and then for the Waters, which he now used, to prevent a Relapse only.

In November 77, his Lordship being then at Bremmer, the Lady Dowager his
Mother came thither, intending to spend the Winter, and keep her Christmas
with him. Her Ladyship had, when she came, a Cold only, as they all thought,
but her Illness daily increased upon her, so that she sell desperately ill, and
in few days Dyed. This ^o affrighted the whole Family, that my Lord and Lady,
and their necessary atten^ance, came away immediately hither, not ^o much to
Drink Waters, as to be out of ^he sight of such Melancholy Objects, as ^ust be
daily before them, in Embalming, and removing the Corpse of his Lady Mo^her.

When he came hither, he drank the Waters ^s formerly, more for Alteration then
Evacu^ion; complained not at all of his Diabetical Distemper, but now and then
of a Giddiness in his Head, which he, and all about him, were apt to ascribe to
Hypochondraick Vapors, which the Trouble for the Lady Dowager's Death, had
increased upon him. But they continuing worse and worse, and being one Day in
hazard of falling in the Street, I proposed Blee^ing to his Lordship; but that
having been declared against, by his Physicians in London, when he was ill of
the Diabetes, he refused it, till I had Answer from Sir Thomas Wetherly, and
Sir John Micklethwait, to whom he made me write: They at the return of the
Post, consenting to it, and referring it to me, it was done, and my Lord was
better upon it, and longer free from the Vertigo. But at last (about the
beginning of February) he was suddenly seized, as he was at Supper, with a
Faultring of h^ Speech, but no Giddiness then Upon this Alarm, a Servant was
presently sent away Post for Sir Thomas Witherly, but h^ came too late. Dr.
Mayo (being then livin^ in this Town) was presently called in (...) join with
me; and Dr. Feilding was sen^ for to Gloucester, who came the second Da^ after
this Seizure. He was let Blood again in the Arm; Bleeding in the Jugula^ was
proposed and urged; but refused ( Cephalicks, and Antiepilepticks were given,
Glysters and Gargarisms were used, and Blyster applied, but on the Fourth Day,
about Seven in the Morning, after he had had an^ indifferent good Night, and
his Speech seemed to be considerably amended, he was suddenly seized with a
violent Convulsion Fit, which wreathed him every way, and lasted half an hour
or more. He was not sensible of any thing that was said or done about him,
after it left tugging of him; nor ever after that first violent Fit But the
Convulsions returning every half Hour or sooner, and growing still more
violent, he at length dyed in the Tenth Fit, and about Eleven of the Clock, to
the great Grief of his Family, and this whole City, where he was by every Body,
deservedly Honored and Beloved.

^e manner of his Lordship's Death, I ^^ve been the more particular in, that it
^^y be known, that he dyed not of the ^^abetes (as was reported, and believed)
(...) of strong Convulsions.

OBSERVE. II.
John Peacock a Londoner, aged Eighteen, well grown Young Man, come hither in
^^ril 75; after he had gone through seve^^ Courses, by the Directions of
several ^hysicians in London. Amongst other Com^aints, he made (when I was sent
for to ^^m) the chief was, that he made much ^ore Water than he drank Beer, or
took li^id Meats, and that by this frequent and ^rge Evacuation, he fell away
in his Flesh, ^ew weak, and faint, and could get no li^^or that would quench
his Thirst. I quick^^ put him upon the Bath-waters, which in ^^tle time had the
same Effect, as in the ^^receeding Observtion they took off ^is Thirst, abated
the excessive quantity of ^is Urine, and recovered his Stomach, and ^ome
Strength, insomuch that in a little ^^me and perhaps too soon, and with half
^is Errand) he returned Back, but what ^ecame of him afterward, I never heard.

OBSERVE. III.
Sir Thomas Fowls, a Goldsmith in Flee^ street London, a Banker of great
Credit a^ Reputation, finding himself falling into the Disease, came hither
purposely to drin^ these Waters, very early in the Year 9^ He came the 25th.
of March, and stayed a^ April, and some part of May. What brough^ him was, his
often making greater quant^ties of pale, crude, and taste less Wate^ then all
the liquid things he took amoun^ed to; he had wholly lost his Stomach fell away
in his Flesh, and withal, by Fi^ had violent Pains and Torture in his Bowels.
He had, I think, (before he came t^ drink them here) sent for these Waters home
and tried them there, but to little purpose which too many to this day do, to
their injury and the disreputation of the Waters, for they have not, and cannot
have, that efficacy and Virtue at any (though a far less distance, as they have
upon the place, which many have (and amongst others, this Gentleman) found very
true: for he in the first Month, found so much Advantage by them here, as to
recover an Appetite, to have Ease from his Gripes, to recover Spirits, and
Vigor, and by Degrees, those pissing Fits lessened, and at length wholly
ceased, and after five or six Weeks stay, thought himself so well as to return
home, and ^here continued free from the great Symp^oms till August, when he
came the second ^ime to confirm what he had got in the Spring, and the better
to secure him (as ^e hoped) against the injuries of the approaching Winter, but
stayed not then so ^ong as at first, yet went home free from those great
Complaints of which he was ^ostly apprehensive, and held so a consideble time.

But in November following (by what error (...) Accident I know not) the
Diabetes retur^ed violently upon him, and continued with that severity, that in
a little time it drayned ^ff all the Lympha, which rendered the remain^ng Blood
to gross to Circulate; so that ^he mean while ceasing its motion, the An^omatom
left moving, and the whole Ma^hine became useless.

This account of the time of his Death I ^ad from his own Brother, and Nephew
(who ^ow keeps on his Employment in the same Shop his Uncle lived in) Summer
95, they ^hen being here at the Bath.

CHAP. VI. Cachexies.
PRecedanious to the Dropsy, are all Ca^ch^ies; inveterate Obstructions o^
Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, Pancreas, and Scirrhous Tumors; yellow and black
Jaundic^ (vulgarly called Black, though I think tha^ to be but an Augmentation
to the Yellow. These therefore may not be unfitly the subject of this Sixth
Chapter; for in all these Cases also, the Bath-Waters have bee^ (with other
means) very instrumental t^ great Recoveries. I shall give a few instances upon
each, and so proceed to the Distemper of the Stomach.

OBSERVE. I.
Mr. Thomas Byrton, Junior, Master (...) Arts, and Minister of Froster in
Glocestershire, aged 33; an ingenious Man, and on^ whose Misfortune it was to
be accounte^ good Company, and his was therefore very often desired, and that
(with his goo^ Nature) engaged him sometimes, (perhaps too frequently) in what
was bad Company. This brought upon him a very ill Habit of Body. He was Pale
and Colorless (or rather discouloured) Faint, and Short breathed; had neither
Appetite nor Digestion, Sower and Bitter Belchings, and frequent Vomitings,
especially Mornings; a constant Cough, and swelled Legs.

In this Condition his careful and kind Father, (Mr. Thomas Byrton Senior,
Schoolmaster of Wotton-under-edge, my old Friend, and Fellow Collegiate in
Lincoln College in Oxford) sent him hither, and with him a Letter to me, and a
Fee enclosed, desiring my utmost endeavors for the recovery of his Son, which
was very dear to him. But he meeting here with a Knight of his Acquaintance, he
persuaded him that an Apothecary would do as well, and therefore his Father's
Letter was not delivered, but he submitted himself to the Apothecaries
Directions, and went on with them for three Weeks or a Month, but finding (in
that time) no alteration to the better, but rather to the worse: he bethought
himself, and sent for me, June 7th. 1688. he then delivered the Letter, and
made some excuse for delaying it so long, expressing no small Trouble, that he
had but when or how, he knew not. He had often Cramps, and Convulsive Motions
in his Legs and Thighs, which would violently draw them upward, whither he
would or not, but of himself could never stir them.

After I had mastered a little those other Symptoms, I permitted him to bathe,
(and indeed sooner than I otherwise would, upon the Importunity of the Soldier
that came to attend him) he endured it better than I expected, and went on so
to do till toward Michaelmas, but without any manifest Advantage to his Limbs,
insomuch, that the Soldier pressed earnestly to be sent back again, seeing no
Good was to be done, and that the Winter approaching, they might probably have
as bad, or a worse Voyage than when they came over. I was for his longer stay,
and writ both to the Doctor and the Captain, what my Opinion was, and the
Reasons of it; in answer to which they left him wholly to my Disposal,
despairing of ever having him cured, if this Means failed, and concluding, that
if he had such another Passage back as he had hither, it must infallibly kill
him: so that if I thought sit to try him another Season, I was desired to
assist the Soldier, in placing the Lad for the whole Winter, and send him back
to be mustered with the rest of his Company, which was done; and the young Man
left ^o the Care of a Woman, that very well ^ischarged her Trust; I ordered her
to put ^im into the Bath, when ever the Wind was not turbulent, or the weather
excessive ^old, though it was Winter; which she con^tantly did; and the first
Alteration that ^ppear'd was, that when he was rubbed after ^is Sweating, he
begin to be ticklish. About Christmas, (I having for some time ^een out of
Town, with a Patient in the Country, for I then attended a Riding, as well as a
Bath-practice) calling to see him ^s soon as I came home, he told me (with
^reat joy) that he could wagg one of his Toes; and pulling off his Shoe and
Stock^^ for me to see it, he was better than his lord, and moved two or three,
and in few Days after, all of that Foot, and not long after, those of the other
also.

In less than a Months time, after that, ^oth Sense and Motion of all the lower
Parts ^^turn'd by degrees; and he could first crawl bout the Room by the
Chairs, after that ^uld use Crutches; so the Soldier return^ng in March
following as was agreed when (...) sent him back) found him (to his no ^mall
Admiration) at the Door of the House ^y himself. After one Month's bathing that
^pring he left off his Cratches, and could walk three Miles in a Morning; but
the Vertibrs still kept out. And indeed I never saw those Subluxations well
reduced, though some bold (because ignorant) Bonesetters, have here pretended to
do it, particularly a Rakemaker, who boldly undertook to recover,

2. Mrs. Unite, a Daughter of Capt. Sendamore's, in Herefordshire, a fine
Woman, and of excellent Temper, who came hither in May, 90. almost in the same
Condition, as is in the last described (only the sense of feeling was not quite
lost in her^ useless Limbs.)

She came hither by the joynt-advice of Dr. Cole, then of Worcester, and Dr.
Williams, of Hereford, and Mr. Powell, the Chyrurgeon of Abergavenny; she was
by some of them recommended to my Care.

After Preparation, she had not bathed past five times, but, by this Fellow's
Persuasion, she left off bathing, and our Directions, wholly submitted to his
Cure; who confidently warranted to recover her; and in order to it pretended to
set some Bones in her Feet, where there were none out; and to reduce the Bones
in her Back, applied Plasters, and bound them up, and kept her in Expectation
of a Cure, a Month at least, but none appearing, she returned home never a Jot
the better, ^^^t came again the next Year, and drank ^^e Waters, and bathed,
and found some Ad^ntage, as to Motion and Strength: How (...) has been since I
have not heard; but by ^^ident, and at great distances I have learnt ^t she yet
continues weak and lame, but ^^th not thought fit to try this Means far^^r,
which I think she ought to have done; if ever she be cured, it must probably be
(...) bathing, year after year, till it be per^ted.

3. A case exactly like the first of the ^^ee was in a Daughter of Colonel
Wal^^s; he being one of King Charles the I.'s ^^ges, forfeited Life, Estate,
and all, so ^^^t the Children lived upon the Exhibiti^^ of Relations and
Friends.

She came hither for Cure in April, 65. and (...) Advice was desired, which I
was not ^nting in. The Alterations toward a Re^ery were not sudden, and
consequently Expenses were enlarged with her Stay, that she ran in Debt with
her Landlady, (...) was forced to send her Sister (who ^e to attend her) to try
her Friends for ^ecruit; which she not quickly speeding the Year was so far
gone, that she was ^ed to stay the following Winter, but (...) kept on bathing,
and used a Swing, and ^etimes darnk the Waters; and all this as the Weather and
her Strength would permit. With long lying she was galled upon her Hips and
Back, from whence came Ulcers, which when dressed by Mr. Chapman, the Apothecary,
(in pure Charity, for she had nothing to pay for Advice or Medicines) she was
not at all sensible of it, though he was forced to use hot, and sharp
Applications to prevent Mortification: But before her Sister returned (which
was not till toward the Spring) she had recovered some Sense and Motion in her
Limbs, and (by that time she had made out her Stay to a Twelvemonth, or more)
went back to London, much advantaged, though not perfectly recovered, as to
Ability to go nimbly; but her Landlady going up about Michaelmas following,
about hers, and some other Debts (for her Sister had not brought enough to pay
off all Scores, and to continue here longer too) she met her walking in
London-Streets, as briskly as ever she did in her Life.

I have been the more particular in the first and third of these Observations,
not only for the remarkableness of the Recoveries, but that it may be again
observed, that The Effects of the Bath do not presently appear, and that the
Impatience and Parcimony of Infirm Persons spoil more Cures, than ordinarily
the Bath, or the best Methods and Medicines do ^erform: For had not these two
(the first and last mentioned) been necessitated to stay ^onger than they were
willing, they might ^ither have remained still lame, or the Cures ^ight have
been imputed to some trivial thing they might have done, or taken, after their
going from hence.

4. Michael King, a Soldier, from Tedbury, ^n Glocestershire; by a Blow on his
Back with (...) Halbert in Flanders, going upon a Party ^o guard Pioneers, was
disabled for farther ^ervice,; and had his Discharge, and re^urn'd to his
Friends in Tedbury aforesaid. ^e had three or four of the Vertibrae of his ^ack
started; and by reason of that could ^ot stoop, nor go steddily, but was forced
(...) wear Iron-Bodices, without which he ^ould hardly sit, much less go,
upright. He ^as sent to Bath in April, 1692. and being ^oor, as a disabled
Soldier, was admitted in^o the Hospital for Strangers, where it is ^y Province
to advise those, whom the ^ayor for the time being, commits to my ^are. I
ordered him some Preparations for ^athing, and sometimes drinking the Waters,
^y which, in a Month, or five Weeks time, ^e recovered so much Strength, as to
leave ^ff his Iron-Bodices, and to go without 'em, ^ompetently well; but the
Vertibrae still kept ^ut, and will do, I suppose, as long as he ^ves.

known him, being of a Complexion, ver^ fair and clear Skinned) Weakness,
Fayn^ness, and decay of Spirits, shaking in h^^ Hands, Pain in his Lymbs,
(especially i^ the Night,) swelling of his Feet and Ancle^ which toward Night,
would retain a goo^ while, the print of a Finger, a clammyne (...) of his
Mouth, a Draught, and foulness o^ his Tongue.

He had been for some time, under the Care and Conduct of a worthy Person o^
our Profession, Dr. Speed of Southampton and had but lately taken Purging
Physic^^ by his Prescriptions; and therefore had the less need of much
Preparation for drinkin^ these Waters, which in a few days he began upon. He
took at first but two Pints after that he increased by Degrees, to three and
then to two Quarts, and seldom exceeded that quantity. They passed ver^ well
with him, both by Stool and Urine the whole quantity before he drank again for
what past not by Day, seldom failed t^ come off by Night, after his first Sleep.

However, he was between whiles, purged with Rheubarb and Calometanos, an^ took
Alteratives, and intermitted now an^ then, some Days from Drinking the W^ters.
About the middle of his Course h^ was let Blood, which was not so sizy as i^
^ad been formerly, and had a quantity of ^erum, but that was tinctured very
yellow. About the latter end of his Course, he ba^hed three or four times, to
get the yellow^ess off of his Skin. He had before bathed ^is Feet and Legs
often in his Chamber at Nights, going to Bed, to get down the Swelling, both
which ends were attained ^y it. He apparently (under all this) got Vigor and
Strength, a clearer Countenance, and a better Habit of Body; and thus returned
to his own Home, after two Months stay here. He came again May, 93, to confirm,
and improve what he had got the Year before, and stayed much about the same
time, with manifest Advanvantage, in all respects, which I suppose, he yet
continues to have, because he returns not again to the same means, by which he
found so much good.

OBSERVE. V.
Whilst I am looking over my Copy, to send it Sheet by Sheet to the Press,
there happens a considerable Observation in a Colic Case, with the Jaundice,
which I think well worth the inserting here. It is of Michael Harvey of
Clifton, in the County of Dorset, Esquire more then 60 Years of He was (for many
Years past) subject (...) the Gout, but by favorable returns, at (...) year,
or more then a years distance, in o^^ of those Fits, about 15 Years ago, he
turn (...) yellow, and took Medicines for the Jau^dice, by Dr. Thomas Cox's
Prescriptions. (...) April last he was seized with a violent Pai^ in his
Stomach, which kind of Pain he formerly had also, by Fits, but was now more
then ordinarily ill and fainty, and the Jaundice presently appeared in his
Water, bu^ not in his Eyes, Face and Skin, till about a Month after. He applied
himself to Dr Rackliff, who put him upon several Course^ for the Colic and
Jaundice, by which h^ had some Advantage, and considerable intervals between
the Fits.

He took also other Medicines by other Advice, but to little purpose, for the
Fits still returned upon him.

He was at length, therefore ordered by Dr. Rackliff, to drink these Waters, in
order to which he came to Bath, the last day of August, 96; but so Weak and
Ill, that all that were with him, feared that he would have dyed by the way.
The Night after he arrived here, he had a most violent Colic Fit, in which he
strayned very much to Vomit, all which had rendered him exceeding Weak, Faint,
Emaciated and Dispirited, loathing almost all Meats and Drinks. He was yellow
all over, and ^llow under the Eyes. He set presently upon drinking these Waters
(being in conti^ual Pain, and Stomachless) but at first in ^mall quantities.
The third time of taking (...) them, he voided a Stone by Stool, a^out the
bigness of a Pigeons Egg, which was but light, considering the Bulk, for it
^eighed but a Dram and six Grains, yet measured two Inches, and three
quarters ^he long way, and two Inches, and the ^ifth part of an Inch the Broad
way. It ^as a little depressed on one side, and ^omewhat exturberant on the
other. It ^ad several small Proturberances all over ^t, which appeared whiter
then the Spaces between, which were of a pale yellow, with some shining
Particles interspersed. With this Stone were voided several lesser pieces, of
like Color and Consistence, a Sabulum, to the quantity of a spoonful or more.

It is observable that this Gentleman had that Morning a Stool before the Stone
came off, as white as (and like to) a Tobacco-pipethy, but the Stool that came
with, and after, the Stone was as yellow as Saffron. We was presently upon the
voiding of it, more at ease; he recovered by degrees, his Appetite, and
Digestion; his Color men^ his Strength increases by it. He goes (...)
drinking the Waters, whilst I writ this (...) his own Lodging, and this one
and twe^tieth day from his beginn ng to take the^ He walks abroad and gives
visi^s, eats hea^tily, and steps well, and is very likely (...) this means to
perfect his Recovery.

OBSERVE. VI.
The Case I am now about to descri^^ had so many, and great Symptoms
co^plicated, that I stood a while dubious (...) what Head most properly to
refer it. B^^ at length finding the Cachexie to be t^^ last and greatest of
them, I have made (...) one of this sixth Chapter.

It is the Case of George Long Esquire Downside, in the Parish of Shepton-Mallet,
the County of Somerset; three Viles Eastwa^^ of Wells. His great and wonderful
Rec^very by the use of these Waters, has be^^ long since made public, I shall
not therefore need to repeat a great deal of his lo^^ and painful Sickness.

It is more then Twenty Years ago, th^^ I was first Physician to him, his Lady
a^^ Family, and its almost so long ago, the he was first assaulted with the
Gout, and find in some of my Papers, that more then sixteen years ago; I
prescribed Medicines for him, for sharpness of Urine, Stone and Gravil; as well
as Antiarthritick Remedies, for he seldom had a Fit of the Gout, without that
of the Stone also, and both frequently seized him. But in the Year 88 and 89,
and so forwards, for two or three Years together, he was seldom free from
great Pains, which were diffused all over his Body, from part to part, from
Joint to Joint, where was wedged in, this calculous Matter; that his Finger
became crooked, his Right Knee, Hipps and Back motionless. He was so
contracted, that he could not be extended in his Bed, much less (if the Pain
would have given leave) could he have been set upright. In short, he became (as
we call it in this Country) Bed^id.

He was lifted in a Sheet from one side of the Bed to the other, and from place
to place, not easy without, nor well within: His Thirst importunate, his
Appetite and Stomach lost, his Skin shrieveled, and discolored, his Face
Meagre, his Hair gray; his Flesh wasted, his Muscles fallen all the Body over;
he could have thrown the Calf of his Leg over his Skin-bone. With all this he
had a perpetual Sharpness of Urine, nay all the Juices in his Body, had such
propensity to Lapidescency, that his Wate^ being left (but a few days) in a
crook Bed-Urinal, it was crusted at the sides an^ top, as thick as a
Half-Crown, with a po^rous kind of Stone, like that of a Prunez^ In this
Condition, he was with difficult^ brought to Bath, April 91. He began with
drinking the Waters, hot in the Morning from the Pump, at Meals cold, (for h^
drank not then, nor has he done since any Malt Drink.) In a Weeks time his
Thirst abated, and the sharpness of Urine lessend, his Stomach began to return.
After a^ Month's Drinking, he bathed between whiles, which much eased his
Pains. He could in the Bath, suffer his Legs to be distended a little. About
the end of May, he returned Home with this begun Advantage, but carried the
Waters with him, and constantly sent for them. About the end of August he came
hither again, and stayed six Weeks or two Months, Drinking and Bathing as
before. In the mean time he gathered some Flesh and Strength, and some small
Ability to go, though Cripplishly. In November following, his Gray Hairs began
to fall off, and new ones succeeded, he says more, that some of the Gray ones
re^urned again to their Color, which way ever it was, by Gandlemass he had few
or no Gray Hairs left, but a good Head; of soft ^rown Hair, such as he had when
he was about Five or Six and Twenty, which grew so fast, that he cut more then
an Inch, every Month or Five Weeks. Even now (...) bating a little Baldness
upon the Crown, for he is on the wrong side of Fifty) it ^ooks like a Border of
Hair, which I have ^een formerly worn, before whole Heads were so much in use.
To perfect this so well begun Recovery, he took a House and lived here for the
most part of the year ^^r, about which time his Toe-Nails which were hard,
ragged and scaly, began to be ^hrust off by new and smooth ones; his Arms and
Hands recovered Strength; he ^ad much freer motion of his Joints, his Muscles
plumpt; he was daily more and more erect, and every Bathing stretched ^im half
an Inch. He has now a Fleshy, Hale, habit of Body, a vigorous Eye; and (...)
Ruddy, Plump, Youthful Face, sespeci^lly when he mixes Sherry with his Water,
which he will sometimes do.)

In fine, he has had no Fit of the Gout ^o lay him up long together, nor the
least ^ouch of the Stone, or Sharpness of Urine, since he left of Malt-Drink,
and made these Waters his constant Beverage. It is pity to leave out one
material Circumstance. An Unbelieving Knight, that knew him well before,
hearing of this mirac^lous Recovery, came purposely to his House to examine the
Truth of i^; with his own Eyes he soon might have seen it, but would no^ Credit
it till he had asked his Lady, whether she found him grown young again? She
modestly (and sharply enough) answered I believe if I were dead, he would marry
again.

Though all this is manifestly known t^ be true, yet little or nothing of it is
believed by the Advocates for other Minera^ Waters, who envy, and would eclips
the Reputation of these. Nay their industr^ous Reports have killed him several
times and many Letters have been sent (some to me) to know the Truth of it. Nay
have been forced to show him to some (Ladys especially) to convince them; t^
which (I thank him) he has not been unwilling to consent.

To save the Charge of more such Pos^ Letters, and to cure this incredulity a^
well as to serve his Country) he was likely to have been sent up, to serve in
Parliament for this City.

He is able enough to bear the Trouble of attending the Business of the House,
nor was there any reason to fear that the Both-Waters would have lost their
Reputation, if he should have dyed there, though both these things were
objected, in a Letter from some that would have had another chosen. To evince
the first, it was scarce two Months before the time of Election, that he rode
from Bath to Oxford in a Day, which is 48 computed Miles, and above 50 measured
ones; and but few days before that, went from hence to his own House, (which is
12 or 14 Miles) after twelve a Clock at Night, went to Bed for two or three
Hours, rose again, and dispatched a great deal of Business before Dinner.

And for the second, those Gentlemen that (for their own ends) pretend so much
Kindness to, and concern for the Reputation of these Waters, may know (even by
some of the foregoing, and following Observations) that the Credit of them is
not to determine with Mr. Long's Life. For though they have wrought a very
exemplary Cure upon him, yet I hope they do not expect, that they should make
him (or any Body else) immortal, or unvulnerable, or not liable to other
Accidents, common to Humanity. But weak Arguments seem strong to those that are
willing they should persuade, at least when they are urged to such whom they
think easy to be persuaded. In short, Mr. Long is alive, and very well, and
not only keeps the Strength he has got, but improves it daily.

OBSERVE. VII.
The next and last instance upon this Head, is an ill Habit of Body, and
general Weakness, joined with an intermitting Fever (a Tertian) a short Cough;
an emaciated Body and languid Spirits, and all this after a Rheumatism, in
which the Pains were so great, all her Lymbs so weak, and her Strength so
decayed, that she was forced for a long time, to be lifted from place to place,
and even then ready to faint under their Hands. It was Mrs. Lydia Merefeild,
Widow to Captain Robert Merefeild of Crookhern, in the County of Somerset.

This illness was contracted by Riding many Hours thorough-wet, and after it
was Night; it continued upon her some Months, with such violence, that her Life
was often despaired of. When the violence of the Pains, and the Fever were in
some measure abated, she was left in the Condition abovementioned, and had
withal, a pale and yellow Countenance, swelled Legs, and every other Day, a
minding of a Fever and Ague; it began with a little Chill, but was mostly hot
and dry. In these Circumstances she was brought to Bath the last day of April
94. After some Preparatory means, she was first put upon drinking of the
Waters, which did not presently agree with her, and when they did, it did not
quickly appear that she was better. For the first three Weeks or a Month (in
which time she bathed but little) she got little Ground, after that it daily
appeared that she had not lost her labor. Her Countenance cleared, her
Appetite renewed, her Digestion mended, and the swelling of her Legs vanished,
and she could not easily recollect when asked, which was her ill day? Then was
she permitted more frequent Bathings, and longer stay, and she bore it better
then at first, by which the remaining Pains of her Lymbs ceased, and Strength
increased, so that she could go up and down Stairs (which she could hardly do
before, by reason of a great weakness in her Knees and Ancles) she could walk
the Town, and the Meadows, and at length (about the middle of June) returned
Home, and has continued in a good state of Health ever since, and is now the
same cheerful Widow as before.

CHAP. VII. Diseases of the Stomach.
ACcording to our proposed Method, this Chapter ought to treat of the Cure of
Diseases incident to the Stomach. Now the Oisophagus being no other then a
Funnel, by which Meat and Drink is conveyed into it; it is not improper, I
think, to begin with a Distemper incident to that part, that is Difficulty in,
or Abolition of Swallowing, for in this Case also we want not some instances of
the Efficacy of the Bath-waters.

OBSERVE. I.
Mr. Yarburgh, a Gentleman of Fifty Six Years of Age (I think out of
Lincolnshire,) having for many years past been subject to difficulty in
Swallowing (especially liquids) came to the Bath, and sent for me July 14.
1680. He had consulted several Physicians before, particularly Dr. Willis, who
judged his Case (as he told me) a Paralysis of the Mussles of the Oisophagus;
others supposed it a Tumor upon the upper Mouth of the Stomach; but upon trial
there appeared no hardness nor extraordinary Distention or Tenderness, upon
that Region. But some not satisfied with either of the former causes, ascribed
it to a Cold and Phlegmatic Distemper of the Stomach, and a Scorbutic Matter,
sticking to the folds of that part, causing a Convulsive Motion of its own
Fibers, which drew into consent those of the Oisophagus also. What ever was the
cause, the effect was, a constant difficulty, sometimes inability to swallow.

Having tried (as he thought at least) all other means, he at length came
hither, to experiment these Waters, which I soon put him upon the drinking of,
causing him to take at first, some Stomach Pills over Night, and the Waters
next Morning, these Pills were continued two or three Nights following, after
which he took the Waters alone, perhaps sometimes some Drops of Sal Volatile
Oleosum in them. It was no small difficulty for him at first to swallow a
quantity enough to make them pass, but by degrees, that obsticle was removed,
so that they at length did very well with him. Toward the Conclusion, we put
him into the Bath, only to have his Stomach and Neck pumped upon; but with a
Defensative to his Kidneys for he was subject to the Stone.

He went away very much advantaged, and I never heard to the contrary, but that
he continued so.

OBSERVE. II.
Mrs. Mary Kirby of Bishops-waltham in the County of Southampton, Aged 40,
having (some years past) a Scarlet Fever, and being put into a Sweat, took
cold upon it, and had upon that Cold, a sudden defluction of cold Rheum to her
Throat, which was like to have suffocated her, and from that time had a more
than ordinary streightness there, and some difficulty in Swallowing; but two or
three Years after, having a sudden and violent Haemorrhage from both Nostrils,
it was stopped by applying clothes dipped in Cold Water to the Throat, and Nape
of the Neck. She had often returns of this Bleeding, which would quickly be
stopped by this Application, and putting her Hands into cold Water.

But in March 93, falling a Bleeding in the Night, and those accustomed
Remedies failing her, she was let Blood to a great quantity, upon which loss of
Blood, both by the Disease and Remedy, her Swallow was wholly stopped (and she
thought that to be the cause) which lasted for some time.

She could chew her Meat, and with her Tongue, thrust it back to the top of the
Gullet, but down it would not go, till thrust down with her Finger, which she
told me she have been often forced to do, to prevent Starving. She came hither
in May 94, and consulted me, being recommended to me by my very good Friend Dr.
Perrin of that Country. When she first came, she could hardly swallow the
Waters by Spoonfuls, but afterward could drink half a pint at a Draught, and
three Pints or more in a Morning. After a Months Drinking, I advised pumping of
her Neck and Throat, which could not be done without going into the Bath, which
I apprehended a hazard from, least it should put her again upon Bleeding at the
Nose. But it was so ordered, that by staying there no longer then to be Pumped,
and then coming immediately out, she escaped that hazard, and after six or
seven Weeks stay, went home so well (and continued to must part of the
following Winter) that she came again in Summer 95, and Drank and Pumped as the
Year before, and had no small Addition to her former Benefit.

OBSERVE: III.
I wish I could have said the same of a Person of very great Quality, and one
that is in a Post of great Concern to the Government of the Nation. I have not
leave to name him, and therefore omit it, but his Lordship came hither almost
in the same Condition with the two former, in July 93, when I had the Honor
(as I had more then Twenty Years before) of attending his Lordship as his
Physician. The Case indeed was very odd and long continued, and had puzzled most
of the Eminent Physicians of the Nation. His free Swallowing would be
interrupted sometimes for a Week, Ten Days, or more together, even Liquids, as
well as Solid Meats, would not go down, and when seemingly pretty well; it
would surprise him on a sudden, whilst he was eating or Drinking, so that he
was forced to give over for a time. Those Stoppages lessened something then by
Drinking these Waters, so much, that his Lordship declared that he ^^^ought if
he could stay two or three Months ^^ey might advantage him. But the pub^^k
affairs wanting his Assistance, he was ^^^t for by that time he had been here
^^ee Weeks. To supply which defect, ^^^e Waters were weekly sent up after
(...), by his Lordship's Order, what effects ^^ey had at that distance from the
Foun^in, I have not had the advantage to know. Having done with the Gullet, we
come (...) the Stomach it self, the chief Illnesses of which are violent Pains,
Vomitings, loss of ^^ppetite, weakness of Digestion, and exorbi^ent Thirsts, of
all which I shall give some ^ew Instances, and so proceed to the Distem^ers of
the Kidneys and Urinary Passages, and Spermatick Vessels, and so Conclude.

OBSERVE. IV.
These Stomach Pains have obtained several Names, as Cardialgia, Attritio
Ven^riculi (so Sennertus in his Third Book, Part I. Sect. II. Chap. XV. De
Dolor and Auxietate Ventriculi) and of late, they have by some been called
Hysteric Collicks. Of ^his I had a sad and long continued Instance in my own
Wife, who for many Years together was greatly afflicted with it by Fits, to a
more then ordinary, Degree. She was naturally subject to a Consumption, of
which no less then five (...) her near Relations dyed in two or three Years
time; two Brothers, two Sister^ and a Sisters Daughter were taken off b^ it,
but those at different Ages, and she h^ self once after I was Married to her s^
far gone in it, as to spit Blood. Thi^ sharp and Corrosive Humor, being by the
use of Means removed from the pectora^^ Parts, after a while it began to
exercis^ its Tyranny upon the Mouth of the Sto^mach, a very sensible part, by
reason of the Plexus Nervorum, that it has from the Par vagum (Dr. Willis's
Eighth pair) there interwoven.

In these extremities, she had not only my own Advice, but the Concurrent
Assistances of what other Physicians were upon the Place, and all of Note, that
came hither with Persons of Quality, at the Bathing Seasons. The Court was at
my House twice or thrice, whilst she lay liable to the returns of those Payns;
and those Eminent Physicians that attended the King or Queen, denied me not
their joint Advice, yet maugre all those several Courses she had (by them and
me) been put upon, and had diligently gone through with, (...) some Months
distances she was still assaul^ed with it. I at length proposed to her the
Drinking of these Waters, which indeed ^ere not then so much in use as they are
^ow (for it was many Years before she dy^^d.) She took this proposal of mine
very (...), thinking that I had abandoned the ^oncern of her Ease, Health and
Life, to any slight pretended Remedies, that came first to my Thoughts.

When I perceived that I told her, that ^he had already run so many Courses,
and ^ook such variety of Remedies, without a ^erfect Recovery, that there
seemed to me nothing remaining, but the drinking of ^ome Mineral Waters, and if
she chose rather ^o go to some others, she should be forwar^ed in it; but why
she should not try the first, I did not know, they being upon these place, and
Experience having been sufficiently had of them, in correcting sharp Humors,
though not perhaps in her very Case. This took off the resentment of my
supposed Slight, and after Preparation, she began upon them, and went on with
them, with that success, that in a little time, she began to be at ease, and
was at length wholly freed from those Pains, and recovered her lost Appetite,
gathered Flesh and Strength, and continued free from their returns longer then
after any course of Ph^sick she had taken before, so that we hea^^ no more of
her going to Epsham or T^^ bridge; but after this, when ever she fou^^ any
little previous dispositions to that illn^^ she would (of her self) begin again
wi^^ her Preparatory Physic and Waters, at ^^ny time of the Year, and continue
the longer, or less while, as she found conv^nient. At Spring and Fall, for
preventio^ she usually took them three Weeks or (...) Month.

This Recovery of hers, caused man^ in the like case to come hither, who al^
had no worse success; to enumerate the (...) all would be too tedious, and
unbecomin^ a Work, that is intended only as a Br^viate. Thus she continued
several Yea^ to do, till at length the sharp Matter gathering head again (and
she in a declinin^ Age, on the worst side of Sixty) fell sever^ly on the lower
Bowels, and corrupted the Parts, and became an inward Ulcer, which after Twenty
Months, sharp and lingring^ Pains, and extreme Weakness, confining her to her
Chamber, and Bed; she dyed (in the Sixty Seventh Year of her Age, and after our
Thirty Seven Years, inte^^ Marriage) May 23d. 1688.

OBSERVE. V.
Mr. Collins Woollrich, an able and diligent Apothecary in Shrewsbury, upon the
9th. of September 83, about Six of the Clock in the Evening, was seized with
torturing Pains in his Stomach, Bowels and Back, successively, for the space of
Ten Hours, and then ceased of a sudden. The next Night in began and ended as
before; and so day after Day, from Six at Night till four in the Morning, until
May following, when the warmth of the Season relieving him, he continued free
till September following, 1684, when they began again as the Year before, and
so Year after Year (except 86) for Seven or Eight Months togethier, during
which time he was necessitated to Vomit, about an Hour and half after Eating,
not being able to retain it any longer, and during the whole Paroxysme of Ten
Hours, had often Motions to Vomit, all which reduced him to great Weakness.

In the Year 1688, his Tortures continued till June, that used to determine in
May, but then abstaining from all fermented Liquors, and drinking nothing but
Milk and Water, the Pains ceased, but the Vomiting continued, and by this time
he became much Emaciated, Languid, and Dispirited. His two very good Friends,
as well as Learned Physicians, who had all along assisted him with their
Advice. Dr. Hollins, and Dr. Fowke, then advised him to these Waters, and
recommended him to me, and to Dr. Baynard, to assist and direct him in the use
of them, which we soon put him upon the Drinking of, he being by them
sufficiently prepared before. The Sixth Morning in drinking of them, he
perceived a sudden and manifest removal of a load from his Stomach, into his
lower Bowels, and presently had a large discharge by Stool; and from that time
had neither Pains nor Vomitings, yet kept on drinking the Waters for a Month at
least. He kept free from any return of this illness till 91, when finding some
dispositions to it, he came hither again in August, and drank them with the
same succcess; for they returned not again till September 93, when he came
hither again, and was relieved the third time.

He has been here the two past Seasons for prevention, and is resolved to
continue so to do, one Month in every Autumn, as long as it shall please God to
grant him Oppertunity, and Health to repair hither.

This account I had (almost Verbatim) under his own Hand, when he was here this
last Season, 1695.

OBSERVE. VI.
Sir Willoughby Aston, of Aston, in the County of Chester, Baronet, having some
Years before been here, and experienced the Efficacy of Bathing, came in
September, 1690, purposely to drink these Waters. He was violently seized some
Months before with this Cardialgia or Attritio Ventriculi, and finding no
relief by what he took in the Country, went up to London purposely to take
advice, and to use means there. Whom he consulted I cannot well remember, but
whoever it was, he sent him away presently to Tunbridge, as the most proper
Remedy, and hastened him thither, because the Season for drinking those cold
Waters was drawing off. According to his Directions, he began the drinking of
them, and went on some time with them; but instead of easing his Pain, they
increased it, and with the Pain he seemed to be inwardly convulsed, so that
after a Week or Ten Days Trial, he was forced to give them over. Then
considering with himself, that if Waters must be his Remedy, the warm ones were
likelyest to do it, especially it being late in the Year. He immediately took a
Resolution, and withal a Coach, and came directly hither. He came into my House
the Twelfth of September, 1690.

He had been very ill all the way down; his Torture was so great, that he was
forced to take Anodynes, and those frequently. We lost no time, we had none to
spare; P ordered him the first Night a Stomach-Pill, with some Drops of
Ol-succini (of which he took a Scruple going to Bed) and one Grain of Laudanum
Londinense; next Morning he Drank Three Pints of the Bath-Water, which after a
while, was increased to Two Quarts, or more by Degrees. He went on thus to do,
and in a Week had manifest abatement of his Pains, and in a Month was
perfectly-well. About the latter end of that time, he sometimes Bathed and
Pumped his Stomach, which was done; designing by it, to strengthen it, being
greatly Weakened by the violence of the Pains and Convulsions.

This perfectly recovered him, and he held well, free from these tormenting
Symptoms, all the next Year, but for Prevention, came again in 92, and drank
the Waters another Month.

OBSERVE. VII.
Sir James Rushot, being very ill, in the like Case, and then a Member of
Parliament, and by reason of this Pain and Illness, not able any longer to
attend the Service of the House, obtained leave to come to the Bath for his
Health, and immediately he and his Family came hither, in November, 1690, and
stayed most part of the Winter. Besides the violent Stomach Payns, he
complained of sour Corroding Eructations, which he himself would compare to
Vinegar, Oil of Vitriol, and Aquafortis. It was a long time that he had been
troubled with it, and much means had been taken for it; at length he resolved
to try the utmost, what these Waters would do toward his Relief, and in order
to a sufficient Trial, he determined a considerable stay. He brought Directions
or Medicines, or both with him, and went on upon them some time before I was
sent for. The Waters passed well enough with him, and some allay of his Pains
he had, but about the middle of December, after he had. Drank them about Three
Weeks, the Waters which formerly passed (as with most they do) chiefly by
Urine, began now to discharge themselves and with them great quantities of
adust Choler) by Stool, which made him, his Lady and Family, very Sollicitous
about it. I encouraged them to hope well from it, judging it to be that
Vitriolick Matter that corroded his Stomach, moved downwards by the Waters,
into his Bowels, and this (by its Acrimony) to have occasioned the Looseness.
The reason that prevailed with me to think so was, that from the time that this
Diarrhea began, the Pains of his Stomach, and the sour Belchings began to
abate, and lessened more and more, as the Looseness increased. This satisfied
for a while, but at length some small streaks of Blood appearing in some of his
Stools, and he being Faint and Dispirited, by frequent Evacuations, and himself
apt to be apprehensive, they all concluded it to be the Bloody Flux, and sent
(in all haste) to Oxford, for Dr. Gibbons, that had formerly been his
Physician; but by that time he came, the sharp Matter was in some measure
spent, and with his joint Advice, it was at length wholly stayed, and he freed
from his Stomach Pains also.

He withal recovered his Appetite and Strength, by Degrees, and in January
fol^^^ (...) from the Complaints he brought down with him) to his House on the
Borders of Worstershire. He was here again in June 92, in much better
Circumstances.

OBSERVE. VIII.
Colonel Talmidge (a person of known Courage and Conduct, afterward
Lieutenant General Talmidge, in the unhappy Expedition against Breast where he
received a Shot, of which he afterward dyed, deservedly pityed and lamented)
in June, 1683, and in the Thirty Seventh Year of his Age, came to drink these
Waters, for a Griping Pain his Stomach and Bowels, caused (as he related to me,
when he first sent for me to him (by taking a Dose of Pills, by a Chyrurgion's
Prescription, wherein was Mercury ill prepared, from the time of his taking
them, (which was some Months before) he had more or less of those Gripes, in
some part or other of his lower Belly. He was averse to the swallowing of
Pills, (perhaps for that reason) and therefore took some Spoonfuls of Tinctura
Sacra before his Waters, which inclined them to pass the more by Siege. This
was continued two or three Days, afterward he drank Waters alone; and
continued them a Fortnight or three Weeks, and then (for some Pain in his
Lymbs, and a desire he had to be put into a sweat) went sometimes into the
Bath, and tried the Pump to his Stomach also, but for the most part, drank the
Waters, and ascribed his Relief chiefly to them.

OBSERVE. IX.
Mrs. Farrer, a Gentlewoman from Norwich, Aged Thirty, had been a long while
afflicted with these Stomach Pains.

After the trial of much means at home, and (if I mistake not) some in London
also, at least in het way hither, she came to drink these Waters in May 93, and
sent for me to assist her in it, with my Advice, in preparation for them, and
manner of using of them. I presently set her upon them (finding that she had
taken Vomits and Purges before) ordering only a couple of Stomach Pills over
Night, and drinking Three Pints of the King's Bath-VVater, hot from the Pump
next Morning. The Pills were continued Three Nights, after which she went on
with the Waters alone, but enlarging the quantity by degrees, to four our five
Pints; when the Waters gave her not a stool or two, the Pills were (now and
then) repeated. After a considerable times Drinking, she Bathed sometimes in a
moderate Bath, (the Queens or Cross-Bath) and had her Stomach Pumped, and was
at length, sent a way so well, that she continued free from those violent Pains
all the following Winter, and Spring; and yet returned hither again the Summer
following, to confirm the Ease and Health she had before got.

Very many more instances of these Hysteric Collicks here Cured, chiefly by
Water-Drinking, and pumping upon the Stomach (if nothing contraindicate) might
be added, but for Brevity Sake, are omitted; and we now come to Distempers of
the Stomach, that had not so violent Pains. but more Weakness and Indigestion,
and want of Appetite, and frequent Vomitings, of which I shall give a few (but
considerable) Instances, and so dismiss this Subject.

OBSERVE. X.
Sir William Clark of Oxford shire, (a Captain of Horse, in the Lord
Colchester's Regiment) by Golds, and lying in the Field, the forogoing Campaign
in Planders, and perhaps not keeping a very regular Diet, and other Enormities
incident to a Soldier's Life; had wholly lost his Stomach, so that he could
hardly endure the Sight, much less endure the taste of Meat. Drink he would
like, sometimes too well. Withthis ill Diet, and loss of Appetite, he had a
tendency to a Cachexie, looked yellow in the Face, Vomited Mornings, was Tyrie
and Fainty, and subject to a Diarrhaea. He complained always (more or less) of
a Pain in his Left Side. For besides that, he had been greatly Splenetick, he
had been run through on that Side in a Duel. His Spirits being low, and he so
faint, and (as is said) apt to reach and strain to Vomit, (though little or
nothing came up) especially in a Morning, when he met with any Company (which
by the way, he was not very apt to avoid) he chose Sack for his Liquor, rather
then any other Wine, which heated and inflamed him, and (in short) all these
things together, had spoiled a good Habit of Body, and left him (in his own,
and every Body's Opinion) in a declining Condition.

In this State he came to Bath in April 93, willing to be well, but very
unwilling to take Physic; nor could I quickly persuade him to begin upon the
Waters, and when I did prevail, I could get him to take but three Half pint
Glasses at first. But finding some advantage by this small quantity, he at
length increased it to three Pints, and after that to four, where he stuck, and
continu d them a considerable time. He bathed also sometimes, but drank most,
by both (and by some little means he could now and then be pe^swaded to) he
recovered to a wonder. His strainings to Vomit ceased, his Looseness was
stopped, his Appetite restored, he could eat Mutton, as well as drink Sack, his
Complexion was cleared, and that old Pain of his Left Side much abated. He
stayed till June, then went away for a time, and returned again in the latter
part of the Summer, fuller and fresher then he went away. He drank again the
Waters this second time, for ten Days or a Fortnight, and so concluded this
Campaign here, with more advantage (in point of Health) then that, the Year
before in Flanders.

OBSERVE. XI.
The Reverend Mr. James Ellisby, Minister of Chiswick, few Miles from London,
came down very Faint, Weak, and Stomachless, about the middle of April, 1690.
His chief Complaints were, decay of Spirits, and Strength, (chiefly in his
Back.) The Remedies he had taken, he thought took off his Stomach, for he could
digest nothing, all things that he eat, came up again; he was withal in great
Pain, so that he could not sleep at Night, nor was he at ease by Day, in any
posture, whether Sitting, Walking, Standing or Lying. At length the Jaundice
appeared by the yellowness of his Skin, and the Whites of his Eyes. Under these
weak Circumstandes he came hither, as is above said, and was so faint and
tyrie, and enfeebled, that he contented himself with a small Chamber, not being
able to go up another pair of Stairs, to a larger and better Room.

He applied himself to me for Advice, and (after some Preparation, what he
needed, and could well bear) I put him upon drinking these Waters, Bathing not
being at all likely to agree with him, nor did he, as I remember, once bath at
all. It was more then a Week, or Ten Days, before he could discover the least
Alteration to the better, but at length, the Water passing well, opened his
Body (which was apt to be costive before) cleared the Passages, restored his
Stomach, and abated his Pains, by which he was enabled to Sleep, Eat, and
Digest, (and consequently to get Strength, which he did in every part, but his
Back, where some Weakness, more or less, has still continued.) He came a
second time the same Year, about August, and was then so much amended, that he
that could he hardly heard to speak in a wide Chamber, (his Lungs and Voice
were so weak when he came first) before he went away, preached in our large
Church, with great applause.

CHAP. VIII. Diseases of the Passage of Urine.
WE have been the longer upon the Diseases of the Stomach, by reason of the
various Distempers that part is subject to; we now proceed (according to our
proposed Method) to the Diseases incident to the Urinary Passages, and these
are chiefly, sharpness of Urine, Stone, Gravel, and Bloody Water, and Ulcers in
the Kidneys and Bladder, of all these something, and then to conclude with that
of old Gonorrhaeas, and the Weaknesses they ussually leave. But there, I hope
you will not expect that I should name the Persons that here received Benefit
in that Case; you would not be so served your Selves. If you believe me not in
this particular, come and try, (for I believe this may fall into some Hands
that need it enough) and besure you shall have the sam: fair Play, in silencing
your Names also. I begin with sharpness of Urine.

OBSERVE. I.
Sir Thomas Ogle, Aged 40, having been a long time afflicted with this
troublesome, as well as painful Symptom, came hither in July 75, puprosely to
drink these Waters, having tried others, as well as other Remedies before. He
was so frequently pressed to make Water, and always with Sharpness and Pain,
both in and after making it, that he could hardly be long together, quiet in
his Bed, and was forced to have Emulsions by him, and sometimes strong Anodynes.

He applying himself to me for Directions, how to use the Waters, and
complaining of the quantities of Physic he had formerly been forced to take, I
put him upon the use only of Dacasia cum Manna, half an Ounce, over Night, or
very early in the Morning; and about Seven of the Clock, to drink three Pints
of the King s-Bath Water. When he took not of the Electuary, he drank two
Quarts, and after a while, Five Pints. They gave him usually two or three
Stools, but past mostly by Urine, and did not bring off a great deal of Gravil
neither, but manifestly abated the Acrimony of the Humor, and consequently
lessened the sharpness of his Urine, so that he could retain his Water a longer
time, and make larger quantities, and take rest between whiles.

After a Month or five Weeks drinking thus, these Waters, and gently Purging
between whiles, and at Conclusion, he went off greatly relieved, and continued
so for a considerable time, and lived (for ought I ever heard) free from this
Symptom. He dyed not long since, but of what, I have not been informed.

OBSERVE. II.
Mr. Belke, a young Man, not much past Thirty, belonging to the Chancery (had a
Seat in the Six-Clarks-Office) having been for some time afflicted with this
Distemper, (and that to a great Degree) came hither (I think) by Dr. Slare's
Direction) in August, 1691.

After Preparation, he drank also of the Waters, which quickly agreed with him,
and past so well both by Stool and Urine, that there was little need of giving
much Physic with them; a Balsamic Pill, he took frequently of overnight, and
drank the Waters next Morning. Thus he continued to do a Month or Five Weeks,
by which time he got well of his Distemper, and held so all the following
Winter, and the next Spring. To confirm therefore this Recovery, in the Long
Vacation, (the time of Leisure for Men of his Profession) he came down again,
and drank the Water as before, which did it effectually, and prevented a
Relapse, for he had not the least return of it afterward. Yet the Summer
following, he designed to come a third time, and having appointed the day and
all, when to begin his Journey, with a Friend of his, that came down with him
the two preceding Years, he was seized by the Epidemical Fever, (which reigned
in London in 93) and dyed of it in ten cays, or a fortnights time.

OBSERVE. III.
In neither of the two former Cases was there observed any considerable
quantity of Mucous Matter, or Gravil, much less Stone, to be brought off by the
Waters, and therefore probably, the Cures were wrought by correcting the
Acrimony and sharpness of the whole Mass of Blood, and the corroding Matter
which Nature had (for some time) accustomed to throw off that way, and withal,
by strengthening those Parts. I shall next give some Instances of the usefulness
of these Waters, when Gravil and Stones are already Concreted.

I shall begin with a worthy Cornish Knight, a Gentleman of a true Old English
Temper, Sir John Cotton of Botrux-Castle, in Cornwell, who having had for many
years past, several severe Fits, and in them voided much Gravil, and Stones of
a considerable bigness and craggedness, which always occasioned Bloody Water,
by lacerating the Vessels as they passed, and previous to each Fit, he usually
made a dark and turbid Urine, like Blood and Dirt mixed together. After several
attempts for Ease and Cure, he at length came to drink these Waters in July 94,
and was recommended to my Care by Dr. Waldrond of Exeter, whose Patient he had
been some time before. Being prepared by taking a Purging Nephretick Bolus, he
began with three Pints of the Water, which at length he increased by Degrees,
to Five, and after that to three Quarts. Never did Waters agree sooner, pass
easier, and better with any one, then they did with him, and continued so to
do, and brought off daily great quantities of Sabulum, and some small Stones,
rough and Scabrous, and bigger then Barly-Corns, but fryable, and might be
broken into small Gravil betwixt ones Finger and Thumb, and all this without
Pain, the Passages were so much dilated. He continued thus to do, (taking once
a Week, or thereabouts, his Nephritick Bolus) for a Month, riding out every Day
(except in ill Weather) after his Waters, which he thought promoted their
passing, and the coming off of the Gravil, and without doubt it did.

The Waters got and continued him a very good Stomach, he had not in the least
any thing like a Fit, all the while he stayed here, and that was more then a
Month. Going hence in his Coach (which perhaps shook his Kidneys more then
riding on Horseback) by that time he came to Exeter (where he designed to stay
a while with some Friends) he began to make a turbid and discolored Urine,
which was accompanied with some sharpness and Blood, upon which followed a
violent Fit of the Stone, which after much Pain, ended in the bringing off of a
larger Stone then ever he had voided before (as he writ me word from thence) it
was an Inch and half in Circumference in the biggest part, and long like a
Date-stone.

It is obvious to think that a Stone of that bigness could not have passed
those narrow parts as are the Uritors, Urethra, etc. had they not been very
much dilated, and subricated by the drinking of these Waters so lately before,
and probably had he continued here till this Stone had moved out of the
Kidneys, it might have come off easier then it did. He held so well all the
following Winter, that he was encouraged to come again the next Summer, and
drank these Waters a Week longer then he did before, scarcely intermitting a
Day, and had no Fit here, but still avoided the same Sabulous Matter, when
first he drank them; but toward the Conclusion, the quantity of Gravil abated.

OBSERVE. IV.
Mrs. Elizabeth Carne, aged 72, a Gentlewoman of an ancient Family, Sister to
Sir Hugh Speak, late of Hazelbury, in Wilisshire, within Five Miles of this
City, though she now keeps a Lodging-House near the King's- Bath in Bathe. This
Gentlewoman has been subject to Nephritick Pains, almost Fifty Years, ever
since she was Three and Twenty Years of Age, it coming to her (though, poor
Gentlewoman, nothing else did,) by Inheritance; her Father and Grandfather,
having been afflicted with the same Distemper. She from that Age, had great
Fits every now and then, and voided large and rough Stones. In a Fit she used
to take Glysters, Nephritick Juleps, and several Medicines, both from
Physicians and others. But since these Waters have been restored to their
former Reputation, in being inwardly taken, as well as outwardly used, for
Thirty Years last past, or more, every time she finds the least Pain or
Disorder, upon the Region of the Kidneys (the small of the Back) she calls for
the King's- Bath Waters, and drinks Three Pints, or two Quarts in a Morning, be
the Season of the Year, or Weather what it will, and continues them till she
has Ease, and voids Gravil or Stone, which usually are Gray, (one of the worst
Colors.) This seldom or never fails to give her Ease, by bringing off the
cause of the Pain, sometimes in a few days Drinking, sometimes longer. Whilst I
receive this account from her, she shows me a little Box, wherein were Ten or a
Dozen Stones, (some considerably big) all a darkish Gray, which she told me,
she voided this last Year, 1695.

There formerly lived a Gentlewoman in this Town, greatly Nephretick, that in a
Fit of the Stone, would go to the hottest part of the King's- Bath; she would
fit there three or four Hours, or more, and drink largely of the Waters whilst
she was there, and to this she imputed her bringing off the Stone sooner and
easier. I did not give the Advice, nor can I think the preceding justifyable,
but this she often did, and thought it to her Advantage. It was the second Wife
of Captain Henry Chapman, she is yet living, in the 80th. Year of her Age.

OBSER. V.
In the Year 75, my Lord Digby (then) and my Lady (now Earl, and Countess of
Bristol) from Sherborne in Dorset-shire, came and Lodged at my House, for the
use of the Bath, and these Waters. They brought with them an old Servant of the
Family, the Steward of the House, Mr. Smith, aged 70, horribly decrepid, not
able to use Hand nor Foot as he should, all rendered useless by Gout and Stone,
with both which painful Distempers he had been for many Years afflicted. The
Gout had knotted all his Joints, both of Toes and Fingers; the one would not
suffer him to tread to support his Body, nor the other to comply so as to hold
a Crutch. And in the mean time the Stone urged him to a perpetual desire to
make Water, and that with great sharpness and Pain, and sometimes it would be
wholly stopped for some Days together. The worthy good Lady was greatly
concerned for him, and when she returned home, committed him to my Care, to
assist him with my Advice, as I would do to her Self, were it her Case.

He drank the Waters in order to the washing off of Gravil, and easing his
Painful Pissing, despairing indeed, of any advantage in reference to his nodous
Gout. And fearing to harden those Nodes further, I was not forward to permit
him the use of the Bath, which by reason of the uselessness of his Lymbs he was
urgent for. In drinking the Waters, he daily discharged vast quantities of
Gravil, and with it some small Stones, of the bigness of Coriander Seeds, and
much mucous Matter. Having by drinking the Waters a while, got some advantage
in respect to his Urtne, he would, and did, venture upon Bathing, and finding
some lightsomness to his Limbs by the first, went on with it for a considerable
time, till at length the N des, both upon Toes, Fingers and Knees, began to
look red, and became softer then they were before, the Skin relaxing about
them, which (because I did not fully assent to his first going into the Bath)
he discloses to his Careful, and diligent Apothecary, Mr. Thomas Gibbs, and
afterward to his Country Man Mr. Dyer, a Chyrurgion, (and I think, then
Serjant of the Cross-Bath) Some of these Tumors opened of themselves, others
were laid open by an Instrument, and by this time they thought fit to make it
known to me. Amongst them they picked out the concreted Chalk by little and
little, and afterward healed up the parts, and this rendered the Joints more
pliable, so that he could set his Feet to the Ground, bend and put straight his
Knees, support his Body, handle Crutches, and at length went with a Staff only,
and continued thus for some considerable time. Whilst these things were doing
to his Joints, he continued to drink the Waters, and took Arthritick Pills, had
Cordials to support him in his Faintiness, and used gentle means (when needed)
to keep him soluble. This Encouragement brought him again to the Bath, a Year
or two after, when he improved what he at first got. How long afterward he
lived, or of what he at length dyed of, I have not had information.

OBSERVE. VI.
Mr. Edward Bushel, Senior, (one of the Aldermen of this City) now aged 70
Years and a half. About Michaelmass, in the 67th. Year of his Age, was suddenly
seized with a violent Pain on the right Side, troublesome Vomitings, and
difficulty of Urine, he made little at a time, and that with Pain, so violent,
that it put him all over into a Sweat. By Glysters and other Remedies, he had
some small respites from his Torture, but for Eleven Months together, from the
time of his first Seizure, he was scarce free a Week, from more or less Pain,
so violent sometimes, that his impatience put him upon wishing for Death.

At the end of the Eleven Months, he made Bloody Water, and his Pains
increased, all concluding this to be a large, as well as a sharp and cragged
Stone in the Right Kidney, he was persuaded to give off Riding, which till
then, he daily did, not only in his Business about his Grounds, but in hopes by
it to get some Ease, and help down what c^used the Pain, and stoppage of Urine,
for he made little at a time, sometimes but a sew drops. Upon sight of the
Bloody Urine, he took to the drinking of these Waters, and has scarcely
omitted them since, no Weather or season of the Year hinders him, but Frost or
Snow, Cold or Hot, Rain or Shine, he goes on with them, and with like Success,
in all Weathers, sometimes with, sometimes without Syrup of Marshmallows. For
they soon eased his Pain, made him piss free and clear. His usual dose is a
Quart every Morning, with a Spoonful or two of the Syrup of Althaea sometimes.

Thus doing for Nineteen Months together, he had perfect Ease and Health, at
the end of which time, upon drinking stale Beer, he had pain again for two or
three days, and once more after that upon the same irregularity, but drinking
the Waters, takes it off again quickly. Nor are these returns now so violent
as formerly, nor has he pain where it began, (on the right Kidney) but just at
making Water, on the top of his Yard. He had lately a Fit which stopped his
Water for some days, but no Blood came before or after, but at the going off,
he voided a great deal of whitish Sand, and made a thick Water like new Beer. I
have heard him often say, how miserable a Man had I been, had I lived any where
but at Bath.

OBSERVE. VII.
The following Observation has something more in it, then the former; for
besides sharpness, and Difficulty in making Water, a clammy Viscous, and Ropy
Sediments, would be in the Urine, when first made, which had a peculiar Faetid,
and ill smell, sa all have that have Ulcers in the Bladder. It was the
Minister's Wife of All Cannings in the County of Wilts, Mrs. Studely, Aged 36.

She had been for a long time, afflicted with continual urgings to make Water,
and always with Smartings, violent Pains, and pressing down toward the lower
parts. Sometimes small streaks of Blood wou^d come with the Water, but always a
heavy roapy sediment would be in the Vessel it was made in, especially if it
stood any considerable time, it would stick to the bottom of it l^ke Birdlime,
and always had a very strong Scent. Of this kind of Matter she always voided
more or less, when the Pain was greatest, then would the quantity of this
mucous Matter be greatee also; in a Nights time, she would usually void an
Ounce or more.

She came hither in August 90, and craved my Advice; after Preparation, I
ordered her the drinking of these Waters with a Balsamic Pill, by which (after
a while) she found much Ease, and some abatement of the quantity of that faetid
Matter. Upon her earnest Desire, I permitted her to Bath two or three times,
and she was not (as I feared she would have been) the worse for it, but (as she
was willing to think) better, as to a dull Pain in her Hipps, and the pressing
upon the Os Pubis.

Her Business called her home sooner then I would, or she expected, but to
supply that, I gave with her a distilled Milk-Water, with order to take that
with her Pills, instead of Bath-Water. She sent several times to have those
Pills renewed, and acknowledged her Self greatly relieved by what she had dono
here.

OBSERVE. VIII.
I do not give this following Instance (the last upon this Head) as a Cure done
by the Waters; for if the Disease had been Curable, the Patient was not, for
though a Person of great parts (as well as Quality) and considerable Learning,
yet was he of so peculiar Temper a and Humor, as not to be governed, regularly
by any Directions.

It was the Old Earl of Thomand, (I may venture to call him so now, there
having been two Earls of Thomond, since him, his Son, and his Grandson, and a
Lord Obri^n, that dyed before him, drowned when the Duke of York was in Danger,
going into Scotland.) His Lordship was decrepid in all his lower Limbs, for
which chiefly he came to the Bath, in June, 83. He was recommended to my Care,
by my very good Friend, Dr. Daniel Danvers, of Northampton. That which makes me
mention him in this place is, that (without pain, or very frequent
Solicitations to make Water, he still discharged, with all the Urine he
rendered, a great quantity of raggy, heavy quitture, (for so I judged it,) which
would presently sink to the bottom of the Ur^nal, yet had no very faeted scent
with it. For this I would have persuaded his Lordship regularly to have drank
these Waters, but he (not being easily to be prevailed with, to do any thing
so) Bathed irregularly, drank sometimes, and did nothing to purpose, though he
was here more then once.

It was then my Opinion, that his Lordship had an Ulcer in the Kidneys, but he
would not believe it at that time, but I think he was Convinced of it, before
he dyed. They that saw him opened, found it to be so, for (as I have been
informed) he had not only Stones, of some considerable bigness, in both
Kidneys, but also vast quantities of this quitture, that with them filled up
the Peluis of each. Kidney. Yet under all this, his Lordship lived to a
considerable Age, to Seventy or more.

OBSERVE. IX.
I shall conclude this Eighth (and last) Chapter, with what I promised in the
beginning of it, which is an assurance (and I hope you will take my word for
it) that not a few have been here Cured, by the regular drinking of these
Waters (and (no very chargeable, (nor troublesome) Remedies taken with them) of
long continued, inveterate, and virulent Gonorrhaeas, and of those Weaknesses
they usually leave behind them, for the Bath-Waters both Cleanse and Heal, and
strengthen the parts concerned, and (as in all other Acidities, Acrimony, and
sharpness of the Blood and Nervous juice) they correct that Corrosiveness, and
dilute that Acrimony, and consequently, alter the temper of that Matter that is
there discharged, and by its Balsamic Virtue, heals the parts that may have
been excoriated, or eroded by it.

And this Remedy (though Calculated for the Meridian of the Male Kind,) yet
will it indifferently serve for the softer Sex also; who (though they call it
by another Name) are too much liable to the same Distemper.

I dare not here give you Instances in either kind, though I have them by me;
but a word to the Wise is sufficient.

THE Conclusion.
AND now that I have given some few Instances, out of very many that might have
been produced, had it not been for fear of making this Manual of too great a
Bulk; (yet I hope these are enough to show how effectual the use of the Bath,
and the drinking these Waters, have been in the several Cases there enumerated)
after all this (I say) It seems to me as needful to add something by way of
Conclusion, as it was to prefix a Preface.

I. And in doing this, I shall again assert the Veracity of each Observation,
in the main Concerns of each Case; though in some little (and those not
considerable) Circumstances, there may possibly be some small Alterations. If
there appears to be any mistake in the time of any ones coming hither, or stay
here, I hope that will easily be excused, when it is considered, how many (in
my time) I have been concerned with.

II. And then Secondly, (though possibly it may not be in every one
particularly mentioned) I have with most (if not all) of the Patients, that
have been by Letter, recommended to my Care, by other Physicians, written back
to them (at their return at least, if not whilst they have been prosecuting
their Course, which often I have done) what they did whilst they were here;
what did, or did not succeed, according to Expectation, what interruptions
there had been, and how each Person went from hence, and what I thought fit
farther to be done for them, but so as leaving it to their farther
Consideration, and to be added to, or altered, as they saw cause, which thing I
always though at due Civility, to all of our Faculty, and a Satisfaction at
least, if not a Service, to the Patient. And to those that came without such
Recommendation (especially out of the Country, and where no Physician was near
them, or had been before concerned with them) I have sent home with them some
familiar Directions, to use such things as they could themselves prepare, or
easily procure, but no such Baskets of Physic, as have been brought down
hither, (as if none had been to be had here, nor Advice neither,) though in
thus doing, I have not perhaps been thanked by the Apothecaries that live here.

III. For (in the third place) I can safely say, I have not burdened a Patient
with unnecessary Medicines, most that come hither, being already tired with
long and tedious courses of Physic, even to the loathing of almost every thing
that comes out of an Apothycary's Shop. Nor indeed, without this Consideration,
that I could the better experiment the Efficacy of the Waters, for when
Medicines are continually thrown in with Bathing, or drinking the Waters, it
can hardly be decided to which of the two, the Success is to be ascribed.

Though (where necessity required it) I have not been wanting earnestly to
press what due Preparation, and needful Alteration, and support with Cordials,
seemed to me to require. If I have erred on either Hand, I must needs
acknowledge, that in (perhaps too much) pity to the Patients, it has been
rather, in urging too little, then wearying them with too much.

IV. The fourth thing I would advertise is (which in some of the Cases has
been already intimated, if not expressed) that it is not a trick of the Place,
(as some have called it) or a bare Consolation to a desponding Person (that
has not found a present Recovery, whilst here upon the place) to keep up his
Spirits for the present, till he is got out of Town (as has been said by
others) to tell him at going off, that he will find the Benefit of it
afterward, For several of the Forementioned instances prove the truth of it;
and I have a Signal one to add, but that I have forgotten the Gentlewomans
Name, and can by no means retreive it.

OBSERVE.
She (for an universal Weakness from Head to Foot, not able to stir any part,
but Heart whole, as they call it, and of sound Mind and Memory) was brought
hither in a Litter out of Hampshire, (or the Isle of Weight,) and stayed six
Weeks or two Months, without any sensible Alteration to the better, insomuch,
that she despaired of ever being recovered, and therefore ordered her return
home, resolving to try nothing further, this being her last refuge, and she
being sufficiently tired with Medicines before. As soon as she came home, made
her Will, took leave of all her Friends, and not only expected, but wished to
dye, being a Burden to her self. At six or seven Weeks end, instead of
declining more and more, she found some small beginnings of Sense and Motion,
in her extreme parts, which day by day increased, till she was perfectly
recovered. As in the case of Philiip Brown, Book I. Chap. VI. Observe. X. and in
the Case of Sir John Clobery, Book I. Chap. II. Observe. III. Many more such
instance, without doubt, might have been had, if the Spirit of Ingratitude, and
Carelessness, had not possessed a great many of this Nation. In our Saviors
time, of the Ten Leapers that were cleansed, there returned but one that
acknowledged it and he a Samaritane too) if but One in Ten of those Jews, that
have received an after-recovery here, and never acknowledged it, had but given
a Line or two (which was all the farthest thanks I ever expected, nay I would
have thanked them for it) to let me know the Success, this Conclusion, (for
ought I know) might have been as big as the whole Book.

V. A fifth particular that I would have observed is, that those that came
timely before their Spirits were spent, or their entrals corrupted or decayed,
and their Flesh quite wasted (yea some of those too) have been here much
relieved, if not perfectly recovered. Nay some of those, that most People that
saw them, have judged they were sent hither purposely to dye here, we have made
a shift, (and sometimes a hard one too) to send back again, that their own Bell
might ring our for them, and not ours.

VI. Another, and a sixth Duty which I think my self obliged to do, is to give
some necessary cautions to those that come hither for Cure, and those will
concern mainly these two Things; the time of their coming, the choice of their
Physician, Lodging and Bath, they are to use.

First, as for the time, that which is freest from either excess of Heat or
Gold, is certainly the fittest (generally speaking) for all Persons and
Distempers. Since my Remembrance, there was as known, a distinction at Bath,
betwixt Spring and Fall, as was in the rest of the Nation, betwixt Summer and
Winter, Company usually coming hither in April or May, (some for Aches and
Lameness in March) and going off again at the end of June, or beginning of
July, which was called the Spring, and they came again about the middle of
August, and stayed till the end of September, and part of October, and this was
called the Fall.

At the return of K. Charles II. (when all the World went to London to live)
this was altered by some famous Physicians there, who could not (or would not
spare their Patients, till the hot Weather came on, that they could take no
more Physic, and then they sent some to sweat at the Bath, and others to cool
themselves at Epsum and Tunbridge, few to the Bath, with a good Will, because
three days journey from them, more to the Wells, because within their kenn.

Second, and for the other particulars, as the Spaniard said; Ragio di Stado,
Reason of State is a very great Knave, so may every one say, that Interest, and
Self-endedness, is not very honest. Every Lodging stands in the best Air, and
nearest the best Bath, by the report of him that keeps it. The best Physician,
is he that has given advice for nothing, or at least helped him to Lodgers,
and if you ask any Apothecary, he is certainly (in his Opinion) to be
preferred, that prescribes most Physic. Therefore it would be prudent to be
directed to your Physician before you come, and not to heed what is said
against him, or for another, afterward, at least be advised by some dis
interested Person, that is upon the Place, and be directed by him, in what Air
to Lodge, and what Bath to use, and what Apothecary to employ. And indeed you
will need to be very well advised, by whom you are recommended to a Physician,
for you may think some Persons are disinterested when they are not so; for we
have had some here lately, that have not only magnifyed themselves above
others, and talked great things in Coffee Houses, and show their Drops, as a
Mountebank does his Balsame upon the Stage) but have also urged their Patients
and Acquaintance, to get them Customers, not only by magnifying their Parts,
but by disparaging the Abilities of others, which things are a disgrace to the
Faculty.

They that think to save Charges, in not giving a Physician a Fee, but depend
upon an Apothecary for Advice, as well as for Physic, will find in the end,
that his Bill for Medicines, will come to more then both would have cost him,
under the Directions of on honest Physician.

They that come and use the Bath, and drink the Waters Hand over Head (as if
the common saying) as too many do, to the disrepute of the Means; without any
Preparation or Direction, Hab Nab, let them look to themselves, we are not
accountable for them, and if they are not recovered, or (as the Case is with
many) have injury by it, it is not to be imputed to the Baths or Waters, (no
more then a Mad-man's cutting his own Throat, is to be imputed to the Knife, or
the Cutler that made it) nor ought it reasonably to be accounted derogatory to
their Virtues, though I have heard them greatly decoyed upon no other Ground
then this; how justly, let the World judge.

VII. In the Seventh place (and what I think, ought to be accounted the chief
(...) nothing of this ought to be done, without a serious address both by the
Givers, as well as the Receivers of the means to the great Physician of Soul
and Body; the tr^mendous Diety, the Fountain and Original of Life, and Light,
and Being, to whom belong the Issues of Life and Death, of Sickness and of
Health, who kills and makes alive, who brings down to the Grave, and
raises up again, who has created Medicine and Physicians, and he that is
Wife, will not abhor either, Ecclesiaslecur, 38th. To assist (in this Duty) the
Rece^ver of the means of Health, and Help, and of Recovery, a devout Bishop of
this Diocese, has piously and Charitably, provided a Direction for their
Devotions in private, by composing and giving Gratis, Forms of Prayers, and
Praises in a little Book, of which some Hundreds have been distributed (to my
Knowledge, because some by my Hand.) And for public Devotion, the Reverend
Rector of this Church (though he be obliged by the Cannon, to Wednesdays, and
Friday Mornings, and Saturdays in the Afternoon only yet) for the sake of
Strangers, he has constantly daily Prayers, Morning and Evening, and in that
Collect, where the Sick and Infirm are prayed for; he inserts a Petition, that
these Waters may be made Beneficial to all that use them. And truly they that
are able, should consider what St. Paul demands of the Corinthians. (1 Corinthians.
9. 11th.) If he sow to you Spiritual things, is it a great thing if he reap
something of your Temporals? For indeed, the Duty of this Rectory is very
great, and the certain income of it, very little.

The charitable Exhibitions of Water-Drinkers, only at Tunbridge, does not
alone maintain a Reading Minister, but has erected a Goodly Chapel also. And
for the givers of the Means, if it were seriously considered, that we are at
best) but Instruments, not Authors of Health, and that all Healing, is from the
great Physician, I am sure, that they that truly fear that great and Holy One,
will (or ought) not undertake any thing in the Administration of it, without an
Ejaculation at least, if not a serious Address to him, by Solemn Prayer. If
Hippocrates (a Heathen) in his Book de Docenti ornatu, thinks it a necessary
Preparation in a young Physician, setting himself upon Practice, to reverence
the Gods, and to give up to them. How much more should a Christian (one that
owns (or should do so) the only One, and true God) I think it his Duty to begin
with Applications to him, that can only make his Endeavors successful.

Though I know that our Profession (with a great many) lies under the Scandal
of Atheism, and that by some, an indifferency in Religion, at least, is
accounted no small ingredient, to make up an Eminent Physician; and that I was
once told by one, that thought himself above the National Profession of the
Christian Religion (for he walked with the Baptists, as he himself termed it)
when he reproved one of his own Persuasion, for making use of one of our
Profession, that was not far from a declared Atheist, he answered him, that the
less he thought of Religion, the more he might think of his Calling. In effect,
the less a Christian, the more a Physician.

For all these Discouragements, I am not ashamed to own, that I as constantly
did, and do, pray for my Patients, as for my Self, my Wife and Children (when I
had them) or as I do now for my dearest Grand Child for whom, all that know me,
know that I am sollicitous enough, if not to a Fault.) And if the Readers will
not make a mock of it, (which is likely enough to be done in this Profane Age
and Nation, where every serious thing is by some, turned to Ridicule, and most
likely to be done, by some of our own Profession.) But I charge them not to do
it, as they will answer it to the Great God that hears Prayers, and unto whom
all Flesh should come by Prayer. To be sure, they that do not pray here, will
hardly be thought fit to praise hereafter, when Love and Praises will be the
Business of a Happy Eternity; when the High and Holy God will be continually
magnifyed by Men and Angels, in all his great and Glorious Attributes,
especially in those of his Wisdom, Love* Mercy and Free Grace, and Good Will,
toward Men through Jesus, when Mockers and Scoffers shall be cast out. Whether
they Mock or not, I do not scruple to tell them, that I prayed for my Patients
in some such words as these.

PRAYER.
BE Merciful to me, O God! in Reference to my Calling and Condition of Life,
Remember not against me, the Worldly Mindedness, the By Respects, and Sinister
Ends that guided me in the Choice thereof; but thou that have brought all
Things out of Nothing, by the word of thy Power, that do bring Light out of
Darkness, and Good out of Evil; Thou that do enwrap all the little Designs
and Contrivances of the sinful Sons of Men, within thy great Providence, and
do order them to what End seems good to Thee; order it by thy Providence,
that it may be to thy Praise; Incline me more and more to the Study and
Practice thereof, enable me, more and more, to a Knowing, Conscionable, Careful
and Successful Discharge of the Duties thereof, suffer me not to undertake any
thing therein, but in thy Name, and in thy Fear; Suffer not any that come to me
for the means of Ease, or Health, or Help or of Recovery, to trust in me, or in
the Means, but to seek first to Thee, and then to the Physician; to acknowledge
Sin to be the reason of Sickness; to be truly Humbled for it, to give thee
Glory, in Confessing and Forsaking it, and then apply themselves to the use of
the Means, waiting upon thee for a Blessing, without which, miserable
Comforters, Physicians of no value are the best of us. The Lord God pardon the
Crying Sins, both of the Giver and the Receivers of the Means, and let neither
hinder thy Blessing from Descending, but prosper thou my undertakings, succeed
my Endeavors, set it upon my Heart, to use such Means, as thou will Bless and
make effectual, to the Ease, Health, Strength and perfect Recovery, of every
one that now is, or henceforth shall be concerned with me, in the use of the
Means especially. If thou otherwise determine, concerning any one or more of
them, to continue their illness to them, or take them away by it, Thy Will, not
Theirs or Mine be done; Satisfy them and me (and all their Relations) with thy
good Pleasure, and their Souls with thine Everlasting Mercies. But if thou
please to give in any thing of Ease, Health, Strength, or Recovery by my Means,
if at any time thou have so done, or shall so do, let all be acknowledged from
thy Gift, and used to thy Glory; let it be an Occasion to, nay an Obligation,
upon both the Giver and the Receivers of the Means to Bless thy Name, to live
to thy Praise, as well as speak it.

VIII. In the Eighth place, I must again tell you (as I have already done in
the Preface) that I can easily foresee that some (and those) perhaps, who
themselves have not a great Command. of that Learned Language, especially of
the true Old Roman Style, (without which, it is far better to be public in any
other Tongue) will say that this ought to have been written in Lattin. To such
I would have it said, that I writ this in English for the same Reasons, that
Hippocrates writ his Observations in Greek, the Language of his Country, that
which was most familiar to him, and in which he could best express the
Sentiments of his Mind, and wherein he could be best understood by those to
whom he designed it a Benefit.

And indeed, Languages were designed to serve things, and not things Languages.
And farther, if the Example of that great Pattern, and Patron of useful
Learning, the ever famous Mr. Boil (and many other most ingenious Enquirers
into Truth of the (Rational as well as) Royal Society, who have published great
Discoveries in this little Language, (as the Italian and French Vertuosi have
done in their Mother Tongue.) If these Precedents may plead any excuse (that
you may see that I have not outlived all my Latin) Venerabili Exemplo Erravi;
si hoc Errare est. At least, let me obtain this of those Critical Gentlemen,
that they would suspend their Censures, till they come to my Age, and then give
an Account also how they have spent their time, (as I have done mine) as much
better as they will, or can; and as much to the advantage of Posterity; in what
Language these, Remembering Marshall, and Carpere vel notae nostra, vel ede tua.

IX. Now if any one apply to himself, what I have before said, of some of our
own Faculty, that hawk for Patients; all that I can say is, that I know there
are, and have been such, and if they think themselves to be meant by me, I
cannot help it, they best know what reason there is for it. I can make no other
Apology then the Poet did, (to a Gentlemen that thought himself reflected upon,
in some of his Verses) I make my Poems, as Shooemakers do their Shoes, for
those they will best Fit.

X. Tenthly and Lastly, I know not what farther to say, unless it be to ask
Pardon of those that take it amiss, that they (or any of their Relations or
Friends) are named in these Recitals. I have industriously omitted them in
those Distempers, that carry with them any show of Scandal; and should I not
have Named some, no Enquiry could have been made of the Truth of what is
asserted, concerning them.

I can safely say, that I meant them no injury by it, but intended it an
Advantage to those (under the some, or like Distempers,) that they had not
Faith enough to spare, to believe what I had said in each Case, upon my bare
Asseveration. That it may be offensive to none, and Advantageous to some, is
the earnest desire of

Their Faithful Servant, Rob. Pierce.
Bath, March 25th. 1697.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for H. Hammond, Bookseller at Bath, and at the Devizes.
GUidot de Thermis Britannicis, in 4to:

-- 's Register of Bath in 8vo.

Prayers for the use of all Persons that comes to the Baths for Cure, etc. 12^*

Two Discourses on several Texts of Scripture, by F. G. Chaplain to the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Scarsdal, 4to.

Four Sermons Preached on special occasions, by William Gough, late Minister of
the Gospel in the County of Wilts, in 12s.

There is just now published, a large Mapp of the City of Bath, in four large
Sheets, sold in Colors, for 8 s. Plain at 6 s. by Henry Hammond, who also
Sells all other sort of Mapps, all sorts of Novels, and French Books, Plays,
Histories, Romances, Japan ink, London Ink, Inkhorns, Wax, Stamped Paper and
Parchment, Bonds, Pens where is also Sold, Tinctura Cathartica, or the Essence
of Epsom, the Scotch Pill, Daffy's Elixir. etc.


