THE CREPLES Complaint: Or, A SERMON Preached Sept. 29. 1661.

At AKLY near BVCKINGHAM, upon some sad OCCASION.

In which, among many Motives unto LOYALTY And other Religious DUTIES, is
proved, by lamentable Experience, That good things are better known when they
are not, than when they are enjoyed.

By THOMAS PHILPOT, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleetstreet, between the
two Temple Gates. 1662.

To him that reads.
WOuld I address my weak endeavors unto any one, it should be to Him who is
most worthy to wear the Diadem, and is most willing to relieve all those that
are distressed, but -- Haud equidem tali me dignor honor, such honor is too
high for my humility. Shall His Highness but be pleased to cast a favorable
eye on this poor Creple as he passes, I shall say with aged Jacob, It is
enough, for then I shall see one happy day again before I dye.

READER adieu.
Junii 27. 1662.
IMPRIMATUR,

Robertus Pory S. T. P. Reverend. in Christo Patriac Domino Domino
Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Sacella.

The CREPLES Complaint.
John 5.7. I have no man to help me.
WHen Apelles was appointed by Alexander to take the picture of the fair
Campaspe a captive Lady, he was so in love with her beauty, that his affection
mastering his fancy, when he went to work could make nothing of it. In like
manner many rare Astists intending to make a Map, as it were, of Gods
mercies, and manifest it unto the world. Did so much admire the matter, that
they forgot the form: Finding also by David's many hundred hills and multitude
of mountains so often mentioned, that there were Lands not yet discovered,
which might in time be found, did also imagine that there might be an America
of Gods mercies, or a greater part of them yet unknown which in their
Cosmography they could not yet find, and so forsook the work, all crying out,
This knowledge is too wonderful for us, we cannot attain unto it. And well
might they say so, for Gods mercies being above all his works, where should we
find or know the sum of them, unless we should seek beyond the -- Primum
Mobile, where our brains would find a Vacuum. Wherefore omitting his merciful
Providence and preordination before the Creation, let us with modesty speak of
his mercy since the Creation until now. First, the whole earth is but a
Salviary or Physic garden, in which are as many Salutary Simples as there are
several Creatures under the Sun, and as some suppose, not one more or less,
and that there may be as many Confections made out of them as should cure all
hurts, diseases or disasters incident unto them whatsoever. And as a Spider or
a Be has found out more virtue in each Vegitable than Solomon's universal
Herbal ever heard of. So there is not a Butterfly, or the least of any Flies
but has found out some Opiated quality in each flower whereby they may take
their rest and sleep all those eight months in which R. is in, and when R. is
out begin to fly about again. And has God such care for his Discecta or
despicable creatures as we suppose them, and has he not more care for us? O
let us not be of so little faith, for you shall hear what he has done for our
souls. First, no sooner was there a Serpent that caused man to break the
Ordinance of God, but there was a man ordained to break the Serpents head for
the breach thereof. Secondly, no sooner an Adam by whose disobedience came
death, but there was an Adam by whose obedience came the resurrection from the
dead. Thirdly, no sooner an Eva betraying an Adam, who caused us all to be
accursed, but there was an Ave the cause of bearing an Adam whereby again we all
are blessed. Fourthly, no sooner a garden in which Adam first offended, but
there was a garden in which to expiate the offense Christ must be apprehended.
Fifthly, as in the garden there was a green tree by which Satan's Kingdom was
enriched, so near a garden there was a dead tree by which his Kingdom was
impoverished, for so at Christ's descention the confused company all confessed,
crying -- Per lignum ditamur, per lignum evertimur. The tree by which man died
enriched our store, the tree on which Christ died has made us poor. Last of
all, as by the fruit in the womb all our teeth were set on edge; so by the
fruit of the womb that saying never shall be said again. But nearer home, the
manifestation of Gods mercies has been most eminent among us, though not
deserving the least of them. First, when this Nation was an abomination, when
our Goshen was a Golgotha, when our Canaan was an Acheldama. Secondly, when the
Roses of this Relm, White and Red, were not only blasted in the Bud, their
Stem being cut off, but Bud and Blossom, root and branch were to be rooted
up. When the house of Danchaster never so illustrious by a judicious and
ingenuous Josiah Char. II.
the joy of the Church, the incourager of the Clergy, the reviver of Religion
was almost lost, when the house of York, never more glorious than by an high
deserving and undaunted Dedan D. York.
the cherisher of Chivalry, the gallantry of the Gantlet was quite forgot.
Thirdly, when the Lily The Church.
of this Land, formerly, as rich as Solomon in all his royalty, taking her
sweet repose among the Roses, was now the Lily in the Canticles indeed among
the thorns, who with the Nitingale -- Spinis cincta canit, being compassed
about with calamity, did not dare to tune her notes but in the night, being
also in the same condition as was Abraham's Lamb in the briars ready for a
Sacrifice. Last of all, when our Israel had been twenty years vexed very sore
by Jabin and Sissera, when in this condition they cried unto God, being
destitute of all help, as this poor Creple was, who had no man to help him;
Then God in his me^cy sent a blessed Barak D. Albemarle.
, a light from heaven, as the word will bear it, to give light again unto our
Goshen, where for want of it the people sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. He also in his mercy sent a discreet Deborah Madam Jane Lane.
, an industrious Be as St. Jerome will have her, to bring sweet honey again
into our Cannan, where before there was nothing but Gall and Vinegar to drink.
And now as this poor Creple had no help but what came from heaven, so but for
these helpers each of us might still have lain languishing, and cried, I have
no man to help me. In the three following points, observe, 1. Who this Creple
was, an individuum vagum, a diseased man. 2. How cured, by Christ, all other
Physicians having for saken him. 3. Why no sooner cured? Because he had no man
to help him.


Diseases as they are diverse, so are they dangerous, especially those that are
diurnal or diuturnal. First, diurnal, such as Hectick-Fevers, who keeping daily
their constant course, and usual hours, and as they are (...), or at an hour.
So sometime they happen in an hour and are not helped in a year. Secondly,
diuturnal, such as Sciaticaes, who like wantons, feed upon Jellies got betwixt
the joints, and will not willingly change their diet, not easily be ejected;
for so the Poet -- Sero medicina paratur -- Cum mala per longas convaluere
moras, though that is not lost which comes at last, yet that is lost which
comes too late. Hipocrates does second the Poet, saying -- Morbi s^nescentes
medendi sunt difficiles -- Diseases durable, are hardly curable. In all which
diseases, as the Crisis, so the Cresis is to be considered; which Crisis is not
the day when one does feel himself sick, but when he does -- Succumbere morbo,
find that he is sick, by reason that the disease had gotten the dominion over
him. Secondly, the Crisis is not when -- Consuetudi tollit sensum, when custom
takes away the sense of feeling of what is suffered, but when custom being a
second nature -- Expellas furca licet, will not easily be repulsed, as may
appear by this poor man who had been diseased eight and thirty years, and could
not be cured but by a miracle. And now as these habitual diseases are in
distempered bodies, so are they also in disaffected dispositions, especially in
such claudicants or lame Lourdans, who when they are most diseased, have least
care to be cured. First, such are -- Claudicantes in officio, lame in their
duties, or in their offices; and although I intend not to meddle with Officers
either in Court or Country, yet I hope it will be no ill office to tell them
what Officers there are. There are first Ostiarii, such door-keepers as David
desired to be one, which was, to be a doot-keeper in the house of God, and he
had good reason for to desire it, for then he should be more sure to be Porter
of Heaven-gate, than St. Peter; for, -- Domus Dei est Porta Coeli: The house of
God is the gate of Heaven. Secondly, Ostiaerii, not that their doors are brass,
but that the Door-keepers do desire -- Aes alienum numerare, to have some of
the money at the door to be their own, and if not, should Christ himself stand
at the door and knock, the Door-keepers will have ears, but will not hear;
hands, but not as much as heave up a latch, unless they may handle what they
would have. Thirdly, there are -- Pseudothyra, back-doors, with this
inscription -- Postico fall clientem, if thou see nothing coming to thee at
the fore-door, get thee out at the backdoor, and let thy Client knock till he
be weary. Fourthly, Feodothyra such doors as Aeneas could not have opened unto
him until he had given Cerberus a sop, but such door-keepers should be wary in
receiving such sops, knowing who it was, that entered into Iscariot so soon as
the sop was received. Fifthly, -- Bifores valva -- Two-leafed doors which are
said to move -- Argenti limine -- hanging on silver hooks, shutting also, and
opening on silver thresholds; such doors hang heavy on the hinges, and if they
be not well oyled, the Door-keepers will out of their affected ignorance
mistake the meaning of their honest Masters, for when this is their rule --

Porta patens esto, nulli clauderis honesto. Let your door be open to all
Petitioners, especially to honest men. The Door-keepers mistaking the comma or
point, make also a contrary construction, and write it thus -- Porta patens
esto nulli, clauderis henesto. Let not your door be opened unto any Petitioner
-- Salvo feodo, especially to an honest man. So that the feeling of a Pulse may
be as proper to a Porter as to a Physician. There are other -- Claudicants
which are not Officers, and yet are lame in their offices and duties in a
higher degree, and that is in coming to Church to serve God; and such are they
who cannot keep the Sabbath without breaking of the Sabbath, for when on that
day our servants and our cattle should rest from all servile labor as well as
our selves, and when the seventh day is a feast as well as a rest, yet on that
day they must fast and not rest, and all to ease the lamenesse, or rather
laziness of those who when they come to Church -- Spectatum veniunt, veniunt
spectentur ut ipsae. Come neither to hear nor to learn, but to see and to be
seen. And what shall we see, Reeds shaking and waving with every wind? Or what
shall we see, Males and Females, -- In mollicie carnis, clothed in soft
raiment? But what shall we see, a company of Jacobs party-colored Kids or
spotted Lambs? Yea, we shall see many of your fine Rufilli, who but for their
-- Pastilli and powders would be Gorgonii. The Poet does speak it plainer --
Pastillos Rufillus olet Gorgonius hireum. -- That is, as all the ill-sented
skins of those Kids which Jacob had upon his hands and the smooth of his neck
would have been offensive to his father, but for the cloths of his brother,
whose smell was as the sweet smell of a field which the Lord had blessed. So
all their -- Essences as they term them, and other effeminate Odors would be
so offensive unto God that he would not endure them, were it not for the Odours
and Orisons of holy men, and for those Prayers and sweet perfumes of their
Aarons who are fain to stand betwixt the Porch and the Altar, and cry -- Quis
teneros oculus mihi facinat agnos -- O ye foolish Galateaes, I would say
Galathians who has bewitched you. Now were this wantonness in the weaker Sex
alone, their weakness might be born with, but when men shall be -- Ut faemina
compti, of the same complexion, and in the same condition -- Spectatum admissi
risum tineatis amici. Could you refrain laughing? Yes, but not weeping, for
should Democratus himself come into some of our Churches, he would also change
his countenance, and turn his smiling into mourning. Thus we may see their
lamenesse in coming to the Church, and careless carriage in the Church. Which
-- (...), or lasie gout, the Physicians will tell you that it comes from
Bacchus or Venus, or from both, which being both hinderers of devotion, they
that are devoted unto them, cannot, as is said, keep the Sabbath without
breaking of the Sabbath; When others, peradventure, not so great sinners as
they, although the Tower of Saloe has fallen on some of them, would be glad
that not for pettilasonies, but petty lapses they might have no harder penance
imposed on them than to go on foot, yea barefoot as far unto their Parish
Churches, though they were as far distant as from White Hall to White-Chappel;
For they for any offense concerning the Law of their God so that they may be
freed from the fiery trial, shall be enjoined a Pilgrimage to travel as far as
from Dover to Saint David's, it being one of the directest Diamiters of our
Land, and above three hundred miles distant; Nay, sometime they must petition
their Confessors, that though they do dwell as far as the Orcades from St.
David's, that they may go in their Pilgrimage twice from thence to St. David's,
that they may thereby save their going once to Rome. For this is their Rule

Roma semel quantum bis dat Menevea tantum. and that we may learn obedience of
them, and yet not be partakers of their Sacrifices, or of their sufferings; you
in plainer terms may understand how their sufferings are qualified --

What Pilgrim to Saint David's twice does come,
Does save his penance going once to Rome.
There are another sort of Claudicants or haulters in devotion crept into the
Country, who scorning to go upon Crutches, or our Common Prayers, as they
term them; are diverse times in such pain in producing their -- Perissologies
or homespun kind of praying, that their faces are disfigured, as the Pharisees
are with fasting, being also in the same condition as the philosopher was, who
having a Xanctippe to his wife, said, -- Non possum cum te vivere nee sine te,
I cannot well live with thee nor without thee. So these Battologists cannot be
persuaded to pray in that form which they are taught, and yet know not well
how to pray without it; who presuming also on that saying of our Savior --
Dabitur in illa hora, it shall be given to you in that hour what you shall
speak, do not care for an hour together what they do speak when they pray, as
appears by their speaking; But had they that love unto Christ or to his
Church as they do pretend, they would be glad to creep unto him with those
Crutches, when well without them they could not go. Now as there is a
Claudicancy or lameness in Officio, or in duty, both in slow coming to the
Church, and slender serving of God in the Church. So our Sacrifices (which
should be without blemish, since they are to be offered in the Church) are
diverse times lame and defective, both in the matter and in the form. First, if
our sacrifice be of meal, it being the material of many Levitical Sacrifices,
it must be of the finest of the meal, it must not be Farrago, or course flower,
but -- Cribro decussa farina -- well sifted, well searched, and the purest, for
such Abraham provided for the three Angels which came unto him. Next, there
must be no messeline, maslin or mixture in it. -- Mixo barbari -- were
Mungrils, and not thought fit to be Priests or Sacrificers, neither among the
Grecians nor Barbarians, nor are such -- Hibrida sacrificia, partly
Enthusiastical, partly phantasmatical, without premeditation or preparation;
proper Sacrifices or Oblations to be offered unless on some -- (...), or
Heathen Altar, but not on any -- (...), or Altar of God. Therefore if our
Sacrifice be of meal (as is said) Moses must make it ready for the Mill, and
St. Paul must grind the grain when it is made ready, for so they agree.

Grana molenda gerit Moses Legem tribuendo,
Paulus grana terit vim legis discutiendo.
The meal must be ground neither too high nor too low, too great nor too small,
for so advantge may be made, and men may take more than is their due, and go
beyond their allowance -- Mediocria sirma, -- Moderation must buswife it, and
discretion must order it, and take away all the Bran out of it, -- En chema en
thora, says the Rabbi, -- If bran be in the meal, it will be as bad as
corruption in the Law, or Colloquintida in the Pottage; and we may cry -- Mors
in olla, There is Death in the Pot, there is Sin in our Sacrifice. So then,
whether our Sacrifices are (...), or (...), preparation for the Sacrifice, or
the Sacrifices themselves, there must be no mixture, unless it be of Piety with
Purity, and so they will be -- Libamina, acceptable Sacrifices unto the Lord.
Secondly, If the Sacrifice be of flesh, it must not be of all flesh, especially
of man's flesh, for Mummy is an abomination, as I shall tell you anon; nor of
fish, and yet we read of no curse they had to hinder it; nor of birds, unless
of Turtels or young Pigeons; nor of beasts, unless of such as chaw the Cud, and
that was the reason that seven pair of such were preserved in the Ark, when but
one pair of all the rest; nor of those clean beasts at all times, all the
flesh, but the best and fattest of the flesh, that as Moses says, Le. 3.1^.
it may be a sweet savor unto the Lord; and this Rule was among the religious,
-- Sacrum pingue dabo: non macrum Sacrificabo, I will make no feast unto my
God, but what shall be of the fattest and the fairest that I have. And from
this word -- Maza, or fat, all feasts formerly had their names, as Lammaze-day,
Candlemaze-day, and the like; not that they came from the word -- Missa or
Mass, or dismission of the -- Catechumeni, such as were not fit to be
communicants; nor from the Hebrew word -- Massah, a morning Sacrifice, which
were more proper; but from -- Maza -- as is said, for Lammaze-day was a feast
of fat Lambs, dedicated to Luperca, that she might preserve their flocks from
the Wolf, long before the Mass was ever dreamed of; and now because those
Lupercalia, Carmentalia, Paganalia, and the rest of them were Jubilees and
feasts of joy, and because on such days the fattest of their flocks they
though the fittest for their feasts, therefore Christmaze-day and
Michaelmaze-day deserving such feasts, the one for Christ's Nativity, the other
for Michael his Victory, have their names from those feasts, as Easter still
retains its name from the Saxan goddess Eoster, who had her feast before the
Resurrection. There is one thing more to be observed in the matter of these
Sacrifices, they must be Holocausta, -- Victimae integrae aris impositae,
perfect, without any imperfection, if but one limb be lacking, it will be a
lame oblation; and if all the Sacrifices fatted on Hermon, should fall or be
slain on Zion, (or else how could the dew of Hermon, being a low hill, fall
upon Zion which was an high hill? Psalm. 133.
) I say, that if of an hundred Hecatombs but one hoof shall be wanting, they
will all of them be but lame Sacrifices; and therefore Moses told Pharaoh, that
of all their Cattle they must not leave one hoof behind, for thereof must they
Sacrifice unto their God. Now as our Sacrifices may be lame in respect of the
matter, so in the manner; and although Ceremonies (by many) are supposed to be
superstitious, yet Selemo Jarchi says that they are -- Segil -- or hedges
invironing the Vineyard; and Solomon says, If thou take away the hedge, the
Serpent will bite thee. So then, Ceremonies not intrenching upon the
Prerogative of Substance, may be requisite in our Sacrifices, especially such
as shall have any relation to obedience; and if Obedience be better than
Sacrifice, as Samuel told Saul, then Sacrifice of necessity must be bettered by
obedience; and this is showed by bowing the body, and bending the knee, both
being proper postures for expiating Sacrifices, and where this obedience is not
performed, there is the (...), or gout in the knee, or a dead Palsy totally
dispersed through an ill disposed body. When Carmenta had not yet invented
letters, from whom comes Carmen, or a Verse, and when she knew not where to
write them, but- in libris -- the barks of trees, from whence comes -- Liber
-- a Book, the ingenuous Egyptians did find a way by Hierogliphicks or
Pictures, to express their minds in writing the one to the other, viz. a
violent man by a Lion Rampant, a vinolent or swilling man by a Swine dormant, a
lascivious man by a Goat Saliant, a meek man by a Lamb Couchant, and the like.
Among which we find two proper for our present occasion. First, Abel and
Delborah kneeling at their Sacrifice on both knees, signifying Gods acceptance
or approbation. Secondly, Cain and his sister Calmana kneeling at their
Sacrifice, but on one knee, intimating rejection and reprobation. If God then
was so displeased that there was a knee, and not a knee, or but one knee, when
two were too little; how will he be offended when at our Sacrifices we cannot
afford him one knee, but sit as though we were sacrificing the Sacrifice of
fools, and what is fit for the back of fools, Prove. 26.3.
you may soon find. When the wise men came with their oblations to Christ the
King of the Jews, as they supposed only, (...) says Arius Montanus,
Prostrantes, Procidentes, as St. Jerome and Erasmus, and the Genevaists
themselves say, fell down and worshipped; The Original goes farther, (if it be
the Original, as Munster affirms it to be) using the Hebrew word Harets, They
prostrated themselves to the Earth, and worshipped. What shall wise men think
of those that at their Sacrifices and Oblations sit or stand, and neither bow
nor bend at all unto the King of the heavenly Jerusalem. This King himself when
he was to sacrifice his soul for our sins, though he could neither bow his
body, nor bend his knee, being both bound too fast to the Cross, yet at the
offering of it up he bowed as much as he could bow, for he bowed his head, and
gave up the ghost; and this may be sufficient to teach wise men both what
belongs to humility and civility in all our Sacrifices whatsoever. There are
yet another kind of Claudicants who are lame in their Benevolences, tributes,
or rather retributions, in which they should not be, if they were as they
should be. First, Because St. Paul says, That we have nothing but what we have
received, and therefore on reasonable conditions may more willingly part from
it. Secondly, Because Tully tells us that -- Non nobis solum nati sumus, we
are not born for our selves alone, and so goes on, -- Partem Patria, our
Country will expect a part, which part is Constancy in our Contrymen, who
when they travel with the Prodigal into strange Countries, they should read the
learned work of a reverend Divine, called -- Quo vadis, that they may know
whither they do go, before they go, and be careful in the first place they do
not change their Religion, unless it be such a one as some of our new ones are,
and then they need not fear, for no man will change with them. Next, they must
be so far from Arminianism, that as judicious Zancheus says, they must be
neither Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinist, but Christians; and that they may so
still continue, they must not read Mariana the Scot, who will have Kings to be
deposed, if they be not of his pestilent opinions; nor must they meddle with
Molanus, who will have no faith with Heriticks, and yet they that are the
chiefest Heriticks, must be judges of the Herisies. And if a Prince shall
dislike that which they have a liking unto, nor Loyalty, nor Allegiance shall
oblige them to do any thing but what they list, who will also so limit His
Prerogative, that rather than He shall be in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, Supreme Head and Governor, they will take off his HEAD. And this is
the Practice of Piety which of late has been brought over into our Country,
either by such Tutors, or by their Disciples, for want of Constancy at their
return; Insomuch that many men knowing what we have been formerly, and seeing
what we are now, do admire to see our unconstancy: Gregory the Great looking on
some of our English features which were taken captive, said -- Angli quasi
Angeli, The English are as Angels; but now our Neighbor Countrymen looking
into our nature, say, Angle terre bonne terre mauvais gens, England is a good
Nursery, but the Nation is ill Nurtured. Nay, so unconstant are we, or rather
careless, that we have forgot our own Mother Tongue, for our ancient Language
which was -- Lingua monosyllabica, a Language of one syllable, may now be
termed -- (...), or a confusion of Languages, where by putting new pieces of
cloth into an old vesture, thinking to make it better, make it worse. For,
English of it self without mixture, is not inferior to any Language that
seems to be of a higher nature. First, The Hebrew, Siriak, Calde, Arabek,
Indian, Egyptick, Saracen, and all the Oriental Languages, which may be so
termed, as well because their letters look Eastward, as that they are Languages
of the East, have all dependence one upon the other, and have been corrupted,
as appears by that Hebrew which was before Esdras, and that which was after
him. Secondly, the Illirick, Greek, French, Spanish, Roman, Italian, and all
the Occidental Tongues so termed as well because their Letters look unto the
West as that they are Western Languages. I say, when in all these Languages
there are so many -- Sesquipedalia verba, or words of so many sillables, that
some of them will make an Hexamiter or long verse. Yet our true English
consisting but of one syllable for the most part (as the Hebrew Radixes do of
three letters) is so significant, that it may well be termed our Mother tongue,
because in one syllable you may find not only the names of an innumerable
company of creatures both by sea and land, but their natures also, as hot,
cold, moist, dry, and all parts belonging to them, and to our own bodies, as a
heart to sigh and groan for want of grace; a hand at hand to help a friend,
and give his bread unto the poor, who pine and die for want of it; an eye to
weep and send forth tears for time ill spent, when all the time we have to live
may not be long enough to repent for the ill spending of it, as has been said

Fleres si scires totum tua tempora mensem
Rides cum non sit for sitan una dies.
The men of Ninive hearing that forty days should end their days, made a
Quadragessima or Fast of those forty days; not having one day of feasting in
it, unless it were -- Festum cineris, a feast of ashes, considering how soon
to ashes they might be turned, But we with those in the days of Noa, eat,
drink, marry, and are merry, cast away all sorrow, and yet with Jerusalem, do
not know whether the day of our Visitation may not be before to morrow. Now as
our English are careless in keeping their Language from corruption, so the true
Brittans are as careful to keep theirs from being corrupted; and though the
Dialect may differ, yet the Idiom is still the same, and not as much as an iota
altered since first it was spoken, as appears by an ancient Manuscript, being
one of David's Psalms written in Welsh, and so long since, that we need not
inquire for any other Original, it being as likely to be penned by David, and
writ with his own hand, as any Psalm made by Moses, Assaph, or any other; some
of the words I have set down, and how they do agree with the writings of these
times, any ingenuous Native shall be the Judge. Trugarog, a glas-lawn yw'r
Arglwydd hwyrfrydic i lid a mawr o drugarogrwydd. The Lord is full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. Thus we may see, that how
careful soever others are, yet we are careless of all such thin^s as do concern
us, and all for want of constancy. And so we come to Courage, which is the
second thing that is required, which must be performed as often as any lawful
cause is offered; concerning which Courage, though every man cannot be a --
Mucius Scevola -- to fly into the fire to save his Country from the flame, yet
he must not be a -- Mecius Cephesies, to sit still and be of no side, when
there is occasion of sideing: And if a man be a Mephiboseth, and not fit to
fight, then he must with Nicodemus, come by night and show his love unto his
Lord with such accommodation as may be consonant to his condition. First, when
flags of defiance are set up at Sea, when fire and water do strive which of
them shall out-rore each other, we must not like cowards, creep into our
Cabins, or get within the gable; but with Saint Paul's follow-passengers, every
man must be doing something, that all may not be undone. Secondly, when bullets
are flying in the field, we must not with the Ephraemites, turn our backs, and
run away so fast, that we shall out-fly the bullets; but observe the word of
Command given to the Ephesians, -- (...), Stand, as a Statue, though the storm
be never so tempestuous. And now as our Country has expected her part, so
Tully has appointed the next part for our Parents, to whom we must not with
the Hypocrites, cry, -- Corban, preferring a feigned Sacrifice before a filial
Obedience; but with the Stork, -- (...), who when their Dams are aged, and not
able to help themselves, do nourish them as they were nourished by them when
they were young. But if we will not learn of birds, we may learn of men,
Anchises when he was left in the Trojan flames, his son Aeneas did not fear the
fire, but ran into it, bearing his father on his back, and bringing him out of
it, having more smell of the fire about him than the three children had when
they came out of the fiery furnace: We read also of a daughter, who when her
father was to be starved in prison, did feed him so long with her breast-milk
unknown to his enemies, that her piety at last being perceived, the daughter
was praised, and the father pardoned. But many of us are so far from this
piety, that we are like those Hippopotami, or savage creatures who are the
death of their Sire for the insatiable desire they have of their Dam; or like
Aristotle's Spiders, or Saint John Baptists Vipers, who enjoy their life by the
death of their genitors; or else why has it been said as it is said in St.
Matthew -- Filius ante diens parrios inquirit in annos, Mat. 21.
the children shall rise up against their Parents, and cause them to die. The
last part that is expected of us is from our friends, where although every man
cannot be a Damon and Pythius, a Pilades and Orestes, a Jonathan and a David.
Yet he must be -- alter idem -- and ad aras, both as one and one unto the end
-- Unas bodas, in Spanish signifies a married couple, or a wedding. And though
friends have not one body as man and wife have or should have, Joh. 2.1.
yet they should have but one soul sympathising both in their sorrows, joys and
sufferings. There were in the memory of a man two -- Didymi or twins, who as it
should seem, had but one soul betwixt them, for the firstborn was lively,
cheerful, and fell to the ter, the other lay like a child still-born, having so
much heat only that there was hope of life; and in those conditions they both
continued about six hours, but when the soul had acted its part with the
firstborn, she began to enter into the other, and then the firstborn began to
droop, and the later grew as lively as the former did before, and so continued
in their vicessitudes and strange intercourses six days together, keeping life
and death betwixt them; at last the soul being weary and tired as it were, with
so many transmigrations, departed from them, laving them both dead in that
order as she gave them life. Such a soul should be betwixt two friends, the one
willing to leave his joy, that the other might not grieve; the other to lose
his life, that the other might live -- Nam sic Eurioli Perithoique fides, such
formerly was the love of friends, and such should be their love unto the end.
But the love of friends in these our days is not unto the end, but for ends.
-- (...), who has a friend, has a treasure, says Periander; but he might as
well have said, he that has a treasure, has a friend, for so says Job,
wealth makes many fri nds, but poverty seperateth a man's neighbors from him.
-- Meander secondeth both Job and Periander -- (...). -- He that has a table,
has a friend, but he that has no table, has no friend, and so says Ben
Sirach, Ecclus. 6.10.
There is a friend at thy table, but he will not continue in the time of
affliction. The birds would never have come unto Abraham's bare Altar, but when
the Sacrifice was on, he could hardly beat them off: Where the bodies are,
says our Savior, the Eagles will resort. Which words, as they have admitted
sundry contrary constructions, some of them aluding to what has been said, so
it may admit this one construction more, that is, where bodies are subject unto
sin, especially unto that silly sin of self-love, there the flatterers love to
flock together. Who, as Carrain Crows, pick out the eyes of rotten sheep while
they are yet alive; so the flatterers pick out the eyes of those that love to
be flattered, insomuch that they have not sense to see how much they suffer in
being so abused, and as in the Epigram -- (...) -- the Crow and the Flatterer
in Greek, as they differ but in a letter, Corax a Crow, Colax a Flatterer, so
they differ not much in the matter, both by nature being devourers, the one
when a man is dead, the other while he is alive. First, such flattering friends
had Alexander, who being fortunate in all his fights, was persuaded by his
Sichophants that he was a God, and begot by the God Amos, and not of Philip
King of Macedon; but being afterward wounded in a battle, cried out -- Hiccine
sanguis -- do the gods use to bleed such blood as this? and upon his recovery
did banish all flatterers out of his Court, as Urbanus Octavus did all Jesuits
out of Rome. Secondly, such flatterers Ahab and Jehosapha: had, persuading them
to go up to Ramoth Gilead, promising prosperity, but Ahab being wounded, found
that all the balm in Gilead could not help him. Thirdly, such a friend had
Faustus, if any faith may be given to his History, whose name was
Mephaustophilus, who made him do more miracles than all Pharaoh his Magicians
could do, but withal did cheat him by a Bill of exchange, which was much after
this manner -- (...) -- giving him Brass for Gold, or making him enjoy the
pleasures of this World for a season, and then seized on his Soul: But had
Faustus looked into the nature of the name of his flattering Familiar, he would
have found that -- (...) -- Mephaustophilus had been no friend to Faustus, no
more than many are, who are Favorites unto many: That friend then that must
have such a part as Tully speaks of, must be such a one who by his Council
may cure all our claudicant and lame diseases. First, Of our Podagra, or
Lameness in coming to serve God. Secondly, Of our Genogra, or Slovenly
Behavior in our Sacrifices, or serving God, considering also that the want of
the wedding garment in the Gospel may be want of this our sivility. Thirdly, to
cure us of our Chiragra or lamenesse in our hands where by we cannot
suppeditate or help those that support us, to whom we should be in our
benevolences Rhetoricians with open hands, as Gods hands are open unto us, and
nor Logicians, with such clutcht fists and withered hands that -- Citius fust
um ex manu Herculis -- men should sooner wrest a clubbe out of the hand of
Hereules, than any benevolences out of our hands that should come either to God
or his Vicegerents. We read of a malevolent company of hide-bound members, who
prescribing abstinence to the appetite, and debarring the belly of its due,
within a small time -- Paller in ore sedit macies, in corpore toto -- their
froward faces grew formidable, and each member grew macilent and lean,
insomuch that they all looked like Pharaoh his lean kine, as all malicious men
will do that pine away with repining at other men's prosperity. Of which Envy
thus

(...)
(...)
Envy, though the most hatefulest sin of all the seven deadly ones, yet she
has one good quality in her -- Suppliciumque suum est -- she hurts none but
her self; And in such condition are all those who are costive in their
contributions and benevolences, especially to those that are their best
Benefactors. For on strict examination we shall find that a subject has
nothing that he can properly call his own, but what he has from his Sovereign.
First, it is true, that our Lordships do descend from our ancestors, but who
does defend them? does not the ancient Law? and who does defend the Law? does
not the King? Yes, nor does he only defend the Law, our Liberties, our life,
but our Religion also, for He is the Defender of our Faith. Secondly, it is
true, that we have our lives from our natural fathers and mothers, but what is
nature without a Nurse? Kings and Queens are our nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers: Isa. 49.23.
and Moses his life was not preserved by his mother as she was his mother, but
as she was the Nurse whom Pharaoh's daughter had provided for him. There was a
question among the Moralists, Whether Alexander was more beholding to
Aristotle, who was his Tutor to instruct him, or to Philip his father that did
beget him? It was held Affirmative on the Tutors side. And thence it will
follow, That we are more beholding to Him by whom our Estates are defended,
than to them from whom they are descended. Such a Protector of our Estates,
such an -- Omen, or Foster-Father, as the Hebrew terms Him, have we, who is a
Nourisher and Cherisher even of His Churlish Children, and well may He be
termed an -- Omen, who was Destined and Ordained for our Deliverance, when we
were left as Perdues in Despair; from whom also we have received so many
favors, and by Him do daily enjoy, by Gods great mercy, so many blessings,
that we may justly say, -- O fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint --
Angligines. -- Our Lot is fallen in a fair ground; yea, our Fortunes, by the
fruition of Him, are too fair, unless we had -- some of us -- more grace to
consider it. Had we an Abimelech, an Usurping Bramble, who would Bathe and
Imbrue his hands in the blood of his Brethren, or one, of whom it might be
said, -- Omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retorsum -- Conspicimus. -- We see
all Goods come to thee, but no Good come from thee. Than to have said, Nolumus
hunc Regnare, This Man shall not Reign over us, had been a Noble Resolution:
Then to have inquired whether the PVBLICK-FAITH had any Executor or
Administrator, who should secure those Sums which a man should lend, had been
in earnest (as one asked in jest) a discreet question: Then with old Piso, to
have said, -- Parcatur sumptui? -- To what end is this waste? had been worth
the asking: Then with the ill Neighbor in the Proverbs, to have said, -- Non
sum, non possum, non libet, esse domi. -- I cannot lend to day, come again to
morrow, the Answer might have been tolerated; and if the morrow had been less
apt to lend than the day, that day had been the better. But when there was a
Man sent from God, yea, and by an admired Miracle; when a Cato -- Nuper de
Coelo. -- Newly, as it were, come down from Heaven: when we had a King that
sought not our Lives and Estates, but our Good; yea, and more than His own,
What good man should think any thing too good for Him? The Jews, questioning
with Christ whether they should give Tribute to Caesar or not, yet when they
saw Caesar's Image and Superscription, which was, -- Augustus augusto Deo:
Augustus gives himself to God; the very sight of the Tribute-money made them
silent, and silence gave consent that they should give Tribute unto Augustus,
and yet there was never such a Tax as at that time: But we not only do daily
see the Image of Caesar, but Caesar Himself, and in that Caesar, the Image of
God; yea, and more visibly in Him, than in any other Man, by reason of his
Vicegerency; who also is as much dedicated to God, as Augustus Caesar could be;
and yet many of us, not only make a question whether we should give Tribute
unto Him or not, but are ready with those foolish Israelites, to give away out
earrings, and other silverlings, to set up again some golden Calf. But if they
had ever heard of -- Ibice grues, or Solomon's birds in Ecclesiastes, the one by
revenging the murder of Ibis, the other by revealing the very thoughts of any
Conspiracies against a King, there would not be so many Achitophels, or
brethren without grace and wisdom, as their names do signify, who with Ahab
taking counsel of more than four hundred false Prophets, make Israel to sin,
and if not in contriving, yet by consenting, and if not in consenting, yet in
conniving, and not preventing all such Plots as should be pre^udicial to His
Person, or His Prerogative. Pilate did not only wash his hands, as being
innocent of Christ's blood, although he was a stranger unto him, but used all
the means he might possible to prevent it, he knowing, that they who were not
with Jehu, were with Jezebel; and what judgments God sent upon Jezebels
juggling, in sending forged Letters up and down to have her bloody designs take
effect, the portion of Jezreel will inform you, where the very Dogs did scorn
to touch those hands of her, that had so great a hand in innocent Naboths
blood. But for all this -- Ambubaiarum Collegia: Cotton and his College, Liola
and his Disloyalists, Parnel and his Partners in New Englands Conclave, do
daily cry -- Nolumus Carolum, volumus Olivarum, We will have no Barsabas, no
Barjonas, Not Him, but Barrabas; and if this were not the language of the
Legion, for they are many, why should so many -- Epicuri de grege porci, who
for want of ringing, lie rooting and digging, as it were, at that dismal
dormitary of them that deserved it, and cry with the Malevolent old man --
Antigonum fodeo, I would have Monarchies Antagonist govern us again; which if
it were not so, why should so many men of fair fortunes, daily foment new
Factions to make themselves unfortunate? They that are skilled in the
Geomanticks and Pyromanticks, can tell you that there are strange spirits in
them both, Viz. Vasago in the one, and Viago in the other. First, In Vasago
there is -- Vas -- the vessel of wrath, the head hatching mischief by counsel
at home. Secondly, In -- Viago there is -- Vis, force of Arms, acting violence
by the hand abroad; and in what particular places they have been acted, God
grant they never may be acted again; and that we may -- Parcere personis, and
dicere de vitus -- not speak of the offenders, but of their offenses, this we
may safely say, That they have been bountiful in their Benevolences, but -- Cui
bono, or to what good end we cannot say: for what ^id the Givers gain by all
their great Sums: not a freedom with the Centurion, but a thraldom; not their
liberty, but a slavery; and this was, because they did not pay their Tributes
unto CAESAR, but unto those that were not CAESAR'S friends. And now what did
they purchase by those large loanes, but a long LENT, and not of six-weeks, but
of more than six years? For as Lent was wont to be known by lean cheeks, pale
faces, and poor clothes; so in their streets some did appear like. Anatomies,
or walking graves, others as walking to their graves, a third sort as newly
risen from their graves, multitudes of men, women and children, walking half
famished in the fields, all representing the Millinary's first resurrection,
only still retaining a few rags. The consideration of which calamities, should
make men understand the meaning of the Moralist in that of -- Magis carendo,
quam fruendo; that is, Good things are never known while they are enjoyed, and
good men best looked on when their places are void. Aristides some say was
banished from Athens because he was -- Virtutis verae custos regidusque
satelles, so just, that men thought themselves injured by his equity; but when
Justice was banished with him, then Aristides was a good man -- (...), says
the Kiliadist, a Brewes never tastes so well, as when a man has nothing but
dry bread; and Darius never knew the taste of good drink, but when he drank
stinking water out of a dirty ditch; nor did Israel ever know the comfort in
having a King, but when there was no King in Israel; for when there was no King
in Israel, and every man did what he listed, see what they did; Will was then
reason, and yet there was no reason in their will, as appeared in that High
Court of Justice, or rather horrid Inquisition of Cruelty, in which when a King
asking whether there was any Court in which Reason might not be heard, answer
was made Him by one of the Three Knights of the Road, who lies buried by the
highway, This is that Court in which Reason shall not be heard. Secondly, When
there was no King in Israel, -- Dat veniam corvis vexat sensura Columbas --
Carrian Crows were preserved, and innocent Doves destroyed. Thirdly, When no
King -- Vivitur ex rapto -- Harpies were the only Hawks, and no less than
Princes were the Partridges. Fourthly, When no King in Israel, -- Non hospes ab
hospite tutus, the brother did betray the brother to death; the Land was full
of Fratricides, Patricides, and Regicides -- Astrea running -- Erinnis
reigning, Virtue vanishing, iniquity abounding, and the love of many thereby
growing so cold, that it was impossible -- Quin laniant mundum tanta est
discordia fratrum -- but for the Elects sake, that any flesh should be saved:
But for the Elects sake those dangerous days were shortened; and as the days
of the year do begin to lengthen at the Feast of St. Lucy, so when our Light,
our Phoebus, our Apollo began to appear, our Halcion days began to lengthen;
nor as the days lengthened, was the cold strengthened, but -- Diffugere nives
-- the hoary frosts of frozen Charity began to fly; -- Rediunt jam gramina
campis -- the store of Corn, Oil and Wine again increased, which made us all
have cheerful countenances, because our hearts were glad. For now our Sun has
passed through all the surly signs of the Zodiac, and beginning with his
Declining, He has escaped Libra, who being weighed in the -- Prudential
Balance, was found neither too light in His Religion nor Conversation.
Secondly, The Scorpion, whose venomous Tail, if it had but touched Him, He had
died for it. Thirdly, The Sagitary, who bend their bow, and shoot their Arrows
at Him that is true of heart, even bitter words. Fourthly, The Capricorn, who
with his Horn pushed against the Host of Heaven, but in his greatest strength
his Horn was broken. Fifthly, The Aquarius who laid wait in all the Sink-ports
to surprise Him. Sixthly, The Piscis, the two Fishes, the one the Fleet, the
other the Leviathan, who would have had his pastime in the water, if he could
have made his flesh food for the Fowls of the Air, or Fishes of the Sea. But
the Trident, or rather the Trientitie who stilleth the raging of the Sea, and
the Madness of the People by Providence did prevent it. Next for His Climax, or
beginning to arise; He has escaped the Aries at Gloucester, the Taurus at
Worcester, the Gemine or Juncto at Westminster, the Cancer or Crooked
Conventicles every where, who make Religion Retrograde, and Reward go backward:
He is now in Leo, in His full strength, where we pray that

Qui Leo de Juda est, qui Flos de Jesse, Leones
Protegat and stores, Carole Magne tuos.
And that nothing may be obscure which should concern His honor, or His
happiness, who is the cause of our Conservation, and the occasion whereby we
are come to pray again with understanding, here (...) Prayer again --

Who Juda's Lion is, and Flower of Jesse
Thy Lions and Thy Flowers CHARLES ever Bless.
And so we leave Him to His next Degree, to -- VIRGO, Ratherina Teresa.
where we also pray that the Beloved Son born of the Blessed Virgin, may
prosper Him and Her in their Proceedings. And now we come to our poor Criple
again, who was cured by Christ, when all other Physicians had forsaken him:
which is my Second Part.

When my father and mother forsook me, says David, the Lord takes me up, not
that his father was taxed with (...), or unnatural affection, or that his
mother should bring the Prophets impossibility to pass, that a mother should
forget her children; for David was not forsaken, when he said he was forsaken.
First, forsaken he was, left alone to the wide world, as we say, yet he was not
forsaken, because his parents forsook the world before they forsook him. So
that when he was left alone, he was -- Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus --
never less alone, than when he was alone. And where it is said -- Deus solus
-- The Lord alone sustained me -- Solus -- or alone has relation as well to
David's solitariness, as to Gods sufficiency; for David's father was not by him
when he took the Lion by the beard, nor was his mother nigh him when he slew
the Bear, and yet he was no more alone than he was when he went to fight
against Goliath; for although Eliah and all his brethten left him, yet he had a
sufficient Second to assist him, for he told Saul, that the Lord who had
delivered him out of the mouth both of the Lion and the Bear, would also
deliver him out of the hand of the Philistine. Now as it was well for David
that he was not alone when he was alone, having the Lord to help him; so it may
be ill with those that are alone, if their help comes not from the name of the
Lord, for they cannot be alone neither, though they are alone. First, the
Lunatic in the Gospel was not alone, not because there is one beside himself,
as some will have it, but because there is one ready to cast him into the fire,
or into the water, and then most ready when he is alone. Secondly, a melancholy
man is not alone because he is -- Aut Angelus, aut Diabolus -- he has a good
Spirit or a bad Spirit always attending on him. Saint Austin had a good Spirit
attending on him, when he was alone, or else his -- Soliloquia had not been so
full of sanctity as they were. Saul had as bad a Spirit while he was Saul, as
St. Austins was good, or else in his zeal he would not have made such havoc
of the Church as he did. Nor had Saul the son of Kish sought to have killed
David his best friend, if the Spirit of the Lord had not forsaken him, and a
foul Spirit entered in his room; such a Spirit had Abimilech above named, unto
whom the Spirit of hatred was sent, as it is in the -- Septuagint, which Saint
Hierom terms -- Non Spiritum malum, sed Spiritum pessimum, the Spirit of
malice, which is the worst of Spirits. But if a man cannot be alone, why does
the Spaniard say -- Guardami Dios de mi, Keep me O God from my self; The reason
is, that if he should be left alone to his hot nature, and not have grace to
qualify it, he should be left in a sad condition. When a Rabbi says -- Marbe
abadim, marbe gazel -- Who has many servants, has many thieves, it need not
be meant of household servants, such as the cozening Steward, or the covetous
Gehazi; the one robbing his Master of his Revenue, the other of his Reputation;
but of homebred senses siding with -- Epithumia, or our natural concupiscence,
who as St. Paul says -- (...) -- work stratagems against the soul. Secondly,
When Christ says, A man's enemies are they of his own household; as the words
may be spoken of a reviling Ziphora, or a rebellious Absolon, or the like; so
may they be taken mystically of the Wife, which is the Will, affronting Reason,
which should be the Husband; or of our corrupt affections, or fleshly lusts,
which are at such enmity against the Spirit, that we cannot please God; which
God foreseeing, thought it not good for man to be alone; upon which words Rabbi
Nathanael said, -- O habrutha, O mithutha, O let me die, rather than be left
alone to be nurtured by my own nature. And if we should look back unto our --
Unde domo -- to the Rock from whence we are hewn, or the hole from whence we
are dug, we should not much glory in our Genealogy; for should we derive our
Pedigree from the ancient -- Umbri which were before the Flood, and did not
perish with other sinners (as Pliny would persuade us) yet unless we could find
a former Creation, and an Adam -- ex mediori luto -- framed of some better
mould than hitherto has been formed, it would be never the better for us,
since still that would be spoken of us, which Ezekiel should seem to say --

(...)
(...)
That we are a froward and untoward Generation, hearing, and not hearing,
because not regarding what we do hear, nor considering -- Quo tendimus omnes --
to what end our destiny may drive us, do diverse times come to an untimely end.
Travelers who may talk any thing by authority, will tell us, That in a Library
in China there are extant some Records of more than Thirty Thousand years
antiquity, and that in them we may chance to find a -- Proprotoplastus, an Adam
before Moses his Adam, and yet that shall be small help to our Genealogy,
unless we can find an elder Eve from whom that Adam should be born, if he were
not created. But to spare this inquisition, we may examine what those years
are, which are multiplied to so many thousands, and then upon the account we
shall find that every month is an year; and so there being in every thousand
years twelve thousand months, though their Records should be of forty thousand
years antiquity, yet that Adam which Moses mentioned, will be as ancient as any
other Adam that may be imagined; St. Luke says, that there was an Adam who was
the Son of God; St. Paul says, there is an Adam which is the Son of Adam, and
the Son of God; and if there should be an Adam before these, then it might be
said, -- Sic a Jove tertius Adam, that there is one nearer unto God, than
either of the two which in Scripture are named, and so St. Paul also might be
mistaken in his account, who says, The first man Adam was made a living Soul,
and the last man Adam was made a quickening Spirit: And again, The first man
Adam is of the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from heaven heavenly.
So then as -- Sapientum octavus quis fuit nondum constat -- the eighth wise man
of Greece is not yet found: so that man only must be the man that must find out
that Adam who shall be before the first. And all that are descended from him
the mean while may say with the Satyrist -- Stemmata quid faciant, or rather
with David, What profit is there in my blood descended from my ancestors, when
I, with those -- Puteolani which are near -- Avernus, go down into the Pit? And
now taking Adam in his -- Puris Naturalibus, he is but earth, and this earth of
all the four Elements, is the coldest, and thence is it that man is cold in his
devotion to God, cold in his charity to man, and cold in all comfort that
should come from him. Secondly, Take him from the Adamant or Diamo^d, as some
will have him: there he is the hardest, as in the other he is the coldest. So
that we are of Ba^tus his breed, or descended from Deucalion, or from such
stones whereof children should be raised unto Abraham, or from any stone that
might be harder than any of these, if there might be any: for -- Gutta cavat
lapidem -- the least drop leaves some impression upon the hardest stone, but
many drops -- Se^e cadendo -- falling often from the eyes of Orphans, can leave
no impression on our stony hearts, for if they could, we should cast our bread
upon the waters of Mara, even bitter tears of those which at this day do weep
for want of it. Thirdly, Derive Adam from Adma, the true Anagram of Adam, which
was a City of Pentapolis, as red a soil as that from whence Adam was descended;
for it was a City built on blood; and yet as dry, as the Adamant was hard; for
if there had been but one penitential tear in it, even that tear might have
quenched the fire, and saved the City, and all the Citizens that were i^ Adma.
So then by the one we are -- Genus frigidum, a frozen generation; by the other
-- Genus durum, an obdurate generation; yea, and so hard, that as Saint Peter
says, And you as lively stones, are made a spiritual building; yet let us talk
what we will of edifying, if we have not something to hold these stones
together, -- Duro conduro non fanno muro -- says the Italian, Hard to hard
will never make a Wall. Fourthly, By Adma we are -- Genus sicoculum -- a
dry-ey'd generation: Nor is this drouth confined to our eyes, but it is
Hydropically dispersed over all the parts of our body; yea, insomuch that
Erisictho^, whose (...) or hot digesture did devour more than Bell or the
Dragon, or whom St. Peter's sheet would not serve for a second course, was not
so hungry as we are thirsty: Our drouth exceeds the drouth of Summer, or of
the drouth of Synosura, whose Bears about the Northern Pole would drink up the
Sea, as some suppose, if they could come at it. Nay, our drouth or thirst is
greater than the thirst of Tantalus, who -- Quaerit aquas in aquis -- suffers
drouth in a deluge, for we are dry while we drink, like unto the Horse-leach --
Nec missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo, we being not satisfied, until we
be suffocated; And what do we thirst after? not after the Wine, but after the
Vine; nor after the Vine, but after the Vineyard: that was it that Ahab sought
after, although it were the price of blood. But these -- (...), or thirsters
after blood, may know, that as drinking in the cold fit of a Fever increases
the fervor or heat of the Fever. So those whose charity being cold, do long
after this cup of cruelty, will increase the heat also of a greater fire. And
now all that has been said, is to show in what miserable condition man is,
where he is left to his own nature, grace having forsaken him. Therefore says
Solomon -- Ve soli -- Woe unto him that is alone, not for want of warmth only,
as in the text, but by reason of the warfare that is betwixt the willer and the
worker, where the Spirit is willing, but the flesh, though weak, will not
suffer the Spirit to do what he would. The woe to him then that is alone, is not
for want of heat only, as in the text, for a man were better be alone than to
have such a companion whereby he may -- Calescere plus satis-have woe with his
warmth. First, had not Sechem felt the warmth of Dina, Dina might have been
still a chaste Diana, and not an -- indomita invenea -- to go a gadding after
may-games -- quae non inventa reperta est, whom when Jacob found, found that
she was lost. Secondly, had not Zimri found the warmth of Cosbi, but had been
alone, all had been well; but Musicians can tell you, that -- Solus cum sola --
is a sweet melodious tune, but the music is sad, mournful and melancholy
withal, and so it was with Zimri, and Cosbi, or else the bed of Cosbi had not
been the bloody bath of Zimri, nor Zimries goar had been the grave of Cosbi. So
then, a man may be Solus, but not -- Solitarius; alone, but not so solitary
alone, but he shall have associates: When Christ was in the wilderness fasting
alone, he was not long solitary alone; for -- Silenus quamvis nemo vocaret
adest, -- Satan came tempting him to eat before his time: Again, when Christ
was praying in the Mount of Olives alone, he was not long alone, though in a
long Agony; for -- Angelus en Christi solatus pectora -- An Angel came from
heaven comforting him in his agony. So then a man is not alone, when he seems
to be alone; nor comfortless, when he seems to be comfortless; nor forsaken,
when some think he is forsaken; for then some would be but in a sad condition.
First, the poor are supposed by some to be forsaken when they beg their bread,
because David says, -- Nunquam vidi -- I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor
their seed begging bread; which in a charitable construction shows that they
are not forsaken, though they beg their bread; for though the word --
Derelictum-or forsaken, is not iterated or twice repeated, to avoid a
tautologie, or words more than are necessary; yet this is the honest meaning of
them, I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed forsaken -- in begging
bread. And if this were not David's meaning, Why should he say so soon after
it, Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy, for the Lord will
deliver him in the ^ime of trouble; yea, and God himself will make his bed in
all his sickness? Secondly, Why should Solomon second David, Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3.
saying -- Qui dat egeno, mutio dat Domino; he that gives to the poor, lends
unto the Lord, and he will see it paid again? Nor can I see any reason why our
seeming religious men should be so hard-hearted to the poor, unless they be
angry, because Christ said, That Lazarus the beggar was in heaven, and Dives
the miser was in hell. So then those that are distressed, must not be by David
thought to be forsaken, for then David himself would be in the same condition.
When the Idumii began to rebel against David, and when the sons of Zervia were
too hard for him; when the feminine faction, who like Sampsons Foxes, carried
fire in their tails to kindle the coals of contention, and foment the flames
of faction and rebellion against him, then -- Congregatio taurorum in vaccis
populorum, not the best of the people, but the beasts of the people, the --
Opifices faeces, the spear-men, the fat Bulls of Basan, the lean kine of the
Common, and all the horned heard compassed him about, crying, God has forsaken
him, persecute him, and take him, for there is no man to help him. But neither
was the good King forsaken, nor his seed forsaken, for -- Patrum virtus, the
virtue of his Father was visible in his Son, who restored all things that were
ruined, both in Jerusalem and in Sion, and grew in favor daily both with God
and godly men. Last of all, our poor Creple might seem to be forsaken, being
diseased thirty and eight years, but he was not forsaken, for -- Medicus and
medecina -- Christ being his physic and his Physician, did cure him when all
other Physicians had forsaken him, saying, Take up thy bed and walk. And now
since he is healed, we may have leisure to enquire how he had been healed, if
there had been any man to help him, since there are so many opinions concerning
the nature of this Bethezda or Lazures bath. First, some will have it natural
only, as our waters are, either internal by potion, or external by lotion,
which if it were so, there need be no Angel, (unless as a Fee) to be a visible
Agent to stir the waters, for many are daily healed by the outward water,
though few by the inward without any such Agent. Secondly, Others will have
this Bath of Bethesda to be accidentally sanative, by reason of so many hundred
Sacrifices as were usually washed against their Feasts in that water, where by
the abundance of blood and other slimy substances residing as a sediment in the
bottom of the Pool, the bathing in it might be as beneficial to a lame man, as
the warm belly of a beast which is usual for any man to bath in that is lame;
and then as there needed no^ any Angel in the natural bath, so there must be no
Angel in this accidental bath; For if the Angel were a Messenger sent by man as
an officer to stir the waters, or to raise up the slimy sediment that the water
might be the stronger; then the servant was more to be blamed for doing such
servile work upon the Sabbath day than Christ was, wi^h whom they quarreled,
because be healed only on the Sabbath day: By which we may see, that curious
inquisitors attributing more to nature than to grace, seeking to shun Silla,
fall into Caribdis, and do as St. Paul says, fearing Idolatry, commit
Sacrilege, who by pulling down the pictures of Christ and his Apostles out of
the Church-windows, break them all in such sort, that they make the Sanctuaries
of God fit for nothing but to be habitations for Zim and Ohim, Ostriges and
Satires, or such unclean creatures as themselves, and yet they that set up
those pictures, did not intend to set up Idolatry, or at least Popery, because
such pictures were up in many Churches before the name of Pope was ever known.
But such curious impertinents may understand that a man may be neither --
(...), a worshipper of Images; nor (...), a lover of Images; and yet he need
not to be -- (...) a breaker of Images. Damascen was a devout man, and loved
Images* and his retired Cell was hung round with them; yet he was so far from
Idolizing or worshipping of them, that he gave this Caution to the contrary.

Essigiem Christi cum spectes, pronus adora,
Sed non Effigiem, sed quod designat honora.
Not the Picture present, but the Party represented (if any thing) is to be
worshipped: there being a difference betwixt -- Signum and Signatum -- as much
as is betwixt the Shadow and the Substance. Suppose that Lots house had been an
Inn, and the Angel had been the Sign, the Angel without could not have secured
Lot from the rage of the Sodomites, it was the Angel within that pulled him
into his house, and saved him, or else he had been pulled all to pieces: so in
like manner there must be a difference betwixt adornation, and adoration,
betwixt adorning, and adoring: A man may adorn his House with Pictures, as
Damascen did, and yet neither Idolize them, nor adore them, and if some naked
Pictures be among them, which were better absent than present, yet if any idle
imaginations should be in the beholders, it is -- Ad intus, non ad extra --
from within, and not without. First, Had we no way to express our minds but by
Hierogliphicks (as is already said) and that we were to show what Truth were,
there would be no way to express it better, than by the Picture of a Naked
Woman, she being termed -- Nuda Veritas -- The Naked Truth, having on her no
Vail nor Visard; and if there should be any wandering or wanton thoughts in the
Spectators looking on such a naked Picture, -- Ita concipit intus, would be the
cause of it; the immodest motions come from the mind; the fault is neither in
the Picture, nor in him who has the Picture. Secondly, The Motto or
Inscription on the Garter, honored be King Edward the Third, and Giver of the
name to the chief King of Arms; when it says -- Honi soit qui mal y pense,
Evil to him that evil thinks, it wishes evil to none but such as think evil:
So that if there were not evil in the thinker, there would be no evil in the
wisher. The supercilious Gimnosophists need not to show their nakedness, but
that they have a mind to be naked. The lascivious Adamites may be clothed if
they please, but that they love to have their foul, uncomely parts to be
discovered: A beauty may behold her face in a Glass, yet neither be proud of
it, nor with Narcissus fall in love with it; -- Non speculum, sed spectrum, it
is not the face without, but the fancy within, which does malificiate and
bewitch the imagination; for diverse times Deformity supposes her self to be a
beauty, all which is made good by a saying of our Savior, Not that which is
without, but that which is within, does defile a man. And, if there were not
venom in the Spider, he could not make poison of that whereof the Be makes
honey: Alpharabius, Aristotle, and other Philosophers make it a question,
Whether the sight comes by sending forth the Spirits, or receiving in the
Species; but this they may affirm, That those eyes do send forth evil spirits,
which make the object evil, which of it self is good. First, At the Bath -- Hic
sedit ignoto juncta puella viro -- here sits an Adonis, there a Delilah;
here a naked man, and there a naked woman, which to a modest mind moves no
more; than when a man looks on a Mermaid, or a Mermaid on a man, and if any
thought should arise, it should be, That either of them is -- Introrsum turpis
speciosus pelle decora -- so fair without, and so foul within, that they need
more washing within, than without. Secondly, The beholding of those naked
Nymphs, to a religious man, is a representation of the Resurrection, and not
only to consider that as we came naked into the world, Rev. 3.18.
so naked we must return; but to take care that the shame of our nakedness do
not appear so much, that we may be glad of fig leaves to cover it, if we could
find them; but if fig leaves cannot be found, our offenses will: for then
there shall be no -- Latitats or Writs of -- Non inventus -- all must appear,
and every man must answer at the Tribunal Seat of Christ, and receive a reward
for whatever has been done in those naked bodies, whether good or evil. When
therefore in that Bath we shall see the water, we may not think on wantonness,
but consider that the Sea must give up her dead, and so to have her discharge.
When we shall smell the Brimstone, that Hell must give up her dead, and not as
the Sea, to have a discharge, but only to show them, and shut them up again.
These should be the uses which men should make of Images, and not to imagine
that there must be Popery in them, or in Pictures, for there can be no
Superstition or Idolatry in them, unless we make it; For the Image is as you
imagine it. According to which imagination, have been the various opinions
about this Bethesda, which can be neither natural or accidental, as is already
said, but supernatural, where, an Angel from heaven, and not an Officer sent by
men, did make the water miraculous, as other waters in like manner have been
made. First, the water turned into wine at the marriage in Cana, neither the
drawer, nor the bearer of it was the cause of the alteration, but Christ or his
Angel was the cause of it. Secondly, the water of Jordan of it self could not
cure the Leprosy of Naaman, for then the waters of Damascus might have done it
as well. Thirdly, Silo having its name from being sent, could not have cured
blind Bartimeas, if some Angel had not been sent to sanctify it. Fourthly, the
waters of Egypt turned into blood, were neither turned by Moses his word, or by
his rod, but by that Angel which made his rod to bud, which was as great a
miracle, as turning the waters into blood. Fifthly, the wine in the Sacrament
turned into purer blood, though alienated by the word of the Minister, yet he
is but (...), the voice, not the virtue of the Consecration, though after the
Consecration it is converted; for the Minister is so far from knowing how to
turn it, John 6.55
that he knows not to what it is turned, no more than he knows how the bread is
turned into Christ's body A real presence he may allow, because Christ said, My
flesh is meat indeed; but a corporal presence he may not allow, because he was
corporally present when he gave the Sacrament; Had those words been spoken
after his Resurrection, there might have been a question with what body he
might rise? whether with an -- Vbiquitary body or not; and yet it is
improbable, that it should be Vbiquitary, or in more places at once than in
one. First, Christ himself affirms that his body was a physical or natural
body, which might be seen, felt, and understood, Luke 24.39.
he showed it to his Disciples, that saw his hands, felt his feet, and by both
understood, that it was that body which was wounded on the Cross. Secondly,
that body was fixed unto the Cross, not a fugitive or fictitious body, as the
Manichees and other mazed men imagine; and what is so confined to any one
place, cannot be Ubiquitary. Could Mercury be fixed (as your Chimicks term it)
and still remain Mercury; or could gold be made fluid or subtle, and again be
made solid, then that Stone which should make gold, would be feasible, which
only is fantastical; and by that stone, gold might be multiplied, which
hitherto has been only diminished. But as neither of these have ever been
brought to pass, so Christ's body being still the same, and in the state of
perfection, cannot admit any alteration, for then it might be subject to
corruption, and so the Spirit of God would be contradicted, which says, Thou will not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thirdly, Christ's body is
framed of flesh and bone, and not a spiritual body, as he himself told his
Disciples, and was the same after his Resurrection, as it was in his Passion,
and should so much of his flesh be taken from his bones, as is daily used in
the Sacrament; I speak it with reverence, there would be nothing but a Skeliton
to sit at the right hand of God. But that may not be: For he ascended with that
body in which he rose, having those wounds on it as were when he was crucified,
and shall come again to judge the world with the same body wherewith he both
suffered and ascended, Acts 1.11.
for so the Angels told those that did see him when he did ascend, saying, Ye
men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up unto heaven? This man shall come down
again from heaven in the same mannner as ye see him go into heaven. Now as we
may allow a real, but not a corporeal presence in Christ's body; so in the Wine
turned into Blood; we must believe, that though the Wine be not turned into
Blood, yet we may believe that his Blood is in the Wine, because Christ also
said, My blood is drink indeed; and yet we do not read of any Blood that he had
lost before the words were spoken; wherefore omitting the multiplicity of
opinions, as also the Schoolmens Praepositions of Trans, Sub, Con, and Super,
we may believe that in the Elements before they are made Sacraments, there are
some Transi^ients transcending the reach of humane reason, but -- Quo mod^ --
or in what manner these transmissions are, or in what measure or manner Christ's
Body is in the Bread, or his Blood in the Wine, I think it modesty not to
meddle, but to refer it to Christ, that at his coming he may resolve the
question: Yet mean while, this we may say of this Sacred Sacrament.

He was the Word that spoke it; He took the Bread and brake it; His Body he did
make it; So I believe and take it.
And he that so takes it, unless judicious men are mistaken, take this not
amiss. Now as there are diversities of gifts by the same Spirit, as says St.
Paul; so there are diversities of operations wrought by such Ministers as God
has ordained by the same Spirit to work his Miracles, for the waters (as
before has been said) have not only been turned into blood, but into fire, and
that fire again into water; for -- Baptismus fluminis, the Baptism of water,
and -- Baptismus flamminis, the Baptism of fire, are both one Baptism. First,
John baptizeth with water unto Contrition. Secondly, Christ baptizeth with fire
unto Remission, as may best be expressed by St. John Baptists own words, I
indeed baptize you with water unto Repentance, but he that comes after me,
will baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with sire; The one saying, Repent and
you shall be baptized; the other, Be baptized and you shall be saved. Which
Aequitollence of contrary Elements, makes a reconciliation of greater
contrarieties. For Nature and Grace being in a Diametrical opposition, the
Spirit and the flesh at open defiance one against the other, yet now Grace, by
this Baptism, begins to supply the defects of Nature, and the Spirit is
willing to support the weakness of the flesh -- Alterous sic, -- Altera poscit
opem res and conjurat amice -- the Lion and the Lamb have lien together; the
Cocatrice and the Child have kissed each other. And yet for all this, that
Sacred Sacrament of Baptism, which has reconciled so many Millions of souls
unto God who have been separated from him by Original sin, is now, among many,
like an old Almanac quite out of date, and set behind the door, both in
respect of the matter, and of the form. First, Baptism it self being the
Freehold of the Elect, and such a Patrimony of Grace, that a child may claim
his admission unto it so soon as he is eight days old, must now be -- Ad
libitum Domini -- deferred until the child be come to the years of discretion;
who, if he does -- Paetrisare -- or be like the Parents, will be -- Ad Graecas
Calendas, or never, since there was never any such day in the Calendar.
Secondly, For the form: The Font so termed, from being the fountain of grace,
is like an old Fabric, or house of Hospitality, quite out of fashion, and in
such disgrace, that a Barbers Basin is preferred before it; which is only fit
for a Midwife in a Chamber in a case of necessity, but far unfit for a Minister
in the Church, unless he want a Font or Conformity. In all which -- Dum stulti
vitant vitia in contraria currunt, we strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels;
stumble at straws, and leap over blocks; who fearing Superstition, fall into
Judaism, as well in the Administration of Baptism, as of the Lords Supper.
First, Why should not the Font, having been so many hundred years used in the
Church to baptize children, be as convenient for the same use still (as of
late) in a Basin, unless it were because as the blood was in the Basin at the
Passover, which was sprinkled upon the door-posts, so the water must be in a
Basin which is to be sprinkled on the children which are to be baptized. But
did we look into the Greek word -- (...) -- or the Latin word -- Immergo --
both being to duck under water, or to dip, signifying, That sin is drowned, and
the sinner saved. We would imagine that the dimensions of a basin would be too
shallow for so deep a mystery. But as -- Dato uno absurdo sequuntur mill, one
absurdity granted, you may grant a thousand; So from one Judaisme we fall into
so many, that decency and order once laid aside, we shall think that all things
are done decently that are done out of order, and so we shall stand when we
should kneel, sit when we should stand, and sit at the Sacrament when we should
neither sit nor stand, which is also done in a way of Judaism, supposing that
the Disciples did either sit or stand when they did receive the Sacrament, or
eat the Passover. But -- Lectis discumbentes -- was not sitting on their beds,
which usually served them for tables, but leaning on their beds* and this
leaning might be done with more ease if they did kneel, but if they did not
kneel, they could not well lean without bending the knee. But well may we
dislike the Ceremonies of the Church, when we do not like any thing that is
substantial in the Church; for we are always contending -- De lana caprina --
seeking knots in Bulrushes, always complaining, because we have no cause to
complain. First, the Altar must not stand Alterwayes, nor the Common Prayer be
said at it, unless we may alter both as we please. But the quarrel against the
Book of Common Prayer, is not because there is swearing and conjuring in the
Letany; for we can swear, and forswear it again, without any great scruple of
conscience, and with Ligatures (if you read Agrippa) so bewitch one another,
that we need no other conjuration. There is one other thing in the Common
Prayers which does trouble us more than any thing that is in the Letany: We may
find that in the Introduction to the Commination ordained to be used on
Ash Wednesday, that Confession and Penance is much to be desired, Psalm. 53 5.
which being desired, we may fear that in time it may be required: but to any
one so fearing, he may say, -- Quid timeam ignoro tim^o tamen omnia demens --
which David does English, They were in great fear, where no fear was. Now in
this long digression, lest we should forget our poor Creple who is not yet gone
from the Bath of Bethesda, I must tell you, that there is one Bath more, in
which the Angel must move the waters: It is a Bath of Brine, which is a
singular good medicine for any Ache in the body, and as Sovereign for any Agony
of the soul; it is not an ordinary brine, but distilled from the Alimbicks of
the eyes; and as the Angel striking the Rock, the waters ran in dry places; so
also he striking or cleaving our petrated hearts, the tears may make long
furrows in our cheeks, but our cheeks are so much smoothed, that no such
furrows can be found in them; and tears are so precious, that God was fain to
put David's tears into bottles, foreseeing that he should find but few in future
times. But I suppose that the Son of man found some tears in our poor Creples
eyes, or else he would have spoken to some of the rest, as well as unto him,
when he said -- Vis sanus fieri -- Will thou have help? will thou be healed?
Thou shall have help, thou shall be healed, perceiving also that he had lain a
long time lame, and was not made whole, Because he had no man to help him;
which is my third part.

When men are dying, says Plutarch, the Lice will begin to leave them, unless
such Lice as Herod and some other near home had sent unto them as a judgment to
devour them. When houses are falling, says Pliny, the Militia of Mice so
termed in Batrocomiama hia, or the furious fight betwixt the Hilander and the
Hollander will be upon their march to find fresh quarters. The reason of the
former is, they feeling the blood to grow cold, find small comfort in their
longer continuance: The reason of the other is, they feeling the wind got into
the rotten holes of the walls, perceive as it were, an Earthquake* in the
walls, and think it high time* to take their walk: Both which have an allusion
to that of Euripides, -- (...) -- When the Birds are flown, no man regards
the Feathers in the Nest: And when Fortune is on her wing, Friendship will soon
find wings to follow after. First, If Craesus become Codrus, and Poverty pinch
the Prodigal, they both shall be esteemed as they are, not as they were.
Secondly, If Dives become Lazarus, Dives must leave his delicates, and be
contented to dine with Lazarus among the Dogs. Last of all, When Homer with his
Iliads and Odices did fit every man in his humor, then -- Smyrna, Rhodos,
Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae, seven Cities were in contention who
should have him to be their Countryman, but if Homer grow poor, his Poems
must be turned into Proverbs -- Si nihilattuleris, ibis Homere for as -- Homer
must be no longer a Poet, but a Peripatetick, and walk about the Streets: which
fortune has befallen men of greater note, than have been named. First, When
Job washed his paths with butter, and his feet in oil, by reason of his fat
pastures, and multitude of milch Cattle depastured in them, then no sooner did
he appear, but the young unmannerly Courtiers began to fly to corners; but when
he scraped his sores with the Potsherds which the Sabeans had broken, then each
boy did abuse him; yea, and such boys, as he did scorn that their fathers
should have eaten with his Shepherds Dogs. Secondly, When David was young and
active the Damsels danced about him, and sang, Saul slew his thousand, but
David his ten thousand; but when David grew aged and diseased, then the
Druides, Bards and Bachides abused him in their Ballads, or using his own
words, The very Drunkards made Songs of him. Such abusive Bachides do every
where abound, whose brains being intoxicated more with wind, than with Wine, do
think that the Church, the State, and every man's estate stands tottering, and
that all things are turning upside down, when the -- Vertigo is in -- Vertice,
and circulatio est in cerebro, the tottering and turning is not in the house,
but in the head; and although the circulation of the blood has been found out
of late as a pretty fancy, yet the circulation of the brain has been long time
found out, and not a fancy: which Circulation cannot -- quadrare, or agree with
regularity; for then there would be -- Quadratura circuli -- which never was
yet found out either in Philosophy, or in Divinity; for if the world being a
circumference, cannot satisfy or fill the heart (as Divines say) being a
triangle, how shall a circumference fill a quadrangle, which has more corners
than a triangle? So then as the Philosophers cannot make that round which is
square; so neither can the Divines make that square which is round: Of which
discordant dispositions are those Ethiopian Cynocephali of Lycaons lineage,
which are sent from Anticera into the Land of Moria, and here are taught to
fetch, but not to carry; who will fetch fire from heaven not with Promethius,
or a peaceable spirit, but with the sons of Thunder, to consume the Samaritans,
and yet will carry no coals themselves: which kind of creatures are derived (as
some will have them) from the Greek fire -- (...), and the British fire Tan,
but they may as properly be derived from -- (...), which is a Flint, which
Flint is hard and cold, and yet on any collision or affront, will cast forth
fire, not only to burn the Samaritans, but the Sanctuaryes of the good
Samaritan, or as the Psalmist says, To burn up all the houses of God in the
Land: Such are some of Abirams brood, who think that Moses and Aaron, and all
the lawful sons of Levi do take too much upon them; supposing also, that any
Phaeton is as fit to rule the day as Phoebus; yet -- Finge datos currus quid
aget -- if he had the disposing of it, what would he do? His History will tell
us -- Non scit qua sit iter -- go he must, yet could not know which way to go:
For when a Phaeton had -- Jus and moderamen aequorum -- yea, -- and aquorum --
the ruling of the unruly, and government of the giddy both by Sea and Land,
what was then Right? the Anagram will tell you -- Jus is vis, and vis is might,
and might was right, and when might was right, he that was wise would take the
advice of Christ, who bid him that had two Coats, sell one and buy a Sword, or
else he might chance to have nor Coat, nor Sword: For the Law of Nations was
annihilated, our Magna Charta which was to maintain Monarchy, was cancelled --
(...) -- the Commons did command in chief, (...). 31.
the Prognosticators prophesied lies, and as the Prophet says, the people
delighted to have it so: But if they looked to the end of the Verse, they might
have prevented the end thereof. Next, The Law of Nature, which was to nourish
the natural Branches both of the Olive, and of the Vine, was then neglected,
and in their room -- I^foelix lolium and steriles dominantur avaenae -- the
Wild Olive and the Sow-Thistle did sway the Scepter. Thirdly, Char. 1^ Henere^
Maria gina.
The Civil Law which was to support the honor both of the Subject and Supreme,
must not then defend the Court of honor, for fear that the Honorable of those
days should be dishonored, and as it was wont to be said -- Mors Sceptra
ligonibus aequat -- Death only did shuffle Scepters and Shovels together, then
the Shovels began to make themselves equal with those Scepters that then were,
perceiving that there was no inequality in men's qualities, for h^w could one be
better than the other, when they were all alike? Fourthly, The Talick Law was
quite laid by, for evil was repaied with good, and good with evil. Fifthly, The
Salick Law, if any Law, was then in force. When as a Joanna was John, or an
Aaron among the Romans, when Diana was -- Dea, or a goddess among the
Ephesians, when Delilae was Sampson, or a Judge among the Israelites: So the
Masculine gender in general, was less worthy than the Feminine in England. Last
of all, That Law which at that time was Law, was not -- Jus legis, but jus
temporis -- not the Law according to Law, but to the Times, which were lawless,
and yet that Law was -- Inque diem -- for no longer than a day, for what was
Law this day, would the next day be out of date: In which times also, Valiant
men were cowed, and Cowards crowed on their dunghills: Learned men were
silenced, and the illiterate had liberty to speak any thing but what tended
unto Loyalty; so that he was homo perpaucorum hominum, a man that must be found
out by Diogenes his Lanthorn, and not by the light of the day, who had any
humility or humanity in his dealing. (...), or self-love was every where,
(...), the love of Gods Servants, or of their own Souls, if it were any where,
was Raraavis in terris, a rare Phaenix, which seldom of any man has been seen,
since as in St. Paul's time, so now we were (...), such as love to please our
selves more than to please God. Nor let any one be so uncharitable as to think,
that any man should tripudeate or glory in this our shame -- sed pudeat should
be ashamed that our glory should be turned into shame. Nor should we impute
these our imperfections to any thing, but to Predictions and Prophesies which
must be fulfilled. First, To that of St. Paul, who says, that by reason of
distractions and desperate designs, In the last times there shall be dangerous
days, 2 Timothy 3.
the particulars whereof (that I may avoid all suspicion of spleen) I refer you
to the Text. Secondly, To that of the Psalmist, where the froward affections of
the Aged Creature, or Apolonius his old man regulating our actions, makes too
many of the like condition, for it is said of him -- Jiblu abbad tacalaphim, be
grows old, aged, and decrepit, declining to corruption; who being also as St.
Paul says, subject unto vanity and violence, makes man the object of them
both by reason of his influence, in whom there is not only -- (...), but (...),
not hope, but a serious solicitude: who having also the knowledge of the voice
(as Wisdom speaks) does know that the Spirit of God is as weary with
wrestling with man's flesh as he was before the stood, ^isd. 1.
so that not only the creature, but we must expect a fire before we can be
refined, and therefore every good man should be a Moses to stand in the gap
betwixt his brethren and Gods anger, that it might not proceed any farther; and
though he be not so zealous as to be blotted out of the book of life, as Moses
would have been for the safety of his brethren, yet he should stand in the
breach with that resolution that -- Si fractus elabatur Orbis, should the
Axeltree of heaven break, and all the weight of the Wayne fall on him --
Impavidum ferient ruinae, he should not fear the fall thereof, hoping that
mercy would fall down with it. Every man also should be an Aaron -- Duplices
tendens ad sidera palmas -- holding his hands as an evening sacrifice, and say
-- Parce pre^^r fulmenque tuum fera tela reconde, Spare thy people O Lord,
spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be
not angry with us for ever, for, hinc ille lachrimae, here is our misery, that
what is amiss will not be amended; it is so revealed unto us, He that is
unjust, will be unjust still, ^^v. 22.11
and he that will be filthy, will be filthy still. This is an age not to
alienate any thing from worse to better, but from better to worse. The ages
fell from gold to silver, from silver to brass, from brass to iron, and from
iron to rust. Our Swords which were turned into Mattocks, are turned into
Swords again; our Spears which were turned into pruning hooks, are, as they
were. Our souls that by grace were made the vessels of honor, are made by sin
the vessels of dishonor. Nor are here the Hercules pillars of our impiety; Man
will have a -- Plus ultra, though he perish in his pride. The Bridge cannot
confine our little Coricles, they will shoot the Bridge though thereby they
sink: Our greater vessels cannot be kept within the compass of the Line, they
must shoot the Gulf, though they be never seen again. There was a great Gulf
betwixt Abraham's bosom and Dives his dark Dungeon, the passage through which
Abraham in his navigation never could find out, but Dives did, or else he never
had been, where God grant none of us may be -- Gens, humana ruit per vetitum
nefas. Man that has tasted of the heavenly gift, and has been partaker of
Gods favors, will fall away from them so far, that he cannot be renewed again by
repentance, ^br. 6.6.
not but that he might be pardoned if he could repent, but he shall not find
grace to repent whereby he may be pardoned; for although graces are -- (...),
graces in their proper places, graces ascending and descending. Yet no grace
descends so low as to be found in such a fall. And now for all this
falling sickness is so fatal, and infectious, yet few follow the advice of St.
Paul, which is, Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall; and yet when he
is falling, no man that loves his own quietness will advise him to stand, for
man is -- Cereus in vitium flaecti monitoribus asper, as pliable as wax to
leave any impression of sin on him, but to take off the impression by
persuasion, will be as hard, as to wash away the blood of some murder, which is
done with so much difficulty, that though it be slubbered over, would appear,
as the blood of many murders do until this day. Imperfections of nature are
diverse times so prevalent in the parents, that their children do fare the worse
for them; as when there is any deformity or crookedness in the father, it does
commonly come unto the child, and there is no doubt but that a child may be
like the father in condition as well as in proportion; and seldom also shall we
see any blemish in the body, but there is some ill condition attending on it.
Venus is said to have a mole in her face, which mole did seem to be a badge of
beauty, but they that are skilled in physiognomy will tell you that it is a
mark of some ill quality; for Mohal in Hebrew is -- litura, or a blot that
should fall upon clean paper, and it is to be admired that any beauty should
make those blots upon their faces by Art, which they have not by nature,
unless they would make wise men think worse of them than they are. Moreover,
we daily see that deformities come unto fair features naturally wanting no
Auxiliaries of Art for augmentation; If we will use Art, it should be to
prevent deformity and other misfortunes, and not to augment them. For our
Criple may teach us that harms come to us sooner than helps, who had been long
diseased, and yet had no man to help him, nor was likly ever to have, having
such an adjunct to his ache as may easily be imagined; for if his disease had
been the Podagra, the Sciatica, or any lamenesse that might come within the
compass of Physic or Surgery, they would have killed or cured him within
less time than so many years as he lay lame. So that it is evident that he did
-- Magis paupertate quam paralisi laborare -- Suffer more by his poverty, than
any other infirmity; and this will appear by a president of one that was sick
of the like, if not the same disease. He that was sick of the Palsy, and not
of poverty, had four men to attend on him, who carried him farther in his bed
than the Text does tell, and were so industrious, or rather audacious, that
they did interrupt Christ in his Sermon, and brake up the house upon him while
he was preaching, which thou durst not have done unless they had been well
paid for their pains, which could not have been expected of a poor man. But
before I proceed any farther, we may enquire why Christ should suffer such
disorder and damage to be done to the house in which he was entertained, for
the Text says; That when they had broken up the roof of the house they let
down the bed whereon the sick of the Palsy lay. It is answered, that in those
hot Countries their houses were made with Peripats and walks on the tops of
them, having decks instead of roofs, as they have in ships. So that the
breaking up of the roof was but breaking of a lock at the most; and therefore
Christ perceiving that their faith was great, and their offense small, gave
them a -- quietus est for the disquieting the house, and a general acquittance
of all damages done, with a Noverint universi, that all men may know, that not
only -- (...), these incivilities, but -- (...), all sins whatsoever were
forgiven, making good his word by a deed, saying, Take up thy Bed, and go to
thy own house: And now that the house in which he was healed, was in the Form
aforesaid, shall appear by parciculars. First, Histriones, or Mimick Actors
personated whom they pleased on the tops of such houses. Secondly, Orators
pleaded on them as our Lawyers do, according as they are paid. Thirdly, The
Expounders of the Law, and such Preachers as then were, preached unto their
Auditories. -- Vulgi stante Corona, All standing, not one sitting, unless he
were a Senator, Suffragant, or some such superior person; and that preaching
was in that manner, also is made plain in our Saviors words, saying, That
which is spoken now in private, shall be preached on the house-tops. ^at. 10.7.
And now also when we shall gather up all the fragments and broken pieces
together of what has been said, we shall find only this, That both were
diseased; the one rich, the other poor; one had friends, the other none, and
that made him say, I have no man to help me. And how helpless man shall be that
is poor, appears by a report of an Echo answering to a voice in this manner
-- Si offeras pecuniam -- uniam -- at si non habeas -- abeas -- To him that
has it shall be given; but where nothing is, nothing can be expected: And it
may be supposed that this Echo formerly has found the way even into Solomon's
Porch, or else why should St. Peter say, when no man said any thing to him,
Silver and gold have I none. What has been in Solomon's Porch we cannot
promise, or what in St. Peter's Porch, or in the house is, we cannot say,
because it has been said that there -- Venalia sunt omnia, ^ Lamb (...) the
^^se, W. ^^on, ^^nt.
-- such sins are venial, but this we may say, That no such thing is in the
Porch of St. Paul, nor in the house, nor in the house of the Lamb, or
concerning the Lamb of the house, nor in our Solomon's Porch, or any thing
reflecting upon the Person of Solomon's For, he is not a receiver, but a giver
-- Nec dat quia abundat, nor does he give out of his abundance, as they did
which cast into the Treasury, but rather with the poor Widow, who gives all
that he has, and more too: For it is well known, that he has been fain to
borrow the very gold, Those outward and visible signs of that invisible grace
which God has given unto him, to give unto those many thousands of diseased
souls whom he has cured. And it is to be wished, that if ever Jove should
descend again in golden showers into the lap of any one, it might be into his,
who has so bountifully bestowed it, and where so great a blessing is given
unto all those on whom it is bestowed: In which course of curing he follows
the practice of Aesculapius, or his Tutor Christ, who looks not on the (...),
or cause why one is sick, but on the (...), considering only that he is sick. A
Physician may search into the nature of the disease, that if it comes by
(...), or fullness, it may be cured by (...), abstinence or emptiness, but if he
enquire after the Pourquoy, or cause why he is sick, that is Ultra Crepidam,
beyond his Crisis or inquisition. Socrates being blamed for giving an Alms unto
a wanderer, his answer was, I look upon his want, not on his wandering. When
Christ cured Bartimeus of his blindness, he did not with the Pharisees,
question whether it came by original or actual sin, but said unto him, Receive
thy sight. It is true, that sickness and diseases are the sequels of sin; and
that is the reason why our Savior was never sick, because he could not sin --
Nil ille nec ausus -- Nec potuit patrare nefas; and if his Omnipotency failed
in any thing, it was because he could not sin, and yet it does not follow, that
the greatest sinners are most sickly, for then Physicians would have so many
Patients, that it might well be said -- Dat Galenus opes, let him that would be
rich, be a Physician, for who would then be so rich and opulent as they? And
now if you should think it strange that this our poor Creple should lie eight
and thirty years, and have no man to help him? It is answered, That he did not
lie all that while at Bethesda, but that it happened to him as unto the woman
which had the bloody issue, who spent all that she had among Physicians, as
many have done, and are rather worse than better: So that he made the Bath his
-- Vltimum refugium, or last refuge to fly unto, and it was well for him that
he had this refuge: For as every disease is a Scurge, and every Scurge is --
Plaga -- or a Plague; so many have been scurged and plagued, and yet not so
soon cured as this Creple was. First, The Jews that dwelled in India,
delighting in Mummi, or man's flesh, because they might not eat Swines flesh,
were plagued with the -- Mark of the Beast, that -- Lues veneria, or the
verola, which Disease, though it were long before it came into our Land, yet it
came to some purpose at the last. Secondly, The Philistines for being too bold
with the Ark of God, were plagued with Emralds and Mice in their hinder parts
with a perpetual shame, so that not cured at all. Thirdly. Pharaoh and his
family had ten plagues sent unto them, for making Moses and Aaron to attend on
them, when they should have attended on their God, as here in brief:

Fit cruor ex undis conspurcant omnia rana
Dat pulvis siniphes, Postea musca venit
Dein pestis, post ulcera, grando, locusta, tenebrae,
Tandem Prototocos ultima plaga necat.
First, Tears of compassion turned to bloody execution. Secondly, Bufones,
venomous beasts billited in the Kings Chambers. Thirdly, Backbiters, noisome
creatures creeping up and down in every corner. Fourthly, Tarantula, the
troublesome Fly making men sottish and mopish, and yet not enduting melody and
harmony, the only means to help them. Fifthly, The Plague of Jelosies, and
fears frighting men and women out of that little wit they had. Sixthly, Blaines
and blemishes upon the reputation of honest men, and botches and Buboes upon
the beasts that did abuse them. Seventhly, Fire and hail, fiery Zeal and frozen
Charity running together, grievous to behold. Eighthly, Locusts, not Bishops,
Doctors and all learned men taking degrees in any University, as it is in the
Geneva note, but Genevaists themselves, who did eat up all the good in the
Land. Ninthly, Darkness, Error, Ignorance, even in the Directories which should
lead unto the light. Last of all, No elder brother in any house which was not
dead in duty either to Father or Mother, Nursing or Natural. These are the ten
Plagues which were in Egypt, yea and in our Israel when it was Egypt, and
Pharaoh had the governing of it. All which were to teach us that God does
punish our offenses with the Rod, and our sins with Scurges, so that according
to the quality of our sin, there will be, as we may say, the quantity of our
punishment. First, Those transgressions which are in -- Transitu, or in passing
to and fro, shall not have punishments answerable to those that are in --
Tentoriis, in the Tents of the ungodly. Secondly, They that walk in the counsel
of the wicked, who turn and return, as Cato going in to the Senate to come out
again, are not so great offenders, as they that stand in the way of sinners.
Thirdly, Those that stand in the way of sinners are not so much to be blamed,
as they that sit and set up their rest in the seat of Scorners, for the
Chair-men deserve the chiefest scurging. There was one Scurge, or one Plague
more in Egypt, which has not yet been mentioned: Those -- Urinatores, or
diverse under water, who, as David says, be Gods wonders in the Deep, do find
that there is one wave in the Sea, which is more dangerous and obnoxious to
Mariners than any other, and it is thus described -- Posterior nono est,
undecimoque prior -- it comes after the ninth wave, and is before the
eleventh, which must be the tenth, but the greatest Plague in Egypt was neither
the ninth, nor the tenth, but the eleventh -- Quae venit haec pestis pestes
supereminet omnes; for it comes like an After-reckoning, which vexes one more
than the total sum of all the particulars. And though -- Decimation was the
last of our Egyptian plagues while our Israel was Egypt, as is already said;
yet if that Plague by Providence had not been prevented from farther
proceeding, there would have been nothing left to be Decimated, for we should
have been robbed or spoiled, as the Egyptians were, who making a Bridge of gold
for their enemies to pass over, left not a penny in their purse; and not to
trouble you with the Hebrew, the Spanish Text says, They lent to Israel, --
Vasos de plata, y vasos de oro y vestidos -- not only their money, but their
plate and their apparel, and so brought on themselves the plague of Poverty,
which was the plague Paramount of all plagues. When the Famine was in Canaan,
they had money in their Sacks to buy food in Egypt; but the Famine being in
Egypt, and having no money, nor plate, nor apparel to pawn, there would be cold
comfort in coming to Canaan, or into any other Country. In this condition was
this Creple, who being sick of this poverty, shall neither, as David says,
have kindred or acquaintance come near him, but stand afar off. Psa. 38.^^
They see the Cross upon the door without, but not a Cross within; they see
the superscription over the Cross, (...), Lord have mercy upon us; But if it
were not for him, whose Superscription Pilate set on his Cross, there would be
no Lord, nor any other man to help them; and that which is worst of all, when
the Plaguesore breaks, there is hope of recovery; but when this sore
breaks, there is no recovery. This is that -- Ingens telum, as the Adage
terms it, That breaks not men, but battereth down Batteries, and with the
help of hunger, breaks through stone-walls: And although this is not always
true, That -- Necessitas cogit ad turpia; Necessity should make noble Spirits
to conspire with any ignoble actions; yet this is true, That -- Dura aegestas
Spiritus altos domans. -- Insuet a facere cogit. Necessity sometime goes
beyond the bounds of Civility; and David when he was hungry, was more bold with
Abiathars bread, than at another time he would have been; not that he intended
-- Sacra prophanis, That the Soldiers should part Christ's garments among them
again, as it were; but foreseeing that an inconvenience was better than a
mischief, gave unto them some of the consecrated Cakes, that they might not be
their own Carvers, knowing also, that where Soldiers are, something must be
had. Prevention, say the Politicians, is the principal point of Policy: And to
meet a disease at the door, say the Physicians, is the best way to keep him out
of the house. Let some Remora, say the Oculists, stay the rushing of the
rhumes, and we shall not need to cup the Catarrs, nor couch the Cataract. The
best way to shun the Cockatrice, is to crush him in the shell. If a Basilisk
come to see, his eye may make a slaughter. And if those Cockatrices Eggs had
been hatched, on which Satan as the old Brood-Hen sat so long, hoping to have
brought a March brood. The taking of Abiathars bread, which was lawful only for
the Priest to eat, would have been but a small offense, for all the Children of
God would have been eaten up, as if a man should eat bread. But some will say
-- Caveat Ecclaesia -- This concerns the Church, it shall never trouble us.
It is confessed, and yet the Clergy may give this Caveat to the Laity -- Jam
tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet -- If the fire be kindled in Jacob,
(...) 78.21
the flame will soon consume Israel; and the Church and Commonwealth being
one contignation, though there should be a partition wall betwixt them, yet if
either bay of the building be on fire, the other has reason for to fear. For,
as David says, High and low, rich and poor, one with another will perish
altogether. Now since fire cannot distinguish betwixt man and man, every wise
man should strive to extinguish the fire -- Fax is a firebrand, from whence
comes Faction; and Tully can tell us, that -- Vbi est Fax, non est Pax, for
says he -- Pax cum Antonio non est Pax, sed pactio belli, which the Prophet
does English for us, There is no peace says my God with the ungodly. There was
a question whether Faux the fire-man, or Fax the firebrand was the greater
offender -- Exturbasse sacrum conatus uterque senatum est, both undertaking to
do that in few days, which the Devil had been five thousand years devising.
The one, by Sulphur to blow up the Parliament; the other, by a Parliament to
blow up the Scepter; and if we shall judge by the effect, the later was the
worse; for the fire of the former (God be praised) came to light before it came
to light, but the fire of the later, has like Etna, burned a long time, and
God knows when it will be quenched; For some Salamanders who live by this
fire, are as careful to keep it still burning, being fomented by the ignoblest
of the people, as the Virgins of Vesta were to keep their fire, being founded
by Numa Pompilius; which Salamanders also at their private fires do frame such
Tenants as shall add fuel to their fire. First, that a Parliament being
chosen by the people, shall not be dissolved but by the consent of the people,
and so build a Castle in the air, casting away the Cornerstone of the
building; for (...), the people, can make no building without (...), which is
the foundation; and (...) the King, is (...), the foundation or establishment
of the people. But Cinthius aurem vellit. Divines in taking their degrees, are
admitted to read St. Paul, and not Machiavel, therefore to keep my self within
compass, and consine my discourse to the method of -- Q^od medicorum est, this
I may safely say, First, St. Paul says that we are (...), or called before we
are (...), or chosen. Next, our Saviors rule is, that there must be a (...),
before (...), a power given to act, before we can make any Acts. Last of all
the Universi y teaches, That -- Ejus est segregare, cujus est congregare; that
he who has power to call a Convocation, has also power to discontinue it, or
dissolve it at his pleasure; and we have at this time a holy Convocation, and a
royal Priesthood; whom -- Non vox populi, sed vox Dei Convocavit, the King has
called, the people has chosen, but God gave the word, and great and gracious
was the company which were called and chosen. They need not trouble themselves
about the point who shall dissolve them, for they proceeding in that peaceable
way as they hitherto have done, may sit till no one will be weary of their
sitting, except themselves; and when they are weary, we wish that they may --
Geminasque resumere vires, go into the Country, take breath, and to it again,
since to our comfort this is the, course they take. First, They do -- Dissuere,
not Disrumpere, unstich the seams of Schism and Dissension, and not tear in
pieces all at once. Secondly, As good Physicians knowing that there is --
Pleura pura, as impute a Plurisie of pure blood, as well as overplus of gross
and impure blood, and therefore will let out that blood which will weaken the
Body, and cherish all such blood as will strengthen it. Thirdly, They remember
that the Sun with his bright beams did get away the Country Coleincloutes
Cloak, when Boreas with his blustering was glad to go without it. This is the
way in which they walk, and therefore all that love the peace of Jerusalem, and
the prosperity of Zion, will say, -- Ite bonis avibus, Ride on and prosper, and
we will wish you good luck in the Name of the Lord. And though -- Crambe his
posita mors est -- that a second Sessions may seem as death to those that
deserve it, yet -- Decies repetita placebunt, the oftener Your Rejournings and
returnings shall be, the more delightful they will be to those that are
Deserving: The next Tenent of these Salamanders, is, That the Sheep shall sheet
the Shepherds, and yet the Shepherds shall have no share with the Sheep; and
although it be the part of a good Shepherd to sheer his Sheep, and not to clip
them, yet they will not only clip them, but sheer them so close, that in the
coldest weather and Winter of adversity, they shall have no warmth of their own
wool. But they do as their sheers do teach them, who as plainly as they c^n
speak, cry (...), Clepte, not only steal, steal, but teach them Sacrilege, the
greatest Theft of all. Now least such disturbers of the Times should find
better enrertainment in distempered affections, than those that tend unto
tranquillity, Christ in his own language says, -- Alta amenu, Say not Amen to
them, or believe them not. And not only so, but in his Gospel bids us beware of
them; and though the Hebrew, Greek and Roman Texts say only, Beware of men; yet
the French, Spanish, and Italian Texts do all say, Guard your selves from them:
And the Dutch says plainly, Shut your doors against them. St. Paul also
advises us, To have nothing to do with them; and tells Timothy, That they
are deceivers, and at last will be deceived; who gadding betwixt Jerusalem,
which is built at unity within it self, and Jericho a City subject to Lunacy,
as its name imports, will find in the Prophet Jeremy his Cosmography, that
there is a dangerous Desert betwixt them, disasterous unto Passengers; for
there Zedechia lost his Army, being all taken Prisoners; there he lost his
sons, being slain before his face; there he lost his eyes, all being
dispitefully done by Nebuchadnezer. There also St. Lukes Passenger lost all
that he had: being wounded, and left half dead; and all that pass that way, may
fear, lest they fare as the other did; for (...), Truth will strip off their
Jesuitical long Robes, and leave them naked, then -- (...), their own Recorder
calling to mind their many Consederacies, will give them their first wound,
then -- (...) and (...), Consultation, Inquisition, Election and Preparation
for Practice, will, like Caesar's Senators, wound them all at once, and leave
them in despair, as bad as dead. And as a Deer, once wounded, all the Herd will
forsake him; so their Levites may look on them, but leave them, and let them
lie. Their Priests may look on them too, and peradventure pity them, but will
pass by them; so that -- Miseretur aliquis succurrit nemo. Some man may pity
them, but there will be no man to help them: Since then -- Frigescit charitas
foris, calescat domi: Since, as David says, No man cares for my soul, let
every man be more careful of his own soul; and whatever our Acts are, let us
look unto our Exits, for we shall come from this earthly Stage with a --
Plaudite, an Applause, or with such a -- Sibile, as shall hiss us off from the
Stage. Let us not then with a -- Cras moriemini, or careless course of life,
say with Hester, If I perish, I perish; for we deal not with man, as Hester
did, but with an Emanuel, and with him there is mercy; in the mean while, the
Moralist will tell us, that -- Suae quisque faber est fortunae, fear and
trembling will frame a good Fortune, but Fate and Destiny have nothing to do
with Divinity; for then with God there would be no -- Anthropopathy, or
relenting on man's repenting: but Ninevi will deny that, and David will affirm,
That as man fears, so is Gods pleasure or displeasure; nay, God is so
pitiful, 96.
that upon man's Petitions he will rather please him than himself; yea, and so
merciful, that man shall have his own will, though it be against Gods own Will:
Nay, God was fain to petition Moses that he himself might be at quiet, saying,
Let me alone; ye^, Ex. 32.^
and promised to make him a great man, and what could he have more? but Moses
would not let him alone, nor have his will, but made him alter his Will, and
reverse his Order, and delivered Israel from destruction when God had fully
determined and resolved to destroy it; and the Poet, as if he had seen the
passage betwixt God and Moses, says thus,

Saepe Jovem vidi, cum jam sua mittere vellet
Fulmina, thure d^^to sustinuisse manum.
I have not seen Jove (as he might say) but Jeh va to be overpowered by Prayer,
since man may not only -- Perorare -- obtain by entreaty, but -- Prece cogere
-- compel God, as it were, to be pitiful, for when Phinehas stood up, Ps. 106.3
and prayed, the plague ceased: And now, as Destiny has nothing to do with
Divinity, so neither with Eternity, for it is confined to Mortality; --
Statutum est -- it is Decreed, that we must all die, and that we must all come
to judgment; but it is not Decreed, that any man shall be condemned before he
come to judgment; and Festus told Agrippa, that it was an unreasonable thing,
that Paul should be condemned before his Case was heard; and how much more is
it an unreasonable thing, that any man shall be condemned before he come to the
Tribunal Seat of justice! Again, If there were any condemnation before
judgment, to what end should Christ come to judgment? First, The souls of the
righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall touch them; and why
should they come? Secondly, The souls which are predestined to condemnation
are condemned already, and what should they do there? So that as the King was
fain to bring in High-way-men, and such as lay under hedges, to furnish his
Table at the Wedding: So when Christ shall come to judgment, he must also seek
out such as are in the old -- Limboes, or in the aerial -- Ergastulaes to fetch
out the -- Ixionists from their wheels, and the Bellides from their bottomless
buckets, to be in a -- Parado, or readiness against the general Appearance, and
consequently, Predestination will be the principle Argument to prove that Third
place wherewith the Predestinarij are so much off nded. But a day of Dome there
must be; the place, says David, is prepared already -- Dome is a Saxon word,
and not Doom, and so is Home; both showing that we must all go to our --
Ultimum domum, to our last, and our long home: Which Dome in the Anagram, or in
the same letters is Mode, and according to the Mode and manner of our living
shall be our Dome, and not according to our Destiny, but our desert. Abraham,
for the prevention of destruction, or coming to the place of Torment, as Dives
did term it, did not refer Dives his brethren to the Meds and Persians, with
whom no persuasion could make alteration, but to Mos^s and the Prophets, who
teach, That by amendment there may be atonem^nt. At which day of Dome also the
Books will be opened, both of our Delinquences, and our Acquittances. Our
Delinquences will be -- in numero, many? -- in pondere, heavy; Our Acquittances
will be few, and scarce as many as -- Thebarum portae vel Divitis ostea Nili;
yea, and so few, that a poor man may number them without a Cipher, if they be
answerable to our payment, either of our vows unto God, or promises unto man.
In like manner, when the Books are opened, the Balances will be brought, where
our ill actions will overpose our good; and though Mercy may help in holding
the Scales, yet Abraham told the Judge unto his face, That he which does hold
the Balance, must be just. So then -- P^rditio tua dete, Genesis 18.15
O Israel, God did as much unto his Vineyard as he could do, and was sorry that
the Vineyard was not sensible of it; wherefore the Vineyard, and the Husbandmen
of the Vineyard, may drink the wine or the dregs thereof as they please: For it
is not in the Text, Faeces quas expresserit hibent impij; God did not squeese
out the dregs for the ungodly of the earth to drink; Ps 75.8.
but it is -- Faeces quas expresserint, The ungodly did wring them out
themselves for themselves to drink, as says Pagnine, and all the three English
Translators: So that still our Dome will be no otherwise than as we do; and
Athanasius in his -- Quicunque vult, says, That who ever will be saved, must
believe it; and Enoch the seventh from Adam, says St. Jude, Prophesied to the
same purpose; and all that were before Enoch, set their names unto a Prophecy
to confirm it, as you may read, -- ADAM man, SETH being put, ENOSH into a
desperate condition, Chr. 1.1
KENAN by his own occasion MAHALALEEL, the light of God, JERED did descend from
heaven, ENOCH teaching us, METHVSELAH, That by his death he would send LAMECH,
to the humble and afflicted, NOAH rest and peace, SHEM and impose, HAM his high
displeasure, JAPHETH to those that were haughty and high-minded. These
Predictions should prepare us for our appearance, and to consider again that --
Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, our sorrows and our sufferings are from our
selves. God made nor sin, nor death, nor would that any one should die, Vis. 1.
we have his Word for it, we have his Oath for it, and Cautions that we should
nor sin, nor die -- Nolite zelare mortem, Seek not death in the error of your
life, and pull not down destruction upon your own heads with the works of your
own hands. St. Jerome says, that this Creple was so long lame, because he had
been long a sinner, and that Christ could not cure him of his sickness, until
he had cleansed him of his sin: It is so in the body natural, first take away
the cause, and then come unto the cure. It is so in the body spiritual, first
-- (...) cast out foul spirits, then -- (...), heal all diseases. It is so in
the body Political. There must be a casting out, before there can be a curing:
It was so in healing this poor Creple -- Christus tollit peccatum, claudus
tollit grabbatum, Christ takes off the sin, the Creple takes up his Couch.
And now whither (Morally) must he go? -- In domum suam, non alienum; into the
house of strangers he must not go, we have a Home to go unto, though it be
homely, and it is our shame that it is so homely that no man cares to come to
us: There are houses more neatly garnished, but consider what spirits come unto
them, we shall not want hunting to be brought into their Toils, but when the
Hunter has caught us, -- Capta relinquit, he will not care for us. It was so
with the Passenger, he had no man to help him: It was so with this poor Creple,
he had no man to help him: It will be so with us all, if we want help. There
will be no man to help us, but our Emanuel, who is both God and man, Christ
Jesus. Cui gloria. Amen.

FINIS.

