A true Account of the proceedings (and of the Grounds of the proceedings) of
the President and Officers of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxford, against Dr.
Yerburie lately a Fellow of the same:
Printed only to save the labor of transcribing many Copies, and to prevent
the mistakes thereby apt to be incurred, and merely for the satisfaction of
private Friends, who either want or desire a most impartial Information of that
Affair.

.1. THe Founder of the College of St. Marie Magdalen in Oxon, The unlawfulness
of Appealing evinced from the Oath, which is constantly taken by every Fellow.
does take so very great care throughout the Statutes, of his President's Power
and Authority (especially in conjunction with College Officers, who by the
Statutes are appointed for his Assistance,) more especially in inflicting every
statutable sort and degree of punishment, without interruption whilst it is
doing, and without trouble when it is done, that if the Deans (his Assistants)
are but difficult and backward in joining with him, the Vice President is to be
sent for, and (in his presence) they are to be deprived of the profit of their
places, (as well money, as commons) Stat. cap. 8. p. 33, 34.
quousque effectualiter se correxerint, and in praemissis se emendaverint. And
to the end that no trouble may follow after, (as no interruption can go
before,) every Fellow is indispensably to take three Oaths, (one as Cap. 52.
p. 125.
Demi, Cap. 15. p. 43.
another as Probationer, a Cap. 6. p. 28.
third as Fellow,) in each of which he ever swears, (especially in that which
he takes as Fellow) quod Praesidenti in licitis, and honestis, maxim in
Collegii negotiis and factis, obediet, assistet, and reverentiam debitam
obedienter impendet. And again, 2. quod monitionibus, injunctionibus, and
decretis, correctionibus, and punitionibus quibuscunque Praesidentis, etc.
parebit cum effectu. And again, 3. quod contrarium vel repugnans praemissis, in
judicio, velexira, tacit vel express, non faciet, seu fieri procurabit, aut
fieri permittet, nec eisdem consentiet quovismodo. And 4. again he farther
swears (...), [ si contingat me in posterum propter contemptum, rebellionem,
inobedientiam, malos mores, vel alia mea That D. Yerburie was punished propter
sua demerita, and even less than he deserved, appears by his several
confessions in his own handwriting, and by the Visitors Sentence of
Condemnation.
demerita, seu propter causas in praesentibus statutis contentas, per
Praesidentem Note the many Terms of universality, by which Appeals are put
under a moral impossibility.
corrigi, and puniri, aut alias a dicti Collegii* sustentatione, and societate
ejusdem juxta formam statutorum ejici, expelli, privari, excludi, vel etiam
amoveri; ex certa mea scientia, pure, sponte, simpliciter and absolute, * OMNI
ACTIONI, occasion correctionis, punitionis, vel privationis, exclusionis,
expulsionis, seu amotionis hujusmodi, contra Praesidentem aut alios dicti
Collegii Scholares vel Socios qui pro tempore fuerint, conjunctim vel divisim
QUOMODOLIBET instituendae, APPELLATIONIQVE and QVERELAE in ea part fiendis, ac
QVAKVMCVNQVE literarum impetrationi, precibus Principum, Praelatorum, Procerum,
Magnatum, and aliorum QVORVMCVNQVE, QVANTVMCVNQVE alias mihi probitatis and
vitae merita suffragentur, in vim pacti renuntio in his Scriptis.]

. 2. Having thus premised the Fellows Oath which had been taken by Dr.
Yerburie, and of which he had been often put in Note that Dr. Yerbury being
admonished of his Oath against Appealing, was thankful for the charity of that
admonition; saying first to the President, and afterward to Mr. Basket (in
these words, or to this effect,) I am not so much in love with perjury, as to
break my oath to no purpose; nor so fond of an expulsion, as to incur it by an
Appeal.
mind by the Praesident, an Oath excluding the possibility of Appeal in the
case of punishments and corrections, to any power or person to be imagined,
much more to the Visitor, the Bounds and Limits of whose Power were fitly set
him by the Founder, (as being an Officer of his Creating;) let us consider how
this Oath may be illustrated or explained by several statutes, wherein Appeals
and Complaints are interdicted by the Founder, and which the Fellows of the
College are sworn to keep.

And from the several following Statutes, which every Fellow is sworn to keep.
First in the Statute [ de Lectura statutorum, and scrutinio pro delictis
detegendis habendo, cap. 16. p. 46, and 47.,] when any person of any quality
shall be punished at the discretion of the President and the Deans (or any one
of Them,) The person punished is enjoined to undergo his correction,
Cessantibus QVIBVSCVNQVE Provocationibus, Appellationibus, and aliis Iuris and
Facti Remediis, per quas, seu per quae ipsius delinquentis correctio and
punitio differri valeat, seu alias quomodolibet impediri, sub poena amotionis
perpetuae a Collegio memorato. Here the punished party, Cap. 16. p. 47.
although he knows not his accuser, and is bound not to know him sub poena
perjurii, is yet obliged to acquiesce in whatever punishment is inflicted,
without any Complaints or Appeals of any kind whatsoever, and without all kind
of remedy; and all under the penalty of perpetual Banishment from the College.

Secondly, in the Statute de correctionibus faciendis circa delicta leviora --
(cap. 25. p. 62, 63.) The Fellows are capable of being put out of Commons, (and
de facto have been often by Dr. Frewen, oftener yet by Dr. Langton, extremely
often by Dr. Humphry, as appears by the College Registers,) even by the
strength of that weakest Statute: Ipsumque nihilominus sic delinquentem, juxta
excessum and delicti qualitatem, Praeses Predictus (vel vice-Praeses absente
Praeside) cum consensu duorum Decanorum, vel saltem unius, corrigat puniatque
pro commissis: Quam correctionem and punitionem, culpabilis in ca part absque
contradictionis, APPELLATIONIS, vel QVERELAE obstaculo, sustineat patienter:
and si similia fecerit post, arctius and acrius procedatur contra cum, etc.
Here Complaints and Appeals are made to be morally impossible.

Thirdly, in the Statute [ de correctione sociorum super majoribus criminibus
defamatorum, Cap. 27. p. 65, 66.) If any Fellow shall be guilty of manifest
perjurie, or Breach of oath, of theft, of conspiracy against the good estate
of the College, or of any other Fact bringing prejudice or scandal to the same;
and shall be convicted of it, either by his own confession, or by competent
witnesses to be approved of in the judgment of the President, with the
assistance of the Vice President, two Deans, and Bursers of the College, or by
evidence of the Fact; EX TUNC a dicto Collegio praesentis nostrae ordinationis
vigore, nulla alia praemissa monitone, eum exclusum, and privatum fore ipso
facto decernimus and statuimus, absque CUJUSCUNQUE APPELLATIONIS remedio vel
QUERELAE. Here all Remedy by Complaint or by Appeal in any kind, is most
strictly forbidden in the case of expulsion.

Fourthly, in the Statute, by which Dr. Yerbury was put out of Commons, ( cap.
35, p. 92.) The President sitting with the Deans and Bursars, and other Fellows
whom They shall choose, is to put an end to all dissensions and quarrels,
within the College walls. Which proves, that in That, as in many other cases
within the College, (though not in all,) the President with his Assessors is
(...), and le dernier Resort de la Justice. The Founders own words are
precisely These. Nec liceat alicui de dicto Collegio cujuscunque status aut
gradus extiterit, occasion alicujus Irae, Rixae, Iurgii aut dissensionis infra
dictum Coll. ortae vel motae inter eosdem, persecutionem facere, aut litem
aliquam movere, vel aliquem impetere, aut ad judicium trahere, coram aliquo
judice extrinseco Ecclesiastico vel seculari. And that by judex extrinsecus, he
means the Visitor himself, as well as any other foreign Judge, is undeniably
apparent from the very next words; Sed volumus quod omnino hujusmodi jurgia,
irae, rixae, discordiae, and dissensiones, infra dictum Collegium per personas
praedictas, (to wit the President, Vice President, Deans and Bursars) aliqua
ordinatione bona seu concordia FINALITER terminentur, and etiam decidantur. And
in the same Statute, quicquid ipse Praesidens cum Vice-Praesidente, Decanis,
and Bursariis, in praemissis duxerit ordinandum, per parts hujusmodi
discordantes firmiter observetur, and executioni absque contradictione qualibet
demandetur.

Fifthly, at the close of the very same Statute ( p. 93.) there is to be found
this other instance of the Presidents being empowered, yea, appointed and
enjoined (together with Them above recited) ipso facto to expel a disturber of
the peace and unity of the College, as a perjured transgressor of College
Statutes. Si post monitionem Praesidentis, aut eo absente Vice-Praesidentis ab
incepto non desistaet, si judicio eorundem, and majoris partis 13. Seniorum in
ea part culpabilis, and parere recusans reperiatur, tunc ipsum ut unitatis and
pacis perturbatorem, and statutorum Coll. nostri violator^m tanquam Perjurum
perpetuo exclusum, and amotum decernimus ipso facto. In which case, there
cannot be place for an Appeal, be the sentence right or wrong, if such as it is,
it is given, judicio Praesidentis and Assistentium; for that is all that the
Statute does require to the expulsion spoken of, though that Iudicium should be
erroneum. Exactly so it is in that other statute, by which we sentence't Dr.
Yerburie to a much lesser punishment. Si Iudicio Praesidentis and unius
Decanorum reus esse apparuerit, etc. it is neither required nor supposed that
our Judgment should be Infallible; It justifies the Satute, that it was our
Judgment; aequum, an iniquum, it matters not, it is ex decreto Fundatoris, a
very statutable sentence, of which the party grieved cannot pardonably complain
(much less from it can he Appeal) unless he can prove that our sentence was
against our own Judgment. For whether that Judgment were true or false, It is
abundantly enough, that it was Sincere. This is said only to prove, that our
Sentence had been just, (that is, according to the statute,) although our
Judgments had been erroneous. But that our Judgments were not erroneous, and
that our sentence was Milder than for the grievousness of the offense, our
Visitor did declare at a public hearing, and (since that) by a public
instrument under his Lp's own hand and Episcopal seal; And Dr. Yerburie himself
has confessed in writing, as is to be seen in the College Register.

. 3. Now having proved from the Statutes and the Oath above written, How the
power of the Visitor is circumscribed in the statutes.
that no Fellow of our College can appeal to the Visitor in such a case,
without committing the crime of Perjury, (which without Cap. 27. p. 66.
all Remedy or * Delay is to be punished with expulsion, as shall be showed,)
we shall proceed to give an Account of the Use and Power of the Visitor, as the
Founder has prescribed in the conclusion of his Statutes. Where first it being
said what he is not to do, it is presently added what he is. Et si aliqua nova
statuta per aliquem successorum nostrorum Episcop. Winton. cap. 54. p. 131.
First, he is not to make any new Statutes at all, nor so much to as interpret
the Founders Satutes, unless according to the Nolentes insuper aliquam
interpretationem fieri de iisdem aut circa ea, nisi juxta planum sensum
communem intellect. etc. ib. p. 132.
* plain and common sense and understanding, according to the literal and
Grammatical importance. Against which importance if he shall happen to expound,
we are sworn to reject such expositions.

It being said what he is not, About what it is proper to be conversant.
it presently follows in the Statute what he properly is to do. Cap 54. p. 131.
Si tamen de and super aliquo articulo nostrorum Statutorum inter Praesidentem
and Socios aut aliquas personas nostri Collegii dubium aliquod seu discors
opinio oriatur, cujus decisio, sanus and planus intellectus intra Quindenam a
tempore Emergentis Dubii conputandam nequiverit haberi, tunc volumus, quod
Praesidens nostri Collegii, quam citius poterit, Dominum Episcopum Wintoniensem
pro tempore existentem, in quo sinceram fiduciam ponimus, consulat; cujus
quidem determinationi, interpretationi, Declarationi, super praedicto dubio
faciendae, volumus Praesidentem, Socios, and quascunque personas nostri
Collegii obtemperare, and cum effectu parere, etc. After which he goes on to
say, that the Visitor is to expound the controverted Statute Secundum
grammaticalem and literalem sensum and intellectum, etc.

. 4 Now it is obvious to observe, What observables arise from the statute last
mentioned.
first that here is no mention of any possible Appeal to be made by provoked
and punished Malefactors, from the President and Officers by whom the
punishment is inflicted, without the least discord, or doubting, about the
sense of the Statute, by virtue of which it is inflicted. Nor did the Criminal
himself ever pretend any such thing. Secondly, we observe, that when a doubt of
the sense of any Statute does arise, the President must Appeal, and none but
he. (Thirdly.) Nor must He do it neither, until together with the Officers, he
has debated the matter for 15. days. So careful was the Founder that the
Visitor might not be troubled, but in a case of mere necessity; whereas if the
Visitor will admit of an Appeal from every person, who shall repine at his
punishment (though exceedingly less then his crimes deserve,) neither the
Visitor, nor the President, no nor the College where he presides, shall ever
enjoy either peace or honor. Fourthly, we observe from our College Registers,
that ever since the Foundation, (somewhat more than 200 years,) though
frequently the Fellows have been put out of Commons, propter verba tantum
indecora, and frequently expelled for their Rebellions, to the President's
order and command, ( E.G. Cap. 6.28. and cap. 14. p. 40.
Rebellion is often the Founders own word,) yet there never was an example of
any Fellow or other person who appealed unto the Visitor or to any other power,
upon pretense of an unjust or a rigorous Sentence. Mr Searle and Dr. Yerbury
are the two first persons who durst attempt it.

The usefulness of the Visitor in 5. respects, by way of Prolepsis to all
objections.
. 5. But notwithstanding that there cannot be a Statutable Appeal from the
President and Officers in the case of correction; yet there is use of a Visitor
in many respects. As first, when due corrections and Reformations are
obstructed, by the multitude or potency of the Offenders themselves, or their
Abettors. Here the President by his Oath is bound to complain unto the Visitor,
giving up to Him the Offenders names. Vid stat. de jurament. Dni. Praes. c. 2.
p. 8. and 9.
Next, in matters of difference between the President and Fellows, when the
difference cannot be ended by the Vice President, and Deanes, and the Senior
Fellows; the Visitors judgment is to be sought, and submitted to. c. 2. p. 11.
Thirdly, when the Visitor shall be entreated and sought to a visitation,
either by the President, Vice President, 3. Bursers, and three Deans, or by the
12. Seniors, or by the common consent of all the College. v. stat. de Visit.
cap. 53. p. 126, 127, 128.
Fourthly, Once in three years, though not desired by any person, either within
or without the College, the Visitor by Statute may come and visit, super
omnibus and singulis Statutis commodum and Honorem Collegii concernentibus.
Cap. 53. p. 126. and 127.
Fifthly, in cases of dispute about the sense of any Statute betwixt the
President and the Fellows, when the president and his Assistants cannot clear
the doubts within 15. days, Then the President is by statute to consult the
Visitor, and all must acquiesce in his Decision. v Conclus. statut. cap. 54. p.
131.


The Presidents obligation from his oath to punish the Violators of statute
without Fear or Favor. Cap. 2. p. 8.
. 6 Now follows part of the President's Oath, by which he stands obliged to
punish all persons of all qualities in the College, without favor or
partiality. Quodque quantum in me fuerit, correctiones, punitiones, and
reformationes debitas, veras and rationabiles, and justas, de quibuscunque
delictis, and criminibus, and excessibus Scholarium and Sociorum dicti Collegii
Quorumcunque, quoties, ubi, and quando, and prout opus fuerit, juxta negotii
qualitatem, omnemque formam and effectum Ordinationum and Statutorum praedicti
Collegii, per dictum Reverendum Patrem editorum, absque partialitate quacunque,
postpositis and cessantibus omnimodis prece, pretio, amore, timore, odio,
invidia and favore, nec non affectionibus consanguinitatis and affinitatis,
facultatis, sive Scientiae, ac praerogativis specialibus, ex quibuscunque
causis praetensis, etiam vel conceptis, diligenter and indifferenter faciam and
exercebo, and ea per alios fieri and exerceri faciam, and etiam procurabo, and
ea quae in ea part faerint facienda fideliter in omnibus exequar, and exequi
faciam juxta posse.

The Purport and Scope of Dr. Yerburies Apeal.
. 7. When according to this Oath, and in obedience to the Statute ( cap. 35. p.
91, 92. The President with the Officers (appointed by Statute to assist him)
had put Dr. Yerburie out of Commons, December. 27. 1662. He, against his own
Oath, and Declaration and the Statutes of the College above recited, made an
Appeal unto the Visitor, wherein he accused both the President and the
Officers, Note that these wilful and studied slanders (for which he was
afterward condemned both by the Visitor and Himself) were all commenced in the
dreadful Name of God, and so we leave it to consideration, whether there was
not in his Appeal a most wilful Breach of Oath.
of conspiring together to do him wrong; of meeting in a time and at a place
altogether incongruous; and of passing upon him an unjust sentence, without any
Accusation, or Information, or complaint brought against him, against the Form,
Tenor, and Grammatical sense of the College Statutes, etc. Things not only
false, and groundless, but against his own knowledge, and his manifold
Confessions, not only when he submitted to the sentence given, (as he then did
profess) with all meekness and humility, but also after he had made and
presented his Appeal.

His solemn Trial and conviction before the Visitor, with the Visitor's
sentence of condemnation.
8. The Visitor appointed a day of hearing, (which was April. 9. 1663) when the
President and his Advocate (having first protested against the Illegality of
the Appeal on Dr. Yerburie's part, and reserved that question [whether he might
Appeal or not] for a fitter season of debate) produced a Certificate of the
matters of Fact, attested by the President, Vice President, Deans, and Burs^rs,
and as many more of the 13. Seniors as had been eye and ear witnesses, and were
present in the College when the Certificate was to be signed. According to
which Certificate, Dr. Yerburie was guilty in 15 Particulars, the least of
which of it self had been sufficient, to justify the punishment inflicted on
him. But he had a Narrative of his own drawing up, which some while before he
had presented to the Visitor. And even according to that his own Narative, (how
partial soever he had made it, and how skilfully soever his learned Advocate
had pleaded in its excuse, when to defend it was most impossible,) The Visitor,
as the Judge Appealed to, did declare him he guilty in no less then nine
points, even according to the Confessions which in his own hand writing were
then produced. The Visitor also told him (in the presence of the President, and
of the Advocates on either side, and of a great many more both friends and
strangers,) that his Crimes were much aggravated by the unjustness of his
Appeal; and by having been committed against a President, who had been very
obliging to him, as having spared him often, and corrected him at last with
much more tenderness and favor, then according to the Statutes he might have
done. Then his Lp. did Note that the Visitor did not enjoin, yea said expressly
that he would not enjoin the President, to forbear expelling D. Yerburie, in
case he should obey the whole Decree, by his Confession, and Recantation. But
only made it his Request, To which the President made a Conditional promise,
that he would not expel him, unless befound himself bound to do it, upon a
review of his Oath and the College Statutes, in which one case Dr. Yerbury's
Recantation could not acquit him.
enjoin him to make a submission, and confession, and Recantation, before the
President, and Officers, in such form and manner, as his Lp. said he would
Decree in an Instrument, under his hand and Episcopal Seal.

. 9. Two Confessions and Submissions (and both in writing) Dr. Yerburie made
before the Visitor and the President, His two first submissions rejected by the
Visitor, though the same in substance with his two last. The Visitor's
Instrument thereupon directed to our Vniversitty, under his Lps. Hand and Seal.
(one April the 9. another April the 10,) but both being rejected as
insufficient, his Lp. sent down an Instrument signed with his own hand, and
sealed with his Lp's Episcopal seal, the Original of which is in the custody of
the College, but a true Copy of it is this which follows.

. 10. Omnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos hoc praesens scriptum pervenerit, aut
ad Quos infra scripta spectant, seu spectare poterunt quomodolibet in futurum.

Georgius permissione divina Winton Episcopus Salutem in Domino. Vniversitati
vestrae notum facimus, and pro veritate attestamur, quod scrutato Registro
nostro comperimus and invenimus quandam sententiam per nos nuper latam sub
tenore verborum sequentium.

In Dei nomine amen. Auditis visis and intellectis, ac plenarie and mature
discussis per nos Georgium permissione divina Winton. Episopum, and Collegii
Sanctae Mariae Magdal. Oxon Visitatorem (in causa infra scripta inter parts
inferius nominatas, virtute officii mei visitorii) Judicem legitime
constitutum, meritis and circumstantiis cujusdam causae praetensae
Appellationis and Querelae, quae coram nobis in Iudicio inter Hen. Yerbury M.
D. dicti Collegii sociorum unum partem appellantem, and querelantem ex vna, and
venerabilem virum Thomam Pierce S. Theol Professorem, Praesidentem, and Decanos
dicti Collegii parts appellatas and que^^^atas ex altera, nuper vertebatur and
p^ndebat, Vertiturque adhuc and pendet indecisa, rite and leitime procedentes,
partibus praedictis coram nobis in judicio comparentibus, parteque praefa^i
Thomae Pierce and Decanorum praedictorum Sententiam ferri, and justitiam fieri
pro part sua parteque praefati Hen. Yerburie justitiam pro part sua instanter
respective postulante, and petente; rimatoque primitus per nos toto and integro
processu coram nobis in huimodi causa habito and facto, and diligenter
recensito, servatisque per nos de jure in hac part servandis, ad nostrae
senentiae definitivae sive nostri finalis Decreti prolationem, in hujusmodi
causa ferendi, sic duximus procedendum fore, and procedimus in hunc qui
sequitur modum.

Nos Georgius permissione divina Winton. Episcopus, Iudex ante dictus, Christi
nomine pri^mitus invocato, ac Deum solum oculis nostris proponentes, deque and
cum consilio Iurisperitorum cum quibus in hac part communicavimus, matureque
deliberavimus, appellationem and querelam praetensam ex part and per partem
dicti Hen. Yerbury in hac part utcunque de facto interpositam, fuisse ac esse
nullam, in justam, and de Jure prorsus invalidam, and ex minus veris, justis
causis and legitimis factam and interpositam, viribusque and effectu juris
caruisse and carere debere.

Ac been, just, and legitime, per Praesidentem and Decanos antedictos a quibus
in hac part appellatum and querelatum extitit processum, The chief part of the
Injunction, to which Dr. Yerburie in writing did finally refuse to yield
Obedience, as well as in contemptuous words, attested by a public Notary.
pronuntiatum, and decretum fuisse and esse adomnem juris effectum,
pronuntiamus, decernimus, and declaramus.

Et 1. Ob prolationem * verborum quorundum sic imprudenter and inconsiderate
per praefatum Henricum Yerbury, loco and tempore praedictis emissorum, contra
quendam Henricum Clerk Med. Doctorem Sociorum etiam dicti Collegii unum, and
contra dicti Collegii statuta in eo casu provisa * Eadem ut Recantet and
Retractet; 2. Ac dictam sententiam sic contra ipsum per supradictos
Praesidentem and Decanos la^am fuisse ac esse justam, and legitimam; 3.
paenamque eidem impositam and inflictam, aliquanto mitiorem, and
favorabiliorem, quam pro delicti gravitate fuisse, coram Praesidente ac Decanis
praedictis confiteatur, 4. Eamque Confessionem in scriptis eisdem tradat,
Injunximus and Injungimus.

Ac insuper dictum decretum per Praesidentem and Decanos antedictos
interpositum, per hanc nostram Sententiam definitivam, sive finale decretum
Ratificamus and Confirmamus per praesentes; Quam sive Quod, ferimus and
promulgamus in his Scriptis.

In quorum omnium and singulorum praemissorum fidem, nos Episcopus antedictus
has literas nostras fieri fecimus Testimoniales; sigillo nostro Episcopali (quo
in hac part utimur) munitas, and manu propria consignatas. Dat. Decimo die
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1663.

Geor. Winton.

Iunii 17. 1663. Concordat cum Exemplari a Mro Cruys Notario publico,
trasmisso. Ita testor Edw. Houghton, Notarius Publicus. Concordat cum
Originali, Ita Testor Robertus Cruys LL. Bac. and Notarius Publicus.

Yet was he not expelled for that Crime only, final Contempt to that Decree,
but for several other Crimes to each of which an Expulsion did indispensably
belong.
. 11. Now its as clear as the light, from the words of this Instrument, that
Dr. Yerburie was obliged by the Visitors sentence and Decree, not only to
confess, that he was justly and statutably punished by the President and the
three Deans, by whom he was put out of Commons, no nor only to confess that
his punishment was milder and more favorable then for the grievousness of his
offense; But (as the first and chief thing in the Visitors Injunction) he was
also to Recant and Retract the words ( EADEM verba, the very SAME words,) which
he had imprudently and inconsiderately vented, both against Dr. Clerk, and
against the Statutes of the College: for his final Contempt to which part of
the Decree, although the President and Officers might very justly have expelled
him, yet did they expel him for several other Crimes, as well as that, to
which other Crimes an expulsion from the College was so peremptorily due, that
if they had not expelled him, they had been perjured. For thus stands the case,
and thus it is expressed in the College Registre, by the pen of a public Notarie.

Being Cited he appeare's.
. 12. According to a Citation which was delivered to Dr. Yerburie, he made his
Appearance on the day and place therein limited. And at a meeting of the
President and 13. Seniors, being required to perform obedience to the Visitors
Injunction, as much as might be in his Lp's own words expressed in the
Instrument, by turning the Subjunctive Mood into the Indicative, and the third
person into the first, or by translating them into proper and significant
English words, that his Lp's Order might be fully and unfraudulently obeyed, he
did often, and absolutely refuse to do it, nor would give in more at that time,
then these words following.

April the 28. 1663.

His first Paper not accepted, and Time given him for a second.
13. I Henry Yerbury Dr. of Physic and Fellow of St. Mary Magd. College Oxon,
do readily and willingly submit to the Determination of the Reverend Father in
God George Ld. Bp of Winton, Visitor of the said College, according to an
Instrument under his Lp's Episcopal seal, Acknowledging that as to the manner
of what I spoke at the late Election of Officers, concerning Dr. Clerk, (being
the only thing condemned by the Visitor) I was not so prudent and considerate
as became me; and that all Truths were not then and there to have been spoken
against him.

H. Yerburie.

. 14. This being not accepted, (as being scandalously deficient) he was warned
to give his last Answer, and to prepare himself for it by nine of the Clock the
next morning; when, at a like meeting, he finally refused to yield obedience to
what was required, as before, especially to the most important clause of the
Visitors Instrument, ending with these words, Eadem ut Recantet and Retractet,
but in stead of doing That, gave in a paper with these words following.

April 29. 1663.

. 15. Whereas Mr. President declared himself unsatisfied with that submission
tendered by me yesterday, His second paper, which he professed to be his last.
alleging that it was deficient in several particulars, (which I conceived had
been sufficiently impli'd, though not expressed) namely, that I had not
confessed the sentence given against me by the President and the three Deans,
to be just, and that the punishment inflicted was milder and more favorable,
then the weight of the offense, I do now in express terms confess, and
acknowledge these particulars, and what ever else my Lord our Visitor by his
instrument has enjoined, his Lp. having been pleased to interpret those words,
recantet and retractet, to respect only the imprudent and inconsiderate manner
of what I said, without relating to the matter or truth of it, not to be
recanted by

Hen. Yerbury.

Vera copia, ita testor Edv. Houghton Notarius Publicus.

. 16. This second submission having been read, in the hearing of the Officers
and 13. Seniors, Made appear to be faulty in no fewer then Ten or Eleven
respects.
(together with a public notary,) the President made it appear to be in many
respects deficient, in diverse, false, in some contumelious; and that as well to
His authority, as to the Visitors Decree. For first, whereas he calls it his
yesterdays submission, it was in reality a refusal to submit, both to the
instrument of the Visitor, and to the President's Order thereupon. Next, a
submission is at once too general and equivocal a word, and comes not home to
the Visitor's instrument, which requires Confession and Recantation. Thirdly,
the recital of what was said to be yesterday deficient, deficient, and very
fraudulent. For besides the two particulars which are here to confess, that his
Appeal was null, unjust, and made up of things false, unjust, and illegal. Nor
only so, but also in writing to recant and retract his Eadem verba, etc.
very words, which he imprudently had vented both against Dr. Clerk, and
against the Statutes; which although the chief things exacted from him, he
neither then did, nor does he now take notice of. Fourthly, the two particulars
which he recites of what he yesterday omitted, are very instrument his
confession was to be this, [ That it was well, and justly, and legally decreed
by the President and the Deans, when he was put out of Commons for fifteen
days;] The first and third of which adverbs he wholly leaves out, and turns the
second into an Adjective; betwixt which two there is a great and important
difference; because a sentence may be just, which yet (in many respects) may be
unjustly and illegally pronounced. Again, according to the instrument, wherein
the words are, poenam ei inflictam fuisse favorabiliorem quam pro delicti
gravitate, he should have confessed in the English, that his punishment was
more favorable than for the Grievousness of his offense: whereas he falsely
translates it thus, (as well in mockery to the instrument, as against common
sense,) that the punishment was more favorable then the weight of his offense:
as if gravitas in That place had signified weight; and that the weight of the
offense had been favorable too; or that the punishment was but more
favorable, than That which was not so at all. For which, and diverse other
reasons, (especially that the Visitor might not be mocked and derided, under
pretense of his being obeyed) the President insisted on what he frequently had
enjoined, to wit, that Dr. Yerbury should show the impartiality of his
obedience to the Visitors Order and Decree, by varying no more from the words
of the Instrument, wherein his Recantation and Confession are enjoined, than *
by turning the third into the first person singular, and the Subjunctive mood
into the Indicative: which he often and finally would not perform. Fifthly, he
says he does now in express terms confess and acknowledge these particulars;
whereas the Terms are not expressed in conjunction with his which if any, is
but implied, as it stands in connection with [ express terms] and [these
particulars.] Sixthly, he professes to confess whatsoever else my Lord merely
indefinite and general Terms; neither naming the nullity, falseness, injustice,
and illegallity of his Appeal, (which he was to confess in writing, and terms
express,) nor so much as Comprehending or Implying those things, which the
Visitor had commanded him to recant and retract, and not to acknowledge, or to
confess: unless he purposely means to scoff, both at the Visitor and his
Instrument, by declaring to confess what he is bound to disavow. Seventhly, by
That his Lp. had interpreted those words, retractet and recantet, to respect
only the imprudent and inconsiderate manner of what he said, without relating
to the matter or truth of it,] he usurps and injures his Lp's. name and
Authority, against his Lp's own hand and seal; and withal against the
judgment of Common sense. Against the former, as appears by the words of the
Instrument, to which his Lp's. own hand and seal are fixed; (a copy of which
instrument Dr. Yerbury professed to have in his pocket, and so he could not
make excuses from wants of knowledge;) against the latter, for these two
reasons; first because the two words imprudenter and inconsiderate are not
ingredients in the object, on which the act of Recanting is in the Instrument
to be placed, (unless by way of consecution, as the word Eadem does relate to
the whole clause going before; in as much as verba imprudenter and
inconsiderate emissae contra Hen. Clerk, and Collegii statuta, are clearly to
be taken in sensu composito;) but more directly in the Reason which his Lp.
alleges in his Instrument, why he decreed the Recantation: witness these
words, [ ob prolationem verborum, etc.] Next because the Recantation (both Act
and Object,) is enjoined in these words by the Visitor and his Instrument,
Eadem ut recantet and retractet, injuximus, and injungimus. Where it is so plain
that the word [ eadem] agrees with [ verba] going before, that there is no
possibility it should agree with any thing else. Which made so clear a
demonstration, that the words themselves were to be recanted, and not the bare
manner of their prolation, That Dr. Yerbury confessed more than once, the in
saying that his Lp. did interpret [ recantet and retractet] to respect only the
imprudent and inconsiderate manner of what he said, without relating to the
matter; he charge his Lp. with an absurdity, which could not possibly stand
with his Lp' s great wisdom. For, to omit that he opposes his Lps private
interpretation (made no-body-knows when, and before no-body-knows whom,)
against his public Instrument and decree, (as was said before,) to which (in
the hearing of the President) his Lp. exacted a full obedience, and that upon
pain of his being left to the greatest severity of the Statutes; he also
forgeth his Lp. to have done a thing so extravagant, that it may very well be
reckoned inter scandala magnatum. For when [ eadem] is the word which agrees
with [ verba] and is governed by the words [ recantet and retractet,] how can
any man say, (Dr. Yerbury only excepted,) that [ retractet and recantet] have
no relation to the matter of what was said, when they must rather (of the two)
have relation to nothing else? Or if they relate unto the manner, (as by way of
Connotation they also do,) yet can it not possibly be exclusive of the matter,
if [ eadem ut recantet] be sense or Latin; as That must necessarily be, to
which (with so great and so Christi nomine primitus invocato, ac Deum solum
oculis nostris proponentes, de and cum consilio Juris-peritorum cum quibus in
hac part communicavimus, matureque deliberavimus, and so forwards in the
Instrument.
avowed a consideration) his Lp. set his own hand and Episcopal Seal. Ninthly,
in saying, that Recantet and Retractet, do not relate unto the Truth of what he
said, he is just as impertinent, as in other things false. It having been
somewhat else, and not the truth of what he said, for which his Lp. did declare
he had been justly put out of Commons; and for Lp. enjoined him to recant. The
falsehood of much, if not of all that he had said, having been proved by the
President, as well before the Visitor in the presence of Dr. Yerbury, (who did
not offer at a reply in his vindication,) as in the presence and hearing of the
thirteen Seniors, when Dr. Yerbury was not silent only, as to any reply, but
seemingly satisfied and convinced by what the President Tenthly, 'Twas observed
in the President's Animadversions on Dr. Yerburie's last paper, That though he
confesses Two particulars, yet still he retracteth and recanteth nothing at
all; no not so much as the imprudent and inconsiderate manner of what he said,
to which his paper confesses the words Recantet and Retractet in the
Instrument do relate. Last of all, for the matter, which is imported by the
word eadem, and needs must be, (whether the manner be, or not,) he does not
only pass it by, (as he does the manner,) or by a modest silence, not recant
it, but immodestly declare's, (notwithstanding his own acknowledgement of the
Visitors Injunction, and its importance in the Instrument,) That it is not to
be recanted by him.

. 17. These were the President's Animadversions which he delivered to this
effect, and in much the same terms, Dr. Yerburie's Confession that the
Visitor's Instrument was against him; with his final Asseveration That he would
not recant his words.
by word of mouth, (before the persons above named) This is said only to show,
That the Faults of his Submission were so gross and obvious, as not to need a
second Thought for their Discovery.
as soon as he had read Dr. Yerburie's Paper, which he did with an audible
voice. This being done, he required Dr. Yerburie to give his last and final
answer, whether or no he would recant, as the Visitor's Instrument had obliged
him, and as his President did require. And the rather did he call for a final
answer, because the patience of all present had been already much tired, and
himself on the morrow was to take a long Journey in College-business. To which
it was said by Dr. Yerburie (in these words, or to this effect;) Note that he
offered to alter some phrases or expressions in his Paper, not relating to the
Recanting or retracting of any words.
It is my last and final answer, (And should you ask me never so long, I should
but give the very same,) That I cannot retract and recant my words. And though
I must confess again, that the Instrument is against me, I can do no more then
I have done in that Paper.

. 18. The President hereupon read the Oath Cap. 6 p. 25, 26, 27.
which had been taken by Dr. Yerburie; The Presidents and Officers Proceedings
thereupon.
and showed him (as he read) his manifold transgressions and breaches of it.
Then he read over that other Statute, of which the title is, Cap. 27. p. 65.
Quomodo proceditur contra Secios and Scholares Coll. super majoribus
criminibus defamatos;] and told Dr. Yerburie, to whom he read it, that as well
for his manifest and manifold breach of Oath, whereof himself and the Officers
had found and judged him to be guilty; and to each of which Breaches of Oath an
Expulsion from the College did by force of that Statute indispensably belong;
Ib. p. 66.
( Ex tunc, and ipso facto, nulla alia praemissa monitione, and absque
cujuscunque Appellationis remedio, vel querelae,) as also for his conspiracies
against the good estate of the College, and for other great crimes bringing
Scandal and prejudice unto the said College; such as were his Contempts, and
his Slanderous Defamations, committed against the This will be proved by his
own Letters from London to Oxford, and by his own Confession of them in the
presence of many witnesses, one whereof is a Public Notarie, under whose hand
it is attested.
Visitor, the This will be proved, as by other evidences, so by his Letters to
Mr. Tayleur, which he communicated to diverse who will attest it As also by
diverse other Letters, and words of mouth, to four other persons, of which proof
will be made when occasion serves.
President, and Officers of the College; for all these reasons, and especially
for the first, (which alone had been too sufficient,) He the said President did
then affirm, That with the sober advice, and by the unanimous consent, of all
the Officers there present, who were appointed by the said Statute to concur
and assist in that particular Case and affair, he was obliged to declare, and
did declare his Place void; and that ex tunc (as the Statute words it) he stood
deprived for ever of all right and title to the place of a Fellow, which once
he held, in Magdalen College here in Oxford.

Which Sentence being pronounced, His Submission to the Legality of his
Expulsion, and his promise to keep his Oaths, by not so much as complaining of
it.
Dr. Yerbury put on his hat; affirming that now, being not a member of the
College, he need not show that respect to which he was bound when he was
Fellow. For which ingenuous acknowledgment that now he ceased to be a Fellow,
the President first gave him a Commendation; and then required him by virtue of
two other Oaths, (which He the said Dr. Yerburie had formerly taken,) to
declare in writing under his hand, Cap. 15 p. 43. Cap. 52. p. 125.
That he did perfectly acquiesce in his Expulsion, and would not endeavor his
Restitution by procuring any Letters, or by making any Appeals, nor create any
trouble to the President and Officers, or either of them, by any process of
Law, or other course whatsoever. To which Dr. Yerburie made this Answer; That
he would look upon his Oaths, which then were showed him, and doubted not but
he should perform what by those Oaths he was bound unto; and that the more to
the President's satisfaction, for taking time to consider of it.

The truth of these things, at which I was present on the said 29th of April,
is attested by me Edw. Houghton Public Notarie.

Statut. Cap. 27. p. 65.
A true Copy of the Statute, by virtue of which Dr. Yerburie was expelled.
. 19. Item statuimus, ordinamus and volumus, quod si contra aliquem Sociorum
vel Scholarium dicti Collegii infamia oriatur, super crimen Haeresis, Simoniae,
aut super perjurio manifesto, vel furto notabili, homicidio voluntario,
adulterio, incestu atroci, percussione injuriosa Socii vel Scholaris, laesionem
enormem inferente, praesertim Praesidentis, Vice-praesidentis, alicujusve
Decanorum vel Bursariorum, Magistri, vel Doctoris ipsius Collegii, vel super
alio crimine similiter enormi, aut aliquo alio crimine de majoribus criminibus,
vel quod notorius fornicator existat, aut quod conspirationes illicitas fecerit
aut inierit, vel eas fieri procuraverit contra Statum dicti Collegii, vel
facientibus conspirationes hujusmodi praestiterit consilium, vel favorem, aut
aliquod factum ejusmodi perpetraverit, per quod grave damnum, praejudicium vel
scandalum dicto Collegio generetur, and praemissa, vel eorum aliquod, public
confessus fuerit coram Praesidente dicti Collegii, assistentibus sibi
Vice-praesidente, duobus Decanis and Bursariis, vel per Testes idoneos
Praesidentis, Vice-praesidentis, and aliorum superius nominatorum judicio
approbandos, aut per Facti evidentiam coram eisdem reus manifest convictus
fuerit, ex tunc, a dicto Collegio praesentis nostrae Ordinationis vigore, nulla
alia praemissa monitione, eum exclusum and privatum fore ipso facto decernimus
and statuimus, absque cujuscunque Appellationis remedio vel querelae.

The Conclusion.
. 20. After This we desire it may be heeded, first, that Dr. Yerburie did
finally Refuse to obey the chief part of the Visitor's Instrument and Decree.
Secondly, that we expelled him, not singly and solely for that Refusal, but for
several other Crimes for which we must have expelled him, or else be perjured.
Thirdly, that we did not require him to repeat whatever words he had spoken
against Dr. Clerk and against the Statutes, and so to recant them in the
Retaile, (though according to the Instrument we might have done it;) But being
desirous to make his Task as easy for him as was possible, we did only require
him to recant them in the Gross, as our Visitor in his Instrument was pleased
to order and injoin. Fourthly, that we omitted to make any mention (in our
Injunction,) either of matter or manner, Truth or Falsehood, for fear of putting
any Rub in the way which we had smoothed to his Recantation; But dealing
tenderly with him as with a weak (whom yet we found a wilful) Brother, we
required him only in general Terms to yield obedience to the Visitor's
Injunction, which did concern his Recantation. And to prevent all deceit which
is apt to lie in Generals, as well as to vindicate and evince the perfect
Sincerity of his obedience, we required him to comply with the Visitor's most
plain and unavoidable Sense, by varying no more from his very words, then by
turning the third person into the first, and the Subjunctive into the
Indicative mood, and so instead of those words (which are the Visitor's in his
Instrument,) Ob prolationem * VERBORVM quorundam sic imprudenter and
inconsiderate per praefatum Henricum Yerburie loco and tempore praedictis
emissorum contra quendam Henricum Clerk Medicinae Doctorem, Sociorum etiam
dicti Collegii unum, and contra dicti Collegii Statuta in eo casu provisa, *
EADEM VT RECANTET ET RETRACTET, -- INIVNXIMVS ET INIVNGIMVS; to substitute
These in obedience to them -- [Ob prolationem verborum quorundam sic
imprudenter and inconsiderate per me praefatum Henricum Yerburie loco and
tempore praedictis emissorum contra quendam Henricum Clerk Medicinae Doctorem,
Sociorum etiam dicti Collegii unum, and contra dicti Collegii Statuta in eo
casu provisa, EADEM RECANTO ET RETRACTO.] But This, or any Thing else, which
might be tantamount to it, he did often and finally refuse to do.

. 21. We will not here add, by how many obliging methods he had been sought
long before; how very often he had been spared, when according to the Statutes
he should legally have been punished; how many of his Faults were connived at,
for fear his Contempt of admonitions should necessitate his Expulsion; with
what offers of Reward, Respect, and Partiality, he had been courted and wooed
to be but a Regular Collegiate, and by such humble Importunities of the
President Himself, (who never once commanded, as by Statute he should have
done, until his earnest Entreaties had been despised,) that Dr. Yerburie
professed his Amazement at it; with what invincible patience and forgiveness
the President had put up his public Indignities and Affronts, his Lies and
Slanders, confessed also to have been such by Dr. Yerburie Himself, as soon as
he came to be in cold blood; how early and how often he had merited an
Expulsion, which was inflicted but once, and as late as might be: we say, we
will not insist upon such Things as These, nor show the Origin and Growth
either of his Guilts or his Discontents, unless we are forced by his
Continuance in the desperate Course he has begun, to proceed farther yet in
our Vindication.

Thomas Pierce Praes. Henry Clerk M.D. Vicepraes. Ed. Rogers S. T.B. Decan.
Theol. Cul. Brown M. A. Dec. Art. Geo. Langton M. A. Burs. Ioh. Clitherow M.A.
Burs.


Now we leave it to be considered by as many as have the patience to peruse
this Account,

I. Whether comparing Dr. Yerburie's Oath against Appealing to any person, (p.
1.. 1.) with the Appeal of Dr. Yerburie (p. 4.. 7.) And Both with the
Instrument of the Visitor unto whom his Appeal was made, (p. 5.. 10.) And all
three with the Statute by which a manifest Breach of Oath is to be punished
with Expulsion without Remedy or Delay, (p. 10.. 19.) And this again with that
Oath which the Praesident had taken to punish All without Fear or Favor,
according to the plain and literal sense of each Statute, (p. 4.. 6.) we had
not been strictly bound in Conscience to proceed to that Sentence which is
pronounced (p. 9.. 18.) though Dr. Yerburie had committed no other Crime.

II. Whether it was not another Crime (deserving Expulsion of it self,) to
persevere in Disobedience to the Visitor's Injunction, which Dr. Yerburie by an
Statut. cap. 6. p. 26, 27.
Oath did stand obliged to obey. And whether he did not so persevere, whose
last and final Submission was in so many respects deficient as is evinced, (.
16. p. 7, and 8.)

III. Whether it was not another Crime (deserving Expulsion of it self) to
enter into Conspiracies against the Praesident and the Officers, (which
Officers he was Statut. cap. 6. p. 25, 26.
sworn both to Reverence and Obey) and against the good Estate of the College,
(to be punished by Expulsion without all Remedy by Appeal, p. 10.. 19.) and
this in many more respects then here is Paper to contain. But Proof shall be
made as occasion serves, or when the President with the Officers shall be
thereunto called.

IV. Whether it was not another Crime (deserving Expulsion of it self) as well
by Word as by Epistles to slander the Visitor, the Praesident, and his
statutable Assistants, in This will be publicly made good, as is offered in
the margin of p. 9.. 18.
several kinds (which for brevities sake are here omitted) to the great
Prejudice and Scandal thereby accrewing to the College, to be punished by
Expulsion without all Remedy by Appeal, (p. 10.. 19.)

V. Whether it were not another Crime (deserving Expulsion of it self) not to
submit unto his punishment of being put out of Commons, although he had
expressly sworn to do it, and protested that he did it, whilst yet he
wilfully did it not, as is evident by the Date of his Appeal, attested by his
public Notarie Lecta and interposita fuit haec Appellatio in Hospitio vulgo
dicto The Catharine-wheel, in parochia S. Mariae, etc. Ian. 8. 1662. in
praesentia mei Greg. Ballard LL. Bacc. Notarii publici, Henrici Alworth LL.
Doctoris, and Johannes Rodes literati.
Ian. 8. 1662. (in a certain Alehouse or Inn called The Catharine-wheel) which
was within the 15 Days, during which he took an Oath to acquiesce in his
punishment with all submission, and solemnly promised that he would do it with
all meekness and humility; and with thankfulness too, that his punishment was
milder then he saw by the Statute it should have been.

Other Crimes of Dr. Yerburie might here be added, (deserving Expulsion of
themselves) were it not for their reflection upon some other persons whom we
respect, for which one reason they are withheld, unless some farther
Provocation shall draw them forth.


