THE DANGER OF A Total and Wilful NEGLECT Equal to the DANGER of an UNWORTHY
RECEIVING OF THE Lords Supper, WHEREIN As is shown the Nature and Danger of an
Unworthy Receiving, so the great Folly and Sin of Neglecting it.

From those Words of St. Paul, 1 CORINTHIANS. XI. xxix.

By C. P. A. M.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at
the Lower End of Cheap Side near Mercer's Chapel, and are to be sold by Obed.
Smith Bookseller at Daventry in Northamptonshire, 1693.

TO THE READER.
HOwever unnecessary this Ensuing Discourse may seem to be in the Judgment of
some, by reason of those many excellent and full Discourses that have been
already published concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and which
almost render it impossible to publish any thing New upon this Subject:

Yet I am not without some hopes of its doing Good, if not to those whose
Circumstances will not permit them to buy and peruse the several Treatises that
are now Extant concerning the Lords Supper; yet to my own Parishioners, for
whose sake it is chiefly published, and who indeed stand in need of Line upon
Line, to bring them to a Practical Apprebension of the Obligation that lies
upon Christians to the Receiving of the Lords Supper, as well as to the worthy
Approach thereof: And if in any Instance this Discourse may procure the End for
which it was designed, and do good to them, or any Persons else; as I shall be
thankful to God for it, so shall I look upon it as no mean Reward, whatever
Censures it meets with from others.

THE DANGER OF A Total and Wilful NEGLECT Equal to the Danger of an UNWORTHY
RECEIVING Of the Lord's Supper,
1 COR. XI. chapter 29. v. For he that eats and drinks Unworthily, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.


AMongst other the Reasons that are urged for the Forbearance from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the sense of the greatness of the Ordinance, and
the sad Sentence that is declared against Unworthy Receivers, is urged as a
great Bar by some Men thereto.

Too many indeed are the Excuses that Men make for their not Coming to this
Heavenly Feast; but that which is most prevalent with well meaning People, is
the Fears of their own Unfitness for it, and the Doubts that they never shall
be Worthy.

Now for the satisfaction of such Men it is that I have made Choice of the
Words of St. Paul, as the Subject of the following Discourse, and from them
shall Treat of the following things.

1. What is here meant by Eating and Drinking Unworthily. 2. Upon what Account,
and by what Ways Men receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper Unworthily, or
are Unworthy Communicants, and by what they are not. 3. In what Sense the
Receiving of it Unworthily is so dangerous as it is said to be in the Text. 4.
That although it be very Dangerous to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
Unworthily, yet the Total and Wilful Neglect thereof is as dangerous; and that
the not partaking of other Ordinances Worthily, makes Men liable to Damnation,
as well as the not partaking of the Sacrament Worthily. 5. I shall Close all
with an Exhortation.
1. Of the First, What is here Meant by Eating and Drinking Unworthily.

Now by Eating and Drinking Unworthily, not only the Words foregoing limit the
Application of them to the Receiving of the Lord's Supper Unworthily, but the
general Apprehension of Christians that they are to be so taken, do declare the
same. It Is true indeed, that the Words are (...) of our common Eating and
Drinking, that (...) soever Eats or Drinks Unworthily, that (...) there
abuses God's good Creatures, or himself (...) an Unworthy or Intemperate Use
of them, E^^^^eth and Drinks Damnation to himself, without Repentance, his
Gluttony and Excess, as u^^ thankfulness for God's good Creatures, being Sins^
that make him liable to the Wrath of God.

But yet as all eating and drinking is not a receiving of a Sacrament; so not
of that which is a Commemorative Ordinance of Christ's Body and Blood, being
given and shed for us, for else we might say that Heathens or Infidels receive
the Sacrament when they eat and drink: But as this is inconsistent with the
Notions that men have of the Sacrament; so particularly with the scope of the
Apostles words, which is concerning eating and drinking, according to the
Institution of our Savior, in remembrance of his Death and Passion, and
agreeably hereto he tells, 1 Cor. 11. chapter v. 26. That as often as ye eat this
Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he comes; and in my
Text, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation:
But why? it follows, because he discerns not the Lords Body, of which he then
Sacramentally partakes, as to the outward Symbols or Elements thereof.

But why do I stand to show, that by eating and drinking here, is meant the
receiving of the Lord's Supper, and not common Eating at our ordinary Meals:
Since though some profane Persons to excuse themselves in their absence from
this Ordinance pretend that they can receive the Sacrament as often as they eat
and drink; yet all sober Christians do apply the words of the Apostle to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and their Doubts are not so much what is here
meant by eating and drinking, as what the doing it so unworthily signifies,
which is the next thing to be spoke to.

NOW, by Eating and Drinking unworthily, is not meant, a not deserving, or not
being worthy to eat and drink what we do at the Lord's Supper, as Deserving, or
being Worthy, signifies our desert or merit to partake of what we there
partake; (for in this sense all are unworthy, yea even the Apostles were so;
yea in that we come to this Ordinance to commemorate the Sufferings of Christ,
as having laid down his Life for our Sins, we do hereby show, That we of our
selves are not worthy to receive so great a Favor, as the pardon of our Sins,
and other benefits of his Sufferings, but only by his Merits:) But tho we are
not worthy in this sense, so as to deserve a partaking of what we there
partake; yet such is the Goodness of God, that if we are but sincere in our
preparations, in our Repentance, Thankfulness, and the like, as also in our
Resolutions and Actions of Faith, Love and Obedience, God will accept of us as
worthy in a Gospel sense, and bless his Ordinance unto us.

Such an Unworthiness then as the not deserving the Favors we then receive, is
not the unworthiness spoken of in the Text, since there are none that are so
worthy in themselves, no, not even St. Paul; and therefore I proceed to show
what is the unworthiness spoken of in this place.

Now by Eating and Drinking unworthily, I presume is meant, a performing the
Duty of receiving the Lords Supper in ways unbecoming, unsuitable, or unfit to
the Nature and Design of it, it is to receive it otherwise than we ought, or
not agreeably to the worth of it, or the esteem we ought to bear to it. This I
take to be the meaning of unworthily, and with this the Corinthians were
charged, as also suffered for, when they made no difference betwixt the Lord's
Body, and their Common meals, ^^t came to, and behaved themselves thereat
disorderly, as you may see Verse 21 of this Chapter.

And so I pass over to the next thing I proposed to treat of, viz. Upon what
account, and by what ways men receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
unworthily, or are unworthy Communicants. Now this they do, as they either come
unprepared to, or behave themselves disorderly or unsuita^ly thereat.

And first, Men eat and drink unworthily at the Lord's Supper, when they come
unprepared to it; and then are they said to be unprepared, when they ^ome not
with those Conditions or Qualifications which belong to him that is a Worthy
Receiver, and so accordingly as men are wanting thereof, more or less, they may
be said to be more or less ^repar'd, I shall therefore speak something
conterning these Qualifications.

And first, One Qualification of a Worthy Receiver, or Communicant, is a
competent knowledge of the Nature and End of this Ordinance, which if Men come
to the Sacrament without, they eat and drink unworthily. Before People eat of
this Bread, and drink of this Cup, they ought to examine themselves, 1 Cor.
11.28. and as of other things, so of their Knowledge, what is to be done at the
Sacrament: And if upon Enquiry they find they have ^ot any Knowledge to
distinguish it from other ^ating and drinking, when they do not discern ^he
Lord's Body, they eat and drink unworthily, ^s it is in the Text: And how
indeed can any Man ^o a thing worthily, that knows not what he does, ^or why he
does it? And agreeable hereto are ^he words of the Learned Bishop Tailor, That
he that knows nothing of the Sacrament, nor can be taught any thing, must be
permitted to the Mercies of God, and the Prayers of the Church, but he has not
to do with the Communion. See Bp. Taylor's Worthy Communicant, Chap. 3. Sect. 3.

But as to this Qualification of a Competent Knowledge, there are but few but
what do, o^ may come with it, if it be not their own faults; for he that has
but so match Learning as to be able to read the Bible, wherein the Institution
and End of it are so clearly laid down; as also any of those Books about the
Sacrament which are published amongst us, that either knows his Catechism, or
applies himself to the hearing of God's Word, and withal has but the common
Reason and Understanding of a Man; it is his own fault if he does no^ attain to
some knowledge of that Ordinance. Its true, that all have not the like
Knowledge, no^ are they equally skilled in the Mysteries of Faith; and as there
is not alike Knowledge in all, so neither is it required it should be so, there
being newborn Babes as well as grown Persons in Christ: So that if Men have but
a competent knowledge, so much as makes them sensible of the Nature and End of
this Duty, and what they are to do at, and after, as well as before it, their
Knowledge shall be reckoned sufficient.

Nay even amongst the less knowing, but sincere Christians, it many times
happens, that though they cannot define the Notion of the Sacrament, no^ talk so
Learnedly about it as the Learned Ones do^ they may yet be more worthy in God's
sight, and more experimentally find out the sweetness of this Ordinance than
the others: And though they cannot dispute so much concerning the manner of
Christ's presence as the great Casuists do, they may ye^ be in a closer
Communion with him, and from the sense of Christ's Love displayed to them in
this Ordinance, have their Hearts so enlarged that they can even dye for him.

But if after all, some are so ignorant in this Nation, and that wilfully too,
in the midst of such Preaching and Printing as we enjoy, That they ^now not
what the receiving of the Sacrament means, and why it was ordained, I conclude
they ought not to come; or if they do, they come unworthily, because they
discern not the Lords Bo^y.

But Secondly, Another Qualisication of a Worthy Receiver, (without which if
men come, they ^ome unprepared, and so eat and drink unworthily) is a real and
hearty desire to the Ordinance ^^d the Benefits of it; for how can Men receive
that worthily or suitably to the Nature and End thereof, that do not desire it?
He therefore that would not eat and drink unworthily, must also ^^amine his
desires; does he desire to have his ^ins pardoned, and Christ dwell in him? Is
he ^illing to take on him Christ's Nature, and to be ^ne with him? or is he
glad to be in Covenant ^ith God? In short, does he desire Christ upon the ^erms
that Christ is proposed? If he does, he is ^a fair way of being a good
Communicant, yea, (...) is one that is bidden and invited to come, Isa. (...)
chapter 1 v. But on the other hand, if a Man comes (...) it without any desire, or
mind to it, and had ra^er not partake of it, (was he left at his liberty) ^^t
only from fear to stay away, or from worldly engagements to come, he frequents
it, it is not (...) be thought that he will be a Worthy Receiver, because in
such addresses a Man comes to it without ^is Heart, and so for want thereof his
Devotion ^^d Behavior is like to be but lukewarm, if not ^ld or dead.

If indeed a Man comes to this Ordinance to en^ crease his Desires after it, if
he comes not only upon the sense of his Duty to come, but out o^ hopes that by
coming his Heart will be enlarged toward Christ, and he become more fit for
this Ordinance: If he, I say, desires that he may desire Christ more, and is
truly sorrowful that he is no more desirous, this shows the sincerity of his
Heart in what he does, and consequently that he is no^ unworthy in God's
Merciful acceptance of what he does, tho he has not those passionate heats, o^
sree Enlargements of Soul as some have. But i^ on the other hand, our coming to
this Ordinance be a Burden to us, and we desire (if it may be (...) to be
excused; but because we are not excused therefore only yield a formal and
outward respect, we don't deal worthily by it when we ea^ and drink at Christ's
Supper with no Appetite^ and do as it were dislike, though we feed on the
Elements thereof.

Thirdly, Another Qualification, without which if Men come, they are unprepared
for the Sacrament, and so eat and drink unworthily, is Repentance, or a sincere
Resolution of amendment. An^ truly they that come to this, or to any other
O^dinance without Repentance, or Resolutions o^ Amendment, come unworthily; and
accordingly God tells us of the Wicked, that their Sacrific^ is an abomination
to him, Prove. 15.8. That his Fa^ is set against them that do evil, that he will
not hea^ their Prayers, Isa. 1.13, 15. yea, all their action of Devotion and
Worship are loathsome in h^^ sight, Isa. 66. chapter v. 3. And if so, you may
imagine they are not in such Cases worthily performed when they are so hateful
to God: and now, if that the living in Sin marrs the Duty, as well as hinders
the blessing of other Ordinances, will it n^ also render us unworthy
Communicants: Surely if living in Sin makes us unworthy in Prayer, it will much
more do so in the Sacrament, so that Repentance is a necessary Qualification
for the Receiving of the Lord's Supper. As to Repentance, what it is, and how
much it contains a change of Heart and practice; or at least a sincere
endeavor to evidence our inward Change by our outward Acts, so much as we have
Opportunity and Ability, I think I need not stand now to show, it being so often
treated of by others, and has been so largely handled in my Parish, for the
good of which ^his Discourse is primarily intended; but shall proceed to show,
how the want thereof in any ^an makes him an unworthy Communicant, for so long
as he retains his Sins, he retains that which is an Enemy to Christ, and caused
him to suffer; ^ea, that which dishonours not only him, but his Ordinance too,
which is an Ordinance of Purity, and therefore to be received with Purity; and
consequently if he does not drive Christ away from his Ordinance, yet by his
Sins he puts a stop to any Fellowship that he may expect with Christ ^hereby,
there being no Communion with Light and Darkness, nor has Christ and Belial
any Con^ord, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. for to bring our Sins un^orrow'd for before him,
what is it else than to ^ring his Enemies before him, and own our Friend^hip
with them, and consequently to affront him? And now we must needs think, that
since they ^ere the Sins of Men which made him suffer so ^uch, he cannot well
bear the sight of them in his ^resence, and especially as allovv'd by them, ^ho
for his sake as well as their own have such ^ogent reasons eternally to hate
and forfake them. (...) short, since the very end of this Ordinance is to
^ommemorate Christ's dying for our Sins, and to convey the benefit of his
Blood, which was shed for the remission of them, it cannot but be an unwo^^ thy
return, to bring our Sins before him unrepented of.

But why do I stand to prove, that Repentance is a Qualification of a Worthy
Communicant, since even Wicked Men themselves own that it is so^ and therefore
make some pretenses to it before they approach to the Lord's Table, yea, the
sense o^ their coming thereto shall put them into some good Moods, and faint
resolutions of Amendment (...) nay it may be cause them to set a day or two a^
part beforehand, to bethink themselves to rea^ some good Books, or with Ahab to
go softly and look mournfully.

Yet after all, here lies the trial of our Prepa^ ration and Worthiness in this
Point, whether ou^ Resolutions be sincere, entire, or constant, and w^ are
become new Men in Heart and practice too, a^ far as we have made trial of our
Change; when there our Sorrow for Sin is like to last longer tha^ the Communion
day, and we are like to be goo^ after as well as before the Sacrament; for if
w^ make never so good Resolutions, and spend a day or two before the Sacrament
never so well in Religious Exercises, and yet when we have Communicated return
to our old ways, if we find that the bent and inclination of our Soul is not
altered, and our zeal against Sin is only Temporary and formal, we do not eat
and drink worthily, but unworthily, and for all our outward Communicating,
Christ may say of us as he did of Judas, Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth
me, is with me o^ the Table. Luke 22.21.

Fourthly, Another Qualification of a Worth^ Communicant, without which, if Men
come to the Sacrament they are unprepared, and so eat and drink unworthily, is
Charity: Now by Charity I mean not only a Love to God, but Love and forgiveness
to Men.

And First, As Charity signifies a Love to God, ^e that comes to the Sacrament
without it, cannot receive it worthily; for how can a Man have such a due sense
of Christ's Love in this Ordinance ^s he ought, and yet remain without Love to
him? Nay, if he is sensible of Christ's Love, and will ^ot Love him again, the
more unworthy he, that ^ill not do so much as the Publicans, who love hose that
love them, Mat. 6.46. Yea very ungrateful, and so unworthy is he, that is going
to receive the Pledges of Christ's Love, and that of ^is dying and greatest
Love, (for greater Love ^ath no Man than to lay down his Life for his friends,
except it be a laying of it down for his ^emies, for this is Love beyond
comparison, and ^et such Love did Christ show when he laid down ^s Life for
Sinners;) For a good man peradventure ^me would even dare to dye: but God
com^^ded his love to us, in that whilst we were (...) Sinners, Christ dyed for
us. Romans 4. v. 7, 8.
And now ^hen God has so loved us, we cannot ^y we are worthy to partake of
his Love, if we ^ll not love him that has endured so much for ^r sakes.

In short, the very Sacrament it self is an Or^nance of Love; it is a
displaying of Christ's in^mparable Love in dying for Sinners under Sa^amental
Representations: If therefore we will ^^t let our Love bear a part in the
Solemnities thereof, we are unworthy of it, Love being not ^^ly a preparative
Duty, but an Ornamental as ^ell as Active Grace therein, But

Secondly, As Love to God is such a Qualificati^^, without which, if Men come
to the Sacrament, they come unprepared, and so eat and drink unworthily, so
also is Charity and Forgiveness to Men: Now by Charity to Men, I mean not only
a forbearance of Revenge, but a doing of good to those that stand in need of
it: And truly unless a Man can come in Charity, he comes but to his hurt; not
that the want of Charity is an excuse for our Absence from this Ordinance, but
a doubling of our guilt, in that we stay away upon so sinful account, but yet
when we come without Charity, we come unsuitably to it, because this is an
Ordinance of Charity -- It is by this Ordinance that we are made Friends with
God, and it is by this that we should be Friends one with another, that as we
are Members of the same Body, so we become Members one of another, and
consequently should not hurt or devour one another: What? when we feast on the
Memorials of the greatest Love, when we are not only invited to be reconciled
to God, but have such a Pattern of Love and Kindness before us in his dying
even to save us, can we yet be Uncharitable and Cruel? One Man bears hatred
against another, and yet does he seek for pardon from the Lord; if he that is
but flesh nourishes hatred, who will entreat for the pardon of his Sins? could
even the Son of Sirac tell us long ago, Ecclus. 28. v. 2, 3, 4. But a greater
than he has told us, that we must first be reconciled to our Brother, in
Affections at least, before we come with our Gift to the Altar^ Mat. 5.23, 24,
25. And again, if we forgive no^ Men their Trespasses, neither will our
heavenly Father forgive us ours, Mat. 6.15. and many such Texts there are to
the like purpose; nay, from the sense of Christ's dying Love, we find Christ
exhorting his Disciples to the love of each other yea in keeping this
Ordinance, St. Paul exhorts the Corinthians, that they should not keep this
Feast with the Leven of Malice, 1 Cor. 5.8.

And now forgiveness and Charity, being so much required at our hands, can we
think to become Worthy Communicants without it? No: he who hates his Brother,
whatever his hopes and pretenses are, is but a Murderer, and ye know that no
Murderer, till he repents, is a fit Guest for the holy and merciful Jesus; yea,
St. John by way of Interrogation, implying a denial, asks How it can be, that
the Love of God can dwell in him, who when he has this World's goods, and
sees the needs of his Brother, yet shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him?
1 John 3.17. Nay if Christ declares, that such as will not give Meat to the
Hungry, and Drink to the Thirsty, Mat. 25. v. 41.
shall depart from him, and are not worthy of his presence, but sit only for
the Devil and his Angels, it is hard to think how he will accept of the
unmerciful and cruel Person, as a fit Guest at the Heavenly Feast, at this
Ordinance of Forgiveness and Charity.

In short, a very wicked Servant is he, and no Friend of Christ's, who though he
comes to entreat for the forgiveness of ten thousand Talents, does at the same
time keep a resolution of exacting the pence of his Brother; surely if the Love
and Pity that is due to his Brother will not move him, the Consideration of
what a Motive it is to his own Forgiveness from God, that he forgives others,
should even make him more kind for his own as well as others sake, which if he
is not, we must needs own, he is an unwelcome Guest, when he is of so contrary
Behavior to the Doctrine and Example of Christ, which to be of, as it is
offensive to him at all times, so much more in the midst of the Memorials of
his Love and Good will, as well as Gods Forgiveness to us, through the Merits
of his Son. Thus necessary is Forgiveness to make us worthy Communicants, as
well as it is the Condition of God to us.

But now least Persons should mistake the Nature of Forgiveness, though few or
none there are but what will own the Duty of it; before I leave this
Qualification, I shall endeavor to show you what is meant by Forgiveness, and
what is required of us thereby. As,

1. By Forgiveness, is not meant a bare Declaration thereof, or a praying to
God to forgive those that have wronged us; but an actual forgiving, a doing
what we say, and a Heartiness in our desires: Yea it contains the laying aside
the thoughts of doing another Mischief, as well as the forbearance of a
revengeful Act; for he that thinks and wishes ill to another, shows that he
has Malice in his Heart, tho he forbears to execute it. Yea, he that dares not
do another a mischief, but yet desires God to be his Revenger, according to his
Imaginations, does in that show, it is fear or something else, that restrains
his hand, but his Heart is revengefull, and it shows that he would revenge if
he might, and so cannot be said to forgive. But,

2. By Forgiveness is not only meant a forbearance of revenging an Injury, but
a Forgetfulness of the Injury too, so far as to cease from revengefull thoughts
or Expressions.

For he that remembers a wrong done him, so as to heighten his Passion under a
new Provocation; he does not heartily forgive, in that he keeps the seed of the
past Anger and Passion still lurking within him.

It Is true where a man has done me wrong, I may remember it so sar, as to take
care to avoid the like or any other from him for the future; yet though by way of
Caution and Prevention, a man may remember a past offense, the better to arm
and defend himself; he is not so to remember it, as to make it an addition to
his resolutions of Revenge, upon a second Offense; for indeed so to do, is not
to put out the Fire, but only to cover it in Ashes. But,

3. By Forgiveness is not only meant, an act or state of Inoffensiveness
toward others, a forbearance of revenging an Injury, and a forgetfulness of it
so far as to cease from revengeful thoughts or Expressions; but also a
readiness to show actions of Civility and Kindness so far as they are due from
us, even to those that trespass against us.

It Is true indeed, I am not obliged to exercise those particular acts of
Friendship with him, from whom I have received Injuries, and am still like to
receive more, from the ill will and designs he has against me; nor does the
Duty of Forgiveness exclude our Endeavors after satisfaction in a just and
legal way: Yet so far does Forgiveness require our Love and Kindness to
Offenders against us, that they are not to be excluded our Prayers, or our Acts
of Kindness to them as they are men, though we cannot own them as Friends. Even to
our worst Enemies we must do that Good that we would do to all men, as men;
(that is) we must not only forbear to deal unjustly or cruelly with them, but
show them all the Kindness that God by the Gospel, and common Rules of Society
and Civility has made it our Duty to show; and especially where there is no
reason to the contrary, but we may do the same things for them as well as
others; tho they have offended us, we must not see them starve, nor perish for
want of our Relief, for so the Apostle tells us: If even thine Enemy hunger,
feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; yea, where we may, we are to overcome
his evil with our good, Romans 12.20, 21.

And thus I have shown in several of the Qualifications of a worthy Receiver or
Communicant, viz. 1. Knowledge of the Nature and End of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. 2. A real and hearty desire to this Ordinance, and the Benefits
of it. 3. Repentance or sincere Resolution of amendment. 4. Charity and
Forgiveness: That if men come without them, they are unprepared for the
Sacrament, and so eat and drink unworthily. And indeed besides these
Qualifications of a worthy Communicant, there are others without which if we
come to the Sacrament, we eat and drink unworthily; such as Faith and
Thankfulness to our Savior for the Pledges of his Love. But these being Graces
that are chiefly exercised at the Lords Supper, I shall speak of them under the
second way which I instanced, whereby men receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper unworthily, viz.

2d. Way. When they behave themselves disorderly or unsuitably at it. Now men
may be said to behave themselves disorderly or unsuitably, when they don't show
a due respect to what they are doing; but either allow their Hearts to hanker
as well as their thoughts to wander after the World or Sin, or are profane in
their behavior at it: Nay I may safely say, they don't deal with it very
worthily, that either look upon their Receiving it to be little more than a
common or ordinary Eating or Drinking, or else undervalue the Bread and Wine,
as but of little use and purpose.

It Is true the Bread and Wine are but Creatures as our Church terms them, they
are but Bread and Wine in their Nature, but yet as they are instituted by
Christ, to be received in remembrance of hi^ Death and Passion, the taking of
them according to Christ's Institution, is a Symbol, or Sacrament of our taking
and eating the Body and Blood of Christ, and therefore as they are appointed by
Christ, we are not to undervalue them, by thinking we may as well receive
Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant without them as with them, when yet
we have opportunity and invitations thereto, which indeed to undervalue, is not
only to undervalue the Elements, but the Wisdom and Authority of the Instituter.

2. Those Men may be said to behave themselves disorderly and unsuitably at the
Sacrament, and so receive it unworthily, that receive it without Faith: This
Sacrament being such an Ordinance, that without Faith it cannot be received,
and therefore it is the Apostles Advice, that we should draw nigh it with full
assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. for indeed Faith is not only the hand to lead
us unto Christ, Heb. 11.6, 7. but of applying Christ unto us, and making that
which was done for many, Mat. 26.28. to be effectually conveyed unto us, for
what does it signify for me to Commemorate the snfferings of a dying Savior
by receiving Bread and Wine according to Christ's Appointment, If I have not
Faith, that the benefits thereof belong to me, or cannot spiritually feed upon
his Body and Blood by Faith, it being by Faith that we feed upon him? for as to
the Corporeal eating of his Body and Blood, it is such a thing, that could the
Papists quit their Avowance of, and yet keep up the Authority and pretended
Infallibility of their Church, many Learned Men think they could easily part
with their Opinion or Belief thereof: However, if it is the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, it is not the Doctrine of Christ, such being not only contrary
to Sense and Reason, but to Faith also; for as to Faith, we are told in Heb.
11. v. 1. it is the Evidence of things not seen. Now if Christ be Corporeally
present, if the Bread that we eat be the very substantial Body of Christ, it is
then seen, and so our Faith being an Evidence of what is seen, it is not the
true Faith, in that it is contrary to the definition of it. Nay further, this
Sacrament cease to be a Sacrament, which is to be an outward and a Visible
Sign of some Inward and Spiritual thing, if so be that after Consecration the
Bread and Wine become the Body and Blood of Christ in a Corporeal sense, there
then remaining no outward Sign or Sacrament.

But however, the Papists are so quick-sighted to see such a Corporeal Presence
of our Savior, it is more than we can, or more than I read that the Apostles
saw in the Bread and Wine of which he speaks, when he says, This is my Body,
this is my Blood, when at the same time they saw his Body separate from the
Bread he gave them, and they plainly discerned that when the Cup of Wine was
given them, his Blood was not then shed.

It Is true, That Faith sees that in the Sacrament which Reason does not; but
yet though Reason submits to Faith, yet Faith does not put out our Senses from
being Judges where they may, as they may be in discerning what is Flesh and
Blood, and what is Bread and Wine.

But if any Man will say, that our Senses are not to be used in Matters of
Faith, I think he speaks very rash, when even Christ appealed to the Senses of
his Apostles to confirm their Belief of what he said, that he was the same
Christ (tho risen again) that was Crucified, Luke 24.39. Since therefore the
eating of Christ's Body and Blood, tho real, is Spiritual and Sacramental, it
remains, that what we see and taste of him at the Sacrament, is by Faith, which
Faith considers not so much how the Elements feed the Body, as how the things
represented, sealed and applied in this Ordinance, feed and nourish the Soul.
And indeed it is by this, that we not only view him hanging upon the Cross, and
shedding his Blood, but Feast our selves of him, that we may dwell in him, and
he in us: If therefore we come withour Faith, we are unworthy of this
Ordinance, yea, we Evacuate it as to our selves.

But then here let us not be mistaken in our Notion of Faith, or think that a
bare and true belief of Christ's Presence and Blessings in this Ordinance is
the right Belief for it; No, but the Faith of a good Communicant is a Gospel
Faith, such a Faith as receives Christ according to the Terms proposed to us in
the Gospel, and the Sacrament also.

Now that which is so, receives him not only as one shedding his Blood, and
giving his Body to save Men from the Guilt and Punishment of Sin, but from Sin
it self, it is such as receives him as a King to rule us, as well as pardon and
save us; yea, it receives Christ's Body and Blood, that our Bodies may be made
clean, and our Souls washed thereby, yea, in Christ Jesus the Faith that avails
is a working Faith, it works by Love, Gal. 5.6. and it works by Thankfulness
too: And therefore in the third place,

3. Those Men may be said to behave themselves disorderly and unsuitably at the
Sacrament, and so receive it unworthily, that receive it without Thankfulness.
The very Business and Nature of it declares, that it is a Thankful Memorial of
the dying Love of Christ, or a showing forth of his Death, 1 Cor. 11.26. So
that by no means can they receive it worthily that do not receive it
thankfully. And how indeed can we but be thankful, if we consider what we do
and receive in this Ordinance; we feast upon the Memorials of his laying down
his Life for Sinners, yea, for such Sinners as our selves, and that in our
stead, to expiate for our Transgressions, and deliver us from the Wrath of God,
and the sad Consequ ents of it; and now are we Worthy Remembrancers of his
Love, when we are not thankful? Suppose we see a Man ready to starve, yea a Man
ready to be overwhelmed with the Waves of the Sea, and in each of these Cases
receiving relief and Succor, would not he (do ye think) be thankful? yea,
unworthy would he be if he would not be thankful for such Blessings.

And now when we are called to Feast at this Heavenly Banquet upon this Bread
from Heaven, and Food of Saints, yea, upon the Representatives and Seals of
God's Eternal Love in Christ toward Sinners, that deserve, yea, that are ready
to perish, shall not we be thankful? Nay, do but consider, who it was that has
done all this? What it was he suffered, and how much, and see whether we can
Commemorate this his Love, and not be thankful? And truly if we can, without
being so, it is a sign of a hard as well as ungrateful Heart, and is very
unsuitable to the Nature and Design of this Ordinance, which is so much an
Ordinance of Thanksgiving and Praise, that from thence it takes one of its
Names, and is called the Eucharist, or Thanksgiving.

And thus have I at large shown upon what Account, and by what ways Men receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper unworthily, viz. when they come unprepared
to, or behave themselves disorderly or unsuitably at it. And though indeed we can
neither perform the preparatory Duties to, nor the actual Duties in this
Ordinance as we could wish; yet we are to labor after the attainment and
performance thereof as well as we can, and be sorry for our failures therein,
and if we do so, upon the benefit of the Sacraments, we need not distrust God's
acceptance of us, as worthy through the Righteousness of Christ.

But on the other hand, if we do not come to the Sacrament in this sense, if we
have no Knowledge of what we do, and why we come to the Sacrament; if we have
no hungrings and thirstings after Christ, nor desires to this Ordinance; if we
come without Repentance or sincere Resolutions of Amendment, and are without
Love to God, or without Charity and readiness to forgive Men, when we at the
same time do stand in need of, and beg God's forgiveness; if we do not believe
in Christ, and are not thankful for what we Commemorate and receive, we come
unworthily, and to no purpose.

It is the want of these preparatory and Ornamental Graces that makes us
unworthy; but as for Receiving the Sacrament with others that are unworthy, or
for receiving it Kneeling, it makes us not unworthy Guests at the Lord's Table,
which brings me to the latter part of the second Head, viz. Upon what Account,
and by what Ways Men do not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
unworthily.

Now amongst these I shall only in this Discourse insist upon two, and that the
more largely, because they have been made by too many, the hindrances to the
worthy receiving of the Lord's Supper, though in themselves no ways the Cause of
an unworthy Receiving: And they are these, 1. The Receiving of it with unworthy
Persons in a mixed Communion. 2. The Receiving of it in a Kneeling posture.

As to the first, The Receiving of the Sacrament with unworthy Persons in a
mixed Communion, it is indeed much urged by some as a hindrance to a worthy
receiving, but upon what reason I see not. If indeed my receiving of the
Sacrament worthily depended upon others behavior or unworthiness, then it
concerned me to take Care that I did not communicate with any that were
unworthy; but now the terms of a worthy receiving are not so uncertain, but
rather such as a private Communicant is to look after as to himself; but let a
Man examine himself, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. 11.28. As for others
Examination of themselves, or their worthiness, they are to look to it upon
their peril: And though a private Christian as well as the Church ought to
admonish profane and careless Persons how they come, yet if notwithstanding his
Admonition, nay, what is further, the Churches, they will venture to come, it
does not make him that is a worthy Communicant otherwise, hereby to become an
unworthy Communicant: For indeed should this be so, not only the Apostles would
have been unworthy Partakers of the Passover and Sacrament, (because a Judas
was with them) but it may be most good Christians besides, that receive it in a
public Congregation, it being hard to say of the Members of any Congregation,
that they are all so good, that there is no unworthy Member amongst them.

And now is this reasonable, that good Mend worthy performance of this Duty
should become Evil, because they receive with the unworthy, when yet that they
were unworthy, is not the Good Men's fault? It is indeed my Duty to fit my self
as well as I can, and behave my self reverently at it, but if another will come
unprepared, be it to himself, tho I deny not but I ought to be grieved at the
danger he runs himself into, and the scandal that he gives to others, yet as to
the benefit of the Ordinance, his fault does not make void God's Ordinance to
me. And accordingly, though I cannot say but we have many times unworthy
Communicants amongst us; yet many Good Men in receiving of the Sacrament
amongst us find benefit thereby to their Souls, though it may be at the same time
they are sensible, that some that receive with them have not given such
Evidences of their Repentance as might be wished.

Nor indeed are they the more unworthy for receiving it with them, because they
do not thereby join with them in their Sins, but in this part of God's Worship,
which being a public Ordinance for the Church, all the Communion of the Worthy
with the unworthy is only a joining together in the performance of a Common
Duty to which good People are obliged to come, and that worthily, though others
do not, which if they do not, it is their fault, and not Good men's.

And sad indeed would it be, That after all our Care and Endeavors to adorn
our selves to this Marriage Feast, we should be forced to withdraw from it
because there should come in one that had not on the Wedding Garment; but
surely if he comes without it, it is his Fault, which though it renders him
without excuse, it does not therefore make it no Feast to others, nor is it an
excuse to any to stay away upon his account, and thereby to neglect their Duty.

It Is true indeed, that the Church should purge out the leven from amongst
them, (1 Cor. 5.13.) and put away from it notorious Offenders; and accordingly
not only St. Paul, but our Church in her Rubric before the Communion
advertiseth, That the Curate shall not suffer Persons to come to the Lord's
Table, in whom he perceives Malice or Hatred to reign, until he know them to
be reconciled; and that he is also to advertise, That none presume to come to
the Lord's Table that are open ill Livers, whilst they are so; Yet if after
all, either the Minister or the Church cannot for many Reasons keep up its
Discipline, or what is worse to be supposed, do neglect it, yet this is not a
making Worthy Communicants to receive unworthily, the Sacrament still is a
means of Grace to the Worthy partaker; so that as a famous Nonconformist
declares, That though Wicked and Profane Persons pollute this Ordinance to
themselves, yet not to others, but he that believes, eats of the Bread of
Life, John 6.33. which shall be made good to the Believer, though there were but
one in the World: See Hussey's Plea for Christian Magistracy, p. 2. And this he
tells us Beza himself is enforced to confess in his Tract against Erastus;
Bonis manner bona Sacramenta etiamsi qui mali ad eadem accedunt, absit ut
inficiemur: The Sacraments remain effectual to the Good, though Evil Men come to
them, far be it from us to deny it; so that the Sacrament (says he) remains
holy to the Believers, and they are pure notwithstanding the unpreparedness of
the Wicked.

And if it be not in the Power of the Ministers of the Sacraments to hinder the
good Effect of Christ's Ordinance, or to diminish the Grace of God's Gifts from
such as by Faith and rightly do receive them, which are effectual because of
Christ's Institution and Promise, although they be ministered by evil Men, as
our Church declares in her 26th. Article: Much less is it in the Power of
Fellow Communicants, who are no more concerned with our receiving it, than as
they join with us in the outward performance of a common Duty.

And that we may be the more satisfied in this thing, let us but take the
Instance of Judas, and we shall find it very hard to conclude, that the other
eleven Apostles were unworthy Receivers, or that Christ ought not to have eaten
the Passover with, or given the Sacrament to them, because Judas was with
them: For however some Persons would seem to deny it, yet as it is plain that
he was at the Passover, so at the receiving of the Lord's Supper, which will
appear so, if we consider what the Evangelists say hereof. Thus in the 22d.
Luke we shall find it not only declared, that when the Passover was ready, and
the hour for it was come, he sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him, V. 14.
but in the 19, 20, 21 Verses we are told, That he took Bread, and gave thanks,
and brake it amongst them, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is
given for you: Do this in remembrance of me. And likewise also the Cup after
Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for
you: And then follows, But behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me
on the Table. Now if Judas was the Person that betrayed Christ, which is not
denied, it follows, that it was his hand that was with him on the Table; and if
so, that then he was with Christ.

So likewise if we look into the 26th. of St. Matthew's Gospel, we find, that
when Even was come, he sat down with the twelve: And as they did eat, he says,
Verily one of you shall betray me, v. 20, 21. And when Judas asked whether it
was he that should do so, he not only gives a sign who it should be, but
answers Judas it was he; Thou say it, V. 23.25. and in the 26th. Verse,
follows the Institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. And as they were
eating, Jesus took Bread, etc. and in the 27th. Verse, He took the Cup and gave
thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood,
etc. V. 28th. The like I might show from the Account given thereof by St. Mark,
Chapter 14. from V. 17. to V. 25. That where Christ speaks of the Passover or
Lord's Supper to his Disciples, it is not separately to the other eleven, but
to the twelve.

Thus we see, that a Judas being amongst Communicants, did not hinder Christ
from instituting, nor his Disciples from receiving the Lord's Supper, much less
make them unworthy Communicants.

And though some, perhaps, may here assert, That Judas's Unworthiness was
unknown, and that the Disciples did not know that he was the Person that should
betray Christ, as appears by their question to Christ; Is it I? Is it I?

Yet I Answer, That supposing it was unknown to the Disciples till Christ told
them, yet they must allow, that Christ knew very well beforehand who it was
that was to betray him, and that Judas was the Person; and yet notwithstanding
he was known to be so by Christ, yet this did not hinder Christ from
Instituting it, nor did it hinder the other Apostles from being Worthy
Communicants, though it is very probable that before thev received the Sacrament,
they knew or were satisfied, that Judas was the Person that was to betray
Christ, Mar. 26. v. 23.
that sign which Christ gave them, that he who dipped his hand with him in the
Dish, the same should betray him; (Now the dipping of the hand in the Dish was
at the Eating of the Passover, which was celebrated before the Lord's Supper,
or the Institution of the Sacrament,) and therefore they might have avoided him
thereat; but we don't find that they had any such demurrs, but they might as
well receive it with Judas, as Christ give it to him, and yet be Worthy
Communicants.

Nay, let us come to the 11th. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
wherein we have the account of the danger of unworthy Receiving, and we shall
not yet find that others unworthiness made the Good to become unworthy, though
some of them were so unworthy as to be drunk at the Receiving of the Lords
Supper, and so did eat and drink unworthily; yet we don't read that St, Paul
declares, that others that were not so as they, were therefore unworthy, but
rather declares, Let a Man examine himself, and so let him ^at, yea for the
future they were not to separate upon past faults, but to amend when they came
together.

Its true indeed from St. Paul's words, it is lawful to censure Offenders, and
separate them from our Communion till they reform, 1 Cor. 5 chapter from V. 7. to
the end; yea with a Brother that is a Fornicator, or such like, with such an
one we are not to eat: By which words, as we are not to hold intimacy or
Familiarity with scandalous Offenders, further than is necessary and
convenient, we are ^ot to countenance them by our Friendship in their ^vil
Ways; so even the Church is to take Care to inhibit them a Spiritual Communion
with us, (till they repent, or make Declarations thereof) and thereby to
prevent their being offensive to others at this Holy Ordinance.

Yet if after the Churches Admonitions, or what is more, it is Neglects, wicked
Men do venture upon this Ordinance, and come to this Feast, not having on the
Wedding Garment, this does not make Good Men the more unworthy, it being
unreasonable to think, that Judas his being with the other Diseiples made them
also unworthy; or that because an ill Man rushes upon this Ordinance, therefore
a Good Man should go or stay away because of him, or else he must receive
amiss, or that another Sin should make me omit my Duty, or turn it into Sin.

And as the Receiving of the Sacrament with Unworthy Persons in a mixed
Communion does not make Men receive unworthily, where the Receiving with them
is not a complying with them in their sins, but a doing of our own Duty, and
that upon the Command of Christ; so neither in the next place does the
receiving of the Sacrament in a Kneeling posture. Great indeed have been the
Clamours of some People against this Posture, yea so unworthy has it made Men
(according to their Exclamations) that it renders them guilty of Idolatry, and
makes them little less obnoxious to reproof than the Papists are for the
Adoration of the Host.

But yet after all, the strength of their Argumenss consists most in popular
Noise. And as our Church has sufficiently cleared her self from the Charge of
Idolatry, and the countenancing of Transubstantiation, so have its Members as
sufficiently proved the Innocence of this posture of Kneelling.

And though indeed there needs little to be added to what they have written
already, it being so clear and full, particularly in the Treatise, called The
Case of Kneeling at the Sacrament, 1st. and 2d. Part: Yet it still continuing
an Objection in the mouths of some against holding Communion with our Church, I
beg leave to consider their Reasons why the Kneelling at the Sacrament makes
Men to receive it unworthily, amongst which I look upon these to be the chief.

1. That Kneeling is not the posture in which Christ gave, and his Apostles
received it.

2. That Kneeling being a Posture of Worship and Adoration, it too much
countenanceth the Adoration of the Host, and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Now if these Objections will not hold good, then it will not appear from them,
that Kneeling at the Sacrament makes Men to receive it unworthily.

To consider therefore their first Reason against Kneeling at the Sacrament,
viz. That Kneeling is not the Posture in which Christ and his Apostles received
it. To which I Answer: 1. That this is more than can be proved. 2. That if
Kneeling was not the Posture in which Christ gave, and his Apostles received
it, yet it does not follow therefore that Kneeling is an unsuitable Posture, or
makes Men receive the Sacrament unworthily.

As to the first, That this is more than can be proved, that Kneeling was not
the Posture in which they received it, appears from hence, That the Posture in
which they received it, is no where mentioned in Scripture. A plain Command we
have to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in Scripture, but in what
posture, whether standing, sitting or kneeling, it is not determined by Christ
and his Apostles; and therefore as they are all postures in themselves lawful,
so they are severally used according to the different Constitutions of
Churches; some taking it in one posture, and some in another, the Gesture at it
being but a matter of Circumstance, and not expressly Commanded, even in the
Judgment of many Nonconformists.

As for what is urged, That it is probable, that Christ did give, and his
Apostles did take the Sacrament in the same Posture as they did the Passover,
and that was as they sat, it will not at all appear to be a proof: For though it
be said, That as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, etc. Mat.
26.26. and that the Custom of the Jews was in Christ's time to eat in a lying
or leaning posture, (which was with them a Table posture, as sitting is with
us;) and therefore in the 26th. Mat. v. 20. where it is said, (...), we render
it, when the Evening was come, he sat down with the twelve; yet this is not
because the word primarily signisies to sit, so that the Apostles sat as we
do, but because that this being a Table posture with them, we express the word
by ours.

But Secondly, Suppose that they did sit down sometimes at the Passover, as we
do at our meals, yet it does not appear by any Text that they remained in the
same Posture; nay Learned Men tell us, [See Lightfoot's Hora Hebraei, in 26th.
Mat. v. 20. Case of Kneeling, 1 part. p. 19.22.] That it is amongst the Jewish
Records, that Persons did not always keep the same posture in eating the
Passover, but when they came to some particular Cups, and the Dish of bitter
Herbs, they forbore the inclining or leaning posture: However, whether the Jews
did keep always the same Posture or not at the Passover, it does not appear by
Scripture that Christ and his Apostles kept in the same Posture at the
Sacrament as at the Passover, on that they did keep the same posture all the
time of the Celebration of the Passover; it might be so, or it might not be
so, for any thing that we read to the contrary, and therefore the
Nonconformists do not so far assert the necessity of sitting from our Saviors
behavior, but allow the taking of the Sacrament standing.

And so I proceed to the next thing which I proposed to prove in answer to the
first Reason, which is this: That if Kneeling was not the posture in which
Christ gave, and the Apostles received the Sacrament, yet it does not follow
therefore, that Kneeling is an unsuitable posture, or makes Men to receive the
Sacrament unworthily. And that first, Because all that Christ did is not
binding to us, but where it is declared as binding, or is an illustration of
some Rule, and consequently all the Gestures and Circumstances in our Saviors
actings are not a Rule for ours; for if they were, then in the Receiving of the
Sacrament, we must take it leaning or lying down, as the posture of eating
amongst the Jews then was, we must receive it in an upper Room, and with Men
only, and that only after Supper, and the like.

But this is so absurd to maintain, that our Dissenting Brethren do own that it
is not Obligatory, and that Gesture is not of the Freehold of this Ordinance.
[See Mr. Vines on the Sacrament, and Mr. Baxter in his Christian Directory,
part. 2. Quest. 3. Sect. 40. Chap. 24. p. 60.] Nay Christ's own Example
(supposing that he gave, and his Disciples received of him the Sacrament in the
same posture as he did the Passover) makes strongly for Kneeling, because in
taking the Passover according to the Custom of the Jews, (which was sitting
say our Brethren, but was leaning or lying along, say the words in the
Original, and the Custom of the Country.) And in complying with the Gesture of
the Jews then in use, he allowed thereby the Authority of the Church in
altering and determining of Gestures: For it is plain, that however the Gesture
at the Passover was sitting or leaning, yet this was not the posture at first
used and prescribed by Moses, Exodus 2. chapter The Gesture that was at first
appointed, was with their Loins girt, with their Shoes on their Feet in haste,
with a Staff in their hands, which way of eating it being but a Temporary Law,
after they were in Canaan, they kept it in the leaning posture, thereby to
show, that now they were free from the fears of Egypt, and therefore did not
eat it in haste, but in a posture of Rest and Security: And now if Christ
complied with the alteration of the posture to what it was at first, it shows,
that in matters of Gesture undetermined by God, we ought to submit to the
Customs and Usage of the Church wherein we live.

Nor does it make Men the more unworthy Receivers of the Sacrament, that they
Kneel at the Receiving of it, because as some say, the Sacrament is a Feast,
and is called the Lord's Supper, and therefore ought to be received in a Table
Gesture, which to be sure is not Kneeling; for though it be a Feast (as it is
indeed for the Souls of Men) it does not therefore follow, that all things are
to be done at it in a Feast way, for if so, then we may talk and laugh, or the
like: But surely upon Consideration Men will be more wise than to assert, That
because the Sacrament is called a Supper, or Feast, therefore the Circumstances
of a Natural Feast, or Supper, are appropriate unto it.

And therefore some of our Brethren urge against this Argument themselves, (
viz. That we must fit, because sitting is a Table Gesture at a Supper, or
Feast, and is a Token of our Freedom and Fellowship with Christ,) That upon the
same Reason (say they) we may as well put on our Hats when we receive the
Sacrament. See Reformed Dissenter, p. 6.

Nor indeed is Kneeling an unsuitable posture at the Sacrament, if we consider,
That when we receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, we receive it with a
Prayer; nay, in Receiving of it we by sensible Signs do the Duties and Parts of
Prayer; in receiving of it for the Remission of Sins, we thereby confess our
selves Sinners, yea we implore the pardon of them upon the Merits of Christ's
Sufferings: As also in receiving of Christ we do hereby show, that we beg Grace
and Assistance of God, it being of his fullness that we receive Grace for Grace,
John 1.16. The like I might show in other parts of Prayer as we use them, viz.
Intercession and Thanksgiving -- yea further than this, that the receiving of
the Sacrament contains a Virtual praying to, and giving Thanks to God. We that
are Members of the Church of England, receive it with a Prayer, viz. The Body
of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul
unto Everlasting Life: And then follows, Take, eat, etc. The like I might show
is done at the giving of the Cup.

And now if this be so, which is not to be denied, it follows, that Kneeling is
not unsuitable to the Nature and Actions of this Ordinance, it being a fit and
proper posture of Praise and Thanksgiving.

And if any Man thinks otherwise, let him but consider the practice of
Heathens, yea of Dissenters in their Domestic Devotions; but if these will not
bear weight with him, let him consider the practice of Christ, St. Paul, St.
Stephen, and he will find plain Instances of Kneeling in Prayer: yea do we but
consider our Savior in his Agonies which we Commemorate at the Sacrament, and
we shall find that even then he did not reckon it unbecoming him to kneel at
his Devotion, Luke 22.41.

And now since that the principal parts of the Sacramental Actions on our part
are Prayer, Praise, and the like, and that either verbally or virtually; and
that Kneeling is agreeable to these great and Spiritual parts of it, it is so
far from being unsuitable, that it is highly becoming this Ordinance, not only
as it is a posture agreeable with the Nature and Use of Prayer and Praise, but
as a posture of Worship to Christ, and as our Church expresses it, A
signification of an humble and grateful Acknowledgment of the Benefits of
Christ therein given to all Worthy Receivers; which brings me to the
Consideration of the second Reason, that some Men urge why the Kneeling at the
Sacrament makes Men to receive it unworthily, viz. That Kneeling being a
posture of Worship and Adoration, it too much countenanceth the Adoration of
the Host, and the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. That we use Kneeling as a
posture of Worship, is what we allow; but that thereby we countenance the
Adoration of the Host, or the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is a thing
unreasonably laid to our Charge, considering not only what our Church declares
in her Rubric after the Communion Service, but with what solidity and strength
of Argument they have Confuted the Abettors of such Doctrines as they are, and
in a time when others that have exclaimed against our Church for bending
toward Popery, either durst not, or would not write against it.

Nor indeed are we to be blamed for worshipping at this Ordinance, when by
Faith we see Christ present with us, yea in as much as we pray to and praise
Christ, and celebrate his Goodness, we do therein Worship, (Prayer and
Thanksgiving being actions of Worship) and that by the Confessions of our
Dissenting Brethren, who allow that Christ may be Worshipped and Adored by
Communicants in their Hearts. And now since Internal Worship belongs to Christ
in this Ordinance, why may not we use an External sign of what we inwardly
prosess to do? Nay, it upon the sense of what we do and receive at the
Sacrament, we may lift up our eyes and hands toward Heaven, and smite our
Breasts, why may not we as well kneel at our Worship too? It being a convenient
Gesture, such as was practiced by Christ, and is even now by many good Men in
their Worship. Surely Gesture is as lawful in one Circumstance as in another,
and I may as well bow my Knees to the Father of the Lord Jesus, as bow my Head,
or lift up my Eyes, a humble posture of Body being not unsuitable to an humble
Mind.

Nor indeed does kneeling at the Sacrament countenance the Adoration of the
Host, or the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, because though we Worship at the
Sacrament in this posture, yet we do not Worship the Sacrament, or make it the
Object of our Worship, (as the Papists do) any more than the Dissenters
themselves, when they pray to, and praise God at the receiving of the
Sacrament: For if by expressing our inward Worship by this posture of outward
Worship, we are therefore Adorers of the Host, it will follow that they too are
guilty of the like Crime, for to Worship inwardly is Worshipping, as well as
using an outward Gesture of Worship.

But as we do not Charge our Dissenting Brethren with this fault, so neither
are we to be charged therewith, it being not the Elements that are the Object
of our inward or outward Worship, but that which is signified thereby; and it
being our Duty in this Ordinance to be inwardly devout, humble and thankful,
they are not therefore to find fault with Kneeling, which is but an outward
Declaration of our inward Respect.

It Is true indeed, that the Sacraments are Ordinances of Remembrance, the very
End of their Institution is to do them in remembrance of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.25.
but because they are so, we are not therefore forbid to kneel at them more than
at Prayer, which brings God into our remembrance: And though I deny not that we
Worship before the Elements, yet this is no more Argument that we Worship them,
than that the Children of Israel could be said to Worship the Ark or the Temple
when they fell down in or before it. And we may as well say, that the Jews when
they cried Hosanna to Christ riding upon an Ass, worshipped the Ass, as say that
every Circumstance in Worship is the Object of it.

Nor is the Gesture of Kneeling the less unsuitable to this Ordinance, nor do
we the more encourage the Adoration of the Host, though we use kneeling, allowing
that the same Gesture is used by the Papists in their Adoration of the Host;
for if so, we may as well be said to countenance them in their Worshipping of
Saints, because we kneel at our Prayers to God as well as they do at their
Prayers to Saints: What though the Papists kneel, must not we therefore? What
though they say the Lord's Prayer, may not we? It is not because the Papists do
such and such things that is a good Reason for our not doing them, because they
do ill therein. Many People we see abuse themselves by Intemperate Eating or
Drinking, but will it follow, therefore that we may not eat or drink? And so
the Papists, we deny not, are guilty of Idolatry and Superstition in the matter
of the Sacrament as well as other things, must we therefore? By this Reason the
Jews should not have sacrificed or burnt Incense, because the Heathens used the
same Rites: Nay, by this Argument, that the Papists kneeling at the Sacrament,
and doing ill thereby, should make our kneeling at it to be sinful, we should
be in a continual danger of losing that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, the same being an Argument against sitting or standing, as well as
kneeling at the Sacrament, should they either stand or sit at it.

And indeed, however we are accused of favoring Popery, as upon other
accounts, so for kneeling at the Sacrament, yet we don't find kneeling at the
receiving of the Sacrament so much a tenet of the Church of Rome, as that none
other is allowed amongst them; for if you believe their Missal set out by Pope
Pius the 5th, we are told, that the Priest, though at the Elevation of the Host,
he is to kneel, yet at the Receiving of it is to stand, and accordingly it was
so practiced by the Popish Priests not long since in this Kingdom: Nay, as
Learned Men have shown, The Pope himself not only used to sit at the receiving
of the Sacrament, as in Bonaventure's time, but even now ordinarily he receives
it leaning, and extraordinarily, or when he celebrates Mass himself, standing:
See Stillingfleet's Vnreason. Separation, p. 15. Case of Kneeling, pt. 2. page
38, 39. By which we see, that notwithstanding the Clamours of some Persons, the
posture of Kneeling at the Sacrament is not so unsuitable to the Ordinance of
the Sacrament, it being a posture that may be used without any Countenancing of
the Adoration of the Host, or the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; the Abettors
of which positions are such as allow of other postures besides kneeling, which
are not therefore disallowed by Dissenters because used by Papists, nor are
they used by us as a countenancing of them: And now if kneeling amongst us be
not used any ways to countenance the aforesaid Errors of the Papists, but is
declared by the Church not to be so designed or used, it cannot make us guilty
of unworthy Receiving.

And thus have I given an Answer to the chief Objections against Kneeling at
the Sacrament; which Answer, though supported with a borrowed strength from the
Writings of several upon this Subject, as well as from its own force, yet is
not therefore the less convincing, but may be of good use to prove, that by our
kneeling at the Lord's Supper, if we have no other failures, we do not eat and
drink unworthily, nor are we unworthy Communicants.

And thus have I at large shown, Upon what Account, and by what Ways Men
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper unworthily, or are unworthy
Communicants, and upon what they do not.

I come now in the next place to show in what sense the receiving of it
unworthily is so dangerous as it is said to be in the Text, which was the third
thing that I proposed to treat of from the words of the Text.

Now the words of the Text are: For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks Damnation to himself. Damnation, a very terrible word, but
much more terrible thing, as it is taken for Eternal Damnation, and could not
be taken in another sense: But yet both in the Notion of it and the Application
of it by St. Paul, it admits of another acceptance. The word in the Original
is (...) which coming from (...), to judge or discern, signifies Judgment,
discerning, or censuring, and accordingly in the Margents of many Bibles, it is
put Judgment, by which is not only meant Eternal, but Temporal Judgment also;
and that it may be so taken will appear the more, in that we find the word
actively applied unto Men.

Thus in the 7th. Mat. v. 2. it is said of Men, With what judgment ye judge,
shall ye be judged. The words in the Original are (...) etc. Now it is it
plain, that in this place it relates only to Temporal censuring, or Judgment,
because it is not in the power of Men to inflict Eternal Judgment.

And as the word in the Original does not carry with it universally such a
dreadful signification as Eternal Damnation: So neither is it taken by St. Paul
in this sense, for if we consider what follows these words of the Text, we
shall find it primarily or chiefly relating to Temporal Judgments, for after he
had shown in this Chapter how the Corinthians had eaten unworthily the Lord's
Supper, v. 20, 21. in the 27th. and 29th. Verses he shows them the danger of
their actions, and that they may not think the danger of their Actions to
consist only in words, in the 30th. Verse he proves it to them from their own
Experience; That for this Cause (to wit, their unworthy eating and drinking, or
receiving of the Lord's Supper) many were weak and sickly amongst them, and
many were asleep: He particularizes in the Judgments they had brought upon
themselves thereby.

Now that these Judgments were not Eternal, not only the Instances thereof, but
the words following do plainly declare, That if they judged themselves, they
should not be judged; if they would censure this fault in themselves, they
should not any more be so judged as they were in the 30th. Verse.

But when by not judging of our selves we put God upon judging, or in the
Apostles words are judged, why then it follows, that we are chastned of the
Lord, v. 32. How? not for ever, but that we should not be condemned with the
World: By which it appears, that the Judgments of God are so far from
signifying Eternal, or everlasting damnation, that he proposes it as an end of
these Judgments to avoid being judged or condemned with the World.

Nay, so far is the word Damnation in the Text from being to be taken as
signifying primarily, Eternal, that till Men are impenitent in their unworthy
Receiving, we find St. Paul to be so far from consigning the Corinthians (though
Unworthy Receivers) to Eternal Damnation, that he rather exhorts them, and that
as Brethren, that when they met hereafter, they should amend this Fault:
Wherefore my Brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another; and
if any man hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
Condemnation, v. 33, 34.

Its true, That if a Man by his unworthy receiving of the Lord's Supper has
brought Temporal Judgments upon himself, and is not thereby wrought to
Repentance; or if he persists habitually in unworthy approaches to, or
behavior at this Ordinance, he does not only bring himself in danger of
greater Temporal Judgments, but Eternal also: And so indeed not only any Person
that receives the Lords Supper unworthily, but he that prays, reads or hears
unworthily, does so too.

In short, the Damnation that a Man incurrs in this Case, is but as that which
he brings upon himself by other Sins, for which every Man shall be damned,
unless he Repent, or sincerely desires and endeavors so to do; but if he does
Repent of this as well as other Sins, he is not in a state of Damnation, though
he has formerly received unworthily -- And tho Damnation may be the portion of
an unworthy Receiver not repenting, yet it may be also the portion of him that
lives in a Total and Wilful Neglect of this Ordinance, as well as of him that
receives it unworthily; which brings me to the next Head I proposed to treat of
from the words of the Text, which was this:

4th. Head. That though it be very dangerous to receive the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper unworthily, yet the Total and Wilful Neglect thereof is as
dangerous: And that the not partaking of other Ordinances worthily, makes men
liable to Damnation as well as the not partaking of this Sacrament worthily:
And that because it is as necessary a Duty to come to the Sacrament, as it is
not to come unworthily to it, to which though we cannot come as we should, we are
yet to come as we can, as I shall show in the close of this Discourse.

For however there may be greater Excuse and Allowance to a Man that stays away
for fear, than there is to a Man that comes unworthily to the Sacrament, at the
first Apprehension; yet if the Man that stays away out of fear does not use his
best Endeavors to remove that fear, and fit himself for it, he is as
inexcuseable as the other. For a Man to say, I will not receive the Sacrament
lest I should receive it unworthily, and yet not to strive after preparation,
or fitness in a Gospel sense, nor to inform himself when he is fit, is but
little better than for a Man to say he will not be a Christian, because if he
should live ill, it would be worse with him than if he had not been a
Christian: He that knows his Masters Will, and will not do it, shall indeed
be beaten with many stripes; but he that will not know it when he may, because
he would not fall into greater Condemnation, does not therefore make his Case
the better, but the worse, in that he Evacuates to himself one means of
avoiding Condemnation, viz. the Knowledge of that will which directs him to
avoid it.

The like is it with a Man that wilfully forbears the Sacrament, that so as he
thinks he may escape the danger of unworthy Receiving, which though he avoids the
danger of, yet he does not avoid the danger of an Unworthy and wilful Neglect;
which however men don't so much consider of as they ought, is none of the
least, as I shall show presently: For let a Man be never so Cautious lest he
receive unworthily, if he makes not his fears an Argument for greater Care in
his Preparations and Endeavors to fit himself, his Fear, though it is not joined
with something of Contempt, yet at best carries with it a great deal of
Superstition, or undue Fear of God, and shows there is many times too much
Carelessness of Spirit in Matters of so great Consequence as the receiving of
the Sacrament is.

So that whatsoever allowable Excuses there may be for our Absence from it at
some particular times, yet there are none for his Carelessness, who lives in a
total and wilful Neglect thereof, where it may not only be had, but
Instructions also as to the Rules and Necessity of Receiving it: And that
because as it is our Duty and Interest not to receive it unworthily; so is
there a plain Command for the Receiving it, which nothing can excuse the total
and wilful breach of.

But that we may not think this Assertion purely begged, viz. That the total
and wilful Neglect of Receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is as
dangerous as the Receiving of it Unworthily: I proceed to prove it in these
following Instances: 1. In regard of the unworthy dealing with Christ. 2. With
the Sacrament it self.

First, If we consider the unworthy dealing with Christ, by a total and wilful
Neglect of the Sacrament. And well indeed may we call it so, when by so doing
we live in a total and wilful Neglect of his dying Command.

Now that Christ has Commanded us to receive the Sacrament, I think is so
clear, that to question it, would be to question the Institution of our
Savior, of which we have so full an account in several of the Evangelists, and
which is confirmed to us by St. Paul in 11 Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. And now when we have so plain a Command, do not we deal very
unworthily by him, when though we call him Lord, Lord, yet we do not the things
he says? Luke 6.46.

But Secondly, Well may we say that a total and wilful Neglect of this
Ordinance, is an unworthy dealing with Christ, if we consider how ungrateful
dealing it is with him also. I suppose none pretend to be true Christians, or
pretend to stay away from this Ordinance out of fear that they shall not be fit
for it, but what have some sense of the Nature and Design of this Ordinance,
that it is instituted as a Memorial of Chrst's Sufferings for us, and the
Benefits thereof: And now how unworthily do we deal with him? Though we hope to
be saved by the Merits of his Sufferings, yet we wilfully neglect to celebrate
the Memorials of them, or do so much in remembrance of him, as thankfully to
show forth his Death till he comes, in ways of his own appointment.

But perhaps here some may say, That we can think of Christ's Love to Men in
suffering for them, without coming to this Ordinance.

To which I Answer, I don't say but they may, but yet not so acceptably with
God, so long as they live in the neglect of this appointed way of Remembrance;
because Christ has appointed this as the great Memorial, and therefore may
well take it ill when Men neglect his Way and Time of Remembrance, and stick
only to their own, which if they could remember his Love as acceptably in, as
in that which he has appointed, why did he appoint such an Ordinance for this
end? Certainly we ought not to think any thing impertinent, or of little use
and acceptance which he has Commanded, much less that which indeed is the
great Ordinance of conveying the pardon of Sin, and confirming our Interest in
Christ.

Surely if any Man under the Law should plead for his Neglect of Sacrificing,
though God commanded Sacrifices, that he could pray to God well enough, though he
offered up no Sacrifice, such an Excuse or Plea would not have been allowed,
but would have been reckoned as a Virtual despising of Sacrifices as
unnecessary, and consequently would have been very dangerous; for so it is
said, that he that despised Moses his Law, dyed without mercy, Heb. 10.28.

And now since Christ has not only done so much for us, but has left it in
Charge at his Death, that we should Take and Eat, yea that we should all Drink
in remembrance of him, and we look upon this Charge as necessary to be observed
by us; can we think he will not take it ill at our hands, and punish us for our
Neglect, unless we repent? Yea says the Apostle, See that ye refuse not him
that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth,
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him who speaks from
Heaven, Heb. 12.25.

But Secondly, It will appear, that a total and wilful Neglect of the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, is as dangerous as the receiving it unworthily, in regard
of the unworthy dealing there is thereby with the Sacrament it self: For by a
total and wilful Neglect of this Ordinance, we either show that we do not
reckon it a necessary Ordinance, which yet is the most solemn Ordinance in the
Christian Worship, (that is, a Memorial of his great Love, and a showing forth
of his Death till he comes:) Or else we make it (to use the word) a Bugbear, or
more dreadful than it is, and so deal unworthily by it, when we act as if it
was such an Ordinance that was a greater occasion of Offense or Ruin than any
other; in that we suppose it as one, that is less possible to be done worthily
as to God's acceptance than any other; which to suppose, is not only to have
ungracious Thoughts of it, but is a reflecting upon the Goodness as well as
Wisdom of Christ, who has ordered this as a means for our Salvation, if we are
but sincere, as indeed we ought, as well as pretend to be, in other Ordinances.

I am apt to think, that many of these Men who stay away altogether from this
Ordinance, for fear, as they say, least if they come to it they should come
unworthily, are yet apt to hope, that (notwithstanding their unfitness to
receive the Sacrament) if they should happen to dye, they shall receive the
things signified by the Sacrament, viz. The pardon of their Sins, and
Reconciliation with God through the Merits of Christ's Sufferings.

And now if these Persons notwithstanding their unworthiness for the Receiving
of the Sacrament, do yet trust in God's Mercy for the receiving of the things
signified and exhibited in the Sacrament, why may they not also trust God's
Mercy for the receiving of the sign? If they trust to receive the benefits of
Christ's Merits, why should they distrust the Institutions for that end: Nay,
if any of these Persons should lie upon a Deathbed, upon asking. I suppose
they would be ready to assert their hopes of Salvation through the Merits of
Christ, tho they were unworthy of it: and now are not Men that are sincere in
what they say, as fit to receive the Sacrament as they are fit to Dye? Yea
surely, if they are not fit to receive the Sacrament, they are not fit to dye,
or receive the pardon of their Sins; for indeed I cannot find where God is said
to be more merciful to Men at their Death than at the Sacrament, it being very
easily to be believed, that he who will pardon us when we come to dye, will
pardon us also when we prepare our selves as well as we can to receive the
Sacrament; it being as easy also to think, that those whom God will receive as
fit for Heaven, he will receive also as fit for his Ordinances upon Earth: and
therefore Persons deal very unworthily with this, when they represent it as
more dreadful than it is.

But Thirdly, It will appear, that a total and wilful Neglect of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, is as dangerous as the Receiving it unworthily, if we
consider, that the being without those preparatory and Ornamental Graces which
should make us receive worthily, does as well expose us to the Danger of
Damnation, when we do not receive the Sacrament, as when we do receive it: If a
Man has the Qualifications of a Worthy Communicant, he is fit to receive; but
if he has them not, whether he receives the Sacrament or no, he is in a
miserable estate.

Thus for Instance, if a Man is without Repentance, whether he comes to the
Sacrament or not, he is like to perish, Luke 13.3. or if he does not believe,
he is like to be damned, John 3.18. nay, he is condemned already; or if a Man
knows not Christ, he has no Eternal Life abiding in him, John 17.3. or if he
is not in Charity, he is a Murderer, and no Murderer, St. John tells us, has
Eternal life abiding in him; 1 John 3.15. or if he forgives not men their
Trespasses, neither will his Heavenly Father forgive his; Chapter 6. v. 15. yea he
that has no desires after Christ, nor Love to him, cannot be happy in Christ,
nor by him; or if he is not thankful to God for his Love in Christ, he is
unworthy of it, whether he receives the Sacrament or not.

Nor is it an Argument that Men are the freer from Damnation, because so long
as they do not come to the Sacrament, they do not make a Sacramental Vow or
Covenant to Live well; for though they never come to the Sacrament, they are yet
obliged to live as well as they can; there is a Natural Obligation upon them to
obey God in all his Commands, from which they are not discharged, because they
do not receive the Sacrament: For suppose Men never make any verbal or formal
Covenant, it is not to be supposed that God loses the least right to the
utmost of their service, or that he will the sooner dispense with them, because
they will not accept of another tie to serve him.

Its true indeed, that he who receives the Sacrament, does thereby lay a
further tie upon himself, and makes the bond double; but yet this does not make
Holiness the less binding to one that does not receive, the Natural Right that
God has to it being an indissoluble bond to man to practice it.

Nay, he that will not receive the Sacrament because he will not make an actual
Engagement to Live better, is more inexcuseable in some Respects than one that
makes and breaks it; for he makes one sin a reason for another, and shows an
unwillingness to be obliged to God's Service so far as he may: But the other
though he breaks his Tie, yet by tying himself, declares that he owns it as his
Duty to be so tied, and that he ought to live up to it: So that to neglect the
Receiving of the Sacrament, and that wilfully too, to avoid the danger of
unworthy Receiving, is but at best running into one danger to avoid another.

But Fourthly, It will appear that a total and wilful Neglect of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is as dangerous as the receiving it unworthily,
because those things which make us unworthy Receivers are no Excuse for a total
and wilful Absence from, or Neglect of the Lord's Supper.

Now that which makes Men unworthy Receivers, I told you, is not only Sin, but
either want of Knowledge, or of Desires to Christ; the want also of Charity,
Repentance, Faith, Devotion, Thankfulness, and the like: The want then of these
things being so ill as to make Men unworthy Receivers, the Question is, Whether
the want of these is a just excuse for a total and wilful Neglect of this Duty.
Now the want of these being so ill, I answer, That it cannot be an Excuse for
the Neglect of our Duty; for one Sin cannot be an Excuse for another, as will
appear, if we consider some of those particular Qualifications for this Duty,
the want of which makes men unworthy Receivers when they come to it: As first,
if we consider the Knowledge of Christ and this Ordinance, the want of which is
rather matter of shame than an Excuse for staying away, in that we are ignorant
in the midst of such means and helps to Knowledge. Nay, should Christ ask a
Man, Why do not thou come to the Sacrament? And he answers, Because I don't
know thee, nor it: would this Excuse be taken? No, rather it would incense
Christ the more, that he should plead his own Neglects as an Excuse for Sin,
and pretend the want of that to defend him, when it is his own Sin and Fault
that he wants it.

And so in the want of Desires after Christ, and his Ordinances, it will be no
Excuse for not coming thereto, that we had no desire to them or him, but rather
an aggravation of our Fault not to desire him, and therefore to stay away from
him.

The like I might show under the want of Repentance; that to neglect coming to
the Sacrament because we don't repent, is to make that which is an Instance of
our sad Estate, a Reason for neglecting a Means of Salvation; yea it is to urge
our Folly, and the danger of our Condition as a reason for not coming to the
Ordinance of Pardon, which though we don't come to, yet we ought to perform the
other, because it is that which we must necessarily perform, (if we would be
saved) whether we receive the Sacrament or not; and therefore if we don't
repent, the more inexcuseable are we, when though God Commands it, and we have
such need of it, we yet neglect it. The want therefore of that which is
necessary in order to save us, cannot be a good Excuse for neglecting the means
of Salvation; so that if we come without Repentance to the Sacrament, we come
unworthily; but the more unexcuseable are we when we do not repent, seeing it
is so necessary, whether we come to the Sacrament, or not.

Nay even under the want of Charity, it is no Excuse for not communicating, to
say, we are not in Charity; for if we are not, what can we say for our selves
why we are not? We are commanded to be in Charity, and there is reason for it,
whether we receive the Sacrament or not; nay, if we are not yet, the more
reason have we to be so for the future, and so come to this Ordinance of
Charity to have the pardon of our past Uncharitableness sealed unto us.

By these and the like Instances we see, That the want of the Qualifications of
a Worthy Communicant is no Excuse for our not receiving the Sacrament, any
further than one Sin is an Excuse for another, or the breaking of one Command
is an Apology for the violation of another. The want indeed of doing our Duty
in some Instances, may render us unfit for it in others; but it is no Excuse
for doing ill in one thing, that we have not done well in another, nor is one
Fault a just plea for another: For if it should be so, it would not only exempt
Men from Receiving the Sacrament, but many other Duties of public Worship, and
we may as well excuse our selves for not Praying at all, as not Receiving at
all; because when we are without the Qualifications of Faith, Repentance, etc.
we are as unfit to pray as to receive the Sacrament; which brings me to the
latter part of the fourth Head, Viz. That the not partaking of other Ordinances
worthily, makes men liable to Damnation, as well as the not partaking of the
Sacrament worthily. Thus for instance: To pray is an Ordinance of the Gospel,
as well as a Duty, by Natural Religion, and yet to pray unworthily does not
only provoke God not to hear our Prayers, Psalm. 66.18. but is an abomination to
him, Prove. 15.8. and what is an Abomination to God, I think I need not prove,
that it deserves his Condemnation.

Nay, As to come without Repentance to the Lord's Supper, so to pray without it
is exceeding dangerous, because such Men that pray as well as receive without
it give God the Lie, and pray in Hypocrisy; nay, without it a Man is an
unworthy performer of any Duty, and is always liable to Damnation, Luke 13.3.

The like I might show in the matter of Faith, That if a Man prays without
Faith, he no more prays aright than he receives aright without it, James 1.6.
Nay even in the matter of Charity it is as unworthy dealing with God, and with
the Duty of Prayer, to ask the Forgiveness of our Sins upon the merits of
Christ's sufferings, whilst we do not forgive men their Trespasses, as it is to
desire it under the Commemoration of his Sufferings with the same
Uncharitableness; for by begging of Forgiveness by virtue of them in Prayer, we
do Commemorate it by words, as in the Sacrament we do it by Signs and visible
Representations.

And indeed both in the Sacrament and in Prayer, to ask for Forgiveness whilst
we are uncharitable, is but to provoke God, and in both we play the Hypocrite
with God, whilst we plead Christ's Sufferings for the removal of the punishment,
before we have left the Sin.

And as in the Instance of Prayer, so under the Ordinance of Hearing, I might
show you that the unworthy performance thereof renders men liable to Damnation;
for thus we are told, that unless the Word of God be regarded, and have a
worthy or due respect, it is but a savor of Death; 2 Cor. 2.16. it will rise
up in Judgment against us, and by it we shall be Condemned, John 12.48.

And yet notwithstanding the great Danger of Praying or Hearing unworthily, the
very Persons that pretend the fears of Unworthiness in Receiving of the
Sacrament for the Neglect thereof, can by their Actions show, that they may be
fit enough for Reading, Hearing, and Praying; and they reckon that through the
Mercy of God, and the Merits of Christ, they may have reason to hope for a
favorable acceptance of their Devotion.

Well now, we may venture upon Prayer to God, and therein to implore the pardon
of our Sins upon the Merits of Christ's sufferings: Nay, should we blame any
Person for a total Neglect of Prayer, (See Case of Doubting Conscience, p. 38.)
notwithstanding there is danger in Praying unworthily? And may not we venture
too upon the Sacrament? Are not we as worthy to receive the Sacramental
Blessings as we are to receive the Pardon of Sin, or other Blessings desired in
Prayer? Surely if through Mercy we are fit to pray to God, as Christians are to be
fit, we are fit to receive his Sacrament: If indeed we do not know what is
signified when we Commemorate Christ's Dying Love in the Sacrament; if we have
no Desires after Christ; if we have not Charity, and are without Faith, and are
not thankful for God's Love to us in Christ, we are not fit to receive, nor to
pray as Christians do; for as we state the Notion and Duty of Prayer to
Christians, it is as requisite that we know what we desire, or have
apprehensions thereof, that we pray in Faith and in Charity, that we have
desires after Christ, when we beg an Interest in him, and Forgiveness through him,
or the like, as when we beg the pardon of our Sins at the Sacrament; yea when
in Prayer we pray to God for pardon for Christ's sake, we are supposed then to
Commemorate his Merits in words, (as in the Sacrament we do by signs) though a
Commemoration in words is not enough always, because he whose Merits we
Commemorate has obliged us so to do, by signs as well as in words.

So that if we are sincere in our words or Prayers, and we hope that we can put
up Prayers in such a way as God will pardon the defects thereof, and accept of
them through the Virtue of Christ's Merits and Intercession; I cannot see but
those that are worthy in God's Acceptance to pray as Christians ought to pray,
viz. in the Name and through the Mediation of Jesus Christ, are also worthy in
the same sense to perform other Religious Duties, and that God is willing to
accept of their sincere Endeavors to Worship him in the Sacrament as well as
in Prayer, and especially when he has Commanded us to receive his Sacraments,
as well as to pray to him upon the Merits of his Sufferings, when we are of Age
and Understanding so to do.

In short, He that is a good Christian, is fit to be a Communicant, and he that
is not so, is as unfit to pray as to Communicate. If we live in Sin, we can
neither worthily pray nor receive, but whatever Ordinance we meddle with, our
sins debarr us the benefit thereof, as well as provoke God therein; and we can
no more be accepted of without Charity in Prayer, than in the Sacrament. But on
the other hand, if we are sincere Christians, and would serve God in all the
parts of his Worship and Service as well as we can, and are sorry for our
failures, we are not only of the number of them whose Prayers God will be
pleased to hear, but if we receive the Sacrament may experimentally feel
thereby our Growth in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Whereas on
the other hand, to all the forementioned Dangers of a total and wilful Neglect
of the Lords Supper, there is also this, that by a total and wilful neglect
thereof, we may bring our selves to a disuse of other Ordinances also, and not
only bring upon our selves a Carelessness of Spirit in matters of (especially
instituted) Religion, but fall into a careless and loose way of Living too.

Its true indeed, that neither the Neglect of Praying, of Hearing and Reading
God's Word, nor an ill Life, necessarily follow the total Neglect of the Lords
Supper, yet should I say, that the Looseness of the present Age, and the
visible Decay of Piety amongst us, is in some measure owing to the great
Neglect, and little sense that too many have of the necessity and Excellency of
this Ornance, I believe I should hardly be disproved: For though it will not be
allowed, that the oftener Men receive the Lord's Supper, the more Holy they are,
and the less they sin; yet since in the receiving of this Ordinance we
Commemorate the Sufferings of Christ for Sin, (and so thereby are made sensible
what an Evil and hateful thing it is in God's sight, when even nothing could
expiate for it but the Blood of Christ the Son of God,) as also are supposed to
renew our Covenant with God, that we will live better for the future; we cannot
but own that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a great Argument if not means
against Sinning.

And this not only those who upon the sense of their approach hereto, make some
formal and temporary shows of Repentance and Promises to do better, do thereby
declare, that it is an Argument to leave off Sin, but even those Persons that
Wilfully neglect to receive it, because they are loath to leave their Sins,
(which they think they are obliged to do, if they should receive this
Sacrament) I say, upon this their Reason of Forbearance, do they even own, that
the receiving of it is an Argument and Obligation against Sinning.

If therefore the Receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper be so great
an Argument and Obligation against Sin, it follows, that the more wilfully we
choose to live in the neglect of one, the lesser help we have against the
other, and so may the more easily be brought thereto.

I do not deny after all, that Persons who live in a frequent partaking of the
Communion, may yet live as loosely as many that live in the Neglect of this
Ordinance; but then this is as true, that those who receive this Sacrament,
have one Argument and Means more against Sinning which the other have not; yea
the thing being equally considered, (not to mention those Temporary Acts of
Devotion as well as Forbearance from Sin, which many (if not most) Men are apt
to have before and upon a Communion day, as also the real Change which God is
pleased to work many times upon some men by their attendance upon this
Ordinance) I say, the thing being equally considered, those that come to the
Communion out of a sense of Christ's Command, and their Duty so to do, are in a
more probable way of leaving their Sins, than those are who live in a total and
wilful Neglect of it, (especially if the Love to Sin be the Foundation of their
Neglect;) and the Reason is this, because the one sort has one means and help
more against Sin (if we will allow that God's Ordinances are so) than the other.

And accordingly I do not find but that many Persons who frequent this
Ordinance, live as unblameably as those that abstain from it; and if they do
not, they are the more inexcusable in their Sins, and that because the more
frequently they come to it, the further Tie and Obligation do they lay upon
themselves to abstain from Sin.

And now perhaps may some desire to be informed what they shall do in this
Case: We are sure (say they) if we come to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
that we are unworthy; and if we come not, or especially live in a total Neglect
thereof, and don't endeavor to fit our selves, we are as unworthy and in as
dangerous a Condition. To whom I Answer, that they are neither to live in a
total and wilful Neglect thereof, nor yet to come unworthily, but to make
themselves ready, and then they may, yea then they ought to come. If any of us
remain in Ignorance or in Sin, and do not endeavor to know or live better; the
truth is, we are not worthy Communicants if we come to, nor are we safe if we
stay from this Ordinance; there is danger both ways, it being no Excuse for not
receiving, that we live in Ignorance or Sin when we have Means and Calls to do
better, and therefore ought to accept and make use thereof: And indeed, to live
in Ignorance or Sin under Means and Calls to do better, is that which is
unjustifyable in all People, and such a state as for their Souls good they
ought (so far as they have opportunity and Ability) to be free from; it being
the Duty of all that pretend to Christianity, at least to know God and his Son
Jesus Christ, as also to be Regenerate; which if they do, or are, they are not
to reckon themselves unworthy; for such Christ invites and receives, and to
those that he thus deals with, we are not to deny his Sacraments, nor reckon
them unfit for them: And such indeed are all good Christians, viz. Persons
invited by him, and these are the Persons that I am now persuading to come to
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and not to stay away by reason of their
doubts and fears of their own Unworthiness, and so unfitness for so Sacred an
Ordinance.

For as to Wicked Men's Doubts of their Unfitness, a great deal of reason there
is for them, whilst they remain so; to such the Sacrament is no more than it
was to Judas, till God is pleased to work a Change upon them; such must believe
and repent, and then they may come, but not till then; and if they do, it is
upon their own peril.

It is therefore to the Conscientious Person that in the close of this
Discourse I am going to speak to: To one that fears, and waits upon God in
his other other Ordinances, but only is hindered by some unhappy Doubts,
(unhappy I call them, that hinder a Christian from so necessary, so comfortable
an Ordinance) if such an one says he is unworthy for it: I answer, it is more
than he knows, or more than Christ has told him; and till Christ denies a Man
his Fellowship, he ought not to debar himself of it.

But why art thou unworthy, Oh sincere Soul, of this Ordinance more than thou
art of Prayer? Thou doubt'st not to make Prayers, and implore the pardon of thy
Sins upon the merits of Christ's Sufferings, why should thou doubt then
thankfully to Commemorate these sufferings in the great Ordinance of their
Remembrance? Surely if thou art permitted to offer up thy Prayers upon the
Merits of Christ's Sufferings, thou may as well be permitted to offer them
up upon the Memorial thereof; if thou have but the Knowledge of the Nature and
End of the Sacrament; if thou desire Christ, and the Ways of Communion with
him; if thou art in Charity with God and the World, and endeavour'st to live
well; if thou believe, and art thankful, who forbids thee the Sacrament? Does
the Gospel, or Christ? or does his Church? No Verily: For pity sake therefore
don't make thy self more unworthy than thou art: Don't Complement away the
blessing of this Ordinance, by pretneding thy unfitness, so long as thou
lead'st the Life of a Christian: Do but try, and come with the Qualifications
afore-mentioned, or with a sincere endeavor so to do, and then tell me whether
Christ will cast thee out. Nay, if thou hopest to be pardoned by Christ, to be
saved by the Benefits of his Passion, thou need'st not to fear that which he
has appointed as the great means of conveyance of such Benefits to Believers,
nor need'st thou dread the Ordinance of Christ, when thou steadfastly believe
thy Interest in him; for if thou art worthy in Christ's sight to partake of the
Redemption purchased by him, thou may depend upon it, thou art not to be
debarred the Seals thereof.

Ay, but may some still urge, That though they come with the Qualifications
aforesaid, though they sincerely seek to prepare themselves, yet still they find
themselves, or at least judge themselves unworthy of this Ordinance; because
when they do come to it, they find that as they have many times unwilling
dulnesses and distractions of Spirit in this as well as other Duties, so at
best they are wanting in those transports and extraordinary Acts of Joy and
Complacency both at, and after the Sacrament, which they many times discern, or
believe to be in others.

To whom I Answer, That the want thereof does not make Men Unworthy
Communicants, it being not necessary that all Christians should be so
enlivened, God neither having made a Promise, nor commanded it as a Duty, that
all Communicants should be so endowed.

I do not deny but God may give sometimes to some Persons these Extraordinary
Impulses and Consolation; and I do believe that many there are who are able to
speak great things of their Faith in, and Communion with Christ; yea, such
Complacency as well as Extraordinary Acts of Love and Adoration do they show
therein, that one would imagine that their Souls were carried up to Heaven, and
that with St. Stephen, they were not only viewing their Savior by Faith in
Figure and Sacrament, but by personal sight, yea by their Gestures and by their
Words, which most sweetly set forth Christ's Love to them, and theirs to
Christ, we may be apt to believe, that if they had not been in Heaven, yet they
minded nothing else, and were going up to be for ever with the Lord.

But however we may admire this in others, we are not to judge those as
unworthy, that cannot reach thereto; for if we should so judge, we should not
only condemn a great part of the Generation of God's Children, but should cast
a stumbling block before them, and render their Case worse than it is: For as
the saving Influences and Operations of God's Spirit may be where there wants
these Extraordinary Impulses and Consolations, so a Man may receive the
Sacrament to very good purposes without them, there being many good Men that by
Means of the blessings of the Sacrament are strengthened more in the Spirit,
that are more consirm'd in their Faith, in their Love to Christ, and hearty
desire of Thankfulness and Obedience, that yet do not arrive to those
passionate heats and flights as others do.

I think I need not tell you, that with many, if not most good Christians, it
is in Holy Duties as it was with the Disciples of Christ in the time of his
Agony: though their Spirits may be willing to serve and adore Christ in the
highest manner, yet their flesh is weak; Mat. 26.40, 41. and though they don't
allow themselves therein, yet they find them selves apt to start aside, or tire
when their Hearts are lifted up to God; and they can hardly watch and pray one
hour, but something or other, either from themselves, or the presence of some
Worldly Object, is apt to give some diversion or distraction to them in their
most solemn Acts of Devotion and Worship.

And yet after all, these very Persons may not only have an high esteem of
Christ, and a real Love to him and his Service, but would be gl^d that they
could serve him better: And now (...) to be supposed, that God will judge them
unworthy, who serve him in Sincerity of Heart, and are sorry that they cannot
Worship him so much as they should? No surely, Christ that bore with the
Infirmities of his Disciples, that knows our Frame and Constitution, that
remembers we are but Men, will not be extreme to mark what we unwillingly do
amiss, but as a Father piti^th his Children, so does he pity them that fear
him; Psalm. 103.13. that set their Hearts to wait upon their Savior in Ways of
his own Appointment, though they cannot Worship him in that perfect and cheerful
way as some do, sincerity of Heart going a great way to God's Acceptance of our
Endeavors, as well as to the pardon of our unwilling, and repented of
Infirmities.

And indeed herein is matter of Comfort, th^^ God accepts of men according to
the sincerity o^ their Hearts and Endeavors, rather than by the Tide or heat
of Men's Affections, which is higher in some than in others, even upon Natural
as (...) as Religions Agitations, nay, is higher in (...) same men at one time,
than at another: And therefore, though we cannot approach to, or come (...) from
the Sacrament with those passionate Tr^^^ports of Love and Consolation as some
M^n (...) or as we could wish; yet if what we (...) sensible Joys, we make up
in Truth and (...) let us not distrust but God will have (...) on us, and deal
with us according to (...) would, and endeavor to be, and not by what (...)
are, viz. Persons of Infirmities (...) were Angels, Go^ (...) expect (...)
Angels from us; but as he knows we are but Men, so he requires no more than the
service of Men, who do they what they can, have their Infirmities and Failures
sometimes, and whose Flesh has its weaknesses, be their Spirits never so
willing.

And though indeed where God gives it to Men to be filled with such Extraordinary
Consolation, and Efforts of Devotion, they are not to hinder or restrain the
flowings thereof; yet where God is not pleased to bestow them, as Men ought not
to murmur against God, so not to condemn themselves as unworthy, because they
are without them. These being Arbitrarious Gifts, which God gives as he sees
good, and therefore it being not for us to choose our places and parts at this
Heavenly Feast, we may reckon it sufficient for us that he gives us his Cup to
drink, and that we are qualified and enabled to partake thereof with the
sincerity of a Christian, and other necessary Qualifications.

If therefore, I say, out of a sense of our Duty to God, we come to the
Sacrament, and endeavor to prepare our selves for, and behave our selves at it
according to the best of our Capacities and Opportunities, and are sorry for
our failures, we are not to stay away from it, though we cannot thereby
satisfy all the Desires of our Souls, to be and do as others, God making it
our Duty to receive, and that as well as we can, but not to forbear it, because
we attain not to those sensible Joys and Exaltations of Spirit, as God for
Reasons known to himself may impart to others, it being enough for us to make
us Communicants, and that with his Blessing too, when he bestows upon us the
Graces of his Spirit, and enables us live as Christians.

But yet, if after all I have said in this Matter, the Good, the Religious Soul
is yet afraid of the Sacrament, I must leave him to the Grace and Mercy of God;
which though I do not deny him in his Absence from the Lord's Supper, yet I must
tell him, that his sear hinders him the enjoyment of a very comfortable
Ordinance to Pious Souls: Nay, his fear (if it is only a snare to keep him from
coming to, but does not put him upon a serious and hearty endeavor of sitting
him for this Duty, as well as seeking for Advice how to remove such fear) does
give too shrewd a sign of his decay in Grace. However, let his fears be as
unwilling as can be supposed, yet they hinder him of an Ordinance, which is not
only a great Means and Reason for living better, when to all other Helps he
has that of the Sacrament, but also of that which is a public Memorial of
Christ's Love to Sinners, and is the Communion of the very Body and Blood of
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. as also a Means of increasing our Union and sweet
Intercourses with Christ.

And thus have I done with the several things that I proposed to be treated of
from the words of the Text, and in the close thereof shown, that the saying we
are unworthy of the Sacrament, does not make us unworthy; nor are we to stay
away as unworthy, because we do not arrive to those Transports, or
Extraordinary Acts of Joy and Complacency, both at, and after the Sacrament,
which we discern or believe to be be in others, if so be we are sincere, and
conscientiously endeavor to do what is required of us.

Yea of the whole Discourse this is the sum, That though it be very dangerous to
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper unworthily, upon those Accounts, or
by those Ways that Men may be said to receive it unworthily, in that so to do,
makes us liable to Damnation, both Temporal and Eternal, without Repentance,
yet a total and wilful Neglect thereof is a dealing with it as unworthily,
which Christians should fear so to Neglect, as well as to receive unworthily.

And now what remains, but that I conclude with a word or two to my
Parishioners, for whose sake chiefly I have published this Discourse: You have
heard of the benefits of the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper by my Mouth, and
have been told thereof in God's Word, and therefore cannot say it is in vain to
come to it: You have heard, that Christ commands the receiving of it as a Duty,
and therefore cannot say it is unnecessary: You have heard what are the
Qualifications, even no other but what are necessary to make your Prayers
accepted, and prove your selves to be good Christians: And now since you hope
you are Christians, and hope for Pardon and Salvation by Christ, why should you
be afraid of a Christian Duty? Or to partake of that which is the means or Seal
of Pardon? Nay, why should ye be unwilling, as I fear too many amongst you are,
not so much because ye may not receive, but because ye will not prepare your
selves for it?

And now if after all the frequent Exhortations to prepare your selves, and to
come to this Ordinance, you yet live in a total and wilful Neglect of so Sacred
and so useful an Ordinance, you cannot say, if evil befalls you for this
Neglect, that your persisting therein has been occasioned by my Negligence in
warning you: For as I call Heaven and Earth to witness, so I appeal to your
selves, whether I have not admonished you of the illness and danger of a total
and wilful Neglect, as well as of an unworthy Receiving of the Lord's Supper.

But, Oh Blessed Jesus, thou that give us such Spiritual Food, give us at
length right Appetites to it; Thou that have Instituted this Ordinance, fit us
also for it, Create in our Hearts such Holy Desires to thee, that we may be
glad of such opportunities of Union and Communion with thee; till from enjoying
thee in thy Ordinances, we are made Eternally worthy by thee to enjoy thy
presence and the Blessings thereof in Heaven; which that we may all be, God of
his Infinite Mercy grant to us all, through the Merits of Christ Jesus. To
whom, etc.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
SYnodicon in Gallia Reformata: Or, the Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons of
those Famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in France, being a most
Faithful and Impartial History of the Rise, Growth, Perfection, Decay of the
Reformation in that Kingdom, with its fatal Catastrophe upon the Revocation of
the Edict at Nants in the Year 1685. also the Confession of Faith and
Discipline of those Churches, their Speeches, Sacred Politics, Cases of
Conscience, and Controversies in Divinity, etc. their Government, Laws, etc.
Collected out of the Original Manuscript-Acts of those Renowned Synods. In two
Vol. Fol. By John Quick.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the lesser
Catechism, Composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Thomas Watson,
formerly Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook, London. Recommended by several
Ministers to Masters of Families and others. In Folio.

Theological Discourses and Sermons on several Occasions. In two Parts. By John
Wallis. D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford. Quarto.

A Brief Tract on the Fourth Commandment, wherein is shown the Cause of all our
Controversies about the Sabbath Day, and the means of reconciling them.
Recommended by the Reverend Dr. Bates and Mr. John How.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, Nov. 5. 1692. By
Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Death Improved, and Immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends and Relations
Reproved. By Edward Bury, formerly Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire.
Octavo.

A Paraphrase on the Psalms of David in Meter. By the the late Reverend Mr.
Richard Baxter.

A Discourse of Earthquakes, as they are Supernatural and premonitory signs to
a Nation, with a respect to what has Occurred in this Year 1692. and some
special Reflections thereupon: As also on that Security and Assurance of Mind
which is attainable in the light and Power of Religion under the greatest
surprizals and terrors of sense, with some Enquiry upon the gaounds both of our
Fears and Hopes, as to the Public State of the Church of Christ in this Day.

The Confirming Work of Religion, or its great things made plain by their
primary Evidences and Demonstrations, whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a solid and rational Account of the Faith. These
two last by Rob. Fleming Author of The Fulfilling of the Scriptures, and
Minister in Rotterdam.

Advice to an Only Child, or Excellent Counsel to all Young Persons: Containing
the sum and substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity. Written by an
Eminent and Judicious Divine, for the Private Use of an Only Child, now made
Public for the benefit of all.

The Carnality of Religious Conrention, in two Sermons Preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet, by the Reverend Mr. John How.

A Short Story of the Rise, Reign and Ruin^ of the Antinomians, Familists and
Libertines that infected the Churches in New England.

The Scotch Psalms in Meter, recommended by 26 famous Divines, lately Rprinted
in 12o.

Books Printed for Obed. Smith, Bookseller i^ Daventry in Northamptonshire.
WOrds to give to the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion, or the Law of
Kindness in the Tongue of a Father to his Son.

A Treatise of Faith and Repentance, with a Discourse of Self-denial.

A Treatise of Grace and Duty.

Some Rules to use the World, so as not to abuse either it or our selves. All
by Francis Fuller, M. A.

Holy Breathings under the sense of Sin, together with a Sovereign Preparative
toward a blessed Eternity. By Tho. Price. The 2d. Edit.

The Life and Death of James Arminius, and Simon Episcopius, Professors of
Divinity in the University of Leyden in Holland; both of them famous Defenders
of the Doctrine of Gods Universal Grace, and Sufferers for it, now published in
the English Tongue.


