THE Whores Rhetoric, Calculated to the Meridian OF LONDON; And conformed to
the Rules of Art.

In two Dialogues.

Id vero est, quod ego mihi puto palmarium,
Me reperisse, quomodo adoloscentulus
Meretricum ingenia, and mores posset noscere:
Mature ut cum cognorit, perpetuo oderit.
Nosse omnia haec, salus est adolocentulis.
Terent. Eunuchus. LONDON, Printed for George Shell in Stone-Cutter-Street in
Shoe-Laine. 1683.

To the most famous University of London-Courtezans.
TO no others than you (fair Ladies) ought this Book to address it self, if it
be true, that every thing does naturally tend to its proper sphere. You will
here find a Register of your own Triumphs, it were therefore injustice to
suffer these painted Sheets to borrow their luster from any other patronage
than your bright selves. You ever prove exquisite Artists in your own
Profession, and can with great dexterity varnish over your imperfections,
whether natural, or casually acquired in the exercise of your own Vocation:
Your Author is sensible of failings in both these kinds, and seeing he wants
artifice to give his natural, or adventitious parts a fair gloss, to impose at
once, as you do, on the eyes and understandings of men, he desires your kind
assistance to pass his Ware as fresh, sound and beautiful, because it is with
all possible zeal consecrated to your service. Though I never had the honor to
receive any marks of your favor, or to be signalized by wearing your badge,
yet I have here boldly adventured to desire your favorable Protection, as if I
were an old Servant, that had lost my Blood in fighting your Battles, and
endured the fatigue of many dangerous Sieges: if my ignorance does not permit
me to pay my Devotion in the usual form; it is hoped you will accept of this
Rhetoric, as an atonement for my want of Faith and Charity at the Worship of
your Shrines. If my youthful inexperience has hindered me from placeing your
honorable Ensigns in the right place, where some people on the sunnyside the
Globe, do their Jewels: if I have not honored you with a flat Nose, pray be
pleased (fair ones) to accept the Tribute of a flat Pen. It would however be a
little hard to expect this rigorous duty of your humble Servant, because I have
weak E^e^ that may soon require the (...) and of Spectacles, which cannot be
supported if once the Bridge were taken away. You have at this instant got the
Maidenhead of my officious scribbling Instrument, as you have some years since,
the Virginity of another Quill. The Ink of this is black and smutty, but that
of the other was of a more innocent and pleasing color; though after having
been improved by your conversation, it changed once its native Simplicity for
the variety of all the colors in the Rainbow, or the greater diversity of a
Peacock's Train. There is another difference between these two Alembecks:
Bacchus makes the one to flow in exuberant and fruitful showers; but he cruelly
seals up the others mouth, that it cannot drop into one tear.

I have wisely chose your protection for this Book, because I would not be
thought to expect the ten Guinea's Fee for a mercenary Dedication: All the
world will clear this from any guilt of that nature, seeing it is directed to
Ladies, who seldom express their generosity in these terms. I have likewise
thought it a piece of providence to make you patronize this minute Volumn, to
save my Pen the trouble of acting the Sycophant in a long and nauseous Epistle,
according to the modern precedents. You have without the help of an Author,
made your selves famous in the World: your Virtues are conspicuous to all Eyes,
and palpable by all hands too: your perfections are the common Theme of the
people, and your graces are daily exposed to public view. Who can enough
admire your Christian humility in being willing to edify with your Doctrine,
the dregs of men? your affability, in being all things to all men that come in
your way? and your hospitality for opening your doors to Porters and Car-men?
Your charity is sufficient to cover a multitude of sins, as diffusive as that
of the Sun, to every body that will appear abroad, or dares but once to ask the
Question; you are at all times inclined to mercy and forgiveness, if your
Votary will express his sorrow in a golden Tear. The Bloody Sacrifice is the
last part of this Ceremony, and still subsequent to the rich oblation: but
which is most of all, your Chastity is no less remarkable than your other
Virtues. Your Lusts and Carnal affections are wholly mortifyed, and you are
become by your industry and fervent application as insensible of sensitive
pleasure, as if you were made of Wood or Stone: surely you have in this
particular, outdone the severest Moralist, or the most Holy of the Primitive
Fathers, who never could subjugate their Bodies to that degree you have done,
as not to be once pricked with the Thorn in the Flesh. You have methinks taken
the same course to arrive at this meritorious piece of supererogation, as the
Fruiterer does to save his Raisins; He makes his young Apprentice surfeit at
his first days sitting behind the Counter, that he may be sure to have no
gusto that way for the future.

I protest (sweet Creatures) to you stored with all the moral Virtues, and not
deficient in one Theological Grace, saving that you may seem sometimes to want
Faith: Some think you should believe your Customers on the Credit of their
word, after having received good store of their ready Money. Instead of this
you look on things with a providential Eye, as Rats do the fall of a ruinous
House, or a rotten Ship: you can foresee the downfall of any Servant, and leave
him, as Heaven sometimes does, to himself. Whilst the Gentleman is willing to
purchase the Soil at any rate, you suffer him to sow the Seed; what he commonly
reaps, you are best able to give an account of: and he that would grind with
you, must pay the Toll before hand, even before he is permitted to bring his
Grist to the Mill. However if you are a little void of this believing quality,
if you have no large proportion of faith, you are so well stockt with good
works, that you may be excused the want of this unactive Grace. Nature has been
in all points extreme kind to you all, that are indeed so worthy a part of her
own Sex; she has been more than partial in endowing you with such capacious
talents, which the scantlings of our curt understandings can never reach. Poor
ignorant man can scarce penetrate beyond a superficial discovery of that
profound Fountain of Knowledge whereof you are Mistresses: and by a strange
unheard of Parodox, those precious mines of solid learning are in your tender
virginal years most inaccessible to the best efforts of feeble man.

The Author hopes you will not treat him after your usual manner, but that you
will excuse him from that rigorous impost you exact of Strangers, and admit him
into the Pit without the necessity of coming with a golden Ticket. If you
become free of your amorous caresses, he promises to regulate himself to the
vulgar Proverb, which forbids us to look a gift-Horse in the Mouth. He says,
he will take you all for fair, virtuous, and honest; tho in so doing, you your
selves will swear he is troubled with a very adventurous and implicit Faith,
large enough for himself and you too. If the following leaves do supply the
room of a Pack of Cards, to increase your Tribute, by cheating the loving
Gamesters; it is hoped you will grant me liberty to trade, though I cannot
properly as one of your body politic, yet very well as an interloping
Merchant. This is a Privilege the meanest poetical Dawber claims from both the
Theaters, who possibly never appears on the Stage after his own night, nor ever
thought of, unless by the baulkt Bookseller: if I have merited no better of you
than some of these Gentlemen do of the Stage, may I be eternally banished your
Parnassus, may I dye anathematized in a full Convocation of the Trading Ladies;
and lastly, may Whetstones-Park scorn to save my longing, with the favor of a
single Kiss.

The only way I know to save the credit of my green Quill, is to make it
resemble as much as possible those patterns of perfection, that are made the
subject of the following Discourse. A little of that sharpness you inspire into
your Lovers Urine, would give my periods a grateful relish: and a small
proportion of that Mercury, you procure for the Salivation of your faithful
Servants, would sublimate my fancy beyond the feculent dregs of matter, which
at present do strangly retard its motion. But why should I borrow any of these
transcendent qualities from your amorous Slaves, seeing they have them but at
second hand; they are in them but a faint reflection of that light, the
Fountain whereof springs from the charming center of your Microcosm. My last
Prayer shall therefore be, That as I have chose you for a Theme, so I may in
all points imitate these fair Idea's; may every line be as poignant as an
embrace of yours, and each Sentence, like you, carry a sting in its tail.

In fine (Ladies) it is hoped, I have like a faithful Dedicator done your
profession, and my self what right, the rules of Justice and Reason could
prescribe. I have been only wanting in two particulars essential to a
Dedication, those are flattery, and fragments of Latin or French Verses: your
modesty so notorious to all the World, has superseded the one, and my own
inabilities have saved you the trouble of the other. Since then it were a sin
to part Modesty and Plain-dealing, nay impossible, because the moral Virtues
are linkt together by a strong Chain, I presume you may be thought the fittest
Patronesses for

Your most Devoted, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant, because
Philo-Puttanus.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
MEN do for the most part take the same measures, and are guided by the same
principles of Fancy and Opinion, in their choice of Books, as in that of Women:
for as the beauty of the one does in a great measure depend on the imagination
of a generous Lover; So the other in like manner is forced to borrow a good
part of its Value and Luster from the bounty of the Courteous Reader. There are
indeed some Women, who do in an extraordinary manner enjoy the effects of
Natures bounty, to whom she has been so profuse in her dispensations, that she
is necessitated to use a rigorous Patrimony to become a Step-dame to the rest
of the weaker Sex; there are, I say, some few Pandoras in the World, who have
in all parts received the favorable touch of a divine Hand, whose perfections
being but just less than infinite, their attractions must be so too.

Who ever then would pretend with his Pen, to gratify all Mankind; whoever
would aspire to compose a Regal, adapted to every Man's palate, (I mean such as
have not lost their taste) must be sure to have at all times these patterns of
perfection before his Eyes, his lines must be drawn to the same perfection
those others are in the Ladies face; there must be a perfect symmetry and
proportion observed in every part of his composition, else he will infallibly
come short of imitating the complete Idea he has set before him. Beside these
extrinsick ornaments, these out side embellishments (which are as indispensably
necessary in a writer, as a gentile dress to render a Female all agreeable)
special care must be taken to infuse such a lively, brisk, and vigorous Spirit
into the mass of matter, as may in all points correspond to the vivacity of the
Ladies Soul. A judicious writer will ever follow the example of Bees, and not
of Frogs; he will like an expert Chemist, so order the most abject, the most
indisposed matter, as to extract thence both pleasure and advantage. By the
observance of this precept an Author may reap the Fruit of singular merit; may
deserve an universal applause, by well handling the most trivial, the most
inconsiderable subject. A Painter shows no less of his skill, and may give as
bold a stroke in drawing a deformed Antique, as in delineating the Picture of
Venus. Where the Original is faulty and imperfect, a more than ordinary art is
requisite to make the draught but moderately pleasing: on this score it is I
would challenge the Readers excuse, and lessen his wonder at this extravagance,
whilst he finds in the subsequent leaves, all the tenets of an infamous
Profession. Some will believe it an act of Charity, to instruct an ignorant
Brute, much more than those of our own species; and it may seem no small
encouragement to the Author, to be already assured of very docil and towardly
Scholars.

It were superfluous here to borrow any Arguments founded on reason, or the
Authority of the Ancients. The Moralist tells us; In medio sita est Virtus;
that is, He is the most virtuous man, who preserving himself indifferently
between the two extremes of good and evil, knows how to apply himself to one or
the other, with equal spirit and equal success, as the design in hand may seem
to require: If we look into the practice of the Ancients, or those of later
times, we shall ever find this trade receiving all possible encouragement. The
best governed, and the most Catholic Cities now in the World, do grant it, if
not a public toleration, yet at least a civil and sufficient connivence. Many
Men have been industrious to improve the Military Art, and invent new ways of
framing warlike Engines; all which tend to no less than the slaughter and
destruction of humane Bodies: why should it then seem strange, or unbecoming to
conduct poor ignorant Women into the Road of knowledge, to acquaint them with
the Rules of a Profession convenient, nay which has been found necessary in all
Commonwealths and civil Societies of Mankind. But to be a little serious in my
Apology, Every prudent man will be solicitous to know all the mysteries of this
Trade, by the ill effects the ignorance of it has produced in others: that so
being informed in the criterium of the unsound Ware, and the Buona Robba, in
the differences of good and evil; he may thereby learn how to correspond with
the one, or at least how to detest and avoid the other. Wholesome and
salutiferous Medicines are produced out of the most dangerous poisons, if
judiciously compounded and seasonably applied. The skilful in Simples do think
it equally necessary to understand the nature of poisonous and destructive
Herbs, as those which do more immediately tend to the health and nutriment of
Man. The learned Physician ought to be conversant in the knowledge of dangerous
and pernicious maladies, as well as in remedies and receipts; in as much as
without understanding the cause of the one, it would be impossible to ground
any judgment in the choice of the other. The expert Pilot does ever make it
his chief care to know the lurking places of Sholes, Rocks, and dangerous
Sands, and this is no less necessary than the being informed in the dextrous
management of the Ship it self. The Modern Politicians do judge it highly
necessary to be acquainted with all the subtilties in Machiavel, with
Guicciardin's, and Boccalin's sage Advertisements to the end they may be able
to defend themselves from cheats and slurs, which are nowadays, no^ only
usual in affairs of State; bu^ very ordinary likewise in private affairs, in
the civil Societies o^ men. When I was at the University, and entering on the
Sophistical part of Logic, my Tutor (I remember) gave me this preliminary
caution. Young Man, say he, you are now to receive my Instructions in a
dangerous part of Learning: But before I proceed (i^ de ignotis Sermo sit) I
must explain the nature and meaning of the Word: Sophista the^ is derive^
(...), and signifies no more in English than a Teacher of Wisdom; the name was
honorable o^ old times, and applied to any person that was skilful in his own
profession, whether Musician, Orator, Poet, or more especially Philosopher; but
when these Artists became mercenary, and instead of true reason, and solid
learning, taught their Scholars nothing but crafty and subtle questions, and
how to impose on the World with some new juggle or legerdemain; the title of
Sophister became infamous likewise. It may be objected (continued he) that this
learning of Sophisms cannot be necessary, after knowing the true ways of
arguing, in as much as contraries do illustrate one another, and that Rectum
and sui, and obliqui norma est: To this I must tell you, if Sophisms did appear
in their own colors, then that rule might very well hold. But alas! These
false and deceitful Syllogisms, like Wolves in Sheeps clothing do ever appear
in sincere and honest habiliments. Things being thus explained, the necessity
(pray mind me) of understanding these fallacious Arguments is very great; not
that we should impose on others, but lest others should impose on us. My advice
and caution to you is this: When you shall by my care and industry arrive at a
perfect knowledge in this cheating trade, I beseech you (Boy) take heed, take,
I say, a more especial care not to pervert your knowledge, that you make it not
subservient to base and ignoble ends. If you happen to study the Law; I fear
you will forget the concern of your own reputation and my precepts; or if you
remember them, that will but enhance your guilt, and my dishonor, if you do
not act conformably to your knowledge. These documents (having first begged his
forgiveness for the excursion, though not impertinent to the present business)
I leave the Reader, and in the same manner (saving the academical Pedantry) do
I desire he will peruse this short piece. The foolish Fish can despise the
allurements of the sweetest bait, and avoid the danger, if but part of the
deadly hook be exposed to view: and so can the most inconsiderate Bird the
snare of the Fowler, if the gin be laid in an open place. Read then this Book
to expose all the tricks, and all the finesses you can find therein; carry it
in your pockets, as some do the pictures of poor Animals rotten with the
Venereal distemper, to make you detest those Monsters, who can destroy
miserable man with a single embrace. Remember if the Whores are hence taught to
exercise their talents with some dexterity; you are the same time instructed to
detect and avoid the cheat. Let your aversion to them and their profession,
equally increase with their frauds; and may every new net they frame to catch
you in, in proportion augment your vigilance and care: double your guards, and
have a care the Sentinel sleep not, lest in the interim the enemy rifle him, he
awake with an empty Pocket; and it is well he comes of with whole Bones, and
the loss of some part of his Blood.

I have given this small contexture the name of a Rhetoric; i^ being that
which makes an absolute Orator, whom I have said, the Whore must imitate in
many particulars. I know it will not relis^ well with some palates, as not
being served up in a scurrilous an^ obscene dish, which they suppos^ an
essential dress to what ever writ on this subject. The Autho^ is not of this
persuasion, he could have been bawdy and profane, b^ detests both; he believes
ribaldry nauseous in whose mouth soever receives a being; he protests (...)
hate it even in a Whore, more than a dawbed face, and in the same degree with a
stinking breath. He says he could have been more particular in the Ladies
Rhetoric than he is in the subsequent lectures: but as a worthy Divine of the
Church of England says, describing the Vices of the age (in which pure Church
Philo Puttanus disclaims all interest) Thus much is abundantly sufficient on
this occasion, lest the Author should be thought acquainted with those persons
he delineated so much to the life.

If this piece be imperfect and weak in what it pretends, if the Whores
profession be nothing advanced by it, then the age can receive no prejudice
this way; for as much as there is no collateral obscenity to infect the world.
But on the other hand, if it bears some proportion with its name and title, if
the young Lady is made wiser and improved a degree beyond the dictates of
natural Logic: The Author on this score also stands upon his innocence, and
pleads not guilty. We find by History and late experience, that a small number
of Men is lost in War since the Art Military has been advanced, since the
Modern ways of Fortifications were found out, and that both parties are wisely
taught strongly to Entrench, to stand upon their Guard, and by stratagem to
starve or tire the Enemy: In like manner if this Rhetoric has elevated the
bawdy Science above its ordinary sphere, if the Warfare of Venus be made hereby
more regular and more methodical; both Combatants, the Masculine besieger, and
the besieged Female are informed of one another designs, and so by easy
consequence to shun the danger and hazard of a Battle. The Author has the
vanity to believe the last part of the Dilemma true, and that these few sheets
(though comprised within the terms of a decent civility may be comprehensive
enough to supersede any lewd revelling on the same subject.

THE Introduction.
IN England's famous Metropolis, not far from the Piazzas in Covent Garden,
there dwelt a young and most beautiful Virgin: who by the poverty and indigence
of her Parents was obliged to one continued retirement. This Fair Maid had
scarce as yet that blessing of Providence fulfilled in her person, who promised
the Sun should shine on all mankind, laying aside the distinction of good and
evil. The want of ornaments suitable to her age, sex and quality, were motives
strong enough to engage her in this sad and miserable confinement: but alas!
this fair Creature's Fate was yet much harder: she wanted even that provision
of necessary attire, sufficient to repulse the injuries of heat and cold.
Dorothea's Father (for so was the fair one called) had much more Nobility in
his Veins than Money in his Purse; and for the support of a numerous Issue,
that angry Heaven had bestowed upon him; there was nothing left, but the honor
of his Family, and the memory of his own brave actions. It was his fortune, or
choice rather, from the beginning of the late intestine broils, to have
imbarqued himself in Caesar's quarrel: the Estate his Father left him, and
which had continued in his Family some hundreds of years had suffered the same
rigorous destiny, that his royal Master had first undergone. So when Brutus had
washed his hands in that Sacred Blood; and when the true Augustus (for there
needed no adoption) by the unanimous prayers and desires of all his Vassals,
had seated himself on his Fathers Throne, this Gentleman then expected some
thing more than a return of the Golden Age: he thought there was something due
to the merit of his services, that might have superseded a tedious attendance,
and take away any necessity of turning suppliant, or offering up a begging
petition; but what a wonderful and surprising disappointment was it! when he
thought his misery had been at an end, to see a new scene of troubles appearing
to him more tormenting, and more dreadful than the first. He began to think,
the doctrine of invoking Saints, was nothing improbable, in that he had
experimented the necessity on it in his own person. His attempts proved
notwithstanding equally insuccessful that way, with his former endeavors: in
as much as he wanted a Golden sacrifice to mollify the Saints Heart: finding
then these Parasites deaf to all his entreaties, inexorable after all his
Prayers; he is finally resolved to make a bold attack on Jupiter himself; from
him he found a reception full of mercy, goodness, and generosity, even like the
Fountain from whence it flowed: but there casually happened a fair Danae in the
way, that received some part of the Golden Shower, and intercepted for some
time the rays of that sacred influence. This unfortunate Gentleman's miserable
Family had occasion much more to yawn, for want of Bread, than excess of Sleep;
and were forced to be very frequent in blessing themselves, lest the Devil
should enter their Bodies, as being for the most part defenseless, and empty
Houses. The revolutions, Philosophers talk of on occasion of a vacuum; rather
than suffer which, angry Nature would invert the Universe; were oft-times found
true in these unhappy persons, who in their empty Guts found the effects of
natures wrath in a horrid grumbling, and an extraordinary confused noise. The
Peripateticks give us to believe, if two Walls were placed opposite to one
another; and the Air extracted from between them, Nature would in an instant
bring them both level with the Ground, or make the two Walls meet, and lovingly
embrace each other: By all which I presume they mean no more than this, and
what is signified in the vulgar Proverb, That the nature of a hungry Belly has
a mighty antipathy to Stone Walls. The Male part of this disconsolate Family,
by diverse Arts and Shifts to be exercised in that spacious City, made it their
business to avoid these inconvenient and griping hardships: but poor distressed
Dorothea, her sex not permitting her to keep her Brothers company in their
frequent sallies, was of the rest, in the most deplorable state: she wanted it
seems, a necessary point of Faith, being equally destitute of Food and Raiment.
The pressing wants this Virgin had undergone, had sufficiently armed against
all Cupid's darts, and all the dangerous effects of love; Ceres and Bacchus the
essential supports of an amorous flame, had been hitherto this fair Maids
implacable enemies; what small favors she had received from that Rural
Goddess, had such a strong mixture of Gall and Wormwood, as too too much
imbittered the benefit, to deserve the tribute of a mean thanksgiving. Among
all the Gods and Godesses, Thetis only remained her constant and faithful
Friend, and her she paid in her own Coin with daily offerings of sacred Vestal
Tears.

One day (and it was that dedicated to St. George, and by us particularly
celebrated in memory of our great Kings Coronation, whom Heaven preserve) was
the pensive Dorothea left alone in the House to contemplate her own misery and
misfortune; She stood at a Window that looked into the Street, which yet scarce
afforded her sight the benefit of the passing objects, it being almost choked
up by a jealous wall that engrossed the fair Dorothea's looks, hindered all that
passed from the enjoyment of that charming vision, and deprived the unfortunate
Maid of opportunity to gratify her eyes, the only sense, she was then in a
condition to please: In this Melancholy posture was the beautiful Virgin
constrained to reflect on her self, and not without an inexpressible anguish of
Soul, to ruminate on her cruel Fate. After a million of confused thoughts, and
some showrs of precious tears, her pitiful but just resentments (as she since
told me) burst out in these or the like expressions: If something of
Christianity, or possibly my Parents Instructions did not at present influence
my Soul; I should certainly at this instant exclaim at providence, and fly in
the face of Heaven. I would boldly approach the Almighty's Throne, to know what
one action of Dorothea's life, has merited this rigid penance, this
complication of misery and pain; but since I am taught and commanded
sufferance, where there is no room for patience; since I must believe and
expect the best, after all hope seems taken away: since I am obliged to think
Justice an essential attribute of the Divinity, though I experiment nothing in
my own person but a cruel severity: since after all I stand engaged to look on
the strokes and Thunder that has fallen on me, as the effects of Heavens favor
and affection, as designed for my future benefit, and present amendment; I
will, I say if this must be made a part of my Creed, follow the example of
other unhappy mortals, who because either they will not, or dare not openly
assault Heaven, make to themselves a Goddess of Fortune, whom they first
suppose blind, and thence make the mark of their rage, fury, and malice: Is it
then from this insensible Divinity that our whole Sex remains accursed,
condemned to subjection, and called by the other part of mankind, light, giddy,
capricious and unconstant? but whither does my perplexed imagination hurry me?
would Heaven, or let it be Fortune, my sufferings were no greater than what are
the ordinary attendance on my own Sex; it is some ease and satisfaction in
affliction, not to be the only sufferer: it is an asswagement of our pain, to
have companions in our misery: The Yoke becomes less galling when many draw,
and the burden more supportable when divided, and placed on many Shoulders.
Unhappy Dorothea! how wretched then and desperate is thy condition? thou have
been from thy Cradle adjudged to a nauseous and solitary confinement, without
any sharer of thy sorrow, any to have compassion of thy misery, any to whom
thou might impart thy misfortunes, save these rugged and savage Walls, as
deaf, as insensible as thy cruel destiny; and lastly condemned to bear on thy
weak Shoulders, Atlas like, a world of insupportable misery; thou certainly
have never yet enjoyed the benefit of a guardian Angel, or tutelary genius,
which some think is deputed to supervise the affairs of every particular
individual; or if fortune has granted thee that only mark of her favor, it is
surely one of her own stamp, stupid, blind, negligent and insensible; if he had
but once looked on his charge with a provident or a tender eye, he had certainly
stifled Dorothea in her Mothers womb, or given her a charitable stroke in her
unhappy Cradle: he has it is true defended her from all these dangers, saved
her from the thousand ways infancy would undo it self, but his care has proved
the height of barbarity, and his charity the greatest plague incensed Fortune
could pour on the head of the disconsolate and wretched Dorothea. Ah! how often
have I prayed my Fate that I might cease to be, that so I might cease to be
unfortunate? How often have I desired to lose that only mark I enjoy of Fortune's
bounty? would she would pay her self with her own gift, and leave me in a
possibility to forget the benefit; but me she treats like a monstrous
malefactor, like a delinquent of an extraordinary size. I desire to dye, but
life is preserved as a part of my punishment; I have begged the uncharitable
sisters to spin out my thread no longer, to cut it in the midst, but am forced
to breath, in spite of all my prayers, all my tears, and all my endeavors.
Scarce had the bright Maid ended these words, when a knock she heard at the
door, made her break off her solitary entertainment, and for a time interrupt
her doleful Plaints: Glad she was at the opportunity of this diversion, to find
occasion to wipe her eyes, and stop her tears, or at least of diverting the
current another way. A little, or a great deal rather, of chat is the life of
Women, the fifth element on which they live, and which they can as
indispensably want, as the air they breath, or their necessary daily bread. The
Reader may hence conclude, Dorothea was not slow to open the door, and inform
her self who it was that came to make such a charitable visit; she soon
discovered, it was one of her own Sex, that seemed so laden with years as to
be scarce able to support the burden; she had very near as many furrows in her
Face, as Hairs on her Head, her Eyebrows were thick and hoary, her eyes
appeared the most fruitful parts about her, sending forth a certain yellow
matter, not unlike that which Hawks mute at one season of the Year. there was
an uninterrupted communication between her Mouth and Nose in the outside as
well as within, held by means of cerose humors that constantly distilled from
one to the other; her Breasts appeared like a pair of Bladders, without the
least particle of Air within, and which had hung some Ages in the smoke of a
Chimney; her Chin was acute and bending upwards, as if it longed to kiss the
under Lip; it was graced with about a dozen hairs placed much after the same
order they are in an old Puss, only they were not so pungent, but rather
resembled that moss or down, which may be seen to sprout from a Dogs T -- d. I
hope the Reader will supply her other parts with his imagination by the taste I
have given of those exposed to view, if he is pleased to fancy her Skin of the
same color, with half-tanned Leather, or her Legs, a pair of Broomsticks
covered with Parchment, that had lately suffered some injury from the fire, I
presume he may do the old Lady no manifest injustice. Her Nails were certainly
visible, and were much of the length of those that are preserved to tune an
Irish Harp: for though she came in a good orderly dress, yet she happened that
day to have put on a pair of Gloves, I should call them by another name, but
cannot think on it, that never had been furnished with Fingers: and so her
tallons were laid open to every eye. Dorothea soon perceived it was one she
never before had seen, but could notwithstanding perceive in her countenance
the marks of sorrow and discontent; she concluded how busy soever Fortune had
been with her, she had been likewise diverting her self at the expense of this
aged Woman: but the injuries she had received from Fortune, were not, she
thought, so visible as those large characters time had imprinted in her face,
as the marks of his impartial, but cruel hand. After Dorothea had conducted the
old Woman into the House, and those ordinary civilities had passed that may be
supposed between two strangers at the first interview: the aged Matron
addressed herself to Dorothea much after this following manner.

The Character I had of your beauty (fair creature), of the endowments of your
mind, and withal, the ill circumstances of your present condition, have brought
me this way, and into this place: I am come to lay before you the unhappiness
of the state you now live in; what you must expect if you persist therein; am
willing to show you the fittest remedies for your distemper, am ready to afford
you my best advice, and if you be not wanting to your self, to put an end to
all your misery and trouble. I need not here (neither indeed is it possible) to
express the satisfaction Dorothea received at the hearing these blessed
tidings: she returned her thanks in the best terms she could then devise,
adding, That her misfortunes rendered her extremely capable of receiving
kindnesses, which she would at all times gratefully acknowledge. Then the old
Woman proceeded thus, It is without peradventure (said she) one of the greatest
misfortunes that can befall a young Lady, either to be ignorant, or not to have
fit opportunities of improving her tender years, so as may most conduce to her
future satisfaction, benefit, and advantage, to spend those precious hours in a
melancholy and drowsy solitude, in which it was designed she should reap that
harvest of content in the open Fields of Liberty, which love inspires, and
Heaven pours down for the delight of youth; is, I say, to pervert the course of
nature, to oppose those benign influences she was born under, and to be
industrious in procuring her own misery and ruin. The niggardly and covetous
Miser has been ever condemned by the universal suffrage of all mankind; in that
his wealth serves only to feed his own eyes, and is never permitted to see the
Sun. The same guilt does a fair Virgin incur, in an equal degree does she
injure the public, who being Mistress of large possessions of Wit and Beauty,
does hide those precious talents, and conceals that inestimable Treasure, from
whence the principal part of mankind might probably expect such infinite
satisfaction. That person does certainly deserve some thing worse than slavery,
who having been for many years detained in a sordid confinement, should refuse
or slight the offers of a generous friend, that would have paid his ransom,
broke his chain, the mark of his servitude, and placed him in an honorable and
pleasant station. 'Alas! replied Dorothea, how unnecessary are your arguments
to one in my state? if you have already discovered any thing in my person your
goodness calls a valuable treasure: if you can prove so good a Chemist as to
extract thence any ease to me, or satisfaction to any part of the World: if
your charity disposes you to break my Chain, and relieve an unfortunate
Prisoner; you should presuppose in me such a willingness to comply with your
kind proposals, as might supersede the necessity of any persuasive. Then the
old Dame in the most insinuating and gilded terms, palliated with a Decorum,
set forth the necessity there was to expose her beauty to sale, and become a
Woman of the Town. She told her that liberty was the first and the greatest
benefit of nature; that the old World had not been circumscribed by any of
those political Laws, which the craft of Priests and cunning of States had
introduced to abridge the World of that satisfaction which variety of love
affords mankind. She magnified the pleasure, state and pomp enjoyed by Whores,
the unspeakable felicity there was in a multitude of Lovers and Idolaters: that
she was to expect deluges of gold and all other good things this World affords,
if she would carefully observe those Rules she would lay before her. That every
particular Votary would come as the Heathens did to their Temples, with rich
oblations of the better part of their wealth. Our youthful years are, continued
she, that golden Age so much talked of by the ancient Poets; and which ought to
be spent in as great variety of pleasure, as Gold is malleable into diversity
of forms. After we have plentifully tasted of those inexpressible sweets that
love dispenses, it is then, and not before, a fit time to imitate with chaste
manners the purity of the Silver Age: or experiment the rigours of the Iron
one, under the austere rod of a cruel Husband. Dorothea had already been
instructed in the School of necessity, to know this was the only remedy, left
to remove the cause of her present distemper. The sense she entertained of her
birth and quality, had made her at all times resolve against any mean or
contemptible Service, the extravagant desire she had of a change, and not being
able, or possibly not altogether willing to answer the reasons alleged by the
old Seducer, she at last yielded to the powerful efficacy of the Hagg's charms,
without being once able to invoke honor to her assistance, or desire the aid
of her own reputation. The only obstacle that now remained, which retarded the
full conquest, and made her for a few minutes suspend a final and absolute
surrender of her self; was the consideration of her own ignorance, in the
affairs of the World: this created in her strange fears and jealousies of being
unfortunate in the exercise of her intended Trade, which required an honorable
beginning and appearance in the world, and in which a Lady ought to be
preinstructed in a systeme of the most curious frauds, and the most winning
blandishments; if she would ever expect to bring her business to a happy
conclusion, or arrive at any degree of an advantageous perfection. These
difficulties she proposed to her new Mistress, as the only Remoras that stopped
her longing desires to condescend to her opinion, and give her self wholly up
to be guided by her. Then the old Lady took the opportunity to remove all
doubts and scruples in words to this or the like effect.

Daughter (for so must I call you) the kindnesses I had for your person, even
before I was acquainted with it, upon the bare fame of your merits, the pity I
entertained for your sufferings, and the tender affection now created by my own
choice, and those extraordinary qualities I have already discovered at this
first encounter, have I say, raised in me strong desires to see you move in a
higher sphere, and placed in a station of uncontrouled felicity; I am very well
able, and yet as willing to instruct you in all those necessary precepts, and
acquaint you with those excellent rules, and practical forms by which you may
become expert and famous in this Art. I will in a few days discourse illustrate
unto you the Whores Rhetoric, in such a plain and an easy method, and paint it
in such lively and charming colors, that you will be constrained by both
profit and pleasure, to learn, remember, and apply to use my short but
sufficient Documents.

Be not surprised that under these mean appearances, I should cover such a
stock of knowledge, imprinted in me not only by a long study in the theory, but
likewise by many years experience in the infallible practick part. I my self in
my younger years, was one of those the World calls a Lady of Pleasure; and even
in the exercise of this profession, in my most lively and licentious days, I
applied my self likewise to the study of polite Learning. I soon arrived at a
remarkable perfection in my own Trade, and in a little time was valued as one
of the first rate Whores, for the splendour of my Lodgings, and other necessary
ornaments, for a graceful and stately behavior, if not on the score of an
agreeable and a handsome face. The memory of my past grandeur, serves now only
to increase my pain: and it is but the just reward due to the non-observance of
convenient rules I was not then so wise as to contain my self within the bounds
of a Rhetoric; my vain curiosity transported me into the wild and unpassible
mazes of Philosophy, and to dive too far into secrets of natural Philosophy to
gratify my own fantastical and giddy nature. I fell in love with a dissolute
and faithless fellow, (Ah Daughter! this is the accursed bane of our Sex, but
those especially of this Vocation) with whom glutting my self in extravagant
pleasures, I fell to discuss the matter and composition of the Heavens in
practicing delights, which to me seemed much more pleasant than the Music of
the Spheres. Then I advanced to the Books of Generation and corruption: and
finally passing to the aerie abstracted notions of Metaphysics, I found all my
Money exhausted, and reduced to a mere Chimera, in search of those vain and
empty Dreams; so that at last I was reduced to theological speculations, and
even almost forced to preach up Charity, as a virtue, I was constrained for
some time to live on: but finding people for the most part extreme cold in the
exercise of this Grace, I soon quitted the service, and betook my self to a
more gainful and more acceptable employment. 'I am sorry (good Mother) said
Dorothea, smiling, that your curiosity has been to you of such fatal
consequence; but though you have not in all points obtained your ends, though
you have not yet perfectly found out the Philosophers Stone, you have, I am
confident, made such accidental discoveries, as may sufficiently make amends
for all your laborious inquisitions, and satisfy all the reasonable demands of
any moderate Scholar. My slender knowledge informs me, I ought gladly to build
on the experience you have so dearly purchased, and rest satisfied with such
practical Doctrines as you shall be pleased to impart unto me; without
entertaining any Metaphysical affections, I shall acquiesce in a knowledge of
sublunary beings, and such of those only, as may afford some profit and
advantage, as well as pleasure. I will not be solicitous to understand what
substance the Heavens are made on; nor to gratify my ears with the Music of
the Spheres: the sweet melody created by the sound of the Golden Oblations you
spoke of, centring in my Purse, is a sound which I presume ought to afford me
principal satisfaction; and I suppose all my industry, and all my policy ought
to be employed in the acquisition of this profitable Science. 'But pray Mother
(continued Dorothea) after such mighty misfortunes as you had suffered, when
you were by the loss of your Money reduced to the contemplation of Divinity?
where was it you then found shelter? what Shore were you cast on after such a
dangerous Shipwreck? 'Before I answer any questions of this nature, that may
interfere with our present business, you must first give me leave, my dear
Dorothea, to applaud the comment you have given my words, and thank Heaven for
having found in your Person a disciple after my own Heart, to whom I may,
before I leave this World, leave all the choice secrets of my Soul, all those
Sovereign Receipts, which being by your care and industry judiciously applied
according to the season of the year, the nature, quality and complexion of the
Patient, will infallibly produce mavelous effects, and make you more famous
in after ages than the Corinthian Lais, or the other Lady of the same name,
that caused Persepolis to be set on fire.

It is the greatest happiness that any mortal is capable of, to be instructed
in a prudent conduct, and sage management of their affairs, by that experience,
which was not gained at first without many hazardous adventures, and a
multiplicity of certain dangers. I have already showed you the fatal rock on
which was ship-wrackt my grandeur and reputation; and I hope the experience of
errors may render the truth of my Doctrine more perspicuous, and the validity
of my reasons more authentic. When the Vigor of Youth, and an inordinate
desire of gratifying my appetite, without any regard to necessity or
convenience, had swallowed up my prudential faculties; then it was I committed
those indiscreet miscarriages, which I could never retrieve but with sorrow and
repentance. When my foolish affections had overflowed all those profitable
pastures, and safe paths, which discerning reason had chalkt out for me; when
the springtide of my passions, had covered the tops of the highest rocks, and
made the face of danger as smooth and calm as that of the waters; then it was
that with all my Sails, running before the Winds of Plenty and Pleasure, I
irrecoverably lost the Ship of my repose: and glad I was to get to shore on the
two planks of Misery and Want. After this sad disaster, when I had sacrificed
my treasure to appease the insatiable cravings of a bawling Neptune; when I had
lost all hopes of being ever able to Rig out a new Ship; and when the number of
my years could scarce permit me to undergo the fatigue of a new Voyage; I begun
then to think it high time to settle my self on the lazy shore of ease and
temperance. I had ever been in the Spring of my years, one of Cupid's most
zealous Votaries: and though impotent nature had disabled me from performing
any considerable service in the fields of love, otherwise than by being passive
in the work; yet my reasonable part, the Will, did still retain its primitive
heat, vigor, and courage; as an old decripit Soldier, who having received
many dangerous wounds, and honorable scars, and is now unfit to give a
personal attendance in the field, yet by his long experience in the Wars, is
able at a distance to win a Battle by his prudent and unerring Rules; and
getting himself carried up to the top of a lofty Tower, he there sits basking
before the Sun, feeds his eye with the sight of the numerous Battalions, drawn
up in excellent order, and gratifies his ears with the harmonious discord of
Drums, Trumpets, and the more warlike sound thundered from the mouths of the
impartial, and all-deciding Cannon. Just so it fared with me in the warfare of
Venus: I could not without infinite regret quite abandon that beloved service,
and seeing I could not be principal in the action, I was resolved to be
somewhat more than accessory by my servent advice, and bold encouragement. Thus
then I turned Natures handmaid, and a Midwife to love, which had often proved
abortive, had not my importunate prayers and solicitations brought it alive
into the world, to the infinite satisfaction of the loving pairs. It is now
about thirty years since I began to serve the public in this charitable
employment, and had still continued so to do, had not a malignant Jury
dispossessed me of my lovely habitation, I had for many years kept in
Moor-Fields, to the joy, comfort, and support of the whole amorous Republic.

'Ah Madam! cried Dorothea, interrupting her, how cruel have you been in
concealing thus long your name, and thereby hindering me from paying you those
respects that are due to the fame and quality of the Lady Creswel? how
obscurely soever I have spent the few years, I have already past, it has not
been without frequently hearing of your name, the place of your abode, and the
cruel severity you have of late been forced to undergo. Would I could by my own
good Fortune, and your wise Precepts, be instrumental in removing all your
perplexity and sorrow, as well as the misery of my own state, I shall be
extreme cautious to avoid all dangerous curiosities, as well as any dangerous
and unprofitable amors. I will make it my principal care to suck in those
wholesome Instructions your Rhetoric shall furnish me withal: I will be wary
not to exceed those bounds and limits which you shall therein be pleased to
prescribe me; yet I will withal be more than industrious not to come short, nor
fail in the punctual observance of all your injunctions. Fair Daughter, replied
the old Woman, (who must be called hence forward Madam, Mother, or plain
Creswel, as the case requires) 'you may I am sure, discover evident signs of
joy and comfort in my countenance, at the hearing your wise and discreet
remarques: I begin to think my good fortune has not utterly forsaken me,
forasmuch as I have great encouragement to believe your pregnant and towardly
genius will prove a blessing to my declining, and become the staff of my old
Age. Seeing you are so well prepared to receive my instructions. I will lose no
time, but will forthwith expound unto you my practical Rhetoric, in the
easiest and plainest method. I will take care in five days to rig you out, and
settle you in a convenient place, where you may see variety of good Company,
and be instructed in some necessary parts of conversation: for this and the
fixing my prescriptions deeply in your memory, I will allow you some months, as
many as may seem necessary to render you perfect in these qualifications, which
are absolutely necessary, before you may be permitted to open your Shop. You
will peradventure be a little surprised to hear me talk to you of things, that
cannot be attained without some considerable cost and charge: let not that in
the least disturb your thoughts, how cruel soever my enemies have been, they
have still left me sufficient to support the small remainder of my days, and
withal enough to gratify my own humor in showing you these inconsiderable
favors. I have at this day some worthy and eminent Debtors, who have been the
Kings Lieutenants, Lord-Mayors, and Sheriffs of the City of London: some of
them have indeed made me but ungrateful returns of all my favors; if they did
believe love still so valuable, as when they were my constant guests, they
would be juster in paying their debts, and more mindful of their old Friend. I
shall not, sweet Dorothea, detain you any longer in the Porch, but shall with
much impatience expect to morrow Morning, when I will return hither, and in a
short time illustrate unto you a perfect system of such necessary precepts, on
which, if duly observed, you may lay an infallible foundation for the
superstructure of Riches and Honor. I must here profess my inability to show
the Reader that satisfaction, the young Maid received at these her Mistresses
last words: she expressed her thanks in a low curtzy, and a submissive look:
She only told her, The marks of her kindness were so great, she was not able to
express her sense of it; but seeing it was impossible to pay her in effects,
she would never be wanting on all occasions to show her grateful
acknowledgments. Then Madam Creswel, being desirous to repair toward her own
habitation, was about to take her leave, and bid her young Pupil good Night;
when Dorothea remembering she had something to ask, for a few minutes retarded
her departure, by desiring to be resolved in the following question. Madam,
said she, you told me, that after that unlucky miscarriage in your amors, when
your good fortune and riches had been split on the rock of credulity, that you
chose of all professions to turn Supervisor of Love; I desire then to know,
Whether there be any kind of a fatal necessity, that all Whores should
terminate their days in this Profession; I hope, Mother, the similitude of the
old Soldier does not run on all four; for indeed methinks, I could never
endure to see those delights practiced by others, which I my self could not
enjoy; it would be to me, I am confident, an excessive torment to be tantalized
with those sweets, I were never to taste. Heavens forbid, answered old Creswel,
that ere my precious Jewel should be exposed to the disquiets and
inconveniences of this slavish drudgery, time will not now permit me to show
thee the mysteries of this profession: at a convenient occasion, I will either
my self, or get one of my younger Sisters to inform you in the most material
tricks and trapans practiced by the Bawds of this Town: some small knowledge in
this affair will be expedient to preserve you from their numerous frauds:
whilst I live, I will be ever at your elbow, to secure you from danger, and if
thou diligently observe my precepts, thou will have reason to bless the Flesh
and the Bones of thy old Mother, and to love me after I am dead, as I believe
you may have good grounds to do as long as I live. But I had almost forgot to
answer your pertinent demand; which I shall do in telling you there is no
manner of necessity you should disquiet your thoughts, with the vain fears of
being one day obliged to undergo that weighty charge, which I have near thirty
years born on these weak Soldiers. If I had not been a dissolute spend-thrift,
I never needed have lost my own liberty and repose, to procure that for others
in an extraordinary measure: if I had regarded my own profit, or advantage half
so much in my green years, as I did the pleasing my fantastical humor, I
should not have forfeited my ease in my old age, to gratify licentious youth
in all its capricious and extravagant desires. But you, Daughter, I promise a
more advantageous fortune: you shall never need turn Bankrupt in love: when you
have laid up a plentiful stock for the support of all the contingences of this
life, and miseries of old Age; when you have plentifully tasted all the
varieties love can afford; when you are cloyed with pleasure, and grown weary
of venereal pastimes, you shall call in your debts, clear your accounts, and
shut up Shop; like a Usurer, who is grown old and tired with cheating, who has
quit both Exchange and Coffee-House on the score of business, only repairs
thither sometimes for his consolation to rail at the Government, and smoke a
Pipe. After you have suffered sufficient drudgery in the Pulpit, you shall
roll into a fat Bishopric, and there pamper your self in Prelatical pomp and
luxury. When you have ruined a million of unhappy Clients, that have thrust
their cause into your hands, and got a mass of Money, by bawling, cheating and
lying; you shall then wrap your self up in lamb-skins, and take a nap on the
lazy Bench. When you have acquired a plentiful Fortune, by destroying many
Legions of wretched Patients; it will then be a good time to leave of killing,
and oblige posterity with some choice Receipts. Finally Dorothea, when you have
for a good number of years imitated the Courtier, in cringing fawning,
supplanting, and undermining, and been quite jaded with acting alla Cortegiana,
that is, both the Whore and Courtier, you may with pleasure retire to a Country
House. The wise Italians by Cortegiano and Cortegiana understand the Courtier
and the Trading Lady, thereby intimating that a Whore ought to be furnished
with all the Courtly qualities, she ought to be a Female sycophant, or the
Courtiers Wise. So Dorothea, I bid thee adieu: To Morrow Morning expect my
return.

Dorothea. Good Night, good Mother: and remember I have given my self entirely
up to your care and conduct.


The First Dialogue.
M. C. WEll, now you see me again, fair Daughter, at the time appointed.


Dor. You are as heartily welcome, Mother, as Money to a needy Whore, or a
Reprieve to a condemned Malefactor.


M. C. It is very well, you will then I hope, lend an attentive Ear, because
you seem persuaded of the necessity of it; and not like Aesop's transformed
Lady, fly off at the first impertinent occasion.


Dor. I will hearken to you with the same respect the young Scholar does to his
rigid Master, or a zealous Christian to an edifying Sermon.


M. C. Pray let not your mind go a Wool-gathering; but fancy you see the
terrible Rod, and that you are to be horsed for every miscarriage, or suppose
for every minute your thoughts wander, you incur no less than the guilt of a
mortal sin.


Dor. I shall, Madam.


M. C. The Whores Rhetoric is nothing else, but the art to multiply
insinuating words, and feigned pretenses to persuade, and move the minds of
those men, who falling into their nets, do become the trophies of their
victories. As Trade and Traders increase, so must industry and ingenuity: and
there are at this day, such a great plenty of Whores, that to live well, and to
continue in that state, it is necessary to understand more than what is vulgar
and common.


Dor. Do not discourage me in the beginning.


M. C. It is not enough to have a charming person, killing looks, and a
graceful mien; cunning, art, and good fortune do the work, all the rest are but
mere bubbles.


Dor. Say you so?


M. C. It were impossible so many Whores should daily become such spectacles of
misery, such objects of pity and compassion, if they would make the right use
of half that wit, nature and their own experience has furnished them withal:
they needed not fear the Constables Staff, or the justices Warrant, a public
whipping, or a private one in Bridewel, where Sir William knocks, and keeps
time with the Lash; they might 'scape the Halter, starving in a corner, rotting
of the Canker, or French Pox, if they were not silly, idle, ridiculous,
negligent, absurd asses, sots, extravagant, lewd, the Devil and worse.


Dor. I believe it indeed.


M. C. If then notwithstanding, these ignorant bawling, scurrilous, drunken,
stripping Sweep-Kennels do sometimes work wonders, and govern the World: If
Privy Councillors, Judges, Aldermen, Doctors, Dukes, Lords, Colonels, Knights
and Squires may be made beasts on by these stupid Jades; how think thou
might the Cullies be handled by Women of sense and understanding?


Dor. We should ride them more unmercifully than they do their Horses; and make
them greater Slaves than the Sally men ever did, or the Algerines.


M. C. For this cause it is not every insipid Slut that is qualified for this
Trade; and I that am instructed by long experience, do not, you see,
precipitate you in this affair, a large stock of knowledge, and the highest
point of policy and circumspection is necessary to render a Whore successful in
her own art; she must be at least as dexterous in the vending her goods, as the
Habberdasher at putting off his small-ware: and if she knew her own wealth, she
has in her Shop no less variety than the Habberdasher in his: for if he can cry
Pins, Needles, Laces, Thimbles, and such like stuff; the Whore has likewise in
her Magazine dainty words, sweet Kisses, pretty Smiles, and charming Looks, but
all this is nothing: she has in her Cabinet, Rubies, Pearls, Emeraulds, and the
joy and melody of the World.


Dor. I understand you.


M. C. I have promised you a Rhetoric, and therefore to make good my word, I
must observe some method, and limit my self to a certain order. I have already
told you what it is: I will now show you its object, and the matter about which
it is conversant. Interest is the subject of this art; and what ever an
insatiable avarice can either pretend to, or desire, may be included in the
object thereof. Invention is principally necessary in this Art, to frame new
pretexts, and a diversity of expressions, with reference to the circumstances
of person, time and place: and to impose probabilities, or even things utterly
false, as certain, and true. A good memory is requisite to avoid
contradictions, and those inconveniences, the repetition of the same frauds
and artifices would infallibly produce.


Dor. You proceed methinks very regularly.


M. C. I shall not trouble you with a particular account of those silly
divisions which those Rhetoricks afford, that are commonly taught in Schools,
as the four parts of an Oration, Elocution, and the Doctrine of the Tropes and
Figures. The things you shall be particularly informed in; I will only omit the
barbarous and insignificant names.


Dor. Pray do so: and proceed to what is material, till you come to the marrow
of the business.


M. C. The Regular Priests of the Romish Church, do seemingly take three Vows
of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; but instead of these they wisely devote
themselves to Luxury, avarice, and Dissimulation; in like manner you must put
on a seeming modesty even when you exercise the most essential parts of your
Profession: you must pretend a contempt of money, that your amorous caresses
are purely the effects of love; and a counterfeit humility, as often as the
occasion may require: when in the mean time, your main, and indeed sole aim
must be to impose on all men, never to stick at any thing how licentious
soever, that may forward your designs or interest: your avarice must be
insatiable, you must therefore never fly any occasion of increasing your stock:
and your whole life must be one continued act of dissimulation.


Dor. I will obey you.


M. C. On these foundations I intend to superstruct my subsequent discourse:
and will for the most part, confine my self to those Doctrines, that may seem
to animate a young handsome Lady in this Trade, such as I have chose for a
Disciple: without regarding the married Women, Widow, or superficial Maid; who
do not obey the dictates of interest, but prostitute themselves merely to
gratify their libidinous appetites. Neither is this discourse directed to
Whores, that have already spent some considerable time in the exercise of this
Function. To those whom either years, or some personal blemish has made less
agreeable, I give only this general caution, to conceal with all possible
industry their particular imperfections; and to supply their wants as far as is
possible, with abundance of good Chat, rich Clothes, Flattery, endearing
Expressions, and some particular Dexterities to please their Lovers: after all,
they will be forced to submit to harder terms than I shall ever suffer you to
comply with.


Dor. I thank you good Mother, in that you are so sensible of my interest as to
square your Discourse to my particular necessities; but I am confident your
instructions, though directed to me, may be likewise profitable to the
cunningest, and most experienced Whore living.


M. C. There is a mighty necessity, Daughter, that you in all points conform
your self to those obligations your Profession will impose upon you in ways far
different from the ordinary artifices of our Sex. We are all, it is true,
naturally inclined to weave fraudulent webs, and to be likewise overjoyed at
the success of our experiments: but a Whore ought to exceed others of her Sex
in these undertakings; as many degrees as her opportunities of knowledge, are
greater, and her necessities of living by such subtleties may seem to require.
She moves in a higher sphere, than the rest of Women; and her actions ought to
seem publick-spirited; though Statesman-like, she should contrive them all to
meet in the center of her own particular advantage: You must be furnished with
great variety of words, and even those that are most familiar and trivial, to
enable you to entertain your Lovers on all subjects: still complying in the
choice of the matter with their various tempers. This part of Rhetoric is
necessary to fit you on all occasions, to use ambiguous expressions, and for
ornament sometimes, synonymous terms; to equivocate, vary and double, according
to your fancy and the present circumstances: all which do extremely enhaunce
the value of your words; and add a particular gallantry to your discourse. A
Whores language in the lascivious dialect, is ever to please the present lover;
who always coming to feed on the same dish, ought to enjoy the variety of
discourse, in such sort that he be not cloyed with his fare, and by consequence
she lose the efficacy and main end of her eloquence. You must seem altogether
insatiable in pleasing your lover; and in multiplying his delight; ever
pretending to receive therein your self particular satisfaction; if his
experience has taught him diverse forms in the enjoyment, gratify him in
condescending to his humor therein: provided his particular generosity
challenge this particular treatment. During these ravishing minutes be not
wanting to afford him a multiplicity of strict embraces: let your caresses, and
ecstasies be sometimes inclining to violent, sometimes slow and remiss; but
still such as may seem natural, without any artificial constraint, that so he
may believe you ravished beyond your self: and be thought, not only to feed him
with your body, but to have given likewise your very Soul. Let this be attended
with some dying words, soft murmuring sighs, as may be just overheard by your
lover. Redoubling the knots of hands and feet, let the Comedy end with some
sweet kisses, in which let your tongue gently glide within his lips; that you
may seem to have transmitted your Soul that way; whilst he infuses his, in
return, at another door. After the disjunction, be very industriou to drive
away that repentance, or melancholy rather, which naturally succeeds fruition:
to hinder him from nauseating those delights, even for the space of one minute;
on which depend the main force of all your persuasions. It will not be amiss,
during this intervall, to divert him with an aerie Song, or some jocular, and
facetious Novel, that may remove all marks of sadness, and prepare him for a
second assault. When he is ready to depart, has paid for his pleasure (for
that I still suppose) and you expect no more of his liberality for that time,
be sure to dismiss him with some extraordinary Epilogue, that may soon enforce
a return; let your kisses be on this occasion more savory than usual, and your
dalliances so exquisite as may create in him strong, and invincible desires, to
buy more of your fruit, though you should be so cruel as to raise the price.
Those are still esteemed the choicest, and are ever the dearest cakes, which do
not cloy the Stomach; but only whet its edge, and prepare it for a new meal.
Promise him the next time greater satisfaction, and more delicious fare; make
him believe the pleasures you disperse are so refined and spiritualized, that
they will always improve by a repetition, and increase in proportion, as they
become familiar by frequent practice. Give him to understand your Treasure is
inexhaustible, and that you will never want sufficient reserves; being thus
entangled in the net, he will fancy himself always a Prisoner, but when your
soft hands loose the knot, and make him free; he will believe every Hour an Age
till he may satiate his longing appetite, and revive his Soul with the
delicacies of the same repast. Men are often of opinion, that Women were made
only for their enjoyment; so by consequence they will too frequently despise
them when the pleasure is over, as they do meat on a full Stomach. Consider
then how nearly it concerns you to know some extraordinary arts to engage your
Lovers, and make them indivisibly yours (if I may so say) even after the act of
separation. Your graces must be strong, and your charms irresistible to oblige
them to continue their conversation; which must after a time redound to your
profit and advantage. Use all men and at all times with terms of the highest
civility, a feigned kindness, and a pretended affection can suggest: unless
some particular disobligation may require the contrary; and then let your
resentments be showed in a stately and scornful contempt; but this I will only
allow, when all hopes of further gain are taken away; when your Votary has
hardened his heart, not to be reclaimed by reason, nor dissolved by tears. With
those that are your familiar and constant Customers you must learn a particular
deportment. When you find your Minion imparadised in pleasure, drowned in
excess of love, and now scarce able to bear the weight of the joy, it will be
then fit you should experiment the virtue of your well regulated note,
insinuate some considerable request, for the which you must never want some
plausible pretense: at one time you shall feign that some of your movables of
value are pawned for a sum of money (which must be proportioned to his temper
and ability) which if not redeemed by a certain day, then at hand, will be
irrecoverably lost; at another time, give him to believe the loss of a Pendent,
Ring, or such like utensil, for which you have a singular value, not for the
thing it self, but lest you should be thought careless of the Donors favor who
must be some particular relation, whom you would by no means disoblige. You may
sometimes complain of an obligation that lies upon you, to pay a debt at such a
day; seem sensible of your present disability, and the damage your credit will
receive thereby, your creditor being one of your main benefactors. At another
opportunity you must put on a borrowing face, but with a firm intent to make no
restitution. If your lover have a retentive faculty, abound with protestations
of good will, and excuse with impotence, the contrariety of effects; put him
fairly to it by way of being security: and be sure never to want a friend on
those occasions, that will lend money, having a hint before hand, of the
stanchness of the person he is to have as surety; with these and the like
inventions, you must strive to keep your Purse, and supply the contingences of
any extraordinary charge: For all these purposes take care your Maid be wisely
pre-instructed, to show her Mistress wholly disinterested, who, she is sure,
would not stoop beneath her decorum, to make any such request, were not her
kindness and familiarity the occasions of it. It will be necessary your Servant
should know on occasion to act the buffoon, or at least many capricious and
pleasant humors: that so under the notion of burlesque, all things being
permitted her, she may by way of jest, use her earnest endeavors to fleece the
Rivals: her desires must be either moderate, or more exorbitant, according to
the discretion of the amorous guest. Some are pretty well, or perniciously
rather, armed against a Whores wit: and dare be so hardy, to resist all the
shocks of her importunities: but much the greater number, are prone to yield in
all these points if discreetly managed; and not a few so weak, as to be imposed
on by the Legerdemains of a Servant. Above all things see that your snares be
not detected, before you have caught the Woodcock; for if the net be foreseen,
even those shallow Animals can avoid the danger. What ever is acquired by these
means may be reckoned as clear gain, in regard the purchase comes in without
trouble; so it is trying men's generosity and good nature: when ever a repulse
happens in the way, step lightly over it without any apparent regard, or the
least trip. There is incertainty in all traffic; one that will build on no
less than infallibility, wants faith, and must never expect any considerable
return: but she that can run the risque, who can look danger in the face, with
a favorable gale, may arrive at some degree of eminence, and come off with
multiplied gain. The Documents are good, but yet the rules of commerce are
voluble: in as much as there are variety of contracts with the like variety of
Persons, it is impossible to meet at all times; one and the same humor:
however Daughter, be sure to trade in the bank of subtilty, that so your cash
may still increase, and your profit advance agreeably to your own desires.


Dor. What do I hear! I had thoughts to interrupt you several times before you
came to this period, but my ears were so busy, I could not make use of my
Tongue.


M. C. You must look on it as the great business of your life, to please
others, and enrich your self. Fancy your self subjugated by an inevitable
decree to satisfy any the most lascivious appetite, provided he comes with
Gold in his Purse, and is willing to purchase at your rates. You must forget
the distinction of Gentleman, and Mechanic; but let men be divided in your
Books under the names of Poor, Rich, Liberal, and Niggardly. I would indeed
have you only seen with first rate Gallants, in the face of the Sun, and in
public places, but under the shelter of darkness, and covert of the night,
lowre your Sail, and condescend to the embraces of inferior persons, who have
oft-times a larger Fond, and are easier induced to comply with a Ladies humor.
The Emperor that raised a Tax from Piss, to confute one that thought it
beneath and inconsistent with the dignity of a Prince, produced a heap of Gold
that came into his Treasury by that Imposition; Does this, says he, stink of
the excrement whence it was drained? Thereby showing, that money removes all
stench, from the meanest action, by virtue of its purging quality. Carry your
self at all times with a superficial stateliness, to gain respect, and avoid
contempt: but remember to bate some degrees of this gravity, if it either may
offend, or be discovered by a discerning Lover. You must in your Clothes appear
beyond all measure rich and magnificent. Young sparks (nay and some that have
arrived at years of discretion) do judge of one another Wit and Parts, by
their dress and garb: so they ever conclude a Woman's attractives to increase,
with the glittering of fine Clothes, and sumptuous Lodgings. Though I am sure
the Coxcombs are almost equally astray in both particulars: I would have your
Clothes rather seem grave than gaudy, yet such as may in their splendor show
something of the fantastical, and notwithstanding preserve a decorum. Those
Whores are very ill advised, and do ever in short time become cracked and
bankrupt in their reputation, who for the humor of strutting about, and to be
thought frollicksome, brisk, and gay, do deviate from the strict rules of
sobriety, they ought to observe, into a contrary excess of lewdness and
obscenity: they hereby precipitate themselves into open danger, and lose their
aim, which was thereby to gain upon their amorous Servants, by falling into
open contempt, because impudence was of the same stamp. She ever sells most
Ware, and at the best rate, who can handsomely show its worth, but yet does not
seem too fond of the Buyer. Men will be sure to respect those most, who set a
high value on themselves, and their own goods. They deal with Women as they do
with their Habberdashers; let the Shop be in a gentile part of the Town, have a
fair outside, let the Seller be well stored with Shop-Rhetorick, and then he
that asks most, is certainly esteemed to vend the best Commodities. But on a
seeming veneration for Piety and Religion, especially before Strangers, whereby
you will be ever valued even by those that have themselves laid aside those
considerations; but much more by Men of generous and free thoughts. By no means
give your self the liberty of Swearing, or drinking to excess; unless on some
particular occasion, a young Bubble may encourage you thereto, who is free of
his money, and in love with those insipid and unprofitable vices. As to the
various modes of fine dressing, Singing, Niceties to be observed in Eating, and
Drinking, Behavior and Corversation; I have already told you, that some time
is to be laid aside for the learning of these, before you can safely begin the
World, all which you must be instructed in at another School.


Dor. I remember you told me, I was to understand these points, and at your
expense too, for which, good Mother, I do again return you my thanks. You are
resolved, I find, not to see me deficient in any necessary part of breeding; I
hope, I shall never give you any reason to repent, either your charge or
trouble.


M. C. Among all the qualities of an exact Oration, there is none more
necessary or more pleasing, than that it should be stored with numerous and
smooth periods, which might gratify the Ears even of Orators themselves, with
their regulated sound, and the harmonious conjunction of all their parts. In
the sentiment of my Rhetoric, there is no music ought to sound so charmingly
in a Whores Ears, as that sweet melody created by the clashing of Gold in her
own purse: and therefore to multiply that, it will be necessary, to increase
likewise the multitude of your Lovers. You may rest assured that no
considerable return can be expected by dealing with one Correspondent (I do not
now speak of those whom some personage may keep for his particular diversion)
it is the height of folly to depend on the supplies of one Purse, the
inevitable ruin of a Whores Fortune, and an infallible prologue to a state of
beggary. It were much better to comport with a matrimonial Chain, voluntarily
to sell your liberty to one Husband, whose person and money may be more at your
command, than can be expected from an amorous Friend, who must needs be tired
with your continual wants, and nauseate your many importunities: but if his
hands did not grow weary of incessant disbursements, if his inclinations still
continued to satisfy all your necessities, the mines would be finally
exhausted, and as the expenses would grow greater, the power and ability would
daily decrease. Those are only the famous Rivers in the World that receive the
tribute of a multitude of inferior Brooks; and the Ocean it self could not
brag of its vast extent, and unaccountable limits, if its supplies were not
unaccountable likewise. Beware then, Dorothea, of ever suffering your self to
languish miserably at the discretion of one man, by deposing in him the sole
hopes of your support and fortune. A long acquaintance will create a fatal
familiarity, and that embolden him to deny you possibly, not only your modest
requests, but to raise his dominion over you to such a height, as to tread you
under his cruel Feet, and with severe blows command you to bury all your
demands. If for want of opportunities a Woman should be constrained to defend
this dangerous post; or at her first appearance on the Stage, she should not be
able to establish her fortune, by a numerous train of admirers; let her be
still on her guard, and cautious not to miss laying hold of the first
convenient refuge, but still with discreet reserves, keeping in her own hands
the power to retract, at the first offer of a favorable gale, that may wast
her over to any other more advantageous Port. In a change and variety of
Lovers, you will find occasion to improve your skill in Rhetoric, which in the
center of one man's Breast, in the continual handling one particular matter,
would become trite, lose its efficacy, and yield you neither profit nor even
pleasure it self. A singular dexterity will be always necessary to keep, to
preserve the peace among the jealous Rivals, to maintain them affectionately
devoted toward their Mistriss's service, and ready to comply with their
respective talents. You must fancy your self supreme Governess of an amorous
Republic. The merit of your Subjects must be valued in proportion to their
wealth, and their readiness to open the strings of their purses: so you ought
to be nicely impartial in distributing rewards and punishments according to
their several merits, or prevarications; which in your Law must mean,
generosity on the one hand, and a retentive parsimony on the other. Still
encourage loyalty, and an humble deference in all your Vassals: pour down the
largesses of your favor on those only, of whose fidelity you are well assured,
and who prove ready at all times to sacrifice what is most dear to them, to
your will and pleasure. It is a foolish maxim to oblige your enemies, or
strangers, by fancying your self secure of your friends Hearts. This piece of
policy would certainly ruin you in the end, and leave you destitute of all
support. If there happen to be any person on whom you may think fit to show
particular marks of your bounty, or whose services have merited some signal
reward, be careful not to give him any distaste, or any just ground of
discontent, let this be the infallible criterion of your servants affection, if
he acts in your service, with more regard to your interest than his own
particular advantage. Be not wrought on by the impudence or importunity of any
bawling fellow, to part with the least part of that Treasure, which ought to be
wholly reserved to recompense your zealous Servants, and your old friends. Be
mindful in a particular manner of those, who stick to you in any adversity, it
is a sure sign they are disinterested and fond of showing their affection. (He
was certainly a coward, and no wise man, the Emperor, I mean, that first
introduced the custom of reclaiming grand Mutineers, with heaping honors on
their undeserving heads; and stopping the mouths of the factious with
preferment in the state. This is to open a wide gap, for every necessitous, or
adventurous Villain to enter the bewitching Fortress of Rebellion: and whatever
Potentate fancies this the safest way to reduce such to their duty and
allegiance, is guilty of the same ignorance and weakness; that would a
Physician be, who should administer nourishing Gellies, and restorative
Cordials to his Patient, laboring under the flame of a burning Fever. Every
one knows that losing a little Blood, and a sparing, or rather no diet at all,
were the only way to have saved his life. So in the first case Phlebotomy is as
indispensably necessary, and the only sovereign receipt to cure the calenture
of a State, and secure the tranquillity of the Body politic.)


Dor. Why Mother, I think you design to make me a States-woman, as well as
knowing in the Rules of Rhetoric. I shall endeavor to imitate the wise
Prince, to show neither partiality, nor cowardice in the administration of my
Republic.


M. C. If it happens at any time, that some one of your favorites does grow
enamoured to that degree as to be impatient of a Rival in your affection;
desires to engross you to himself, and make a monopoly of your Wit and Beauty;
if his estate be as large as his flame, and his generosity equal to both, I
shall approve of your deserting your other Clients to place your self in this
easy and pleasant station. Take care however before you enter upon this
monastic way of living, to have a convenient maintenance settled during your
own life, in case of any contingency, as a rupture between you, his death, or
the alteration of his humor. If he chances to be a single man, not yet caught
in the noose of Matrimony; you must even outdo your self in all demonstrations
of a a fond respect. Exercise on this occasion the quintessence of your
flattery and dissimulation, and with studied arts, and exquisite inventions,
make it appear you have exceeded your passionate Squire, in all the effects of
a profound and sincere love. After he is sufficiently convinced in this point,
fancies himself the happiest man living in the fidelity and affection of his
Mistress, and begins to brag of his bright possession, it will then be fit you
should entertain some thoughts of seizing the Golden fleece. When you have for
some time found the good effects of your knowledge, in gleaning whatever
escapes your keepers hook; or what he is generously pleased to leave behind
him; raise then your aspiring thoughts, and consider how you may best make your
self capable of enjoying a third part of your future Husband's estate, if you
should chance to survive him. The Lawyers call this Dower in their Jargon, and
tell us it is one of their Ladies prime favorites, and seems in her eyes the
most precious Jewel, next to Life and Liberty, that she wears about her rusty
and wrinkled Neck. If these Gentlemen of the Robe would pardon the misprision
(for so I am sure they miscall it) I should think this careful provision for
married Women might be well termed the courtesy of England, in benignly
telling them, they may cuckold their Husbands all their lives, and yet they
shall not be able at their death, to stop this legal current, or hinder their
Wives from enjoying that signal courtesy the Law affords them.


Dor. Pray Madam, pardon me if I interrupt you: I am not desirous to hear any
more of the Lawyers; those dragled-tail'd fellows (as I heard my Father say)
are more griping, and have more jilting tricks than I can hope to have after
all your instructions. I desire to hear what I am more concerned to know, and
that is, How I may get a Gentleman of the Gown, not of those Westminster ones,
to say Grace between my Spark and me.


M. C. I thank thee, Child, for not permitting me to dwell on these
impertinents; I love them as little as thou do, and have much more reason to
hate them, since my late overthrow at Westminster; where one of that impudent
Tribe, cited I know not how many cases, wherein I had transgressed the Law, and
came within the purview of such and such Statutes (for so I remember the
mercenary Varlet called it) though I have, as it is well known, made it my
business to quell all insurrections, appease all unlawful emotions, to keep the
Kings peace, both by Night and by Day; and to satisfy all men according to
their several exigences.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha. I believe you without swearing. But do beseech you to come to
the point I am to be instructed in.


M. C. The remembrance of these disasters has put me into a grave humor, and
almost into a fit of Devotion; so the next thing I shall inform you, after you
have gained those necessary points in the faith of your beloved; is that you
must gradually fall into a contemplation, and a retired humor, and soon after
into a pretended deep and constant melancholy: which you must always discover
most, when your Gallant may be apt to take notice of the change. You must not
be unprovided of the Whole Duty of Man, Practice of Piety, and such like helps
to Devotion; as having been from the beginning a great pretender to Religion.
Order it so, that he may surprise you in a zealous mood, in the midst of an
ejaculation, and not without your eyes overcast with tears: he will certainly
show his affection in being extremely inquisitive, to know the source of your
tears, sorrow and discontent: pretend at first, unwillingness to trouble him
with a discovery; but after he has redoubled his importunities, satisfy his
curiosity, and remove the mist from before his eyes, by hood-winking him with
this or some such answer. I cannot, my dear, (shall you say) but account it a
very signal misfortune, and one of the saddest circumstances of my whole life,
to be guilty (if I may so say of the innocent) of contributing in any degree to
your disquiet, or the disturbance of your, so much by me desired, repose. As I
have for the time past, since I had the honor to know you, so I shall for the
time to come, and with my last breath, wish you all imaginable satisfaction.
Nature, my own choice, and the essential obligations I owe you, those large
marks of your generous temper, have made me totally and eternally yours. I find
in my self the genuine effects of a sympathetick flame, if by that be meant a
strong, a violent, or a spotless passion: but if such as is created by no known
cause, or wherefore no reason can be assigned, then I must confess my affection
thus far will not correspond with the name of sympathy. It is however, much to
be feared, that I am now arrived at a dangerous precipice. I love you, and must
ever do so, though my own reason and the dictates of Heaven tell me, I ought to
break off this impure communication, and demonstrate my love in other more
lawful methods, and more agreeable to our holy Faith. And yet the flame within
me is so strong, and has in it so much of a violent sympathy, that it forcibly
prevails over all the faculties of my Soul, and even deprives me of that
liberty, whereon, I thought, had been grounded, either the hopes of reward, or
fears of punishment. It boldly triumphs over my reason, drowns my Faith, and
baffles even those supernatural aids, that should enable me to overcome all the
most dangerous difficulties: In fine, Sir, I am torn in pieces between love on
the one hand, and fear on the other: between the force of Religion, and the
stronger powers of an immoderate passion. It is from you then, and only you I
may hope for relief, it is you that can cure me of my pain, that can prove the
Physician of my Soul, as well as body; and it is you I conjure by our mutual
flame, our past joys, your own goodness, and my tears to commiserate the
wretched, but still too too loving Dorothea.


Dor. I protest, Madam, this lecture pleases me extremely; I am confident it
might do feats, if acted to the Life.


M. C. Thou have undoubtedly read Cleopatra, Cassandra, Pharamond, and others
of that nature, which I protest I never did, and so from those Romantic Ladies
may say something more heroine and gallant than what I can at present
suggest. Tell him it would be more insupportable than a thousand deaths, to be
bereft of the blessing of his conversation. Beg that he will still permit thee
to enjoy the sight of his person, without those impure effects of his love.
That you will be extremely satisfied to serve him in any mean capacity, and
think it a higher felicity so to do, than to live with any other man upon Earth
in the circumstances of a married Wife. I tell thee again, Child, my crazed
fancy cannot soar so high, beyond the Planets, as it ought at this time: my old
Minerva wants the encouragement of a quartern of Brandy to spiritualize it for
this occasion. But faith, Dorothea, if thou will be advised by me, tell him in
plain English, if he will not make thee his in an honorable way, desire to be
excused from supplying any longer the room, and place of his Whore.


Dor. But what if all this Rhetoric with my own additions should not prevail
on him to marry me, I hope you would not have me so silly, to quit him only to
prove a Woman of my word.


M. C. By no means, Daughter: But it is forty to one odds if you miscarry; and
indeed this is the state I hope to place thee in; and methinks I already see
thee at the Helm steering the Ship of this pleasure toward the Port of Bliss,
in one continued and uninterrupted course, in spite of all the storms and
tempests raised by a jealous Husband.


Dor. I take it for granted, seeing you are pleased to give the assurance of
your endeavors, to make for me this careful provision. However, I desire you
will finish your Rhetoric, which you have so much to my satisfaction already
begun. You know Madam, knowledge is at least an ornament to every body, and
will be so to me though I should have such a fortune as not to put all your
instructions in practice. A wise man will make his Son a Scholar, though he
intends him the reversion of a plentiful Estate: which may save him the trouble
of making a trade of his acquisitions, by proclaiming the Gospel, thumbing
Littleton, or dissecting Gallen.


M. C. You say well: and I will comply with your requests, only I shall in my
subsequent Discourse, sometimes touch on things in the third person, treat of
what a discreet Whore ought to do, but as you have already well observed, all
of it is not intended for your practice.


Dor. Pray be pleased to proceed in that method.


M. C. When a Lady is kept by a married Man, if old, I shall speak of that,
when I have done with my general Rules, and descend to particulars.


Dor. A natural method.


M. C. But if the spark be married and young, the same Rules will serve already
laid with some abatements. In as much as there is no hopes of decoying him into
Matrimony, she must be therefore particularly industrious to squeez what money
she can out of him.


Dor. I would fain know, Mother, whether a Lady, in this case, might not take
now and then the liberty to divert her self with other Lovers, that may
probably be more pleasing to her than the maintaining Gentleman: For I fancy he
may become in time as troublesome as an impertinent Husband.


M. C. That is a nice point, Daughter. Variety is indeed the Soul of the World;
and I would not be so cruel to confine a young Creature to the embraces of one
man, no more than I would to one Dish of Meat, or one Petticoat. But then,
Daughter, it is more than necessary to be well assured of the persons
discretion, whom she trusts in an affair of this consequence. There is not one
in twenty, that is able to conceal his conquests; for men do take more pleasure
in divulging their good fortune, than they did in the very actual enjoyment.
They can indeed rail at Women as weak and frail Vessels; and yet they
themselves are rather more leaky; being as little able to keep an intrigue of
this nature undiscovered, as they are to keep their Chambers the day they have
put on a new Suit: a discreet reservedness is therefore necessary, and to be
strictly enquired into, in regard so few are masters of it. And yet beside that
I would not have her run the risque without the temptation of a good sum.


Dor. I am clearly of that opinion; That if he should prove a Blab, he might
not have all the reason to laugh at the Ladies easy nature, and she no means
left to make him suitable returns. But

Are there no other qualifications required in an amorous confident, beside
discretion, and generosity?


M. C. Only that if he be a person not acquainted with her Guardian, or any of
his Friends, there is then the less danger: and therefore such a one is most
safe, and may be traded with on more severity.


Dor. You have given me satisfaction.


M. C. As to those that live at large, other measures, and different ways of
proceeding are necessary to be known, they are daily to encounter a multitude
of various humors, and so of course, accidents of the like nature. Their
business and Trade being universal, their cunning and industry ought to be so
too. And indeed this general acquaintance, this multiplicity of experiments, is
the readiest way, after the foundation of a good Theory, to make a Whore expert
in her own business, but without that, unless, I say, she have imbibed some
speculative notions, and been instructed in some preliminary Doctrines, she
must fail in the practick part, turn Bankrupt in a short time, and then suffer
that long series of Misery, which usually attends broken and neglected Whores.
Both then are absolutely necessary, a competent stock of knowledge and an
industrious application of that learning to use and practice.


Dor. You talk Philosophically, Madam.


M. C. A multitude of Clients does never follow any man, who is not first well
read in the Common and Statute Laws; so neither will the indefatigable Study of
many years make a complete Lawyer without some considerable practice, to whet
his judgment, and improve his reading: and seeing I have given the Whore this
pattern to walk by, I desire her to be like the Lawyer, well stored with
Bar-impudence, not to be run down, by dint of sense nor force of Argument. Let
the Whore imitate the Lawyers Christian Patience, in suffering any scurrilous
abuse, so the Libertines Purse be sufficient to atone the miscarriage: I would
have her likewise give her Client a fine story for his Money, as the Lawyer
serves his; and lastly let her be sure to hate a poor Lover, as much as the
Lawyer does a pauper Client.


Dor. Because you say so, I will conclude, a Whore ought to imitate the Lawyer
in these particulars, but sure you would not advise her to be likewise
unmannerly, dull, and slovenly. It is necessary a Whore should have invention
(which you said was a part of Rhetoric) and not Lawyer-like to walk,
discourse, and even think by precedent.


M. C. Thou art in the right, Child. But pray give me leave to finish my
general Doctrines, and ease my self of the greatest part of this weighty
affair, with as few interruptions, as you can.


Dor. It is very reasonable: I will obey.


M. C. The most convenient habitation for a Trading Lady, is in a small
convenient House of her own, rather than in Lodgings. For in these she will be
subject to several Rules, which in a House all at her devotion need not be so
much feared. If she lies at a place of any credit, it will be expected she
should observe some reasonable hours; then her secret intrigues will be more
liable to a discovery, when pryed into by a whole Family, than if communicated
to one or two Maids, that depend on her self, and are her own Creatures. But
the farther, and main inconveniency of Lodgings is, That in them it will be
difficult to contrive several small Chambers, or dark places of refuge, just
large enough to contain a Bed, which may be easily had in her own House. The
use of these is very great to conceal, and entertain at once several Lovers:
That while the Maid stands Sentinel, to expect, and give her Mistress warning
of some jealous Servants arrival, she may have opportunity to satisfy with a
short repast, and a hasty bit, the hunger of another, who will content himself
with such a sottish enjoyment, and pay as much for this stolen fruit, as if he
purchased in the open Market. There are not a few of this temper, who love to
steal these joys, and think them more valuable than those they obtain with
freedom and privilege; as Schoolboys love one stolen Apple above twenty
fairly come by with ready money. There are a sort of Gentlemen, that are easily
gulled into a belief of their being the sole Favorites, and who are only
admitted to the Ladies bed. These youths are naturally free of their money, and
therefore deserve a singular management. The Whore ought to answer their zeal,
in all the demonstrations of a feigned affection: so when the Spark comes to
cool his heat, when she is engaged in another adventure, and entertaining a new
Servant, the said retreats and lurking holes will stand in principal stead. I
knew a Whore (whether more bold or cunning I cannot determine) that used thus
to lodge two or three Guests in her several apartments; he that paid best was
of the most jealous temper, and whom she was most unwilling to disoblige, was
the person to whom she would engage her self for the Nights diversion: so after
immoderate riding, beside perhaps the occasional incentive of some Bottles, had
lulled the wearied Traveller into a profound sleep; then would she pay her
respective Visits, and satisfy the several exigences of all her Friends. These
by places, these dark Conventicles, for the entertainment of the family of
Love, are moreover extreme necessary, for both the hypocritical and the
cowardly Lover, him that thinks to cheat the eyes of Heaven, as well as those
of the World; and him that loves the sport, but believes it unnecessary to
appear in the Fields of Venus with drawn Swords, and who thinks a treat of love
never the more unsavory for wanting the dry sauce of a bastinado, or the more
genteel relish of a thrust in Cart.


Dor. Will any Man be fond of a Ladies company, coming hot from the embraces of
a Stranger?


M. C. A Lady that uses this stratagem, should make her private Lodger believe,
she has only in her own Chamber a precise Female Friend, or some such pretense:
but as I was saying, These two sorts of men are always to be led blindfold into
one of these amorous Cells, and though there were no need of this wary and
severe conduct, yet it is necessary to make it seem so, by magnifying the
danger they would both incur, if their commerce were found out by her keeper,
who must be represented either a fighting Blade, or one that loves to expose
reserved and sober Lovers. On such terms the Cullies will pay any rate for a
reserved entertainment; and think they arrive at the highest pitch of felicity,
when they meet a Whore that pretends to love a secure privacy, and discreet to
manage them according to their several failings. Such Squires will be
credulous enough to believe this circumspection is all but necessary: so their
appetites must increase as does the Ladies caution; and her dainties still the
higher prized, the more seeming difficulties there go to the purchase: beside
this, they may be made condescend to any terms, to wait of their Mistress at
her hours, receive her assignations as may best square with her convenience,
how prejudicial soever to their own; and will finally remain full well
satisfied to get with Foot in Stirrup, one hasty embrace; and having once
discharged, will streightway turn tail, as do the barbarous Moors after the
first volley, not daring to abide the shock of a second encounter, like brave
Christian combatants. They will persevere in their liberality, to procure a
secret continuance of the amorous theft, much more, so they might be permitted
to feed after the manner of the Country Mouse, without fear of disturbance, or
danger of the Bullies rude visit, to make up an unwelcome second course. This
the Whore must still fairly promise, but ever as slow in the performance,
protesting she will study all means to secure a long entertainment, giving them
by little and little larger hopes; so gradually draining their Pockets, she
shall at length feed them with the prospect of a whole Nights regal. She may
render her promises more plausible, and her pretenses more authentic, by
showing that her Guardian is soon to take a progress into the Country, where he
intends to make some considerable stay; that then all things will naturally
tend to their mutual pleasure and content; so the good man will live on these
fancies, and lest he should be baulked of his hopes, will be sure to keep the
jest warm, and alive with ready Money. These are the blessed minutes that bring
in the golden Tribute, that dissolve these facil Deities into plentiful showrs,
with a short and an easy prayer, an empty and vain promise. Several of these
intrigues may be carried on every day, in that they consume but little time,
and do scarce admit of any impediment. Special heed must be taken to avoid
confusion, which must be done by adjusting assignations to her best advantage
and opportunity: and having strong excuses at hand, to apologize for any
accidental or necessary failure. Let her call one of her Customers Brother,
another Uncle, a third Cousin, that so the conversation of such being without
suspicion; this may serve on occasion as a good reserve, to remedy any
inconvenience that may happen from a jealous Servant, when such Friends are
casually surprised, or taken napping in the House. It will be expedient that
some of these Relations should sometimes make their visits, as if by accident,
when they know the paramour is engaged with his Lady; who having civilly passed
some time in an indifferent conversation, such as may bespeak consanguinity,
and then formally taking his conge, with a, good night Cousin; will hereby
justify the Whore's sincerity, and for the future remove all shadows of doubt
from the formerly suspicious Lover. The pretext of being married may draw
Customers, if well carried on of her side, and if she can likewise light of a
loose fellow, who will not be wanting in playing his own part. I need scarce
mention in this Rhetoric, the necessity a Whore has of keeping a continual and
strict correspondence with some particular Bawd; it being a thing so well
known, and universally practiced. These Brokers are as necessary in love, as
the Spaniel to the Sportsman, first to nose out the game, and then to drive it
into the Net, or cunningly to surprise, till the Whore draws the Net over, and
all fear of escaping is taken away: and then too they will Spaniel-like, if the
Whore be not expert at her Trade, be too nimble for her in seizing the prey,
and taking to themselves the first pluck. It will not be amiss however to
conceal her keeping intelligence with these Emissaries, but especially from
those they intend to possess with a belief of being kept, married, or a hater
of multiplicity of amorous caresses. When a young Woman is often seen in
company of any known she-Scout, every body will conclude her business is great,
her designs general, and that she intends to prove a latitudinarian in Love. I
would have her allow the Bawd, a certain proportion out of every pound acquired
by the old Ladies industry and negotiation; And not any certain sallary by the
Month, Quarter, or Year; for seeing that were to be still the same, she might
prove negligent and remiss in her Embassies: but when her gain is to increase
proportionably with her own diligence, abundance of expedition may then be
expected, and frequent returns of plentiful and secure profit. Herein imitating
a discreet Merchant, who thinks it more for his advantage to allow the Pilot a
small share in the Cargo, than a certain monthly stipend: wisely considering
though his life be concerned in the welfare of the Ship; yet the hopes of
lucre, are ofttimes more regarded than even the consideration of life it self,
and may probably add more to his vigilance and care, than that first natural
principle of self-preservation. When the Lady and her inamorato meet to Sup at
the Bawd's House, (which must not be neglected, if she would not incur the old
Dames displeasure, and endanger a rupture) she must not be wanting to find ways
of enhansing the reckoning: what ever Wine the Spark likes, the young Lady must
make some pretense for disliking the same at that time; I am sure the old one
will be for a third: and the like rule being observed in eatables, variety of
Wine and Dishes will easily mount before parting to a round sum. If there be
an Oyster-Woman within half a mile, she shall be commanded from her Post, and
pre-instructed to pass by the door at full cry, and if not called in by order
of the treating Squire, to enter without invitation, opening one or two of the
Cock-Oysters, (which she knows better by half than a Jockey does a found Horse)
she will transgress the rules of good manners, in serving the Gentleman before
the Lady, because forsooth, it is he must pay for the peck. So according to the
season of the year, and what is most grateful to the old tooth, occasions will
be found to introduce the several retailers, and the modest Lover no Christian
liberty left, of saying yea or nay, but (to invert the vulgar saying) is forced
to receive all whether Fish or not that comes to the Net The same method is to
be followed, and larger opportunities of spending are then to be found, when
the pair of Lovers lie all Night at the Bawds House.


Dor. Have these procuring Gentlewomen, accommodation of Beds in their
Habitations?


M. C. Some have, and some have not. And that happens as the Bawds business and
ability concur. These amorous Inns sometimes are furnished with all necessaries
in Love, good Wine, neat Chambers, and delicate Beds. It is the custom in some
of these for the Lady Procuratrix to furnish the Whore also; so for Lady,
Supper, and Lodging the hungry guest may pay without any trouble, a certain sum
to the Mistress of the Family: but then in this case you may believe, there
will be no variety, as when the Gentleman does not stipulate in any certainty,
but brings his Mistress along with him, and pays according to what he calls for.


Dor. I suppose Gentlemen would be for paying a certain sum for all together.


M. C. Then Child, they depend on the courtesy of the old Hostess in the
choice of their Bedfellow, who is still qualified according to the Gentleman's
extraordinary generosity. Did thou never hear of the Inn by this Town, where
one side of the House is set apart for weary Travelers, the other for
languishing Lovers, where the Stage-Coach goes to one division; and the
leathern Bawdy House to the other?


Dor. Never in my life.


M. C. I dare not speak it out, lest some body should over-hear, and tell the
Innkeeper, who would certainly bring his Action upon the Case, and recover
damages, but I will tell thee in thy ear, it is the Swan at K. B.


Dor. This puts me in mind of the Italian I have heard on, That could look
grave on one side his Face, and smile on the other, that laughed with one Eye,
and wept with the other. And this, Mother, by a chain of thoughts brings
Heraclitus Ridens into my memory,


M. C. Take care you have not forgot your promise of giving a serious attention.


Dor. By no means.


M. C. I would here adorn my Rhetoric with some Rules, by which my young Pupil
might learn to impose on my Sisters of the procuring Trade, but that I foresee
an absolute impossibility in the attempt. She or he that intends to sharp on a
Bawd, (I will use that word) must get up before Lucifer, and be stored with
more cunning, than was the old Serpent that cheated our Grandmother Eve. They
have all exercised the Whores Function, whilst any mortal man would give them
leave, by joining in the business. And even after many years practice of
Bawdery, (I speak experimentally) they are over-joyed, when any rampant youth,
overflowed with Wine, to show the greatness of his courage, and sharpness of
his Stomach, will for once cure their Itch, by rubbing their superannuated
Tails. Mr. Hobbs, Child, says well, that Wisdom is nothing but experience; so
by consequence the Bawd must surpass all mankind in point of Wisdom, in as much
as her experimental knowledge does exceed all others. She has read more Men
than any mortal has Books, she has spent more oil and more pains in quest of
knowledge, than the most laborious of the ancient Philosophers; and has been
more unwearied in her nocturnal elucubrations, than the most severe of the old
cloystered Monks. Let my Scholar then be advised by me, who is now grown old,
and full of years in the exercise of both faculties; that it will be prudence
not to aspire to this inaccessible point of knowledge; the Bawd will ever prove
too hard for her in the Politics, though she invoked Hell to her aid. Let it
suffice her to understand the old Rooks false Dice, to hinder her self from
being passive in the cheat: if she aims higher, to reach at the forbidden.
Fruit, she must not expect to reap knowledge thereby; but will only disclose
her ignorance, and make her nakedness visible to her self and others.


Dor. I am mightily afraid of these Bawds, pray give me a particular account of
their State Policy. But sure Mother, they are not so cunning as Gypsies.


M. C. Egyptians, Child, are Asses to them; there is more difference between
the two, than between a learned Physician and an impudent, assuming Mountebank.
At our next meeting, I will give thee a taste of these sour Apples, or get one
of my younger Sisters to do it at a fit time; I wish they may not set thy Teeth
on edge.


Dor. Fear not that.


M. C. Next to these love Embassadresses now spoke of; it is fit my Disciple
should make it her business never to want an interest in those Houses, where
foreign Ambassadors and other Strangers of quality lodge. Among these there is
never wanting good store of Gold, nor a number of Woodcocks, that will with
open Eyes fly into the Net. It may be an argument strong enough to gain her a
reputation, in the opinion of these Gentlemen, to pretend they are not to be
admitted without a mighty privacy, her carriage and conduct being looked after
with a jealous eye, that she might forfeit her dears kindness by taking this
liberty: his generosity must be exalted at this time, that she may not seem to
act out of a principle of necessity; so her caresses will be more valued and
rewarded in an extraordinary manner; as men are commonly at greater expense in
a Gentleman's House, than a public Inn. The same rule may be used to good
purpose with some of her domestic acquaintance. She will find it much to her
advantage, to enquire particularly into the state and quality of all her
Suitors affairs, to hinder any disappointment or surprise: for if she has well
informed her self of their busy hours, and when the necessities of their
vocation, or the impulse of pleasure, do oblige their attendance; it will be
easy to appoint times of meeting, as may give general satisfaction, and enable
her to observe her particular engagements. This enquiry into the condition of
her Lovers may be in another respect of no mean use. It is hard to know a man's
temper from the lines of his Face, or any other extrinsick mark; and it is no
less difficult to give a Judgment of his fortune, or estate, by his spending,
or the figure he makes in the World. Some Men are for this day, and let to
morrow provide for it self; others look on futurities; remember the precedent
of the Ant, in providing against a wet day. Some imitate the Snail, I do not
mean in their gate, but in carrying their Houses on their backs; others are
solicitous to satiate their Bellies, and a third to replenish his Purse. A
Whore then ought to understand Men in all these circumstances, to avoid
contracting a familiarity, or making any strict alliances with such as live
beyond their bounds, and promise in short time to become Bankrupts. This were
an unnecessary precept, if I could suppose my Scholar, upon her guard on all
seasons and hours: for then she might be trusted to deal with any extravagants,
who are the best Friends, and the most generous Lovers, whilst the Fond lasts:
and therefore are for a time extremely necessary; but when they break, it is
almost impossible for a young Lady not to engage her self in their ruinous
fortune. So that it is reasonable to suppose a Woman frail in this case: Daily
experience, and the destruction of many credulous Whores, do evince the truth
of this. They find their Gallants in the beginning of their amor, for the most
part kind and generous; but in a few Months acquaintance, familiarity will (if
the Whores discretion do not prevent it) blunt the edge of both, or at least
the Squires want will produce the same effect. Let her then be acquainted with
her Lovers condition, to know how long his stock will last, and when it may
seem reasonable to discard him; which must be punctually put in execution, the
first minute he becomes necessitated to fail in his usual respects: unless she
intends to bring, not an old, but which is worse, an empty House on her Head,
and be forced to contribute to the support of this useless and unnecessary
tool. When fortune deserts the man, let the Whore do so too, without retaining
the least sense of her old acquaintance, their mutual joys, or his past
generosity.


Dor. In so doing she is but fashionable, and does but conform her self to the
mode of the times, which I think a Whore ought always to observe, when public
practice and her own interest do join hand in hand, and run together in the
same stream.


M. C. She that exposes her Soul and Body for gain is more than a fool, to be
influenced in any degree, by either the obligations of Friendship, the Laws of
Justice or points of Honor. However, it is requisite she should on all
occasions preach Doctrines quite contrary to what I have recommended to her own
practice. She must make show of being disinterested in all her actions; that
not one look, kiss, touch, caress, embrace, flows from any other source than
the pure Fountain of an unspotted affection. When she is in company of her
several Admirers, an indifferent reserved, and equal carriage will be
convenient, unless it be found expedient at certain times, to show the most
liberal and rich of the whole covey, some particular favors, whereby the
others may grow jealous, and study to raise themselves in her good liking by
some extraordinary piece of gallantry. Privately let each one be the Dear, and
the Beloved: and let her feign the present Lovers joys are singularized with
several prerogatives not dispensed to others, in that degree and quality. Let
her pretend a mighty abhorrence to the embraces of many; and that she nauseates
nothing in nature so much as to become a Prostitute to the lust of any, but him
she actually enjoys. This will improve the sense of his pleasure, make each bit
go down with a gusto, and as it swells his content, it will at the same time
enhaunse her Tribute. Thus the consort of her amors will never be found to
jar, but still in a condition to raise a harmonoius and seeming, if not a real
satisfaction in their Souls, who come for the gratification of their exterior
senses. I would have her forward on all occasions, to proclaim the generosity
of any Servant, both to encourage the continuance of it by this counterfeit
gratitude, and to excite others by this example to the like performance. This
will be an infallible means to extort money from a wounded Lover, one who has
folly enough to fall in love, and faith to believe a possbility of any kind
returns; he will strive to exceed every body in profuse regals, not only to be
respected in an equal degree with others; but likewise to banish all other
pretenders from her grace and favor; whose person he will hope to engross to
himself by supplying all her wants, and removing all necessity of depending on
other Lovers. If he be a youth of Fortune, one fit for a Husband, let her not
fail to play her part at this time, with more than usual dexterity. The same
rules I have already given thee, will suite this occasion, and if opportunity
be caught by the foretop, they will prove of force sufficient to overcome the
weak and negligent guard, kept by unwary youth: provided also a propitious
fortune do concur in the business. If Matrimony do not ensue, let her however
not be wanting to pluck the master Feather from the Goose-wing, and to show her
trophies to the next Bird that comes to the Net, to encourage him the more
freely to part with his own: thus wheeling round in an eternal circle of fraud,
she will fulfill the Vows of Avarice and Dissimulation, taken at her initiation;
and soon place her self in a station beyond the reach of malice, or the strokes
of fortune. It is unnecessary to prescribe any farther Rules to drain the
inamoured Cully: he will suffer himself to be patiently fleaed, and so becomes
rather the object of her pity, the dishonorable trophy of an easy conquest,
than the noble victim that withstood the force of repeated strokes; but fell at
last a sacrifice to the irresistible power of a well laid counsel, and the
magical artifice of a counterfeit look. With young Men, that have lately dropped
from under a Mothers or a Tutors Wing; a Whores great work is at first, rather
to captivate their Heart, than win their Purse; because enjoying the first,
entitles her to an absolute Soveraignity over the last. A handful of Modesty, a
dram of feigned Piety, and a scruple of counterfeit Chastity, is a Recipe,
with a probatum est, to intoxicate any tender Heart. Keep him fasting, he will
pray with more zeal, nor will he fail to make his approach to the Whores Shrine
with a magnificent Oblation.


Dor. Pray, Madam, when the Bawd prescribes to a young Whore her Patient, who
must be the Apothecary to compound the Medicine?


M. C. Thou have just now entertained a wicked thought; for I fancy thou
believe the Apothecary must be no less than Master Satan.


Dor. Never stir not I.


M. C. I remember a Whore not many years since, that attempted several times to
enslave a young rich Heir, who had just thrown off his Oxford Habiliments
(though with a saving for the truth, because it might be he was of Cambridge)
and had yet scarce wore off the gloss of his first London Suit. After the ill
success of some projects, occasioned rather by unlucky accidents than either
her ill management, or the Esquires discretion. She is at last resolved to make
her self up to the Ears in Love, that she can neither eat, drink, nor sleep
without the dear Creatures company: she entertains him several times at her own
Lodgings, presents him with some toys of small value, and never a Week passes
without some dying Letters conveyed to him by means of her trusty Maid, who at
the delivery of each, harangues the Youth with her Mistresses quality and
virtues: and that she had rather suffer a thousand deaths, than have her
reputation exposed by a discovery of this epistolary correspondence. She
entreats the sweet Boy to tear off the name (...) bottom, (though the true name
he had not yet known) lest any of them might be lost, or some other unthought
of accident should make it known, that her Lady used this freedom, to which,
she is sure, nothing but the greatness of her passion could have possibly
inclined her.

The milky Youth was far overcharged with all this weight of kindness; one
might have seen all the Ladies favors writ on his Brow in large Characters: he
went strutting up and down, showing the Letters, and the Presents, to all he
met. This singular treatment raised him much above himself, firmly believing
all her protestations real, as if they had proceeded from the simplicity of his
own heart, and that the charms of Person and Parts had made this absolute
conquest over the fair Lady. But withal her fondness slackned his respect, and
the further she proceeded in the demonstration of her flame, the higher he
stood on his punctilioes, and at length arrived to that degree of familiarity
(though not without a blush in his pretty Cheeks) as to reach his hand toward
the basket of fruit, which she had resolved should be forbidden till the Parson
had tied the knot, and given a blessing to their future endeavors.


Dor. I find you were particularly informed in this intrigue.


M. C. She thought it expedient to carry the joque one story higher; ordering a
flippant young Fellow of her acquaintance, to call at her Lodgings, when he
knew the Heir was there, and to personate a Man of quality, and a passionate
Servant of her Ladyship. Accordingly the Mock-Lover comes, and as he was
mounting the Stairs; the Lady desired her Dear (who came a little before) to
retire into the Closet, for that the Knight, who was coming up was a
troublesome Servant of hers, whom for his sake, she was forced to hate. The
Youth obeys, and the Lover enters. He was a person well qualified for such a
piece of Service, being by name a Player, one that could not walk the Street,
but in the same method he trod the Stage, and was still full of the Hero he
there represented. He had by several years instructions attained the art of
accenting a number of fine words, which he no more understood, than does the
honest Parrot intend to abuse the Charioteer, when she makes him whip and
drive, by having innocently cried, Coach, Coach. This Gentleman-actor was a
plagiary for every thought of his mind, and every word that proceeded out of
his regular Lips: The Poet, on whose person he daily committed notorious
Robberies, is not by half such a bold borrower; for what the French or Italians
lend him, he must at least be a Translator in the Case, to make it appear in a
vulgar dress: or when he makes bold with his Country men, he then
transubstantiates the matter, so that to a resigned judgment, and an implicit
faith, it seems a new substance, without the least remainder of its original
qualities.


Dor. If I do not interrupt you, you will make this digression too long.
Therefore be pleased to remember how the Lady entertained the Player.


M. C. The Wight thus equipped entered the Chamber, made his honors to the
Lady, and was by her received with those respects, his forged quality, his
acquired merits, and her design might well challenge: after abundance of
heroic Love, spoke sometimes in Prose, then in Numbers, he at length came
plainly to unfold the scene of his passion; the Lady then began to act her
part, telling him, in terms better than I can think of, That her heart was
already preingaged to one, who though too too cruel, had yet forcibly captivated
all her thoughts, and how insensible soever he proved, must ever seem charming
in her eyes, and deserving all her Sighs and Tears, and all the Affection that
could be crowded into a passionate and tender Soul.


Dor. What will all this come to?


M. C. The noble Histrio that day put on the face of a murdering Hector,
though love was now his business; I will not be particular for fear of lying,
but you may suppose it was Almanzor's, and that in his strain he spoke things
that would have made Oroondates blush; but Almahide was that day clothed with
more than ordinary cruelty, and in her purple Robes was about to pronounce the
Sentence of death, or perpetual Banishment, when the Bravo made his exit, in
hopes, as he said, That a gentler air would calm the disturbed Ocean of her
Brow: the same did the beautiful Endymion, with more than usual state, having
his Luna'S passion confirmed by the undeniable testimony of his own Ears. But
in short, to come to the conclusion of the Ladies stratagem, and I to the end
of my story.


Dor. That I earnestly long for.


M. C. The next time the adamantine Lover came to pay his Mistress a Visit; she
gave her Maid orders to tell him her Lady was busy, and could not be seen at
that time. At first he thought it was but the Maids own humor, but as he was
pushing forward, she somewhat rudely repulsed him with the repetition of the
same orders. He marched off with his usual gallantry; but not being called back
as he expected, he presently began to discover in himself the symptoms of
sorrow and repentance for his severe carriage to such a fair and such a
passionate Lady. Those thoughts he diverted with some pain, for that Night,
being confident to meet his Mistress next day in her usual temper. But coming
at his old rate the following Evening; all his hopes were dashed in pieces, by
a sharp message delivered him by the Maid, and a cruel Letter, such as he never
could have dreamed of, from such a tender hearted and compassionate Maid.


Dor. What did the Letter contain?


M. C. I cannot particularly tell you, but I presume a lively representation of
her just resentments. However it was, the Youth found himself struck with
something more than ordinary thunder, and greater confusion than was Phaeton
that day he fell from his Fathers Coachbox. With much ado home he got all in a
cold fit, with liquid Eyes, and Joints trembling, just as they would after a
tedious and lingering distemper. He began to ruminate on this surprising
alteration, he found himself guilty in all points; he was his own Accuser, his
own Judge, and if his good genius had not hindered those dire effects, he had
proved likewise his own Executioner.


Dor. Would not the Lawyers have then called him Felo de se?


M. C. The Lady appeared in his eyes far more lovely, and more ravishing than
ever. Her Fidelity, Virtue, and the Constancy of her passion, were so many
Vultures, preying on his broken heart: in fine, he was resolved to make amends
for his past coldness, by the zeal and warmth of his future passion; and either
recover his lost bliss, or follow his Brother Naroissus in the same or the like
unseasonable fate. In these contemplations he spent the whole night, in spite
of Morpheus and all his Opium. As soon as Madam Aurora gave him leave, he
called for Pen, Ink and Paper, and wrote to his incensed Lady, the most
passionate, most humble, and most penitential Epistle, that ever dropped from a
Goose-quill.


Dor. What were the effects of it?


M. C. The angry Queen returned an answer, of force enough just to revive so
much of his drooping Spirits as did enable him to appear before her. What she
did, or what she said, I protest, Child, I have forgot. But this I can well
assure thee, that within three days Hymen's noose was made fast, and I hear she
proves a good Wife, and extreme happy in a most dutiful Husband.


Dor. I am this Ladies slave in a chain. She must indeed have offered her
Husband abundant satisfaction, having been so well managed to his hand.


M. C. She was indeed, Daughter, a young Lady that had extraordinary charms in
her person: and yet nature had taken more care in furnishing the inside, for
she was Mistress of more wit than beauty.


Dor. I could almost fall in love with her.


M. C. If thou had seen her ingenious quaint Love Letters she wrote to her
now Husband, thou would be yet much more taken with her.


Dor. If your memory be so kind to you as to remember any of them, pray oblige
me with a repetition, they may perchance be useful to me on the same occasion
your Lady wrote them.


M. C. I remember some notions of one, but it would interfere with our
business; besides I should do the Lady a great piece of injustice, to rehearse
it in worse terms than it flowed from her Pen.


Dor. I shall rest satisfied to have it your own way.


M. C. I am willing to satisfy all thy desires. The Letter which I remember
best, was comprised in these words.


My Heart,
THE consideration of the sinister fame that some ill Women acquire our Sex,
does at present wholly confound me; who by their base treachery and
dissimulation, discredit the virtue and sincerity of others. I am full of
doubts and jealousies, My dearest life, that you do not judge aright of my
passion, else there would be a return on your part, you would think it justice
to give me your heart in exchange for mine you are already possessed of, at least
endeavor to retaliate the ardour of my affection, and ease a dying heart of
the torture of a burnning flame. Oh! Heaven protect me from the sin of
infidelity. I shall cease to be a Woman, nay to be at all before this can ever
prejudice the desire I have to be loved again. If inconstancy be inseparable
from a Woman's Heart, I will deprive my self of life, to abandon those
principles which render me unworthy of your affection, and make me an
unfortunate Lover. Have you a care not to give way to injustice, cruelty, and
ingratitude under the pretext of any unreasonable suspicion; for none of those
ordinary failings can have any shelter, any receptacle in the purity of my
faithful mind. If things ordinary and common are likewise contemptible, and if
it is the scarcity that makes things valuable, my love can never be too highly
prized, in that it is far from common, such as is no where to be found but in
the center of my own Breast, and can never admit of any parallel. If I have in
any degree transgressed those rules of decency, young Ladies have prescribed
themselves, it is you, and you only, that could have been the Author of my
miscarriage. If you have made me forget the dictates a severe modesty would
enjoin (which I had yet hitherto preserved inviolated) you ought not first to
act the Seducer's part, and then likewise to inflict the punishment. I know the
writing of this single Letter, is a crime, for which I never can make
sufficient atonement, and yet I am irresistably hurried on to the committal of
it. I clearly see those plain, and safe paths, honor and prudence have chalked
out for me, but notwithstanding my uncontrollable fate drives me on in the
rugged course of a precipitate and indecent love. Seeing then it is impossible
not to love you, it is equally impossible my love should be fictitious. You may
assure your self, there can be nothing Womanish that is inconstant in that
affection, which has for its basis the starry firmament of your charming
countenance. That flame can never be corrupted nor consumed, that has chose for
its seat the Heaven of your face, for its Sphere, the light of your bright
Eyes, and the splendour of your shining Virtues. Be not then insensible, my
precious hope, after my tears and prayers flowing from the untainted source of
your Adorer's Eyes, and that pure fountain of immaculate love, the unfortunate
Catherina's languishing and distressed Soul. I will again be guilty, by turning
suppliant once more. Consider then I beseech you, my pain, of which you have
been the sole cause. It is virtuous and just you should apply a remedy to those
wounds, which as they have been created by you, so they can only be cured by an
excess of your generous goodness.

Katharina.


Dor. I like the Letter well; if it were not a little too tedious, and the
flights seem a little too high to be thought real: among the old Romantic
Heathens such braveries might pass, but they can scarce be digested among
Christians.


M. C. It is very well, Daughter! First you will have me satisfy your
curiosity, and then you find fault with what I say: like a bold Guest, that
thrusts himself uninvited to a Gentleman's Table, and then finds fault with his
entertainment.


Dor. Pardon me, Madam. A modest censure is no finding fault with what you say.
The Letter was good, but every thing has its defects, so that is best which has
the fewest imperfections.


M. C. She considered the person to whom she addressed her self: but many other
Letters were more concise, of a more sober and persuasive strain. Pray Heaven,
Child, thou may have virtue to follow the wise Katharines sage and unerring
footsteps.


Dor. Amen.


M. C. A Whores eloquence, as if it were an artificial composition, has no
small resemblence to the Body natural: for it pretends to a distinction of
Members, some essential, others for ornament, which chaining together the
several periods, render the work perfect, and entire. I will therefore follow
the Idea this example sets before me, in giving some further Laws to make the
conjunction more agreeable, in which consists the last part of a Woman's
persuasive; and in like manner in this Venereal act, there are some things
indispensably necessary, others, like a Fringe or Lace to a Petticoat, are
added in conformity to the mode or humor of man, and so, requisite to make the
Work agreeable and complete.


Dor. You still observe a regular method.


M. C. I would not here prescribe any set unalterable Precepts; because the
Whore stands obliged to alter in many particulars, and change her method as may
make the deepest impression in the capricious head of that Man she is about to
persuade. It will be at all times necessary to gratify her Lover in the
position of her Members, to place them in that part of the period, which may
create most pleasure in his particular fancy. Let her industriously avoid all
harshness or ruggedness, especially in those parts that are more exposed to the
Lovers touch. A morbid smooth skin is one of Venus's chief attributes, and one
of the Whores most forcible arguments. As her Bed must be clean, sweet and
soft, so ought every part of her Body, to make it a scene suitable to the
delicacy of amorous joys, let her be curious in her Perfumes, Essences, and
sweet Waters, to procure the satisfaction of the smelling sense; which will
much advance her Lovers joys, and make her appear a complete Sphere of delight
and pleasure. My Rhetoric must not be deficient in showing the several
slights, that may be fitly adapted, to captivate every Sense of a Man's Body,
and each faculty of his reasonable Soul. She must be nicely clean in every
action, and part of her life: not omitting to advance as much as possible, the
natural whiteness of her Skin with the assistance of artificial means. An
exquisite night-Dress for the Head is a thing not to be neglected by any Whore,
that would be absolute in all her numbers, and one of those Lessons you are to
learn among other things at your entering under the tuition of another Mistress,
as I have said, you must for some Months. And yet if the Ladies Hair be short
(as indeed it ought) and her constitution will bear it, she may well in my
opinion, at warm seasons of the year, omit covering her Hair with any attire;
which of themselves afford the Eyes, and Touch a pleasing diversion: and yet in
that negligence there is a decorum to be observed, to render such a fantastical
Undress more agreeable. All her Linen whether about her Bed, her Person, or
belonging otherwise to her Lodgings, must be exquisitely neat and pure, as well
as rich and costly. And when this cannot be had, the former must not be wanting.


Dor. I approve mightily of neatness in a Whore, as well as a luxurious
magnificence, because in these you make her agree with a Lady of quality and
reputation.


M. C. Assure your self, Dorothea, that nothing advances a Whores credit and
reputation more than these external appearances of pomp and grandeur: as a
stately and majestic deportment in her Looks, Gestures, Words and Actions,
does forcibly extort respect and veneration; so costly Clothes, rich Furniture,
do singularly advance her profit and advantage. The price of her vendibles does
notably increase when they are dispensed in a splendid and magnificent Shop:
and it is in this, as in other Trades, they that are richest, are ever thought
to be furnished with the best Commodities, have most Customers, and sell their
Ware at the dearest rates.


Dor. You gave me already a taste of this Doctrine.


M. C. Pray thee, Girl, do not put me off the Hinges. Do know how Seneca
excuses his repetition of the same Precepts?


Dor. No.


M. C. Because people, are again, and again guilty of those Vices, which he was
reforming: Therefore (says he) my Precepts ought to be inculcated over and over.


Dor. It was morally spoke.


M. C. A glittering show dazles the Eye, and wins much, on even the rational
part of Man: he is ashamed to make any mean offers, when all things about him
are full of pomp and gallantry: he will think it reasonable and consonant to
good Manners, to be liberal, when he meets with luxurious fare; and a breach of
one of the points of ordinary civility, not to proportion his generosity to the
state aed quality of his entertainment. When he is hungry, and in have, a man
of business will sometimes sculk into a nasty Cook's Shop for a Six Penny Cut,
which he would blush to talk of in any of the first rate Houses of
Entertainment. Many Traders cannot maintain this advantageous Post of Pomp and
Magnificence: those then that are Frigates of a smaller size, and lower Rate,
must be stored with ready and easy excuses, to palliate the disorder of their
weak Tackling. The pretense of having been lately snatched from under her
Parents Wings, or deserted the embraces of a cruel Husband, may serve sometimes
to gain her a reputation, of being sound fresh Food, and sufficient likewise to
excuse a weak and a slender beginning. When this sham will not fix (do not
interrupt me by finding fault with the word) let her feign some unlucky
disaster, almost unavoidable, and which may be apt to move compassion: as that
some barbarous Debauchee had lately seduced her out of her Virginity and
Fortune, with the promise of Marriage, or Maintaining her as his Mistress, with
a plentiful Annuity for life. Let her always exercise this cheat, as that it
may appear, she is but a young beginner; for if the contrary be discovered, it
cannot be supposed any youthful, or innocent miscarriage, but as in old
Bankrupts, the effect of fraud, villainy and incorrigible lewdness. Whores are
all knowing in that maxim of changing Names and Quarters, from one part of the
Town to another; when they become cracked in their reputation. This is no ill
project, to enable them to treat Lords and Grandees, with that flesh, which
Porters would not have tasted at their former station.


Dor. This is to me a new thing.


M. C. The World, and so all men in it are governed by fancy and opinion: good
and evil are therefore little understood as they are in themselves, but rather
as they come represented to Men's various and often vitiated palates. One will
swallow a sliced salt Herring for the best Anchoves, he will pay his money as
cheerfully, and take his rest as naturally, as if he had got a sincere Treat
Another will carouze in plain Claret, and get drunk some hours the sooner,
because he imagined every glass was of true Port.


Dor. He had better have left his fancy at home that Morning


M. C And a third will pay for a Duchess, and over-act himself in that Faith;
yet all the while he embraces (I cannot say a Cloud, because there is so much
dirt) yet at best but her imaginary Grace, and in reality a common Strumpet.


Dor. Poor Cully!


M. C. Thus then it is plain, a Whores work is no more than to be well skilled
in legerdemains, to know how to raise a Fog, and artificially to throw it
before the Fops Eyes: then all her Cheats, Slights and Juggles pass for
Honesty, Sincerity and Plain-dealing. Let her Frenchifie her Commodities, or,
(to avoid ribbaldry) her Merchandise, not with that Country Pox, but with hard
names, and Je ne scaiquois.


Dor. You mean, What do ye Call'ums.


M. C. And then she may be sure the Gulls will swallow the Bait, be it never so
unpleasant or hard of digestion. When she finds a Customer cool in his desires,
and no great extravagance in the carnal appetite, she must raise his passion
and warm his blood into a luxuriant heat by artificial incentives drawn in, all
at the Window of a lascivious eye, and created by a gentle touch. Let nothing
be disorderly or out of its proper place, for that a little adjusted with
symmetry, is more effectual than a better stock not managed with the like
dexterity. As to the body it self this is principally necessary, and nearly to
be minded, in as much as every small blemish there is liable to nice
observation, and very pernicious to the Ladies interest. Let her be tight in
her Clothes, and when they cannot be of great price, let them have still
something of a particular grace and beauty. Elegant colors not too gaudy, but
yet adapted to the humor of love, must be chose when she cannot look big in
the Majesty of pale Gold. Let her imitate the modes and dresses observed by the
top Ladies, though she cannot always arrive at such variety of Clothes, or such
costly ornaments.


Dor. These are useful Documents, and I presume may suit my circumstances,
though spoke in the third person.


M. C. This Rhetoric is principally intended for thee, and every thing in it
either directly, or obliquely may be of use to thee. Did thou never hear the
Parson speak emphatically of the wicked Man, and the pious, in the third
person; and yet the Assembly applies things home to their own Breasts, as if
directed to each particular Individual?


Dor. I am sensible of what you say.


M. C. Let the Whore then take particular care, not to betray her self, at the
same time deceiving her Lover, by procuring a Gentile outside, without equal
care had in the furniture of the inner Chambers. Such a one may serve to please
a Passengers eye, but can never be fit for habitation or use. When the Gallant
is excited to strong desires by the agreeableness of exterior ornaments; it
will be no small disappointment to him, and disparagement to the Lady, to find
under such fair promises a course or a dirty Smock. My pupil must not be guided
by the French Man in this particular, who said, Who see wheder me have Shirt or
no? This Gentleman used, peradventure, to go to Bed without a Candle, and lie
alone; neither of which can pass for a supposition in the Ladies case. Let her
be industrious to remove all possible occasions of ill smells, the least
tincture of these either from Breath, under the Arms, or elsewhere would be
sufficient to pall the briskest courage, and nauseate the stronest appetite.


Dor. I must fancy, Mother, if a Gentleman were sharp set, he might lay aside
these considerations.


M. C. I am not willing to suppose any imperfections in those that expect to
live by this Trade. For Sparks are sometimes critical and captious at a Whore,
as they are at a Dish of Meat that wants the new fashioned Sauce, though (as
thou have observed) they could dispense with some blemishes in the one, and the
want of a modern Sauce in the other, if it were not in conformity to the mode;
and they must seem men of polite and refined judgments, as well as of dainty
and exquisite palates.


Dor. The Fops.


M. C. All the Rhetoric between Heaven and Earth, will never make the deformed
handsome, or the crooked straight, some small peccadilloes are easily forgiven,
and very often not perceivable, if art and industry be made use of. The same
qualifications which the Jesuits require in any youth they cull out for a
Nursery of their Fraternity, are likewise necessary in all that ought to be
admitted into the Whores Seminary. The young Brother must have a good Face (the
reason of this the good Fathers best understand) a ready Wit, and a confident
and bold Genius. These are the three ingredients in point, (as Master Pleader
speaks) necessary in a young Lady that would open her Shop to the best
advantage.


Dor. And do you know the Jesuits reasons in desiring handsome pupils to breed
up for their Society?


M. C. I do, Child. But I cannot tell.


Dor. As you please.


M. C. By way of charity however, I desire those that have any part of their
Body vicious or out of order, not to expose those blemishes by any persuasion,
force or importunity. If the Breasts be not sound, unfit to abide the test of a
Man's hand, and to enhaunce the delights of a ravishing touch: let the Breasts
be kept close bound, covering that defect with the pretext of keeping the
Stomach warm.


Dor. I have laughed sometimes to see Women simper that had rotten Teeth, what a
severe guard they kept over those putrified Bones, without ever daring to
gratify their humor with a fine laugh.


M. C. In like manner a veil must be found to conceal every fault; though it
should happen to be in those parts which ought to be armed with nakedness, to
raise the value and sweet of the enjoyment. A Whore must not forget that her
Bed is the Altar, where Cupid's Sacrifice is made complete and perfect; that it
is therefore a duty incumbent on her, to see nothing there but what is
exquisitely pure and clean, which is a thing religiously observed even by the
most barbarous Nations, in their approach to a place they account so Sacred. A
double portion of curiosity and neatness is requisite to understand, and how to
use inoffensive washes. Let them be still such as may give the Face a
carnation-varnish, and yet leave the skin smooth and fine. Solid Paint has very
ill effects, it brings roughness on the Face, and a necessity of continuing the
application of it. Men had for the most part, rather excuse a little paleness
or greenness, than see them supplied with a plastered face, or a dawbed Lip.


Dor. How must I do to attain a critical knowledge in delicate washes?


M. C. My book of Receipts at home will make thee abundantly knowing in that
particular. Thou shall there find exquisite washes for the Face, for the hands,
and for to make thy skin fresh and gay. There thou shall see the Rules of
making a water of an admirable Talk, of mighty virtue and use. Another Receipt
for preserving and improving the Teeth. And a third for converting a stinking
breath into a smell much like that of Clove-gilliflowers: beside a multitude of
other choice Receipts for preparing cosmeticks and blanches, which I need not
insert here, because I intend you shall peruse the book it self: But Dorothea.


Dor. Madam.


M. C. Pray do you never make use of any thing to improve your Breath, for the
Breath is like Oil, when right without any smell; so any artificial aid does
but create a suspicion, that it was once adulterated.


Dor. I shall remember this Precept.


M. C. Neither be too solicitous of being provided of Musk, Civet, and such
like acute Odors.


Dor. Why so?


M. C Because they are good for those that are infected with evil smells.
Therefore whilst thou art of thy self sweet and clean, milder perfumes will be
more proper


Dor. I will be mindful.


M C. I am amazed at the folly, nay stupidity of many young Ladies, that
debauch their Faces, and vitiate their complexions with all sorts of Paint,
when nature has been kind, and as it were prohibited the use of this
sophisticated stuff, by having there planted with her own hand a delicate
mixture of Red and White


Dor It Is certainly in such a great madness It Is as bad as to be constantly
tampering with Physic, when one is perfectly sound and well in health


M C A seasonable blush is much more prevailing than any artificial supply: it
is a token of modest, and yet an amorous sign: it is one of my sovereign
Recipe's to win a Man's Soul and Body, and command his Purse: It forces his
Blood from the most secret recesses of his Heart, into those amorous parts that
soon after pullulate (if it can be so said) into a dying transport In this act
care must be taken, to avoid a troublesome improportion: neither leaving the
gate of Love so wide as the Passenger may enter without a touch of either side;
nor yet on the other vicious extreme, embarassing him too much with a forced
and an artificial straitness. Art may serve sometimes to mortify nature a
little, but should not be permitted to confound her, by any piece of unnatural
extravagance. Industry will indeed be necessary in old Traders, to moderate the
excess of that Port which swallowing up the Man of War at one morsel, does
miserably shipwreck the Saylors expectation, and deprives him of the better
part of his pleasure. It is supposed, a Lady of good practice may have each day
many Clients knocking at the Closet door: by which means the Stairs will be wet
and the Passage slippery, by the frequency of those that come with Fee in hand,
to discharge themselves of their superfluities. It must therefore be her care
to remedy this inconvenience, by keeping all clean, and dry, repeating her care
after the departure of every Client. A drying Pessary will be proper on this
occasion, for the preparation of which there is a particular method in my Book.
A mixture of Wine with some restringent Waters, and the curd of an Alum
Posset, may be fitly used in an idle intervall to contract the lines of
Longitude and Latitude into their original and proper bounds.


Dor. I protest, Madam, I believe you know more than all the World beside.


M. C. The most delightful and pleasant sailing is in a strait and narrow Sea,
between two pleasant Shores.


Dor. Because there is no apprehension of danger, not fear of shipwreck.


M. C. A Man would not grudge to pay any impost at his entrance into the mouth
of such diverting streights, which he would not do in a boundless and wide
Ocean, without the Rhetoric of some broad-sides. It must be the Whores
indispensable duty, to keep a continual and strict watch, that no pert man of
War, with top and Top-gallon of flattery and dissimulation, driven by the
strong winds of impudence and importunity, should dare to pass that way,
without first disbursing the usual tax. A connivence in this particular would
discredit her Government, bring her Policy in question, and encourage every
pitiful Privateer to steer the same course, in hopes of the like success.


Dor. It is fit a Man should first sow his coin, before he be suffered to reap
the fruit of Pleasure. And methinks he should be laughed at if he expected any
other: what would his Habberdasher say to him, if he came to entreat the gift
of a Beaver; or his Draper, if he asked half a dozen yards of Cloth without
money?


M. C. My dear Novice, let me kiss thee for that wise Aphorism.


Dor. Go on, pray Mother.


M. C. I would have my Disciple keep a good correspondence with some skilful
Physician, or some expert Venereal Doctor. These are as necessary in the war of
Venus, as in that of Mars; because the casualties are as different that may
befall a Female Combatant, as any the most adventurous and daring Soldier. The
Lady is on duty every day, and being sometimes forced in her single person to
face whole Armies of fighting Men, and Volleys of Shot, it is odds but some of
them hit, and disable her from further service; if the Gallenist or Emperick
were not at command, to assist with his healing hand. She must liberally
dispense her talents to the Doctor gratis, as he his eleemosynary Pills. When
any disaster happens a friendly. Physician will take care with hasty Medicines
to remove the virulence that she may be fit to go on in the exercise of her
Function, and then at better leisure complete the cure: though I confess it
were for her advantage as to her Body, to attend a perfect recovery before she
ventured into the Field.


Dor. That is certainly true; or at least I am very apt to believe it.


M. C. I would have her cautious not to entertain any commerce with her
generous and constant Customers, till she can pass her Word for the soundness
of her Ware: otherwise she will lose her reputation, and endanger breaking. But
as to those that come accidentally en passant, for a recruit, to her magazine,
this caution need take no place in her consideration. When she intends to rid
her self of a decayed Minion, the time she is not well may be a fit opportunity
to give him his Writ of Ease.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha, to one she intends to dismiss with a Pox?


M. C. It may hold as well here, as when a decrepit Judge gets his Quietus (as
they call it) only to give the Gout and Stone larger opportunities of
tormenting that superannuated piece of mortality, without any diverting
impediment.


THus the good old Lady terminated her first days Discourse, to the no small
satisfaction of her fair Pupil: who was much overjoyed at the hopes she
entertained of such a blessed alteration, in her affairs, as, she doubted not
would be the effect of her School-mistresses providential care. They got up
from their Seats by mutual consent: Mother Creswel, to yawn and stretch her
aged Limbs; being tired with long sitting, and no less wearied with bearing
such a large share in that days Dialogue. The like did young Dorothea, as
having either the like necessities, or that she thought it civil to sympathize
thus far with her kind Mistress. After they had entertained one another some
small time in an indifferent conversation, Dorothea remembered by her Stomach,
that Dinner time was already past, and therefore thought it expedient to lay
the Cloth, whilst the Maid made ready such Provisions as the Cavalier's House
could afford. It was for the most part so slender, that the Master of the
Family did seldom dine at his own Table, but was willing to invite himself
abroad among his old Friends, who had not been so unfortunate, as to spend
their Patrimonies, in hopes of any uncertain futurity. This gave the Virgin
much solitary leisure, and at this time a fit opportunity of hearing the Bawds
Lectures, without the danger of any disturbance. Among other passages at
Dinner, she asked her Daughter particularly of the state her Fathers affairs
were at present in; How he stood affected as to his Morals, his temper and
disposition, and many such minute circumstances; that from the knowledge of
those she might infer her own conclusions, and the most plausible means, her
Scholar might make use of to relinquish her Parents House, and put her self
under the tuition of a new chose Mother. Dorothea told her to that, She was
sure his humor was such, as that he would never consent to part with her on
any indirect terms: but being now on the borders of old age, and weary of the
Town, he had resolved very soon to retire, and end his days in the solitude of
a Country life. This was pleasing news to the decripit Hag, who else might have
been disappointed in her hopes of propagating her Faith, by adding this Maid to
the number of her Converts. It was then resolved, Dorothea should remain in
Town after her Fathers departure, under the pretense of getting into some
creditable Service: to which they concluded, the Gentleman would readily agree,
as not being himself capacitated to make any better Provision for his Daughter.
When Dinner was ended, and all fit measures taken in order to the adjusting
that affair, and removing any stops that might fall in the way: The Lady Abbess
took leave of her young Probationer, to dispatch some affairs of her own
elsewhere; having promised to return next Morning about the same Hour she had
done that day.

The Second Dialogue.
M. C. HOW does my Jewel do to Day, and how has she digested the Documents she
lately received?


Dor. I find them very agreeable, good Mother: However you know nothing can
master a young Stomach, and therefore am very joyful to see you returned, in
hopes you will give me a second taste of the same fare, to complete at once the
knowledge and satisfaction of my mind. But before you enter upon that business;
pray have patience till I tell you a strange Dream I dreamt last Night.


M. C. Let Us hear it.


Dor. Will you then give me the interpretation of it?


M. C. I will.


Dor. This Morning a little before day, methought I was in a large, high and
spacious Room, which as I fansied was furnished with the richest and most
lively Tapestry that I had before ever seen. Over this costly Arras there hung
all about the Room, rich gilt Swords, of all fashions, French, German, Polonian
Scymeters, and Spanish Toledoes, fine Beavers, a great number of Point Cravats
of all sorts, Venetian, those which come from Paris, and the other we have from
Lorain; some furred Gowns, such as Aldermen wear; two or three Sergeants Coifs,
a number of Lawyers. Gowns, some Velvet Coats and Ebony Canes, a multitude of
imbroidered ones, some Scarlet, others of Crimson-Velvet, with many more
braveries that have slipped my memory. At one side of the Room there stood a
sumptuous Bed, the Curtains whereof were all Cloth of Gold; near the Bed there
was a magnificent Chair of State, such as I once saw at White Hall, whereon the
King sits when a Foreign Ambassador is admitted to his first Audience. In this
Throne, I thought, I saw my self seated, with a regal Scepter in my Hand, and a
Crown of Gold on my Head: round about me there stood almost as great a variety
of Beasts as were said to be contained in Noah's Ark, as Asses, Sheep, Buffles,
Foxes, Peacocks, Woodcocks, several sorts of Owls, Dotterels and Gulls; in
tormenting all these I fansied my self mightily pleased; I took singular
delight in beating some and pricking others, in pulling the Peacocks Trains,
and the Feathers from the other Birds: all which methought they suffered with
mavelous patience; without any sign of anger; nay the Beasts lickt me from
top to Toe, showing marks of content in being thus cruelly treated. After I was
weary of this exercise, I thought all the Brutes disappeared, and that there
only remained with me a little Fox, that was grown gray with age, that had by
some accident lost his Tail almost to the Rump, to which was fastened a Bag of
Money so large that the Animal was scarce able to draw it after him; but yet
with much ado, I perceived him scramble into the stately Bed; where I had not
imagined him settled any time, before there returned a stately young Buffle fat
and comely (by the by, Mother, I never saw this Creature, but by desciption
suppose it is like one of our Bulls) who forcibly took me on his Horns, from
whence I could by no means free my self, till the Bull gave me leave to alight
in the midst of a mighty Forest, and there methought I was forced to draw in a
Yoke with this wild Beast: the fright of which awakened me in great confusion.
And now I desire to hear you declare the meaning of this extravagant Vision.


M. C. This Dream, Daughter, I can unriddle better than ever Lilly could, or
his disciple Gadbury. The Asses thou kicked and abused, are the wretches, that
will on the score of Love, cheerfully submit to those rigid Laws, and that
severe yoke thou shall hang about their necks. Robbing the Peacocks of their
beautiful Tails, denotes the dexterity thou will use in rifling young rich
Heirs of their money; the Foxes signify certain old crafty Lovers, whom thou
shall entrap with some baits, I will prescribe thee anon; The Owls, Gulls, and
such others are a rascally rout that will be fleeced and plucked with more ease
than thou can speak or walk.


Dor. What becomes of all the rest?


M. C. Soft and fair, Daughter. The magnificent Room shows thy future grandeur,
and the pomp thou shall live in. The gallantries stuck round, are those
trophies thou shall win, and the tribute that will be paid thee by all sorts of
Men; and the royal Chair imports the honor the world will pay thee.


Dor. You have forgot the old Fox, and the young fat Buffle, that carried me
away.


M. C. Behold now that my Prophecies are already half fulfilled: The old Fox is
an old Gentleman, who will for some time have the honor to be thy Keeper; his
wanting a Tail, and having instead thereof a bag of money, shows thy old Lovers
impotence, that he shall have lost the faculty of dispensing venereal pleasure,
but instead of this will impart largely of that Treasure wherewith he seemed
overcharged. The last part is, after thou have lived sometime at large, and
gained extraordinary honor and reputation, as thy Dream prognosticates, and
then come for a short time under the tuition of an old Guardian, that finally,
a young fat Buffler. that is, a young rich Country Gentleman, carried thee on
his Horns, that is, in his Coach, to a Forest, to his Mansion House: now what
do think drawing in one yoke implies?


Dor. I cannot guess.


M. C. That thou may be linked to this Squire in the yoke of Matrimony,
Child.


Dor. You have indeed given me entire satisfaction: pray Heaven, Mother, you
prove a true Prophetess.


M. C. Never doubt it, dear Child, There are, I am sure blessings for thee in
store; if with an industrious and vigilant hand, thou will turn Fortunes wheel
to thy own humor.


Dor. I thought this Wheel had been uncontrollable, not to be stopped in its
motion.


M. C. No such thing. Good Fortune follows well laid counsels, as naturally as
the shadow does the Body. Therefore, Dorothea, think not to become great and
fortunate without a laborious industry: neither be in any wise diffident of
success, if proper means be used to arrive at the designed end.


Dor. I will be guided by you in all things. So I desire the continuance of
your favors, in giving me your further instructions, and proceeding in your
own method, which, Madam, if I well remember, engages you to give me light into
the particular humors of some Men, you thought fit to mention in yesterdays
discourse.


M. C. A Whore indeed ought to have skill in Physiognomies. Reading Men is the
great work of her life. As it is among Gentlemen, a main principle of policy
and prudence, and even more necessary than understanding Books; so in a Whore
it is not ornamental only, but an essential part of her breeding and
qualification.


Dor. Books are, in my opinion, the only sure foundation; but the beautiful
superstructure must be ever raised by conversation, traveling, experience, all
which is comprehended in reading Men.


M. C. Thou have spoke discreetly, Girl. But yet I fancy it is a little
unnatural for fifteen to talk at thy wise rate.


Dor. I ought to have some degree of wit, to make me comprehend your sage
instructions, which I hope will in the end make me wise indeed.


M. C. What sort of Lovers will you see first delineated?


Dor. You have already touched on several degrees of Youth, pray now a little
of old Age, which in point of decency ought to have had the precedence, and it
seems by your Prophecy and my Dream, that I am to be acquainted with one of
those hoary Heads.


M. C. From whom thou may expect dainty Fare, rich Presents and costly
Clothes, and indeed every thing Lady-like, if thou can discreetly comply with
his peevish humor, and dispense with the want of due benevolence.


Dor. Would not that be a hard task?


M. C. I have already settled the limits in that case I have told you on what
terms I would allow a Lady the liberty of cuckolding her Keeper.


Dor. But have these disabled old Soldiers no power to handle their Arms?


M. C. As much, Child, as I have to manage a hard Crust with those few Stumps I
have yet remaining. Have thou never observed, when a Candle burns down into the
Socket, and when the flame begins to want nutriment, how it is sometimes up,
and sometimes down, one while it seems quite extinct, and then of a sudden it
makes a faint resurrection?


Dor. That I have often remarked, for it always happens, if the Candle is
suffered to burn down, and a Save-all wanting.


M C Then, Child thou have seen the natural emblem of an old Man's vigor.


Dor Ha, ha, ha. I fancy you have given me a lively representation on it. But
what use has such a decripit Wretch for a Mistress?


M C The same a Miser has for his Bags, he loves to be contemplating the beauty
of his bright Treasure, but has it not in his power to turn one Penny to its
natural use Thus the old Squire pays his respects to his Virgin, in teazing
her, and tumbling her over and over, and fumbling her from Head to Toe


Dor Well Mother, nothing but a Lordly generosity could make a Woman endure the
impertinence of these Impotents.


M C Hanging about her Neck for hours together, then hiding themselves under
her Petticoats, to raise their decayed appetites by the warm sauce to be found
under those Robes.


Dor. What if all that is not of heat enough to inflame their chill Blood?


M C. Then they fall to dallying and sucking the Pappies, as if they expected
to extract thence some sovereign Cordial, that would introduce a new Spring
into their frozen Hearts, and snowy Heads.


Dor. It is natural for an old Fellow to be fond of the Pappies, if the Proverb
be grounded on truth, which makes him a Child the second time


M C I must still laugh, when I think of the excuse he has, when all his
endeavors have proved ineffectual in the matter of erection.


Dor. What is the excuse?


M. C. He will lay all the fault on the back of too much Love, as if the
extremity of his passion had hindered the usual effects of an ordinary flame.


Dor. That is well indeed; ha, ha, that a flame should be extinguished by
throwing on more Fuel! I would as soon believe a Man could be so hungry he
could not eat, or so dry that he could not drink.


M. C. Thou must exercise all thy Christian Virtues, especially thy patience
and moderation, to abstain from laughing, when the old Romancer enters on the
Stage of his own exploits. He ever talks at the rate of twenty mile an hour,
and if thou will credit himself, Orlando the Wight, was a dastardly Coward, if
put in the Scale with this venerable Hero. It is odds if sometimes in a rapture
a-Bed, he do not get astride of thy Back, to demonstrate how he managed his
Horse at Naseby fight. And because he must be deficient in the more substantial
performances, it is necessary, he thinks, to talk big.


Dor. I should instantly dismount him, if his Worship tried any such tricks on
me.


M. C. It will be no easy matter to forbear smiling, when thou shall see thy
old Guardian dress and undress. And the pleasant figure he will make in his
Jerkin and Nightcap. Thou must be at the pains to assist at the swaddling him
up, and the uncasing him of his multiplied Flannel.


Dor. Will nothing less defend him from the cold?


M. C. Because he is not able in many particulars to infringe the Law, he will
in those points seem a religious observer of it. And his veneration for Acts of
Parliament, makes him think it a duty incumbent, to bury his own Carcass in
Woollen: and to take off the more of this manufacture, he uses as much about
his own Corpse, as would make him three Sheets, such as he is to lie in, in the
Grave, when he is become one degree more mortified.


Dor. I could pity this spectacle of mortality.


M. C. Thou will find matter of pity and contempt both, to find such strong
insatiable desires, lodged in such a shriveled Body. When one hand must be
employed in administering Lozenges, or Penets to stop the Catarrh that crucifies
him every moment; thou will be a little surprised to see the other busy,
fumbling at the amorous parts of thy Body, to provoke the old Lecher to a
higher pitch of Lust.


Dor. You make me fancy, I see the old Fobus before my Eyes.


M. C. It is impossible to express the hugging, squeezing, antic gestures, and
ridiculous expressions the old dotard will use on this occasion, just such as
Nurses prate to their fondlings, who understand not what they say.


Dor. And all this to no purpose.


M. C. Have thou ever had the opportunity to view the efforts of a sick person,
that would spit into the floor without defiling his Bed? how many essays the
infirm wretch will make to leave his giddy head, which is as often forced back on
the weary Pillow? and after he has in vain tried to ease himself by his own
strength; he is glad at length to make use of his Nurses helping hand.


Dor. What then?


M. C. So, Child, this decrepit Minion, this sickly lover, will never of
himself be able to elevate his drooping courage, unless thou raise and
encourage him with thy warmer hand. If thou would have him spit in the proper
place, thou must chase him like a mortified piece of flesh, scratch him in
every wrinkle, tickle him in the Flank, and under the Arms. A wanton Sonnet in
a soft low Air will not be amiss to moisten this insipid Animal. Ask him, who
is his own pretty Whore, his Flesh and Blood, his Daughter, his Dalilah, his
Honey, his Sugar? and a thousand such wretched fooleries.


Dor. A Woman had need be well paid for all her trouble, in nursing one of
these superannuated Babies.


M. C. That is never wanting, Child. But then after all thy industry, when thou
have animated the insensible log, and inspired it with a faint venereal motion,
the terrible trial of thy patience is then at hand.


Dor. As how?


M. C. Why, Daughter, I must tell you, when the crazy Lover is emboldened to
pay a debt, he has for many Months owed Cupid; he will be so tedious and
nauseous in the performance, he will go near to tire any Woman of ordinary
Flesh and Blood.


Dor. What should one do in that case, it is but throwing him out of the Saddle.


M. C. That would be an irreparable injury, never to be forgiven by him. He
would sooner mortgage his Soul, nay one of his Bags, than suffer any
interruption in his amorous effort.


Dor. I find it will be no easy matter to humor the old Fox, no consideration
but the bag at his tail could prevail with me.


M. C. He will sweat more than a Dray Horse, or one in the Bagnio, though one
would think it impossible, a Chemist could extract half so much moisture out of
such a miserable Creatures dry Bones. He will beg thee a thousand times, and
more earnestly than ever he did the remission of his sins; to wait till his
retentive nature, after long solicitation, can be forced to squeeze out a
loving tear.


Dor. This then must needs be a fit time to chouse the old Cully out of a Sum.


M C Thou have well said, for there is nothing so dear to him, he would not
part with to be humoured in this critical juncture. If thou can get the way
of exciting him to the youthful game, the exquisite arts of hastening the
pleasure, and bringing off the disabled Warrior from the assault with honor
and reputation; there is nothing between Heaven and Earth, he would not procure
for thy satisfaction: his Body, his Soul, his Money, will all truckle to thee,
thou may command him more absolutely than the Grand Signior does the meanest
of his Vassals; and therefore interest requires indispensably abundance of
discretion at this time to purchase the desired reward of thy perseverance.


Dor. This is a great encouragement: but the Precept seems extreme difficult
and rigid; for I have heard experienced Women say, that nothing in nature is so
fulsome, as to be bound to endure the repeated strokes of a drowzy embrace,
after the Woman has acted her own part. It is like sitting at Table with a full
Belly, to endure the steam of a fresh course, and see a new set of Guests fall
to, Tooth and Nail.


M. C. For that, Daughter, I must tell you: a Whore is a Whore, but a Whore is
not a Woman; as being obliged to relinquish all those frailties that render the
Sex weak and contemptible. A Whore ought not to think of her own pleasure, but
how to gratify her Bedfellow in his sensitive desires: She must mind her
interest not her sport; the Lovers sport, the ruin of his interest and the
emptying his Purse. The unthinking part of Women place all their worldly
happiness in the center of venereal Pastimes, and they are all Mahometans so
far as to wish a continuance of them in the world to come; though all these
things are enjoyed by Wolves, Bears, Cats, Dogs and Rats, in an equal, if not a
larger measure than what we can pretend to.


Dor. That is even a sad consideration; but why in a larger measure?


M. C. Because our reason checks us in the midst of the pleasure, imposingly
telling us, It is all but Vanity; therefore you must think it reasonable to
endure the fatigue of an old sordid embrace, for your own benefit, without
foolishly regarding the present titillation, or the pain of continuing after
that is over.


Dor. I will endeavor to obey you.


M. C. The contrary practice of many impolitick Whores, does manifest the truth
of this, who following their fancies more than their judgments; and loving to
please their Eyes and not their Reason in the choice of their Friends, do
become in a short time poor, beggarly and miserable, rejected of the world, and
most of all by those Men to whom they afforded most plentifully of their free
love.


Dor. This is a political Maxim.


M. C. Thou have now engaged thy self, as it were to run a Race, by the loss of
which thou must expect to forfeit thy ease, pleasure, liberty, and in a word
all earthly satisfaction. Thou know it is not always the Horse that gets the
start, who wins the Plate, but he that perseveres in his swiftness, and
maintains his first vigor in the last heat. Thy case is much the same, thou
art preparing thy self to appear in the Field of Love, whilst I act the part of
a faithful Groom, to feed thee with Precepts suitable to the exercise thou have
undertaken. Instead of airings Morning and Evening, I enjoin thee a daily
repetition of this Rhetoric: which will, if old Creswel understands the World,
enable thee to carry away the golden prize of Love.


Dor. You frighten me with this similitude; the danger of miscarriage is so
great: it is an eaven lay I come off a loser, because you know it is impossible
both should win.


M C. This is only to heighten thy care and vigilance, as Parsons think fit
sometimes to scare their Flock into Heaven, and gall them with dreadful
corrosives.


Dor. That is only in the beginning of their Sermons, but they conclude
generally with Balsome and Lenitives.


M. C. Those I have already applied to thee. I have inspected the Table and
Lines of thy Hand, and by my Chiromantick skill have already told thee that
blessed influence thou wast born under.


Dor. What skill is that?


M. C. Palmistry, Child. And though thou know thy self to be one of the little
flock, within the pale of ease and plenty, yet, I hope that consideration will
not slacken the reins of thy industry, and conformity to the Laws of thy
profession, as it does in our Modern Babes of Grace.


Dor. What Babes do you mean?


M. C. Though it is not seasonable to answer thy Question, yet I had rather be
irregular, than not satisfy thee. They are, Child, a people that call
themselves the Elect, the Children of Adoption, who believe they cannot fall;
or if they slip at any time, it shall not be, imputed to them. What the World
calls rebellion, is in them a taking the Sword out of the hands of the Mighty;
and that Plunder, Rapine, and Sequestration are in the Saints only, civil ways
of Borrowing as the Israelites did from the Egyptians.


Dor. I do not well apprehend you; and I suppose it is not material whether I
do or no. Pray return to the old Gentleman, he is grown cold by this time for
want of moving.


M. C. I will only advise thee to be extreme reserved before the old Flogger:
for that he is the most jealous Animal of the whole creation.


Dor. As being conscious to himself of most imperfections.


M. C. If thou laughest, he thinks it is at him; if a sudden cough overtake
thee, he will swear it is in derision of his hoarse Throat: if thou happenest
at any time to stagger or stumble, streightway he fancies it is in imitation of
his gate: if to hinder the effects of a troublesome Corn, thou wearest thy Shoe
open a little at top, it must be in contempt of his Gout: thou must scarce
touch his Spectacles, for fear of being thought to reflect on his Eyes: thou
must keep thy Head and Hands steady, lest doing otherwise should be interpreted
a flouting of his paralytick Members: nay thou scarce may take the liberty
to rub thy Teeth with a Napkin, as is customary after meals.


Dor. Why so?


M. C. Because it is great odds but his are loose, and so he will think it an
imposing on him to use that freedom with thy Teeth which he dares not with his.


Dor. How is it possible to regulate ones self in all these petty circumstances?


M. C. Custom, Child, and the sweets of his wealth will make them easy:
Besides, when once thou have gained upon him, and made him entertain a good
opinion of thy discretion, he is for ever after easily kept blind, if thou do
not carelessly suffer him to stumble on something that may force him to open the
remainder of his Eyes.


Dor. It is sufficient I have Father grey-Beard in my Eye, and shall know how
to handle him without a Constable.


M. C. If you remember; one of my first Lessons was to avoid empty
speculations, which in our Idiom signifies no more than not to love any Man for
the titles of Genteel, Handsome or Witty, unless these qualifications be
attended with the solidity of a weighty Purse.


Dor. It is reasonable, but I presume a little difficult exactly to follow that
rule.


M. C. I do assure you, if my Mothers Clay were animated a second time, she
could not oblige you with a Precept of more use or comprehension, and she was
one of the wisest of the Daughters of Men, nay, or Sons, saving Solomon his
right. Therefore Dorothea you must take more than ordinary care in this point,
on the critical observation of which does much depend a Whores Fortune and
advancement. On this score, I am against your reading Romances, where constancy
in love is cried up as a virtue, and dying Lovers make up a great part in the
Pageantry. The Modern Comedies are a Lecture much more adapted to the interest
of my Scholar, for there you will find fraud and dissimulation called
discretion and prudence: cuckolding Husbands, cheating Lovers, prudently styled
Address and Wit. And for obscenity I recommend those pieces to you, where you
may be supplied with a better stock than I can in Conscience expose in this my
Rhetoric.


Dor. You have proceeded hitherto in modest terms, however I understood your
meaning. But seeing it concerns me so highly not to be in love with any person;
I desire you will prescribe me some Antidotes in case I should unawares suck in
any of that fatal poison: for I must confess to you, Mother, I can hardly trust
my self in this case; I fear a good Dress, and a good Face, might yet have on
me dangerous effects.


M. C. Alas! that is one of the infirmities, and one of the curses which the
first Woman's sin entailed on the whole Sex. I could make thee a longer
Preachment against Love, than Baxter did on a Thursday Morning; I could come to
the Nineteenthly, if I did not believe thy own discretion informs thee, the
least spark of this dangerous fire would infallibly ruin all thy hopes of good
fortune, and thy prospect of any future felicity: let my costly experience
teach thee Wisdom: a small sincere flame was my bane, and in the whole course
of my years, I never knew any one Whore escape a miserable and a beggarly end,
who was so weak as to entertain any spark of a true love. Do but consider the
impertinent causes of this silly effect: that the most insignificant
circumstances about Men, as their Garb, and such like are the strong Philters
that captivate the weaker Sex. It is certainly true, that Women are caught for
the most part in such weak Nets as these, that the most shallow, the most
insipid, nay, the uglyest of Men have been the most successful in gaining an
ascendant over the hearts of poor Women. You must know, Dorothea, that no Man
is valuable on any endowment that proceeds not from the Soul; what ever ows its
original to the Body, is brutal, because Beasts enjoy it in an equal measure
with Men: nay, in every particular they are outdone by some mere Animal, The
Ox is stronger, the Horse is swifter and the Goat more salacious, till humane
nature is debauched by art. I never knew a Lady enamoured of any Gentleman, for
being an expert or a brave Soldier, loyal, learned, or wise, whereas these are
the only qualifications that create a real distinction between Men, and make
one Man more worthy than another. Seeing then the noble, the amiable part of
Men is not able to kindle a flame in a Woman's Breast, let her never be enslaved
by any thing that is of a far more vile, base and degenerate nature: if she be
secure of receiving no wounds from the valiant, and the wise, she will sure be
able to guard her self from the darts of dastardly Fools. It must needs be a
sufficient preservative against loves infection, to consider that the spruce
incentives, the Sparks who are most dangerous, have never any thing in them,
but what their Dancing or Singing Masters were pleased to retail unto them.


Dor. This might pass for orthodox out of the Pulpit.


M. C. You desired a Prescription in this case, and therefore I will procure
you a Root, a little of which grated, as you would Nutmeg, upon a glass of any
liquor in the Morning fasting, will infallibly preserve you from all amorous
impressions.


Dor. What is the name of that rare Root.


M. C. Misanthropia is the name our Drugsters give it.


Dor. I never heard such a name before. Misanthropia, is it so you call it?


M. C. Misanthropia, my Heart, is the term of art, that properly signifies
Manhating; so the Root had its name, as most others have, from the virtues and
effects of it, which are to create in Women, a hatred of Men, or at least to
keep them in a cool state of indifference.


Dor. Does it grow in England?


M. C. No Child, nor in any part of Europe, or the World indeed; save in one
Region of Asia, called the Amazon Country.


Dor. I remember to have read somewhere (in Cassandra, I think) of these
Viragoes; how they inhabited, and commanded their own Country without the help
of Men, and that they banished every Male into its Fathers habitation, as soon
as ever it saw the light: but I confess, I was till now wholly ignorant how
they came to assume this courage, and hatred of Men; which I suppose now
proceeded from the use of this Root, that grew among them.


M. C. That is indeed the very individual reason.


Dor. But I likewise remember, that a Queen of that Country fell in love with
Alexander, in his conquest of Asia: it seems her Majesty forgot to use this
remedy; or at least the Conquerors charms were stronger than the virtue of
Misanthropia.


M. C. I know not where you got that fabulous Story, it must be out of some
Romance; for my Author who is reputed an authentic and faithful Historian,
tells me, That Thalestris (for that as I remember was the Queens name) came to
Alexander as a Sovereign Princess, not as a whining Lover, with a splendid band
of her own Subjects, not like an humble suppliant, commanding rather than
entreating that great King, to stop in the carreer of his Victories, till he
left something in her Womb; which if of the genuine Sex, might prove an Heiress
to the Kingdom, and succeed in her Mothers Throne. It is plain there was not a
glimpse of love in the case, or any thing like a fond passion; for we find the
first instant, this Princess found in her self the desired effect of that noble
conjunction, she bad the Conqueror adieu, and gave him leave to proceed in the
pursuit of his victories.


Dor. You have corrected my judgment in this particular.


M. C. You see it is my opinion, a Whore ought rather to hate the whole race,
than love one single Man: and indeed it is requisite she should have a secret
antipathy against Men, that she may fleece them with less regret, and never be
moved to lend one Penny, to any of her broken Friends. There will then be no
fear of poisonous Arrows, or invenomed Darts, when she once gets the man-hating
quality, because Philosophers deliver it as an Article of their Creed, that two
contraries cannot by any means cohabit under one roof, no more than two Whores,
at least not without mighty feuds and restless animosities.


Dor. What sort of Men do most commonly fix these Darts and Arrows in the
Hearts of Women?


M. C. The Men of mode and fashion, those that are used to set the old Bawd a
work; who can at other times make use of the no less industrious Masculine
Pimp, of Billets deux, that is Child, love Letters, of Promises, Flattery,
Oaths, Execrations, a good Face, and a deceitful Heart; if any or all these can
prevail with thee, I do assure thee, thou art an undone Girl


Dor. I shall serve them in their own coin. But who are those you call the men
of mode?


M. C. The Men of the times.


Dor. All Men are Men of the times, pray explain your self.


M C. I mean those Gentlemen that have served one apprentiship, or possibly
two, to the Trade of Foppery


Dor. Now I understand you: it seems then a Man of Dress, a Man of Garb, a Man
of Wit, a Man of Mode, a Man of the Times, and a Fop are much one and the same
thing.


M. C. It is so And if this Man thou speak of, had a name for every humor
he has, he would have more names, by half, then Briareus had Hands.


Dor. How many was that?


M. C. Ninety nine.


Dor. It is a pity the Hundred were not made up. But inform me how I must carry
my self in company of these critical Gentlemen.


M. C. When any of these Critics (as you call'um) comes to make thee a visit:
receive him in mood and figure, caress him, and entertain him with the pertest,
and the quaintest chat, thou can devise. Flattery and ceremony are the
comfits that taste sweetest in his mouth.


Dor. He shall have his Belly full of them.


M. C. You must study a particular way of commending every thing he wears, the
sitting of his shoes, the mixture of his Stockings, the shape of his Leg, his
Tread, the turn up of his Breeches.


Dor. Methinks, Mother, you should begin at the other end.


M. C. The make of his Clothes; the adjusting of his Sword knot and Cravat
string, the briskness of his raillery, the fringe of his Gloves, his Lace, the
smoothness of his Face, the redness of his Lip, his jantee way of picking his
Teeth, the foretop of his Peruque, and if you please, the cock or the sitting
of his Hat.


Dor. Will not he think I am abusing him?


M. C. He would, if thou did treat him after any other manner. It is in this
method they claw one another, and sure you will allow, it may come as naturally
out of a Whores mouth?


Dor. Are they generous after a Woman has taken all this pain to please them?


M. C. That is as the maggot bites; they will sometimes throw away their
Guineas as profusely into the Whores, as into the Groom or Porters Box; then at
another minute, they must bilk the Lady, as much for the humor of doing so, as
the consideration of saving their money.


Dor. I find it is ticklish trading in this brittle Ware.


M. C. Pretend to have heard much of the Sparks Poetry, that you have seen some
ingenious lines of his composing.


Dor. What if he was never given that way?


M. C. It is odds but he is a dabler in rhyme; however he will procure a Sonnet
from one of his Poetical friends, which he will show thee, as the fruit of his
own Brain.


Dor. What should I do with it? a Bushel of them would not yield me a Groat.


M. C. You must make much of the Song, for the love you bear his Purse: as Men
sometimes kiss the Bantling for the Nurses sake. Receive the precious gift with
the same grace you would a Necklace of Pearl, read it over and over, praise it,
kiss it, and then place it in your Bosom.


Dor. I will gratify him in this particular.


M. C. If you well remember, Daughter, I told you at the beginning, that Memory
was a part of Rhetoric, and necessary in a Whore, to learn and retain those
essential documents that are to be observed in her own Trade. In as much as all
her discourses in conformity to her manners, are a medly of lies and fictions;
it is requisite she should have a faithful remembrance to hinder tripping and
contradiction, which would detect the falsehood of her intentions, no less than
the sophistry of her words. Remember, Dorothea, what form of treatment may best
comport with every person, according to the variety of his humor and quality.
What ever he be, whether of the long Robe, or one that wears a Cloak of the
Geneva cut, whether one of the black Gown, or the red Coat, whether Gentleman
or Mechanic, let him hold his Heart fast, and his Purse loose, if he be of
small credit, let him be of greater advantage.


Dor. I expected you would have said more of the modest.


M. C. Voh, voh, voh, this Cough kills me. I did intend to have been more
particular on that large subject, but I have so many things in my Head, I shall
forget many points that are material, if I dwell long on any one.


Dor. Proceed.


M. C. You must know how to bridle that indiscretion, which is natural to men
who have spent seven years behind a Counter.


Dor. The Citizen, I suppose you mean.


M. C. A brisk check will keep these Spaniels in order and obedience, better
than fawning dalliances or flattering caresses: let not these however be
altogether wanting; but let a bit and a stroke go together, or rather follow
successively as the nature of the Animal may require.


Dor. I should love to show my Authority on these tame Creatures.


M. C. Let my Pupil rest fully assured that the most profitable, easy and
secure Traffic is to deal with honest wealthy Citizens. A rich Mercer can with
more ease rig out a Whore, than a score of ranting blades: and an Apprentice
that is Cash-keeper to a substantial Citizen can oblige a young Lady, with
larger supplies than a Regiment of modish Gentlemen. These are the golden
Lovers, you must by all possible arts endeavor to make your own: a small
proportion of Flattery, and a spice of counterfeit Affection will be sufficient
baits to captivate these mute Fish; when once they are fast in the Net, there
is but little danger of their making escape; a frown, a contracted Brow, or a
harsh word will quiet them at any time, and make them willing to gratify your
most exorbitant demands.


Dor. These modest guests are much more to my humor, than the Huffs you spoke
of just now.


M C. All the time you live at large, you must remember to set apart the
Sundays, and other Festivals of the Year, for the service of young Citizens,
for Apprentices have only those times granted them, to breath a little free
Air, out of their Masters Houses or Shops. What I have already said of the
hypocritical, and the fearful Lovers, as likewise those precepts already laid
down to enslave young Gentlemen, may be applied to this place, as being
necessary to regulate the several sorts and degrees of Citizens.


Dor. I fear, Madam, you are in some have.


M. C. Not at all, Daughter. If this defluxion will give me leave, voh, voh. I
will methodically complete the work of the day.


Dor. Pray be pleased so to do.


M. C I have already hinted, That you must be critically obsequious in paying
every man those respects that are due to his birth and employment, in such sort
that you seem neither too haughty, nor yet contemptible by any mean
condescension: even with great Men you must preserve this decorum, not
seemingly to want, or care for their money, you will the easier arrive at the
end of your own desires: and by standing on your punctilios, be able on all
occasions, to calm the heat and extravagance of any insulting Hector, not
suffering your self to be fed with that aerie nutriment (loud big words) which
is the usual entertainment of certain Bravos. With all Men without distinction
of persons, you must study to be in your dissembling and cheating Talents
crafty and cunning, in your delights graceful, and in your persuasions
powerful: thus you will in some sort imitate the good Orator, and fulfill the
practical Doctrines in your own Rhetoric. The memory which belongs properly to
you, is not so much an immense capacity, qualified to receive and retain all
objects represented to the exterior, and thence introduced to the general and
interior sense; as an artificial ready remembrance of all points necessary in
your own Trade, and the persuading power of your eloquence, which consists in
timing your words and actions with a seasonable discretion, assigning every
part of your art its proper place, and feeding your Lover with a real, or at
least an imaginary pleasure.


Dor. Good Mother, do not confine your self to the Rules of Rhetoric, because
that will render your precepts obscure, and as to me scarce intelligible.


M. C. Where your interest, and the Rules of Art concur, there you will permit
me to speak in terms consonant to the name I have given the discourse. Where
they jarr, I promise to forget the Rhetoric for your particular advantage.


Dor. I thank you.


M. C. What the Rhetoricians call Disposition, is requisite in this place to
regulate the several parts of interest to the best advantage. The Rhetor some
times persuades with arguments drawn from true History, Realities, and the
nature of things; but when such cannot be brought to square with his present
design, he makes no scruple to introduce fictions, chimera's, shadows, and such
like notions, that serve the turn as well, and tickle the Auditors ears as
effectually, nay often times better than if he had handled nothing but solid
matter, and the real substance.


Dor. Must I imitate him here?


M C In like manner the Female Orator must strive to make the best use and
advantage of substantial Flesh and Blood, solid Kisses, and sensible Touches:
but if these do not sufficiently mortify an obdurate Lover, nor make him drop
any golden Tears, she must not be unprovided of lascivious Pictures, obscene
Images and Representations to raise her own and her Lovers joys.


Dor. This is a thing I never dreamed of.


M. C. When you are detained in ugly, sordid, or ungrateful embraces; it would
be difficult without the artificial aid of a picture to counterfeit those
ecstasies which every comer may expect for his money. Therefore on these
occasions you must frame in your mind the Idea of some comely Youth who pleases
you best, whose shadow will create a greater gust than could be raised by a
nauseous though real enjoyment. The Picture of this charming Boy may very fitly
be placed near your Bed, to imprint the fancy deeper in your imagination, and
enable you to fall into those sweet transports, which do singularly gratify
the enjoyers heart.


Dor. This gallantry does almost ravish me, because it is altogether new.


M. C. The dexterous acting this dying part, the artificial counterfeiting an
immoderate passion, will ever produce very advantageous effects: the deceived
Gamester believing these amorous pangs created by himself, will be apt to fall
into the like trance, will approve of the ardour of his own flame, and be ready
to comply in the generosity of a grateful return.


Dor. That is still the burden of the Song.


M. C. In this act young Ladies do often forget their interest, and when the
person does not please, it is a piece of self-denial my Scholar must learn, to
make it appear he does To prevent then any discovery of nauseating the present
Bedfellow; a continual mindfulness of her own interest, and the assistance of a
handsome Picture are the best and most easy remedies. The whole series of
carnal satisfaction does purely consist in fancy, and he effectually enjoys
most, whose imagination is strongest, who frames in his mind the highest
conceptions of joy and content. This artifice therefore is principally
necessary in conjunction with certain credulous humors, who believe themselves
adored by the whole Female Sex: such will as it were force their Mistresses to
dissolve in pleasure, and give sense of a sincere delight, in regard their own
fancies are high and elevated. They would otherwise count her dull and
insensible of that weight of bliss she enjoyes in the circumference of their
Arms.


Dor. And it may be a weight too of folly and impertinence.


M. C. That is more than probable, and men of this faith are to be heightened in
their folly; no excess of false transports can be ever found out by such
believing Proselytes, as being already full of themselves, and prepossessed of
their own particular merits.


Dor. I should love to bubble such conceited Coxcombs.


M. C. Besides the Male Picture prescribed for your use, you must be stockt
with others of a different nature to operate on your visitants more effectually
than the similitude of your Ganymede could affect your self. These must make up
a part of your household stuff, must consist of the best draughts of Men and
Women naked, in sweet caresses, and dying postures. It will not be expedient to
have such hung about your Bed Chamber or elsewhere, however they need not be
wanting on one side of the Bed, in such order to be absconded at pleasure, and
again to appear when necessary, by withdrawing a Curtain or other Veil that
must hang over them. It is fit likewise these bawdy incentives should be under
cover when you happen to entertain any number of your followers together, for
at such times genteel and modest conversation is most agreeable. Beside, I
would have you make it your business to be seen at home sometimes, engaged with
grave and sober company, and when that can be had of your own Sex, for I judge
it necessary you should personate the reserved, the coy Dame, saving when the
scene of enjoyment begins to appear on Loves Theater.


Dor. And then it seems I must throw off the vizard of modesty.


M. C. These obscene Images do produce mavelous effects toward the
propagation of Love, they insinuate at every pore of the Eye an extravagant
desire to gratify the sensitive appetite, they spur Men on by an irresistible
impulse toward the venereal Bed; from whence he ought at no time be suffered to
come off a winner.


Dor. If he does, I have but ill deserved your instructions.


M. C. By means of such Pictures, new Lovers may be acquired, especially when
they are of an exquisite and extraordinary nature, and when your skill in your
profession, and your good temper do concur to animate these uninformed beings.


Dor. I hope neither shall be wanting.


M. C. I desire my young Student to believe the usefulness of these amorous
scenes as an infallible truth. In this particular all Men are of a Romish
persuasion; in as much as their devotion at the Shrine of Venus is extremely
enlivened by the prospect of a naked Saint. Let care be taken that none appear
in this number who have dyed Martyrs in the cause of Venus. That would be a
mortifying sight, and ungrateful to the amorous Goddess, whose Votaries are of
a Geneva stamp, all militant, but mortal enemies to that Bugbear, called
Passive obedience.


Dor. And who can blame them?


M. C. Aretin's Figures have no place in my Rhetoric, and, I hope, will find
no room in my Pupils apartment. They are calculated for a hot Region a little
on this side Sodom, and are not necessary to be seen in any Northern Clime.


Dor. What do you mean by Aretin's Figures?


M. C. Only, Child, Six and Thirty Geometrical Schemes which he drew for his
own diversion.


Dor. What have I to do with those hard names, are those tame things to be had
here?


M. C. Four and Twenty rough draughts may be had for money.


Dor. Pray tell me of something I understand, and which is proper for this
cooler Region. Though I have an itch to know what you mean by the Figures, for
I am sure it is something else than what you have yet told me.


M. C. Aretin, Daughter, among other things was a great Astronomer, and
particularly had an exquisite knowledge in the nature of Mars and Venus, and in
all the Seasons, and varieties of their conjunction.


Dor. Pray proceed in what I desired to know.


M. C. I have seen a certain draught of Pictures that would serve sufficiently
on this occasion, hanging one way it might be set up in a Cathedral, but the
reverse was able to seduce a Hermit into obscene thoughts. Such a Model as this
may be had, and at an easy rate, it may appear barefaced in your Lodgings, and
on occasion, with an easy motion, turning the upside down, the obscenity
appears, of power to raise a luxuriant heat, and a beastly appetite. This Scene
with its double Face, must be furnished with variety, to make it a sufficient
Theater for the diversion of the amorous pair, affording a large field of
pleasure, and a multiplicity of forms to pay Cupids delightful Tribute. This
pleasing spectacle will ever sensibly affect the seeing organ, so turning the
leaf according to what diversity the eye discovers as most pleasant, a
harmonious discord will thence arise, and in the delight, which is still the
same, that diversity will be found, which is the sole universal sauce of all
terrene sweets.


Dor. Must I lead or follow in this Dance?


M. C. It is civil you should submit to the Man's choice in the capriole to be
next cut; however I will allow you sometimes to make use of your negative Vote,
in refusing to tread such steps as may disparage the Dance, and approving
others that may hasten and increase that beatitude so much valued by foolish
and unthinking Lovers.


Dor. would they were all so.


M. C. You must remember to observe in the exercise of this Precept, which are
the best, and most agreeable positions, to the end you may be able to instruct
a raw Lover in the practice of these exquisite deportments, nothing in nature
will be more engaging with Men than to meet them half way in these recreations,
or even sometimes to act the teachers part. When you shall have practiced and
understood a multiplicity of these capricious Games, you must make use of your
memory to retain as eligible those forms, that were found to please most, and
to avoid others that were found troublesome, or did create disgust.


Dor. Will it not be dangerous to seem knowing in this affair?


M. C. That was the caution I did intend to deduce from the Doctrine of Images.
You must with all strangers and new friends, or such on whom you have
particular designs, make it your business to appear wholly ignorant in all new
modes, or at least you must handsomely pretend that nature, and sometimes a
mighty affection, and desire to please your Lover, has inspired you with this
dexterity.


Dor. I am of opinion it is best to seem at all times wholly ignorant, and only
to afford a civil condescension.


M. C. I cannot be against what you say, for it may prove inconvenient, that
your knowledge should be thought to proceed from art and experience; for Men do
for the most part believe this sort of skill in Women, as nauseous in an
amorous conversation, as a Pedant's learning in civil society; unless it be
when they may conclude themselves the Authors and Instructers in this piece of
obscene gallantry. With Men therefore that are troubled with a discerning
faculty, I am satisfied, you should plead ignorance, rather than disoblige your
Guest, by seeming wise to a superfluity.


Dor. I think so too.


M. C. The unfolding the amorous scene will soon excite any Man of potent Flesh
and Blood to show his skill in the imitation; then a feeble resistance, with a
declaration of being unacquainted with the practical part, may serve to raise
his appetite, and possess him with an opinion, That his Mistress made that
purchase for ornament and not for use.


Dor. It will be requisite he should think so.


M. C. I would have you inquisitive to discover all those hard ways, through
which the famous Curtezans of the Age have dug out their victorious fortune;
and the several precipices from whence others, no less remarkable in their
infelicity, have been tumbled headlong: the first will serve as a Spur to push
you forward in that fortunate road; and the other may be a useful caution to
avoid those Rocks whereon others have so lately shipwrackt.


Dor. Point me out some of those dangerous Rocks.


M. C. One of the main causes of a young Traders miscarriage in the World is, a
fond passion for some one of her Lovers, fixing her hopes and thoughts on a
single person, which as I have already told you, never fails to bring
destruction on Fortune, Body and Reputation; it is the greatest curse that can
happen to any Lady of this Profession, because it destroys all those ways and
means that should make her happy.


Dor. I presume you mean such persons as are neither fit for Husbands, nor
Keepers; and I think you have told me so already.


M. C. Another main instrument of the Whores misery, is a lewd and an open
conversation, admitting all sorts of men to a familiarity, without any
distinction or regard of persons.


Dor. I should not wonder at that.


M. C. Others finally, not resolute nor steady in the government of themselves,
careless in their Trade, and fantastical Lovers of their own capricious
humors, do miserably shatter their prosperity, which by steering a regular
course, might have been preserved entire, and perfected at last with a
plentiful return of riches and honor.


Dor. It were strange if such giddy pates did ever fare better.


M. C. Many young beginners do rashly addict themselves to a scandalous liberty
in drinking, lewd swearing, and open ribaldry, foolishly judging all these as
necessary incidents to any Whore, that would make a remarkable figure in the
World.


Dor. To be remarkably abused.


M. C. Whereas in effect there is nothing can more certainly bring them into
contempt and misery.


Dor. It is scarce possible it should be otherwise.


M. C. Men will, it is true, in a jovial humor encourage all the vile excesses
that the most profligate stripping Whore can act, yet at the same time they
applaud, they must needs entertain a secret hatred and scorn for such wretched
Prostitutes.


Dor. That they must needs do.


M. C. They are solicitous for this wild diversion, as they are for the sight
of a Bartholomew Show, a Harlequin or Jack-pudding, but once a year, and then
too the Farce grows nauseous before it is half ended.


Dor. Before it is well begun.


M. C. These infirmities are to be avoided by Whores, with equal care as they
are shunned by industrious and thriving Merchants. The loss of time and neglect
of business are the natural effects of these enormities, and the genuine causes
of a lost reputation.


Dor. I love those Rules that prescribe sobriety.


M. C. If you would desire to maintain your Body in good order, you must be
nicely cautious not to allow any commerce with Men noted to fly at all Games,
and famous for never wanting a Neapolitan running-Nag.


Dor. I conceive you.


M. C. I will explain my self more largely at another time, but I am now in
have to tell you, that these are very dangerous and as unprofitable Guests;
their Money is dispersed into so many Purses, no one Lady can receive any
advantage by it, as a River is lost by being divided into may Channels.


Dor. What similitudes you make?


M. C. You must avoid such company as you would a Pesthouse, or as a young
Scholar would the irregularity of breaking Priscian's Head.


Dor. What is that?


M. C. It is a Proverb used in Schools against any one that makes a false
concordance in the Latin Idiom. Of this solecism thou will be guilty in a
literal sense, if thou approach any of these virulent Bodies, because thou must
impart some of the same sauce to the next Customer, and so effectually break
the real Priscian's Head.


Dor. I shall have a care of that for my own sake


M. C. You must strive to outdo the severest Moralist, in controlling and
subjugating all your untowardly and prejudicial passions, as love, any external
marks of envy, hatred, malicious anger, and such like.


Dor Why, may I not be sometimes angry?


M. C. With some fond Lovers a little of it may not be amiss. But for the most
part it is best to mollify a hardened Lover with a Crocodile tear, and redress
injuries that will be offered by mildness, a seeming patience, and neatly
imposing a pecuniary mulct, rather than cursing, bawling, or any Billingsgate
arguments


Dor. In what cases must I avoid any show of envy?


M. C. Principally in shunning a silly error very common among Whores.


Dor. What is it?


M. C. It is the humor of exclaiming, detracting and vilifying one another
with an envious and envenomed Tongue.


Dor. According to the vulgar saying, That two of a Trade can never agree.


M. C. I know it is impossible a Whore should see any of her Sisters in finer
Clothes than she can compass, or more caressed, without secretly cursing her
Rival in her Soul, and entertaining such damning wishes, as two competitors at
Court do in private pour out against one another.


Dor. And how is it possible to contain without bursting?


M. C. Alas Child! How does that expression agree with the uninterrupted
hypocrisy and dissimulation I prescribed Yesterday. I say you must put on a
serene countenance, a pleasant look, and a Tongue dipped in Honey and Oil, when
you happen to talk to any of your Servants of the other Whores about the Town.


Dor. Does not commending others equally disparage ones self?


M. C. Good Faith, Daughter, I believe, there is scare a Whore in Christendom,
who is not of that opinion; and yet Creswel dares swear, they are as much
astray in that particular, as the unthinking Keeper, who is persuaded of the
honesty of his Mistress.


Dor. Is there no such thing then as an honest Whore?


M. C. I have known in my time more Whores than would Hand in Hand make a
larger circle than the circumference of London; yet never could set sight of
the thing called an honest Whore. It is true, young Whores like young Sinners,
are oft-times troubled with a weak and distempered Brain, whimsies,
reluctancies, sorrow, repentance, and some faint glimpses of what the World
calls virtue; but I must tell you, till all these shadows are vanished, they do
not deserve the glorious name of Whores.


Dor. For Heavens sake, Mother, no more of this it will raise Clouds in my
Brain, with I shall not be able to dissipate.


M. C. But to do the memory of the Lady, justice, I remember to have heard of
one honest Whore.


Dor. I am glad on it.


M. C. Who refused the Son entrance, because the Father had already traveled
that Road.


Dor. I am afraid, Madam, I should be of that Ladies humor.


M. C. Fie, fie, Child, there is no such precept in natures Law. I have been
lately under the clutches of the Law, and if I were not afraid that a Scandalum
Magnatum might bring me into such another praemunire, I could show thee a noble
precedent to confute thee and remove this error.


Dor. I guess your meaning. It is an intrigue might afford matter for a Novel,
which would in part take off the scandal of translating daily such numbers of
French ones, that are in my mind, fitter for the necessary House than the
Closet. But now I must return to desire you will inform me, how I ought to
commend other Whores, I am sure it must not be without some discreet reserves
or equivocations.


M. C. That I will allow. You may do it just as the Fanatics pray for the King.


Dor. That is, not at all.


M. C. Yes they do; but it is still with a but at the end of it. You may say,
Such and such a Lady is handsome and agreeable, then cunningly insinuate
something that may defeat the encomium: or to come nearer the simile, praise
the Ladies good qualities, then with a fly but, (as if sorry for her failings)
hook in with pity and compassion in your mouth, what may fully the good. Wish
her better advised, and better Counselors, and pretend concern and regret for
her infirmities.


Dor. What good effects will this produce?


M. C. It will infallibly make the Gentleman most entirely thine if thou can
act the part neatly. He will be amazed to find such an unheard of piece of good
nature in a Whores Mouth, and be in love with thee for thy virtue, more than
were possible on the score of a Face.


Dor. This part I must learn to personate.


M. C. You should gull your Lover at this time with the same dexterity the
Fanatic Parson does his hearers. You must cloth your discourse with a meek,
grave, and a pious aspect, to make your sophistry pass for sincere and real.


Dor. Were you ever imposed on by any of these Preachers.


M. C. I have been often at their Meetings, not to edify by their Doctrine, but
to propagate my own.


Dor. If you will tell me what you used to see and hear in such places, I shall
reckon it among the number of your favors, and I fancy the digression may not
be altogether impertinent to the business in hand.


M. C. I have heard the lecherous Goddess Venus talked of in those Conventicles.


Dor. Did the Holder-forth give her that epithete?


M. C. Verily he did: And once, I remember, proceeded to talk of the bawdy
Flora (so he termed her) so much celebrated by old Rome, and to compare her
with the Scarlet Strumpet, now so much adored in the same place.


Dor. Was there any more of this nature?


M. C. I protest, Child, to have heard the Menstruous Cloth painted to the
Congregation in plain colors, more obscene and filthy than the thing it self,
At another time the Saint had occasion to harangue on the test of Virginity
explained in Moses's Law, and laid open in a large scene of ribaldry.


Dor. Foh! Sure the beast must have acquired this breeding at Amsterdam or some
such place.


M. C. Thou have, I believe, hit pretty near the mark.


Dor. But it was not this I desired to hear, but how he made his impressions on
the deluded Assembly, because you said a Whore should imitate him in that
particular.


M C. That is, I confess, the greatest wonder of all, that even in the midst of
that mixture of obscenity and profaneness, when there was no more seeming cause
of any emotion than at the hearing a dull bawdy Farce, that the Pastor should
be able to extort from the pious Assembly such heavy groans, and deep sighs, as
if he had been reading the Commination, or denouncing nothing less than
Darkness, Fire and Brimstone.


Dor. How was that possible?


M C. As I am a Christian it is true; but as to the possibility of it, I my
self am a little at a stand, and can only answer thy question by telling thee,
he was a gifted Preacher.


Dor. What is that?


M. C. That is one inspired with a double portion of the Spirit of hypocrisy,
one who has served seven years to the Trade of Gerning, putting on a starched
countenance, an edifying look, and the white innocence of a Soul-saving eye.


Dor. His Doctrine then, it seems, borrowed all its efficacy from the Saints
gestures.


M. C. There was nothing else to recommend it to the Assembly, unless it were a
number of tautologies larded with nonsense.


Dor. Notwithstanding the nonsense, I fancy, he might have some qualities fit
for a Whore to imitate.


M. C. The Sun does not shine on any mortal, I would sooner propose as a
complete pattern for my Scholars example in the histrionick part of the Whores
learning, than one of these Parsons, who is thoroughly instructed in all his
paces.


Dor. Sure it must be something extraordinary in him that you prize so highly,
pray tell me some of his particular excellencies.


M. C. First, Child, he is a Man can work miracles with his pharisaical Face,
before he lets one word drop from his Puritan Lips; you may see his Flock
reduced to mighty extremities, excessive agonies, and even toward a dangerous
state of desperation, when first the Geneva-Apostle mounts the Tub.


Dor. And all this at a mute show?


M C. Ay, ay; He spends at least a quarter of an hour in this dumb conjuration,
about a third of the whites of his Eyes to be seen, the Lids twinkling like the
reflection of a Star at Night in a pool of Water, with Brows contracted, and
Mouth wryed, before he squeezes the Clasps of his Dutch Bible, or even mutters
one single word.


Dor. Sure, Mother, you left all your spleen at home, the day you went to hear
this Evangelical Mountebank.


M. C. I usually went to those places about business of importance, and it
stood me upon it, not to disoblige the many substantial Friends I had there of
both Sexes, with an Antichristian or a Prelatical laugh.


Dor. You had a wonderful stock of continence.


M. C. Notwithstanding, if I had not been well read in Conventicle demureness,
it had been impossible to have refrained at seeing the Sisters, with greedy
Eyes, fixed in the contemplation of this powerful spectacle; only sometimes
they removed for a short space, in pursuit of several Texts, as if the Gospel
Trumpeter had been all the while sounding quotations.


Dor. If his looks were so prevalent, his words sure made much deeper and more
wonderful impressions.


M. C. After the first scene was over, he cleared up a little, and in part
removed the Cloud that had hung over his mysterious visage; he opened his Eyes
a thought wider, and began to wag his Lips, which he continued to do for almost
another quarter, before one word could be kidnapped by the most zealous and
attentive Elder.


Dor. I vow, Madam, I had rather say Amen to a Latin Mass, than to such a piece
of religious mockery.


M. C. But when as the Oracles voice was heard, and the holy Impostor began to
show his juggling tricks and legerdemains:


Dor. You mean his Sophistical and Seditious Doctrine.


M. C. Then it was one might have seen the Rabble about this Empirick's Stage,
quite overwhelmed with spiritual ejaculations, and enthusiastic raptures.


Dor. I had rather see this Comedy, than the Plain Dealer, or the Country Wife.


M. C. I thought thou never had seen a Play.


Dor. Very few, Mother, but pray go on.


M. C. It was a pleasant piece of pageantry to behold the gulled multitude
swallow the Mountebanks Pills as the most sovereign Catholicums, or universal
Medicines.


Dor. It is well you explained your self, else I had taken your Catholicum for
a Popish word.


M. C It was diverting to perceive the heedless (though attentive) Sheep led
astray by this seducing Shepherd, and the unwary Animals intoxicated by the
poisonous humors inspired from this Serpents forked Tongue.


Dor. I am afraid some of them owe you money, you inveigh against them with so
much zeal.


M. C. It had been a pleasant entertainment for any disinterested Ear, to have
heard the Lungs of this numerous meeting all strain together, to show their
zeal, and the warmth of their Devotion, at the conclusion of each long winded
period; just as a Consort of Vocal Music may be heard to conspire in a
refreshing breath, after the end of a tedious Song.


Dor. How naturally have you expressed it?


M. C. If I should delineate this Monster in all its deformities, I must be
more tedious than his nauseous Preachment: I will therefore pass over his other
good qualities, and only at present recommend him to my Scholar, as an
exquisite Harlequin, or Scaramuccia, that can personate any humor, can at
pleasure command a tear, a select shrug, or any mimical gesture that may serve
to vend his empty verbose Drug for solid found Ware.


Dor. Would you would get me one of these Conventicle Jack-puddings, to make me
Mistress in this art.


M. C. He might be had on easy terms, for the State begins to take pity of this
canting Tribe


Dor. Why then will you not procure me such a necessary Tutor?


M. C. He would infallibly debauch thee, Child, (as one may say) in Forma
pauperis.


Dor. That is, without purchasing on a valuable consideration.


M. C. I will not venture thee any long time from under my own tuition, however
I will not see thee remain ignorant in this qualification; I will prescribe
thee ways to compose thy Brow, or make it muddy on occasion, to squeez a Tear,
and imitate April weather, to dart a smile through a fruitful shower.


Dor. I am glad to hear you make that promise.


M. C. It is on this matter I intend to conclude my Rhetoric, and the work of
the Day. I have hitherto chiefly insisted on what might seem necessary to
furnish your intellectual faculties, to invent, dispose and place every part of
your persuasive, in an orderly and advantageous method. I must now lay down
some useful Rules how to regulate the external acts of the Body, which is no
less necessary in this exercise than the modelling the mind it self.


Dor. I admire the regularity of your method


M. C. A graceful pronunciation is an essential part of an Orator, consisting
of two parts, a judicious framing the Voice as the matter requires, and
assuming that gesture of Body that may operate most effectually on the present
hearers.


Dor. How comes a gesture to be a part of right pronunciation?


M. C. It is however an appurtenance: the one serves to move the affections,
making its charming notes penetrate the Ear: the other insinuates it self into
the Eyes of Men. In like manner you must be expert at these parts of corporal
eloquence, having an artificial dexterity in the management of your tongue and
the movement of your other Members. A good Voice will mightily conduce to the
efficacy of your persuasive, and tuneable according to the Rules of Music; for
as I have already hinted, neat Singing is a singular advantage to a Whore, and
a strong allurement to the solace of love


Dor. I love this part of Rhetoric.


M. C. This qualification is found highly to improve all Creatures that are
capable of it, above their ordinary worth and value. A well instructed Parrot
is worth Money for its mimical chat.


Dor. A Parrot does not sing, Madam.


M. C. But I am going to tell you of the Canary Bird that does, and which is
purchased at dear rates for the variety and pleasure of its artificial notes.


Dor. What more?


M. C. And an insipid Singing-Master is admitted into gentile society, for the
diversion, his regulated Voice may afford the company


Dor. Have a care you do not make his Worship grow proud with such a favorable
character.


M. C. If I were not talking to a fair Maid, I would here show the excellence
of a good voice in helping to set off an ordinary Face, as a new bush, or a
good Face at bar does serve with undistinguishing palates, to palliate the
imperfection of debauched Wine.


Dor. I drop you a curtzy for that complement.


M. C. She is sure to be caressed and admired by all Men, who is provided of
this vocal accomplishment, and even by those who neither are affected with, nor
understand the power of musical numbers.


Dor. Are young Gentlemen so much of the Monkey, to mimic things they do not
value, only because they see them please others?


M. C. Thou have put me in mind of a certain Spark, ha, ha:


Dor. Who did he Ape?


M. C. That takes snuff eight Months in the Year, in deference to the King; and
the other four takes none in complaisance to the Duke.


Dor. Ha, ha, I could laugh at the Noddy a Week together. But methinks (with
submission) the King should grant him a Letter of license to lay up his
Snuff Box for two Months more to make it up the even Six, because, people say,
he is desirous every body should treat his Brother with the same respects they
do himself.


M. C. Well, but to the Song again. I tell you, Daughter, all the fictions of
the Poets concerning Sirens, and the prodigious effects of their charming
notes, are comprised in the center of a fair Ladies Voice, for that is the
genuine mythology of this Fable.


Dor. I had thoughts several times to have asked you one question, which if you
will give me leave I will do now.


M. C. When you will.


Dor. The apprehension of losing my Maidenhead has already put me in pain, I
have heard such terrible things of it.


M. C. And all thou have heard then, is a ridiculous foolery.


Dor. Is it not as bad as the cut of a Sword?


M. C. No such thing.


Dor. As pricking, as the thrust of a Rapier.


M. C. Not at all.


Dor. Like the opening of a Wound when the orifice is almost closed up?


M. C. Thou art wide yet of the mark.


Dor. The drawing of a Tooth?


M. C. Wider.


Dor. The tearing up of a Nail?


M. C. No.


Dor. Pray make me conceive it?


M. C. Do thou never remember to have scratched a certain fort of an angry
Pimple, and thereby to have made it fret and bleed?


Dor. I do remember.


M. C. The smart thou felt then is just like that thou may expect, when thy
virginal flower is snatched away.


Dor. Is that all? I shall no longer be afraid of shadows. But pray do not
forget what you were going to say when I interrupted you.


M. C. I was ready to tell you, that Love and Music do seem to bear a near
resemblance in their own natures; an agreeable variety is in both the Mother of
Harmony, and where there is the least appendix wanting, a harsh discord is
thereby created as certainly in Love, as it is in Music. A symmetry in the
Person, Dress and Speech of a Lady that would excite Love, is as requisite as
an accurate Player, a good Instrument, and right in tune, to raise a harmonious
proportion in musical numbers.


Dor. Why do you make Love and Music so near akin, because it is odds if a
Whore has a great deal of Music, but she will likewise be apt to receive the
impression of Love?


M. C. I would not have you fond of any Music created by your self, much less
what you hear of another, your Love and your Voice must be both mercenary; a
counterfeit Love, and a feigned Voice must be two of your prime Advocates, to
plead your Cause at Cupid's Bar.


Dor. The Lovers you mean?


M. C. An aerie Song is likewise very proper in a Whores mouth, to restore a
languishing Lover with fresh vigor: and to supply him with new Spirits, who is
weary and faint in the extremity of an amorous toil.


Dor. You have already told me something like that.


M. C. A good tale cannot be told too often; therefore I tell you, your Voice
must be still in tune, to hinder your Gallant from being surprised with
desires, that might, if suffered to grow on him, destroy loves Empire, take
away the virtue of your eloquence, and ruin all the political designs of your
interest. There is no absolute necessity you should exceed in the knowledge of
this art; it is sufficient to be able on occasion, to entertain your friend
with a lively Song, and to give life to certain artificial graces, which in a
young Ladies Mouth breath a most sweet air, to refresh and fan that flame,
which sometimes finds reception in the center of an enamoured Heart. No grave
heavy canticles must be heard at these times, but all amorous compositions apt
to excite luxury, and create a particular delight. It is fit to observe a
seasonable discretion, in disposing the Music in its proper place, not to
prove tedious with the length, nor troublesome by singing at such seasons, when
the appetite may possibly require an entertainment of a different nature.


Dor. That were worse than singing at meat.


M. C. Beside this, there is another kind of harmony, a young Lady ought to
acquire by practice on her own Voice: I mean an agreeable tone and sweet accent
in the expression of each word in ordinary conversation.


Dor. How is that to be learnt?


M. C. Not by any certain rules of art, but must be attained by your own
industry and practice. I have known Women do miracles with a sweet dying Voice;
and indeed nothing can be more prevalent on the affection of any Man, than to
hear a handsome Female express her self in apt terms, articulated with the
advantage of a languishing air. In this particular you must play the Orator, to
adorn every period with all the embellishments, Voice, Eyes and corporal
Gestures can afford, still discreetly varying in some points, as the different
circumstances of Person, matter, time and place may require. If you cannot at
first arrive at a height of perfection in this affair, be not discouraged by a
slender proficiency in your first attempts, you must frequently experiment your
skill alone, as if your play fellow were listening to every word: however if you
advance not to a high pitch in this virtue, you must be at some extraordinary
pains to manage your tongue, if you cannot perfectly regulate your Voice.


Dor. How, to manage my Tongue?


M. C. It must be known that this Arrow, the Tongue, shot from the Bow of the
Lips, when kisses are dispensed, does make a very remarkable impression; and it
is worthy observation, with what alacrity the Blood and Spirits correspond to
the raising a lascivious desire, at the gliding of this Member between the
opposite Lips, just so far as to hit the white, that is, the Lovers Teeth: but
it is likewise true, that some not well informed in this exercise, thrusting
their Tongues with impetuosity into the Mouth of him they kiss, do nauseate
rather than please; or using this appurtenance of a kiss indiscreetly at all
times, do render it less pleasing, nay hated sometimes, as not agreeable to the
expressions of the sweetest love.


Dor. This is a notion I was altogether a stranger to.


M. C. This form of kissing, mankind learned from Pigeons, amorous Birds, and
dedicated to Venus; whilst we see in the simplicity of their amor they
interchangably give one another the Beak. Let rude Women be corrected by these
emblems of innocence into the graceful acting of this part: not striking their
Tongue into another Mouth with such force as if they intended therewith to
drive a Nail. Daughter.


Dor. Mother.


M. C. Remember you to frame your Tongue acute, in form of a Darts head, and so
to dispose the motion that the extremity or tip may only pass to and fro
tickling between the Lips, without forcing too hard on the borders of the
Teeth. Be mindful also on these occasions to incite your beloved Soul to the
table of Venus, as if your Tongue designed by penetrating there, to speak
within, and make a sweet invitation to the amorous joys; or that being ready
to expire with pleasure, you ought to breath your Soul, which being brought to
the summity of your Tongue, would seem willing to remove its habitation, and
find out a more beloved seat in the Lovers Breast.


Dor. I wonder, Mother, you do not set up a School, I am sure you would have a
multitude of Scholars.


M. C. In the excess of higher pleasures, let the Tongue be buried in its
proper grave, to be for a while there silent, contemplating those important
affairs, that are transacted in the middle region. Or let it be rather
imprisoned as a murderer, as having given its consent, and deliberately
contrived the death of two persons at one blow.


Dor. You are florid, Madam.


M. C. You must not forget to use the natural accents of dying persons, as my
Heart, my Life, my Soul, I Dye, let us Dye together, and the like, which imply
a counterfeit, if not a real sense. You must add to these, ejaculations,
aspirations, sighs, intercision of words, and such like gallantries, whereby
you may give your Mate to believe, that you are melted, dissolved, and wholly
consumed in pleasure, though Ladies of large business are generally no more
moved by an embrace, than if they were made of Wood or Stone.


Dor. I never desire to arrive at that degree of mortification.


M. C. You know another and a better fortune expects you: but it is certain a
universal Whore can receive but little satisfaction in point of venereal
desires, neither indeed is it possible there should be any titillation in those
parts, that are peradventure rubbed a dozen times in one day.


Dor. No more than Grass can grow on a beaten Road.


M. C. It is requisite however to give content, though she be seldom capable of
receiving any, let her speak things as aforesaid to mollify her companion in
love, and make her self seem so too; and to give her words an authentic gloss,
let all be ratified with shut Eyes, falling off as breathless, and then
awakening in the extremity of a vehement sigh, as having been overcharged,
languishing, and even extenuated with excess of joy.


Dor. Are these forgeries never discovered?


M. C. They are very beneficial when not detected, but are often discredited by
being over-acted by some indiscreet Whores in many unnatural and extravagant
transports, as if they had been bred to the great Saddle.


Dor. I wonder they are not always found out.


M. C. If the scene be cunningly represented, it may pass for natural and
lively: though if Men did but open the corner of one of their Eyes, they might
easily perceive the impossibility of giving a Woman any taste of delight, who is
commonly tired with the fatigue of many repeated strokes. Their credulity must
be managed in this juncture by all possible arts and stratagems, and though
sense and reason might seem strongly to oppose this opinion, yet it is fit they
should believe their dear Whore sensible of pleasure, nay constant, faithful,
virtuous, disinterested, or what else she pleases to impose in contradiction to
the testimony of a treacherous sense, or a deluded reason.


Dor. How is it possible to abuse any Man to that height, who has the least
shadow of understanding left?


M. C. Daughter let not this Doctrine startle you. There is not one Trade in
England that does not impose on their fellow Subjects of another Profession in
both these particulars: it would be tedious to enumerate how every Society of
Men cheats those of another rank, and how they again in a different manner,
slur on those same persons, that first made them swallow the Gudgeon.


Dor. You make then all the World to be both active and passive in a cheat?


M. C. I cannot hinder thee to put that construction on the words, Though I
desired only to show thee, That humane nature is weak, and that a Whore may by
those Rules I have already showed, deceive any Man of ordinary Flesh and Blood,
if she will but firmly possess herself of the necessity incumbent on her, of
being cunning and artificial in all her plots. Married Women do daily discover
new fine methods to abuse their Husbands; a discreet Dame can blind the good
Man's Eyes, that he shall not perceive his own Horns, which are palpable to all
the World beside: or if at any time he is forced to open his Eyes, and see them
at large in a fair Glass; she makes him believe it is a deceptio visus.


Dor. What do you mean by that?


M. C. Something that his evil genius had maliciously formed to separate his
affection from the bosom of a chaste Spouse. Nay though the honest Man should
find her in strange embraces, yet it was only a lump of condensed air Satan had
brought into the way, to leave a new Devil of jealousy in possession of the
Husbands Heart.


Dor. I see married Ladies have likewise their State Policy.


M. C. She ever has a Crocodile Tear at hand to soften a resenting Cuckold, but
if the Tool be soft and malleable, then an impudent look, a face assured with
something better than Brass, and a series of diabolical Oaths, are the Potions
she pours down the Animals Throat, to carry off all grudges, fears or
jealousies, and increase the Lethargick humor she has already made predominant
in the heavy constitution of her passive Husband.


Dor. Sure, Mother, it is a wicked Age we live in.


M. C. Faith, Daughter, so it is, and was so every Age since Adam quitted the
Garden of Eden: but methinks thou have spoke what might more properly come out
of the old Leechers Mouth, of whom I spoke a while since.


Dor. You think then there is no difference between the wickedness practiced
now adays, and the honest sincerity of our Forefathers so much talked of?


M. C. I believe that Virtue and vice are at all times both triumphant in the
World, though not in the same place or region; I fancy they may be appositely
compared to the Ocean, which though immense in it self, and still the same, yet
admits of Ebbs and Floods; when it runs up the Thames, it may be making a
retreat through the doors of Tiber; when it is full Sea at Bristol, it may be
low water at Tangier. Just so it is in the case of Virtue and Vice, they have
their risings and their falls, and as Virtue is banished one Country, she flies
to the next that will receive her; then Vice steps into the exiles Throne, and
usurps the Sovereignty till a new period of Years brings back the banished
Lady, and restores her to her primitive splendour and glory.


Dor. How does this agree with what we hear daily Preached, That no Age could
parallel the enormities of this; that Vice is become epidemical, the World is
corrupt, the Vessel of iniquity running over, and a great deal to this purpose?


M. C. What is said of the World is understood of the English World, and all
centred within the circumference of this Land. And so it is true; the Fops are
a degree more exquisite, and the Ladies a thought more tenderhearted than they
were in King Edgar's days.


Dor. I could raise one objection more against your opinion of Virtue and Vice,
if you are not in have to complete the work of the day.


M. C. I am ready to hear it.


Dor. I have read Ovid's Metamorphoses in English, and I there find that the
Goddess Astrea fled from Earth; now if this be true, and that by her is meant
Justice, it follows, there was nothing left but rapine and oppression.


M. C. Is it not a little irregular, Daughter, to propose the Poets Tale, after
I had answered the Parsons resolve? however I will satisfy thee with two may
be's. First it is possible the Poet was induced to tell the World of Astrea's
flight, in that he found all the dispensations of Fortune so partial and
unjust: he thought it was no eaven hand that intailed poverty on him and all
his fraternity, whereas those he called dull and insipid, (I take it for
granted there were Lawyers and Aldermen in those days) could lead the World in
a String, and abound in all the gifts of a propitious Planet, even to a
dangerous superfluity.


Dor. Now for the second may be.


M. C. I presume that Ovid had either seen, or at least heard much of the books
of Moses.


Dor. That is more than I heard till now.


M. C. And that by his golden Age, he means the state of Man's integrity, that
by his fall he lost his original brightness, and degenerated into a meaner
state, yet still preserved some beams of innate morality in the purity of the
Silver Age. Then the succeeding Generations growing more wicked and ambitious,
made them Swords and Spears, which naturally introduced the fancy of rugged
Iron. At which time the Goddess is said to have deserted her habitation here
below. In this fiction, I fancy the Poet alluded to the deluge that was brought
on Men in the Iron Age, when they became cruel, barbarous and savage as any
instrument of that rusty metal; then Noah's ascending the Ark (who was then
the just Man) and being lifted up therein above the Earth, is what the Poet
meant by Justice flying out of the world.


Dor. You have done Ovid a great deal of right; but is not the latter part the
comparing Noah and Astrea, a new notion of your own?


M. C. Upon my honesty, I never met any such thing in all my reading, and
therefore thou may at pleasure take or leave an old Wives conjecture.


Dor. For Heavens sake, Madam, how came you to be so well read? Yesterday you
quoted Seneca, you have talked of Law, Politics, a number of words not
understood by me, and indeed I think nothing but Divinity escaped you.


M. C. Why really, Child, as to that I can readily tell thee, Creswel has
conversed many long Years, if not in the Schools, yet with the Sons of the
Prophets.


Dor. Who do you call the Sons of the Prophets?


M. C. Thou must expect to be resolved at some other time, because I am now in
have to reduce to the Doctrine of Gestures some particular accomplishments, in
which you must endeavor to show a singular grace.


Dor. You are resolved to make me an accomplished Lady.


M. C. It is a very endearing entertainment, when the first appearance of anger
in a Ladies Face is resolved into a charming smile; just as when the Heaven
overcast with dark Clouds admits an impetuous and sudden force of the
Sunbeams, which in a moment disperse the thickest vapors, and make the aerial
body serene and clear.


Dor. You talk youthfully, Mother.


M. C. Your Kisses, Curtzies, Caresses and embraces must not be of the same
stamp with those in ordinary use among Females. My Pupil must know how to grace
every motion of her Body with some engaging gallantries, all her actions,
looks, words, must he remarkable for some capricious but pleasing gayety. When
a Lover appears under the Window or Balcony, let your salute be humourous and
brisk, with an aerie kiss dispatched from the tops of your Fingers, you must
seem as it were impatient of his company, and even ready to fly into your
Lovers Arms in your Lodgings, even out of your venereal Nest, you must not sit
idle like a lazy statue, but be still employed in diverting the losing Gamester
in dallying, mignardizing, and a thousand wanton expressions of love. You ought
sometimes of a sudden seize the Prey with strict embraces, and flatter it with
the sweetest Kisses. The more surprising and unthought of, these motions are,
they still imply the impulses of love more strong and prevalent.


Dor. This shall not be wanting.


M. C. There is a particular method of lithping, which though an imperfection
in speech, yet being judiciously managed, may become a notable ornament to a
Whores Tongue.


Dor. I have been often chid for lisping, but could never wholly relinquish it,
because it is natural.


M. C. This is not acquired by set rules but your own practice, and the
exercise of the most famous Traders must regulate you in this as in many other
particulars, better than you can by my documents.


Dor. Why should I not be guided by prime Ladies of quality in these affairs
rather than by Whores.


M. C. So I would have you, if you can be sure to forsake them in those points
that may prove destructive to the interest of your Profession.


Dor. In what points?


M. C. Time will not permit me to unlock the Ladies Cabinet, nor indeed my
decayed Lungs, voh, voh, voh, voh, voh, else I could make a longer harangue on
the married Dames State Policy than I have done on the Whores Rhetoric. I will
only tell thee at present, that they place their chief happiness, their summum
bonum (as I have heard a Philosopher speak) in gratifying their carnal and
obscene desires; whereas a Whores interest and worldly lucre ought to be
considered as her first, last, and her greatest wish


Dor. But married Women may lawfully place their thoughts on those things in
obedience to their Husbands.


M. C. Where have thou spent thy days, that thou should raise this strange
notion of obedience from a Wife to her Husband? it has been laid in the Grave
these many Years.


Dor. Buried, say you?


M. C. Would you Daughter, be fond of eating a Venison Pasty, or any other
Dish, if you had been for some Months before forced to feed on it Morning and
Evening?


Dor. It is certain I should hate it as I do poison.


M. C. In like manner Wedlock'd Dames grow weary of their Husbands, they are
cloyed with a repetition of the same fare, and so very apt to disobey those
persons they nauseate so much.


Dor. You do not mean Women of honor and reputation?


M. C. Quality and reputation are fine things, Child, but are not able to
remove a certain itch natural to our Sex: Honor in Women advances them only to
act the Whore in a higher sphere, does not all contribute to quench the flame;
for as there are two sorts of Beggars, one that with a stretched out Arm,
implores the charitable assistance of all that he meets; the other a Beggar of
Quality, that craves as heartily, but with a better grace, of some worthy
Patron in an honorable Dedication: so besides the Whore who receives the
benevolence of all Men, and whose office I have already described, there is
another equally covetous of Cupid's charity, though she dedicates her self to a
particular Gallant, who has treasure enough in his Veins to supply her
honorable requests.


Dor. Her lustful requests?


M. C. I have already told you the great advantage you may hope to reap by a
dexterous movement of the Body. Motion is, according to the Philosopher, the
cause of heat, and a brisk and lively one may prove in love the Parent of
prolific flame, out of whose ashes there will infallibly spring a number of
zealous Lovers.


Dor. It must be a singular passion that is generated this way after the manner
of a Phoenix.


M C. As you must not be stiff not starched in your conversation, so neither in
the ordering your Body; remembering that Venus transformed her self once into an
Eel, to leave a precedent for young Ladies, not to degenerate from the first
principle in this science, to be ambitious of perfection in the methods of
dispensing pleasure. By this model you are taught to circulate, to wind, to
turn and to wriggle.


Dor. That is a filthy motion.


M. C. To stretch, to contract, to push forward, to retract, to raise upward,
to bend down, and other delicious motions, that are acquired better by
experiment than by any notional precepts.


Dor. What should one do with all those motions?


M. C. Choose those you like best, and throw the rest to the Dogs; and in the
exercise of these several feats of agility, such, I say, as please you, care
must be had to appear free and disingaged, but not to those mad excesses which
bespeak a Lady inspired rather with fury and rage, than the lambent spirit of
an amorous flame.


Dor. It seems you look on this as a very necessary injunction, because you
have put me in mind of it now the third time.


M. C. Not to relinquish the form of a Rhetoric, and the subject of Eloquence,
I remember to have heard that Demosthenes, if I mistake not, had the reputation
of a ready and an expert Orator. To become perfect in the mimical part, he made
use of a Glass, large enough to represent his whole person in its full
dimension. Before this he used to make proof of himself, and in it observing
his own failings, he thus found it easy to correct them, and imprint in his
memory that action or gesture which seemed to himself most agreeable and most
likely to please others.


Dor. Would you have me take the same method Demosthenes did?


M. C. I would. You will daily find easy opportunities of applying your self to
this practical part of learning. Every young Lady may have these clear Crystals
for her privy Counselors; and I advise you to make the best use you can of
these bright aids. They serve to modifie the attire of the head, the tincture
of the Face, the excellency of the Dress, and the symmetry of the whole.


Dor. Every body consults them on all those doubts.


M. C. But every body does not take care as you must, in such sort that there
be not the smallest motion of the Brow, Eye, Lip, or other part that does not
exactly square, to the completing a perfect and a wanton beauty.


Dor. This, I confess, is not so much regarded.


M. C. The quality of every look, every smile, must be adjusted to a singular
aerie grace; each step carry in it something brisk and gay, that may demonstrate
a lively deportment of the whole body.


Dor. It shall be done


M. C. As to your carriage in these and other particulars, in your Lodgings, at
a Play, or elsewhere, you must carefully follow the approved precedents of the
most knowing Ladies, still with an ambition to improve the best examples, by
your own ingenuity.


Dor. Why do Whores appear ofttimes masked at the Theaters and other public
places?


M. C. A Mask is the Whores Label, the Flag she hangs out, to signify to all
Men, That the Lady in Masquerade is to be sold to him that makes the first
generous offer.


Dor. Sure no Man will make any offer before he sees what is under deck. Did
you never hear, Mother, of buying a Pig in a Poak?


M. C. They are sometimes bought up as Kings marry their Wives, even before
their Faces are seen. But they have other designs in carrying these dark
Lanthorns.


Dor. That is probable: because Masks seem unnecessary to make them known; for
Ladies of business, they say, may be discovered by their look, mien, and many
other signs and tokens.


M. C. A young Trader ought to be extremely industrious to preserve her Face as
long as she can, under the notion of strange and new: so it ever proves of ill
consequence to be frequently seen barefaced at Plays or any other public
places, which is well avoided by appearing under the safe cover of a vizard.


Dor. What prejudice can it bring to be well known, methinks it should be a
part of her business in such places to make her acquaintance?


M. C. I Would allow her sometimes to be seen without a false Face, but generally
it is most convenient to make her Markets under a disguise, she thereby is at
liberty of going off with whom she likes best, without disobliging others; and
as I told you now, she avoids the inconvenience of being Fly-blown, or blasted
by the contagious Eyes of any sparkish Cabal.


Dor. How do you mean?


M. C. These Blades will sit on a young Lady, especially her that is suspected
to have the least pretense to the Whores character, as a Consult of Physicians
over sick persons, still concluding in the destruction of her honor and
reputation.


Dor. The Physician kills the Body and these Gentlemen the good name, but sure
they do not take this liberty without an experimental knowledge of the Ladies
temper?


M. C. It is the same thing for that. One will say he has debauched her,
another will sweat to have lain with her such and such a Night, though possibly
not one letter of either true.


Dor. But it does a Woman equal prejudice to be thought common, as effectually
to be so.


M. C. You say right: and therefore a young Whore ought with all industry avoid
being publicly talked of, which were impossible, unless she cheated them with
these false colors.


Dor. Is it not necessary I should know these caluminating Fops, to escape the
censure and company of such empty Blabs?


M. C. I know them all, and will direct thee particularly in this critical
point, and in all others necessary to be known, and which this accursed phlegm
will not now suffer me to impart. Voh, voh, voh, voh, voh, voh. I am not able
to proceed farther: so I can now only desire thee not to fancy thy self for the
future any thing of a Woman, save what craft and fraud may seem essential to
the Sex. Agreeably to a young Female that is cloystered up in a Monastery, who
has renounced the World, put on a new dress, new manners, new thoughts, and who
is become (as the Lawyer has it) a person dead in Law; so you must now at your
initiation in this profession divest your self of all Womanish conceits,
abandoning that weakness and pusillanimity that renders many of our Sex, and
more of your Trade the object of men's charity and contempt; and to complete the
parallel, be sure to believe your person dead as to all Laws, except those
prescribed by your own interest Let this Rhetoric be to you, (my dear
Daughter) instead of a moving intelligence, to regulate the new modelled
Fabric of your Heaven: let no other principle of life or motion be
acknowledged in all your works, all your actions regulated in an exact
comformity to it, and with the same may thou be ever preserved in a perfect
state of undisturbed tranquillity.


Dor. Even so be it.


FINIS.

