THE New Politic Lights OF MODERN ROMES CHURCH GOVERNMENT: OR THE NEW GOSPEL
According to CARDINAL PALAVICINI; REVEALED BY HIM In his HISTORY of the COUNCIL
of TRENT.

Englished out of FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be Sold by T. Flesher at the Angel
and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard, and by R. Sollers at the King's Arms in
Ludgate Street, and by H. Bonwick at the Red Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
1678.

THE PREFACE.
NOthing appears to us with more disadvantage than when we have entertained our
selves with great expectations of it; for all that we can attain in this world,
must needs fall short of those fair Idea's we propose to our selves. There was
never any Instance which did more evidently demonstrate this, than the
expectations from the Council of Trent, compared with the disappointment that
followed, when the Issue of it was found so disproportioned to the hopes were
conceived about it.

When Pope Leo the 10th. gave out his Thunders against Luther, he appealed to a
free General Council; and the Princes of Germany that received his Doctrine,
pressed the Emperor much to procure one. This was a Popular thing; for from the
Days of the Councils of Constance and Basil, it was universally received both
in France and Germany, That Popes were subject to a General Council: but all
that depended on the Court of Rome, looked on this as a thing of dangerous
consequence; yet till the matter were laid to sleep, it was not fit to hold a
General Council out of Italy, for there they were safe: and the Pomp of a
reconciliation with the Greek Church, in the Council held at Ferrara and
Florence, through the Pageantry of which, an ill informed Age could not see,
gave their Popes great credit; they were sure of Italy, that nothing could
miscarry in a Council that sat on their side of the Alps. This appeared
signally in the Council of Pisa, which Lewis the 12th. held against P. Julius
the Second, where the people, though under the French power, treated the
Cardinals and Bishops so ill, that they were forced to remove from thence to
Millan, and there their reception was not much better. And as all feeble
Attempts do confirm those against whom they are made, so P. Julius drew great
advantages from that opposition, by a Council which he then held in the Lateran.

But now the Demand, a Free Council, out of Italy, gave them no small terror;
the Riches and Greatness of their Court depended on so many Exactions,
Dispensations and other Oppressions, that it had been presumption to have
expected that these things, for which nothing could be pretended from Scripture
or Tradition, should have been defended or preserved. It is true, the Lutherans
had no great reason to expect any thing from a Council, nor is it to be
imagined that they promised themselves much from it. Generally all Bishops
condemned their Opinions, and they did so effectually beat down the Secular
Interests of the whole Ecclesiastical State, that nothing but the force of
Truth joined with great Sincerity, could bring over any Aspiring or Dignified
Churchmen to their Party: So that how much soever the Court of Rome might lose
in such a Meeting, they were not like to gain much. But an Appeal to it was
plausible; they knew the Pope would not be easily brought to it. Divisions were
like to follow between the Court of Rome and the Clergy beyond the Mountains;
and they knew that there could be no hopes of a Council truly called: So that
if such a one were called, as former Councils had been, they would not want
good Reasons to justify their declining these Judges.

A General Council was a Demand which upon so urgent a necessity, a Pope knew
not how to deny, but they went about it with much caution. Adrian the Sixth
carried too much of an Outlandish Simplicity with him to Rome, and without any
difficulty promised a Council, confessed there had been many corruptions in the
Court, that needed Reformation, and set about it in good earnest; but these
Disorders were not so easily cured, they were become necessary to the Court; so
he made but small progress. The Distemper was too inveterate to be soon
removed. But if the Court was little edified with his Methods, they found his
Successor a man after their own heart: he was well taught in all the Arts of
the Court, and knew how to dissemble and disguise things well, and was as
dexterous in turning about where his Interest led him, as could be; but it was
not without difficulty that he always put off the motion for a General Council:
He once offered one within Italy, but he knew the Germans would not accept of
it. The Effect of these Delays was, That Luther's Doctrines got thereby more
footing in Germany; for there was not such a colorable pretense for proceeding
against them, as a Decision of a General Council would have furnished; and the
Emperor finding it necessary to close that starting-hole to which they always
betook themselves, at length procured one: To which, the Bishops chiefly of
Spain and France went with very honest Designs, hoping to carry on with their
Determinations against Heresy, some good Decrees for a Reformation; yet that
they chiefly looked at, was to raise their own Dignity, and to beat down the
swelled and uneasy Pretensions of the Papal Authority.

But the Popes were too hard for them, and as they bridled their Mouths with
the Proponentibus Legatis, by which no motion could be made but by the Legates,
so by their Intrigues with Princes, by the pensions and preferments that were
given, by the Numbers of Italian Bishops, and the great Dexterity of the
Legates, Matters were so carried, that those who called for that Assembly,
suffered much by it, and the Popes who were very apprehensive of it, gained
more by it, than by all the Meetings that ever they had had in the Lateran. The
Lutheran Tenets were all condemned, and so there was now a better color for
proceeding against them. The Bishops were much depressed, and at best made but
Delegates of the Apostolic See, which did most effectually subject them to the
Tyranny of that Court. Some Abuses were put down; but those were among the
least of these that were complained of, and the manner of putting them down,
did prove the most infallible way of setting them up, with great advantage to
the Court of Rome: For in all these Condemnations the Prerogative of the
Apostolic See was still reserved; by which they plainly acknowledged a Power
in the Pope to dispense with them; and it was better for the Interests of that
Court thus to condemn them, than to have given a full allowance for them, since
these Decrees could have no other effect, but raise the compositions for
Dispensations higher, which it has since done so successfully, that soon after
the conclusion of the Council, it was found that all the Diseases under which
the Patient long groaned, were now redoubled by this unfaithful or unskilful
Physician.

It was no wonder then, if upon so great a Disappointment, every body desired
to see the secret Arts by which the Court of Rome had so successfully managed
and turned so great an Engine; the Lutherans published all that their
Intelligence brought them; but as that was not much, so what came from them,
was generally suspected. The French being also dissatisfied with some Decrees
of Reformation, which were thought contrary to their King's Prerogative, and
the Rights of the Gallican Church, took great exception to these, and published
the Instructions, Letters and Speeches of some of their Ambassadors and
Bishops; but that was a lame account, and rather increased than satisfied the
curiosity people had.

At length the Famous History of that Council, written by Father Paul of Venice
appeared; it was quickly carried beyond Sea from this City where it was first
Printed, and put in many other Languages. The Style and way of writing was so
natural and masculine, the Intrigues were so fully opened, with so many
judicious Reflections in all the parts of it, that as it was read with great
pleasure, so it was generally looked on as the rarest piece of History which
the World ever saw. The Author was soon guessed, and that raised the esteem of
the Work; for as he was accounted one of the wisest men in the World, so he had
great opportunities to gather exact Informations; he had free access to all the
Archives of the Republic of Venice, which has been now looked on for several
Ages, as very exact, both in getting good Intelligence, and in a most careful
way of preserving it; so that among their Records, he must have found the
Dispatches of the Ambassadors and Prelates of that Republic that were at
Trent, which being so near them, and the Council being of such high
consequence, it is not to be doubted but there were frequent and particular
Informations both of more public Transactions and secreter Intrigues
transmitted thither. He had also contracted a close Friendship with Camillus
Oliva, that was Secretary to one of the Legates, from whom he had many
Discoveries of the Practices of the Legates, and of their correspondence with
Rome. Besides many other Memorials and Notes of some Prelates that were at
Trent, which he had gathered together.

His Work came out within Fifty Years of the Conclusion of the Council, when
several who had been present there, were still alive, and the thing was so
recent in men's Memories, that few thought a man of so great Prudence as he was,
would have exposed his Reputation by writing in such a nice matter, things
which he could not justify; never was there a man more hated by the Court of
Rome than he was, and now he was at their mercy if he had abused the World by
such Falsehoods in matter of Fact as have been since charged on his Work; but
none appeared against him for Fifty Years. The things were of such importance
to the Church of Rome, that every body concluded their concern in the Matter,
as well as their hatred of the Author would have engaged them to write against
a Book that had represented an Assembly which they called an Holy Ecumenical
and General Council, whose Canons were to be received as a certain Standard of
Faith, to be but a company of cunning and ignorant men, who many times
understood not so much as the debates of the Friars that opened the Canons
which they were to Decree: That all was guided by Faction and Intrigue; That
the Legates took from them all the Freedom of any ordinary Meeting; That the
honest Motions of some zealous persons were always checked and suppressed;
That all Attempts at a true and effectual Reformation were crushed; That they
went on slowly or speedily as it served either the Emperor's Turn, or the
Pope's Ends; That under a pretense of finding a Temper to reconcile
Differences, ambiguous Words were put in their Decrees, which were afterward
perverted to such Senses as did defeat all the good Designs of some there; and
in a word, a man shall find a great deal of Art and dextrous cunning in the
Shufflings and Policies of the Legates; but for any thing of Sincerity, or that
savoured of men that sought the Truth, and depended on God for the direction of
his Spirit, to which they pretended so highly, there is not so much as an
appearance of it to cheat any body with, though he had ever such a mind to be
cousened.

Nor was it to be wondered, that those whom they called Heretics, did not
acquiesce in the Decrees of such a Meeting, which a Writer of their own
Communion had so exposed, that every good Catholic (as they call them) knew
not how to defend it any other way but by that common and cheap Answer, That
these were the Lies and Forgeries of a discontented Friar, who either out of
Faction or Interest, designed to disgrace the Church. This was easily said, and
very hardly answered; for though it was not reasonable to reject a History that
had so many Appearances of Truth in it, without other Reasons but that
unconquerable one, That they would not believe it, because it liked them not;
yet they were safe in this Incredulousness, and there was no driving them from
it, till at length Cardinal Palavicini with great Art and much Industry, did in
a most infallible way give a confirmation, instead of a confutation of that
History.

Father Paul's Work lay Fifty years at quiet in the possession of the Belief of
all that were disinteressed; and though some Writers of the Court-party were
now and then pecking at it, yet none durst take it to task. They could not
pretend they despised it; for the credit it was in, set it beyond that. At
length one undertook it; but dying before he had made any great progress, the
Cardinal entered the Field, and that he might attain the Purple upon Merit,
resolved to vindicate the Council of Trent, and the Court of Rome from the
Aspersions of the former Historian. It was indeed safe to write at so great a
distance, when the Third Generation from that Council was going off the Stage,
so that whatever a man designed for Preferment, who could varnish all he said
with fair and specious colors, wrote of Transactions that were passed a
hundred years ago, was like to be well received, and at least few could upon
authentical grounds disprove it; and such of Father Paul's Friends, as perhaps
knevv from whence he drevv his Informations, and could go to them again, were
also dead: So that here lay a great and just prejudice against the Cardinal's
Work.

There was too much Art and Varnish in his Style, mixed with too many ingenious
Apologies for things that could not be denied; this must needs make the Reader
see that his Design in writing, was not to tell the Truth, but to defend his
Church. So that he is rather to be looked on as an Apologist than an Historian.
It is true, on some occasions he makes bold with Popes, and not without
affectation censures their Actions; but this is a common Artifice, to seem
ingenuous in lesser matters, that upon greater occasions one may cozen others
with a witness: yet those that read him, will find that he is very cautious in
his censures, and takes great care not to blame any of the former Popes, for
the faults that were too apparent in his Patron P. Alexander the 7th. About
this one that lived in Rome at that time, has published a very pleasant thing.
Pope Alexander did the first years of his Reign declare loudly against a
Nipotismo; and had solemnly sworn that he would never admit his Kindred into
the Government, nor so much as bring them to Rome; but when Flesh and Blood
grew too strong for these Resolutions, he made a shift to satisfy his
Conscience about his Oaths, and brought them to Rome, and put the Government in
their hands; which they managed with as many scandalous excesses as any had
done who had gone before them in that nearness to the infallible Chair. But
before this was done, the first Volume of the Cardinal's History was finished;
and in it he had laid most of the faults of former Popes on their raising their
Families and Kindred, and putting the Affairs of the Church in their hands: and
all this tended to raise the esteem of his Patron, who had resolved to root out
that Abuse, from whence all the rest seemed to be derived; yet the Volume was
not published when the Pope had brought his Family to Rome, therefore
Palavicini finding that what he had intended to set out for the Pope's Honor,
would tend to his Disgrace, and would also draw the Indignation of his Family
upon himself, suppressed that whole Impression, and printed that Volume over
again, leaving out all the severe reflections he had made on a Pope's raising
his Family.

He vouches his Relations from the Memorials of many of the Prelates and Friars
that were at the Council of Trent, which, he says, are to this day preserved;
and tells in what Libraries they are to be found, and offers very fairly full
satisfaction to all persons, who desire a further information about them. If
these were lying in Paris or Venice, or any other indifferent place, some would
perhaps adventure to examine these Vouchers; but few will hazard on it at Rome.
Besides, there is untoward Jealousy got into the minds of people that they are
not over-ingenuous at Rome. The forging of the Decretal Epistles, and the
Donation of Constantine the Great, with many other things, has given the World
such prejudices against what they bring forth of that nature, that few will
give credit to things that tend much to the advantage of that See, and are
discovered at Rome, when men think they both lie for God and his Vicar, and for
Preferment too, it will be hard to restrain them, especially if they be of an
Italian temper, and of Jesuits principles; which, to say no worse, are not very
severe in the matter of Candor and Sincerity. We know what a Trade the Monks
and Friars drove many Ages by Lies and Forgeries. If any thing might either
raise the honor of their Order, or of the House wherein they lived, a
miraculous Story was first contrived, and either a Writing or some Relick was
laid under ground, and then another dreams a Dream, that such a Saint appeared
to him, and told him to dig in such a place for such a thing: This being
published, with great ceremony they made a solemn Search, and the credulous
Rabble were thus cheated. It is said of Thieves and Robbers, who have driven
the Trade long, that even after they are discovered, and in the Jayl, they
cannot give it over, but must be still practicing their old Arts. So Rome has
been so long used to Forgeries, that after all the Discoveries that are made,
they cannot hold their hands; and this in a great part lessens the Authority of
those Journals and other Memorials that have been hid and unknown about a
hundred years, and at length have appeared to serve a turn.

But there are two things in the Cardinal's Work, which have given great
advantages to those who are not much disposed to any high esteem for that
Council. The one is, That though in some circumstances, and less material
things, he has said much to show that Father Paul's Informations were not just
nor exact, yet upon the matter he represents the transactions as full of
Intrigues, Artifices and Faction, as the other did; only with this Difference,
That Father Paul laid the heaviest load upon the Legates and the Court-Party,
and the Cardinal lays it sometimes on the one, sometimes on the other Faction;
but generally on the Party that was for Reformation. In a word, no man that is
not quite blinded with prejudice, can think, after he has read the Cardinal's
History, that the Holy Ghost had any special influence on the prevailing Vote
in that Council; and it is as easy for a man to believe that the Success of a
Session of Parliament, and those Acts that are carried by the Authority of the
Prince, the policy and dexterity of the Ministers, and the zeal and industry of
some Patriots, flow from the special direction of the Holy Ghost, as that the
Council of Trent, according to Palavicini's Relation, was conducted by the
Infallible Spirit of God, in making their Canons and Decisions; for we plainly
see the same Intrigues and Practices, the same Arts, either to take off, or
satisfy the opposite party, and the same Conduct and Method in the one that is
in the other. The Resolving the House in a Grand Committee, was the ordinary
practice of that Council; for a General Congregation was the Council in a Grand
Committee, and this was an excellent Demonstration of the Legates great
Distrust of the Holy Ghost: For they would never put any thing to the hazard of
a Vote in a Session, till they were sure of it, by putting it to the Vote in a
Congregation; and if it went not there as they had a mind it should be, then
they were to practice a little longer, till they had made the major Vote sure;
and then when it passed in a Congregation, the Legates held a Session. He would
be looked on as a man of great extravagance, who would study to impose on any
body that is acquainted with the Methods of holding Parliaments, That there is
any other Direction of God's Spirit than that Universal Providence that
watches over and orders all humane Actions, accompanying or governing their
Proceedings. Men are not so tame as to suffer such Mistakes to pass, and he
that would make use of his Wit or Eloquence, to persuade any to such an
Opinion, would be so generally cried down, that people would not hear him in
patience.

What must we then judge of those who would make us believe that the Council of
Trent was infallibly directed, when we plainly see by the Historian of their
own Court, that it was managed with the same secret motions and springs, by
which other Princes carry what they desire from the Assemblies of their several
States? and I dare safely challenge any that has read that History, to show me
any step or motion that is different from all other Secular Councils, or that
does not clearly show that they not only did not expect an infallible
Direction, but knew they had it not; and therefore were to supply that defect
by other Political Arts; and it is an undertaking well worthy of a Jesuit's
Candor, to persuade the World that the Holy Ghost was among them, when their
own deportment shows they themselves knew there was no such thing.

There is another Observation on the Cardinal's History, which is the chief
Subject of the following Reflections, That he knowing most of the abuses in the
Court of Rome, which from thence have spread over their whole Church, were
things that could not be denied; and that it was no less evident that all the
Decrees about Reformation, made at Trent, have been ever since neglected by the
Popes, goes about the excusing of that which he could not deny.

The Scheme he lays down is this, That Christ designed a Temporal Monarchy in
his Church: That men being but a composition of Flesh and Blood, we must not
expect any high Reformation, nor raise things to that pitch, that only holy and
good men will enter into the Service of the Church: That to maintain this
Monarchy, and invite Great persons into the Interests of the Church, there must
be vast Dignities and great Preferments: That these must be supported by some
things, that taking things simply seem corruptions; but as men are, must be not
only born with, but encouraged; therefore Non-residences, Pluralities,
Dispensations, Indulgences, Privileges, Exemptions, with a Thousand other
Abuses in the Datary, must still be kept up, since they are necessary for
bringing in that Revenue which must support the Monarch of the Christian
Church, and his Princes, the Cardinals; who, if they lived in the simplicity
and poverty of the first Ages of Christianity, could not attract that Esteem
and Reverence from a Carnal World, which keeps up their Greatness and
Authority. It is true, Christ and his Apostles took other methods, and by their
wonderful Holiness, and constant Labors, planted the Gospel: But the Church
was then in its Infancy, and needed Milk; but now that it is grown up to a full
Age, it requires stronger Food, and Motives that prevail more on the Appetites
and Interests of frail men.

It were to be wished that good things were well done, and that the Church were
cleansed from all Abuses; but these are the Idea's of Speculative persons, who
know not men, and understand not Business; and therefore all Reformations that
are not practicable, and cannot well consist with men's corrupt Interests, are
to be rejected; and those who promote them, are either weak, though zealous, or
factious and discontented persons, who design to beat down the Greatness of the
Papal Monarchy, by withdrawing from it those necessary Supports.

And may not such a Scheme of Maxims be well called a New Gospel, proceeding
from New Lights? This the Witty and Judicious Author of the following
Reflections, thought was so great an injury to that Church of which himself was
a Member (being as I am credibly informed, of the Sorbon) that he would needs
expose it; which he thought might be better done by bringing the Cardinal's
Maxims under some Heads, and laying them together, with the Consequences that
naturally flow from them, than by any labored or learned Confutation of them.
And indeed they do at first view discover such an opposition to the Spirit of
Christ, and the Gospel, that no man who has a right taste of the one, but must
see it in the other.

The Reader will be easily able to judge whether a Church founded upon, and
governed by such Maxims, be liker to be a Babel raised up, and carried on by
humane Arts and carnal Policy, or a Jerusalem, built on the Foundation of
Christ and his Apostles. And indeed the Cardinal has fully satisfied us, That
whatever respect the Court of Rome pretends for Tradition, and the Doctrine of
the Ancients, that is only because they think in some points of Controversy to
have the better of the Protestants with that Weapon, yet in their hearts they
despise the Rules and Opinions of the Fathers, as the fond conceits of
Christianity in Childhood, and far short of their Refinings in Policy; and
therefore though there are many things practiced and encouraged among them,
which the Ancients not only knew nothing of, but hated with a perfect
abhorrency; yet their Sentiments are not of sufficient Authority to make them
throw out any thing that brings them in advantage; and any Objection from the
Fathers, get no better Answer than this, That the Church was then but in its
Infancy; but as she grows older, she becomes wiser than Christ or his Apostles
were. These are excellent Arguments to persuade men to hold the Decisions of
that Council, or the Practices of the Roman Court in high estimation. In all
this Palavicini was much to be pitied; for both by other parts of that Work,
and some other of his Treatises, it seems he had good Notions both of Virtue
and Devotion; but it was his Misfortune to undertake a Work which could not be
finished without touching it in several places with such a Pencil.

It is observed of men bred all their Life in Schools or Cells, who have never
gone without their Precinct, nor conversed in the wide World, That when they
appear in public, they mix their Works or Discourses with many Conceits which
they think witty and fine, but appear extravagant, antic and ridiculous to the
World, who vouchsafe them no better Name than Pedantry. So fares it with one
bred at or about Rome all his Life, where the Abuses of that Court, through a
long practice, are legitimated, and easily colored over with some slight
excuse, which passes there, because either men dare not speak out what they
think, or the want of Ecclesiastical Learning, and of a deep sense of the
Pastoral Charge, makes them soon satisfied with any Answer, since they
understand not the weight and force of the Objections that lie against those
Abuses. But whatever operation such things may have about Rome, when they once
pass the Mountains, and are seen by men more disinteressed and awake, they
appear so foolish and childish, that no man needs to be at the pains to confute
them; it is enough to read or hear them.

The following Discourse was with much care suppressed beyond Sea, yet found
its way into England, and fell into the Hands of one who was so Generous, as to
oblige the Nation, by putting it into their Language: His Translation as far as
I have compared it, is exact and true; the only Fault that I found in it, is
from his great care to be faithful, which has made him follow the French phrase
too near in some Passages: But for a Translater, this is to err on the safer
side.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Necessity, the Utility and Excellency of Religious Policy: It
renders men happy in this World, and in the other. CHAP. II. The Errors and
poisoned Maxims of the scrupulous Policy of the zealous Ignorants according to
the Flesh. CHAP. III. The only Rule of the Politic Church Government, is, its
Felicity according to the Flesh, in this World, and in the other, under the
Authority of one sole Monarch of the Universe, who is the Pope; to whom all
Christian Kings are Tributaries and Subjects, and who has, or ought to have
for his Inheritance or Demean the Riches of all the World, whose Honors and
carnal Pleasures make the Churches Splendour and Felicity. Jesus Christ has
merited them for her by the effusion of his Blood, to render her Visible,
Perpetual, and Remarkable, as the most happy according to the Flesh, of all
other Republics, that are, that shall be, or that ever were upon Earth. CHAP.
IV. Twenty Reasons that prove the Necessity of the Riches, Honors and
Voluptuousness of the Church, to make thereof a Gospel according to the Flesh,
the Vocation of all the World to Faith, and a part of that World to the
Ecclesiastic Life, without which, Riches, Honors and Voluptuousness, the
Church having no Reputation among them who fancy those things, would perish,
not being able to subsist happy, according to the Flesh, if her Ministers were
poor, as formerly, and if they had not vast Riches, as the Glorious Cardinals,
who are at this day the Pope's Courtiers: Here also shall be shown the
unluckiness, the shamefulness, and even the Vice of Poverty, whereof God in his
Providence, is no Author, but Sin; or only Fortune, which on this score, may be
accused as the Enemy of Virtue. CHAP. V. Here are related the Twelve ordinary
means, enriching the Court of Rome, and maintaining the splendour thereof,
according to the flesh, which is the act of all Religious Policy, the most
pious, and the most important. The Twelfth and most efficacious of those means,
to teach every where the Gospel according to the Flesh, and this Religious
Policy according to the Doctrine of Aristotle, to whom the Church is beholden
for many Articles of Faith; is to establish Colleges of Jesuits, with power to
set up the Inquisition, and to be high Commissioners in that Holy Office; to
make out process against all them who shall differ from the sentiments of that
Philosopher. And that these Jesuits shall have a general grant of all
Privileges granted to the other Monastical Orders; although St. Bernard has
blamed those privileges; for on the other hand they be approved by Nicholas
Machiavel. CHAP. VI. Here be related the Interests and different Sentiments of
the Catholic Christian Crowns, and Republics according as they are more or
less favorable to this Religious Policy according to the Flesh, and it is made
appear that there is none more opposite than those of the Crown and of the
Church of France, which proposed no less at the Council of Trent, than to throw
down the Churches Monarchy and Empire, and to take away the splendour of the
Court of Rome.
THE NEW POLITIC LIGHTS OF Modern Rome 's CHURCH GOVERNMENT. OR, The New
Gospel according to Cardinal Palavicini, Revealed by him in his History of the
Council of Trent.
The Design and Partition of the Work.
THis Work is divided into six Chapters. In the first, by the Cardinal's own
Words will appear the Necessity, the Utility, the Nature, and the Excellency of
that same Religious Policy which renders men happy in this world and in the
other.

This Policy, to be true, ought to be, according to Aristotle, and according to
the Flesh, which distinguishes it from the false Policy of Mahomet, that is pure
Tyranny; and from the indiscreet and scrupulous Policy of certain zealous and
weak Ignorants, who not believing that one may be happy in this world and in
the other, carry the Virtue Policy into the excess of an ideal and extravagant
Reformation, as Pope Adrian the 6th would fain have done, who in sooth was a
most special Priest, but a very ordinary Pope; Ottimo Ecclesiastico, Pontifice
mediocre.

In the Second Chapter are related and refuted five general Maxims of those
zealous and scrupulous Ignorants who pretend that Religious Policy ought to
found the Rules of its governing upon that which should be according to God,
and not upon that which may be agreeable to the Flesh in the state of corrupt
Nature, and who believe that what is best to be done, is also best to be
commanded; following Antiquity, Councils and the Vote of a Commonalty of
private Bishops, which these zealous people regard as little Kings Il volgo de'
Re, and as so many small Popes in their Diocesses a guisa di Papi; whereas by
Rules of the Policy indeed, the Pope cannot consider them otherwise than as
little Bishops, piccioli Vescovi; Babies, Fanciulli; indiscreet Zealots, per
indiscrezione di zelo; Impertinents, impertinenti; Insolent, insolenti;
Buffoons, i Buffoneschi; in a word, unruly headstrong Coach-horses, still ready
to run away with the Coach, Vna Carozza trata da Cavalli che volino; and
Ignorants, who cannot skill the manage of the Roman Court, inesperti di
maneggio; all as these Qualities may belong to them some or others respectively.

In the Third, will be made evident, that the only Rule for politickly
Governing the Church, is its felicity according to the Flesh in this World, and
in the other, under the Authority all-puissant of a King, sole Monarch of the
whole Universe, who is the Pope, Signore del Mondo; of whom all his Christian
Kings are Tributaries and Subjects; Molti Regni al loro Monarcao; whose Revenue
is made up of the riches of the Universe; avendo per patrimonio le sustanze de'
sudditi; and whose Honors and Pleasures make the splendour and carnal Felicity
of the Church. That Jesus Christ has merited this Church by the effusion of
his Blood, to render it visible, perperual and remarkable, as the most happy
according to the Flesh, of all other Republics that are, that shall be, or
ever have been upon Earth; questo governo disegnato da' Christo piu felice che
sia in terra.

In the Fourth, will be alleged Twenty Reasons proving the necessity of the
Riches, Honors and Voluptuousnes of this Church, to make thereof a Gospel
according to the Flesh, and a Vocation of all the World to her Faith, and part
of that World to the Ecclesiastic State: Without which Riches, Honors and
Voluptuousness, the Church, having no reputation among them who fancy those
things would perish, not being able to subsist happy according to the Flesh, if
her Ministers were poor as formerly, and if they had not vast Riches, as the
glorious Cardinals, who at this day are the Pope's Courtiers; Gloriosi
Cardinali. Here also shall be shown the unluckiness, the shamefulness, yea, and
even the Vice of Poverty, whereof God in his Providence is no Author, but Sin,
or only Fortune, who on this score may be accused as the Enemy of Virtue;
poter' accusar la Fortuna come nemica della virtu.

In the Fifth, will be related the Twelve most ordinary Means to enrich the
Court of Rome, and to maintain the Splendour thereof according to this World,
which is the most important and the most pious action of all the Religious
Policy.

The Twelfth and most effectual of these Means is the establishing of Colleges
of Jesuits, to teach the New Gospel, and this same Religious Policy, all
according to the Doctrine of Aristotle, with power for them to set up the
Inquisition, and to be High Commissioners in that Holy Court, making out
Process against all them who shall differ from the Sentiments of that
Philosopher. And over and besides, with a general Concession to them of all the
Privileges granted to the other Religious Orders, although found fault with by
S. Bernard, Non sodisfece pienamente a San' Bernardo; because on the other side
they are approved by Machiavel, per Confessione dello stesso Nicolo Machiavelli.

In the Sixth, will be discoursed the Interests and the different Sentiments of
the Catholic Christian Crowns and Republics, in relation to this same
Religious Policy, according as they are more or less favorable or opposite
thereunto, it will be made apparent that there is none of them more opposite
than those of the Crown and of the Church of France; la qual tendeva ad abbatre
la Monarchia e levar lo splendore e l'imperio della Corte Romana.

The Conclusion will be, That the Council of Trent ought to be taken and
interpreted after the sense and meaning of this same Religious Policy according
to the Flesh, that makes men happy in this world and in the other, not in the
sense and meaning of those zealous Ignorants, who would have all observed that
is ordained by that Council, and would thereby establish their Ideal
Reformation. But in the sense and meaning of those who would follow the
Doctrine of this our Cardinal; according to which, by leaving to the Pope full
and whole power in the Shop or Office of Dispensations, Sopra la bottega di
dispensazioni, to grant them as he pleases, and even to derogate from the
Canons, it will clearly be seen, that that Council brings incomparably, more
advantages to the Church, than the Heresy either of Luther or Calvin have
caused Losses or Mischiefs to it; maggior accresimento di bonta per mezzo del
Concilio che non fu scemato dell'istessa Eresia; because being taken in that
sense, it teaches men a Policy and a Gospel according to the Flesh, with the
means to be happy in this World and in the other. This will be henceforward, as
our Cardinal promises to himself, an invincible Defense of the Catholic
Religion against all the Heretics, Infidels and Atheists who may have the
presumption to write against it, or against the Council of Trent: For it can be
no longer doubted but that the Holy Ghost assisted in a special manner at that
Council, to hinder that it should ordain nothing but what might be profitable
to the Church; the Heretics themselves having taken up and owned those words
of Monsieur de Lansac, the French Ambassador, which are since become so famous
throughout the World; That the Pope sent every day from Rome the Holy Ghost to
Trent in a Cloak-bag; Lo Spirito Santo venia portato nella valigia: For, though
at first blush these words seem impious, yet by means of the Scholastic
interpretation that this Cardinal bestows upon them, he makes subtly to
appear that their sense is exactly true, solid, Catholic, and that there are
no longer any but Idiots that are able to perceive in those words any shadow or
appearance capable to startle their weak and ignorant Devotion. Lo how it has
steaded the Cardinal to have passed a Master in School Divinity, and
Aristotle's Philosophy; and Lo wherein this Philosophy is profitable to the
Church! for he that knows well how to handle it, turns against the Heretics
themselves the Shot which they thought to discharge against her. And in fine,
from what they say, that the Holy Ghost was sent by the Pope in a Cloak-bag to
that Council, one proves the assistance of the Holy Ghost in that Council; so
then the Heretics must own they are overcome. And whosoever does not approve the
Government of the Church, such as it is this day under the Pope's Royalty,
according to the Rules of this our Cardinal's Policy, must manifestly be either
a Fool or a Seducer; Chi per approvare una forma di Republica non si contenta
di questo, o e insano, o e seduttore. And so all good religious Politic
Christians ought to pray God, quoth the Cardinal, that it would please him to
cause the Spirit of S. Peter to live still in all his Successors, as it lives
now at this day in him that reigns. Preghino Iddio che faccia vivere
stabilmente com' oggi vive lo Spirito di San' Piedro Alexand. VII.
ne' successori.

CHAP. I. The Necessity, the Utility and Excellency of Religious Policy; It
renders men happy in this world and in the other.
ARTICLE I. According to our Cardinal, there is nothing more important for a
Christian, than to be a good Politician; and it was to instruct Christians in
the Maxims of the True Policy, that the Cardinal undertook his History of the
Council of Trent: This Policy is that of the worldly wise, for the establishing
of which, Jesus Christ preached the Gospel, that he might teach men to be happy
in this World and in the other.
ARistotle says, That a man who sins and commits, for example, Murder or
Adultery, believing that those Actions are good, does more mischief to humane
Society by his Error, than if he knew those Actions to be ill, and yet would
not leave off committing them: H ior. del Conc. di Tr. l. 14. c. 13.
Secondo Aristotele sarebbe piu nocivo al commercio umano chi uccidesse e
adulterasse, persuaso tali attioni esser buone, che consapevole della lore
malizia.

Which makes one perceive that there is nothing of greater import, than to
instruct the understandings of men, and cure their Errors; but chiefly those
Errors opposite to true Policy; because Policy is the first and supreme of all
the Moral Virtues; l. 5. c. 16.
la quale e la suprema delle virtu morali: the reason of this Virtues
excellency is, for that it has for Object the common Good, which is the
noblest of all Goods: Ibid.
Essendo ella uno studio del ben' commune ch' e il piu nobile di tutti beni.

Hence, according to the same Aristotle, it being so that the corruption of the
greatest Good brings forth the greatest Evil, Il peggior Vileno risulta dalla
corruzione doll'ottimo, it follows, l. 1. c. 13. and l. 7. c. 2.
that there is no Error more pernicious, nor no Crime rendering men greater
Villains, than false and corrupt Policy; La quale e il piu scelerato de vizii;
because it is contrary to the greatest of all Goods: l. 5. c. 16.
Si come contraria a quel prestantissimo Been: So that there is nothing more
important, than well to distinguish between Policy taken in the vulgar sense,
di huomini volgari, Ibid. Ibid.
and the true Policy of Knowing and Learned men; Tra la politica vera intesa
da' scienziati; for false and corrupt Policy is accursed. Ibid.
Questa Politica essecranda. The reason is, That that Policy, instead of
proposing for its End the Good of all men, and how to render them happy in this
World and in the other, either proposes to it self but the welfare of one
single man only, whom it makes all men beside to serve; rendering them
miserable, to hatch out of their Misery the Felicity of that one man; like the
Turks Policy, throughout the whole Extent of his Dominion: l. 5. c. 16.
Qual e la Politica del Dominio Turchescho: Or else in proposing to it self the
the welfare and felicity of all Particulars, it sets awork to arrive thereunto,
nothing but extravagant Conceits; Introd. c. 10.
Concetti stravaganti; such as are the Thinkings of some zealous and scrupulous
Ignorants, without Experience: l. 16. c. 10.
Person zelanti ma inesperte: Therefore there is nothing more imports than to
enlighten the Understanding of man, Introd. c. 1.
which alone makes up the man; che solo e l'huomo, and to make him better by
giving him knowledge of the most important Truths; that is to say, those Truths
which compose the Policy of the Learned: Per migliorare l'intelletto co'lla
notizia d'importantissime verita per ammaestrare il lettore nella Politica.
Proem.
By the Learned or Knowing, I mean, quoth the Cardinal, those who skill the
World; l. 1. c. 5.
Periti del Mondo. The Design then that the Cardinal has proposed to himself
by setting forth this History of the Council of Trent, is to defend and
maintain the Catholic Religion by the Policy, and according to the Policy of
those who skill the World; l. 22. c. 5.
Quest opera ch' e una diffesa della Catolica Religione; and to make you see
that the Policy of the Catholic Religion according to the World, is that which
is true; because that by following its Maxims, a man is happy here below, and
in the other Life. Wherefore, quoth he, I do undertake to defend the Judgments
given by all the Earth Assembled in the Council of Trent; Introd. c. 2.
Pero diffendendo i^ nel giudicio del Mondo; and therein I maintain, goes he
on, the Cause not of one private Client, but of the whole Catholic Church; Non
un privato Cliente ma tutta la Chiesa Catolica. So he pretends to make you see
in the Proceedings and in the Decrees of the Council of Trent, that the present
Government of the Church being formed according to the Rules of worldly Policy,
and being the most profitable to the true common Good, that one can imagine
according to the Flesh, in this world and in the other, is that Government
which Jesus Christ himself, who is the Wisdom Incarnate, came to establish upon
the Earth, and for which he has shed his precious Blood, Questo governo
disignato da Christo. l. 1. c. 25


ARTICLE II. The Church may be considered in two manners; according to the
Flesh, and according to the Spirit; and so these are two sorts of Felicity or
Welfare of the Church; Jesus Christ had them both in view.
TO comprehend perfectly the Mystery of this Religious Policy of the worldly
wise, know ye that the Church may be considered in two manners, quoth Father
Diego Lainez, Second General of the Jesuits; the first, according to the Flesh,
the second according to the Spirit; secondo la Carne, l. 23. c. 3.
secondo lo Spirito; according to the Spirit, quoth he, the Church is the
Temple of Charity; Stanza di Carita; according to the Flesh, she is the
Fountainhead of all temporal profit, Font di utilita temporale.

Ibid.
So that according to these two Considerations of the Church, a man may conceive
two sorts of common Good and Felicity; the first according to the Spirit; the
second, according to the Flesh: The Felicity after the Flesh, is that of the
World, which consists in Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Glory, Splendour and carnal
Delights; The Felicity after the Spirit, is Divine, l. 8. c. 17.
and works a supernatural course of Life. La vita supraumana. This Felicity is
the Object of Heroic Virtues; Virtue eroica. l. 1. c. 25.
The Felicity according to the Flesh, is humane, civil and temporal; Felicita
civil; l. 24. c. 8, and 10. l. 1. c. 25. l. 8. c. 17.
l'umana felicita de fideli che rendono felice la Republica interra, and the
hope of this Felicity makes all civil and humane Virtues to bud and spring out;
fa gergmogliare le insigni virtu, Ibid.
and renders man happy according to the Flesh in this world: Whereupon it
follows that true Religious Policy ought also to be carnal, because it ought to
have for Object, the making the Church happy, not only according to the Spirit,
but according to the Flesh, and to bestow on her a Felicity not only Divine,
and of the other Life, but humane, temporal and earthly, in this world; now
there be none that can better judge what that true Felicity is, than those that
be Sages after the Flesh; that is to say, worldly wise; periti del mondo
secondo la Carne; and so for to know well what is the true Policy of Jesus
Christ, one needs but to know what that is of the People of the world, not of
the Vulgar', but of the knowing and enlightened World, whose Maxims our Learned
Cardinal goes on here to teach us.

ARTICLE III. Jesus Christ came to establish the most commodious kind of
Government for the Humane and Temporal Felicity of the Believing; yea, and that
is the most Religious which is the most Commodious.
LEt us suppose, quoth the Legate Alexander, sent by Pope Leo the Xth, to the
Diet at Worms, That Jesus Christ were ready to change the Government of the
Church, and to fit it to our convenience, Fingiamo che Christo fia pronto di
matar' la fua chiefa a commodo nostro, do ye think he should change it from
that which we see it at present? Surely no: So then we ought to conclude, that
Jesus Christ has fitted his Church with such a Government that there can be
none imagined more conform to humane Felicity after the wish of the worldly
wise, and after the Flesh. Now it is certain, that the desire of all after the
Flesh, is to be happy in this world as well as in the other; so then
conformably to this Wish has Jesus Christ formed his Church; Che Christo ha
formata la sua Chiesa in quel modo eti' e piu conform eziandio all'umana
felicita. l. 1. c. 25.


Also the same Pope Leo, to extinguish Luther's Heresy, gave in charge to his
Nuncio's, to represent to the Emperor Charles V. That it was necessary to
destroy that Heresy, for Three Reasons: First, In regard of the eternal
Salvation of the Flock of Christ. There Is the Divine Reason that respects the
Life to come. Per l'eterna salute del grege Christiano. The Second, For the
Quiet of the Politic Government. Per la Tranquilita del Governo Politico.
There Is the Humane Reason, and the Humane Interest of this Life. The Third, For
the Preservation of the Apostolical Principality. l. 1. c. 23.
Per la Conservazione del Principato Apostolico. There Is a midling Reason,
betwixt Divine and Humane; for that the Pope is Mediator betwixt God and Man,
betwixt Heaven and Earth; Il mezzano fra il Cielo and la Terra; l. 1. c. 1.
that is to say, a Mediator that knows perfectly well how to make agree
together the two Wisdoms, that of God, and that of the World, that which is
spiritual, and that which is temporal; and it is even in this that the
perfection of Religion consists, and which, by consequence, makes up the height
or top of Religious Policy, which tends to make men happy in this World here,
and in the other.

ARTICLE IV. The Measures and Rules of the Churches Government, according to
the Wisdom of God, ought to be taken from the Public Good; that is the End
that Jesus Christ had in view.
It Is certain, that the Common Good, being the End and Object of Policy, is the
Measure of all the Judgments, of all the Laws, and of all the Actions of that
Policy; for example, to judge wherein consists true Honor, even temporal; and
according to the times, we must fall to examine what is profitable for the
Public Good; for there is no other true Honor: So that the Common Good is the
measure of all Politic Judgment, l. 1. c. 26.
Il vero onore di cui e misura il ben publica: And the Policy that is guided by
this End, is that of the truly Learned and Knowing men, l. 5. c. 16.
Politica vera intesa da scienziati.

On the contrary, it is Popular Judgment that is not guided by the Common Good,
but forms its Conclusions upon another Principle. The good which popular
judgment proposes to it self either for Principle or End, is not a true Good,
but an Idol, l. 1. c. 16.
that witless and unruly Heads forge and work up according to their Fancy:
Onore popolare ch' e un Idolo fabricato da ingegni stolidamente feroci. l. 1.
c. 26.


Now for to discern well what is the true common Good of the Church, there
needs no more, but to mark what is the common Good that Jesus Christ had in
view when he instituted the Government of his Church; for the end is the
measure whereby we judge what is good and fit to be done in all actions, l. 2.
c. 2.
fine ch' e la misura dell'opportuno in tutte le azioni; through knowledge of
the true common Good, a man ought to judge of true or false policy.

The true is founded upon Virtue, and upon Zeal, the false, upon Fraud and
private Interest, Ibid.
i fondamenti nella virtu e nel zelo, o nella fraud e nell'interesse; By means
of these politic Virtues, a man arrives to the politic Felicity of this Life,
which is the recompense of them, and which consist in Riches, Honors and
Pleasures.

ARTICLE V. For to know well the Common Good which Jesus Christ had in view, a
man should judge thereof by the Doctrine of Aristotle, and other wise Heathens.
Luther's Heresy had never happened but through his slighting of Aristotle.
IF Jesus Christ had taken for the End of his Policy, only the common Good
after the Spirit, and not according to the Flesh, and temporal Convenience,
without doubt it would not have been safe to consult Aristotle and the wise
Heathens, to know the Nature of that common Good which Jesus Christ had in
view, and the Qualities thereof; but Jesus Christ having it in view to fit up
the Government of his Church on humane Felicity, whereof it is capable in the
judgment of the worldly wise, it is not possible that he should teach contrary
to the Teachings of Aristotle and the Heathen Sages, l. 7. c. 9.
come si la chiesa di Christo predicasse ch' e contrario non dico a
l'insegnamenti d'Aristotele ma d'ogni tolerabil'republica de' gentili. Jesus
Christ was the Wisdom Incarnate, the Source of all true Wisdom, be it never so
Paganish; so then he did establish the Government of the Church the best that
could be, in the judgment of the worldly wise, though Pagans. He never
prescribed her a Government to be changed for a better; for can any body be
persuaded that Jesus Christ did form a Government that was not the best of all?
l. 8. c. 7.
dovremo noi persuadere che la sapienza incarnata istituisse la sua chiesa con
un governo il qual non fosse de' megliori? To judge then what is the Government
that Jesus Christ established, one needs only to judge what is the best of all
Governments according to those that be Sages of this World; for one Wisdom
never opposes another Wisdom; the Fountain is no enemy to its own Streams. The
Philosophers were Sages according to Sense, according to Flesh, according to
humane Reason; thereafter they knew the common humane Good, and what was best
for Commonwealths; it is not possible then that Jesus Christ having the same
Good in view, should lesson us contrary to the Teachings of the Philosophers.

And in effect, there is no doubt but if Plato and Aristotle lived in our
days, they would experience that there was never Commonwealth more civil, more
politic, better improved, more noble, and more virtuous than the Catholic; l.
12. c. 3.
se Platone o Aristotele vivessero a nostri giorni esperimentassero che nessuna
Republiqua e o fu may piu culta, piu nobile, piu virtuosa, che la ^atolica.

It follows then, that the common Good of the Church considered according to
the Flesh, has nothing that is contrary, and which is not extremely conform to
the Public Good, such as the Philosophers set it forth. All the Difficulty
that they had in their times, was to find out means to establish that public
Good, and to make it practicable; and this is that which Jesus Christ has done
in a manner, which the Philosopher would have been very capable of, and very
much satisfied with.

It chanced that Luther, not being willing in his Doctrine and Practice, to
follow the Maxims of Aristotle, slighting that Philosopher, through that
slight, his Heresy gained ground; which, as it was contrary to the Principles
of Aristotle, so did Luther endeavor to destroy the reputation of that Prince
of Philosophers; l. 1. c. 8.
ma perch si fatta doctrina appariva contraria a principii della retta
filosofia insegnatasi da Aristotele, procuro d'estinguer la stima di questo
filosofo come d'huomo che scrivesse molti errori contro alla feed.

Slighting of Aristotle, has also caused, that Luther's Sect never had any
Writers of a much elevated Genius, l. 1. c. 17.
il disprezzo a' Aristotele fece che fra sui sequaci appena puo annoverarsi
scrittori di relevato intendimento: Those Heretics laughed at that Philosophers
Arguments so full of Learning, reducing all they taught, to the understanding
of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, l. 1. c. 23.
ridendosi degli argomenti scietifici, and diquanto insegnavo Aristotele il
tutto reducevano all'intendimento della lingua greca and dell'ebrea.

Carlstad cursed Aristotle, whose Doctrine, said he, corrupted Divinity, l. 3.
c. 13.
Carlostadio malediceva Aristotele, la cui dottrina havesse corotta la
Teologia, and as for Luther, he plotted to ruin that Philosophers Reputation,
machinava d'abattere Aristotele nella filosofia. l. 1. c. 3.
Here was that then which destroyed them, they did not know how to piece the
Policy of Jesus Christ and that of Aristotle together; for at last, let them
say what they will, it is certain that if Aristotle had not writ, and so taught
the Church to distinguish well, she would have lacked at this day a many
Articles of Faith, for which she is beholden to that Prince of Philosophers, di
cio sidovevain gran part l'obligazione ad Aristotele, l. 8. c. 19.
id quale se non si fosse adoperato in distinguer accuratamente i generi delle
ragioni, noi mancavamo di molti articoli di feed: Paul Soave thinks Aristotle
to be jeered by this Discourse; but our Cardinal-Historian does indeed approve
of Aristotle, and not jeer him, and makes the Truths of Aristotle admirably to
appear.

ARTICLE VI. Through the slighting of Aristotle, Luther would not endure that
Interest Humane and according to the Flesh, should have its share in Government
of the Church; he is followed by certain zealous Ignorants: One ought to shun
that their Excess.
It Is neither permitted, nor expedient, said Martin Luther, to regulate Divine
things by Humane Interests, non esser ne lecito ne spediente regolar le cose di
Dio con gli umani interessi. l. 1. c. 27.


He rejected not this conduct of Affairs. but only because it did plainly show
that Kings might be stirred up by the Motive of humane respects, as well as by
that of God's Interests, to set themselves against that Heresy, che per
rispetti cosi divini come umani possono muovere i Re and i Regni Christiani a
persegnitar l'eresia. l. 1. c. 25.
Now Humane respects be those we call Humane Reasons, which have for Object
humane Felicity according to the Flesh: Jesus Christ had in view this Felicity
as well as Aristotle, and their Sentiments make up a judgment the most humane
imaginable, and opposite to that Censure (forsooth) of those same zealous ones,
which is a Resolve Ideal and impossible in the Practice, contrary to
Experience, and which does not proceed but from Ignorance of the things of the
world. This Censure or Opinon cries nothing but Reformation, Reformation; which
is nothing but Idea and Extravagance, Intr. c. 10.
quella riformatione ideale per cui gravada il zelo imperito di person per lo
piu non esperte; concetti stravaganti: Thus it is plain, that the Government of
the Church ought not to be regulated by the judgment of those, who have not
experience of the World: It Is properly this Experience that makes up that which
is called Knowledge of the World, after the which also, Jesus Christ did form
the Government of his Church.

ARTICLE VII. The Discernment of zealous and scrupulous Ignorants is very
different from that of persons that have experience of the World, and knowledge
of the Times.
It Is certain there be such zealous persons, without experience of Civil
Affairs, and the present course of the Politic world, l. 16. c. 10.
person zelanti ma inesperte negli affari civili e nel corso del present
mondo politico, who have none of those Lights which afford that experience, l.
1. c. 23.
niente illuminato da peritia. This sort of zealous Folk have their minds
enslaved to vulgar Opinions, l. 1. c. 25.
intelletto schiavo delle opinioni volgari; on the contrary, there be that
skill the world, l. 1. c. 4. l. 1. c. 2^.
periti del mondo, able for practice, un huomo pratichissimo negli assari del
mondo, which are none of your retired people, that are wont to feed themselves
with Idea's and Speculations, Ibid.
un ideale and ritirato speculativo.

These People being no strangers to the Court-breeding at Rome, have thoughts
exalted above those vulgar ones of others, concetti non volgari; Introd. c. 6.
prattiche della corte Romana; these be persons of business and intelligence,
l. 21. c. 4.
person prattiche ed intendenti: Their eyes are versed in and used to the
affairs of the world, l. 17. c. 10.
occhi periti delle facende civili. The difference that is between the sights
of these two sorts of persons, is, that the first are still on all occasions
poring on Idea's, and are ravished in contemplation of abstracted forms and
Universals, which have not any proportion with the dispositions of the matter,
and which by consequence, are incapable to come to good. But the others give
close heed to those particular circumstances which are wont to meet in the
success of things; and to make them take effect, the first propose nothing but
speculative regulations and ideal reformations, the success whereof is
impossible, riformatione ideale and non riuscibile; Intr. c. 10.
the others, propose regulations and reformations discreet, possible, and
likely to come to good, Introd. c. 9. l. 1. c. 25.
riformatione discretta che poi success e che la prudenza de' padri stimo
riuscibile. Censura umana e non ideale. Whereupon, the Cardinal concludes in
these terms, Let Us leave them to Plato his Idea's, and let us go upon practice,
lasciamo a Platone l'idea, l. 12. c. 13.
veniamo alla prattica.

But in fine, the better to make it be comprehended what one ought to
understand by those Idea's, that a zealous indiscreet and ignorant person would
have to be followed in Government: One cannot tell how to give a better Example
on it than that of Pope Adrian VI. related by this Cardinal-Historian.

ARTICLE VIII. The Example of an Ideal extravagant Politician in Pope Adrian
VI. his Carriage.
It Is certain that Pope Adrian VI was a special Priest, says our Cardinal, fu
Ecclesiastico ottimo. l. 2. c. 9.


He was so thrifty as to his Person, and in his Household, that out of his very
thrift, he was near able to raise the Succors he had need of to assist, as he
proposed to do, the Christians against the Turk, l. 2. c. 3.
a si gravi spese non bastava la parsimonia da lui usata nel proprio
sostentamento.

One might say that he had quite forgot Flesh and Blood, la pienissima
oblivione della carne e sangue.

l. 2. c. 3.
Not only he never sought that Dignity, but contrariwise he was terrible
doubtful whether to accept or refuse it, l. 2. c. 7.
ondeggio tutta la notte nella deliberazione di consentire o di ricusare; and
when his Election was assured, he was so little concerned for it, or moved with
it, that this indifference appeared Blockishness to those which distinguish not
heroic Virtue from the insensibility of a foolish Spirit, l. 2. c. 3.
mostro ben si una inalterabilita che parue stupidita a chi non distingueva
l'eroico dell'insensato.

At last, it was not the desire to command, that made him accept this so
important Dignity, but fear to disobey God; nor yet much less design to enrich
his Kindred, but desire to reform the Church, and to fulfill all the Duties of
the Sovereign Pontiffe, or if one may so say, of a good Pope.

He was besides very Learned, he had been long while Professor in Divinity, his
Life had been always exemplary, and he had been, as Aaron, called to all the
Charges, through which he passed, as well as to that of Sovereign Pontiffe; he
was born poor, he loved the poor, and Poverty; the Heretics as well as the
Catholics did acknowledge these his Virtues; but for all that, says our
Cardinal-Historian, he was a very ordinary Pope, ma in verita mediocre
Pontefice, because he was too free and too sincere, Adriano troppo aperto', he
loved free and open persons without artifice, which caused, for example, that
Cheregat's humor pleased him, l. 2. c. 7.
per che Cheregato fosso di natura apertissima e pero grato al Pontefice; his
Nature being candid, he hated and abhorred all Artifice, l. 2. c. 3.
essendo 'proprio delle nature candide com' era quella d'Adriano d'aborrire
ogni artificio; this made him ill beloved of the Italian Nation; for as that
Nation is ingenious, so it is the property of ingenious Natures to be crafty,
Ibid.
essendo proprio delle nazioni ingegnose com' e l'Italiana l'esser artifiziose.

So that here all the ill that could be observed in this Pope, was an Heroic
Virtue, according even to this Cardinal-Historian; but for all that, he was but
a mean Pope, because he had not the Industry, the Address, nor the Skill to
distinguish amongst the Italian Artifices, Truth from Disguise and feigning, l.
2. c. 3.
mancandogli la perizia per distinguere il simulato dal vero. There is extreme
much therefore to be said against him, that he had not Prudence more
accommodated to the Circumstances of the Times, and one would have been glad if
his Zeal had been accompanied with less indiscretion, ha fatto in lui
desiderare maggior prudenza e circonspezione un zelo non affatto discreto. l.
2. c. 7.
He acknowledged too sincerely the truth of the Abuses which had reigned in the
Court of Rome, under those who had immediately gone before him in the Popedom,
il vituperar si agramente i prossimi antecessori. l. 2. c. 7.


Adrian VI thinking therefore seriously upon Reformation of the Court of Rome,
it seemed to him in the first place, that he ought to retrench the Revenue of
the Datary, and those Fees that were exacted for the Expedition of Bulls and
other Graces which were granted at Rome; but as he knew not the sage Lessons of
Experience, and the judicious reasoning which she furnishes her Disciples
withal, questi discorsi somministrati dal magisterio sapientissimo dell
esperienza. The good man did not see that those Designs so zealous were no
other but abstracted Idea's, pretty indeed to contemplate; but that yet the
form of them had not any agreement with the dispositions of their Matter, l. 2.
c. 6.
che i suoi zelanti dissegni erano idee astratte, bellissime a contemplarsi, ma
non form proporzionate all condizioni della materia.

It Is the most essential point of all Policy, to discern if the form be
proportionate to the dispositions of the matter, that is to say, if Laws carry
an agreeableness to the gust and inclinations of People for Times, Places, and
other necessary Circumstances.

Here is for example, a Maxim of Cheregat, Adrian's Nuncio at the Diet of
Nuremberg, that evil ought not to be admitted that good may come thereof, l. 2.
c. 8.
non doversi tolerare i mali affinche ne vengan i beni. This Maxim taken thus
universally, is not true; it appears by the permission that is given to lewd
women to exercise their commerce in quiet, without any bodies being suffered to
trouble them, l. 2. c. 8.
come si vide nella permissione delle meretrici: In effect, this Maxim is not
true, but in case where the permission of some ill would cause a greater ill
than would come by punishing it; but on the contrary, when one is willing to
stop an evil, and a greater would come of it, assuredly one ought to tolerate
it; so that one of the most important points of Religious Policy is to discern
between the evils of the Abuses, which ought to be quashed, from those which
ought to be suffered; as for example, dishonest and lewd women are suffered by
the Rules of the fleshly Religious Policy. But as in occasions, where things
seeming alike are to be deliberated, men's sentiments differ, and they are
fertile in apparent Reasons of one side and the other, l. 9. c. 10.
le deliberazioni umane sono fertili d'apparenti raggioni per ogni part. So
the most important point of all the fleshly Religious Policy is to know in whom
the Supreme Authority to govern the Church, ought to reside, and what Rules
ought to be followed, that one be not deceived in making a judgment, and too,
that the Church be more happily governed according to the Flesh. Our Cardinal
maintains that above all, one should have a care of those zealous persons,
person zelanti, but without experience of civil affairs, and the politic
course of the present world, ma inesperte negle affari civili e nel corso del
present mondo politico: such as Pope Adrian the VI. was. A Pope like unto him,
that forgot Flesh and Blood, is not fit for this kind of discernment. Heed must
also be taken of a Policy simple, sincere, and without mask, as was his, which
had not been refined in any famous Court, such as be those of Italy, l. 8. c.
17.
senz' affinarsi nell'excellente scuola della frequenza.

As this is a point of the utmost import, so ought the general Maxims of those
zealous Spirits to be related, that a man may keep from them as a pernicious
poison of the public Tranquillity, l. 17. c. 14.
concetti stravaganti veleni della publica tranquilita.

CHAP. II.
ARTICLE I. Five Errors and poisoned Maxims of the scrupulous Policy of the
zealous Ignorants according to the Flesh.
THe first pernicious Error of the zealous Ignorants is, to pretend that one
should live in the Church as one ought to live according to God, and that the
Laws of the Church were regulated and formed by that Principle.

The contrary Maxim is, that the Laws of the Church ought to guide men
according to the Flesh, and commodiously having regard to the corrupt
inclinations of their Nature.

The Second pernicious Error is, That that which is best to be done, is best
also to be commanded.

The opposite Maxim is, That the best to be commanded, is that which can be
done commodiously according to the Flesh, and not that which should be the best
to be done according to God.

The Third pernicious Error of the zealous Ignorants is, That the Church ought
to be governed according to the Rules of Antiquity.

The opposite Maxim is. That the Church ought not to be governed according to
the Rules of Antiquity.

The Fourth pernicious Error is, That the Church ought to he governed by the
way of Councils.

The opposite Maxim is, That the Church ought not to be governed by the way of
Councils.

The fifth Error is, That the Church ought to be governed by every Bishop in
particular, according to the portion of the Episcopacy fallen to him, which
makes in all the Bishops but one and the same Unity of Episcopacy in solidum.

The Fifth opposite Maxim is, That this Opinion is seditious, and that the
Church ought to be governed by one only Bishop, King and Monarch of all others.

It Is true, quoth the Cardinal, if one would take the measure of Good from the
Idea of what it ought to be, the Church in the condition wherein we see her,
would appear most dreadfully deformed, Introd. c. 8.
vero e che se vogliamo prendere la misura del bueno dall'idea di quello che
doverebbe essere, la difformita ^^nza dubio rimane grandissima.

Now it is from the Idea of what ought to be, that the Zealous take the
measures of their Policy, and they would fain have Laws made to oblige the
Church to live as it ought, to live; for example, that Charity should be
regulated by that which Gods Love requires, and as the hope or fear of an
eternity of Heaven or Hell requires, Introd. c. 8.
dacio che merita un Dio, e un eternita di paradiso o d'inferno.

They will not by any means that things should rather be regulated according to
that, which one man can in reason no more but expect in the times wherein we
are, who are as it were, the Dregs of Adam's corruption, where our Republic to
be governed, is not composed of any that be perfect, but of so many Millions of
the imperfect Believing of the old and new world, Ibid.
e non piu tosto da quello che puo sperarsi in questa feccia d'Adamo.

The true Religious Policy, according to this Cardinal, does lay it then for a
general Maxim, that for to make Laws, one should be guided by the disposition
of the people, who being imperfect, ought to be regulated according as God and
Nature has set them into the world in these our times, l. 9. c. 9.
dovendo governare gli huomini quali Iddio e la natura gli producono al mondo;
and a Form must be proposed proportionate to the dispositions of the Matter;
that is to say, propose Laws accommodated to peoples humors, and not introduce
Idea's founded upon what ought to be, having relation to God, digne Deo, as S.
Paul speaks; From hence this Cardinal leaves it to be concluded, that the Laws
of the Church ought not to be such as they should be: for example, if one were
obliged to love God by an Act of Love, as a Divine Virtue; if one were obliged
to tend to the perfection of that Love, if one were cursed, doing the work of
the Lord negligently. Intr. l. 10.
This is ignorant Folks Zeal, zelo imperito d'alcuni, to confound what is best
to be done, with what is best to be ordained, as if one was the other, Ibid.
che confondono l'ottimo a farsi con l'ottimo a commandarsi, not perceiving
that Laws are then worst when they prescribe what is most excellent, that is to
say, a perfection impossible, l. 1. c. 25.
le leggi tal ora son' pessime quando prescrivono l'ottimo, cio e una perfezion
inosservabile.

Thus to make Laws according to the true carnal Policy, one must take great
care if one would bring it to good, to cause that they be observed, Intr. c. 10.
che poi success, looking out first to see if there be any likelihood of
success in the Reformation pretended, riformation riuscibile; for on the
contrary, if Laws be made where there is no appearance, they will bring in the
Reformation proposed, those Laws become a poison in the Policy. It Is important
then that one be instructed how to take well his measures to make Church-Laws,
that the success thereof may be infallible; for one ought not to imagine with
the Zealous Ignorants, that Antiquity must be followed, l. 21. c. 6.
Vsaronsi per l'antichi tempi, adunque deonsi rimettere in uso. Antiquity ought
not to serve for a rule to the present Church, neither ought she to be governed
by Councils and Bishops assembled: on the contrary, there is no conjunction of
Stars whose influence can be more perilous to the Church than that of Councils
is; l. 16. c. 10.
non si puo imaginar congiunzione di piu pericolosainfluenza che un synodo
generale.

The Church ought not to be governed by Bishops, every one according to his
share of Episcopacy, as if it were all but one Episcopacy in it self common to
the Bishops and the Pope; it is a seditious Doctrine to pretend this solidity,
Ibid.
quella sediz sosa dottrina. This Cardinal busies himself in the following
course of his History, to confute these Errors, and to establish the opposite
Maxims to purge the poison of these Errors out of the Religious Policy of the
Church; and he concludes very well from thence, the necessity of a Monarch,
that may be the Head of the Church, Emperor and King of the whole Universe, who
is as the Soul and the Form of the Church, to inform it, animate it, and direct
it, according to the Laws of true Policy, which is that according to the Flesh,
secondo la carne.

ARTICLE II. The first Error of the Zealous Ignorants refuted: which is, That
by the Laws of the Church, men ought to be obliged to live as God's Love
requires, and the Hope of Paradise, and the Fear of Hell; there ought to be
grateful Laws made, and commodious for corrupted Nature.
LAws are corrected and change according as they are approved by the People who
make the trial of them, l. 23. c. 11.
non e stato may al mondo alcun senato ne sacro ne profano le cui leggi non
habbiano in qualche part ricevuta la correzzione dalla proua.

Wherefore, though even one should have hope enough of success, yet before Laws
be stablished, it is prudence first to try and see what may be grateful to the
generality of the World, in case ones Laws should take effect, talora e
prudenza il tentare eziandio con dubio dell'evento chio che se riuscisse
sarebbe grato al commune. Ibid.


So that the Rule to be given for making of Laws, is the disposition of the
people to receive them; otherwise if they be not grateful to them, it would be
Ignorance and indiscreet Zeal to offer violence to corrupted Nature.

Now to judge of the inclinations of people, we ought not to consider those
which they would have had if their nature had remained sound, but those which
they have, their nature being corrupted by Adam's sin, in questa feccia
d'Adamo. Introd. c. 8.
For God will not tear out of our hearts those inclinations we brought into the
world when we were born, l. 1. c. 25.
non vuole Iddio sveller da gli animi le innate inclinazioni; for example, men
in the corruption of their nature, have a dread of Poverty and of taking pains,
which does accompany Poverty, the poor being forced to labor to get their
living; men in their corrupt state love Idleness, the dread then that they have
of poverty, l. 9. c. 9.
ought to be kept up in the spirits of men, in tal'manniera si mantiene
l'horrore verso la poverta come compagna dello stento.

Look ye, here is the inclination that the Religious Policy according to the
Flesh, ought for to nourish, whence one ought to conclude, that Riches making
one part of man's Felicity, it is a sin not to seek to enrich ones self. Likewise
corrupted Nature is ashamed of Poverty, she finds it a shameful thing; this
thought makes one afraid, either for ones self, or for ones posterity, Ibid.
turpis egestas, temuta da lui o in se stesso o nella discendenza; what should
Religious Policy according to the Flesh then do? should it disabuse men of
these thoughts? No, on the contrary, it ought to cherish these thoughts, going
along after them, and accommodating Laws thereunto; This is the very Cardinal's
consequence. If one would seek the reason of it, it is visible there can be no
other but that corrupted nature in pursuance of this same horror, this same
shame, and this same dread of Poverty will seek for to enrich it self, and such
seeking is a great virtue; for that every Act that serves to a man's Felicity,
is an act of Virtue; so that corrupted Nature will shun Idleness, which is a
sin contrary to the carnal Felicity of the Christian Republik, which causes
even the rich to fall into poverty, which is opposite to their Felicity;
whereas, if Religion on the contrary, should teach people that labor and
pains-taking, far off from being dreaded, is a thing enjoined, even to be done
by the rich, that poverty, far off from being a state of it self shameful, is
the first of the Christian Beatitudes, as our Lord has preached in his Gospel;
this same Belief would at least render the man indifferent, both in regard of
Riches and of Poverty, and falling into poverty, he would believe himself happy
in that state of Humiliation that Jesus Christ chose for himself; so that fear,
horror and shame would not oblige him any more to labor to shun poverty, and
get riches; that Christian and Spiritual indifferency would make him less eager
to work, as well as to get more quiet, and less careful of the Morrow, which
would not be profitable for the carnal Felicity of the Christian Republic, nor
by consequence, conformable to Virtue.

The same would come to pass, if the greatest portion of the Goods of the
Church were employed for relief of the poor, and not to enrich Priests and
Churchmen; for what a thing would that be, that Nature-corrupted-men, as the
poor be as well as others, should find, when they came to be poor, such great
Estates and abundance settled upon them? l. 9. c. 9.
che charebbe quando vedessero una provisione abondante e sicura per tutti i
poveri. This supposed then, pursuant to the inclinations of Nature corrupted,
shall the Religious and Carnal Policy, which is the true, establish for Law,
that the best and biggest portion of Church, Revenues be employed for relief of
the poor? Nay but to enrich Churchmen, and make their Felicity according to
the Flesh.

If the Zealous maintain, that the best and biggest share of Ecclesiastical
Revenues ought to be employed for relief of the poor, Ibid.
che la prima e principal part delle Ecclesiastiche entrate doverebbe
applicarsi a poveri e non a ministranti, the Religious and Carnal Policy will
condemn that Maxim as directly contrary to the happy estate of that Republic,
Ibid.
to the Institution of God and of Nature, ed io affermo che cio sarebbe un
costume dirimpetto contrario al felice stato della republica ed a gl'istituti
di Dio e della natura.

So too corrupted Nature loves Voluptuousness, yea and she invites men to all
their Actions by the Motive of some pleasure; as for example, to eat and drink,
to the end to taste what is delicious in those Aliments, l. 9. c. 9.
la natura medesima c'ensigno questa prudenza invitando gli huomini a mantener
la propria vita col diletto del cibo.

Corrupted Nature hates all that is less commodious and less delectable than
that which she is wont to taste or enjoy in the life one uses to lead, Intr. c.
10.
all'orecchie loro suonera, sempre molesta la vita men' commoda e man
dilettevole della passata; and this affection is so natural to man, that one
may observe it practiced even in Communities the most mortified and holy, Ibid.
e questo affetto e si natural dell'huomo che suole sperimentarsi in ogni
communita eziandio piu mortificata e piu santa. What shall the Religious and
Carnal Policy do then? Shall it root out those inclinations of corrupted Nature
to pleasure? God does not will it. l. 1. c. 25.
Non vuole Iddio svellere dagli animi le innate inclinazioni. Shall it teach a
man that he is obliged in usage of things to have no more but what is precisely
necessary for him to do a virtuous action, and not to do that virtuous action
by the alone Motive to find pleasure therein according to carnal sense? It Is
visible, that if Christian Religion should establish these Maxims, Christians
Lives would be a continual Mortification, and all that eagerness which makes
men bustle to advance themselves, enrich themselves, and enjoy humane Felicity
according to the Flesh, would be deadned. This would be the ruin of our Carnal
Policy, which is the most excellent of all Moral Virtues, whose Object is
carnal Felicity, Riches, Honors and Voluptuousness, what ought this Religious
Policy then to do? See ye here what it ought to do according to our Cardinal.
The Heathen they set before corrupt Nature Voluptuousness, which nourishes
Vices, which are ever linked to Idolatry; the Church ought to set before
Christians such pleasures as may serve for remedy against Idolatry; and as
pleasure for pleasure, if it were equal on both sides; so corrupted is Nature,
that she would prefer Idolatry before the Worship of the true God. The Church
ought in such sort to deal, that in the voluptuousness which she presents to
the people, there may be more and greater Dainties, and of that which tickles
the Appetite and Senses, than in that which is tasted out of her Communion,
that the pleasure may be greater in what she makes use of to cure Vices, than
in any voluptuousness which Paganism or Heresy can make use of to nourish
them, ed e conform non solo alla pieta, l. 1. c. 23.
ma eziando alla politica, il far che i teatri piu sontuosi e piu dilettevoli
sian quelli dove il vizio si medica, non dove si nutre; for example, quoth
Nuntio Alexander, the People will have Stage Plays and Sights, they love the
pleasure thereof, vuole il populo i teatri, shall the Church then make Laws
against Stage Plays, Comedies, and the love of Pleasure? No, she will
accommodate her self to that natural inclination of the people, and bring it so
to pass, that there shall be more pleasure in the Shows she sets forth for
Christians, than ever were in the Pagan Shows: Here is that called true
Religious Policy according to the Flesh, to cure the love of Pleasure by
bestowing more carnal pleasure upon a man within the Church, than one should
have had remaining out of its Communion. This is the Religious Policy that
Jesus Christ came to establish in his Church, quoth this our Cardinal, to
signalize his people upon Earth by the Prerogatives of their pleasures, questo
governo dissegnato da Christo per signalare in terra con manifesta prerogativa
il suo popolo; l. 1. c. 25,
'twas for the establishing of this Policy that he died. Here look ye, the
felicity and common Good of the Church according to the Flesh, is the Object of
this Virtue; the first and most excellent of all the moral Virtues. It Is
through this Religious Policy, that the Church, of her great Revenues, of her
Honors, and of her carnal Pleasures, even makes the vocation of all men to her
Faith, and a vocation to the Clergy-ship of as many as she pleases to call it,
as shall be seen by and by. Instead of amusing her self to make Laws contrary
to the esteem of Riches, of Honors, and of carnal Pleasures, she establishes
that Maxim of true worldly Policy, to guide men according to the Inclinations
of their Natures, dovendo governare gli huomini, l. 9. c. 9.
quali Iddio e la natura gli producono al mondo; for God and Nature bringing
them forth such as they be, there is no more to do, but so for to govern them.

ARTICLE III. The Second Error of the Zealous Ignorants, That the best to be
done, is the best to be commanded; it is better to command that which is
according to Nature, than that which would be better to be done according to
God.
IT would be better to observe the Laws that are made; for Law is a Rule which
in the time it was made, was esteemed the very best to govern well by, la
leg, l. 7. c. 2.
il che vuol'dire la regola riputata la migliore per buon, governo; and the
Zealous Ignorants would have that a general Law, which enjoins the observation
of the Laws already made, because it is the best thing that can be done. This
was also one of the Demands which the French Ambassadors made at the Council of
Trent, to wit, That that, and former Councils Orders might exactly be observed
without being infringed by Dispensations: This was a request, quoth the
Cardinal, that tended to no less than to undermine the Churches Monarchy, l.
19. c. 11.
che le costitutioni fat da Concilii non cadessero sotto dispensazioni, la
qual domanda tendeua ad abbattere la Monarchia. This in effect, was the 28th of
the 34 Articles of Reformation, which the Ambassadors proposed to the Council;
That there might be no dispensing with the Canons which forbid Marriage within
the Degrees prohibited, unless in favor of Kings and Princes for the public
Good.

It Is very easy to make the Poison of this Error manifest, That what is the
best to be done, is the best to be commanded, whether one considers it in
relation to Divine Laws, that direct the inward affections of the heart, or
whether one considers it in relation to the Humane Laws of the Church, which
can but direct exterior actions, it is wholly throughout pernicious. As for the
inward Affections, God being the great invisible Good of man, it is certain,
that to love him by an act of Love, as a Virtue Divine, would be the best; as
also to set ones affection more upon that invisible Good, than upon that which
is seen; but is it best to say, that God has thus commanded it? No, because
that that Command would not be accommodate to the condition of the most part of
men which are within the Church, who set their affections more upon what is
seen, l. 9. c. 9.
than upon what is not seen, molti maggiormente i s' affezzionano a quel che si
vede che a quel che si creed. This same Law of Love would not be grateful to
them, being corrupt as they are. Likewise to be willing and endeavor to arrive
to a perfect actual Love of God, would assuredly be best; but would it be best
to preach that men are thereunto obliged by Commandment? No, without doubt, by
the same reason of this same Cardinal: so, to say, that he which does the work
of God negligently is cursed; one sees clearly the venom of such like Doctrine,
and how many persons it would cast into despair; here is what regards the Divine
Laws, which regulate the motions and affections of the inward man.

As to the humane Laws of the Church, which can regulate but outward actions,
suppose one should make a Law obliging Christians to observe all the Canons
indistinctly, as the Council of Trent has done, in these terms, Sciant
Vniversi sacratissimos Canones exact ab omnibus and quoad ejus fieri poterit,
indistincte observandos; Sess. 25. c. 18. There is no doubt but it is best to
observe all the Canons; but is it best to command it? No, because that that Law
would take away from the Princes of the Church the power to derogate from those
Canons, and to show favor therein to those whom they should judge fit, l. 7.
c. 2.
derogando per ordinario alla lege; prima de due qualita che massimamente son'
bramate del principe: Now to derogate from Canons or Laws, in favor of those
which one would gratify, is the prime of those two Qualities desirable in a
Prince, and this ability is one of the most effectual that he can have: to
vitiate and ruin this Quality, by taking that power from him, is most
pernicious, il pessimo suole essere una corruzione dell'ottimo; so that it is
also manifest in this respect, that it is a most pernicious Error, That the
best to be done, is the best to be commanded.

This may be remarked in the Laws made by the Council of Trent; for if the Pope
should observe them, and not show favor when he judges it fit, the Spring of
at least half his Graces and Benefits would be at a stop, Intr. c. 10.
se'l Papa vuol'osservare quelle leggi, il font della sua benefizenza
asoiugasi per meta.

Now the power to do good, is one of the two Hinges whereupon Veneration for
Powers moves and is upheld, l. 23. c. 3.
la facolta di benefacere e un de' due cardini sopra cui sostiensi la
venerazione de Principati,

The respect that men have for Princes, is the firmest Basis of their Empire
and of their Authority, quella venerazione ch' e la base del loro Imperio. The
Popes Authority is the Groundwork of the Church and of its Government
according to the Flesh, as according to the Spirit, l. 1. c. 25.
del qual governo la base e l'authorita del Pontefice.

So to follow the order of all these Truths, and to conclude from first to
last, it is manifest, that to lay this Maxim, that the best to be done, is also
the best to be commanded, is to lay a Principle that destroys the foundation
of the Church; and see here of what importance it is to disabuse humane
understanding concerning the false Maxims of Zealous Ignorant men's Policy,
Vulgar Souls, Slaves of Common Opinion.

That which is the best to be done, is desirable, must be agreed, but more
desirable than possible, l. 19. c. 11.
piu desiderabili che possibili. It is more desirable than commodious for men's
conditions; Nature it self has a regard to what is convenient for the state of
men, and avoids that which is not suitable for them according to Tempers and
Times wherein one is, and with whom one lives, non adattate all condizioni
degli huomini come fa la natura ed allo stato del mondo che portavano i tempi.
Ibid.


It Is then very evident that the Laws of the Church ought to be grateful and
accommodated to the inclinations of corrupt Natures, such as they are, and not
such as they ought to be with relation to God. To well govern the Church, there
needs but to observe how the present times go, and after what fashion men live;
for if the Law has man for its Object, and as it were its Matter, yet he also
is as it were Agent, in regard of the Law, and upholds himself in all the
inclinations which he has brought into the world, and in all the habitudes
wherein he has been engaged, l. 6. c. 4.
i quali hanno per attori e per soggetto gli huomini che sono di fatto al mondo
e con l'inclinazioni e con l'usanza che di fatto hanno. This is a reason why
Right must be regulated by Fact, and not Fact by Right: Right is immovable in
its nature, and he that would stay there, should never do any thing; and this
is again one of the pernicious Errors of the Zealous Ignorants which we are a
going to refute.

ARTICLE IV. The Third Error of the Zealous Ignorants; That Antiquity ought to
serve for a Rule to guide the present Church; This Error comes from the
Instinct of the Devil; it is a folly to believe, that what is Ancient is best;
the ancient Laws were in the Churches Infancy.
THe Reverend Father Diego Lainer, in that Famous Discourse which he made in
the Council of Trent, touching the Reformation of the Church, l. 18 c. 15.
voto famoso, speaking of re-establishing Elections according to the ancient
manner practiced in the Church, says, That they which would renew those Usages,
and other like ancient Customs, l. 21. c. 6.
were moved thereunto by the instinct of the Devil, Coloro che volev^no
rinovare tali usi antichi muoversi per l'instinto del diavolo. That the French
were instant to have that old Usage re-established, but he doubted the miseries
of that Kingdom were a chastisement from God upon that Nation, for having in
some sort separated themselves since the time of the Council of Basil, dubitar
egli de Francesi come di tali che forse erano gastigati da Dio ne' presenti
infortunii per qualche loro separazione fin dal tempo di Concilio di Basilea.
Their Reason, l. 21. c. 6.
quoth he, is, that it was wont to be thus done in the first Ages of the
Church, so that those Elections ought to be brought into use again, Ibid.
vsaronsi per gli antichi tempi adunque deonsi rimettere in usu: And I, replies
that Father, say the contrary; it has been wont to be so used, therefore one
ought not to set it up again, piu tosto seguirne il contrario. This is the
reason of it; since it was wont to be so used, it had never been left off, if
there had not been inconveniences observed; in that Custom such there were
observed to be in it, and for that reason it was left off, Ibid.
and by the same reason it ought not to be revived, percioche s'erano
sperimentati loro inconvenienti e pero elle dimesse.

For why would the Church have quitted her ancient Customs of discipline, if
she had not perceived that Discipline followed with inconveniences? Is the
World at this day less wise than it was at the beginning; it would be a great
folly to believe it.

It Is in effect a great one, quoth this our Cardinal, to imagine that all that
is old is best, l. 23. c. 10.
e gran' folia il credere che tutto l'antico fosse megliore del moderno. The
Church had its Infancy, l. 8. c. 17.
infanzia per cosi dire della chiesa, in that time she was little, and the
number of the Faithful was not great, as since the believing persons are
become, Ibid.
quando il numero de' fedeli non era ancora ben cresciuto. Now, that which is
thought, and that which is done in Childhood, has not the advantages that Age
is wont for to bring; so that that which is ancient now, is but that which was
thought and done when the World was but young, and as one may say, l. 23. c. 10.
a Child; l'antico era pensato e fatto del mondo ancora moderno: but that which
is new, is done and thought in the World's ripe and full-grown Age, Ibid.
e per contrario il moderno, del mondo gia divenuto antico: So that it is an
Error which would fain set up again the ancient Customs of the Church, and of
her Discipline, such as were in the Apostles times, and in the first Ages:
It Is, as one may say, to make the Church fall back again into Childhood,
nell'infanzia della chiesa. Now is there any man grown up to years, that would
fain be for the Teat again, to live as he did when he was a Child? l. 1. c. 25.
ne il giovane potrebbe tornare al vitto che uso bambino. Is it not ridiculous
then to think the same may be done in a Body Politic, as that of the Church
is? Ibid.
cosi parimente accade ne' corpi politici. So that the present Policy of the
Church ought to be regulated, not upon that which the ancient Popes did
heretofore, but upon that which in likelihood may be brought to pass in the
present state wherein she is, l. 1. c. 25.
misuriamo quel che puo riuscire secondo il present stato del Christianesimo,
non quel che i Pontefici hanno fatto altre volte.

ARTICLE V. The Simplicity of the Ancient Councils opposed to the Courtliness
and Regal, which the Legates Presidents at the Council of Trent showed toward
Philip II. To go about to re-establish the Ancient Simplicity, is to put men
again to live upon Acorns. The Change that is made in the World, is not for the
worse.
'TWould be a ridiculous Blindness, and an Extravagancy never to be justified,
if it should be proposed to retain the Wonts and Ancient Simplicity of the
Church in its Councils, l. 6. c. 4.
onde saria schiocchezza derisa ritener lo style de l'antica simplicita
nell'Ecclesiastiche radunanze: For as in the Councils of our Times, the
greatest Princes of the Earth have concernments, and are therein interessed,
Ibid.
di cui sono partecipi i maggiori principi della terra; Should it be a vanity
blameable and criminal to use a little of it, as the Legates of the Council of
Trent did toward Philip the Second, when he passed through that Town, to go
into Spain, and he was there magnificently regaled by those Presidents of the
Council; As for me, quoth our Cardinal, I do not believe I can be taxed of
vanity, if I recite in my History the Ceremonies of that Feast, ne par mi
dannabile di vanita il narrar le ceremony che vi seguirono. l. 11. c. 13.
For after many other Feasts in the Honor of that Monarch, the Legates caused
to be erected 300 paces from the Town, in a little Isle upon the River of
Adige, a Palace of excellent woodwork, hung within with rich Tapestry, adorned
with Painting and excellent Statues: In this place they gave him a most
magnificent Feast, accompanied with charming Music; at the end of the Meal,
according to the custom of Germany, began the Ball; the Prince danced there,
and the Ball was followed with diverse Tiltings and Plays; where were
represented the principal Feats of Chivalry described in Ariosto, whose Poem
came forth a little while after, Ibid.
seguirono le danze, eve ballo il principe stesso. There was never seen the
like in the Times and Places of the ancient Councils. Did Constantine dance and
lead the Ball at the Council of Nice? Theodosius at the first of
Constantinople, etc. What appearance mean while or likelihood should there be to
make the Church at this day go back again to that Ancient Simplicity, and
hinder Princes, for example, from leading the Ball at Councils? I shall be
asked perhaps, quoth Alexander, Nuntio of Pope Leo the 10th, in the Diet of
Worms: But did they live so in the first Age? l. 1. c. 25.
Come si viveva ne' primi secoli? I shall answer, quoth he, that by the same
Reasoning one might undertake to persuade men to live upon Acorns; because they
say, that in the primitive times of the World, men made their Meals thereof,
Ibid.
ma con questa forma d'argomentare si potrebbono ridurre gli huomini a cibarsi
di ghiande, perch liggiamo che cosi negli antichi tempe si viveva.

By the same reason, continued the Nuntio, one might undertake to persuade
Princes to live like the first Founders of States, without Guards about their
Persons, without Anti-Chambers in their Palaces, i Principi a star senza
guardie, Ibid.
senza anticamere; one might exhort Princesses and their Daughters to wash
Boucks, and in Soap; to spin and sew, as whil'om did Augustus his Daughters,
with their Mother; that Master of the World not being willing to be clothed
but with the Stuff they had spun with their own hands, Ibid.
le figliuole de' Re a lavar i panni.

But does not one know that Humors change with Age; Ibid.
chi non sa che si come ne' corpi humani si mutano le complessioni e bisogni
secondo l'eta? It would show finely, if one should follow this day in Building,
the Rules of Architecture 400 years ago, l'architettura di quattro cento anni
sono; l. 6. c. 4.
as if a Body should sing, or as if one draw the Images that are adored in our
Churches after the Model of those times, Ibid.
la pittura di quel tempo nell'adorate imagini degli altari, la musica di quel
tempo nell'armonia sacra del coro.

The Maxim then that one ought to oppose to that of the Zealous Ignorants, who
do not know the World, is to tell them in general, Change of Times, change of
Customs, altri tempi, l. 23. c. 10.
altri costumi.

The World being at this day refined, or at least much changed, Civil Commerce
and Policy has also received changes, and it is as by a common consent, that
change in Policy has brought in the same proportionably in treating
Ecclesiastical affairs, l. 6. c. 4.
Essendosi adunque o affinato o almeno mutato il sentimento degli huomini e il
commercio civil, e convenuto che a proporzione di quello si mutino ancora le
maniere di trattar gli affari Ecclesiastici. In good deed, men at present have
their inclinations conform to the present times, and not to the times past: Why
should they not have their Usages and Customs in Ecclesiastical affairs conform
to the present times? and why should they be obliged to follow the old Customs
of their Grandsires? gli huomini con l'inclinazione e con l'usanza che di fatto
hanno, Ibid.
e non qu^lli e non quali fur^no a tempi andati.

Let no body say the World is at present worse than it was formerly; such
Discourse is the old Tune, and the old Proverb of the Country; Introd. c. 8.
these be complaints and lamentations of the Ignorant Vulgar, il dire che'l
mondo present sia peggiore dell'antico, sono proverbii delle comedy e querele
del volgo; to be surpised thereat, is a sign one is but meanly bred, privo di
erudizione che cio credesse. To hearken to these sorts of common Proverbs, is
to have ones mind enslaved, as they call it, with the Opinions of the Vulgar.
It Is not true then, that the later Ages are more corrupt than the former; it is
true, the number of the wicked is increased, but that of the good is so also,
because the Church extends further than it did then: And if any body says, The
Church had formerly more holy men, one may answer again, and say, That at this
day the present Church has a greater number of believing saved Catholics,
though not so holy indeed as formerly, l. 1. c. 25.
se questa piu feconda di santi, quella e piu abondante di salvi.

These Truths being so evident, though the reading of my Book, quoth our
Cardial, produce no other fruit, at least, I assure my self, it will disabuse
the world of these kind of popular Errors, l. 16. c. 10.
Io mi confido che la lezione di questa mia istoria, ove non partorisse altro
frutto, levara uno scandalo assai commune da person zelanti ma inesperte negli
affari civili e nel corso del present mondo politico, cio e perch i Papi non
usino a nostra eta di raunare i concilii come usavasi per altri tempi, come
persuadono i canoni; for the Error of ruling the Church according to Antiquity,
is one of those Errors of the Zealous Ignorant, of the same nature as is that
of Government by way of Councils, whereof we are going to examine the
extravagancy.

ARTICLE VI. The Fourth Error of the Zealous Ignorants refuted; That the Church
ought to be governed by way of Councils, as She was Fifteen Hundred Years
together. The Provincial Councils are hard to assemble; the National have
always been abhorred by the Popes; and the General have none but malign
Influences on the Church.
THe Reverend Father Diego Lainez, in the Famous Discourse he made in the
Council of Trent, upon the Business concerning Reformation of the Church,
speaks thus of Councils; As for Provincial Councils, they cannot be assembled,
but with great difficulties, Sinodi Provinciali congre^herebbonsi
difficilmente. l. 23. c. 10.


But that which ought to make them to be apprehended, is, that they may easily
degenerate into National Councils, which would not be without great peril to
the Church, ma ben si ne seeguerebbono i Nazionali con grave rischio della
chiesa. The Popes also have always abhorred all National Councils, l. 14. c.
12.
Concilio Nazionale sempre aborrito da Pontefici, because that those sort of
Councils are not proper, but to excite Novelties among the Catholics, Ibid.
atto fra Catolici a suscitarne novita.

Now although Novelties, as we have seen, ought not to be rejected, and that
Ancient things are not all good, the Novelties that National Councils may
produce, are all bad; and of all the Ancient Customs, that of having National
Councils ought above all, to be looked upon as ill; and that is a laudable
Novelty no more to call any of them. Now to discern well in Policy, the good
Novelties from the bad, one needs but to observe the Rules which we have
already laid down, to accommodate ones self to Times, Places, Humors of
Persons; in a word, to fit the Form to the Dispositions of the Matter.

But to come back to General Councils, It Is not fit, quoth Father Diego Lainez,
that the precedent Council do set the time when another should follow, as did
the Council of Constance; because that would give advantage to the stubborn to
appeal from the Popes Sentences to the future Council, and that would be to
take away from the Church Obedience and Unity; percie cio sarebbe data
occasion a' contumaci d'appellar delle sentenze del Papa al futuro Concilio,
l. 24. c. 3.
togliendosi l'ubidienza e l'unita del Christianesimo. Moreover, the Influences
of a General Council could be no other but lamentable to the Church, l. 16. c.
10.
nel Cielo mistico della chiesa non si puo imaginar conjunzione di piu
periculosa influenza che un Sinodo generale. It Is with the Mystical Heaven of
the Church as with the Visible and Material Heaven, where God has placed that
great number of Stars which we see, but all far off and separate one from the
other by considerable spaces. If he should assemble them all in the same place,
would it not be to destroy all Nature, and to confound it so in the Heaven
Mystic of the Church? The Prelates are as the Stars, of different greatness;
all would be lost in the times wherein we are, if they were assembled; and it
cannot be undertaken without manifestly tempting of God, Ibid.
sarebbe appunto un tentare Dio. It is good to see the particular Reasons
thereof.

The First Politic Reason against the holding of Councils.
Wherever the greatest Number be assembled, there be many Opinions, as well
as many Heads, and there be always differing Votes and Sentiments, which
produces Division, Intr. c. 10.
Dove sono piu test e piu cuori ivi sempre e qualche discordia di pareri e di
voleri.

Discordance in Sentiments and Councils, is the Origin of Disputes and
Contestations, la discordia e l'origine del contrasto; Intr. c. 10.
and as in the humors of the Body, so in the motions of the Spirit, contrast is
a cause of corruption, Ibid.
e' contrasto cosi negli umori del corpo come dell'animo e origin della
corruzione; Councils then are but a Spring of Divisions.

Reason II.
Every numerous Body of men, how holy and sublime soever the order of them may
be, contains a deal of Ignorance, and is a source abounding with a spawning of
passions, Introd. c. 9.
mi e noto che in ogni ordine numeroso di person benche sacrosanto e sublime,
talora si addensa molta ignoranza ed alligna molta passione. Though they be
Bishops which compose Councils, yea, though the Bishops were Princes of their
Diocesses, though they were Kings thereof. There is a Populace even among
Kings, said the Moral Philosopher very well, Ibid.
e pero ben disse il morale, che si dava il volgo eziandio di Re. Now the more
a Populace assembled is numerous, it is manifest, the more Ignorance, and the
more passion is there.

Reason III.
The Authority which resides in an ordinary and common Bishop, quoth our
Cardinal, is as it were a Tenure or Jurisdiction, holding very much underneath
that which gives the Purple to a man of Quality, l. 20. c. 10.
tal bassezza. d'authorita qual convenisse ad un' ordinario Vescovo e non ad un
nobilissimo porporato. The Popes are Elected by these Eminentissimoes, and are
ordinarily of their number; but those little Bishops are not drawn but out of
the number of poor Priests of some unknown Diocese, and the multitude of them
is infinite, l. 1. c. 25.
una moltitudine immensa di piccioli vescovi eletti non fra un senato di
Cardinalie da un senato di Cardinali, ma da volgari Preti d'un augusto
territorio. Now what good can one hope for from a great troop of Bishops of
this size? Cardinals are bred up in opulence, in the Crowd of the Popes Court,
which is that of the whole World; there they take notice of the businesses of
all the Churches of the Universe; from all parts there is an influence of
Courtiers, all versed in Policy; it is there that men's Wits are refined. But
these Bishoplings are confined with a pitiful Revenue, within the pent up
Territory of their Dicesses, where they are content to snudge, and live
wretchedly, Ibid.
che si contentino di confinarsi con poche rendite in angusto territorio. What
Breeding can be got in this base kind of Education and Living, to make a Bishop
able to argue in a Council upon Politic affairs, which he does not understand,
nor has been ever able to learn, and to give after that rate Laws to the whole
Universe, having no skill in the Worlds, nor the Court-shifts; how can they
avoid being baffled in the public or private Conferences, held in Councils
with Persons, the most refined in Policy in the World, and with whom
nevertheless, Measures and Resolutions must be taken; how should they be able
to do it with any sufficiency, being never any more refined than Pope Adrian
the Sixth was in any Court of Italy, still having kept in the Country, and in
private dwellings, nelle terre particolari, l. 8. c. 17.
senza affinarsi in dottrina ed in senno nell'eccellente scuola della frequenza.

What then can one hope for from such kind of Stuff assembled in Council, but
that they will be hurried away through Passions, and gross Ignorance, and
Inconsideration, which is not meet for Legislators, gli affetti particolari si
muovono talora da un solo sguardo inconsiderato. Intr. c. 9.


Reason IV.
A multitude of petty Prelates without experience how to govern people, can but
produce a like multitude of Sentiments, little regular, and Projects likely to
trouble the Church, Intr. c. 10.
in una moltitudine di person per lo piu non esperte del governo de' popoli si
potea dubitare che sorgessero concetti stravaganti e di gran' disturbo al ben
della chiesa: An example thereof was seen even among the Bishops assembled at
the Council of Trent, vescovi raunati in Trento, l. 5. c. 25.
i piu di loro inesperti degli affari mondano... l. 6. c. 7.
i vescovi chi per imperizia di maneggio, chi per discrezione di zelo, etc.

Is it not much to be feared lest the Whimsey should take these petty Prelates
to decide once more again, as it was done at the Council of Basil, That a
Council is above the Pope? Intr. c. 10.
Era da temersi che non si resuscitasse la fastidiosa disputazione della
maggioranza tra il Concilio e' l Pontifice. Who does not see what trouble such
a Decision would bring upon the Church? It Is an Opinion held erroneous at Rome,
and condemned by a multitude of Divines and Canonists; l. 9. c. 16.
in Roma si tien per dottrina erronea e condannata dal torrente de' Theologi e
de' Canonisti.

Reason V.
What can be expected from a Council, but that which is called Reformation? Now
it is certain, that alone the very word Reformation will sound always ill, I do
not say, only to the Ears of Church-Courtiers, but even to Communities the most
mortified and holy, Ibid.
a l'orrechie suonera sempre molesto il vocabulo di reformazione, a questo
affetto e si natural del huomo che suole sperementarsi in ogni communita
eziandio piu mortificata e piu santa. The Sentiment is natural; Reformation is
not beloved for what is meant by Reformation, but a life more strict, and less
commodious, a life less pleasing than that which one led before, l. 9. c. 16.
il vocabolo di riformazione cio e di nuove strettezze, di nuove proibizioni,
di vita men commoda, men dilettevole della passata; Now who is it that loves to
have his pleasures retrenched? and who can be certain whether or no the Council
may not drive on their Project of Reformation into Idea's impossible, and
without any likelihood? Ibid.
quella riformazione ideale non riuscibile.

Reason VI.
Every Multitude falls into the one or the other vicious Extreme; to err either
by excess of animosity, or through lack of Courage, Intr. p. 10.
e solito d'ogni moltitudine dar negli estremi o di pusillanimita o
d'animosita, such was the disposition of the Bishops Assembled in the Council
of Trent, l. 5. c. 15.
come suole ia moltitudine congregata, hauean concetti guaillardi; It Is known
how much a very small Wit can attribute to himself, and take upon him in every
Punctilio of power and authority, when he believes himself mounted to that
degree of honor, as to give Laws to the Church; l. 21. c. 5.
sapendo quanto s' aroghi ogni cervello l'habilta di fare statuti. l. 7. c. 2.
... misurando essi pretenzioni con l'eminenza del posto nel qual vedeansi
constituti in quel senato. When a whole Assembly then goes too far and exceeds,
it fails not to make Laws too violent, and too full of rigor. So Pope Pius the
IV, in the Instructions he sent to his Legates, compared the Bishops of the
Council of Trent to Headstrong Coach-horses, ready to run away with the Coach;
whom one ought not to check and hold in with ones utmost and direct force, l.
9. c. 10.
lest they break all apieces, essersi gli animi tanto infiammati nella
carriera, che il ritenerli sarebbe stato con quel rischio di rottura e de
sinistro col quale si tenta di subito fermare una carozza tratta da cavalli che
volino. He took all manner of care that the Council should not make any such
escape, as to make him work, Ibid.
cerco ben talora che non se ne facesse qualchucna troppo guaillarda... nel che
soglion peccar le comminuta e massime le nuove.

Reason VII.
It Is a very common Proverb, That one must do good to Children and Commonalties
whether they will or no, l. 17. c. 10.
a fanciulli ed a communi, convien fare il been contra lor voglia.

The People whereof every Commonalty and every Assembly is composed, are not
able to govern themselves, otherwise they would never have been such Fools, as
of their own selves to set up upon their own heads Masters to domineer over
them, and they to submit under them, Ibid.
se i popolo sapessero e potessero governarsi da se, non sarebbono stati si
folli che havessero sopraposti i dominanti. Now how should one suffer those
that are not capable to govern themselves, give Laws to others and govern them?

Reason VIII.
It Is well knowh what power Hope and Fear have upon the Spirits of men; now the
Bishops commonly being Temporal Princes Subjects, how can they be free from
those humane respects? l. 23. c. 3.
sarebbon piu valenti i respetti del timore delle speranze e degli altri
affetti che null Pontefice, si per la sua grandezza, si per la sua lontananza;
and in effect, when Pope Pius IV was reproached, That he did not leave to the
Bishops of the Council of Trent their liberty: He cleared himself thereof no
otherwise but this fashion; That their Kings and other Princes left them less
of it than he; so that their servitude was undoubted, and the business was no
more but to choose which Master they ought to serve.

Reason IX.
To verify this shameful Servitude, it may be sufficient to relate some
Examples of what passed in the Council of Trent.

1. Martel Vescovo Fiesolano having complained, That by reason of the Pensions
imposed on their Bishoprics, and of the Privileges granted to the Religious
Orders, there remained to the Prelates but only the vain Name of Bishop, l. 7.
c. 4.
non restar ad essi quasi altro che nome vano di vescovi; Cardinal Farneze
answered on behalf of the Pope, That as to the impertinencies of the Bishop of
Fiesole, his Holiness found it good not to proceed against him otherwise than
by reproof and remonstrance, Ibid.
quanto all'impertinenza del vescovo di Fiesole, sua Santita approva non
proceder che di riprensione verbale: So that the Cardinal del Monte, first
Legate, having a passion to mortify that Bishop, bramoso di mortificarlo,
interrogated him publicly, Whether he persisted to say, That Bishops did hold
upon Earth the place of Jesus Christ? s'egli teneva come pur haveva affermato,
che i vescovi sostenessero la voce di Christo in terre? Whereupon, he was fain
to explain himself, lest his Proposition should be qualified more rudely than
with Impertinence; which, quoth our Cardinal-Historian, makes appear the
Legates and the Popes moderation, Ibid.
accio che apparisca la moderazione si de' Legati come del Papa.

2. So were the Bishops of Cadix and della Cava served also; their Discourses
were termed impertinent, because they had said, they reckoned they were not
answerable for their Sentiments to the Cardinal of Lorrain, da Legati, dal
Visconti, e dal Cardinal Borromeo, furon chiamate impertinenti.

3. The poor Bishop of Aliste, being willing to hold at a second Sitting, That
Bishops were instituted Bishops by Jesus Christ, drew upon him the ill humor of
Cardinal Simonetta, who told him in full Council, You are insolent, let others
speak, l. 19. c. 5.
onde il Cardinal Simonetta gli disse ch'egli era insolente e che desse ormai
luogo di parlare a gli altri.

4. The Bishop of Budoa, speaking his Sense, alleged those Words of the Wise
man, All is Vanity; the Legates did not believe that they were alleged on that
occasion, seriously; so they wrote an ignominious Letter against him to the
Pope, una lettera ignominiosa, wherein they called him Ridiculous and Buffoon,
l. 10. c. 2.
gli raccontarono i buffoneschi suoi motti, and the Pope sent them word, that
if they could not reduce him, they should turn him out, and drive him away as
scandalous, Ibid.
il mandassero via espressamente come scandaloso. He that would reckon up all
the trouble that the Popes had to master these kind of Bishops at the Council
of Trent, and the pains the Bishops were at every moment to justify themselves
toward the Popes, when they had spoken either about Residence, or the
Jurisdiction of Bishops, as of Divine Right, or of some other such matter,
would never have done. It Is manifest then, That Councils are neither pleasing
to Popes, nor advantageous, nor desirable for the Bishops, where they are
becall^d Fools, Buffoons, Insolent, Impertinent, Headstrong Coach-Horses, and
useless to the Church.

ARTICLE VII. These Reasons did presently make the Council of Trent dreadful to
the Roman Courtiers. These Reasons hinder Princes also from Assembling the
Estates of their Kingdoms. It would be to tempt God, to be forward to call a
Council: The unprofitableness thereof appears by the little or no Good that
came of the Council of Trent.
I Believe in truth, quoth our Cardinal-Historian, That the Court of Rome
dreaded and abhorred a Council, when that of Trent was proposed to be
Assembled, Intr. c. 10.
io credo veramente che dalla Corte di Roma fosse temuta, ed ancora in qualche
tempe aborrita, la convocazione del Concilio. But though that Court should have
had no dread thereof, Sovereigns have always very much apprehension, when the
business is about the Assembling their General Estates; wherefore they never
call them together, Ibid.
but in case of extreme necessity, sapevano esser regola di tutti principi non
adunare senza extrema necessita gli stati generali; and this makes me conclude,
quoth the Cardinal, that as long as the course of the World is such as it is,
it would be tempting of God to be forward to call a Council, unless out of very
necessity, l. 16. c. 10.
onde fin che il tenor del mondo proceed cosi: il tentarlo, fuor che negli
estremi bisogni, sarebbe appunto un tentare Iddio: Such an Assembly would
threaten Schism and apparent Division, Ibid.
e un far congregazione che minacciasse evidente rischio di convertirsi in
disgregazione della chiesa.

And besides, there would not come thereof any considerable Good; for it is
clear the Reformation established by the Council of Trent, is very moderate,
Intr. c. 10.
quella riformazione sola si moderata e discreta che poi success e che la
prudenza de Padri estimo riuscibile.

Nevertheless, if the Pope should observe strictly this moderate Council, all
would be lost; this troubled Alexander VII, at his coming to the Popedom; for
at that time he was very zealous and desirous to re-establish Discipline, and
retrench Abuses, he called to Council the ablest men of the Dattery, periti
delle facende della Dateria, and speaking to them about the Dispensations for
Marriages within the prohibited Degrees, which were granted so commonly at
Rome, against the express Prohibition of the Council of Trent; he told them, he
wondered much at so frequent a going against the Decisions of the Council,
asking them how it could possibly be that it had so passed into a Custom, l.
23. c. 18.
come passasse questa contrarieta usitata in Roma allo statuto Tridentino; That
so frequent a contravention against the Judgment of that Venerable Assembly,
appeared to him little praiseworthy, pareva poco lodevole che si
frequentemente si repugnasse al giudicio di questa veneranda assemblea. They
answered him, That this Custom began in the time of Pius V, a Pope of a signal
and severe Goodness, and a religious Observer of the Council, and that there
was no other Reason, but that of experience of the Fact, Ibid.
che la ragione di questo discostamento del decreto Sinodale era stata
l'esperienza del fatto. He had seen that from the Decree of the Council of
Trent ensued great and very considerable inconveniences in practice, and
therefore that holy Pope made no difficulty to dispense therewith, even without
having any other cause therefore. Thus the Council of Trent, for all its
Prudence and Moderation, suffered it self to be carried too far away with its
Zeal, and went too far into an Ideal Reformation, whereof mischievous
inconveniences might have followed, if the Prudence of the Popes had not
brought a Cure. What can be hoped for then from all the other Councils wherein
there was never found so much Prudence and Moderation, as appeared in this last
Council?

There be a-many other Articles besides that of Marriage, wherein there is need
that the Pope should give ease against the severity of the Council; for
example, in that which concerns plurality of Benefices, if the Pope should not
still dispense therewith, the Cardinals would have nothing to live on, and the
Court of Rome would turn Desert, l. 12. c. 13.
Senato Romano privo di quelle badie rimanerebbe privo del vitto. One may see
of what importance it is for keeping up the Church, to keep up the Splendour of
the Court of Rome; yet the Council of Trent made no reckoning of it; so that
what can one hope for from any other Council whatsoever?

In fine, The Council of Trent declared, That all the World was obliged to
observe its Canons indistinctly, and that none should be dispensed with, but
when there was urgent and just cause, urgens justaque ratio; and then the
Dispensation should be given freely gratis, otherwise the same should be null:
Aliterque facta dispensatio subreptitia censeatur, Sess. 25. c. 18. But now
these Dispensations are not given gratis at the Court of Rome, where a great
deal is given for them sine causa, without any reason, but that they pretend
that the Money that is gotten thereby, contrary to the Council of Trent, is a
just and pressing consideration for to grant them out, l. 23. c. 8.
Anzi essere in verita gran' cagione per dispensare quella grossa multa che
l'impetrante si contenta di pagar in aiuto de' poveri e dell'opere pie.

It is manifest then that even the Reformation of the Council of Trent would be
Ideal, and of no success, riformazione ideale e non riuscibile, if it were not
judiciously reformed by the Politic Prudence of the Roman Court; so that
nothing is less useful than Councils, and less necessary for governing the
Church.

ARTICLE VIII. The Council of Trent it self has acknowledged, That the way to
govern the Church, is no longer that of Councils; and that the Laws which it
made were submitted to a Superior Authority.
THe best one can say of the Council of Trent, is, That it had the Prudence to
insert in its Decrees beginning and ending, That it meant in all things, that
the Authority of the Apostolic See should remain inviolate, l. 23. c. 3, and 8.
salva in tutto l'autorita della Sede Apostolica. Wherefore, quoth our
Cardinal, I will not quite blame the Fathers of that Council for Decreeing
against Plurality of Benefices, ne per tutto cio si vogliono biasimare i padri
Tridentini; for they had no intention by that Decree, to bind his Supremacies
Hands, whom they had declared all along to be left at full liberty, l. 23. c.
11.
per cio che il decroto non intese d'annodar quelle mani supreme che il
Concilio si nel principio come nel fine delle sue leggi dichiaro di lasciar
disciolte.

But as in all Policy Sacred or Profane, it is the approbation which the People
give unto a Law by their usage thereof, that determines the force and the Merit
of that Law, and when it is doubtful what success it may have, it is prudence to
try first if the greatest number will be pleased therewith, l. 8. c. 11.
e prudenza il tentare ezandio con dubio dell'evento cio che se riuscisse
sarebbe grato al commune: It follows that there must be a Superior Authority to
derogate from the Laws of a Council, or to dispense with them, according as
usage may require therein, or thereabout; and this the Council of Trent has
very well acknowledged, in declaring it meant not in any sort to tie up the
Popes hands; insomuch that through an effect of a singular Policy, though there
should not be so much as one Decree of the Council of Trent observed; yet if
that were so by the Pope's Order, it would be found, That nevertheless the
Decrees of that Council were kept, because he would be obeyed to whom the
Council has left absolute power, which reaches as far as to empower him to
derogate from the Council's Orders. After this fashion is it, that our
Cardinal, maintaining, That the Church ought not to be governed by way of
Councils, and that, That of Trent has upheld the Pope in an Authority over its
own, does defend the Judgment of the whole Christian World Assembled in that
Council; and thus he defends the whole Catholic Church, and this is the Ground
he has to call his Book Diffesa del Sacro Concilio di Trento. Proem.


ARTICLE IX. Refutation of the Zealot's Fifth Error, That Episcopacy is but
one and the same thing in all Bishops: This is a Seditious Opinion, and
destroys the Allness and Soleness of the Monarchy Ecclesiastic.
THe Difference about Episcopacy, is not concerning the Bishop's power of
Order; for that is common to all Bishops, of Divine Right. There be a-many
Catholic Authors, who hold, That the Character of the Bishop's Order differs
not from that of Priests.

The Business is about their Power of Jurisdiction, in governing the Church;
for the Zealous pretend, That all Bishops have received this Jurisdiction in
governing the Church, immediately from Jesus Christ, and that it extends it
self throughout the whole Church in solidum, and that herein Episcopal
Jurisdiction is of Divine Right, as well as the Popes Jurisdiction; it is one
and the same Episcopacy in him, as it is in them; in him, as their Head; in
them, as Head of their inferior Priests, by Divine Right.

If that were so, Seeing the Bishops did never exercise that Power of
Jurisdiction over all the Universal Church, what power was that which Jesus
Christ gave them, which never yet took any effect? This was the Argumenting of
Father Lainez, l. 18. c. 15.
a che valere una sort de giurisdizione come quella ch' e in loro da Christo,
per se medesima affatto impotente e inesercitabile.

Supposing that the Bishops may exercise sometimes this same power in solidum,
l. 6. c. 3.
over the Universal Church, it follows then, That there is no Universal Prince
of the Church; but that she has as many Universal Princes as she has Bishops,
Ibid.
e pero che non fosse un solo Principe di tutta la Chiesa, ma tanti Principi
universali quanti vescovi; so that every Bishop reckoning himself entrusted
with the whole Church in solidum, will attempt as of Divine Right, to govern
the Dioceses of all others, and if that might be, what would become of the
Order and unity of the Church, It Is clear, That if this Opinion had place, and
that Jurisdiction were such in all Bishops, there would not remain any thing
more of the Monarchy and Unity of the Church, and she would be, as it were,
without a Foundation, Ibid.
onde in tal caso non rimanerebbe dove alloggiar sodamente la Monarchia e
l'unita della Chiesa; and by consequence, this Doctrine is quite and clean
seditious, questa sediziosa dottrina. And here follow now the Reasons of the
opposite Doctrine, which is nothing but Peace and Quietness.

Reason I.
If the Bishops have their Jurisdiction of Divine Right, it follows that the
Pope can neither deprive them of it, nor restrain, nor enlarge it for them,
ch'el Papa non potesse loro restrignerla, e cosi ne meno ampliarla; for a
Jurisdiction thus changeable cannot be of Divine Right, l. 18. c. 15.
percio che quella ch'e tale non e variabile della volonta e della potesta
umana. l. 19. c. 6.
Non la potesse ritorre o scemare senza cagione. Notwithstanding this, it is
which the Pope does when he reserves Cases to himself concerning Persons, or
Places, or Affairs, and grants Privileges or Exemptions, or makes Decrees all
without any ground; yet if all those Dispositions were null, what trouble would
be in the Church, sarebbe cosa di grande perturbazione si tali suoi ordini
irragione-voli fosser' nulli. Ibid.
Every Bishop pretending his Jurisdiction of Divine Right, and therefore
unalterable, would pretend also a Right to overlook the Popes Ordinances, and
so impugn them of Nullity, or abuse as often as he pleased, under pretense they
were without cause, Ibid.
gli si potesse muover sempre questione di nullita con allegare il diffetto
della sufficiento cagione. What would become then of blind Obedience, which
alone maintains the Unity of the Church? To withdraw this Obedience from the
Popes Commands, would teach Subjects to withdraw the Obedience they owe to the
Princes of the Earth, l. 1. c. 8.
lo sciorre se stessi dall'ubidienza verso del Paapa ero uno sciorre insieme le
coscienze de Vassali dall'ubidienza verso di qualunque principe.

After this Rate, no Parish Priest would obey his Bishop, when his Orders did
not please him; and this would make the unbenefic'd Priests or Curates rise up
against the Parish Priests, fra poco la medesima pretensione di governo
poliarchico havrebbono i rettori privati co' loro vescovi, i preti simpli ei
co' Rettori; l. 1. c. 25.
thereby the Church would become a very Babylon, e finalmente si formarebbe con
verita quella Babilonia.

Reason II.
Bishops are obliged to obey the Pope, though his Decrees should be
unreasonable: So then their Jurisdiction is not of Divine Right, and that of
the Pope alone is of Divine Right. If the Bishops power were of Divine Right,
one should be obliged to obey them, as one does the Pope, though their Decrees
were unreasonable, and contrary to the Pope's; now if that were so, Bishops
would turn little Tyrants, having shook off their Obedience to the Pope, who
is, as S. Charles Borromee calls him, l. 21. c. 5.
Our Lord upon Earth, Nostro Signore.

Take away from the Pope Right to make himself be obeyed, though his Orders
should be unreasonable, whilst his Power is of Divine Right, and grant that
power to Bishops, as having their Jurisdiction of Divine Right, every Bishop
will be Sovereign in his Diocese, ciascun vescovo sara sovrano nella propria
Diocese. The Bishops will pretend they have put down one Tyranny in the Church,
viz. the Pope's; diranno d'haver estinta una tirannia, but instead of one
pretended Tyranny, there will come up by that Disorder an innumerable crew of
small Tyrants, l. 1. c. 25.
e n'haveremo generate innumerabili; every one of them as a small Pope, will be
obeyed with blind obedience, though he commands evil like the Pope, a guisa di
Papi. They will have it, that their People shall believe all that they tell
them, as if 'twere Gospel, as if they were infallible Popes, Ibid.
not able to err, a guisa di Papi credendo ogni popolo cio che il suo vescovo
per altro soggetto ad errare gli proponesse comme senso della scrittura; And
from thence what would follow, but that what one teaches in his Diocese, the
other will condemn as Heresy in his? Which would bring forth among believing
Catholics a most fearful contrariety of Laws, of Ceremonies; of Usages, Ibid.
and in fine, of Faith too, qual contrarieta forgerebbe di leggi, di riei, e
fin' di feed trai fedeli.

The Source of all these Disorders comes from Bishops pretending that their
Jurisdiction is of Divine Right.

Reason III.
The Bishops proposing in the Council of Trent, That it should be determined
that their Jurisdiction was of Divine Right, and the Question being discussed
on both sides, it appeared to some, That all the Dispute was nothing but a pure
Logomachia, and disputing about Terms; but the more subtle, i piu sottili, and
scrupulous, i piu scrupulosi, judged quite otherwise thereof, and made it
manifest, That if the Bishops Pretensions took place, it would follow that the
Pope could not without cause dispose of things belonging to the Jurisdictions
of Bishops, senza cagione; for example, l. 19. c. 6.
he could not of absolute authority reserve to himself the Collation of a
Benefice in another Bishop's Diocese, he could not send Prohibitions to the
Ordinary, or exempt an Inferior from the Jurisdiction of his Bishop, or even
translate a Bishop from one Diocese to another, unless for Reasons contained in
the Canons, Ibid.
o trasferir un vescovo da una catredrale all'altra. These Reasons hindered the
Question from being decided, Ibid.
questi risguardi facevano che molti ne consentissero a diachiarare ch' i
vescovi fossero immediate da Christo: Which makes it evident how important it
is in the Church, when one would think there is no more but a Question about
Terms or Words, to take good heed if the Question be not about something
indeed, and not to think that Questions which appear to be only about Terms, be
of such slight Importance, especially in Matter of Church Government.

Reason IV.
There is a deal of difference between the largeness of the Pope's Power, and
the Power of Bishops: The Pope, who is chosen, is ordinarily pious and sage,
ordinariamente suole eleggersi pio e savio; he has remorse of Conscience, hai
rimorsi della coscienza; he has Sentiments of honor, e dell'honore; which
being so, it is a less evil, as it may sometimes happen, though some of his
commands be unreasonable; which is seldom, and his Subjects be obliged to obey
them, possa tal'ora obligare i soggetti exandio con qualche irragionevole
ordinazione, than that he not being Prince and Monarch, as he is of all
Bishops, who are his Subjects, should be made subject to their over-looking,
and to their passionate Votes and Judgments, to which they are so subject.

Reason V.
But the great Reason which decides the Question beyond Reply, and makes the
Juggle of the contrary Opinion appear, is, That in effect, if the Bishop's
Jurisdiction were of Divine Right, they are obliged not to obey the Pope, when
his Decrees are not grounded upon just cause: they could not use the
Dispensations which he gives them, when they are not granted after the manner
prescribed by the Canons; for the Canons do forbid plurality of Benefices; it
confounds, quoth the Council of Trent, the Church Order, that one person alone
should take upon him the Offices of many persons. All are obliged to observe
the Sacred Canons without any distinction, indistincte, Sess. 25. c. 19.
unless they be dispensed therewith for just and urgent cause, and which may
redound to the Churches greater profit, and that the Dispensation be granted
cost-free; in default whereof, it is to be reckoned surreptitious. Now almost
all the Bishops have plurality of Benefices, and they have the Pope's
Dispensation for it, which is not grounded upon any urgent or just cause, nor
given to them cost-free; they make use of these Dispensations, they be
conformable to these Decrees, the Pope then has a right to rule over them, even
without reason; and since they obey him, they acknowledge that their
Jurisdiction is not of Divine Right, otherwise they could not in conscience
possess a many Benefices, they could not in conscience be translated from one
Bishopric to another; the Dispensation that is granted them, is by right null
according to the Canons, in maniera qualora volesse trasferir un vescovo da una
Catedrale all'altra, l. 19. c. 6.
gli potesse muovere sempre questione di nullita con allegare il difetto della
sufficient cagione. But if it be so, that the Pope has no power to dispense
without a cause, where be the Bishops? for either they have Consciences, or
they have none; if they have none, and that being transported with passion for
a Benefice or Bishopric more fat or honorable, they will needs be translated
thereunto, l. 23. c. 8.
accade che la violenza della passione accenda talmente gli affetti che ove non
si dispensasse cadderebbono in grave peccato; and that they will frame false
and colored causes to obtain their Dispensations, which is rather to get by
stealth, than to obtain; such Dispensations granted upon false considerations,
are null, rubando per questo mezzo le concessioni mill, and so they will
continue even unto their Death, in a sort of sacrilegious, incestuous Marriage
with their Churches, Ibid.
continuando poscia in maritaggi sacrileghi, fin' alla morte, unless they had
rather keep all their lifetime in one condition against their minds, and lead
a miserable kind of life, con repugnanza di cuore and con infelicita di vita.
If they have any Conscience, then if that Conscience be in the least tender, it
will never let them be quiet while they reflect upon those just and reasonable
causes allowed only by the Canons, non quietarsi interiormente may; thereupon a
thousand scruples, either concerning Substance or Circumstances, will be still
returning upon them, ripullulando loro sempre n'el cuore varii scrupoli intorno
alla verita o nella sustanza o nelle circonstanze della ragione esposita, which
will keep them in perpetual torture, without any Remedy, il che gli fa stare in
un perpetuo tormento senza rimedio, and will make them in danger to commit many
sins through an erroneous Conscience, e con pericolo che per coscienza erronea
tommettano molti peccati, that in fine they will fall into despair of their
salvation, l. 23. c. 8.
e cadano indesperazione della salute.

Now to avoid such terrible and dangerous extremities which might put all the
Bishops into a damnable condition, a man sees there is nothing safer than the
Doctrine that maintains against the Zealous Ignorant, That Bishop's
Jurisdiction is not of Divine Right.

ARTICLE X. From these Reasons it results, That these Bishops Jurisdiction
comes to them only from the Pope. The Opinion that Episcopacy is but one and
the same thing in all Bishops, is nothing but a Platonic Idea.
FRom all before alleged, it is easy to conclude, That there is an infinite
difference between Episcopacy in the Pope, and Episcopacy in Bishops; because
the Bishops not holding their Jurisdiction but of the Pope, he shares out to
them no more thereof than he pleases, they being the Inferior Order, l. 18. c.
13.
di cui egli fa part a minori Prelati, as Father Diego Lainez said; but it is
wholly in him as the Source, because he is the Sovereign Vicar of Jesus Christ,
tutta come in suo font nel summo Vicario di Christo per cui descendesse negi'
inferiori Prelati; l. 24. c. 12.
l. 2. c. 27.
in effect, their Rank and their State is a State inferior, minore stato,
Prelati minori, vescovi minori, quoth S. Charles, they be small Bishops, and
small Prelates; for which reason, l. 19. c. 12.
the name of Vicar of Jesus Christ has not continued to them, non essersi
lasciato il nome di Vicario di Christo a vescovi minori; they are nothing but a
great multitude of petty Bishops, l. 1. c. 21.
una moltitudine immensa di piccioli vescovi; Now for a small Bishop, small
Power, and small Business. Wherefore the Pope has reserved to himself all the
great Affairs of consequence, leaving to the Bishops only the small ones, as,
to grant Licenses for ordinary Marriages, to issue out some forts of
Monitories, to visit Nunneries, or the like; or many times, to avoid contest,
he permits them to act as Delegates of the Holy See: For the Pope being
distracted with the great affairs of the whole Universe, he cannot tend to muse
on trifling petty matters, l. 5. c. 16.
quella giurisdizione a particulari Prelati, la qual e profitevole che sia in
loro per non costrigner i Christiani d'andare a Roma in ogni mediocre affare, e
perch alcuni negozii meglio son terminati da chi gli vede con occhio occupato
in que pochi soli, che da chi gli ode con orecchio distratto ad una immensita
d'altre cure. The Bishops have not the power to dispense with plurality of
Benefices, because it was not fit to trust their discretion with so imimportant
a part of the Government of their Dioceses, as that was, l. 23. c. 11
al cui giudicio non era convenevole il permetter.

And as for the choosing of Parish Priests, the Council has not given the
Bishops liberty to do that, for it obliges them to follow the judgment of
certain Examiners appointed thereunto, l. 23. c 3.
sono obligati a seguir le sentence degli esaminatori; and the Council enacts,
That those Examiners be approved by the Clergy of the Diocese at a Synod, qui
Synodo satisfaciant and ab ea approbentur, Sess. 24. c. 18. Which makes it
appear, that even those small affairs which the Bishops have left them, were by
the Councils Order, not to be done but in a Synod, and with the Synod's advice.

So that no man which has not a mind to feed himself with Fancies, will ever
approve that opinion of an entire Episcopacy, being one and the same in all
Bishops, but will look upon it as a Chimera impossible in practice, l. 6. c. 3.
ogni huomo capaci d'affari civili auvisera per impossible in prattica questa,
per cosi dire, ideal Republica di Platone, dove tutta la giurisdizione fosse di
ciascun' presidente.

Aristotle has confuted this imaginary Government by Reasons very evident,
Ibid.
e pure una tal Republica con evidentissime raggioni vien rifutata da
Aristotele. Now that which is contrary to most evident Reasons of Aristotle,
cannot be conformable to the Institution of Jesus Christ, l. 9. c. 9.
come si la chiesa di Christo predicasse ch' e contrario a l'insegnamenti
d'Aristotele, It Is a very Chimera, una chimera impossible; l. 6. c. 3.
a false and fraudulent invention, Ibid.
una invenzione bugiarda; a Chaos of confusion, l. 1. c. 15.
un caos di confusioni; a right Babylon, con verita Babylonia.

CHAP. III. The only Rule of the Politic Church Government, is, its Felicity
according to the Flesh, in this World, and in the other, under the Authority of
one sole Monarch of the Universe, who is the Pope, of whom all his Christian
Kings are Tributaries and Subjects, and who has, or ought to have for his
Inheritance or Demean the Riches of all the World, whose Honors and carnal
Pleasures make the Churches Splendour and Felicity. Jesus Christ has merited
them for her by the effusion of his Blood, to render her Visible, Perpetual,
and Remarkable, as the most happy according to the Flesh, of all other
Republics, that are, that shall be, or that ever were upon Earth.
ARTICLE I. Jesus Christ has instituted in his Church the most excellent kind
of Government. Monarchical Government is the most excellent.
A Man should not doubt that the Wisdom Incarnate did not institute in his
Church the most excellent kind of Government, l. 8. c. 17.
dovremo noi persuadere che la sapienza incarnata istituisse la sua Chiesa con
un governo il qual non fosse migliore.

Now Monarchical Government is the best of all even among Christians, essendo
l'ottima forma del governo spirituale fra' Christiani, l. 1. c. 25.
la monarchia. l. 5. c. 16.


So that it must needs be that the Pope was instituted by Jesus Christ King of
the Church, and Monarch of the whole World, adunque la necessita del governo
monarchico si paleso per esperienza. l. 8. c. 7. and 17.


Therefore it is that the Popes do reign at Rome, l. 2. c. 9.
regnare in Roma, and their Kingdom is called the Kingdom of the Vatican, regno
di Vaticano; l. 2. c. 7.
and the Pope is called God's Viceroy; and our Cardinal-Historian calls Pope
Alexander VII, l. 24. c. ult.
Vicere d'istraordinario valor.

He has the Seignory of all the world, l. 6. c. 4.
il dominio de l'intero mondo Christiano.

He is the Monarch and Lord thereof, l. 6. c. 3.
Monarca e Segnor del mondo.

Insomuch that the whole World is the Empire whereof he is the Emperor, whose
puissance is upheld by the veneration of Emperors and all other Kings, who be
his Subjects, Intr. c. 16.
quella venerazione ch' e la base del loro Imperio.

ARTICLE II. That Emperors and Kings have acknowledged the Pope.
It Is this Sovereign Puissance Ecclesiastic of Popes, superior to the Secular,
that the Kings and Emperors of the Earth have acknowledged by kneeling down
before them, l. 12. c. 3.
l'Ecclesiastica e suprema in authorita perch ad essa i Principi secolari
s'ingenocchiano.

Monarchs do not only kneel before the Pope, but they kiss his Feet, in token
they acknowledge his Sovereign Authority as Vicar of Jesus Christ, Ibid.
inducendo tutti Principi a riconoscerli come vicarii di Christo, basciando i
loro piedi.

They acknowledge him as the chief Magistrate over all men, l. 7. c. 14.
Magistrato supremo umano.

They adore him as most holy in that quality, and too as Mediator between
Heaven and Earth, l. 1. c. 15.
chi dev'essere adorato con sopranome di santissimo, e mezzano fra il cielo e
la terra, and as Mediator between themselves, and Arbitrator of their
Differences, to hinder the Insolences of some of them, and the plottings of
others, otherwise States would never endure his meddling in their Matters, l.
12. c. 3.
il principato non e durabile con l'insolenza, rimosso l'ostacolo dell'autorita
spirituale, e percio molto minor numero di congiure e di ribellioni.

Therefore Kings and People adore the Pope's hands, l. 24. c. ult. l. 14. c. 10.
adorato sua mano; they adore his Crown, corona Pontificale; and his Diadem, l.
1. c. 25.
si tratta di mantenir l'adorato diademate nel front al mio principe.

In fine, they regard him as their Lord, nostro Signore. l. 21. c. 6.


ARTICLE III. The Popes Monarchy over the World is necessary for the Church.
THe Church is a Body, composed of all the Catholic Kingdoms and Republics of
the World, which be the Members thereof: And in every State or Republic, all
the Dioceses with their Bishops, are also Members of that Body. And as in
compounded natural Bodies, there be many particular Forms, because every Member
has its own Form; so every Diocese, and every Kingdom, and Republic has its
particular Form, that is to say, its Bishop, its King, or its Superior and
Head, in whom resides the particular superior power. But as in the compounded
Natural Body, it is impossible that diverse Forms, which have no order nor
relation among themselves, can be able to govern, because they would separate
Unity. So it is impossible that Church-Unity can subsist, unless all the
particular Forms of her Members have relative Order among themselves-and be
subject to a Form Total and Superior, to be as it were the Head and Soul of
them, from whence the Particulars may fetch all their direction and force, l.
8. c. 17.
non possono molte form tra loro non ordinate dominare in un composto.

If the Church had not such a Soul, viz. a Sovereign Power that gave her Form,
and whereby she might be directed, she would not any longer deserve the name of
Church, non meriterebbe piu la Chiesa nome di Chiesa, l. 1. c. 25.
cioe di congregazione, mentre fosse disgregata per tante membre senza haver
l'unita da un anima che le informasse e le reggesse,

It would be but a Crowd of men without Order, not a Body Organick and Formed,
unless it received the Unity of a Form total, proper to animate it and rule it,
Ibid.
numero aggregato accidentale s'ella non riceve l'unita con una forma che la
indirizzi e la governi.

Now then, supposing that the Pope is the Head and Soul of that Body that
stretches it self through the World, whereof all States and Dioceses of the
Universe are Members, the union and submission of these Members to this their
Head, who is the Soul of them, forms the perfect band of the Life Politic, l.
3. c. 10.
una congiunzione di vita perfettamente politica.

The Pope's Authority is the Basis, the Band, and the moving Intelligence of
this Body's Government, l. 1. c. 25.
del qual governo, la base, il legame, e l'intelligenza motrice, e l'aurita del
Pontifice.

So that what ought not a man to suffer rather than let himself be separated
from this good Soul, from which one draws all his Being, his Unity, his
Direction, his Motion and Intelligence, per non separarsi da quest' anima; l.
3. c. 10.
for what can the hands and feet in man's Body do, if they do not receive all
their direction and force from one sole Head? che potrebbono li mani ed i piedi
se non ricevessero tutta la direzione e tutta la forza d'un solo capo?

ARTICLE IV. The Power of the Pope is Independent from every Creature, and
without Limits: The Riches of the World are his Revenue.
THe Popes Sovereignty being then so vast, it extends through all Countries, as
the Soul does through all parts of the Body, un principato vasto e di vary
nazioni; l. 23. c. 11.
and like as the Soul in the most raised operations of her Intelligence depends
not of her Members, so the Pope's power is independent from every Creature, and
unlimited, autorita illimitata ed independente. l. 8. c. 17.
It Is a power more than humane, and which, as such, ought to be adored, l. 24.
c. ult.
con debito d'adorarla, che impone la sopra umana sua dignita, it is as it were,
a divine state, l. 1. c. 2.
stato quasi divino.

And as the Members obey the Soul, without asking it a Reason; so every one is
bound to obey the Pope, even when his Orders be unreasonable. Indeed he does
sin, when he ordains any thing against Reason; but he that obeys him, does not
sin, end peccaben in concederle, l. 21. c. 60.
non i famigli inferiori in usarle.

In this Quality of King and absolute Sovereign, he has for Revenue and
Inheritance, the Goods of all his Subjects, to wit, of all the Kings of the
World, and of all their Subjects, l. 1. c. 1.
havendo per lor patrimonio le sustanze de' sudditi; he has power to dispose
thereof even against their will, l. 6. c. 3.
con autorita a di commandare all person e di maneggiar le rob per raggion
propria, ed eziandio con altrui repugnanza.

And by consequence, Kings and their Kingdoms be Tributaries to him, and that
with Reason; for every Parish finds its Parson, and furnishes him with all
that is necessary for his Ministry, l. 1. c. 25.
ogni terra gli somministra a suo piovano.

Every Diocese does likewise so in respect of its Bishop proportionably, and as
it is meet for the Rank that he holds in the Church above Parish Priests, Ibid.
ogni Diocese al suo vescovo.

Every State does the same proportionably toward its Prince, Ibid.
ogni stato al suo Principe.

Thus it is manifest, That all the Prelates and Kings of the World do owe to
their Monarch the same Contributions proportionably, Ibid.
molti stati e regni insieme al loro Monarca.

As the Pope is Monarch of the whole World, it is clear, That his Revenues be
laid and set out for him upon the whole World, Ibid.
questi ritratti si cavan da tutti i regni del Christianesimo.

ARTICLE V. The Pope may compel Kingdoms to pay him Tribute: To dispute this
Power with him, is Treason.
THat which is considerable herein, is, That as the Soul has power to oblige
the Body to render it the service it ought, because all the service which the
Body owes to the Soul, has no other End but the common Good of the one and the
other. So the Pope, who is Soul of the Universal Body of the Church, having no
End but the common Good of the Church, has power to constrain all the
Communities which make Parts of his Body, to pay him the Tributes due to him,
suitable to the Grandeur of his Administration, l. 1. c. 25.
quali richiedonsi alla grandezza di sua amministratione. It Is for their own
Good that he may oblige them to it; for one must do good to Communities, as one
does to Children, even against their wills, l. 17. c. 10.
qual piu tritto proverbio che quello, a fanciulli e a communi convien fare il
been contra lor voglia.

He that has power to bring to the End, has power to levy the means; as for
example, the Church has power to constrain people to receive the Sacraments,
it is necessary then that she should have power to compel those things which be
necessary to that end, l. 17. p. 10.
se la chiesa puo costringere i fedeli a pigliar i Sacramenti, li puo
costringere a tutto il necessario per l'amministrazione di essi.

Now the prime thing that is necessary for the Administration of the
Sacraments, is a competent maintenance for the Ministers, Ibid.
com' e in primo luogo la sostentazione de' Ministri. So the Pope being prime
Minister of the Sacraments; and of the Government Ecclesiastic, there is
nothing more plain than the power he has to constrain the whole Catholic
Christian World to pay him Tribute; this Demonstration is most clear, Ibid.
questa chiarissima dimostratione.

This supposed, who is it that can deny it to be Treason, to say, one ought not
to pay to a Prince the Tributes which be due to him, l. 23. c. 3.
si come verrebbe accusato di lesa Maesta chi affirmasse doversi levare a
Principi secolari i loro tributi.

In greater Reason, then it must be a greater crime for him that would take
away from the Prince of the Church and Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Fruits that
are due to him from particular Churches, according to Reason, Ibid.
Equity and Custom, cosi di molti piu grave delitto e reo chi vuol'torre al
principe della chiesa e Vicario di Christo li frutti che a lui son' debiti
dalle chiese particolari secondo la ragione, l'equita, e la consuetudine. For
the Revenues, for example, which come of Indulgences, and other like Graces,
are as his Gables, l. 9. c. 3.
il medesimo in tutte le Gabelle, Imposts being necessary in all sorts of
Government, l. 16. c. 8.
in ogni principato essendo necessary le imposizioni.

ARTICLE VI. The Pope's Authority is conformable to Nature; according to
Aristotle, the Pope ought not to give reason for the using of his Power; it
has no other Limit, nor other Reason, but, Such is our Pleasure.
WE have seen how the Union and Submission of the whole Body of the Church to
its Head and its Soul, which is, forsooth, the Pope, makes the perfect Band of
the Life Politic, and that the end of this Life is the common Good of the
whole Compound, to which it is natural, according to Aristotle, that all the
Members do contribute This Philosopher has made no difficulty to say, That, as
a Hand which does not serve the Interest of the Body, from whose good estate
the good even of every particular Member derives it self, could not be called a
Hand, unless in an equivocal sense; so the man which serves not the common Good
of the whole Body of the Commonwealth, but has his particular Interests for
his Ends, cannot be called a man, unless in an equivocal sense, l. 3. c. 10.
la qual congiunzione e si natural che Aristotele hebbe a dire, che si come la
mano che non serve a l'intero corpo dal cuibuono stato ridonda il been di
ciascuno membro, dicesi equivocamente mano, cosi l'huomo che habbia per fine il
privato suo pro e non il commune dal quale deriva ogni ben privato, chiamarsi
equivocamente huomo. Now he that is but a man in an equivocal sense, cannot be
a faithful Christian Prince nor King, but in an equivocal sense, and no other;
this is the essential Reason that all Princes and People have to be the Pope's
Subjects, if they will remain true Princes, or true Christians; he is not
obliged to give you the reason for his power, having power in quality of
Sovereign, to dispose, l. 6. c. 3.
according to his liking, of persons and of Goods, as he thinks fit, con
autorita di commandare all person e di maneggiare le robe per raggion propria
ed eziandio con altrui repugnanza.

If it were otherwise, a man might upon every occasion, contest all his Orders
and Commands as null, under pretense that they were not reasonable, l. 19. c. 6.
gli si potesse muover sempre questione di nullita con allegare difetto della
sufficient ragione; and of Prince, as the Pope is, Ibid.
he would be made subject to his Subjects Orders, che sarebbe costituirlo di
principe ch'egli e, soggetto al giudicio de' suoi soggetti.

For avoiding then all these kinds of contradictions, he may order it, and
every one is obliged to pay him all that he demands, senza esprimer veruna
ragione; l. 23. c. 8.
there is no need for him to allege any other cause, unless Such is Our
Pleasure. It Is Pleasure that is the Rule of all Natural Equity, and all that is
done against this good Pleasure, is but Violence, l. 3. c. 13.
violento facendosi contra il gusto del Papa; In fine, the Pope himself is his
own Law, l. 20. c. 5.
il Pontefice esser leg a se stesso; for example, suppose that the Pope had
no other reason for granting his Pardons, but the Money he gains thereby, and
the Income which rifes thereof, this only Reason is sufficient to justify all
his Orders, essere in verita gran ragione quella grossa multa. l. 23. c. 8.


Nevertheless, this is said with respect to his boundless power, and in it self
independent, illimitata ed independente, taking it abstracted from honest
Decorum, and other Circumstances which do moderate the Pope in the usage of his
Power, and causes that one needs not to fear he will commit any abuses in the
execution thereof; for setting these aside, he may do all through the plenitude
of his Power, l. 14. c. 14.
e libero con la pienezza dell'autorita; but honest decorum hinders him from
doing sometimes things he could and might, Ibid.
l'onesta richiede che non facesse da se medesimo. These were the Sentiments of
Pope Pius IV. writing to the Emperor Ferdinand, in which he was contrary to
Pope Paul IV. Caraffa, who was persuaded that his Wisdom had no other Rules for
acting, but those (forsooth) of his infinite power, che tutta l'ampiezza del
suo potere fosse anche la misura di saggiamente esercitarlo.

ARTICLE VII. It Is not to be feared that the Pope will abuse his Power, and
that for diverse Reasons.
THere is no fear the Pope will abuse his All-puissancy.

1, He is Elected by a Senate of Cardinals, l. 1. c. 25.
da un Senato di Cardinali, whose lives, for the most part, Ibid.
are very exemplary, tanta esemplarita in molti del Senato Apostolico.

2. They Elect him ordinarily from among themselves, Ibid.
fra un senato di Cardinali. They choose him when he is old and a tried one, l.
12. c. 15.
huomo vecchio provato; the most pious, and the wisest, which they think fit
for the place, pio e savio.

l. 19. c. 6.
3. The Pope has Sentiments of humane Honor, per senso d'onore umano.

l. 1. c. 25.
4. He has Remorse of Conscience, i rimorsi della coscienza.

l. 19. c. 6.
5. Being good, judicious and experienced, it is morally impossible that he
should not govern the Church, either right well, or at least in tolerable
manner, he is aided by able Ministers, l. 1. c. 25.
and with Motives of Honor and Policy, si puo sperar che si elegga quasi
sempre tale che per giudicio, per bonta, per esperienza, e quando tutte
mancasse per aiuto di Ministri e per senso d'onore umano governi o been o
tolerabilmente la chiesa.

6. It Is his Policy to do so; for his Empire not being able to stand without
the peoples Veneration and Devotion, it is of utmost consequenee to him to do
nothing that may cause him to lose that Devotion which maintains his Power;
Intr. p. 6.
ed in risguardo eziandio d'interesse umano il dimostra sarebbe un tal modo
troppo dannoso a quella venerazione ch' e la base, l. 23. c. 5.
del loro imperio.... questa podesta la quale non ha altri littori che la
divozione de' sudditi.

ARTICLE VIII. Difference betwixt the Pope's Policy and the Turk's. Kings need
not to fear the Pope's Power, but in case of Rebellion against God, or his
Viceroy upon Earth.
THe Grand Seignor's ultimate End is his own Felicity, and his means to arrive
at it, is, to make his People miserable, l. 5. c. 6.
qual e la Politica del dominio Turchesco; but the Pope's end is the Public
Felicity of the Church, which is his Body, and whereof he is the Soul, the
Head, and the common Father. The Grand Seignor is free, and all his Subjects
are Slaves, e teene loro in miseria per ch'egli goda; which is an execrable
Policy; as Slaves, he commands them with Sword in hand, being obeyed out of
dread. The Ecclesiastic Power of the Pope, l. 12. c. 3.
is a Power unarmed, la podesta goduta dal summo Pontefice pure e disarmata.

Whence it is, though of right, the Pope has power to compel Peoples Obedience
to his Authority, yet having no force joined to his Supreme Authority, all its
Power, as to its execution, depends on the inclination of the People, on their
Veneration and their Piety; therefore it is that the Pope, for to succeed in
his Designs, ought to accommodate himself to the Peoples inclinations, l. 9. c.
9.
though corrupt, dovendo egli governare gli huomini quali Iddio e la natura
producono al mondo. The Great Turk never informs himself concerning the
inclinations of his People, he does all by force, by Authority, and through a
Spirit of Domination; so that there is nothing more execrable than the Turk's
Policy; nothing more mild and more natural than the Pope's; there is no
Republic in the World more happy, even according to the Flesh, than that which
lives under his Empire; l. 3. c. 10.
un corpo politico il piu felice che sia in terra.

The Kings and Princes of the World have nothing to fear from the Pope's Power,
except in case of a declared Rebellion against God, l. 12. c. 3,
tal che non puo temere ne de forze ne dalle volonta di si fatti huomini se non
in caso d'un aperta sua ribellione contra Dio, that they attack God through
Heresy, or else his prime Minister and Viceroy General upon Earth, to suppress
his power; in these Cases, the Secular Powers indeed have great reason to be
apprehensive of the Ecclesiastic; for that their People through veneration for
the Pope, and through Sentiments of Religion, would rise in Rebellion, if not
always, at least often enough against such their Princes, being once declared
Enemies by the Pope; la secolare ha gran raggion di temerla, perch se non
sempre, Ibid.
almeno spesso la venerazione de' popoli e'l rispetto della Religione muove i
sudditi a sollevarsi contra'l principe temporale quando egli vuol'supprimere la
podesta spirituale. Or else when Kings do publicly violate Justice, as Henry
VIII, King of England. By example of that King, all others may observe how fast
the Pope holds, that when a humor takes Christian Princes to violate Justice
and Religion, without being by any means to be brought back to their Duty, they
are always to apprehend the Arms of the Vatican, l. 3. c. 15.
Si e mantenuto il possesso, che tutti i principi Christiani qualunque volta
disegnino di violare incorrigibilmente la giustizia e la Religione, Ibid.
temano l'armi del Vaticano. L'e sempio di lui non puo dar ardimento a
potentati Catolici d'esser' impii senza terrore; After this Example, there is
no Catholic Prince, who ought not to tremble, when he dares but think of
becoming impious.

ARTICLE IX. Of the Peoples Sovereign Power in the Church.
THe Cardinal assures us at last, That it is the People have the Sovereign
power in the Church, if not of right and in reason, l. 1. c. 9.
yet at least, in fact and by force, il quale volgo finalemente ha la suprema
potenza, e pero se non di raggione almeno di fatto e il supremo de' tribunali;
the people, quoth he, l. 2. c. 4.
is more powerful than all the Laws, essendo il popolo piu potente d'ogni
leg: So there needs the utmost skill to hold them in, and without the succors
of great respect, and of some Love, it is hard to make them to like the yoke of
Obedience, Ibid.
e pero richiedonsi gran' destrezza nel frenarlo e grand'aiuto di venerazione e
d'amore perch'egli si contenti di ricevere in bocca il freno.

It Is by the greatest number that at last things are decided, and at bottom;
this is the greatest Potentate of the world, l. 1. c. 24.
impercio che la moltitudine finalmente e il maggior potentato del mondo; for
the Multitude have more hands than the small number of their Superiors; and
when all those hands unite, they make a power that renders its self Mistress of
the World, l. 9. c. 9.
perch hanno piu mani, le quali quando s'accordano, sono le padrone del mondo.

The Ecclesiastical Superiors ought above all, to be persuaded of this Politic
Maxim, That all their power, as to its effect and execution, is upheld by the
Peoples Veneration, l. 12. c. 3.
questo sapersi da Presidenti Ecclesiastici, che il loro potere quanto
all'effetto e tutto appoggiato alla venerazione de' popoli, which is a warning
to them to keep up this Veneration by an exemplary Life, abstaining from all
which has the looks of excess, Ibid.
gli ammonisce a conservarsela con la vita esemplare e ad astenersi da cio che
habbia dell'immoderato o del violento.

ARTICLE X. An Example of the Peoples Power in the Church in what passed at
Milan, and at the Council of Pisa, under Louis XII.
THe Sovereign Authority of the People, which renders it self Arbitrator even
between Popes and Kings, appeared in the People of Pisa, and those of Milan,
under Pope Julius II, and the King of France, Louis XII. Some Cardinals having
a mind, out of Ambition, to be Popes, under pretense of reforming the Church,
as well in Head as Members, met in Council at Pisa. The Inhabitants of that
Town being Subjects of the Commonwealth of Florence, were constrained, through
its Authority, to receive into their Town these Cardinals, and those of their
Party; but nevertheless, they detested the Assembly of them as Sacrilegious,
come sacrilega, they could not hold from giving them all possible marks of
Slight and Abhorrency, so that the Council was transferred to Milan. The
Cardinals of the Faction were received by the People in that Town, not as
Cardinals, whose Dignity is in most great veneration in Christendom, but as men
infected with the Plague, and as Cutthroats, ma come huomini pestiferi e
scelerati, and as boding Comets, which foretell and cause Mischiefs to the
Countries over which they appear.

The French at that time got the Famous Victory at Ravenna against Pope Julius
and his Confederates: The Popes Nuntio, John de Medicis, which afterward
succeeded Julius, by the Name of Leo X, was brought Prisoner to Milan. In this
condition, a wonderful thing! even the Soldiers of the French fide could not
choose but yield to their Prisoner, as the Legate of the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
Marks of their utmost Veneration, asking Absolution of him for having fought
against the Church; such power has the force of Religion over the Spirits of
Christian people; l. 1. c. 1.
tanta nel popolo Christiano e la forza della Religione.

Mean time, what kind of man was this Pope Julius? He was fierce-natur'd, Ibid.
una tal ferocia, in whom the Vapors of adust Choler reigned so violently, that
they carried him out to Feats of War, little agreeing with the Holiness of his
Degree, Ibid.
eccesso militare non convenevole alla santita di grado, da qualche vampa men
regolata di bile accesa.

He had to do with Louis XII, that good King, surnamed The Father of the
People; which is to say, All; yet the Subjects of such a King favored such a
Pope; what would they have done then if this Popes Virtue had been as sublime
as was requisite for him who ought to be adored by the Surname of most Holy, as
Mediator between Heaven and Earth.

This only Example makes it at once to be seen how puissant a Pope is that is
revered by the People, and how puissant the People is that is animated by a
Spirit of Religion, tanta nel popolo Christiano e la forza delle religione.

But on the other side, this Example ought to teach Popes what they are to
fear, when they abuse their supernatural and divine Authority, and do injury to
the Secular Power; for then the People changing their Veneration into
Abomination, they abandon his Holiness's Interest, and in stead of remaining
Superior, he becomes slighted. See here then the different Interests of Popes
and Kings, and the politic Reasons, that these Powers which are superior of
Right, and by Authority, have to conserve to themselves the succors of that of
the People, which is always at last the Sovereign by way of Fact, and as to the
execution, and that same which obliges all these Powers to abide within terms
of moderation, the just temperament whereof makes the Politic Felicity
according to the Flesh, even in respect of the Christian Republic, under the
Monarchy of the Sovereign Pontife; for to preserve which, all the world by
consequence is equally obliged through very Natural Love, seeing that does
embrace the whole World for its Felicity.

ARTICLE XI. The Pope is not Master of his Authority, he is but the Depositary
thereof, and obliged to preserve it: The most pious action of Christian people
is to uphold it.
THe Popes do not reckon themselves Masters of the Apostolical power, which is
entrusted them; they do not believe that they can release the Rights thereof,
of which they are nothing but Depositaries, to hold them and keep them up
together, and not to permit the diminution of them; Thus spoke Pope Clement
VII, of it, l. 3. c. 12.
Primato Apostolico di cui non era signore ma custode, The Pope may dispose on
good consideration of the Things and Persons whereof he is Lord, though, may
be, he cannot do it lawfully, setting aside Honesty or other Virtues; but for
what concerns the Rights of the Holy See, he cannot permit the diminution
thereof, neither lawfully, nor upon any consideration whatsoever, which is so
true, that Paul IV, who thought he might do any thing, and that all which he
did by virtue of his Authority, without having respect to Honesty or other
Virtues, became honest and lawful, l. 14. c. 13.
che tutta l'ampiezza del suo potero fosse anche la misura di saggiamente
esercitarlo: Nevertheless, as to the Rights of the Holy See, he made no
difficulty to acknowledge that he was not absolute Master of them, but only
Depositary, l. 13. c. 15.
di quella dignita della quale non era padrone ma oustode.

And the reason is, That the Pope's power in all the extent of it, which we
have been speaking of, is the Public Good and Felicity of the Church, even
according to the Flesh, secondo la carne; now the Public Good of the Church,
even according to the Flesh, is the greatest of all visible Goods, and the most
noble Object of all the Virtues; and so the most noble action, not only of
Policy, but of Piety that the Pope and Christian people can do, is to uphold
the Sovereign power of the Pope, in the extent of his All-puissantness
independent and infinite, and to maintain it with vigilance and stoutness; l.
5. c. 16.
il custodir con intrepidezza e con vigilanza la sovranita del Pontificato, e
per mio aviso la piu commendabile operazione che possa fare la Politica
virtuosa, percio che di nessun' popolo si procura con maggior lodevolezza il
pro universale che del popolo piu diletto da dio e sedele a dio.

It remains then to make it evident what it is that is suitable for the Grandeur
of the Pope, according to that Degree of Sovereignty which he is advanced to in
the Church in quality of Vicar of Jesus Christ, Viceroy of God, Emperor of the
whole Universe, Lord and Monarch of the World, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Vice-God, and a God himself, by the most excellent participation of God
that is visible upon Earth.

ARTICLE XII. The Pope must have Means and an Estate suting with all these
Qualities. To deny this Truth, is a Treasonable Crime. Humane Felicity
according to the Flesh, ought to be found in him as its Source.
THe Pope being King of Kings, and of the whole Universe, the Estates and Goods
of all Kings, and of the whole Universe are his Inheritance; otherwise if the
Temporalities of Kings were not the Pope's Inheritance, the Subjects Estates
would not be the Inheritance of their Kings. It Is the part of Kings to
consider, if they will renounce this new Right which the Religious and Carnal
Policy of our Cardinal-Historian does offer them; but as for the Pope, he is
not Master of his, he is but Depositary; wherefore in quality of King, and for
that very reason, it is unlawful, quoth the Cardinal, to abate the Pope his
Rights, or any of that which is fit or suitable to the support and maintenance
of his infinite and unlimited Grandeur, l. 23. c. 3.
non essendo lecito di sostrare i suoi diretti e cio che richiedesi per la sua
convenevole sostentazione al Pastor universale de tutta la Chiesa.

So you see, that to stop his Revenue, or force him from it, is a crime more
treasonable than that of those who would deny to those Kings, who are the
Pope's Subjects, to pay them Gabels.

It is a General Order established of God, That all things should be
conveniently ordered, convenevole, according to the Degree and Rank which they
hold in the Universe; for example, That a Cardinal have the Authority that is
suitable to his Purple, l. 20. c. 3.
and not that pitiful little power that suits only with an ordinary Bishop, tal
bassezza d'autorita qual convenisse ad un ordinario Vescovo e non ad un
nobilissimo porporato. And generally speaking, The Church has power to exact
from her Believing Ones whatever is necessary for the maintenance of her
Ministers, l. 17. c. 10.
li puo costringere a tutto il necessario com' e in primo luogo la
sostentazione de Ministri: So that she has power to levy from the whole
Universe, Contributions necessary and proportionable to the Grandeur of her
Ministry, quali richiedonsi alla grandezza della sua amministrazione.... questi
tributi raccolti da ogni paese Christiano, l. 1. c. 25.
l. 2. c. 6.
queste contribuzieni di tutto illo mondo Christiano.

Now that which suits the Grandeur of the Apostolic Principality, suits it as
it is the Source of all Temporal Profit and Felicity, l. 23. c. 3.
even according to the Flesh, font d'utilita temporale secondo la carne in
quel modo ch' e piu conform eziandio all'umana l. 1. c. 25.
felicita, then must needs this humane felicity be found in the Pope, as in its
source. Now Felicity according to the Flesh, consists in Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, and in all besides which the World loves, esteems and admires; to
the end that the Pope may afterward convey it, as it were, in several streams
or veins all the World over; wherefore the Pope is compared not only to the
Soul or Head from whom the Body derives Being, and all the Felicity it is
capable of, but he is also compared to the Stomach.

ARTICLE XIII. The Pope is the Stomach of the Churches Body, which disperses
shares of Nourishment to all his believing ones, that be Members of his Body.
It Is true that all the Tribute which the Pope levies upon the World, seems to
tend to enrich only the Vassals of his Temporal Domain, or his home-born
Subjects, questi tributi raccolti da ogni paese Christiano paian colare ad
arrichir solo i vassali del dominio temporale; l. 2. c. 26.
nevertheless in truth it is not so, in verita non e poi cosi.

But to make the thing better understood, we must use the Fable which whilom
Menenius Agrippa made use of when the people of Rome revolted against the
Senate, and refused to fight for it; This sage Politician told them, that one
day the Members made a revolt against the Stomach, and refused to contribute
toward its nourishment, but incontinently they perceived that they all fell to
languish. One may say it is the same thing with the Pope, who as the Stomach,
does not digest for himself only the Goods which he possesses, but to
distribute out to those Believing Ones, that be his Members.

That which ought then to be so much the more stronger in application of this
Similitude concerning that of the Body Natural, is this, The other Members
which labor for the Stomach, can never be the Stomach, so they have not that
particular reason to maintain the Stomach's Interests, but in the Mystic Body
of the Church, there is no Member but that may one day become Stomach, l. 3. c.
10.
no faithful Catholic, but may hope to become Pope, habbiamo un corpo dove
ogn' altro membro si puo convertire in stomaco, si come chilo in sangue e poi
questo in carne. So that all these faithful Catholics have a particular
Interest to contribute to the Pope's Felicity according to the Flesh, because
this Felicity returns back again to them according to the share they have in
the distribution made by him after his having digested it, as the Stomach of
the Church; and besides, they or some of theirs may one day arrive to this
quality of Stomach, and then shall they too digest all the Goods of the World,
first for themselves, and afterward for others.

It should follow from hence, may some say, that in time all the Riches of the
World will flow to Rome, to enrich the Pope's Court; but though it should be
so, l. 24. c. 10.
fingiamo che con longo giro di secoli questi beni colassero nella corte, what
hurt would there be in it, that all the Goods of the Earth that now pass from
one to the other, by way of Inheritance, at a venture, without regard to merit,
should be distributed by the Pope to every one according to Justice, Ibid.
and according to their Merits? Pongasi mente se verun disconcio arrechi alla
felicita civil, che molti beni passino da esser dono del caso nell'heredita
del sangue, ad esser distribuzione della giustizia nel riconoscimento del
merito.

So that although all the Goods of the World should actually pass by
distribution of the Pope, as Victuals do through the Stomach, and as of right
all the Goods of the World belong to the Pope, as a King, whose Inheritance is
the whole Universe, there is no body but may see that the Carnal Felicity of
the Church would be thereby more perfect, at least no body can deny but that
the Pope has right to levy upon the whole Earth what is necessary to make a
Carnal Felicity suitable to his Royalty, to make him the richest, the most
glorious, and the most happy, even according to the Flesh, of all the Kings and
of all the Emperors of the Earth.

ARTICLE XIV. It is suitable to the Pope to have his Kingdom and State apart,
and a Princes Court equal to other Kings, superior to all Princes. The Pope's
Courtiers be called the Glorious Cardinals: They be the splendour of the Roman
Court.
SUpposing then, as it has already appeared, That it is necessary for the Unity
and Majesty of Church Government, that there be one Supreme Head, and Sovereign
Ruler, it is convenient, to the end he may be the common Father, and not held
suspected by any one, as partial, that he reside not in the States of other
Princes, but in his own; That he have a Court and Courtiers, such as the
Grandeur of his Administration require, l. 1. c. 25.
or supposto che per l'unita del governo, per la Maesta, debba esser un Capo
supremo e un supremo Rettor della Chiesa, convien ch'egli, affine di poter
esser Padre commune non diffidente a veruno, non habiti nello Stato d'alcuno
degli altri Principi ma che habbia Stato proprio, Corte propria, Ministri
proprii e quali richiedonsi alla grandezza della sua amministrazione.

If a man had regard but only to the Grandeur of this Administration, and to
its infinite power, the whole Universe, and (...) the Kingdoms of the whole
Universe should necessarily appertain to the Pope, immediately in demean: only
if the Pope were immediate Lord of all Kingdoms, without any other King upon
Earth but him, or that Kings in their Temporal concerns were as the Popes
Vicars, men would be ready to attribute Faith, and the Conversion of the World
to a humane awe that Folks had of this same King of the World, and not to an
affection for Religion. See here then an admirable providence, that the Pope
has a State little enough, to give no place for any evil judgment that some
might be ready to make disadvantageous to Religion; on the other side, if this
State had been lesser, the Pope would have been too openly exposed to Temporal
Princes assaults, wherefore he had one bestowed upon him big enough to defend
himself in, l. 1. c. 1.
non e si grande che il culto del Christianesimo si possa ascriver ad umano
timor, e non ad affetto di religione: non e si picciolo che possa di leggieri
il suo possessore venir violentato dalla potenza di principi secolari.

There Is the reason then why the Pope is not immediate sole King of the whole
Universe; but this does not hinder, but that he may be so in quality of
Sovereign, Lord Paramount, as one may so say; of whom all Kings are Tributaries
and Tenants, as has been already been seen; by the right he has to compel
them to pay him contribution for his maintenance, suting the Grandeur of his
administration, questi rittratti si cavan da tutti i regni del Christianesimo:
l. 1. c. 25.
Therefore they ought also to maintain him Courtiers in such State as may befit
the Grandeur of their Elevation, and these be the Glorious Cardinals, l. 6. c.
4. l. 9. c. 10.
Gloriosi Cardinali, to whom all Bishops are Inferiors, Prelati loro inferiori;
it is clear that their Riches, their Honors, and their Pleasures, their Glory,
their Splendour, and in one word, their Felicity, according to the Flesh,
secondo la carne, ought to be incomparably greater than that of the richest
Bishops, who in comparison of Cardinals, are but little Prelates, piccioli
Vescovi.

This Degree of Cardinalship is the principal Splendour of the Roman Church, l.
21.
and of its Popes, quella dignita ch' e il precipuo splendour della Chiesa
Romana e de' suoi Pontefici; and in effect, it is a great Glory for a Pope to be
able to create Senators, who in Privilege and Honor are before all the
Creatures of other Monarchs, so that even the Children of the greatest Princes
aspire to this Dignity, l. 21. c. 4.
mentre possono crear Senatori che in privilegii ed onoranze molto avanzino
quelli d'ogni Monarca terreno, si che aspirino a tal grado i figliuoli de'
sommi principi.

Also at Rome, one reckons that Cardinals are above all Princes that be not
Kings, l 9. c. 9. l. 13. c. 14.
Cardinali che si stimano in Roma superiori ad ogni principe minor de' Re,
predecessero cem' era stato fin all'ora il costume, a Principi del sangue
reggio, and in all parts of the Christian World, men render to them the same
Honors as they do to Kings, l. 1. c. 8.
tanti altri gran' Senatori venerati con Reali onoranze da si grande e nobil
part del mondo.

Thus is it manifest, That Cardinals being equal to Kings in Honor, it is
suitable that they should be like unto them in Riches, Pleasures and
Voluptuousness according to the Flesh, fecondo la carne, and by consequence,
that the Pope may take out of all Christendom all necessary Tributes, amply to
recompense his Cardinals; which could not be, if the piety of Christians did
not furnish out his huge expense, l. 1. c. 25.
cio senza dubio non seguirebbe se la pieta de' Christiani non somministrasse a
lui la commodita di remunerarli altamente.

ARTICLE XV. Besides the Glorious Cardinals, the Court of Rome ought to be
filled with an infinite number of small Prelates that are to be equal with
Bishops, and these be to lead no sad nor poor life, but to be jocund, and live
in plenty.
OLtre all innumerabili Prelature, Ibid.
dignita e prebende, che in quella si compariscono; il che fa godere molti con
l'effetto e tutti con la speranza, laqual forse in questa vita e da maggior
godimento che l'istesso effetto.

Here is the Glory, the Splendour and the Voluptuousness of the Roman Court,
according to the Flesh, which consists in the actual possession of an Earthly
Felicity; or, as to those who do not at present enjoy it, at least it consists
in the hope they have to arrive thereunto, the Felicity of which expectation is
many times even in this world, not less than the actual enjoyment; And that
this Felicity may be suitable to the Popes Grandeur; it is fit he bestow
Recompenses on that his infinite number of Courtiers with advancements,
altamente, without impoverishing his Treasure Royal, because the greatest Evil,
and the most remediless Want in a Community, is a scarcity of Recompenses, when
one cannot bestow them without impoverishing the Public, nel vero il piu
dannoso e il piu irremediabile mancamento della communita e la scarsezza de'
guiderdoni, non potendosi dar quest senza impoverire il publico. l. 8. c. 17.


Whereby one may judge of the opulency and abundance of the Court of Rome, and
of the Piety of all Christians, which contribute thereunto, to render it
suitable to the Glory of the Universal King and Lord of all the Earth; for it is
an Object of Joy for all pious Christians to see the Glory, the Abundance, and
the Felicity, according to the Flesh, of that Universal Court of Christendom,
Ibid.
era giocondo oggetto al cuor di ciascuno, il ritrovarsi una Corte universale
nel Christianesimo la quale abbracci con indifrenza tutti li fedeli, e senza
molta distinzione di patria o di nascimento vi elegga il supremo Principe. A
Court wherein indifferently the Sovereignty of the World, an infinite many
Dignities, equal to those of Bishops, are exposed to the hope of all, and the
enjoyment of those which get them. Was there ever formed a finer Politic Idea?
Yea, this is the Government designed by Christ, to render his people remarkable
all the Earth over, by Prerogatives so apparent, l. 1. c. 25.
questo governo disegnato da Christo per segnalare in terra con manifesta
prerogativo il suo popolo. Now what is the Soul, the Basis, the Band, the
moving Intelligence of this Government, but the Pope's Authority? del qual
governo come vedete la base, il legame, Ibid.
l'intelligenza motrice, e l'autorita del Pontefice? Have not all the Kingdoms
of the Earth then a notable instance to maintain the greatness of their King,
the Pomp and Glory of his Royal Court, of his Royal City, the Mistress of the
Universe, the Court of all Religion? Regia della Religione, l. 1. c. 2. l. 8.
c. 17.
una regia Ecclesiastica, the Royal Ecclesiastical Court, una corte, una regia
universale, patria commune, Ibid.
regia commune, which cannot be maintained in a manner agreeing with its
Institution, without Contributions, vast Riches, Torrents of Gold and Silver,
l. 4. c. 5.
torrenti di pecunia.

ARTICLE XVI. The Glory and Felicity suting with this Court, subsist through
her Magnificence in Buildings, Theaters, Spectacles or Sights, of Piety,
Processions, Regales, Politic and Warlike Expeditions.
ADd to all this, the Magnificence in Buildings: What prodigious abundance of
Means must one have to bestow thereon, though there were, for example, no other
Building but that of S. Peter's Church, whose Structure alone astonishes, so
great and vast it is; l. 1. c. 1.
il nuovo edificio della stupenda basilica da san Pietro? Add to that, so many
other Churches and Palaces, which make an admirable Ornament of the Royal City,
and Mistress of the Universe; are not these pieces of Workmanship wholly
glorious? Ibid.
Opere gloriose; the work thereof is immense, and the Millions be numberless
that were fain to be collected for only Building of St. Peter's? A work worthy
of the Monarch of the World, and Sovereign Pontiffe, Ibid.
affin d'adunare tanti milioni quanti ne assorbiva l'immenso lavoro di quella
Chiesa, opera di sommo Sacerdote, mainsieme di sommo Principe.

It was for this, that the Indulgences under Pope Leo X, were Published, which
gave ocasion to Luther's Heresy; the Sum of Money that arose of them, was not
sufficient, non bastino, l. 1. c. 25.
it did furnish but a little to the expense of building that glorious Fabric,
the prime Temple of the World, qual fabrica piu gloriosa che quella del primo
tempio che sia nel mondo. l. 1. c. 3.


To this sort of Expense we may join that of Sights or Spectacles of Devotion,
Theaters, Perfumes, Music, Ornaments, Lights, and other parts of the Glory and
Magnificence of Public Feasts; for in fine, the People will have Theaters and
Spectacles, whatever they be; the World bestowed such upon them as nourished
their Vices through Voluptuousness: Is it not then the Christian Pietie's and
the Christian Policie's part to bestow such as be more voluptuous upon them, to
the end, that by so entertaining them, it may draw them to Virtue? Vuole il
popolo i Teatri, l. 1. c. 25.
ed e non solo conform a la pieta, ma eziandio alla Politica il far che i
Teatri piu sontuosi e piu dilettevoli sian quelle dove il vizio si medica non
dove si nutre. Magnificenza di spettacoli, l. 24. c. ult.
trionfo della Religione, non pomp della vanita.

The diverse Nunciatures, and the Apostolic Legations that must be sent from
time to time about the World, must not be forgotten; l. 2. c. 8.
Il qualo per been Christianesimo dee non solo mantenere lo sua Corte, composta
di molti ufficiali nobili, ma dar sussidio a pove Cardinali provisionar tanti
nunzii, ajutar tanti bisognosi, e premiar tanti benemeriti.

The Regale that must be made to Nephews and Kindred, l. 24. c. ult.
rigaiglie del parentado, other costs and recompenses of Officers and other
persons Services, either Noble or Learned or Poor, whom the Pope keeps, the
secret Alms which the Pope bestows; as for example, at the Council of Trent, to
so many poor Bishops which had not wherewithal to maintain themselves there,
Introd. c. 4.
secret limosine a Vescovi bisognosi, the Money that was fain to be sent to
Alexander, to quiet the German Spirits, l. 1. c. 25.
i mandati e la pecunia. These be all heads of Charge, or Articles of expense,
and Examples whereby one may judge of such like others; but above all, the
charge of Wars against the Heretics and the Turks, the Succors that the Pope
gives at all times to Christian Princes; there needs no more but to read what
our Cardinal-Historian relates of it in the Tenth Chapter of his Third Book;
there one shall see the Torrents of Gold and Silver that go perpetually forth
of Rome, to succor Kings and Christian Princes' torrenti di pecunie. l. 4. c.
5.
Could these Torrents go out thence, if they had not first come in there? Now
all this can be done only by means of the huge Revenues which the Piety of
Christians ought to furnish for maintenance of the Royal Court of the Monarch
of the Universe, whose Court is the Soul that re-unites under one and the same
Unity so many Kingdoms, and which of all Countries of his obedience
constitutes, one Body Politic, the most Formidable, the most Virtuous, the
most Learned, l. 3. c. 10.
and the most Happy that is upon Earth, una Corte la quale e l'anima che tiene
in unita tanti regni e costituisce i paesi a lei ubbedienti; un corpo politico
il piu Formidabile, il piu Virtuoso, il piu Litterato, il piu felice che fia in
terra.

Such is then the Fidelity and Glory of the Court of Rome according to the
Flesh, and such is the Temporal Felicity of that Church, for this same Felicity
according to the Flesh, is a means most gentle, and at the same time, most
efficacious to form the Temporal Greatness of the Church, as will be seen in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Twenty Reasons that prove the necessity of the Riches, Honors, and
Voluptuousness of the Church, to make thereof a Gospel according to the Flesh,
the Vocation of all the World to Faith, and a part of that World to the
Ecclesiastic Life, without which Riches Honors and Voluptuousness, the Church
having no Reputation among them who fancy those things, would perish, not being
able to subsist happy, according to the Flesh, if her Ministers were poor, as
formerly, and if they had not vast Riches, as the Glorious Cardinals, who are
at this day the Pope's Courtiers: Here also shall be shown the unluckiness, the
shamefulness, and even the Vice of Poverty, whereof God in his Providence, is
no Author, but Sin; or only Fortune, which on this score, may be accused as the
Enemy of Virtue.
ARTICLE I. Corrupt Nature loves Riches, Honors and carnal Pleasures; if the
Church had not of them to propose and bestow, there would be but few
Christians. The Church is composed of three sorts of Persons. The Magnificence
and Stateliness of Rome is able to work the Conversion of the Mohammedan
Princes: The Popes must have somewhat else to be for them beside God.
THe Pope's power being without Armed Forces, cannot make Infidels to believe,
or to list themselves in the Churches Communion, but through fair and gentle
means; but still efficacious by accommodating it self to Natures corrupted
inclinations, as has been said, for man seeing he does Idolize himself, would
never be ruled if he were not ticed and wheadled on by promises and
recompenses, l. 1. c. 25.
l'huomo ch' e l'idolo di se stesso non si coudurrebbe may senon allettato dal
premio. Therefore it is that the Romanists are at so much costs for Stages or
Theaters, and in Shows or Spectacles of Devotion, because people do naturally
love Voluptuousness, and will do any thing for its sake, after the inclinations
of corrupt Nature; this corruption is such, that if the Church had not the
greatest of all Voluptuousness according to the Flesh, to set before and
propose to those which She calls to Her Faith, the greatest part of Christians
would go seek their Fortune out of the Church, the Church would lose her
Reputation, and all her esteem, l. 5. c. 10.
which is the Basis that holds up all the Engines of her Policy, la stima ch' e
la ^ase di questo machine.

The better to conceive this kind of Verity, we must make a distinction of
Three sorts of people, which make Three kinds of vocation to this Faith; the
first are those who live in the Faith only out of pure zeal, di purissimo zelo,
l. 9. c. 9.
and which serve the Church out of pure spirit and courage, servon la Chiesa
per solo spirito, Ibid.
and these be those which are the purely spiritual, that would love God though
there were no Temporal Goods to be hoped for, because they slight all temporal
things, l. 8. c. 17.
dispreggiatrici d'ogni cosa terrena.

The second be those which are made up of Flesh and Spirit, and which are
willing to enjoy besides God, as much of the goods of the world as Law will
permit, Ibid.
composti di Carne di Spirito, desiderano per quanto la leg di Dio permette
anche i beni di questa vita; so they must have a Felicity composed of Spirit
and of Flesh, and they would not be so in love as they are with Religion, if
they did not give them hopes of worldly Goods, l. 9. c. 9.
non si nutrirebbe cosi universalmente l'affetto alla Religione.

The Third sort be those who are stark carnal, and which are taken up more with
those things that are seen, than with those which are not seen; and these be
the greatest number of all, Ibid.
molti ancora maggiormente s'affezzionano a quel che si vede che a quel che
sicrede. Now though this be an ill Quality, the wicked being wicked, only
because they prefer the Goods of the Body before those of the Soul and Spirit,
l. 6. c. 12.
i malvaggi sono malvaggi per che antepongono i beni del corpo a quei dello
spirito; nevertheless this disposition of theirs is in some sort not so bad
then, if having such a mind as they have after worldly Goods, they should spend
them in the Service of Jupiter and Mars, rather than in the Service of Jesus
Christ and his Church; so that the Church accommodating it self to their
corrupt inclination, calls them to its Faith, and its Communion, by setting
before them, and proposing to them greater worldly Goods, and greater
Voluptuousnesses, even according to the Flesh, than they could have if they
abode in the Service of Jupiter and Mars, Ibid.
ma pur servono al culto di Christo dove prima servivasi a queldi Giove e di
Mart.

Look ye there then, what it is that keeps the Church up in esteem, even
amongst people stark carnal, l. 23. c. 3,
per conservarla in estimazione anche presso gl'imperfetti.

Now this Esteem brings forth Veneration, and Veneration is the Basis of the
Churches Empire, Introd. c. 6.
quella venerazione ch' e la base del loro imperio; for without this great
Veneration that the Carnal Ones have for the Church, it were not possible to
keep the people in, nor to tame them, and make them keep on the Yoke, l. 2. c.
3.
richiedendosi grand aiuto di venerazione per ch' egli si contenti di ricevere
in bocca il freno; the Veneration that these Imperfect Ones have for the
Church, being founded upon the Carnal Felicity which she puts them in hope of,
there is no body but may see how greatly this Felicity is needful to make a
Catholic and Universal Vocation of all the World to the Churches Faith;
without this Felicity the Church having but a small concourse of these Faithful
Ones; l. 15. c. 5.
would fall into contempt, pover^ di concorso vile d'autorita; but on the
contrary, the alone Magnificence of the Buildings at Rome, since Two Hundred
Years agon, is able to strike admiration into all Infidel and Mohammedan
Princes, and to convert them to this Faith, l. 8. c. 17.
tanto che tali opere pie fat in Roma in solo due secoli bastarebbono per
render venerabile ed ammirabile la nostra religione alli sguardi di tutti i
Monarchi Maometani e Gentili.

And if instead of this Felicity of the Church, which appears to them, so they
did but know how often all goes contrary against the Popes, who have none for
them, but the Holy Spirit (quoth our Cardinal) they could not choose but have
Sentiments of Pity, l. 5. c. 13.
and (...) Disdain to enter into the Pope's Communion Non ho potuto d'hora non
compassionare i Pontefici conventi fra loro contrarii e tutti infesti al corso
di lei eccetto l'aura dello Spirito santo. Now if the Pope's having only God on
their side, make our Jesuit-Cardinal to pity them, and should appear thus to be
miserable in the eyes of others, how should they ever be able to convert
Mahometans? there must needs be something else then besides the Spirit they
speak of, for Popes to work such like conversions; and it would be great pity
if a Pope should have but only that for him.

ARTICLE II. The hope of sharing the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures which
belong to the Ecclesiastic state to be Pope, and to possess by Resignation
ones Kinsfolks Benefices; these things do make a great and substantial Vocation
for People to become Churchmen.
EVery one knows how much the Ecclesiastic State is glorious to God, the
Splendour and Glory of this State is due to the Carnal Felicity wherewith it is
invested, l. 1. c. 25.
se veramento vogliamo che la Regia spirituale sia frequentata da person
d'ingegno, di lettere, di valor, di nobilita, lasciando le patrie,
sottoponendosi al celibato ed all altre gravezze le quali induce la vita
Ecclesiastica, fa mestieri che possano sperare onori edentrate, for would there
be found so many persons of Wit, of Learning, of Worthiness, of Noble Birth,
that would betake themselves to a single Life, and other toilsomnesses which
the Ecclesiastical Life obliges them to, if they had not hopes by that means to
gain Honors and Temporal Revenues? Without doubt they ought to promise this to
themselves, and be content with their condition, partly out of affection for
Religion, and partly through joy to see themselves reverenced, and had in
veneration as Churchmen, especially amongst their Kindred, l. 17. c. 5.
vivano contenti, part per affetto di religione, part per godimento di quella
reverenza che in ogni famiglia si suol portare alla toga. Let a man consider
what Glory it is for this Faith, to see so many Noblemens and Princes Sons
enter into Orders, and consecrate themselves to the Service of God in quality
of the Pope's Courtiers. Should this be seen if the Church were poor, and if
the Piety of Christians had not afforded Means to the Pope to recompense
magnificently all this Gang? l. 1. c. 25.
cio senza dubio non seguirebbe la pieta de' Christiani non somminist^asse a
lui la commodita di rimunerarli altamente.

For in fine, there is no private man that gives himself to serve the Pope and
Court of Rome, but may hope to become one day a Cardinal; that is to say, above
Bishops and all Princes, and an Equal for Kings, that may not even hope,
himself or some of his to be one day Pope; without doubt, this thought cannot
be but most pleasing to all people, l. 1. c. 8.
era giocondo oggetto al cuore di ciascuno... habbiamo una Republica, l. 3. c.
10.
dove ogni plebeo pue divenir senatore, ogni suddito principe. The Court of
Rome is a Court composed of persons of all Nations of the World, where there is
none of them but may through his Learning and Deserving, be advanced to the
most sublime Dignities, and arrive either at the Sovereignty, or to a
participation of the Government and Revenues of the Church, l. 3. c. 10.
e una Corte composta di tutti i paesi Catolici nella quale ogn'uno con la
dottrina e co'l merito puo salire all dignita piu sublimi ed havere, o la
sovranita, o la participazione del governo e del patrimony Ecclesiastico.

But without flying so high, may not every Nephew easily hope for the Benefice
of his Uncle, upon his Resignation? And is it not a great comfort that an Uncle
may hope one day to leave his Benefice to his Nephew, or to some other of his
Kin, or to his Friend? How many young men have been, and are daily educated
virtuously, for the sake of this same carnal Expectance? molti giovani sono
educati nella virtu con la speranza d'haver si fat risegne di qualche vecchio
sacerdote di loro parentado. l. 23. c. 12.


Even this same hope according to the Flesh, makes the Incumbents more willing
and careful to repair or beautify their Churches, out of the confidence they
may be able to substitute in their places such persons as they bear a kindness
to, i beneficiati piu s'affezionano al ristoro della Chiesa confidandosi di
surrogarvi persona loro gradita. Ibid.
On the contrary, take away these Expectations and Hopes from the Roman Court,
and leave her only the Spirit, eccetto l'aura dello Spirito Santo, it will be a
great Pity, and no Contentment; she must have a better kind of Suckle to suck,
miglior sugo, that is to say, a Carnal Felicity; so that there is none but may
see, that all these Reasons be puissant, and yet mild means to make the
Vocations either to this Faith, or to this Clergyship, efficacious, and which
is no impediment to the perfection of that State or Order.

ARTICLE III. The Hope of Carnal Felicity which the Church promises, hinders
neither its Perfection, nor the perfection of the Ecclesiastic Order. The
Vices of Ambition and Worldly Glory are glistering, bright and taking Vices:
These same Hopes of Carnal Felicity, make all Virtues to bud, come forth, and
grow up, even to the perfection of the Contemplative Life.
THE Church setting before all the World an hope of possessing either the
Royalty of the World, or the Glory and Felicity of the Cardinalship, of the
Episcopacy, or other Prelateship, there is no question but the greatest part of
them who do enjoy these Honors, made their way thither through all the Virtues
which this same carnal Hope made to spring up in them, l. 8. c. 17.
il far germogliare le insigni virtu se premii fossero pronti.

This was it which rendered the Cardinal of Mantoue so admirable in the time of
the Council of Trent, he did not desire, or at least appear to desire, as all
others, the Crown nor the Diadem of the Sovereign Pontificat, l. 2. c. 6.
illustro lo Pontificato non desiderato, o almeno cosi temperamente nell
interno che nulla apparisse di cio nell'esterno. This is a rare Example; for
Ambition is so glistering, bright a Vice, that it loves to appear abroad; and
it is a Vice which is universally in great men, Ibid.
vizio splendido ed universale a grandi.

We must be fain then to conclude that these bright Vices which are universally
found in Grandees, are not opposite to that Sovereign degree of perfection
which their Rank, altogether Divine, does require, quel grado che richiede il
sommo della perfezione; l. 1. c. 2.
for otherwise one must be forced to say that the Vocation to the Popedom, and
other Ecclesiastical Dignities, were vicious and corrupt, and by consequence,
not of God, which would be quite against all appearance; for as to the State of
Holy Father, the Pope's perfection, in as much as he must be adored by the
Surname of Most Holy, the sublimeness of Virtue suting his Degree, is so great,
that those imperfections which be nothing in other men, become Monsters in the
Sereneship of his Divine State, l. 1. c. 1.
e tanta la sublimita di quella virtu la qual si richiede in chi dev' essere
adorato con sopranome di santissimo, e come il mezzano fra il Cielo e la Terra,
che le imperfezioni insensibili negli altri huomini in quella luce divengono
monstruose.

From whence it follows, That if the Hope and ambitious Desire of coming to the
Popedom, and the Gladness when one is arrived thereat, which are just like
those bright Vices which be in all Grandees, were monstrous Vices in Popes, as
it is rare to see any come to the Popedom by any other way, according to our
Cardinal-Historian; since the Church, as he makes it out, calls them to her
Offices through this way, it would follow (a man may say) That as often as one
beholds Popes, one should behold Monsters of Pride and Ambition, which had no
Piety coming near that which is requisite to an Order that is, as it were, l.
1. c. 2.
altogether Divine, pieta quanta si richideva da quello stato quasi divino.
Divino principato debitore d'una virtu cosi alta, d'una bonta sempre ammirata,
condizion del Ponteficato.

As to the state of Perfection of the Cardinals, in as much as by their Duty,
and the Functions of their Charges, they are the Reformers of Christendom, they
are obliged in their Lives to give a perfect Example of all Virtues, l. 6. c.
13.
dov' esser piu tosto i riformatori del Christianesimo, dar' esempio d'ogni
virtu.

The Cardinal's Order is the Mirror and Rule of all others, which are inferior
to it, ordine Cardinalizio il qual doveva essere specchio e norma degli altri
inferiori. l. 1. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 5.
On the Actions and Examples of the Cardinals, as well as on their Reputation,
depends the Good and Honor of the Church, l. 20. c. 8.
dall'opera, dal esempio, e dalla riputazione di essi pendesse il been e l'onor
della Chiesa. And as it is the Roman Court which is the principal Reformer, it
is that also which ought to be the first reformed, l. 23. c. 7.
che la principal reformatrice fosse anche la prima riformata; for the
Government of the Church Universal being upheld by the Councils of the
Cardinals, it would be unhandsom if the Course and the Virtue of their Lives
should not be so conspicuous and regular as to draw the eyes of all the World
upon it, l. 24. c. 7.
al cui consiglio presso al Pontefice essendo apoggiata l'amministrazione della
Chiesa universale, e deforme cosa ch'essi non risplendano con tali ornamenti di
virtu e di disciplina nel la lor vita, onde traggano gli occhi di ciascheduno.

From whence it must be concluded, according to the Principles of our
Cardinal-Historian, that the bright and glistering Vices of Ambition, of Desire
and Hope of Riches, and Honors and of Pleasures according to the Flesh, which
are found universally in all Grandees, are not those monstrous things that be
opposite to the State of Perfection, nor to the Reputation of the Order of
Cardinals.

As concerning the state of Perfection of the Bishops, one needs only to read
the Decrees of the Council of Trent, to know what belongs to their Rank, which
is so exalted, that all men are not, and there be very few which are found able
to reach it, poco eminente sarebbe la perfezione convenevole alla dignita
Episcopale se fosse in tal grado che vi giungnessero, o tutti o molti. l. 2. c.
3.


And thus too, forasmuch as they as well as others, have their share of these
bright make-shew Vices of Ambition, and the Love of Felicity according to the
Flesh, one is also fain, of necessity, to conclude, That that these kind of
vainglorious Vices are not so monstrously opposite to their Calling, nor to
their state of Perfection; otherwise they would be all Monsters which fill all
the Chairs and Thrones of the Ecclesiastical State; for in fine, if it be true,
That the Hopes of the Worldly Means of the Church make all Virtue to sprout; it
is certain that that Hope in the Church adds such spur^ to Virtue, as there be
not the like in any Republic in the World, l. 12. c. 3.
il quale stimolo alla virtu non e o fu may si forte in verun altro principato
d^po la creazione del mondo. Then also is it true too, That the abundance of
these very Goods is the Dug which nourishes these Virtues after they are
brought forth, l. 8. c. 17.
adunque l'abondanza di questi beni e mammella per nutrir la virtu nella Chiesa.

Who is it, for example, that would submit himself to be under the Rules of a
Single Life, and yield, if one may say so, that Pension to God, which is so
difficult a matter to pay truly, if there were no consideration for it, but
only Hopes in the Air of invisible Benefices, and Preferments hereafrer; but
that the Church has here in this Life, those other to give whose Revenues are
in present, and more solid according to the Flesh, l. 8. c. 7.
una garvissima pensione a' beneficiati: ed e peso tanto grave consiglio
difficillimo della continenza.

No doubt on it, but if the Hopes of the Temporal Goods of the Church were taken
away, a man should not see so many Noblemen and Gentlemen engage themselves in
the Ecclesiastic Life, l. 23. c. 3.
harebbe ritenuti molti nobili dalla vita Ecclesiastica.

Mean time, every one knows how much the Single Life serves to put a man upon
Contemplation of the things of Heaven, il chc riesce di tanto pro ad applicar
gli huomini alla contemplazione celeste; Ibid.
so that it is clear, That all those Barons which post after Benefices, would
never have applied themselves to the same Contemplative Life, if they had not
caught the Benefices; which makes it appear, That these splendid Vices be not
so opposite to this Contemplative Life, and yet at the same time, a happy Life
according to the Flesh; and that the Church would be deprived of an infinite
many of these blessed Contemplative men, if she had not an infinite many fat
Benefices to make thereof for them a corporal Beatitude; for if the Church had
been poor, humane frailty is so great, that she would never have had the Glory
to have seen these Contemplative Barons invested in her Offices and in her
Dignities, whom she calls thither through the Hope which she gives them
thereof, l. 1. c. 25.
il che per l'umana debolezza non cosi auvarebbe nella poverta della Chiesa.
From whence it appears, That this Politic Prudence is not opposite to Piety,
l. 15. c. 6.
la Prudenza politica non ripugna cosi alla Pieta Christiana.

The First of the Twenty Reasons why the Church makes use of the promise of
Temporal Goods to call Laymen into Orders. The Excellency of the Angels is, to
have no need of Lackies; that of Men to have a great many of them.
The perfection of a Magnificent Work, is, to have a deal more about it than it
needs, to the end it may appear more splendid; for example, the Magnificence of
a Palace upheld by rich Columns, is, to have a many more of them than needs
precisely to uphold it, l. 13. c. 3,
si come appunto ad un magnifico edificio si pone maggior numero di colonne ch'
e sofficiente a sostentarlo.

Unto this mavelous neat Example the Reverend Father John Baptist Giatino the
Jesuit, who translated into Latin this same History of our Cardinal, Printed at
Antwerp, in 1670, adds another surprising Example, which is that of Lackeys:
A Great Lord (quoth he) has need of some Lackeys, there is no doubt on it; then
it is for his honor to have a great many of them; yea, a many more than the
number precisely necessary; but on the contrary, the Angels having no need of
Lackeys, it is their excellency to have none at all. Angelorum est praestantia,
qui famulis non indigent, famulis carere, sed hominum quibus sunt opus,
praestantia est, supra quam indigeant iis abundare.

From whence that Father takes occasion to make this general Proposition, That
as for those things which have no need of supports, their perfection is to have
none at all; but as for those which have need of support, their excellency and
their perfection is to have more of them than needs, ita universe rebus quae
fulcimentis non egent, praestantiae vertitur, fulcimentis vacare; sed rebus
quae fulcris indigent, eis plus quam indigent abundare.

Now the Felicity according to the Flesh, has need of some Riches, of some
Honors, and of some carnal Pleasures; and by consequence, the excellency and
the perfection of that Felicity is to have a superfluous abundance of Riches,
of Honors, and of Pleasures, even according to the Flesh.

The Zealous will be ready to object, That in the present Life, it is man's
imperfection to stand in need of things, and that it is a perfection to have no
need of them.

The Cardinal-Historian answers them according to the Principles of the
Religious Policy, that Aristotle teaches the contrary; for he says, That the
Arts which serve to help our necessities, were first invented in the World, and
afterward the Wit of man applied it self to those Arts which serve to the
Felicity of Life, l. 8. c. 17.
insegna il filosofo prima essersi ritrovate le arti che sovengono all
necessita e dipoi rivolto l'ingegno all'invention di quelle che servono alla
felicita della vita: So that according to Aristotle, there is a carnal Felicity
in the Christian Life, and upon this Politic Rule of Aristotle, the Church did
presently in the first Ages provide things of Necessity, afterward she took
care together self a Court-Royal-Universal, which might have, without
impoverishing it self, wherewithal to recompense a great number of Excellent
persons that were to serve this Republic, and consecrate themselves to God,
specially in that kind of Life which is led in the Pope's Court, where their
Virtues suck abundance of Milk out of her Breasts; that is to say, out of that
Court's Temporal Felicity according to the Flesh, which cannot subsist, but
through abundance of Riches and Temporal Goods, Ibid.
dapoi che s' e supplito si ampiamente al bisogno, non era forse oportuno di
provedere anche ad una Corte e ad una Reggia universale laqual potesse
alimentare e rimunerare gran' numero d'huomini, i quali servissero a quella
Republica e si dedicassero specialmente a Dio in questa vita; adunque
l'abondanza di questi beneficii simplici e la mammella per nutrir la virtu
nella Chiesa.

So that the abundance of Riches, of Honors, and of Pleasures, making a
Felicity, whereof the Church is the Source, and the Hope whereof, makes the
Vocation of the Ecclesiastical Estate, yea, and even their Vocation to the
Faith; the more one has of these Goods, the more one is happy with an
Ecclesiastical Christian Felicity: Now the more happy one is, the more perfect
one is; yea, one is the more perfect, according as he has more of this sort of
the forementioned Felicity; and ones Virtues are kept by it so much the more in
better plight, and are better bred Virtues; if the Church then had remained
poor, should one have seen her Offices and her Dignities filled with so many
Virtuoso's as now there be, Great Wits and well-bred men; no never; for humane
Frailty is so great, that all this Glory of the Church would never have
appeared, l. 1. c. 25.
if she had remained poor, che per l'umana debolezza non cosi auverrebbe nella
poverta della Chiesa.

If the Church had remained poor, she would have remained unhappy according to
the Flesh, without Joyfulness, Splendour, or Honor, and by consequence,
imperfect, as well as unhappy, and deprived of the Felicity of Aristotle: Now
Jesus Christ did not preach a Felicity contrary to the Doctrines of Aristotle;
so that this Felicity has nothing contrary to Jesus Christ's; it has no thing
which is not conformable with it, but that therewith the Church may serve it
self, to make her vocation of the World in general unto this Faith, and of some
into Orders.

Reason II.
Can any blame the carriage of the Church, if in imitation of what God did
under the Old Testament, she accommodates her self to humane imperfections and
makes use of earthly recompenses as it were of an allurement to train on men to
the Clergiship, and to hold out the fatigues of the Ecclesiastical life without
Marrying; l. 9. c. 9.
Possi pe cio riprender la Chiesa s'ella, ad imitazione di cio che faceva Iddio
vel vecotuo Testamento, s'accommoda all imperfezione umana ed alletta eziando
con premii terreni a pigliar i legami dello stato Chiericale e le fatiche de'
ministerii Ecclesiastici.

Let the Zealous object, that God did never propose to his People temporal
goods, as necessary to their felicity, even temporal and fleshly. All the true
felicity of the Flesh being in those times only the hope of Eternity, according
as God did will, that even the Flesh after it is capacity should partake of,
caro mea requiescet in spe. All other carnal felicity being a sin condemned of
God in the Old as well as in the New Testament.

Yet the Cardinal, according to the principles of his Policy, maintains, that
these idea's which seem fine in Speculation, are some of those forms, which
have no consistence with the dispositions of their matter: for in fine the
Jewish People did believe, that temporal goods did make a true felicity
according to the flesh, for them; they loved them as such, and so did they beg
them of God, and he did grant them.

Ay, but the Zealous will reply, God indeed did grant them to that People, but
not as they did make a true felicity, no such felicity being the true one; but
only that which comes from the hope of Eternity, spe gaudentes. But granted
them temporal goods, telling them that they were not their felicity, warning
them not to cosen themselves, to believe they were such, nor to look after them
as such, nor to pray for them, as things making a kind of true felicity for
them, and that all their prayers made through this false faith were sin, and
their Sacrifices abomination before him; that Job upon the Dunghill, saying
with that his very flesh, which was then full of sores, he should see his God
and his Savior, after he was risen again from the dead, was more happy even
according to the flesh in that hope, than ever Solomon was in all his false
carnal felicity.

To all this, the Cardinal says, that these be Platonic Ideas; Ibid.
lasciamo i discorsi, poniamo il negozic in prattiqua. These be fine
discourses: but let us fall upon practice. Has Jesus Christ as to the
Government of his Church, taught any thing contrary to the lessons of Aristotle
and the other wise Heathens? Did God the Father teach his People things
contrary to what his Son has taught? Ones wisdom is not opposite to the
others. Aristotle and all the Pagan Legislators won upon People through hope
they gave them of carnal felicity. Is it possible that the Church can teach any
thing else? l. 9. c. 9.
come si la Chiesa di Christo predicasse ch'e contrario non dico a
l'insegnamenti d'Aristotele ma d'ogni tolerabil Republica de' gentili. As if a
carnal felicity for being Pagan, or for being Jewish, could not be Christian.

The Church is a Corporation the most happy that ever was, and the most happy
that is upon Earth; il corpo piu felice che sia in terra. Then her felicity
according to the flesh, that is to say, the happiness of riches, honors and
carnal pleasures ought to be greater, and more abundant in all those goods,
that if it were yet a Jewish or a Pagan felicity: For what should oblige men to
part with either their Paganism or their Judaism to become Christians or
Prelates in the Church, if the Church were not able to assure them, that by
entering into its Communion they should be richer and more voluptuous than the
Jews or the Pagans?

Reason III.
Nature it self, does it not teach men this prudence to act through motives of
temporal good, as of riches, honors and pleasures? la natura medesima
c'insegna questa prudenza.

When for example she invites them to eat, does not she propose pleasure for
the Motive, and that which is pleasing in the food; l. 9. c. 9.
invitando gli huomini non che ad altri azioni honest, a mantener la propria
vita co'l diletto del cibo.

The Zealous will reply, that it is even in this that the corruption of Nature
consists, to take pleasure, for the Motive of its actions; whereas it ought not
to consent to pleasure, but as unto a repose till its force return again, the
better to fall on again to its business, and that even Aristotle was no
ignorant in this Doctrine.

Within the large compass of our Cardinals principles, it is easy enough to
reply hereupon, that if it be in this that the corruption of Nature consists:
The Church, to the end her Laws may take effect, is obliged to accommodate them
to the imperfections of corrupt Nature, and to suffer a less evil to shun a
greater.

The greatest of all evils would be to see the Church and the Ecclesiastical
Principality to perish. Now it is certain that this Principality would perish and
all the Church with it, in condition which things are now in, if she had not
riches, honors and carnal pleasures to nourish the virtues of her Priests;
togliendosi. The Milk and the Dugs of the Church being once taken away, the
Church would be destroyed, l. 8. c. 17.
because the carnal felicity of the Court of Rome would be brought to naught;
cio che sarrebbe pe^gio, mancherebbe il principato Ecclesiastico che mantiene
in unita, in regola ed in decoro tutta la Chiesa. Now is it possible that any
greater evil should happen than that same? No certainly.

For to hinder this, there needs no more but to set up in the Church carnal
felicity, that may be pleasing to corrupt Nature and serve for a motive to
receive its Faith, and to undergo the toilsomness of a Clergy man's life; if
this be a corrupt Motive, yet this same corruption serving as the remedy of so
great an evil it ought to be regained, l. 23. c. 3.
as a very great good, minimo male massimo been.

It would be very good it is to be granted, l. 17. c. 10.
if all were done through the Motive of piety, and not of gain, per affetto di
pieta e non di guadagno. But if the Church tending only after this same
goodness, did propose no Motive of gain, this very thing would become the
foundation of the greatest evil; fondamento del male; for the Church would have
no more a Court of Rome, nor an Apostolical Principality, which upholds the
whole Church. So that this good becoming the ground of evil, Ibid.
would become worser than if it were an evil in its own Nature, con divenir
fondamento del male, riesce peggior che se di natura sua fosse male. What must
be done then according to right Policy? Why, set this same kind of goodness
forth of the Church, which is only for proposing Piety, for the Motive to bring
men to the service of God, and would be for employing Church riches for to
relieve the Poor, rather than to make carnal felicity for Churchmen, this
heroical felicity must be absolutely destroyed, convien tolora levar un been
qund'egli con divenir fondamento del male riesce peggiore che se di natura sua
fosse male. Ibid.
In such case poverty is vice, and poverty in Churchmen would be worse in them
than sin; peggiore che se di natura sua fosse male.

So that although it were an evil in the Church, to propose carnal felicity and
the enjoyment of carnal pleasures to those, she would bring into her Bosom; yet
in respect of Politic prudence, this false Faith being the lesser evil, it
becomes stark honesty and has all the qualitys of goodness which render it
laudable, l. 2. c. 6.
il minor male in risguardo alla prudente elezione ha onesta, e lode volezza di
been.

Reason IV.
A government is not to be blamed, if through hope of Booty the Soldiers be
stirred up to forage a Country, to conquer it, and kill their Enemies, capi
militari con speranza della preda e del sacco stimolano gli eserciti a
l'espugnazione del paese nemico. l. 9. c. 9.
Booty and pillage are the pincipal ends that Soldiers purpose to themselves,
Ibid.
il principale nelguerra rispetto al Soldato, e il botino. Should a man do evil
to exhort Soldiers by this hope? Now then do but suppose that Clergymen may
have for the principal Motive of their functions carnal felicity, Ibid.
which is the recompense thereof, il principale ne' Ministerii sacri sia il
temporale and non lo spirituale. Can the Church be blamed to set before them
the carnal Motive of this same felicity, and to offer fat benefices to those,
which she invites to the toilsomness of the single life and to be Clergymen, to
make the condition more desirable and more supportable?

The Zealous will object here, that the Church should teach Clergymen that
carnal pleasure is not right humane felicity, and that if they believe that
riches be able to make their felicity the right even as to their flesh, which
is baptized, their faith is false as well as their pretended felicity, they
renounced that pretended felicity when they received Baptism: for that which
may be the cause of Eternal damnation can never be the right felicity, no not
even according to the flesh, which is redeemed and sanctified to be saved.

According to the Principle of the Religious Policy of this same our Cardinal;
one answers, that these be discourses in the Air, let us leave off discourses,
and come to matters that be practiced, lasciamo i discorsi, Ibid.
poniamo il negozio in prattica. It Is a matter of fact according to the
Cardinal's principles, that most part of men are more taken with that which is
seen, than with that which is believed, Ibid.
molti ancora maggiormente s' affettionano a quel che si vide, che a quel che
sicrede. All this multitude of folks here in the World would never have left
off worshipping of Jupiter and Mars, and to betake themselves to the worship of
Jesus Christ; if this same Church had not told them that she had more carnal
felicity to reward them with all than they could ever expect from Mars or
Jupiter. Why should any one be loath then, that the Church should begin the
preaching of her Gospel, upon that point; that from thence she may begin their
vocation to the Faith? If she went about at first to disabuse them, and tell
them that the felicity of the senses is no true felicity, and that all the
delight thereof is but error, and false felicity; who in these times wherein
we live would believe such a Gospel? Here are your demonstrations as they be
called in the affair of Politic Religion. But when one at very first does
preach thus to the People, viz. That the Court of Rome is a Theater, and a
Treasury set open with the deservingness of all men, without distinction of any
Nation, a Treasury and a Theater common to all the learned and to all the
persons of merit of Christendom, l. 24. c. 20.
un erario ed un teatro commune al valor, alla dottrina, al merito di tutti li
Christiani. That in this Court is every subject may become a Prince, l. 3. c.
10. Ibid.
and every Prince King of the Universe, ogni plebeo puo divenir Senatore, ogni
suddito Principe... ogn'uno puo selire all dignita piu sublime ed havere o la
soveranita o la participazione del governo e del patrimonio Ecclesiastico. Who
is it now that would not become a Christian, if he have but never so little
belief in the words of these Apostles, and love for their carnal felicity.

Reason V.
The Sacraments instituted by Jesus Christ, are sources of his Grace which is
Spiritual, and yet their matter is corporal, l. 23. c. 12.
i medesimi Sacramenti i quali son fonti della grazia divina furono istituiti
da Christo in materia sensibile. So also riches and carnal pleasures, though
they be temporal things, may well be the sources of the highest Virtues in
those who act through the Motive and hope of getting temporal goods, and of
enjoying them. It Is clear then that neither those who for recompense of the
toilsomness of their Clergyship propose to themselves carnal felicity, nor the
Church which promises these felicity are to be blamed, Ibid.
val cio di premio all fatiche sosteneut lungo tempo dall'antico beneficiato.
Riches are as one may say the Sacraments of carnal felicity, and the
Ecclesiastics are Ministers thereof.

The Zealous will look upon this compassion of sensible Sacraments, with
sensible felicity, as a piece of blasphemy.

But according to the Principles of our Cardinal, the Sacraments make Virtues
to sprout forth and feed them being sprung, in this all agree with him; but
what is there besides the Sacraments that is fitting to make virtue sprout, but
the expectation of carnal recompenses? Se i premii fossero pronti, l. 8. c. 7.
sarebbe agevale il far germogliare le insigni virtu.

The Zealous will reply, that it was very easy for God to give the recompense
which he promised, and yet the promises of God and his recompenses had not the
effect to make those remarkable and grand Virtues spoken of here before to
sprout forth in that People: but on the contrary all their old Worship was
nothing for the most part but abominable hypocrisy before God.

The answer is not difficult, following our Cardinals Principles: It had been
yet much worse, if God had not had recompenses to promise unto them, for they
would not so much as have rendered him any Worship or service though but
hypocritical, and no-wise pleasing to him; they would have forsaken him quite
as they did so often, and as Christians would do at this day to serve Jupiter
and Mars, if Jesus Christ did not promise them a temporal and carnal felicity,
greater than Jupiter or Mars do promise.

Reason VI.
In a good action, may be considered the interior Piety, which God
recompenseth with Eternal felicity, and the exterior pains which suteably God
is to recompense with temporal reward: for humane incommodities ought to be
rewarded, with humane pay, convien che nel culto divino l'umane incommodita
siano ricompensate con altri umani vantaggi. l. 1. c. 25.


Is it not a rugged task to be obliged to pray to God every day an hour and an
half, l. 8. c. 17.
or thereabouts? Interno ad una ora e mezza d'orazione cotidiana. The urgent
instances which the German Priests made at the Council of Trent for leave to
Marry, do not they leave witness, how troublesome it is to lead the Clergy's
single life, and that their continence is very painful? Ibid.
Le istanze perpetue della Germania pe'l matrimonio de' sacerdoti testificano
se resti una gravissima pensione a beneficiare. Can all these incommodities be
enough recompensed with all the Benefices of the Church?

Virtue, quoth the Zealous, is recompense great enough of it self, and divine
rewards do far out go all that be humane; and as for temporal conveniences
they are due in Justice to those which labor, not as recompenses to make up
humane felicity for them, otherwise then so far forth, as they may be necessary
means to make them to live in the service of God, l. 8. c. 16.
non in pagamento ma in sostentamento: It Is only hopes of Heaven that makes
humane felicity even here upon Earth, spe gaudentes; all other humane felicity
is false.

But these Zealous Persons may please to consider, that God has undertaken to
root up out of man's heart his Natural inclinations, l. 1. c. 25.
non voule Iddio sveller dagli animile innate inclinazioni. Now corrupt Nature
believes that there is a civil Politic humane felicity, such as Aristotle and
the Philosophers were acquainted with, which consists, not in the hopes of
Eternal welfare which is supernatural, but in the enjoyment of Riches, Honors
and carnal pleasures; corrupt Nature following this belief, has an inclination
for this felicity. God came not to root out inclinations so Natural.

To believe that the hope of Eternal welfare is the only felicity of this
temporal life, and to follow that faith, is an heroik Virtue. It Is not God's
design to make a general infusion of this Faith, Ibid.
and of this heroic Virtue in all Christians, non vuole Iddio infunder
universalmente una virtu eroica. So that according to our Cardinal, the Gifts
and divine Virtues of the Holy Spirit are not heroical Virtues; because they be
common to all Christians, who be in the state of grace and ought to be saved,
but Christians may be saved without this same Faith and heroical Virtue whereof
he speaks. We are no longer in the times of Heroes, nor of their combats
against Tyrants; we are in a time of Peace and humane Virtue, which is
nourished by and finds its felicity in humane rewards. In the time of
persecution, and of Heroes, there were more Saints than in this present time of
humane Virtue, but on the other side there were fewer then that were saved. On
the contrary in these times there are more saved and fewer Saints, because the
Heroes times were times of Victories and of combats to get to Heaven, l. 1. c.
25.
but ours is a time of facility and easy Devotion: Se questa con vittoria
della difficoltu e piu feconda di santi, quella con l'acuto della facilita e
piu abondante disalvi.

Here now as it is called, is demonstration in Politic Religion! After which no
man may doubt that the Church has not right to call men to the Faith, through
the hopes of Riches Honors, Pleasures, and all carnal and humane delights,
which are enjoyed in her Communion in this happy time of humane felicity.

Reason VII.
The People could not live without carnal felicity, according as every one's
gust requires to please his sense, wherefore they will have Theaters and
Stage Plays, vuole popolo i teatri; they are set upon it obstinately to love
this felicity; it is necessary then to govern them according to this obstinate
inclination of corrupt Nature. Why should not the Church then bestow and allow
them Stage Plays and Sights and Theaters.

But to furnish People with these pleasures and to flatter their senses with
these satisfactions, the Prelates themselves must have Riches and Pleasures,
and in such great abundance that they may be able to give them out abroad in
large measures, for no body can give forth what he has not.

The Zealous will say, that this is to uphold Peoples errors, who find in the
pleasing of their senses a delight which they call felicity: That the delight
of the senses in this, cannot without error be called felicity nor be loved as
such without sin, and that it is never permited to contribute to any sin how
little soever it be under pretense to avoid a greater thereby, che sia sempre
illecito il fare mali. And therefore that the Church cannot make use of those
Pomps and Ceremonies which she reckons necessary to refresh the senses, and
procure attention, which the Soul ought to have for divine things: the right
felicity of senses regenerate, being to serve God according to, and in the
perfection of Christian regenerated Souls; all other carnal felicity, being
false, and all love of false felicity, sin, and an error in the heart, which
the Church ought not to cherish under color of avoiding greater thereby.

To this it is answered according to our Cardinal. That the common Proverb
among them which have Law business, l. 6. c. 3.
is, that an Ounce of Fact is more worth to win your cause than many Pounds of
Argument, essendo commun' proverbio che a vincer i liti piu vale un' oncia di
fatto che molte libre di raggione, and the fact is constant and apparent, that
the Church gives the People Theaters and Spectacles of Devotion, l. 1. c. 25.
to give them pleasure and a felicity humane, sensual, Devout, confederando il
piacer con la divozione. She does it, to cure the fondness which they have
after other sensual and indevout delights, wherein they might set up a false
felicity to themselves: Now this fact being notorious, to what purpose all this
reasoning against fact?

It will be replied again that the Church does not pretend to cherish Peoples
errors, who would feign find their humane felicity in sensible delights; that
if in Church shows or sights, the Ministers go into an excess and beyond that
which is necessary to keep the People attentive upon God, the Church is neither
guilty nor answerable for those excesses, she condemns them in her Canons, l.
18. c. 6.
s'interdisse ne' suoni e ne' canti qualunque mistura di lascivo e d'impuro,
and that she does not permit that kind of delight, but in such degree, Ibid.
where it may serve to keep the mind attentive to its Devotions, ove e il
tenore del canto e il significato delle parole sia divoto e quella aiutie e non
impedisca l'indtendiment di queste; and in that degree which may be fitting to
instill into hearts, after a sweet manner, Ibid.
sentiments of Piety, ed acconcio instrumento ad infunder per dolce modo negli
animi i sensi della pieta. But the Church in this did never pretend to serve
the Peoples error, which of this delight create to themselves a carnal
felicity.

All these zealous distinctions be speculative, and discourses are to no
purpose where there is visible and manifest experience, sono indarno i discorsi
dove l'esperienza e palese. l. 8. c. 10.


So that by these Reasons taken from the Practice of the World, such as it is
at this day, and from right Policy, it appears, that the Church may invite
unbelievers to the Faith, and believers to the Clergyship for the sake and
consideration of an humane felicity, all of Riches, Honors and delights
according to the Flesh, secondo la carne; from whence it follows that Riches
are absolutely necessary for the Church, and poverty would be its ruin and
destruction.

It Is fitting to Observe here as a conclusion clearly drawn from the Seven
Reasons foregoing, what advantage it is to the Church that her Clergymen should
possess all the Riches possible; l 9. c. 9.
it is much preferable even before the relief of the Poor. Che la prima e
principal part dell'Ecclesiastiche entrate doverebbe applicarsi a' poveri e
non a' Ministranti. These be the Churches Enemies which broach this, for the
Cardinal maintains, that if the chiefest and best Portion of Ecclesiastical
Revenues were applied to relieve the Poor, it would be a Custom directly
opposite to the felicity of the Commonwealth, Ibid.
to the institution of God and of Nature, ed io affermo che cio sarebbe un
costume dirimpetto contrario al felice Stato della republica, ed a l'istituti
di dio e della natura. So that it is upon this Principle that the other Reasons
remaining behind shall be grounded.

Reasons VIII and IX.
Poverty is shameful, turpis egestas. Now what is shameful is contrary to the
Veneration, which the People ought to have for Prelates, and which make the
Basis of their Empire, quella venerazione ch'e la base de loro imperio.
Ecclesiastical Revenues then ought to be employed above all to enrich the
Prelates and not others. A man naturally abhors Poverty, and the pains-taking
which accompanies it as necessary to get a livelihood: It Is this same dread
that makes men labor, to the end they may shun poverty: if then for all this
same dreadfulness of poverty, yet so many People of the poorer sort do still
lie lazy, what would they do when they saw, that there was a settled bank for
them in the Riches of the Church? Ibid.
Che sarebbe quando vedessero una provisione abondate e sicura per tutti
poveri. So that it is better that this bank be applied for to enrich the
Prelates, than to succor the Poor's misery: the Poor must be made to work to
heap up in others that Nataural dread which they have of Poverty and
pains-taking, which accompanies it, in tal maniera simantien l'orrore verso la
poverta come compagna dello stento. Ibid.
If a man reads Chapter the Ninth of the Ninth Book, and Chapter the Ninth of
the Sixteenth Book of the History of our Cardinal's Council, he shall see by
what the Cardinal speaks thereof poverty, as also by what he has already said,
that he talks after another manner than Mahomet. The Cardinal approves the
dread and shunning of poverty, which he attributes to Nature, whose
inclination's God will not, quoth he, destroy; and the false prophet Mahomet,
in his Alehoran in the Chapter of the Cow, says the Devil will frighten you
with poverty, condemning the fear of poverty, as a temptation of the Devil.
Thus the Policy of Mahomet, is tyrannical and contrary to Nature, but our
Cardinals, is Religious and all full of new lights.

Reason X.
Poverty comes ordinarily from some one of these Five causes, Lust, Gluttony,
Crime, Idleness or Misfortune; but the Four first are the most ordinary, so
that of Ten Poor, a man scarce finds one that did not become so through his own
fault, or his Ancestors, si che di ognidieci poveri a fatica sitrovera uno la
cui poverta non sia proceduta o da colpa di lui o degli antenati. l. 9. c. 9.
So that pain being inseparable from sin, makes this sin be as much feared, as
a man fears the inseparable pain thereof, which in this Case is the sin it
self, even poverty, though it be only out of Natural dread that a man has of
pains, which must not therefore be separated from the sin, nor must a bank be
made for to relieve the Poor, because they being Poor are therefore guilty
sinners; this would give boldness to men to sin, by taking away dread of those
miseries which accompany poverty, which follows sin: It Is better then to
convert this bank unto the profit of the Prelates, and to enrich them and make
a voluptuous carnal and devout life for them.

Politic considerations upon that which is called fortune or misfortune.
This Maxim, That all which we see come to pass among men is the effect of a
just providence, would cause if it were true, a very great disorder in the
Religious Politic Government. Upon this Principle, it would be taken for
granted, that when a man is not Rich, it is a certain sign that he has no
virtue: because a just providence could not leave a virtuous man without
temporal reward, nor without perferring him in the distribution of Riches,
Honors, and Pleasures, before those who have not so much Virtue; and so it
would come to pass, that the perfection or lack of Virtue, being thus openly
marked by temporal felicity or misery; every one would be ready to reason thus,
This man is Rich, so then he is virtuous, this man is Poor, so then either he
is not virtuous, or else his Ancestors were not virtuous, which would cover the
face of the Poor with confusion; and in effect ordinarily poverty is
shamefaced, because it does suppose some sin, turpis egestas.

Yet it is not just to wrong all that be poor, by believing they have deserved
their poverty, by their own or Parents sin: there be poor which have been all
their life most virtuous, and so would be very Rich, if by a just providence
they were recompensed according to their merit. Indeed the number of this sort
of Poor is not great, and of Ten Poor, it may be there is not one which is not
Poor, for the punishment of his sin; but yet at last some such virtuous Poor
there are, how small soever their number be: it is then necessary to cast forth
this Maxim, out of the Religious Policy; for if Poverty goes for Vice, or the
mark of Vice without exception, to hear their generally speaking, all the poor
are disgraced except the Monks, who make a Vow of Poverty, whereof we say
nothing here; so that if a man should seek after Ecclesiastical Benefices, and
should be put by, he will be disgraced, which would extremely trouble the
Commonwelth's repose; because no body would be able to suffer a putting by, or
a putting after another, with so manifest a shame, percio che nessun potrebbe
tolerare d'esser posposto con si manifesta vergogna. l. 1. c. 25.


The opposite Maxim then is more convenient, which admits a fortune which
presides in its turn over the distribution of temporal goods, and which regards
this same Fortune as the enemy of Virtue. This Maxim being established, all
the unfortunate may be able to cover the shame of their poverty, by accusing
Fortune, the enemy of Virtue, which set her self to persecute them, and this
kind of accusation will be a Puissant lenitive to their grief, Ibid.
e un ottimo lenitivo il poter accusar la fortuna come nemica della virtu. This
consideration is from an Author profound in feat of Policy, he proves that this
recourse to an unjust Fortune, is necessary to keep up the Public quiet, Ibid.
l. 2 c. 10. l. 3. c. 16. and l. 12. c. 3.
e alta osservazione di qualche serittore che si fatti abbagli siano necessarii
per conservar la quiet nella Republica. After this manner also did the Nuncio
Alexander, reason in the Diet at Worms, whom our Cardinal also approves, and
who upon this Principle did observe amongst the causes of Poverty, misfortune
as the fifth, il disastro, l. 9. c. 9.
that is to say the Disgrace of Fortune, enemy of Virtue.

Now the Providence of God cannot be enemy of Virtue; so that what one calls
Fortune in right carnal and Religious Policy, is not according to the
Principles of our Cardinal, the same thing as divine Providence. Also he does
not fear to say that it would be better if the Pope were in actual possession
of all the Riches of the Universe, that he might make distribution of them to
every one according as he deserved then to see them distributed as they be, by
way of inheritance without any discretion, and to go from Father to Son, at
hap-hazard, l. 24. c. 10.
esser dono del caso nell'eredita dcl sangue. The Estates which go from Fathers
to Children, by way of inheritance, go to them according to his reckoning by
hazard, and not by divine Providence: otherwise he might say it would be
better, that they went by the Order of the Popes Providence, then by that of
the Divine: Thus in general it is true to say according to him, that Fortune
has a great share in distributing Estates, nel conseguire i gran' beni suol
haver part la fortuna; and that ordinarily the events of Fortune do concur to
make Virtue honored, and Vice hated, gli auvenimenti della fortuna concorron
tutti con fare che per lo piu la bonta sia onorata ed amata, e'l vizio
vituperato e odito. l. 3. c. 8.
Which comes to pass, because the goodness of divine Providence corrects when
it pleases, malignity of Fortune, Virtues enemy, or else the industry of man
surmounts Fortune's malignity; for it is upon this account we say, That many
times a man is the Artifice of his own Fortune, l. 9. c. 19.
onde per lo piu e vero il detto che eiascuno e fabro della propria fortuna.
But when it is not so, this malignity of Fortune, does not fail to show it
self, and to make it appear that sometimes, and in her turn she presides alone
over these events: Thus it was to Fortune that our Cardinal attributes, for
example, the event of the Regency of Queen Catharine de Medicis in France, l.
14. c. 3.
dalla fortuna fu riserbata ad havar la corona di Francia e l'assoluto imperio
di quella Monarchia.

So the Kingdom of England, being reconciled to the Church under Queen Mary,
who preceeded Queen Elizabeth, he concludes thereupon, That there are
vicissitudes of Fortune vanquished by Virtue, which fill mortals with
admiration though without reason. Inconstancy being so Natural in the World,
that the greatest of all marvels would be, if inconstancy did not rule therein
vicende di fortuna ch' empiono di maraviglia i mortali. On the contrary, the
advancement of Elizabeth, and the Heresies reestablishment, he attributes to
Fortune Victorious, rather than to the Spirit of that Queen, l. 14. c. 8.
in cio piu adoperasse la fortuna che l'accortezza. But then there are some
things, which according to our Cardinal, God never leaves to Fortune, l. 14. c.
10.
as for example the Election of a Pope, divina providenza la qual non vuole che
un Papa si elegga a caso; which makes it appear according to the Cardinal that
there be then some events, which God leaves to hazard and fortune, such, for
example, as the dying of a child, without baptism, when by chance, there is no
water to be found, l. 9. c. 8.
e caso fortuito che non si trovi acqua, or when the Child dies in its Mother's
Belly, Ibid.
e coso fortuito che'l fanciulli moia nel ventre: For then nothing hinders to
admit a state wherein it is possible the Child may be saved provided it come by
accident, Ibid.
ove non sia natural ma accidentale. For God was able to leave these sort of
accidents to Fortune, without providing for them in his Providence, toltine gli
auvenimenti fortuiti. Ibid.
It Is even the same in distribution of temporal Goods, Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, when it is made with injustice, that is, when the virtuous have the
least share thereof: for then it appears that this event can have no other
cause, but that enmity which Fortune exercises against Virtue, when by hazard
that enmity becomes Victorious. The establishing of this Politic, and
Religious Maxim has been very important according to our Cardinal, as we have
seen here before, for Public repose and quiet, whereas on the contrary, the
Zealous who refer all to divine Providence, attribute events to it altogether
unjust: they overwhelm the Poor with shame and confusion, so that they can find
neither lenitive for their quiet, nor a vail for their shame, which fills all
with confusion, and makes it appear how dangerous it is under the pretense of
Piety, to be ignorant, or to forsake the Rules of the right carnal and
Religious Policy, which has the repose, and Worldly felicity of People for its
object, prudenza politica laqual habbia per oggetto la quiet e la felicita
mondana de' popoli. l. 14. c. 8.


Reason XI.
Quoth the Cardinal, I willingly allow that those heaps of excessive Wealth, in
one sole Person is an offense against distributive justice, l. 8. c. 17.
aggiungo che i medesimi eccessi dell'entrate Ecclesiastiche, i quali cadono
quivi in una persona stessa con offessa della giustitia distributiva. It Is a
sin, it is true, but a sin, which is turned into good for an infinite company of
men; convertonsi in beneficio d'innumerabili. Because remorse of Conscience and
desire of reputation put together, spur on Rich Prelates to undertake
Magnificent works of Piety, which bring great honor to God, great relief to
the Poor, setting them on work for the Ornament of the City, and Royal
Ecclesiastical Court, in so much that such very buildings are enough to make
Converts of Infidel and Mohammedan Princes; nel sollevamento delle poverta,
Ibid. l. 23. c. 11.
nel fomento della virtu, nel esecuzione di pie opere grandi. All this would
never be, if Prelates were not rich, and if the chief and best Portion of the
Churches goods were distributed among the Poor; and there would be a great evil
in the Church, whereof this pretended Charity for the Poor, would be the
ground. Now that which is the ground of so great an evil, is worse than a sin,
according to our Cardinal, so that this pretended Charity for the Poor, which
would hinder the carnal felicity of Churchmen, would be worse according to him
than sin.

Reason XII.
The Prelates will not reduce themselves to as strict a life as Monks; l. 9. c.
9.
non vogliono ridursi a quel rigore di vita. But yet through their Riches they
be the props of those Holy Academies of Ecclesiastical perfection; Ibid.
sono il sostegno di queste santo palestre di perfezione Ecclesiastica.

So that this can be no less than the Churches great Zeal, and great Wisdom;
gran zelo e gran saviezza nella chiesa, that has settled so many Millions of
Rent throughout all the extent of Christendom, to employ only for rewarding of
those which labor in the perfection of others, which the Prelates themselves
will not attend to, l. 9. c. 9.
il costituir tanti milioni di rendite u mercede solo di questi Ministri.

Reason XIII.
Put case, quoth our Cardinal, that all Benefices were infructuous, bringing in
no Revenue to the incumbents, siano ministerii infruttiferi; what would come
out? One should see presently fall to ground the Ecclesiastical Order, upon
which depends the exercise, the knowledge, and the Port or stateliness of
Religion; tosto vedremo cader quell'ordine dal quale dipende l'esercitio, la
notitia, e'l mantenimento della Religione. For no body would undergo the
Clergy's single life and other fatigues of their Order, for pure love's sake
toward God.

Reason XIV.
The Cardinals being deprived of these vast Riches could not live, l 23. c. 11.
l. 12. c. 13.
non potrebbono vivere i Cardinali, il Senato Romano rimanerebbe privo del
vitto: The Roman Senate would be deprived of livelihood.

Reason XV.
Without these excessive Riches, the so glittering splendor of the Roman Court
would be extinct; therefore the instructions of the French Ambassador at the
Council of Trent, containing Articles which tended to impoverish the Court of
Rome, one sees clearly that France by that its proposed Reformation, went about
to take away from the Court of Rome, its splendor and sovereign Authority, l.
16. c. 10.
i quali tutti si riducevano a torre al Pontefice la collazione de' benefici,
la riserbazione delle pensioni, la riscossione degli emolumenti, ed in somma a
levar lo splendore e l'imperio della Corte Romana.

Reason XVI.
If the Riches of the Romish Prelates were not excessive, the Principality of
the Apostolic See would fall to naught, l. 8. c. 17.
mancherebbe il principato Ecclesiastico che mantiene in unita, in regola, ed
in decoro tutta la Chiesa. And the Reason is, that the Roman Court is the most
excellent School, wherein all men's Wits, who may be fit to rule in the Church
ought to be refined, that they may be capeable thereof, otherwise they would
remain ignorants in Policy, Ibid.
senza affininarsi in dottrina ed in senno nell'excellente scuola della
frequenza, like to your petty Bishops or Prelates, which are confined to scurvy
little Places, and are obliged to stick to the exercises of their Proper
Functions of the Altar, and the Quire, l. 17. c. 10.
confinarsi in piccioli luoghi all'esercizio privato dell'altare e del coro.
For unless the Courtiers of Rome, had hopes of great rewards, Ibid.
Rome would have no Courtiers for God's sake, non rimanesse in piede una Reggia
universale della Chiesa, i cui stanziali ed ufficiali potessero sperar gran'
premii.

Now, if the Roman Court were no more in the bravery, and splendor, wherein
now it is, and big through the concourse of so many Barons, and Princes, which
through their Birth or Dignity, are the Columns of the Church, and which are
not come thus together to Court, but only out of hopes of great and mighty
Riches, whereunto they aspire, what would become of the Church? The Court of
such a Monarch is a most excellent Workhouse, where every thing that is an
Artifice in the World, and the most cleaver shifts are woven and wrought
dexterously, and by consequence one learns there more perfectly to know them
and toward them off with address, l. 1. c. 23.
Corte d'un Monarcha, cio e una di quelle officine dove i piu fini artificii si
come perfettemente si lavorano, cosi sottilmente si riconoscono. There it is
that one may say humane understanding is perfected, and becomes refined to the
supreme Degree in all the subtilties of Religious Policy, Intr. c. 3.
raffinatissimo in tutte le sottilezze dell'umana politica. If then the Church
were deprived of her Universal Court, where the sleights of all other Courts
might be as it were refined, what would become of her Unity, her splendor and
all the Rules of her Discipline, wherein she is upheld by the Roman Court? What
would become of this Roman Court, without vast Riches? Which as it were by way
of circulation, flow to her from all the parts of the Churches Body to be sent
forth again from thence, and to carry life up and down? It Is evident then, that
Riches are the blood of the Church, and that her Soul and life are in this
blood. Wordly goods and pleasures are the best juice, which the Roman Court as
a mystic Vine, sucks from all parts of the Universe, and by means whereof she
keeps life, Unity, l. 6. c. 7.
and vigor in all branches of the Church, that are planted and flourish all
Christendom over. il miglior sugo ond'ella quasi mystica vite mantien l'unita
e'l vigore ne' palmiti delle Chiese Christian. It Is by means of these Riches,
that the Court of Rome, keeping it self up in reputation and authority, it
gives Laws, l. 16. c. 8.
and even Being to all the Body of the Church, whereof it is the Head, corte
Romana la quale e il capo che non solo da le leggi ma l'essere a questo corpo.

Reason XVII.
In every natural Body, animate, and liveing, there must be two distinct sort
of humors, one courser, as the blood, phlegm, the two biles yellow and black:
now in the Body of the Church, the Prelates be as these humors. The other
humors are subtle and are called Spirits, which are most purified, and the
most active parts of the blood; these be the Instruments which serve the Soul
to give the Body all its motion. The Monks and Religious Orders in the Church
are as the Spirits: They live purified from all love, and esteem of things of
the Earth, l. 8. c. 17.
dispreggiatrici d'ogni cosa terrena.

These two sorts of humors in the Body are so necessary, the one to the other,
that he that should go about to separate the Spirits from the grosser humors,
and to keep nothing but pure Spirits, upon pretense that they be the purest,
and contribute most to action, would quickly see those Spirits to fail and
evaporate for lack of matter to vegetate them and feed them, gli spiriti soli
nell'animale fanno le funzioni vitali, adunque direbbe taluno, l. 9. c. 9.
e che servono tanti umori piu grossi? Servono a molto; senza questi non
formerebbono e non si conserverebbono gli spiriti, cosi accade nel proposto
nostro.

If you ask to what purpose then do Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops and
other Prelates, full of felicity according to the flesh, serve? You will be
answered they are very useful, because without their carnal felicity, the
Priests, which are bred up in the Seminaries, or in the Religious Orders, and
which be in the state of perfection, would not be maintained, protected or
directed as they be, and upheld by the Prelates, who govern the Church and who
nevertheless cannot, or will not bring themselves to live like them, Ibid.
un tal numero di sacerdoti perfeti si va formando nelle scuole o degli ordini
religiosi o de' Seminarii chiericali, e questi non durerebbono al mondo, se non
fossero alimentati da' Prelati che governano la chiesa, i quali non possono, o
diciamo ancora, non vogliono ridursi a quel rigore di vita.

Thus then, as there would be no Priests perfect in the World, if there were no
Rich Prelates able to maintain them, it is evident that the perfection of the
Church, who is the Body of Jesus Christ, and his Holy, and altogether pure
Spouse, is totally founded upon the vast Riches of the Roman Court; and upon
those sweet, gentle, and yet efficacious means, which she is able to invent to
heap them up.

After a Body has well considered these two sort of Persons, which make up the
Church, the Priests Spiritual, who are animated with zeal altogether pure, di
purissimo zelo; l. 9. c. 9.
and the Rich Prelates, who are carnal, and who would not serve God, if they
were not very Rich; because they have no mind to strain up themselves unto the
Priests perfection. One ought to conclude that these two parts of the Church
have need one of the other, In somma chi ben considera ogni part di quella
republica, l'una e bisognosa dell'altra. Ibid.
And as it would be an Atheistical impiety; seeing the Body, even but of a fly,
to maintain, that all the parts which compose it came together after that
fashion casually, or by chance; neither can it be any less but impiety, Ibid.
to have such like thoughts of the Body of the Church, s'e impieta d'ateista il
tener che sia casuale il corpo natural d'una mosca, non sara il creder tale il
corpo civil della chiesa? So that it is clearly to be an Atheist, to be
persuaded, that the carnal felicity of the Court of Rome, is not conformable to
the intention of God, or that it were better for the Church, to convert the
chief and best part of its vast riches, for relieving the poor and miserable,
rather than before all things to found the felicity according to the flesh of
the Roman Court.

Reason XVIII.
There is not seen in any part of the World, where ever it be, a Republic that
keeps up the Nobility so flourishing, and in such great number as the Christian
Republic, l. 1. c. 25.
nessun' altra republica come la Christiana conserva in tanto numero ed in
tanto fiore la nobilita.

Nobility is the Nurse of civility, Honourableness, Virtue, and Wit, che vuol
dire la nutrice della creanza, dell'onorevolezza, della virtu, dell'ingegno.
How does the Church do to keep up her Noblemen thus fashion? Why here is the
Secret, It Is by means of her Riches; because that having great Dignities and
great Revenues to set before all Noblemen, who to have them will but keep
themselves unmarried, she wins them after this manner, and they thereupon
resolve to profess continence to possess what the Church proposes to them, cio
auviene perch allettando nella Republica Christiana con le dignita e con
l'entrate i nobili a professar Celibato. Ibid.
Hence it comes to pass that the younger Nobility, have no need to share
Estates with their elder Brothers. Inheritances by this means are kept from
being dismembered without which the Rent charges upon the elder Brothers, Ibid.
would be intolerable, succeed che gli patrimonii delle famigli si mantengono
uniti, la dove per altro gli usi della primogeniture rinscirebbono
intolerablii. Now would all these great goods come to pass, if Church-means
were bestowed on the poor? Is it not plain that this policy is worthy of a God
incarnate, and of the blood which he shed to merit this carnal felicity for his
Church, il governo disegnato da Christo, l. 1. c. 25. l. 1. c. 9.
il thesore della Chiesa essersi acquistato da Christo. If the Church were
poor, should one see the flower of the Nobility, of litterature and of Virtue,
consecrate themselves to the service of the Altar, if the Pope had not such
ample rewards to bestow. Would the Church be honored with that sovereign
splendor, which Noblemen bring her by serving her, l. 1. c. 25.
di si ampii guiderdoni che dispensa il Pontefice risulta alla Religione quel
sommo splendore, mentre il fiore della nobilita della dottrina, della virtu, si
consecra agli altari di Christo. All these Noblemen do not love God enough to
make themselves Churchmen gratis, they bargain with God, and give themselves to
him to have the glory, and carnal felitity of the Church, which could never
come to pass if the Church were poor, l. 1. c. 25.
il che per l'umana debolezza non cosi auverrebbe nella poverta della chiesa,
because that this kind of trading in Religion seeks perpetually its advantage,
questo mercato della-religione sempre opera a suo vantaggio.

Reason XIX.
It was this kind of Government that Jesus Christ instructed to make his People
recommendable upon Earth, and to make his Church lovely to all Nations, by
these manifest Perogatives of carnal felicity, and of force, which do render
her happy, civil, politic, virtuous, and formidable above any other Republic
that is upon Earth. l. 1. c. 25.
Questo governo dissegnato da Christo per signalare in terra con manifesta
perogativa il suo popolo, del qual governo la base, il legame, e
el'intelligenza metrice e l'autorita del Pontefice.

Now all the Authority of the sovereign Pontife, is founded upon the Veneration
of People, l. 12. c. 3.
il loro potere quanto ad effetto e tutto appoggiato alla venerazione de'
popoli.

The Veneration of the People is upheld by Reason of the splendor of the Court
of Rome. The splendor of the Court of Rome is maintained by the Riches,
Honors, and carnal delights of its Cardinals and Prelates, so that all the
Christian Religion does not subsist but upon this carnal felicity: It was to
merit this, that the Word became flesh, and shed his blood, and to say the
contrary is a piece of Atheism, l. 1. c. 9.
il tesoro della Chiesa essersi aquistato da Christo.

Reason XX.
It Is a pernicious Maxim for the Church to hold that the chief and better part
of her Riches would be better employed on the necessities of the Poor, then to
make the carnal felicity of Prelates, but it is the property of seditious
tempers to scatter, that they may please the People, l. 9. c. 9.
discourses marked with popular Zeal, e proprio de' seditiosi sparger i
concetti mascherati di zelo popolare accetto a poveri; and that under pretense
that our Lord did speak in favor of the Poor, and that even amongst the marks,
which he gave to make it known, that he was the Messiah, he bid them take
notice, that he preached the Gospel to the Poor: For in fine, it has been made
out, that the poverty of the Church, and the destruction of the Church, are the
same thing. And after nineteen Politic Reasons, which have made it appear,
here is one more at least, to which there is no reply.

The Court of Rome, is the Soul which reunites all the Catholic Kingdoms,
under one and the same Unity. Without Unity there is no Church. Then without the
Court of Rome, both the Unity of the Church, and the Church it self are
destroyed. Now without Courtiers, there is no Court, without wealth no Courtiers
that will serve the Church for God's sake without wealth, then there is no
Unity, nor no Church. Here Is a Politic demonstration, that has not all its
like in all the Gospel! Here look ye is the foundation of this demonstration,
that the Court of Rome, is the soul of the Church and of its Unity, l. 3. c. 10.
una corte laquale e quell'anima che tiene in unita tanti regni e costituiss e
un corpo politico il piu formidabile, il piu virtuoso, il piu litterato, il piu
felice che sia in terra.

That which hinders even the Peoples rebelling against Kings, and Conspiring
against their persons, is the veneration which the People have for the Court of
Rome, which is the prop of the power Monarchical.

That which hinders Wars, either civil or foreign, is the multitude of
Churchmen, which be Gown-men, and for Peace: and that which makes the
multitude of Churchmen is the multitude of Benefices and good Revenues. Take
away then from the Church, it is great Wealth, and all will be full of Wars and
Conspiracies, as on the other hand, the power of Kings could not subsist with
that insolence, wherewith it would let it self be transported, if it had not
above it, the power of the Pope, and the Court of Rome, l. 12. c. 3.
which makes a temperament so equal between all extremes, that if Aristotle,
and Plato, were living, they would be glad to yield themselves to the
beautifulness of this project of a Republic, and to confess that their Policy
understood nothing herein. Such a design could not be molded, but only by the
eternal Wisdom and a light, whereunto humane sagacity could never arr ve, Ibid.
per che l'intelletto degli antichi savii ad assai piu basse cose non giunse
che non e l'econnomia della sapienza Incarnata nell'istituzione della sua
chiesa. All which things being considered, the greatest Act of Christian Piety
consists in defending this Politic government to the last drop of ones blood,
as well as all that which is neces-to the keeping it up, how opposite sover it
seems to be to the Canons, and particularly to those of the Council of Trent;
because that Council having submitted all to the Politic prudence of the Pope,
not to obey the Ordinance of the Council, to the end to obey the Pope, is truly
to follow the Council, and more perfectly to hit the meaning of the Council.

ARTICLE IV. The most noble act of the Pope's Policy, is to enrich himself and
the Roman Court. To dye for this Monarchy is the worthiest act of any
Christian's zeal.
RIches then being the ground, whereupon the sovereignty of the Pope subsists,
and the splendor of the Roman Court, and the carnal felicity of the Church; it
is visible that the most noble act of the noblest of mortal Virtues, which is
Policy, is to enrich the Court of Rome, and to uphold with vigilance and
stoutness, the sovereignty of the Roman Pontife, as it has been represented,
l. 5. c. 16.
il custodir con interpidezza e con vigilanza la sovranita del Pontificato e
per mio auviso la piu commendabile operatione che possa fare la politica virtu.

It Is true the worship of God is preferable before this Court; if one came in
competition with the other. But after the worship of God, the most worthy act
of a Pope's, zeal is the keeping up of his Monarchy, which cannot subsist but
by wealth, nessun a cura, toltane la propagazion del culto divino, e piu degna
e zelante in un Papa che il mantenimento illoso die questa Monarchia, and to
make it appear with what zeal, with what vigilance, and what stoutness one
ought to uphold it, there is an example of it to be seen in the Person of
Alexander, Nuncio of Pope Leo X at the Diet of Worms: Lo how he speaks, I am
ready, quoth he, to burn alive to defend the adorable Diadem of my Prince, l.
1. c. 25.
which they would take off from his head, io mi confesso interessatissimo ed
appassionatissimo nella causa dicui vi parlo, nella quale si tratta di mantene,
l'adorato diadema in front al mio principe, e per laquale io anche secondo il
privato affetto mi lascierei arder vivo se meco insieme dovesse arder il mostro
della nascente eresia. Look ye here what the sentiments and the words of all
Christians ought to be. There remains no more, but to make known the means that
this Policy suggests to the Court of Rome, for to uphold its stateliness, its
splendor and bravery, and its carnal felicity, for he that wills the end wills
the means necessary to the end, and on the other side not to love the means is
to hate the end, l. 8. c. 17.
perch chi odia un fine odia specialmente que' mezzi che sono piu oportuni a
tal fine. For example, one of the most efficacious means to keep up the
splendor of the Clergy's Royal Ecclesiastical Court, is the abundance of
Benefices, and not to be obliged to reside upon them, Ibid.
in verita fra i mezzi per conservar lo splendore dell'ordine clericale e d'una
Reggia Ecclesiastica, un de' piu efficaci e la copia di que' beneficii i quali
non obligano a residenza. There Is no need then to wonder, why all the World
cries out against this plurality of Benefices, it is because they do not love
the Roman Court, whose splendor is the end for which these Benefices be
instituted. When one hates the end it is not possible one should love the
means which do lead to it.

On the contrary all right Christians that love the Court Royal Universal of
the Church would burn a live in defense of the means, which she has invented
to uphold her self, how contrary soever they seem to Antiquity, or Canons of
Council, or the private interest of petty Bishops; In fine to all which seems
venerable; to certain Zealous ignorants in Policy, which is the Queen of moral
virtues.

CHAP. V. Here are related the Twelve ordinary means, enriching the Court of
Rome, and maintaining the splendour thereof, according to the flesh, which is
the act of all Religious Policy, the most pious, and the most important. The
Twelfth and most efficacious of those means, to teach every where the Gospel
according to the Flesh, and this Religious Policy according to the Doctrine of
Aristotle, to whom the Church is beholden for many Articles of Faith; is to
establish Colleges of Jesuits, with power to set up the Inquisition, and to be
high Commissioners in that Holy Office; to make out process against all them
who shall differ from the sentiments of that Philosopher. And that these
Jesuits shall have a general grant of all Privileges granted to the other
Monastical Orders; although St. Bernard has blamed those privileges; for on
the other hand they be approved by Nicholas Machiavel.
ARTICLE I. The first means of enriching the Court of of Rome, are the Annates,
which be a sort of yearly Tithes, or Pensions. A curious distinction about
Simony.
TWo things says our Cardinal do make the sovereign Power of the Pope ardently
desirable, The great Wealth whereof he is Master, and The great many means,
which he has to oblige men, l. 4. c. 9.
due beni percui foli appar desiderabile, il principato dell'oro dell'obligo.
The Policy of the Roman Court to uphold it self in this possession uses the
following means to enrich it self. The first is the Annates or Yearly Pensions,
that the Clergy pay to the Pope, but to judge well of the Justice by which they
as well as the other means which follow are established, it is good we remember
the Rule of Pope Paul IV, who to guide his Wisdom had only but this, viz. To
use his Spiritual power in its full extent, l. 14. c. 9.
s' auviso che tutta l'ampiezza dello spiritual suo potere fosse anche la
misura di saggiamentte esercitarlo. That is to say, That all that a Pope does
is done wisely: whosoever has but any insight into public affairs, quoth our
Cardinal, knows that the government of this is famous, for having been the
excellent Model of a rare Pontifical prudence, l. 3. c. 17.
chiunque ha tintura d'affari publici sa ch'il suo governo riman famoso per
idea di pontificia prudenza. So that the means to get Rich or Great, which have
no other Principle, other Reason, nor other measure, but the all-Puissantness
of the Pope, be those which come the nearest to this excellent Idea of the
Pontifical Government, l. 13. c. 10.
and curious fine and neat Policy, fina prudenza. The Annates or Yearly
Pensions are one of these means found in this all-Puissantness, so do they
suffice without other Proof to make it appear that the Pope is the sole
Patriarch of the West, because all the Western Churches pay them and to him
only, l. 14. c. 9.
anzi ricevendo di fatto il Papa da' soli Occidentali bastarrebbe a
giustificare eziandio il solo Patriarcato dell'Occidente. Besides the Pope has
right to receive Annates or yearly Pensions of all the Churches of Christendom
as taken instead of Tenths or Tithes, due by the Bishops and lesser
Ecclesiastics to the sovereign Pontife, l. 4. c. 8.
si riscuotono da' beneficii di tutto la Christianita in luogo di decime dovute
per sostentazione del somma sacerdote dagli altri minori Ecclesiastici. For the
sovereign Pontife, for the good of Christendom, ought to keep up his Court full
of Nobility. Il quale per been del Christianesimo dee mantener le sua Corte di
molti ufficiali Nobili, besides so many other expenses which he is obliged to
make, as has been showed.

It might seem Simony to give money for the Bulls to a Benefice, but the Pope
does not receive Annates or yearly Pensions, but only for a temporal thing
which is linked to a Spiritual Grace. Now what hurt is it that the suitor who
obtains a fat temporality, should give a small part thereof to him which grants
it? On the contrary is there any thing more reasonable then this? l. 19 c. 9.
Qual cosa piu raggionevole e piu consueta e piu soave, che si contribuisca
qualche rigaglia al conceditore dall'impetratore delluogo, all'oro que questo
riceve la nuova grazia, percio che in un tale acquisto non gli e grave quella
piccoila spesa.

Indeed if the Pope gave nothing but Spiritual as the Bishops do when they give
Orders, one might find more appearance of Simony for such a grace, Ibid.
per le ordinazione le quali danno unagrazia meramente spirituale era
convenevole qual si fosse temporal pagamento, e pero santamente constituirono i
Padri Tridentini, che i vescovi nulla prendessero. It Is manefest then according
to humane equity that the Tax or Impost of Annates, or Yearly Pensions is just,
Ibid.
stabilitasi l'equita secundo t'umano discorso. Now it is another Principle,
that when the humane equity of a business is once famed to be settled, divine
equity as has been shown, wills that the Pope should guide the Church
according to Natural inclinations: So that there can be no divine Reason to
forbid what humane equity permits, no more than that which is permitted by the
Doctrine of Aristotle and forbidden by any other; but to comprehend yet more
neatly, in what, that which is called Simony consists it must be known, that
when the Pope takes Money for granting Spiritual Graces, which serve for
example unto the Peoples Salvation, this is no Simony to give it unto him, l.
1. c. 2.
the Pope grants it, in primo del denaro donato a Dio. But if the Pope gave
Money, or relinquished his temporal interests to win People to their Salvation,
this would be Simony in him, thus to buy with Money the Poeples Salvation, and
in the People to consent to their Salvation, which is spiritual, to get the
Popes Money, or any other temporal benefit, l. 2. c. 10.
far una specie di Simonia vendendo al Papa la ricuperazione dell'anime a
prezzo d'entrate e di giuridizioni ritolte della chiesa. Temporal revenues and
other rights annexed to the Authority not only of the Pope, but of other
Ecclesiastics, are the best Juice and the most pure to nourish up the Church,
l. 2. c. 10. and l. 6. c. 7.
miglior sugo: This Authority to suck and drain this Juice from all parts of
the Univers is of divine Institution. Jesus Christ has instituted this power,
when he came down upon Earth for the Salvation of the World, ufficio istituito
da Dio quando scese in terra per la salute del mondo. l. 2. c. 10.
So that Jesus Christ has given power to the Pope, to take Money, and Milk the
People for the Salvation of the World, but not to the People to suck the Popes
Temporalities for their Salvation, nor to the Pope to give them his
Temporalities for to save them. This would be the utmost Simony, the first is
none. Mark ye here how important it is to know well the Rules of right Policy,
and how far the Pope's power reaches, for he can do all except relinquishing
the least part of his power for the sake of Peoples Salvation, because he is
but the Guardian of his all-puissantness, l. 12. c. 15.
and not the master, non essendo egli abitro e padrone della sua maggioranza
costituita da Christo, and pero non potendo farle alcun pregiudicio.

The second and third means are Pensions, and Commendams, the Residence of the
Commendaries suplied by the good turns of the New Monastical Orders.
Their end who attact Pensions and Commendams is to suppress all benefices that
are exempt from residence and by stronger Reason Pensions, l. 17. c. 10.
fine sarebbe ill torre affatto ogni Beneficio non allaciato a residenza, e
molto piu le pensioni. This would be to ruin in the Church the Universal Court
Royal, whose Courtiers could no longer hope for great recompenses, and they
would be obliged to confine themselves to scurvy little places, and be reduced
to the poor functions of the Altar, and the Quire. In the mean time without
Pensions, Ibid.
senza il sussidio delle Pensioni, the Cardinals could not live, i Cardinali
non pottrebbono vivere. l. 23. c. 11.
Without Abbeys and Commendams, they would not have bread, l. 12. c. 13.
Senato di Roma privo di quelle badie rimanerebbe privo del vittio. So that it
is evident that the Institution of Pensions cannot be but good, for if this
Institution had not been, how many Noblemen which do not make themselves
Ecclesiastics for God's sake, would there have been retained in the service of
the Church? l. 23. c. 3. and 11.
Harrebbe ritenuti molti nobili dalla vita Ecclesiastica. It Is true all these
Noble men do not reside, and it is manifest that non-residence is a great evil.
But since this evil begun, let a man consider the swarm of those of the
Monastical Orders which God has sent to labor about the Salvation of Souls,
and then see if there be any comparison between the good which they do, and
what one of these non-resident Noblemen would do, l. 9. c. 9.
if he should keep resident, fatto parangone all'opera di ciascun residente la
quale per una tal mala esecutione sia si tolta al cultivamento dell'anime,
Iddio ha restituito centenaia di Regolari che abondano in ogni loco. And
without doubt we shall see that the Church profits by Pensions in every
respect, both according to the flesh, and according to the Spirit.

The fourth and fifth means. Plurality of Benefices, and the absolute disposal
of those Benefices.
The disposal of a many Benefices all Christendom over being a great means for
the Pope to do good is one of the things whereupon the Apostolical principality
moves, Intr. c. 6.
la disposizione di molti Beneficii in vary parti del Christianesimo, e pur la
facolta di benefacere e un de' due Cardini sopra cui sostiensi la venerazione,
ch'e la base del loro imperio.

This power of conferring Benefices being formerly more extended over more
Nations then it is, drew then to the Court of the King of Kings, a world of
strangers which posted thither from all Quarters to be known, and to get
Benefices, l. 23. c. 3.
quella frequenza che le portava il concorso di tanti stranieri Ecclesiastici i
quali dovessero farsi quivi conocere per ottenere i Beneficii.

The Zealous will say that a man is unworthy, that thus crowds in for himself,
but these be Ideas which were good in the time of the Churches Infancy, Intr.
c. 6.
nell'infanzia della Chiesa; They will say that these be worldly, and humane
considerations for Popes to act by, il risguardo eziando dell'interesse umano:
But is not the humane felicity of the Court of Rome of divine Institution, and
will not God have his Church governed according to humane inclinations? This is
all can be said for Plurality of Benefices, for to look only upon the divine
institution, and setting aside humane interest, this is a business able to
confound Ecclesiastic Order, to give to one alone the duties and functions,
which cannot be discharged but by diverse. Ecclesiasticus ordo pervertitur.
Sess. 24. c. 17. Sess. 14. c. 9. Conc. Trid. Which made the Council condemn
this plurality, herein the Fathers of the Council are not quite to blame, l.
23. c. 11.
ne per tutto cio si vogliono biasimare i Padri Tridentini. But this kind of
Reasoning though Natural and Divine ought to give place according to Religious
Policy, to the interest of the humane felicity of the Court of Rome, which
cannot subsist without this Plurality, and the Church must be guided not
according as God wills, but according as corrupt Nature desires as it has
been shown: Likewise the Fathers of the Council have declared that they do not
mean to tie up the Popes hands, and though they would have pretended to it,
it is Policy, that there should be an head in the Church, that may dispense with
Canons and even derogate from them, as has been showed before, and that there
be a Head whose all-puissantness may be the Rule of Wisdom, according to Paul
the Fourth's Maxim whose Government was the Sampler of Pontifical prudence,
and who upon that account was chosen Pope, by an unanimous Election, which
could never have come to pass, l. 3. c. 17.
if a Pope so Elected, had not been of eminent Virtues, il che non puo
conseguirsi senza un eminente virtu.

The sixth and seventh Means. The calling back of greater Causes, and the
reservation of Cases.
Four Reasons make Popes to reserve certain Cases to themselves, and to retain
the greater Causes: The First is ignorance of Bishops, whether it be about
regulation of the Conclave for the election of a Pope, in very deed it was not
left to the Council of Trent to deliberate thereof, l. 22. c. 7.
perch ne' Vescovi non era veruna perizia di tal facenda; because the Bishops
were ignorant of those kind of matters; or whether it be about Reformation of
the Cardinals, the Legates in Council found that business was a Gulf where the
Bishops would have been lost, having no skill in those affairs, parue a Legati
che cio sarebbe stato eutrare in un nuovo e vasto pelago del quale Pochissimi
de' Padri haveano perizia. l. 23. c. 7.


The Second Reason is, That whatever skill the Bishops may have, they are not
refined for the practice of the Court of Rome, as has been seen here before.

The Third is, That being Secular Princes Subjects they are liable to act out
of fear, hope, or other humane Considerations, as was observed.

The Fourth is, to make the Sovereign Power of the Pope over Bishops be
acknowledged; from hence it is that the Popes limit even the Bishops Power, that
in such certain Cases falling within their Dioceses, they shall not proceed,
but they are referred to the Pope, l. 12. c. 11.
ed usano di limitar aneche a Vescovi la liberta di riserbare.

As to greater Causes they do not leave them to the Cognizance of Bishops,
being they are smaller Prelates, to whom they only leave smaller Causes, which
would be too troublesome for Suitors to go to Rome about; but of all that be of
importance the Popes reserve to themselves the Cognizance, because Justice
cannot be better administered than by the Sovereign Power. la giustizia non puo
universalmente procedere, l. 23. c. 13.
e con vigore e con sincerita se non dove sia tal preeminenza di stato nel
superiore sopra a suddito, che nel primo non possa cader ne timore ne
competenza; even so much as for nominating Parish Priests to Parishes, the
Bishops are bound to follow the Counsel of Examiners appointed, l. 23. c. 13.
or agreed on by a Synod of their Clergy, as has been shown before.

The Eighth Means. Frequent Jubilees, and Indulgences.
The Council of Trent desires that the usage of Indulgences may be reformed by
those ancient and rigorous rules made about that matter, l. 24. c. 12.
Che si tornasse all'antica severita. But it is not to be understood that one
should quite return to that ancient severity; l. 24. c. 12.
non volle significare che vi si ritornasse in tutto; but that herein one
should use prudence according to time and places, Ibid.
fin a quel segno che la condizione de tempi e de luoghi cansiliava, which
depends on the Pope's prudence, that is to say, That the account upon which the
Pope grants it be such, that the Pope in granting it commits no imprudence, and
yet that the reason therefore in it self appear little considerable. As for
Example, When the Pope grants a full Indulgence to him that shall visit St.
Peter's Church, or stay to take the Pope's Blessing in a public place; the
Cause in it self does not appear so great that it should merit Indulgence or a
Pardon; but in the same thing we must distinguish, what that thing is in it
self, and what it is as to its End, for to attend, for Example, the Pope's
Blessing in a Public place is not an Act that appears in it self important,
but yet it is very much so, when it is considered as to its end: which is
thereby to make public profession of Belief of the Unity of the Church, and
the Worship which is due to the Sovereign Pontifice, as Vicar of Jesus Christ,
l. 2. c. 4.
far co'tali opere che fia una professione universale esibita da Christiani
sopra l'unita della chiesa e sopra il culto che rendono al Romano Pontefice
come Vicario di Christo. So that to make profession of this Worship is an act
that is worth as much as all the ancient severity of Canonical Penances; and
this is the sense that one should understand the Council of Trent in, when it
desires that the ancient simplicity should be returned unto; wherefore the
least actions being capable to be thus exalted through their End, though it
were only to manifest the all-puissantness of the Pope, it would be rash, if
from the small Importance which is found in those actions, one shoulld conclude
therefrom a nullity in the grant of Indulgences, saremo temerarii se della
tenuita delle azioni conchiuderemo la nullita delle concessioni. l. 2. c. 4.


Add to this the vast profit which comes in to the Pope from these
Indulgences. As in Pope Leo the tenth's Time, who granted them (when Luther
Preached against them) to help build St. Peter's Church, for he wanted for that
a vast sum of money, richiedendosi all'opera denaro immenso. l. 1. c. 2.
Wherefore he had recourse to this efficacious remedy of Universal Indulgences,
adding Liberty also to it to eat Cheese and Milk on Fasting-days, and to choose
what Confessor one listed.

This was in truth a great scandal to Christendom to see the Revenue of these
Indulgences let out to him, that would give most, as temporal Princes do farm
out Imposts; but it is certain also, as Princes would get little by their
taxes, if they were to leavy them themselves, by their own immediate Officers,
so the Pope would get as 'twere nothing by Indulgences if he did not find
people to farm them at a Rate and Price, l. 1. c. 3.
qual Principe non e costretto ad usar il medesimo in tutte le Gabelle che
impone.

Its further true, that those Indulgences which were leavied upon the people to
build St. Peter's Church, a material Temple, have been the cause of the ruin
of a great part of the Churches Spiritual Temple, quel edificio materiale di
San' Pietro rouino in gran' part il suo edificio spirituale; because that for
leavying so many Millions, which the vast work of that admirable Church was to
take up, the Pope was constrained to publish those Indulgences, whereof
Luther's Heresy took beginning, which has impoverished the Church a many more
Millions of Souls that are separated from her Communion, l. 1. c. 1.
percioche affin d'adunare tanti milioni quanti ne assorbiva l'immenso lavoro
di quella chiesa, convenne far cio d'onde prese origin l'eresia di Luthero,
che a impoverita di molti piu milioni d'anime la chiesa.

But yet this hinders not, but the building of that material Temple, which is
the first Temple of the World, and which draws the greatest veneration to the
Pope, was a very sufficient cause for granting those Indulgences; because that
which is most important in the Church after the Worship of God, is the Worship
of the Pope, and it would be Simony in the Pope to relinquish his Rights under
pretense of buying thereby the salvation of Souls.

The ninth Means. Dispensations granted for money.
It is necessary in every Principality well regulated to draw forth some
Imposition from the Graces which the Prince accords, l. 16. c. 17.
essendo necessario inogni Principato le imposizioni sopra le grazie. It Is also
one of the sources which nourishes the abundance and luster of the Court of
Rome, and keeps up at the same time the All-puissantness of the Pope who grants
the Dispensations both with, and without Cause. This money, which comes thereof
in great quantity to the Coffers of his Holiness, is an All-puissant like means
to uphold his grandeur, l. 8. c. 17.
Omnipotenza del 'oro. For as our Cardinal says, Money is all things in virtue
and in power; pecunia e ogni cosa vertualmente; and he that has Money has
all, and may do all with an efficacious Power. By granting Dispensations and
Graces for money, the Pope does thereby punish those who sue them out, and this
is an industrious and new means to keep up, as one may say, Discipline and the
Canons, by breaking them.

If the Bishops take Money for Dispensations they be null, quoth the Council of
Trent, but when it is the Pope that grants them for Money they be good, and
which is most admirable that even they would be null if he did not take money;
because they would be given without any cause, as has been observed: for the
money which the Pope takes for them is the great Consideration and a good cause
why he grants them, so that there are few things forbidden which the interest
of establishing the All puissantness of the Pope to enrich and keep up the
splendor of his Court, do not make lawful. For this purpose he is not only
permitted to take money for dispensations, but to derogate from the Laws of
Councils, that he may fulfill them in a more perfect manner, since this is to
exercise his all-puissantness, which after God is the principal end whereunto
all Councils ought to have regard.

The tenth Means.
Experience teaches every Superior, that his faithfullest and most obedient
Subjects be those which do immediately subject themselves to his grandeur and
to his power without any semblance of going Cheek by Jole with him, l
Esperienza dimostra ad ogni superiore che i sudditi piu sicuri e piu
ossequiosi, sono i sudditi immediati non grandi: Hereupon it is that the Pope's
interest is grounded, when he exempts Chapters in Bishoprics to depend upon
him and be be independent from their Bishops: therefore the instances that the
Bishops made at the Council of Trent, To have their Chapters again under their
yoke, was prejudicial to the Apostolic See, l. 8. c. 17.
prejudiciale alla sede Apostolica. Besides the Bishops being, as we said
before, Ignorants in policy, seditious, interessed, timorous and subject to
temporal powers, they are facil and ready to fall into heresy which the
Chapters are not: To this the Council of Trent had respect, as to Germany,
where a many Bishops fell into heresy, which no Chapter was found to do,
ponendo in Considerazione quei di Germania, l. 23. c. 3.
dove avevano mancato molti vescovi ma niun Capitolo. And as for those of
France, the Cardinal of Lorrain told it out that there were heretic Bishops
who forbid Catholic Preachers to preach, ibid.
riferi che alcuni vescovi eretici in Francia havean vietato il predicare a
Catolici: Whereupon he went on and said that in case the objection of
Prebendaries were to be made according to the Canons, that the Bishops should
do nothing therein without the consent of their Prebendaries, ibid.
piacerli che i Veseovi nulla potesser fare senza i Capitoli quando i Canonici
s'eleggessero come si doveva di raggione.

In the four and thirty Articles of reformation, which the Ambassador of
France brought to the Council, The seven and twentieth ran, that the Bishops
be obliged according to the Canons to treat of all the affairs of their
Dioceses according to the advice of their Prebendaries, and for that reason,
the Prebendaries be obliged to reside continually at their Cathedral, l. 19.
c. 11.
dovendo i i Vescovi secundo i Canonitrattare i negozii col parere del
Capitolo, si procurasse che i Canonici fossere assidui all Catedrali.

Because that being exempt from the jurisdiction of their Bishops and governing
the Dioceses with them, their exemption was a bridle which the Pope put upon
the Bishops, very fit to keep them from prevaricating, whether in regard of
faith or of government, l. 23. c. 3.
anzi l'esenzione de Capitoli se riconosceva per un gran freno in bocca a
Vescovi di non prevaricare o nella feed o nel governo.

This makes the infinite difference to be seen between Episcopacy in the Pope,
and that which is by participation in the Bishops. For, I. The Pope is not
subject to Ignorances nor heresies as the Bishops are. II. He is not bound to
follow the Counsel of his Cardinals, because he is King of the Church and the
Bishops are not Kings of their Chapters, no more then of their Dioceses. III.
No body can be exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Pope, and there is no need,
they should, as there is need Prebendaries should be exempt from the
jurisdiction of their Bishops, that the Bishops may be thereby bridled; and
though there were no other reason for exemption of Chapters, but to show the
Popes Royal Sovereignty, which is the foundation of the Church: for it appears
that it is a most puissant means to establish the Popes power and the gallantry
and riches of the Roman Court.

The eleventh Means. Privileging the Monastical Orders.
One of the Principal advantages which comes to the Church by the exemption of
the Regulars is maintaining the authority of the Apostolic See, according to
the institution of Jesus Christ and the general good of the Church, l. 12. c.
13.
jo non nego che un de profitti che arreca l'Ezenzione de Regolari degli
Ordinarii sia il mantener l'autorita della sede Apostolica secundo
l'istituzione di Christo e'l ben della chiesa.

Because we see that all Monarchical Government for the keeping up it self
without suffering diminution, had need to have in every Province some powerful
Body of Subjects independent from those, who be the ordinary and perpetual
Superiors or Magistrates there, ibid.
veggendo noi che ogni governo Monarchico per conservarsi illeso ha bisogno
d'haver in qualunque provincia qualche nervo prevalente de sudditi independenti
da chi e quivi superiore immediato e perpetuo.

Yet as men's opinions be diverse, these privileges to the Monastical Orders,
which make the force of the Church and the principal sinew of the Pope's Power,
did not quite please St. Bernard, questa raggione pero, come son' vary le
opinioni degli huomini non l. 8. c. 17.
sodisfece pienamente a San' Bernardo; because he feared that the desire of
exemption came from some hidden sentiment of Pride, l. 8. c. 17.
il quale dubito che il desiderio d'esenzione dal proprio Vescovo potesse
nascere da occulto Spirito superbia. But on the other side Nicholas Machiavel
remains agreed of the profitableness of these Exemptions, and that it was in
them that the Prophecy was fulfilled which said that the Monks should uphold
the Church of St. John of Lateran ready to fall, that is to say the whole
Church, non in altro modo i predetti ordini sarebbou valuti a sostenar la
crollante basilica di Laterano, cioe la Chiesa Catolica, profezia auvera ta per
confessione dello stesso Nicolo Machiavelli.

Here Is then the advantage of the Politic conduct of every well-governed
Monarchy, to have certain persons in places distant from the Sovereign, which
have power without limits, as for example the Romans gave it to their Generals,
ibid.
percio che ad impresse grandi e in regioni lontane dal supremo, richiedesi
autorita illimitata ed independente quale usarone di dare i Romani a lor
condottori.

All the religious Orders are every man as it were so many Generals of the
Popes Army throughout the Earth, and as so many Roman Chieftains, who living
above an humane life would not uphold such a Monarchy as the Pope's if it were
tyrannical: which makes it appear that this same Monarchical all-puissantness
of the Pope is of Jesus Christ's institution.

But that wherein the religious Orders serves yet further to advance the
splendor of the Court of Rome, is; that making profession of single Life they
quit their paternal Estates to their brethren and Kinsfolk, una utilita delle
grandi che riceve la Republica per la felicita civil dell'istituti Religiosi:
l. 4. c. 6.
their kindred becoming rich, by that means they become the Pillars of the
Temple and the Columns of the Church, l. 9. c. 9. l. 17. c. 9.
che per altezza de sangue sono i Pilastri del tempio. Il chiericato mantien la
richezza e'l decoro delle stirpi e per conseguente la nobilita e gli spiriti
d'onore. One's piety makes the other get a great Estate, hence comes forth Abbeys
which are afterward put in Commendams, and they become great Benefices, whose
revenues stream forth even to Rome to be digested in the stomach of St. Peter.

And thus it is that all the members of the Church serve to enrich the Court of
Rome, and to uphold its bravery; thus it is that that Court is the Churches
soul, and its moving intelligence.

The twelfth Means. The establishment of Colleges of Jesuits, and of the Holy
Inquisition.
It has been seen that Policy is the prime and most excellent virtue of all
the moral virtues, because her Object is the happiness of the Commonwealth,
not only according to the spirit but according to the flesh, secondo la carne.
Now the corruption of the greatest Good produces the greatest Evil, il pessimo
esser suol una corruzione de l'ot timo; l. 17. c. 2. and l. 1. 13.
It follows then that the greatest of all the Churches Evils, is Ignorance of
Policy.

It has been seen that private Bishops do not skill this excellent virtue,
because the excellent school where this Science is learned, is the Roman Court,
where a man is refined in this virtue.

That Is the shop or workhouse where all the sleights of Policy are learnt, and
where cunning prudence may be gotten and subtlety of Wit, sottile ingegno fina
prudenza. l, 13. c. 10.
The privy Counselors of temporal Princes Courts are enough refined in
temporal affairs, but commonly they do not know what Religion is, nor what is
the only Base which upholds it it, and renders it immovable, l. 16. c. 10.
huomini di stato i quali spesso non ben intendono che cosa sia la Religione e
qual sia l'unica Base che possa mantenerla non vacillante, that is to say, to
speak fine and plain, They do not know the mystery, nor the Extent of the
Pope's only universal Monarchy, whereof all Kings are subjects, and all
Catholic Kingdoms the demean lands, with an all-puissantness to dispose of all
things etiam sine causa, as it has been explained. It was upon the principles
of this Ignorance, that the instructions of Monsr. de Lansac the French
Ambassador at the Council of Trent, were framed; these instructions were
composed of four and thirty Articles all opposite to that which makes for the
Popes Royalty in the Church, and his absolute Empire over the whole Universe,
and which in conclusion tended to throw down the Roman Court, both splendor
and Empire thereof, l. 16. c. 10.
tutte contrary al Pontefice o pui tosto al Pontificato e contenute nella sua
istruzione i quali tutti si riducevano a levar lo splendore e l'imperio della
Corte Romana. What specific remedy for such a disease? doubtless there could
not be a better then for all Bishops, yea even for Parish Priests to be
educated and refined in the excellent school of the Court of Rome. But that is
not done, in default thereof it could be wished that at least all the Heads of
Houses in Universities had studied there, but that is against their Statutes.

In fine, what then is the last Expedient, but that all not being able to go
to Rome to take in the Politic spirit there, Means should be found out to make
it come from Rome and disperse it over the world.

'Twas said 100 years ago that the Holy Ghost was brought from Rome to the
Council of Trent in a Clokebag, l. 16. c. 10.
la Spirito Sancto veniva portato nella valigia. This proposition appeared
injurious to the Holy Ghost, to the Pope and to the Council; yet our Cardinal
Historian expounds it learnedly and makes it out, how it is conformable even to
the Doctrine of S. Augustine; and that Pope Innocent X, in effect to condemn
Jansenius, thought it not unfit to order the exterior light of the Holy Ghost
to be brought in a Clokebag to Rome from all Quarters of the Church, which he
consulted. Leo X did the same when he condemned the heresy of Luther, Ibid.
non hanno s'degnato di procaciar l'esterna luce dello Spirito Sancto a se
stessi per le vaglie de' corrieri avauci di condannar le opinioni e di Lutero,
e di Jansenio. Now the exterior light is always accompanied with the
interior, which is the Soul thereof, and which is that which is called
sufficient Grace to know the Truth and to follow it, which is not wanting to
any one. So that which is called sufficient grace, to condemn Jansenius was
brought in some sort in a Clokebag to Pope Innocent X, as one may say that the
Horse that carries the Body of a living man carries also his Soul; otherwise
sufficient grace might fail those which do all their endeavor to know the
Truth, and condemn Heresy and they would condemn it blindfold, Ibid.
alla cieca as our Cardinal speaks.

There be none then but Idiots which will let themselves be scared with this
Vizard of a Proverb, that the Holy Ghost was carried in a Clokebag, for there is
nothing more exactly true according to School Divinity; and look you now the
Vizard is for ever taking off which Scared Idiots, l. 16. c. 10.
Ecco dilegnate quelle vanissime larve discoucia apparenza che agli occhi degli
Idioti potea recar una call forma di proverbiare lo Spirito Sancto veniva
portato nella valigia.

It being thus, may not one say that the most puissant and yet the most sweet
and gentle means to uphold the Universal Monarchy, the Royalty and absolute
Empire of the Pope over all the World, which is the Fundamental Point of all
the Christian Policy is to make come from Rome in a Cloakbag the spirit of this
Policy into all Quarters of the World. There remains only the nameing and
choosing of the Couriers to go along with the Males or Clokebags.

1. The Religious, whose Generals reside not at Rome, are not fit for it.

2. The Religious, which do not teach youth, are unfit for it too, for this
Spirit must begin to be administered in tender years.

3. There Is none but the Jesuits, to whom this Employ can reasonably be given:

For 1. If to this end there need no more but to be Masters in this Policy by
our Cardinal Historians Example, who is of their Society, it appears that they
talk as if they were the Authors thereof.

2. If for it there needs zeal for the Holy See, there is no body able to
dispute with them that their advantage, for all this Father Jesuit and
Cardinal's book is full of protestations upon that Subject.

3. If there only needs testimonials of Nuncio's and Ambassadors, see those
of the Nuncio Commendon and of the Comte of Lune, related by this our Cardinal,
l. 20. c. 4. and 11.
io per certo non ho ritrovato nelle chiese di Germania piu fermo ne maggior
prefidio della religione che i Collegii di costoro; l. 15. c. 7.
cosi piacesse a Dio che se ne fossero molti. l. 20. c. 4.
Onde non e dubio che quando si facessero molti collegii se ne caverebbe fructo
incredibile.

But above all, the Testimony of Pope Pius IV, and that of S. Charles Borromeo
are of extreme advantage for them. They are related by this Cardinal in his
XXIV Book, chapter 6, where their Society is called Religion it self and their
institution Pious; Religione, e l'istituto pio.

Now their institution is particularly destinated by their founder St. Ignatius
to serve in the Missions, l. 4. c. 11.
istituita per sine speciale delle Missioni, and it is for this same subject
that they have shunned giving to themselves any of the names, which the other
Monastic orders take, as Father Guardians, Correctours, Wardens, Discrets and
even shunning the names of Covents, Dortoirs, Chapters, yea and even the habits
themselves, though venerable elsewhere, because those other sorts of habits
were not very commodious to carry the Cloakbag in the Missions, l. 4, c. 11.
hebbesi risguardo d'astenersi dalle appellazioni e delle vesti di frate benche
per altro venerabili e Sacrosante.

So that it is manifest that there is nothing more important for the felicity of
the Pope and the Roman Court according to the flesh, secundo la carne then the
establishment of Jesuits the World throughout, giving them power to set up
every where the Sacred Tribunal of the Inquisition, for setting up whereof Pope
Pius IV has merited, quoth our Cardinal, l. 14. c. 9.
a Praise which will be Eternal, d'eterna lode lo fa degno, il tribunal
dell'inquisizione che dal zelo di lui riconosce il present suo vigor nel
l'Italia, e dal quale l'Italia riconosce la conservata Integrita della sua
feed. Because it is to the Inquisition, according to our Cardinal, that Italy
and Spain are indebted for retaining the Faith among them, as to those Articles
thereof which have no nearer nor immediater certainty then only the Popes
authority, l. 3. c. 15.
quella religione, i cui articoli unitamente confiderati non hanno altra
certezza prossima ed immediata che l'autorita del Pontefice.

CHAP. VI. Here be related the Interests and different sentiments of the
Catholic Christian Crowns and Republics, according as they are more less
favorable to this same Religious Policy according to the flesh. And it is made
appear that there is none more opposite then those of the Crown and of the
Church of France, which proposed no less at the Council of Trent, then to throw
down the Churches Monarchy and Empire, and to take away the Splendor of the
Court of Rome.
ARTICLE I. The Estates, whose Politic Maxims are favorable or opposite to
this same Roman Policy.
OF all th Parts of Europe, which have remained in the Popes Communion, there
appears none more considerable then Italy, Germany, Spain and France. To know
which are the States whose Politic maxims are more or less favorable to the
Roman Policy, there needs no more but to represent the Interests and the
Sentiments of these States which take up those parts of Europe.

ARTICLE II. The Italian Policy favors that of the Court of Rome.
ACcording to the Testimony of our Cardinal Lib. 21. Chapter 4. the Italian
Bishop had no other end in the Council of Trent but the upholding and
aggrandizing of the Apostolic See, non mirava ad altro oggetto che al
sostentamento ed alla grandezza della sede Apostolica, and therein they thought
they did the duty of good Christians and Italians at once, e pero ch' essi in
tal opera facesser ad un ora le parti di buoni Italiani edi buoni Christiani.
Because 'twas the honor and the advantage of their Country to be the abode and
ordinary residing Place of the King of Kings, and of the Lord of all the Lords
of the Earth.

ARTICLE III. The Spaniards are not favorable to the Cardinals, nor other
Officers of the Roman Court.
THE Spanish Bishops being for the most part great Lords and very considerable
either for the great Extent of their Dioceses, or by reason of their great
revenues through their high birth and illustrious families, or through their
great learning, hardly could endure the preeminence of the Cardinals, and above
all few of those Bishops could ever hope to arrive at that dignity, and it was
no less unsufferable to them to see themselves subjected so much as they are
to the Pope's Officers, and be Dependants of the Roman Tribunals; wherefore
they thought it would be exceeding good for the Church to bring back the
Cardinals to their first rank and to restore those rights to the Bishops, which
they enjoyed anciently; and for this purpose they had a mind to disable the
Cardinals to possess Bishoprics, and oblige them to reside at Rome, and rule
the parishes whereof they are the Titulary Parsons or Priests, and withal they
would have taken away dispensations, whereby persons or causes are exempted
from the Bishops Jurisdiction, and thereby make the Bishops in their Dioceses
as so many Popes, onde fossero a guisa di Papa nelle loco Diocesi, which would
have much diminished the splendor of the Roman Court and sapped the foundation
of the Church.

ARTICLE IV. The Policy of France quite and clean opposite to the Roman Court.
AS for the French Bishops they have less of jurisdiction, because the Usages
of that Kingdom look most at enlarging the temporal power, and this also causes
that they are less incommoded with the Roman Tribunals, and don't complain so
much of wrong that the Scarlet does to the Mitre; but all their thoughts tend
to set bounds unto the Pope's Monarchy according to the sentiments of the late
Council of Basil approved by them, l. 21. c. 4.
erano rivolti a moderar la Monarchia del Pontefice secondo in sensi del
moderno Concilio di Basilea da loco approvato.

Germany is so cantoned out that it is difficult to mark the point wherein those
people may be said to accord: some of them are of the Italian mind, others of
the Spanish, others of the French. As for the several Princes they are each of
the several mind as his Bishop is; i Principi almeno i loco politici, chi piu
chi meno inclinavano a sodisfare i Prelati di lovo Natione, because that the
preferring of their Bishops, who remain still their Subjects, gives them
lesser jealousy, then the Pope's grandeur and power. They were brought over to
this in the time of the Council of Trent by the abuses which they saw in the
Roman Court.

Christian Policy has then its choice betwixt that of France and that of
Spain, which of the two may be the most favorable to the all-puissantnesse of
the Pope to take that side, and favor it carefully and stoutly, l. 5. c. 16.
con intrepidezza e con vigilanza, now it is not very hard to see that the
French Policy is less favorable to that of Rome then the Spanish, which made
Friar Thomas Stella Bishop, di Capo d'Istria a great creature of the Popes in
the Council of Trent, for to say, that all mischief came out of the North, l.
19. c. 9.
ogni male dall'Aquilone.

ARTICLE V. Wherein the Policy of France is not favorable to that of Rome.
THE First Article is that of a Council being above a Pope, according to the
Council of Basil which is a seditious opinion, quoth our Cardinal, sedizioza,
and overthrows absolutely the Pope's Monarchy, sediziosa, l. 6. c. 13. l. 19.
c. 11. l. 16. c. 10.
questione della maggioranza tra lui el Concilio, i quali capi si riducevano a
levar lo splendore e l imperio della Corte Romana; it is an erroneous opinion,
Erronea, Pestiferous, l. 9. c. 16. l. 6. c. 7. Ibid.
Pestilente che nonsolo abatterebbe il trono pontificale ma disordinerebbe la
Spiritual Hierarchia.

II.
It Is not the Doctrine of France that the Pope is King of Kings, Lord of Lords.
So that the Crown Lands of Kings should be his Inheritance

III.
It Is not the Doctrine of France that the Pope is Infallible, nor that he can
make Articles of Faith, unto which if Kings do not yield he may declare them
Heretics, and give their States to the first occupant.

IV.
It Is not the Doctrine of France, that it is Treason to hinder Money from being
carried to Rome.

V.
It Is not the Doctrine of France, that Bishops hold their jurisdiction from the
Pope, l. 16. c. 10.
questa sedizioza dottrina.

VI
It Is not the Doctrine of France, that the Pope may dispense without cause, or
derogate from the Canons of Councils, l. 19. c. 11. see mons de Marco Concord.
l. 3. c. 13. 2.
la quod tendeva ad abbatere la Monarchia, che le costituzioni fat dal
Concilio non cadessero sotto dispensazioni.

But the better to know wherein the Doctrine of France, and its Policy is
opposite to that of Rome, one need but to read the Thirty four Articles
contained in the Instructions of the French Ambassadors at the Council of
Trent, on occasion whereof Cardinal Simonetta, Pope Pius IV. his great
confident in the Council of Trent, said, That the Physic of Reformation ought
to be like that which old Physicians prescribe, which is always gentle, al
Cardinal Simonetta parea che a guisa de'Medici vecchi and l. 18. c. 4.
cauti non formasse ricette senon leggiere; and that the receipts of the French
Reformation were too strong.

The Four and thirty Articles proposed by the French Ambassador at the Council
of Trent for Reformation of the Church.
I.
THat the Age of Priests be an Age of Maturity, and that they have a good
testimonial from the people. Against this Article, Lainez. l. 21. c. 6. This
Article would hinder the multitude of Churchmen, who are exceeding useful to
all States and Conditions according to our Cardinal. l. 17. c. 9.

II.
That Vacancies be supplied according to the Canons.

III.
That none be ordained without some Office or Benefice, against this Article,
Lainez l. 21. c. 6. Palavicin. l. 16. c. 9.

IV.
That every one ordained, be obliged to perform his Function.

V.
That none meddle with other business than the Functions of his Order. Against
this demand, l. 8. c. 17. one has reason to complain of the temporal Princes,
quoth our Cardinal, when they don't employ Eclesiasticks in State affairs, le
doglienze sarebbon giuste quando escludessero del maneggio gli Ecclesiastici.

VI.
That none be made a Bishop if he be not capable to instruct, and do all his
Functions in person.

VII.
The like also as to Cures or Parish Priests.

VIII.
That none be made an Abbot or Prior Regular, that has not taken his Degrees,
and taught Divinity in some famous University.

IX.
That Bishops Preach all Festival days, and Sundays, Advent and Lent, either in
person or by some other for them.

X.
That the Cures, or Parish Priests do the same.

XI.
That in Abbeys and Priories, the ancient studies, and exercises, and
hospitality be again set up.

XII
That he which cannot (through some disability after his admittance) perform
the Functions of his Benefice himself, either quit it, or take a Coadjutor.

XIII.
That Catechizing be used.

XIV.
That Plurality of Benefices be taken a way, and no distinction made of
Compatible and Incompatible, unknown to antiquity, and which is an occasion of
many mischiefs in the Church that Secular Benefices be given to Seculars, and
Regular to Regulars. Against this Chap. 5. art. 4.

XV.
That he which has many Benefices keep only one of them, or incur the pains of
the ancient Canons.

XVI.
That it be so ordered, that every Cure or Parish Priest, have means enough to
keep two Clerks and maintain Hospitality.

XVII.
That the Church Prayers, Psalms, and Gospel be sung and uttered in French at
the Mass.

XVIII.
That the Communion be given in both kinds.

XIX.
That in administering the Sacraments the virtue of them he explained in French.

XX.
That no Benefices be given neither to Strangers nor unworthy persons,
otherwise the Collation to be void.

XXI.
That Expectative Graces, Regresses, and Commendams of Benefices be abolished
in the Church, as contrary to the Canons.

XXII.
That Resignations in favor persons named by the Resigners be also declared
null, because it is forbidden by the Canons that none should seek, or choose a
Successor. Against this Palavicini, Cap. 4. Art. 2.

XXIII.
That the single Priories be reunited to the Benefices, with cures of Souls,
from which they were separated.

XXIV.
That there be no Benefice without Cure of Souls. Against that, Art. 3. Cap. 5.

XXV.
That Pensions be abolished. Against that, see Art. 2. Cap. 5. Palavicin. lib.
23. cap. 11.

XXVI.
That Jurisdiction be restored to the Bishops, excepting over the Covents,
Heads of Orders, and others subject to them, and which make General Chapters,
and such as have privileges by ancient Charters, notwithstanding all which, let
them be subject to correction.

XXVII.
That Bishops do no business without the advice of their Prebendaries, as it is
ordered by the Canons, according to which also the Bishops ought to be
assiduous at and in their Cathedrals, and not less aged than Five and twenty
years.

XXVIII.
That the Degrees of Kindred be observed in marriages, without permitting any
dispensation, except between Kings and Princes, for the Public good, la qual
tendeva ad abattere la Monarchia. lib. 19. cap. 11.

XXIX.
That the True Doctrine touching Images be taught, and Superstitions taken away.

XXX
That the public Penances for public Sins be re-established, as well as
public Fasts and Mournings in the Church, to appease the wrath of God.

XXXI.
That Excommunications be not pronounced in the Church but for most grievous
Sins, and after the second and third admonition in case the Sinner be obstinate.

XXXII.
That suits for Benefices with the distinctions of petitory and possessory be
taken away, and that the Bishops never bestow Benefices upon them who sue for
them, but upon those which shun them, and so render themselves worthy of them
by avoiding of them. Against this, Palavicin. Art. 4. c. 5.

XXXIII.
In case where a Benefice is litigious, let the Bishop send one to supply the
Cure who shall give no account to him for whom judgment goes, because the
Revenues of Benefices belong not but to him that does the Duties.

XXXIV.
That every year a Synod of the diocese shall assemble, and every three years a
Provincial, and every ten years a General Synod. Against which see Chap. 2. As
for the National Synods, our Cardinal calls them Abortions in the Church,
l'aborto d'un Concilio Nazionale. l. 4. c. 9.

The most important of these Articles being manifestly opposite to the absolute
Monarchy of the Pope, and to his All-puissantness, l. 16. c. 16.
contrary al Pontificato, to the splendour of his Court, and to his felicity
according to the flesh. It now appears in what sense Father Lainez said, That
the French had in a sort made a Schism since the Council of Basil's time, and
that perhaps, 'twas a punishment for that Sin, that so many miseries had come
upon them: And this he said upon occasion of the Canonical elections, which the
French required should be re-established, l. 21. c. 6.
dubitar Egli de' Franchesi che cio chiedevano come di tali che forse erano
gastigati da Dio ne' presenti infortnnii per qualche loro seperazione fin dal
tempo del Concilio di Basilea. And he made no difficulty to say, that all those
which would renew all those kinds of like ancient usages were moved thereunto
by the instinct of the Devil, Ibid.
coloro che volevano rinovare tali usi antichi muoversi per istinto del
Diavolo. From hence one ought to infer, that the Jesuits having this sentiment
of the Policy of the Gallican Church,

First, It Is necessary that the Roman Court do employ them for to combat
effectually in that Kingdom, against the Maxims of Reformation; that the Spirit
of the Devil, according to them, inspires into those which have governed it
since the Council of Basil's time, and now again since the Council of Trent,
which all tend to nothing but to the overthrow of the Roman Empire, of the
whole splendor of it is Court, and of it is Carnal felecity.

Secondly, It concerns the Roman Court to deal in such sort, that the
reputation and the Doctrine of Aristotle may subsist with approbation in
France; for the project of Felicity according to the Flesh, and of the
Universal Monarchy of the World, which are the two cardinal points of the new
Policy of our Historian, being particularly established and upheld upon the
Doctrine of that Philosopher; and that Prince of Philosophers having already
bestowed a many Articles of Faith upon the Church, the last effect of his
Doctrine ought to be, to make these Articles be received in their full extent
as Articles of Faith. Viz. That of the Universal Monarchy, as our Cardinal has
explained it, and that other of Felicity according to the Flesh necessary to
the Church, for then one might well approve those words of our Cardinal, di cio
si doveva in gran part l'obligazione ad Aristotele, l. 8. c. 19.
il qualc se non si fosse adoperato in distinguer accuratamente i generi delle
cagioni, noi mancavamo di molti Articoli di Feed.

For if once one could but come to make in the Church Articles of Faith out of
the Maxims of our Cardinals Policy, which have been related and are approved
even by Nicholas Machiavel, then one might well say with our Cardinal, That the
Councils of Ephesus, of Calcedon, and all those which have followed, as well as
all the Fathers which assisted thereat, had never been able to make their
Decisions, if they had not imbibed Grecian Philosophy, and that it is easy to
see among their Oracles how much of the Stagyrite and of Athens they have
mingled with them, because that if Aristotle, or Philosophy had not given us
common notions of things, we could not have been able by the aid of Divine
Revelation to apply them to supernatural objects. l. 8. c. 19.


The Conclusion of the Work.
BY all that has been said it appears, That Religious Policy is the most
excellent of all moral virtues, and the most necessary to Salvation.

That all this Policy is reduced to two principal points, the First is the
Royalty of the Pope over the whole World, the Second, is the carnal felicity of
his reign, because it serves to bring Christian Religion in Reputation amongst
imperfect and carnal men which have no pure Love toward God, l. 23. c. 3.
per conservarla in est^mazione anche presso gli impertetti, which set their
affections more upon what they see then upon what is believed, maggiormente
s'affezzionano a quel che si vede ch'a quel che si creed.

From whence it comes, that the carnal felicity of the Church is a Vocation to
Faith for all the World, and to the Clergyship for Lords and Gentlemen, who
make the Churches Glory, and her to be signal over all the World.

'Twas this temporal glory of the Pope's Royalty that Jesus Christ came to
establish, and did merit by the effusion of his blood, and to set up which, he
came down from Heaven upon Earth. l. 2. c. 10.
Vfficio istituito da Dio quando scese in terra per salute del Mondo.

It Is the spirit of this carnal Monarchy which he shed forth upon the whole
Church according to our Cardinal, the fullness whereof was in St. Peter, and he
has derived it since, as from a source, unto his Successors proportionably
according to the progress of their studies in the science of Policy, as it
appears at this day that this Spirit of St. Peter is liveing, quoth the
Cardinal, in his Successor Alexander VII. comme hoggi vive lo spirito di san'
Pietro ne' successori. l. 4. c. 5.


Wherefore having at the beginning of his work an Example of an ordinary Pope,
viz. Adrian VI. who by consequence according to him had not the Spirit of St.
Peter, though he had all his Apostolical virtues, because that according to our
Cardinal, he had not his fine policy. He now on the contrary for the conclusion
of his work, represents Pope Alexander VII. as one of the perfect Copies of
this great Apostle according to the maxim of this same refined Policy.

"You are," quoth our Cardinal, l. 24. c. ult.
speaking as to Alexander VII. The Sun that bears rule in the Hemisphere of the
Church. Light cannot suffer any darkness to obscure it. You have been created
Pope according to the desire and the Heart of the Holy Ghost, alla voglia del
Spirito Sancto, the Heretics themselves have born witness thereof. Other men
are oft-times praised for their success, in which fortune did more then they,
but you deserve a Praise no wise equivocal. The actions of your life are all
yours, and fortune has no part therein, si piglia da fatti che tutti son suoi
e niente della fortuna. Whereby it does yet again appear that our Cardinal does
admit a Fortune distinct from divine Providence, as it has been explained to
us in the Politic consideration upon Fortune; For he would not say that divine
Providence had no share in the actions of Pope Alexander, VII. He goes on in
these Terms, The pontifical officiatings which your Holiness has performed at
Seasons, with so much order and Devotion have made the most lively image of
Paradise to appear upon earth, that ever can be seen. But what shall I say of
your Holinesses Nephews and near kindred, which you have left a whole year
together at a distance from you, to try them before you called them to the
Participation which they ought to have in the government (and the carnal
Felicity of his reign.) To be absented a whole year together from the top of
the perfection (and the carnal felicity of the Church) what a trial! What a
long time for a principal Nephew, so learned, of so ripe a Wit and of an
integrety of life (so worthy of all the Ecclesiastical and religious
voluptuousness of the Roman Court) so known as was then the life of Cardinal
Chigi, your Holinesse's principal Nephew, which you called to you for the
solace rather then the burden of the people. I am of a Religion that does not
permit me to lie, mi ritrae dal mentire; Introd. c. 8.
but though that were not so, yet if what I say could be satisfied by the
public knowledge, would not it be, for me my self to destroy my own reputation
to lie so openly; sarebbe infamator da se stesso chi narrasse dal suo principe
vivente fatti particolari smentiti dalla notizia commune. Those magnificences
which your Holiness caused to be represented in the shows which you gave the
people to honor a Queen, which took off the Crown from her Head to lay it at
Jesus Christ's Vicar's feet; were not they Triumphs of Religion rather then
Pomps and Vanities? Thus then, adorable Holy Father, it is with these praises of
your Holiness that I mean to conclude my work, which is a defense of the Faith
and of the Holy See, whereof your Holiness is the infallible Master and Supreme
President essendo questa una diffesa di quella feed e di quella sede di cui
elle e infallibil Maestro e supremo Precidente. It Is to uphold this
Infallibility that the later Popes causing from all parts of the World the Holy
Ghost to be brought to them in a Clokebag, as formerly from Rome to the Council
of Trent, to the end nothing might be pronounced as it were blindly or in the
dark, l. 16. c. 10.
per non sentenziare alla cieca, have pronounced judgment against Jansenius and
against Luther, non hanno Sdegnato di procacciar l'esterna luce dello Spirito
Sancto a se stessi pe^ le valigie de' corrieri. And for upholding this
prerogative of infallibility, I do also pray God that after the Example of
your Holinesses life, He would make an extension and widening of this Spirit
(of religions and carnal Policy) in the Soul of your Successors, who may keep
up perpetually upon the Holy See in their persons as in yours, a living Book
and a living Apology of the Sovereign Pontificat, and of its rights, such as
this same Policy, that is the Queen of virtues, has fixed, and so to be able if
not to convert, yet at least to confound all those who would be Rebels. l. 24.
c. ult.
Non cessero di pregar la divina bonta che nella simigliante distesa dal suo
esempio ne' successori tenga sempre nel Vaticano un libro vivo e una viva
apologia del Pontificato, la quale vaglia se non a convertire al meno a
confondere i suoi ribelli.

These are the last words of our Cardinal's book, which make it appear that he
believed even unto the last, that the Spirit of Saint Peter reigned in all the
Conduct and Policy of Pope Alexander VII, preghino Iddio che faccia vivere
stabilmente com' oggi vive lo Spirito di san' Pietro ne successori.

He has assever'd it so strongly that he would not lie, that he is by no means
to be suspected, not so much as of the least wilful flattery. From whence it
remains then to be concluded, that for to comprehend well according to him what
was the Council of Trents Policy in all its orders made for reformation of
manners, and which Policy ought to be the Churches to be in her perfection.
Those which have seen with their eyes the Reign of Pope Alexander VII. and the
carriage of Cardinal Chigi his principal Nephew, Legate a Latere in France, have
no more to do but to call them to mind; there they will see as in a living
book all the rules of the carnal and religious Policy writ in letters of Gold,
that is to say in the characters of works and practice, which are as says the
Cardinal, moralities gold, in comparison whereof words are but chaff, l. 6. c.
7.
le parole esser paglia i fetti esser oro.

In the life of this same Pope a man shall see a King all-puissant in his shop
or office of Dispensations, sopra la bottega dalle dispensazioni, granting them
as he pleased, and even derogating from the Canons, and it will be plain that
in not observing or obeying the Council of Trent, it was the more perfectly
observed, because that the all-puissantness of the Sovereign Pontife is set
forth the better thereby, which the Council allwaies adored.

A man sees that this way the Gospel of the flesh receives every day more and
more propagation and growth, by telling aloud abroad, to the most imperfect,
this good news, That they have an easy and certain means to be happy according
to the flesh in this World and in the other, and that through the benefit of this
new Gospel, the Council of Trent has done the Church more good, then the
Heresy of Luther has diminished it or done it Mischief, maggior accrescimento
di bonta per mezzo del Concilio che non fu scemato dall'istessa eresia. This
shall serve henceforward, as the Cardinal promises, for an invincible defense
of the Catholic Religion, against Heretics, Infidels, or Atheists, which
shall be so rash as to write against it. This will be henceforward an Apology
without reply for the Council of Trent it self, since the French and the
Heretics having first said that the Holy Ghost was carried thither from Rome
in a Clokebag; they have confessed by jeering that he presi^ed there. For after
the subtility wherewith our Cardinal explains seriously this wicked raillery,
and makes a Scholastic interpretation thereof, proving the assistance of the
Holy Ghost at the Council, one needs not be an Eagle to stare out the truth of
it; even a mole it self, either may see it, or smell it out, non si richiede
esser Aquila, basta non esser talpa. Herein also most manifestly appears the
infinite usefulness of School divinity, the incomparable fruit that our
Cardinal has gathered, having been a Master so long therein as well as in
Philosophy according to Aristotle's principles, that the Heriticks cannot frame
any conceit how ridiculous soever it be, but that this Cardinal's Subtility
meditating a little profoundly thereupon, can give as serious and as surprising
an interpretation thereof by force of his good sense, and reasons far fetched,
as the heretics thought to make use of to surprise simple folk with, by their
wicked raillerie. So after two Tomes of his History of the Council of Trent in
folio, and the vast labor wherewith he composed the whole Body of carnal and
religious Policy, he concludes gravely in a confident tone, that he which is
not content with the government of the Church, such as he has told you it is,
and has made it appear to be in the Carnal and Religious Policy of Alexander
VII. and his Nephew Cardinal Chigi, and that is not content with the Spirit of
St. Peter, as it appeared in our days living in that Pope, and in that his
principal Nephew, can be no other but a Fool or a Cheat, chi per approvare una
forma di Republica non si contenta di questo governo present, o e insano, o e
seductore.

FINIS.

