It Is Humbly Proposed to the Honorable House of Commons, for Raising 368000 l.
per An. in Lieu of the Duties on Glass-Wares, Tobacco, Pipes, and Stone and
Earthen-Wares; and to supply the Want of about Six Hundred Thousand Pounds, by
FALL of the Wine Bill. Viz.
TO lay a Tax of 4 s. per Hundred on all Melted Fat, prepared for the Use and
Make of Tallow-Candles and Soap, which will Raise the above said Sum; when
considered, That in England, Wales, and Berwick, by Computation, the number of
Houses, (besides Colleges, Hospitals, and Cottages) are more then -- 1300000.

Then admitting, each House use Two Pound of Tallow Candles per Week; few using
less, but many considerably more, as Taverns, Inns, Ordinaries, and other
public Houses; as also Houses of Artificers, Manufacturies, etc.) makes 104 l.
of Candles Yearly to each House, which in all, makes Yearly Consumed Hundred
Weight of Fat. 1207142

And it may reasonably be supposed, the like quantity may be Yearly Expended in
our Merchants Ships, Merchant Strangers, Coasters, Small Craft, Katches,
Colliers, Hoys, Barges, Dock-yards, Tallowing of Ships, Vessels, Boats, etc.
also at times of public Rejoicings, great Festivals, and Illuminations 1207142

All which, at 4 s. per Hundred, makes 368000 l. per Ann. besides what Fat is
yearly Expended in Make of Soap.

That the said 4 s. per Hundred be laid upon all Foreign Melted Fat, to be paid
by the Importer.

This moderate Tax on Melted Fat, cannot be Grievous or Burdensome to either
Buyer or Seller, but be easy to the Subject, and readily Collected, by finding
the same at the Melters, Tallow-Chandlers, and Soap-Boilers.

Note, That the Scotch, by their cunning, have Enacted, That all Goods, Wares,
and Merchandises, of the Growth or Make of the East Indies, shall be Imported
Custom-free.

For which Reason, it is humbly submitted, if a Duty of 10 l. per Cent. may not
be laid upon those Goods when Imported at London, or other Places in England,
Wales, and Berwick; as also the Wares and Merchandises, being the Growth of
their own Country, which may bring the Crown above 100000 l. per Ann. and be
Perpetual.

Proposed, and humbly Presented, by Charles Palmer.
April the 6. 1697.

