A VINDICATION OF THE KING'S Sovereign Rights:

Together with A Justification of His ROYAL Exercises thereof, in all Causes,
and over All Persons Ecclesiastical (as well as by consequence) over All
Ecclesiastical Bodies Corporate, and Cathedrals* More particularly applied to
the KING's Free Chapel and Church of SARUM.

Upon Occasion of The Dean of SARUM's Narrative and Collections, made by the
Order and Command of the most Noble and most Honorable, The LORDS
Commissioners, Appointed by the KING's Majesty for Ecclesiastical Promotions.

By way of Reply unto the Answer of the Lord Bishop of Sarum, Presented to the
aforesaid most Honorable LORDS.

Printed only to save the Labor of Transcribing several Copies, and to prevent
the Mistakes thereby apt to be incurred, and merely for the Satisfaction of
private Friends, who either Want or Desire a most Impartial Information of that
Affair.

A GENERAL TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
THE Dean of Sarum superstructs the Ecclesiastical Rights in Thesi, (to things
of humane Establishment) upon the Foundation of the Regal, as upon a Rock which
cannot fail them. And also the Rights of the Bishop of Sarum in Hypothesi, upon
the only sure Foot which it can possibly stand upon. The Moral Necessity of
distinguishing (with the Judicious Bishop Sanderson) between an Original, and
Derivative Right: As also (with the famous Chief Justice Coke) between a
Subordinate, and the Supreme. The KING in Law is The Founder, Proprietor in
Chief, and Advower Paramount, of All Arch-Bishopricks, and Bishoprics,
Cathedrals, Prebends, and of All contained in them. The Despotical Exercise of
the Regality, as in all Other Churches, so Above All in the Church of Sarum.
The Church is never so much Betrayed, as by Them who assert a Church-man's
Right, with an Exclusion of the King's; and strive to take down the Stairs, to
which they owe their own Advancement. The Dean of Sarum does not ascribe an
higher Prerogative to the KING than Judge Coke himself, and Bishop Sanderson,
the Common, and Statute, and Civil Laws; yea no more than Pope Nicolas to
Edward the Confessor, and his Successors Kings of England: And does but
distinguish (with the most excellent Paolo Sarpi, That Oracle, Life, and Soul,
of the most famous Venetian Senate) between Dominion, and Dispensation. Where
any Bishop is Dispensator, the KING is Dominus.

The Second Chapter.
THE King's Castle at Old Sarum, and the King's Free-Chappel in it, and the
Dean of it, Before a Cathedral Church was built, Before a Chapter was created,
Before the Indowments of the Sovereign and Subordinate Founders, and during all
Bishop Herman's Time, are made Apparent and Undeniable, by the Best and First
Authors printed, by which the Written Registers can be confirmed. And That
Register of Registers, which was cited by the Dean, but cheaply slighted by the
Bishop, is showed to be as Authentic, as any his Lordship can produce, and for
All the same Reasons, which any Ordinary can urge for another Register.
Florentius of Worcester, Eadmerus, Will. of Malmsbury, Roger Hoveden, Simeon
Dunelmensis, (All elder than Mat. Paris) and M. Paris Himself, with several
others, do all conspire ( in antecessum) to prove the Authority of the Deans
Register, maugre Those who disesteem it, for appearing too much in the Royal
Cause. Truth justified by its Opposers (before they are aware and against their
Wills) in the very Act of their Opposition. Two or three Bishops, and many
Earls., had the King's Castle only as Keepers, and during pleasure; Thence
'twas an Ambulatory Trust, as is demonstrated by an Induction. The Castle stood
on the King's Soil. The Lord Bishops Margin does only serve to Confute his Text.

The Third Chapter.
THE Dean of Sarum's Jurisdiction in his Peculiars, and particularly in That of
Salisbury-Close, (which must be distinguished from the City, which is the
Bishops under the KING) whereof the Dean is the Sole Immediate Ordinary, was
ever Exempted from the Bishop, by the Charter of the Supreme and Subordinate
Founder of the Cathedral, the King, and Osmund. In comparison with which, The
most unlawful Composition was but a Novelty. Almost Three Hundred years
Younger, than the Great Fundamental Statute. That Composition was a Conspiracy
of Pope Boniface the Ninth, with the Then Bishop, Dean, and Chapter, against
whatsoever is Great, or Sacred. Against the Good Word of GOD. Against the
Supremacy and Prerogative of the KING. Against both the Common and Statute Law
of the Land. Against the very Foundation, whereupon the whole College and
Church are laid; and together with which they must Stand, or Fall. Against the
Souls of Them that Made it, and have Acted according to it, both in regard of
their own Oaths, and the Founder's Curse. And (by reason of All the Nullities
and Inconsistences that are in it) against Common Sense, and against It Self.
The Dean of Dr. Pierce
Sarum's Jurisdiction, exclusively of the Bishop's within the Close, is
strongly proved by the Confessions of the present Dr. Seth Ward
Lord Bishop to the Dean, Before his Lordship had been Incensed by the Dean's
Services for the K. Charles the 2d.
King, and by his dutiful Obedience to the Lords Commissioners Command. It Is
farther proved by All Decisions of Authority, For the Dean's evident Right,
against the Bishop's Invasion of it. An instance of it in the Sentence of the
Lord Chancellor of England, and the Archbishop of the whole Province. The
Mischeivous Effects of the Composition. Of no use to its Observers, unless to
make them in danger of incurring a Praemunire. The Absolute Necessity of a
Royal Visitation to set all Right,

The Appendix.
MR. Yeates, in several Letters to persons of Honor, and lesser Quality, does
strongly assert unto himself his whole design of the Four Heads. He
irrefragably proves the Dean of Sarum, not to have had an Hand in, or Assent
to, or Connivance at, or Knowledge of his Design, Antecedently to the Command
of the Lords Commissioners, or to the First Notice sent him by the Lord Bishop
and the Chapter. His Two Inducements to it from his Right Reverend Diocesan;
and his None at all from the Dean of Sarum.

A VINDICATION OF THE King's Sovereign Rights, As in all Cathedral Churches, so
especially in the Church both of Old and New Sarum, as asserted in the Dean of
Sarum's Narrative, drawn up and presented to the most Noble Lords Commissioners.
HAving labored of Late under the Obloquy of Some, and the Ill Will of Others,
and the impotent Revengefulness at least of One, for having delivered what I
had found of the King's Sovereign Rights, and his Royal Exercises thereof, as
well in All Causes, as over all Persons Ecclesiastical, All Bodies Corporate and
Cathedrals, more particularly applied unto His Majesty's Free Chapel and
Church of Sarum; though I did nothing of my self as a Voluntier, but by
Commission and Command from the most Noble and the most Honorable the Lords
Commissioners, appointed by his Gracious Majesty for Ecclesiastical Promotions,
(whom God knows I did believe it my bounden Duty to obey;) I am induced to give
the Reasons of my having made so bold with my Master's Enemies and mine own, as
to be dutifully Loyal without their Leave. I was loath to ask of them, by whom I
was sure to be denied; And* did Presume I might as pardonably assert the King's
and the Churches Rights, now that the King is on His Throne, and the Church
less Militant, as I did safely and with Success, before the Great Year of their
Restoration.

Sect. 1. First I was of an Opinion (before I had it from a most excellent and
most Noble Lord Commissioner) That it is the Duty of every Subject, and
especially of the King's Chaplains, to discover all they know of His Majesty's
Prerogative, though not Commanded by Authority, as I had been. Which saying of a
Judicious and a most Honorable Lord (in the Council Chamber, and elsewhere,)
is agreeable to another of two Lord Chancellors in their times, whereof the
first was the Lord Bacon; from whom 'twas borrowed by the Second, who used it
in his Speech to Sir Edward Thurland when made a Baron of the Exchequer. To
wit, That the Subjects of England in General, as well as the Judges in
particular, (and particularly the Judges of Ecclesiastical Courts, such as is
the Dean of Sarum,) are bound to maintain the Prerogative, and not distinguish
it from the Law. The King's Prerogative being Law, and (in the words of Chief
Justice Coke Instit. Part. 1. Sect. 648 P. 344.
Coke,) The Principal part of the Common Law; as That from which all other Laws
are derived, and on which they do depend. With these I compared that famous
Saying of a full Parliament, which I found cited by my Lord Inst. Part. 4. c*
1. p. 44.
Coke too, That no King or Kingdom can be safe, but where the King has Three
Abilities, 1. To live of his own, and defend his Kingdom; 2. To assist his
Confederates, and 3* To reward his deserving Subjects. From whence I thought it
would follow, that to take from the great Number of Ecclesiastical Promotions
in the Kings Gift, is to act against the safety of King and Kingdom, It Is
reckoned one of those things which even a King cannot do Lawfully, and which a
Rot. Parl. 42. Ed. 3. n. 7. ibid p. 14.
Parliament cannot consent to. Besides I thought it most unworthy, that he who
had not been afraid in the worst of Times, and without a Warrant, and under
none but God's Protection, to defend the King's Rights and the whole Church of
England, by many Arguments in Print, (when some New Royalists durst not join in
a Petition for the Kings wished Return, for fear (as they then said) of setting
their Hands to their own Ruin, as having reason to suspect the Restoration
would be General, that All Usurpers must be Ejected, and all Ejected for their
Loyalty, would have their own, which passed with some for an heavy Judgment,)
should now descend unto the Meanness of hiding himself behind Another, and
behind such another as he knew to be Unqualified for such service, as I was
irrationally suspected and most maliciously reported to have engaged Another
in. No, the Pretenders to that Suspicion, and the Inventers of that Report, did
only design by such Baseness to lessen the merit of my Obedience to the Lords
Commissioners Injunction, and of my Dutiful Regard to the King himself, toward
whose Service it was my fault, (as it is my Apology and Excuse with a sort of
men,) that I did not go till I was sent, nor mend my Pace till I was driven.

Sect. 2. Next I had learned by my perusal of Keble's Statutes at large, and of
Chief Justice Coke's Institutes, (to name no more in this Place) 25 H. 8. and 1
Ed. 6. 2.
That the Gift of all Bishoprics, and Nomination of Bishops did ever belong to
our Monarchs, both before, and since the Conquest, as in Right of the Crown. My
Lord Coke gives the Reason from this trite Maxim in the Law, 1 Inst. l. 2. c.
6. f. 94. 97. And l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 648. p. 344.
That all our Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, were and are of the King's
Foundation. That at first they were therefore all merely Donative, merely by
the Delivery of a Staff, and a Ring. Never Elective till King John, who Reigned
not without the Murdering of Arthur of Britain the Rightful Heir. Dr. Burnet's
Hist. of Reformation. Part. 1. p. 265. and Part 11. p. 2. 7.
That it was again taken away by Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. in whose Reigns all the
Bishops were required to take out New Commissions for their Bishoprics, and so
to hold them only as Delegates in the King's Name, and not for Life Absolute,
but During Pleasure. And Archbishop Cranmer gave an Example to the Rest. 1 Ed.
6. cap. 2. Rast 9. Wingat. Sect. 15. 25 H. 8. c. 10.
That Elections by Deans, and Chapters are declared by Law to be No Elections,
but by a writ of Conge d' Eslire have only Colors and Shadows, or Pretenses of
Elections serving to no Purpose, and seeming derogatory and Prejudicial to the
King's Prerogative Royal, etc. That Bishop See the 14th. Collect. to the 1st
part of the Hist. of Refor. p. 184, 185.
Bonner declared under his hand, He held his Bishopric of London, of the
King's Bounty alone, during the King's Pleasure only, and that he would again
deliver it up, when it should please the King to call for it. That Coke 2.
Inst. c. 6. upon Magna Charta p. 15.
all the Temporalities of Archbishopricks and Bishoprics in all Uacancies
(which our Kings made when it pleased them) ever came to the King as Founder.
He being Patronus and Protector Ecclesiae in so high a Prerogative incident to
his Crown, that he cannot part with it, no Subject can have claim to it either
by Grant or by Prescription. That C. de Sacrosanct. Eccles. and de Episc. and
Clericis.
the Lands of the Church were all at first given by gracious Princes, as may
appear from the first Book of Iustinian's Code, where Laws are recorded for the
conferring, and also for the Conserving of them. Which is also the Affirmation
of the most excellent Paulus Sarpius. That Coke 2 Inst. on Magna Charta. c. 33.
p. 68.
if the King and a Common Person have joined in a Foundation, the King is the
Founder; because it is an Entire Thing. For the Truth of which Maxim that
renowed Judge cited 44 Ed. 3. c. 24. from when I inferred within myself, that
King Hen. 8. (rather than Wolsey) was Founder of Christ Church in Oxford, though
its well enough known, that Wolsey was a Co-Founder: Or, Founder Subordinate to
the Supreme. So William the Conqueror (rather than Osmund) was the Supreme and
Sovereign Founder of the Cathedral Church of Old Sarum; though by the King's
Bounty, as well as Leave, St. Osmund built, and greatly endowed it with such
Revenues, as he Seldom. Ianus Anglorum. l. 2. c. 1. p. 48.
held of his Lord and Master during Pleasure and by Knights Service. For the
Conqueror's Soldiers (whereof Osmund of Say was one) held all the Lands which
he gave them under military Service, not as properly Freeholders, but as Lords
in Trust only, and according to the King's Pleasure, thereby hoping to engage
them to a close Dependence upon the Crown: as the learned Seldom relates of
Matthew Paris, and his learned p. 116.
Annotator does give the Reason. I do not say our Monarchs have had the same
Power ever since, but the same Right by Law which ever any King had. Nor do I
say they have a Right to any Saecular Possessions whereof the Subject has a
Feesimple; But a Right to confer on Ecclesiastical Persons such Ecclesiastical
Dignities and Revenues, as are in Law of the King's Foundation, Which all are
affirmed to be by Keble, referring to the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. p. 121. Where
the Holy Church of England is said to have been Founded by Ed. 1. and his
Progenitors, etc. as the Lords and Advowers of it. And then by virtue of that
other Maxim in my Lord Coke, (who was never more an Oracle, than when he spoke
for the King's Prerogative, to which he had never a Partiality,) That 2 Inst.
in Statutes of Employment. p. 742.
Successors are included under the Name of King; It Is plain that what Right
soever was in William the First, and his next immediate Successors, (especially
Hen. 1. and Hen. 3. from whom the Church of Sarum had vast Additions of
Endowment,) Our King has now. Hence it is that All our Kings have been not
only owned as the Founders, but as Patrons of our Cathedral. For which I cited
the Address of the Dean and Chapter to Hen. 7. in whom the two contending
Houses were united, wherein they called him their Founder Fol. 46. 47. usque ad
Fol. 59.
seven times at least. Their Numerical Expressions in their Prayer to God for
him, (to whom they could not intend to lie) was Fundator Ecclesiae Sarum. And
Hen. 8. was so styled by the famously Learned and Prudent Regist. Harw. p. 66.
125.
Longland, after Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, for which I might cite the Exact Register of Harward, the
Authenticalness of which was never questioned. So it is Notorious that all
Members of Christ-Church in Oxford, in their Prayers before their Sermons do
Commemorate Hen. 8. (not naming Wolsey) as their Founder. From whence it is
that the Dean of Christ-Church is the Sole Governor of that Cathedral, and the
Bishop of Oxford not. As the Dean of Westminster, had the Sole Jurisdiction
within the Precincts of that Cathedral, when there was Created a Bishop of it.
And the Dean there has more than Episcopal Jurisdiction. Archiepiscopal (says
Dr. Heylin) within all the Liberties, as the Abbots had heretofore. Ever since
Sebert King of Essex, Kings and Queens have been Successively, and in the Eye
of the Law the Founders of the Church, and of all within it. As it is now a
Collegiate Church, Queen Elizabeth was the Foundress, and our King at this day
(whom God preserve) is in Law the Founder of it. As for all the same Reasons,
He is the Founder of our College and Church of Sarum, as well by several Acts
of Parliament, as in our own Books. Our Norman Kings did say of it, as Will. 1.
of Battle Abbey, Eadmerus l. p. 6. Seld Spic. p. 165. and
Libera sit sicut mea Basilica Capella; and as that was exempted from the Power
and Visitation of the Bishops of Chichester, so was ours from the Bishops of
Sarum, as shall be shown in its proper Place. I end this Section with that Old
Distich in Spondanus of our Salisbury Cathedral, and with a Verse made in those
very times.

Spond Annal ad A D. 1237.
Rex largitur opes; fert Praesul opem; Lapicidae Dant operam; tribus his est
opus ut stet opus. Cambden in Wilt.
Regis enim Virtus Templo spectabitur isto. Sect. 3. Thirdly, Although I do not
say, with that incomparable Civilian Sir Thomas Ridley, Cambden in Wilt.
That the King himself is instead of the whole Law, yea he is the Law it self,
and the only Interpreter thereof, in as much as all those who govern under him,
govern by him, and for him; Yet I will and do say with our Acts of Parliament,
View of the Civil Law. part. 2. c. 1. Sect. 6. p. 104.
That the Kingdom of England is an Empire; and the King Supreme Head of it; and
his Crown an Imperial Crown. He is not a Precarious, but an Absolute Monarch,
says the Learned Camden in his Britannia. Supremam Potestatem, and merum
Imperium habet apud nos Rex. And his Sovereign Dominion over all Ecclesiastical
Persons, and in all Causes without exception, is confessed to be de Iure, by
All our Clergy Men in their Pulpits, as well as by All in England who pay him
Firsts-fruits and Tenths. Not excepting those very Persons who cannot yet
Pardon my most necessary Distinction, (on which does lie the whole stress of
Ours and all Other Cathedrals) 24 H. 8. c. 12. and 1 Eliz. c. 1. 2. 3.
between an Original and Derivative Right; a Right Supreme and one Suburdinate
thereunto. Our Proprietaries in the Chief of the Church of Saerum; and so it is
with the strictest Propriety of speaking, that in all their Royal Mandates they
use that Style, Our Church of Sarum. For as Proprietaries in Chief, and bonae
fidei Possessores, and Founders of the Bishopric, as well as of All belonging
to it, I find and can prove (against the naked and cheap Denials of such as can
easily deny what they cannot Disprove by any Artifices or Strengths) that our
Monarchs have Acted as Despotically in and over the Church of Sarum, as in any
their Mansion Houses. Who but our Monarchs did take away the Fourteen Prebends
I reckoned up in my Collections, and the Archdeaconry of Dorset, and all the
Dorsetshire Jurisdiction from the Bishops of Sarum, (not so much as One Parish
remaining there unto the Bishop, though about Forty to the Dean,) and conferred
them upon others according to their Wills and Pleasures? To begin with the
first Times, were to write a Volume. Let it suffice that Hen. 8. gave Four of
them at once to the Dean and Chapter of Windsor, as that of Okeborn St. Andrew,
that of Okeborn St. George, that of Hungerford, and that of Sherbourn; but did
not take from the Dean of Sarum the Episcopal Jurisdiction in any one of them:
Nor in that which was given by Hen. 8. or Ed. 6. to the Earls of Pembroke, to
wit, the Great Prebend of Axford, supposed to have been given by Q. Elizabeth,
to her Secretary of State, Sir Francis Walsingham, from whom I know it came by
Purchase to Sir Francis Pyle's Grandfather; the like to which he has also in
the Prebend of Sherbourn in Dorset, which has been variously disposed of to
and fro by our several Monarchs, for about Five Hundred Years together, from
King Stephen to King James. And though Sherbourn was the Seat of so vast a
Bishopric, that no fewer than Four Bishoprics were taken out of it. yet the
whole Jurisdiction of That, and many round about it, have still been saved
entirely by All our Monarchs since the Conquest, to Him who was then, and ever
since the Dean of their Majesty's free Chapel and Church of Sarum. Then
Formaliter, and ever since Virtualiter, in Respect of the Franchises belonging
to him. Indeed in the Prebend of Bedwin, given away by Ed. 6. to the Earl of
Hertford and his Heirs, the Dean of Sarum has but Episcopal Jurisdiction, and a
Triennial Visitation; the like to which he has in the Prebend of Faringdon,
which is now in Sir Robert Pie, to whom it descended from his Father, by whom
it was bought of the Lady Umpton, and given for ever from the Bishop and Church
of Sarum, by Ed. 6. to Wm. Hening, Esquire. A. D. 1550. The Three good Prebends of
Uphaven, Loders, and Horton, were Alienated from us, I know not when, or by
which of our English Monarchs. The Prebend of Shipton (which was no more in our
Monarchs to dispose of, than All the rest) was given away by King James I. (as
to the Patronage and Advowson) unto the Chancellor and Scholars of the
University of Oxford, for the use of a Layman the King's Professor of Law
there, and to his Successors for ever, with an Etiamsi Laicus sit, and sacros
ordines non susceperit; and this the King gave under the Great Seal of England,
wherein the Habendum and the Tenendum, is not of the Bishop of Sarum (of whom
there is not the least Notice taken) but of Him the said King, and his
Successors for ever: Which Gift and way of giving it, was afterward confirmed
by an Act of Parliament, which I wonder to find alleged by the Right Reverend
the Bishop in Derogation to the King's Right of giving Prebends; as if a King's
Act were the less Regal, or Legal, for being done by the King twice. First
without a Parliament, and a Second time in it. Or as if the King of England had
not Acted as the Proprietor, because the Three Estates of Parliament did so
esteem Him. Nor has any Reason been given (that I have ever read, or heard of)
why King James might not as easily have given away any other Prebend, which had
been founded in that Church, that of Netherbury in Terra for Example, which he
really had given to his Divinity-Professor, and to his Successors, but that His
Majesty found it too little, and rather chose to give them a Greater Thing. Nor
is the King's Act in Parliament (which we may no more distinguish from the
King, than we may distinguish the King's Prerogative from the Law) more or less
the King's Act, than his Act in Council (although perhaps of more force:) For
the Three States which make the Body of a Parliament, whereof the King is the
Head (tho a most Honorable Body, and a whole Kingdom in Epitomy) can but
prepare Matter for Law, and humbly propose it to the Sovereign to be ratified
or rejected, as his Majesty thinks sit. But the Ratio Formalis of Legislation
is fully and solely in the King; whose Fiat or Le veult is the very Soul and
Life of every Law made, or to be made. And really if the King of England is not
the Founder, the Sovereign Patron, and Proprietary in Chief, as well of the
Prebends, as of the Bishoprics; the Bishop of Sarum can have no Right to his
Prebend of Potern (tho Installed and Admitted by the Dean and Chapter, as other
Prebendaries are;) much less can he have Right unto his other Prebend of
Blewbery, into which he was never so Installed or Admitted; and which is
reckoned in the Choir among the Alienated Prebends, because transferred from
the whole Chapter to the Bishop of Sarum, who is indeed one of the Chapter, as
he is Prebendary of Potern, but not at all as Prebendary of Blewbery: And so
his Lordship cannot have a Right to it, (tho he has Possession of it,) unless
he has it from the King, which is Right enough; and yet it is not enough, in
case the King is not de jure the Sovereign Patron, and Proprietary in Chief.
'Twas never once held by any Bishop of Sarum, (but was a distinct and good
Provision for one of the Simplices Canonici) until the Reign of Hen. 8. by whom
it is pretended to have been pressed upon Bishop Salcot, alias Capon, and that
in Exchange for the Manor of Godalming in Surrey; which could not possibly be
de jure (if indeed 'twas so de facto) in case the King had no Right to dispose
of that Prebend as he thought fit: I say if it was indeed so de facto, because
the Manor of Godalming in Surrey (with the Rectory and the three Copices, and
the perpetual Advowson of the Vicaridge) was the Gift of King Lib. Stat. ut
fol. 38.
Hen. III. and is the Dean of Sarum's Corpse, and held of him by Lease to this
very day. Nor could such an Exchange be made ( if it ever were) without the
King's Fiat, as Proprietary in chief: And I hope 'twill not be said, that the
King has only Right to Alienate what he will to the Bishop from any other, but
no right to give what Prebend he will to any other. It is against Law and
Reason, that one Man in the same Church should have two Prebends at once. And
therefore when Hen. II. of England gave two to one Person Conc. Imp. and Sacr.
l. 8. c. 22. art. 7.
Pope Alexander the Third complained of it: Not at all questioning his Royal
Right to give Prebends, but the Evil Use of it. Hence it follows, that the
Right of any Bishop of Sarum to bestow Prebends (which I shall ever assert as
the only sure Foot it can stand upon) must needs be Subordinate to the King's,
from whose Supreme Right it was derived. For the King (if he would) Coke 1.
Inst. l. 1.. 1. and part 2. in Stat. de Westminster. c. 1. p. 501. praesertim. part
4. c. 7. 287.
cannot legally confer a Sovereign Right upon any Subject, much less upon a
Bishop, Dean and Chapter, who cannot hold what they have for Term Life
Absolute, being many ways subject to Deprivations. Amongst many other Examples
which might be easily given of that; Judge Part 4. c. 76. p. 356.
Coke tells us of one Bishop of Exeter, who fell into a Praemunire, for not
admitting one immediately, who was presented by the King to the Church of
Southwell: And this was done in the prevailing Times of Popery (24 Ed. 3.) much
more easily may it be done by a Protestant King (and has been often) who has
of Right an Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and does assert it without a Sacrilege,
or an Encroachment upon the Church, and that by the Confession of all Loyal
Churchmen. I am sure I can name Many, who once allowed much more to Cromwell:
And yet by 23 Eliz. c. 1. 3. Iac. c. 4.
two Statutes in force, it is downright Treason, for any Subject of England,
either to Promise or Pay Obedience, to any other than to the King, his Heirs,
and Successors. 'Twould be as endless, as it is easy, to Muster up Instances of
the Regale over Churches and Churchmen, and their Revenues, even when they
were as Great, as the Pope could make them; and at as high a pitch of Pride, as
that Usurper of Supremacy could raise them to. The most Assuming Bishop of Rome
that ever was, was Pope Hildebrand; against whose Tyrannies and Encroachments,
William the Conqueror was a Protestant; yet he apparently so dreaded the
growing Power of the then Bishops within this Kingdom, that he Confirmed his
own Power (as well as showed it) by lessening Theirs. Our Kings (in a word) are
de jure Kings of France: And the French King's Prerogative, or Propriety,
cannot be greater in the Gallican Church, than our Kings is in the Church of
England. Nor indeed near so great. ('It Is a little thing to say in the Church of
Sarum only.) And yet the whole Clergy of the Gallican Church, have lately
declared their Opinion by the Mouth of the Archbishop of Rheims
(notwithstanding their Popes Pretensions) That the King has a clear Title to
the Right of the Regale in all the Bishoprics of his Kingdom; That a General
Council cannot lessen it, much less a Pope; That no Present King can be
deprived of what a former King had; That the King's Collating to Prebends is
such an Act of Supremacy (so the Historian does infer) as shows the King to be
Lord in Fee; and by the Code made in the Time of Hen. 4. Code Hen. 4. l. 7.
Tit. 1. Art. 47.
If a Chapter refuse to Install a Regalist, Letters are to go out to compel
them to it, or else their Revenues are to be Seized on. Briefly 'twas confessed
by the Bishop of Pamiees (the stoutest Assertor of the Pope's Ecclesiastical
Supremacy) that The Foundation of Churches does prove the King's Right of
Patronage. All which and much more may be Collected out of Dr. Burnet's
elaborate History of the Rights of Princes, etc. And if the French Kings
Prerogative is such; who does not own an Ecclesiastical Supremacy in all
Causes, and over all Persons, as our King does; How much greater is the Regale
of our Kings here in England, ever since the Reformation? I will conclude this
Comparison of the King of France with the French King, in the words of this
King's Procurator General in Parliament, to wit, That the King can no more
renounce the Right of the Regale in Ecclesiasticis, either in whole, or in
part, than he can destroy the Salick Law, or quit the Sovereignty of any
Provinces in France: And further adds, They would all quit their Employments,
rather than consent to the least Diminution of that Right. There are some among
Us, who do not speak in that Strain, though others do.

Sect. 4. Fourthly, I observed a Maxim of Law in my Lord Coke, which did
Confirm me in my Distinction between a Supreme and Subordinate Right. The Maxim
is, 1 Instit. l. 1. c. 5. Sect. 35. fol. 30.
that If the Title of the King, and of a common Person concur, the King's
Title shall be Preferred. For the Law (says he) respects Honor and Order:
Therefore if the King makes one Man a Resident, whilst the Dean and Chapter is
choosing, and have a desire to Choose another; the Dean and Chapter will prefer
the King's Clerk, and not dispute with his Majesty de jure Patronatus. Several
Instances may be given in several Churches. Those of Sarum, and Wells in
especial manner. So if the King presents One to a Prebend without Residence,
and the Bishop Another; the Dean and Chapter will Install and Admit the King's
Man, because by express Statute Law, 29 Ed. 3. Stat. 6.
The King is the Advower Paramount immediate of all Churches and Prebends. And
accordingly our Kings, the Last, and Present in particular, do not only
Recommend, but pro Imperio plane Despotico, do expressly Command Obedience to,
and Compliance with them; and that sometimes in the very same Line, sometimes
two or three Lines lower, sometimes again in the Conclusion. Yes, and in
variety of Despotical Expressions (as great as any can be invented in Law to be
Imperial. Such as are (for instance) Of many more Instances, These at present
may suffice. In the Letters of Chapter I. May 18. in the 9th year of his Reign. And
Feb. 8. the same year of Chapter II. Iul. 24. 1674. and Ian. 11. 1665. and Sept.
10. 1666. and Mar. 8. 1676. and Iun. 8. 1680. Besides many more Registered, and
many which are not, but ought to be, and to have been.
We will. We command. We will and require. Willing and requiring you. Our
pleasure is. Our express will and pleasure is. This We will have done, Any Use,
Custom, Prescription, or any other Matter, or Thing to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. Again, We Will, and Our Pleasure is, that You cause these
our Letters to be entered in your Register, to the end they may be produced when
Occasion requires. What French King did ever Write in a more Decretory,
Despotical, and Masterly Style, than Le Roy le veult. Car tell est son plaisir?
This was as far as Heaven from Hell, from Expressly Disclaiming a Royal
Patronage, and Right, and Jurisdiction. I will add but one more, which was both
ways Despotical; to wit, by a signal Inhibition, and by a Peremptory Command.
For having said, that He had given unto his Chaplain Dr. Drake the Dignity and
Office of Chancellor in that his Cathedral Church of Sarum, with the Prebend
thereto annexed? His Majesty added these signal words; [We hereby Will and
Require, that no Other Person be Admitted or Elected into any Residentiaries
Place now vacant, or that shall be vacant, until He (the said Dr. Drake) be
received into the Rights and Profits of Residence: And for so doing, This shall
be your Warrant.] Much more might be said of the King's Mandate for Dr. Whitby,
which yet I forbear, till occasion serves. Only of this I am assured by as
Eminent Coke 1. Inst. l. 1. Sect. 31. fol. 27.
a Lawyer, as perhaps ever was, That a false Suggestion in a Petition to the
King, does void the King's Grant of the thing Petitioned for: It being a Maxim
in My Lord Coke Stat. 14 Ed. 3. cap. 4.
; [The Grant is void, where the King is deceived in his Grant.] Besides all
this, I sadly considered with my self, how often Bishops Temporalities have
been Resumed by our Kings upon light Displeasures. How often Will. 2. did
Daniel in the Life of Rufus. p. 44.
Resume his own Grants. And how he at once took all the Profits of the
Bishoprics of Canterbury, Winchester, and Sarum. And how all Bishops were
threatened Lord Coke out of the Parliament Rolls. 18 H. 3.
by Hen. 3. With a Seizure of all they had, if they presumed to intermeddle in
any thing to the Prejudice of the Crown. Lastly, How V. Cottoni Posthuma, p.
280. 281.
all our Kings and Parliaments (excepting one) even from Hen. 3. until the 6.
of Hen. 8. have used Acts of Resumption, whereby to Repair the low Estate of
the Crown. The just and frequent way to do it (said the learned Sir Robert
Cotton, in his Speech to the House of Commons, 1 Car. 1.) The Dean of Sarum, as
much as any Man, is for the Bishop of Sarum's Rights (though not exclusively of
the Kings) and would have it stand safely, by standing for ever upon a Rock, to
wit, The Prerogative of our Monarchs, who, in Law, can never dye. They tend to
the Ruin of the Prelacy, and all Cathedrals, who labor to make their King
Despotical, in the Sense of the Greek Proverb only, (...). Be a Family never so
Great, there is but one Servant in it, and that is the Master of the House. But
the Learned Dr. Burnet affirms the King to be Despotical in a much better
Sense. For premising an Observation, how frequently Christian Monarchs made
Paenal Laws for Churchmen, the Pains of which were Suspension, or Deprivation
(whereof the Instances are many, both in the old Roman Laws, and in the
Capitulars) He Infers the King's Hist. of the Rights of Princes, in disposing
of Church Lands and Eccl. Promotions. p. 322.
Mastership, and gives a very sound Reason for it. Indeed the Bishops of Rome
for several Centuries of Years, even in all their Public Bulls, and till the
Death of Charles the Great, did own the Emperors of their Times, as their
Guiccard in. Hist l. 4.
Lords and Masters. And Richard Poor, Bishop of Sarum, did own King John as his
Regist. ex Annal. Pontif. fol 3.
Master, with greater Reason; however that King de facto made himself the
Pope's Vassal. Postulans ab Eo tanquam a Domino suo manus adjutrices. All agree
the Monarchs of England have power to Suspend, or Deprive a Bishop (as Ours has
done an Archbishop, and that for a lesser degree of Guilt, than that of
opposing the King's Prerogative) as Q. Mary and Elizabeth did: and of our Kings
not a few. So it is on all hands confessed, That their Royal Visitations, either
of All the Churches of England (as Hen. 8. Ed. 6. and Q. Eliz. by their
Commissioners) may Abolish Old Statutes, and Order New ones to be made; and
this for One (if they please) That No Prebend shall be conferred without the
King's express Mandate, or Permission and Consent, in a Conge d'Eslire. This
would be at once Despotical, and yet according to Law; however some in the
World are willing to make them Inconsistent: And every Statute would begin with
a Statuimus, Ordinamus, or Volumus and Mandamus: Which being supposed, I would
ask, What hurt would there be in it? Or, What Ill Consequence could therebe of
it? Is the King fit to be entrusted with All the greatest Promotions, All the
Bishoprics and Deaneries? And is he not fit to bestow the Least? It is
convenient, and of good Use, and according to Law, that he should make a Bishop
of Sarum, as well as the Dean, and All the Residentiaries, (as at this Day, and
in Antecessum for Days and Years yet to come?) And is it Illegal, or of Ill
Consequence, that he should sometimes (though seldom) bestow some Few of his own
Prebends, even on Men of great Learning, and Holy Life, and in full holy
Orders, and that for Term of Life only? when his Progenitors gave so many even
to mere Laymen, and their Heirs for ever? The World takes Notice, and it is to
be Written with a Sunbeam, that generally speaking, and taking one with
another, no Preferments are so well given as by the King, and by the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and by the advice of the Lords Commissioners,
whom His Majesty has appointed for Ecclesiastical Promotions. It Is certain the
Bishops, and the Deans, and others, whose Preferments are in the King's sole
Disposal (not only in his Supreme, for which certain Bishops have a Subordinate
Right derived) are all exactly of this Opinion: This (I say) is as certain, as
it is certain they have a competent good Opinion of themselves, and their own
Deservings: They would not else have accepted, much less would many of them
have sought, what many others had deserved as well as they. And if it is true
that This in Scriptis was the Assertion of the present Bishop of Sarum Dr.
Ward's, in Answer to the Dean's Narrative,
Neither the Bishop, nor the Church of Sarum, did suffer any prejudice at all,
by King James his giving a Prebend unto a mere Layman, and to his Successors
for ever; (at which saying of a Great Churchman, many good Secular Men have
wondered) How much less can his Lordship think it any Prejudice at all to the
Bishop of Sarum, or to the Church, or to the whole Order of Churchmen, if
another Monarch of England shall confer another Prebend (I do not say upon a
Layman, and his Successors for ever, but) upon One in Holy Orders, and
(without a Nepotismo) of Holy Life, and of excellent Learning, and for term of
Life only, or so long as he is seen, and Notoriously known, to continue to
deserve the Enjoyment of it? It Is very well known what was the Judgment of Hen.
8. upon his Deathbed, and of all his Executors after his Death (whereof three
were Eminent Churchmen, to wit, Archbishop Cranmer, Tonstal Bishop of Durham,
and Dr. Wotton, the famous Ambassador, who was at once Dean of Canterbury and
York, and humbly refused the Archbishopric of the great Province) and also of
All the Privy Counselors of Ed. 6. when they decreed to the Hist. Reform. Part
2. lib. 1. p. 6. 7, 8, and 9.
Earl of Hartford, Six of the best Prebends at once, and Three Hundred pounds
per annum out of the Lands of the next Bishopric, which should fall to the
King's Disposal. After which 'twas granted also (at the said Earl's Suit) that
his Lordship should have a Deanery, and a Treasurership, in lieu of Two of the
said six Prebends: But very far was the Dean of Sarum from defending the
Alienations of Ecclesiastical Endowments to Saecular Men (as the Lord Bishop of
Sarum does;) He was not so little verst in Logic, as to argue a Facto ad Ius.
For when he related matters of Fact, and what our Monarchs had done in the
Church of Sarum, he added, [ Quo jure, I humbly leave to the Judgment of my
Superiors.] He only demonstrated, that our Monarchs had acted as Founders, and
Proprietors (which indisputably our Monarchs All are) and have a strict Right
(as well as Power) to bestow all our Prebends as well as Bishoprics upon God's
proper Usu-Fructuaries, deserving Churchmen for term of Life. But whosoever
shall consider, what Powers were given to the Lord Cromwell by Commission, as
Vicar General to Hen. 8. and also shall consider those famous Parliaments,
composed of the clearest and deepest Heads of those Times, both Spiritual and
Temporal, who made the known Statutes of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 4. and 13. and 27. 28.
and 1 Ed. 6. cap. 14. will at least excuse and pardon any Man living who now
believes (and with a much Greater force of Reason) that our King has a Supreme
and Sovereign Right (from which and under which some of our Bishops, as well as
Deans, have one Subordinate and Derived) to dispose of Vacant Prebends now and
then, when they please, in their own Cathedrals. And as well may he dispose of
All our Residentiaries Places (as his now-Sacred-Majesty, and his Royal
Progenitors have done) yes, and return them, if he thinks fit, from six to
seven, from seven to twelve, and from twelve to fifty-two; and bind them to
Residences in their Courses, thirteen every Quarter, according to our several
Statutes, both Old and Modern.

Sect. 5. Besides all this, I find it said to the Lords Commissioners, First by
my Brethren of the Chapter, [ That His Majesty's Power within the Church of
Sarum appears to us to be the same, and no other than it is in All other
Cathedral Churches in England.] Next by the King's Attorney General, [I cannot
find that His Majesty has any other Right in That Church, than in any other
Cathedral Churches.] These Assertions, but especially the First, because of its
important Monosyllable All, do seem at least to me to imply a Grant, That His
Majesty has the same both Power and Right in the Cathedral Church of Sarum,
which he has, and ever had, in the Churches of Worcester, Norwich, Rochester,
Bristol, Gloucester, Oxford, Peterborough, Westminster, Windsor, etc. In All
which Churches, as well Cathedral as Collegiate, Every one of the Prebends is
in the King's Sole (not only Sovereign) Disposal, (by Himself, or Lord Keeper,)
and not one in any Bishop, or Bishops whatsoever. Yea, even in the
Archbishop's Metropolitical Church of Cnanterbury, the King has the Sole
Disposal of Nine of the Twelve Prebends, and the Archbishop of but Three. Though
the Primate of all England and Metropolitan, should have as much Power and
Right, (a man would think,) within the Cathedral of his own Diocese, as any one
Inferior Bishop, both within his Grace's Corrections also; such as the Bishop
of Sarum is. And I do sometimes ask my self, what Inconvenience could there be,
if the Bishop of Sarum, or any other who is Subordinate to the Archbishop, (as
the Archbishop to the King,) had no more Prebends to dispose of than the
Archbishop has? Or if His Majesty now and then (although but rarely, only
Fourteen, or Fifteen, in above 500, years,) should give a Prebend at large of
Sarum, to a Priest every way qualified with Want and Worth, as well as he gives
All the Prebends in All the Churches recited, without Exception? The Church and
State might stand firmly as now they do, and Christian Souls might be as
salvable as now they are, though the King's Power and Right were as much owned by
All, as it is by me. The Bishops of London and of Lincoln, and several others,
have a most undoubted Right to dispose of Prebends, (such at least as the
Bishop of Sarum has,) and that Right the more unquestionable, by being held of
the Supreme, and derived from it, and Subordinate thereunto. A Sole and
Sovereign Right wholly exclusive of the King's, (which is all I contend
against, and which my Lord Bishop of Sarum, seems to aim at, and effect, or
else his Lordship and I agree,) I am verily persuaded, none of those Bishops
will pretend to. It cannot be said with any Truth, that All the Bishoprics I
have named, wherein the King gives All the Prebends, the Bishops none, are not
of Old, but New Foundation. For Worcester, and Norwich are very Old; Canterbury
and Rochester two of the Oldest we have in England. Besides that, the King's
Power and Right in the Church of Sarum, is greater than in many others; not
only because of his Old Free Chapel, which I shall prove in the next Chapter
(and cannot be disproved by some Negatives, from some Interested and Passionate
Opposers of the Prerogative,) but also because the Kings of England were the
Co-Founders of that Cathedral in a Literal Sense, as well as Founders in the
Sense of our Common and Statute Law: The Co-Founders at least, because Osmund
had his All from the Bounty of Will. 1. and held his All of that King's Favor,
under Knights Service during Pleasure, for which I cited Mr. Seldom and Matthew.
Paris, in the first Sect. of this Chapter. King Hen. 1, in one day gave 20
Churches to that of Sarum, besides the Tithes of New Forest; if the Part. 3.
C. 4. Sect. 4. p. 190.
Record which was read by Sir. Tho. Ridley said true, which he mentions in his
View of the Civil Law. And (passing by the lesser Bounties of Steph. and K.
Hen. 2.) it is confessed, that Hen. 3. gave no fewer than 20 or 21 Prebends,
and other things; even All the Tithes of all the Kings Forests within Three
Counties, Wilts, Berks, and Dorset and the Removal of the Cathedral from Old to
New Sarum, is owned by Bishop Spondanus (as well as Bishop God win in his
account of Rich. Poor. p. 276. and Spondanus supra.
others) to have been at the King's cost chiefly. Next our Kings were Sole
Founders in the Eye and Sense of the Law, according to the Maxim cited before
from Judge Coke, Instit. Cart 2. Chap. 33. upon Magna Charta, p. 68. and 44 Ed.
3 cap. 24. And our King at this day, according to that other Maxim in Coke 2
Inst. in Statute of Employments, p. 742. Whatever Right our Former Kings had,
our King has now.

It seems strange to most men, (who have considered the matter thoroughly,)
that the King who gets the Right of giving every Ecclesiastical Possession in
England, not only where Church men, but where Saecular men are Patrons, by
promoting an Incumbent unto a Bishopric, should immediately loose All even in
That very Church where he makes the Bishop: Or that the King who has All in
his own Disposal, during the Vacancy of All the Bishoprics in England, should
have nothing to dispose of, (without the Bishop's good leave,) as soon as the
Vacancies are filled, though filled up freely by himself. They are Betrayers of
the Churches Rights who go about to undermine and betray the King's; And they
tempt the King and his Royal Successors, to let their Bishoprics lie void, as
Q. Eliz. and her Ancestors thought fit to do, even as far as for 20, or 30,
yea, for 40, years together. Signal Instances of which in the most of our
Churches, if not in All, 'twere too easy for me to give, if it would not
occasion too great a Length. Alas! we may judge of the King's Regale within the
Cathedral Church of Sarum, (supposing there had been never a Royal Chapel in
the Old Castle, which yet I shall shortly make apparent,) by the Exercises of
it in other Churches. They having (in their Pleasures and Displeasures) Created
some Bishoprics, and Suppressed them soon after; (whereof Westminster is an
Example:) Dissolved, and Restored; (whereof Durham is an Example:) United two
into one, and again Divided into Two; (an Instance of which we have in
Worcester and Gloucester:) Taken three out of one, (as Hen. 1. took Ely out of
Lincoln. Hen. 8. Oxford and Peterborough out of the same:) Though the Diocese of
Lincoln is still the greatest, ('its Parishes being no fewer than 1255.)
Ordered one Bishopric to be held with Another in Commendam; (as that of
Bristol with that of Gloucester for 23 years together:) Gave the Bishopric of
Hexam in Augmentation to the Archbishopric of York; (from which it was taken
again in the 37. of Hen. 8.) Converted Canons Saecular into Regular, and vice
versa made the Prior and Convent of Westminster a distinct Corporation from the
Abbot: Conferred the Patronage of a Bishopric upon a Subject; (as Hen. 4. that
of Man upon the Family of the Stanleys: Gave Temporalities, and Reassumed them;
(as in 14 Ed. 3. cap. 3.) deprived Bishops for very small Failings; (Examples
of which are elsewhere given.) Subjected them to the Statute of Praemunire, and
to the Judgments of Saecular Men; (As All at once to the Lord Cromwell, and Sir
Io. Tregonwel to that of Sarum.) Made Inferior Clergymen to be the Judges of
their Superiors; (as the Dean of St. Paul's over Bonner Bishop of London:)
Translated Bishops in Displeasure, from the Greater Bishoprics to the lesser;
(As Nevil from York to St. Andrews in Scotland; and John Buckingham from
Lincoln to Litchfield, which was not then half so good:) Made a Saecular Man a
Dean; (as the Lord Cromwell Dean of Wells:) In a word the same Authority which
took four Bishoprics out of Sherburn, and added Sherburn (with about 40
Parishes about it) to the Dean of Sarum's Jurisdiction; And gave away the
Jurisdiction of the Rest of all Dorsetshire from the Bishop of Sarum to that of
Bristol, (but never gave away one from the Dean of Sarum,) can give a Prebend
of Sarum, or a Residentiaries Place, to any man in full Orders, and that de
Iure; for to a Layman, and de facto, it has frequently been done. And if the
Corporation of Dean and Chapter is not of the King's Foundation, when the
Bishopric is by all Confessions, and by the frequent Declarations of the Law;
why have our Kings disposed oftener of the Residentiaries places, than of the
Canonries at large without Residence? Why should any man dispute against his
Kings being his Founder? Can he pretend to have a better? Or will he pretend to
have none at all? It Is true that Osmund was a Secondary and Subordinate Founder
of many Prebends. But His Founder and Royal Master, was worthily reckoned as
the Supreme, with which Distinction it is as true, the Dean and Chapter have a
Right to choose their Bishops as well as Residents. But both in a subserviency
and subordination to the Supreme, wherewith their own must stand, or fall. The
Reverend Archdeacon The Established Church. c. 12. p. 144. etc.
Fulwood has enough, whereby to clear the King's Patronage of the whole
English Church; and he cites Archbishop Bramhall, producing several Laws for
it. The Assize of Clarendon; the Statute of Carlisle; the Statute of Provisors.
All asserting the Power and Patronage to be de jure in the King, which was de
facto in the Pope, and by Usurpation 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 6.
The Parliament told the King plainly, That the Right of the Crown is such, and
the Law of the Land too, that the King is bound to make Remedies and Laws
against Incroachment on his Prerogative.

Sect. 6. Lastly, I must in my Narrative (in imitation of the most Learned and
most Judicious Bishop Sanderson,) assert the Bishops Right, as well as the
Chapter's, and mine Own, (both as jointly with them, and as Separate from them)
upon what I think the surest and safest Ground. Only I could not find in my
heart to take down that Scaffold, or to invalidate those stairs, unto which we
all owe our own Advancement. I was really afraid to betray the Church, by
asserting the Churchmen's Right with an Exclusion of the Kings, as I am sorry
some do, to the endangering of the whole Body. For it is to Expose her as an
Orphan to a very unkind world, sadly stripped of the Patronage, and so the
Protection of the King, who is her Guardian, and Nursing Father, to whom the
Church owes her Safety, (if not her Being;) and without whose Royal Patronage
she cannot comfortably subsist: The Church (in our Laws) being evermore a Coke
Inst. Part. 2. upon Magna Charta c. 1. p 3. where Fleta, Bracton, Glanvil and
others are cited by him.
Minor, ever a Pupil under Age; as utterly destitute of help, as ever any
Expositious and Forsaken Child was, without that Guardianship and Patronage,
that Royal Right and Prerogative, which some (who live by it) have lately
attempted to Undermine. In this my Sentiment if I have erred, it is with the
Great Man I just now mentioned as my Exemplar, in that Book which he composed
by the special Command of King Charles the First of Glorious Memory, proving
Episcopacy in England not at all Prejudicial to Regal Power, (which some would
make Destructive of it,) by the same way of arguing which I have used. See
Bishop Sanderson's said Book, especially page 30. 31. to page 34. 35. etc.
The shortest Account which I can render of it is this: All Episcopal Power is
either of Order, or Jurisdiction; hereof the latter is either Internal, or
External; and this last is either Directive, or Coercive; the first is from
God, the Second wholly from the King (as is declared by our Laws, and
acknowledged by the whole Loyal Clergy.) Yea that Power which is from God, (as
that of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving and the like,) is so subject to be
Inhibited, Limited, and otherwise Regulated, in the outward Exercise of that
Power, by the Customs of the Land, as that the whole Execution of that Power
does still depend upon the Regal. Now In ibid. p. 45 where Bishop Sanderson
cites the Statute of 1 Ed. 5. and makes an wholesome use of it, p. 45, which
compare with 1 Eliz. c. 1.
All Jurisdiction being Confessedly from the King, it seems to follow, that
all Prebends, as well as Residentiaries places of the Old Foundation, which
have a Jurisdiction belonging to them, (as those of Sarum are known to have,)
are disposable by the King, when, and as often, as His Majesty sees Good. Pope
Nicholas could not deny it, and therefore Granted it very cunningly to Edward
the Confessor, with a Vobis and Posteris committimus Advocationem etc. We
commit the Advowson of all the Churches of Baronius A. D. 1059. n. 23.
England, to you and your Successors, Kings of England. So that if the Popes
Grants are of any value, (before the Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire, (by
which the Composition, in it self Evil, was made much worse, as having been
when those Statutes had made it Criminal, for the Subjects of England to
petition a Bishop of Rome for a Confirmation; the Regal Right I plead for has a
double Title, and is not questionable by the Papalins, much less by the men of
the Church of England.

Now whereas I did distinguish (with the Judicious Bishop Sanderson) between an
Original, and Derivative Power of Jurisdiction, (wherewith I have been twitted,
in derogation to the Kings Honor, to whom it seems I ascribed more, than
Malignity will allow, though no more than Bishop Sanderson, whose Loyal
performance justifies mine,) And after showed the Great Extent, with the
greater Intensiveness, of my Derivative Jurisdiction as Dean of Sarum, which
had been a most Extravagant and Unaccountable Jurisdiction, if the first Deans
of Sarum had not been Deans of the Kings Free Chapel, (before the Cathedral
Church was built, and before Bishop Herman was the first Bishop of it, as well
as during all his time, which I shall prove to be as clear as the Sun at Noon
in a fair day,) I will justify my self in my so magnifying my Office, out of
mere Gratitude to the King, and to show his Royal Bounty as well as Power, in
the words of the said meek and most Learned Prelate. The more a Derived Power
is extended and enlarged in the Exercise thereof, (so as to be Regular) the
more it serves to set forth the Honor and Greatness of that Original Power
which granted it. Since the virtue of the Efficient Cause is best known by the
Greatness of it is Effect. For -- Propter quod unumquodque est Tale, Illud ipsum
est magis Tale; as the warmth of the Room does not lessen the Heat of the fire
upon the Hearth, but is a sign of it is Greatness, etc. From all which it
follows, that the Dean who does as modestly, as he does thankfully distinguish,
between his own but derivative and Subordinate Rights, and the Rights of the
King which are Original and Supreme, cannot magnify his Office, or defend his
Jurisdiction (according to his Oath and bounden Duty) with too much Zeal;
whilst they who hate that Distinction, (as by me it has been used,) and will
have the Sole Right to dispose of this or That, Exclusively of the Kings, are
neither so modest nor so thankful, as I sincerely wish they were: They
maligning their Maker's Power, whereby they are what they are. I will add ex
abundanti what may conduce to Their Conviction, (in this great Article of our
Religion,) who would be thought of the Church of England Littleton. 64^. and
Coke upon him. p. 344.
It is a Principle in Law, that of every Land there is a Fee simple in some
body: But the Fee simple of the Land of a Prebend cannot be in the Bishop, or
in the Prebendary, (both being at most for Term of Life, and both Subject to
Deprivations, for less then Treason, or Felony,) therefore it is in the King, as
Original Pa^lo Scarpi, ubi Supra. n. 77. page 23.
Founder, whose Royal Right can never dye. King Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. did act
accordingly and the Stat. 1. Elizab. 1.
same Authority which was made use of by Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. was declared by
Parliament to be in Q. Eliz. her Heirs, and Successors. Coke 1. Inst. l. 3.
fol. 344.
Nor can any Discontinuance be any prejudice to a King's Right, who therein
has this Prerogative, Quod nullum Tempus occurrit Regi. And Westminster. 1. 49. and
3. Ed. 1. Wing. p. 378.
when a King ordains any thing for the Honor of God and the Church, he Wills
not (says my Lord Coke Coke ubi supra Inst. p. 3.
that it turn to the Prejudice of Him or his Crown; but that his Right should
be saved in all Points. Besides the Church is for ever in Law a Minor, (as I
observed before) semper in Custodia Domini Regis. And it is unnatural that the
Guardian should have nothing to dispose of (not so much as a Prebend) in the
Minority of his Pupil, to which he is a Nursing Father. The King's Possession
and Rights (says the same 1 Inst. l. 1. Sect. 1. and Stat. de Westminster. c. 1. p.
501.
Oracle of the Law) are called Sacra Patrimonia, and Dominica Corona Regis: So
that it is Sacrilege to invade them. Nor can he so make them away, but that at
one time or other they will revert unto the Crown. He is in Law Summus Dominus
supra Omnes, (still the words of Chief Justice Coke,) of whom are held either
mediately or immediately All the Free Lands of England, much more all
Ecclesiasticals for term of Life only, or Quam diu been se gesserint
Possessores. Lastly, The King is not only the Legal Founder and Patron of all
the Bishoprics in England, and of all contained in them; (as Causa Causae is
ever Causa Causati) But he is himself in Person, the Supreme and Sovereign
Bishop of every Diocese in England. It being the true and known saying of
Constantine the Great, (an Englishman born, and King of Britain, as well as
Emperor of Rome and Constantinople,) in his Speech unto the Fathers of the
first Nicene General Council, (...). And every body knows, that the perpetual
Advocation or right Patronage of is a Lay Fee; as peculiar to many Lay
Subjects, (much more to the Sovereign, qui intra Ecclesiam potestatis Culmen
habet, say the Canonists themselves,) as Institution to a Subordinate Bishop,
or other Ordinary, and Induction to an Archdeacon. Especially when the thing
presented to is without Cure of Souls, as Prebends are. For where a Parsonage
is the Corpse of any Prebendary at large, and demised for three Lives to a
Secular man, (as most commonly it is,) the cure of Souls is wholly devolved and
incumbent upon the Vicar, if at least there is a Vicaridge endowed; and if not,
upon the Curate. But the Rector and his Tenent are both Exempt.

Briefly our Monarch has a Right, as well by Common, as Statute Law (and the
Deans of Sarum have ever been largely Partakers of it by Royal Bounty) to Coke
1. Inst. l. 2. c. 11. Sect. 136. f. 96. -- a. and f. 344.
Exempt what Place he will from every Bishop's Jurisdiction; and (when he will)
from the Archbishops; such as Pool, and other places in the possession of Sir
John Webb: Every Ordinary in England (such as is the Dean of Sarum in the
Close) is an 2 Inst. c. 19. p. 298.
immediate Officer to the King's Courts. And to the King Appeals lie even from
the Court of Arches: His Majesty being in Law, Le dernier Resort de la Justice;
yea, in Places exempt, no Archbishop may intermeddle, according to 25 Hen. 8.
c. 19. 6. and c. 21.. 20. 2 Inst. c. 19. p. 298.
And all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical being both derived from, and inseparably
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and that for ever, by 1. Eliz. c.
1. 1.
Acts of (g) Eus^ in vita Constantini, l. 4. c. 24.
Parliament; from thence it is, that a Convocation cannot meet, without the
King's Writ; nor treat at their meeting, without his Commission; nor Establish
any thing when Commissioned, without his Royal Assent and Fiat. They who say
less than this, Do make Episcopacy Prejudicial to Monarchy (which Bishop*
Sanderson could not endure) and set up a Papal like Supremacy in a Protestant
Kingdom. A Loyal Subject and Son of the Church of England, will conscientiously
distinguish, with Padre Paul, and the Canonists Paulus Scarpius ubi supra. n.
85. 86. 87. Tancredus and Lindwood Provin. l. 3. Tit. 2. page 125. 126.
between Dominion and Dispensation; and then he will dutifully concede, That
where the Bishop is Dispensator, the King is Dominus.

CHAP. II.
WHat I said in my (unprinted) Narrative of the King's Castle at Old Sarum, and
of the King's Free Chapel in it before the Cathedral Church was built (All
which is gainsaid by the present Lord Bishop of Sarum in his Answer to the
said Narrative) I take upon me to prove, and to place beyond Dispute, by not a
few of the best Historians who have written of those Times, whose printed
Writings are extant, and do confirm what was produced out of the Dean of
Sarum's Register, which was extracted out of the Registers (for the most
important Part of it) of the Ancient Bishops of Sarum; and which I thought had
been Sufficient, without the Confirmations of it which now ensue.

Sect. 1. First, It Is plain from William of Malmsbury, W. Malm. Hist. nov. l.
2. Sub initium. Flor. Wig. ad An. 1086. Hoveden ad eundem. An. Daniel in the
Life of Rufus. p. 48. Eadmer. p. 55. and 117.
that the said Castle was the Peculium of the King, and stood upon the King's
Soil. Castellum Salesberiae Regij Iuris Proprium erat.

Sect. 2. Next it is Evident from the same, and from other old Authors of
greatest Note, such as Eadmerus, Florentius Wigorniensis, Roger Hoveden, Simeon
Dunelmensis (All elder than Matthew Paris) and Matthew Paris himself, and
several others, that the said Castle was a Place of Usual Resort for the Kings
of England, and sometimes for Extraordinary Meetings: As for Example;

A. D. 1086. Cambden in Wilt. calls them all the States of England and says
that of every penny of the 3d. penny of Sarum the King had 20. s.
Aug. 1. William the Conqueror pointed his Bishops, Barons, Sheriffs, and their
Milites, to meet him at Saresbury, where, and when, the said Milites took their
Oaths of Fidelity to him. So says Florentius of Worcester (the Ancientest
Writer, who has mentioned the Church of Old Sarum) and Roger Hoveden.

This precisely was the Year wherein was compiled the Doomsday-Book; as the
same Authors, and the Book it self Witness.

A. D. 1096. W. Rufus held a Council in his Castle at old Sarum (as the same To
whom add Daniel, p. 48. a good Historian, though not an old one.
Authors testify) when Osmund was present, and took the Confession of William
de Alvery, before he went to Execution.

A. D. 1100. Henry I. le Beauclerc newly Crowned, held his Court in the same
Castle. Archbishop Anselm repairing thither to His Majesty among the rest. So
says Eadmer. p. 55 A. D. 1133. Dan in his Life. p. 57.
He also held an Assembly of the Three Estates at Old Sarum, which had from
that Time the Name of Parliament.

A. D. 1116. The same King called a Meeting of the Bishops and Great Men of the
whole Kingdom at the same Place, there to do their Homage to his Son William.
So says Eadmer p. 187. Flor. Wigorn. and Rog. Hoved. ad an. 1116.
Eadmer. page 117. Florentius, and Hoveden.

Hitherto is no mention of City, Town or Village, but of the King's Castle
only: Which W. Malmsb. thus describes, W. Malm. de Pontif. l. 2. f. 142. -- b.
Salesberiam, quodest vice Civitatis Castellum locatum in Edito muro vallatum
non exiguo.

A. D. 1140. Daniel in King Stephen. p. 61.
The Archbishop of Roan in the Council at Winchester maintained, that by the
Canons of the Church, Bishops could have no Right to hold Castles; and that if
they were tolerated by the King's Indulgence, they ought in times of Danger to
deliver up the Keys. Here the Question then rise (as Camden Camden in Wilt.
tells us) Whether Bishops might be the Governors of such Strongholds, which
was determined by a great Churchman Against the Bishops in general; and in
particular against the then Bishop of Sarum, whose monstrons Avarice, Pride,
Perfidiousness, and Ingratitude, are by none so well expressed, as by our
excellent Bishop Godwin in Roger, the 3d. Bishop of Sarum.
Bishop of Hereford, de Praesulibus Anglicanis.

Sect. 3. Thirdly, During the Time, Herman, the first Bishop of Sarum, in point
of Time (though Osmund was the First in point of Dignity, and Endowment; and the
Ego Osmundus notifico, Ecclesiam Sarisb. me construxisse, and in ea Canonicos
constituisse, etc Mag. Char. Osmundi in Statut. de Collatione Prebendarum. f.
36. -- b. 37. -- a.
First who had any Cathedral Church, or Chapter in it:) It is agreed by All
Authors, both Printed, and in Manuscript, That there was not yet any Cathedral
Church, or Chapters either within, or without the King's Castle: But only a
Chapel, and a Dean, as now there is at Whitehall. For

No one Author in the World did ever say, that Bishop Herman did build the
Church; the most that is said of him, is said by Bishop Godwin, That Herman
laid a Foundation; and having so done, he dyed. What is said by Malmsb. f. 161.
(fol. 91. edit. London) is not said of Bishop Herman, but Bishop Roger, who
being after Os mund, makes it nothing to the purpose. Besides, that 'twas
written when Roger was in Greatness, and flattered for it, De gestis Reg. l. 5.
But his Churches was in the Air, like some men's Castles; a mere Imaginary
Church, and the Child of Phantasy. Nor indeed could it be more. For by the
Command of Will. 1. he had left the two Cathedral Churches of Sunning and
Sherburn to the Dean, who then was Formaliter (as virtualiter ever since) Dean
of the King's Free Chapel only (without a Chapter or a Church;) And in whom,
as their Sole Ordinary, Sunning and Sherburn have ever since been, with many
Peculiars belonging to them, in Berks, and Dorset, in Wilts, and Devon; (to
which I might have added the County of Oxford, were it not that the said Dean
has little Jurisdiction there, though there he has some.) Herman's time was too
short to build a Church at Old Sarum. He did rather design a Church, than so
much as lay the Foundation of it. But All agree, That the Favorite Osmund (a
Captain of Say in Normandy, who came in with the Conqueror, from whom he had
All he had, and in whose Castle, whereof the King made him the Governor,
Conicerge, or Keeper he found no more than a Royal Chapel) both See H.
Knighton, apud. Be. fol. 2351. and Bish. Godwin, p. 272. and Osmund's Chartar.
ubi supra.
Built and Repaired the Cathedral Church there, whose Steeple was burnt the
next day after its being Finished. How by his Master's great Bounty, as well as
License, He added a Chapter to the Dean, besides three Dignitaries, four
Arch-Deaconries, etc. has been expressed in my Narrative, and remains
Uncontradicted. What his Lordship cites as the Work of Mr. Be, Sir Roger
Twisden was the chief Designer of, and must not be defrauded of the Honor due
to him for that Collection.

Sect. 4. Fourthly, It Is acknowledged by my Lord Bishop himself (so God will
have it many times, that Truth shall be justified by its Opposers, even in the
Act of their Opposition) that The Church of Old Sarum was Always a Cathedral;
which is as much as to say, There was not any Church there, until there was a
Cathedral Church. And it is as evident as the Sun, that no Cathedral could be
there, before the Bishop's Seat was removed thither: Nor then, till it was
built by the King and Osmund. And therefore,

Sect. 5. Fifthly, The King had a Chapel, for Himself, and his Royal Family,
and his Great Council to Serve God in (as none in their way were more Will. 1.
was so eminent for Devotion, that 'twas confessed by his Haters So says Daniel
in the Life of Will. 1. p. 43. Rad. de. Diceto A. D. 1072. p. 485.
Religious than in those Times) before he had in that Place a Cathedral Church.
For besides the Absurdity and Incredibility, that in the King's special Mansion
for Strength and Pleasure, wherein he had the Great Conventions of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and a Family in his Absence consisting of Soldiers as
well as Servants (sometimes called Ministri Regis, and sometimes Milites) He
should not have so much as a private Free-Chappel for public Worship; I say
besides This it appears as by others, so by Radulphus de Diceto, that the
King's Castles in those Times had Chapels in them, for the King's Honor, as
well as Use. -- Ventilata autem est haec Causa prius -- in Paschali solemnitate
in CAPELLA REGIA quae sita est in CASTELLO. This is confirmed by what was said
in the Chapter's Accusation of Bishop Erghum to Archbishop Sudbury. Registr.
Jo. Davysone. Dec. A. D. 1375. fol. 13.
Infra castrum Domini Regis, and in Ipsius Solo, nullatenus Episcopi Sarum,
primitus extitit fundata Ecclesia, ut Libera Capella ejus, ab omni
Jurisdiction Diocesani exempta, plena liberate, more aliarum Regiarum
Capellarum Angliae, gaudebat, etc. Which Free-Chappel of the King was never
denied by Bishop Erghum, and was owned in the Sentence of the Archbishop for
the said Chapter Against that Bishop. And as the King's Chapel first, before
the building of the Church; so the Church, as soon as built; and the
Churchmen, as soon as Founded, were every whit as much within the King's
Castle, as the old Bishops of Sarum's Registers were able in Latin to express
them. Regist. Davysoni fol. 3.
Continetur in Annalibus Pontificum inter Gesta bonae memoriae Domini Richardi
Episcopi Sarum, quod antiquitus Canonici Ecclesiae Sarum residebant infra Septa
Castri Veteris Sarum, usque ad tempus Supradicti Pontificis. In cujus Tempore
orta erat Persecutio, etc. ratione cujus, Rex Angliae praecepit omnibus
Vioecomitibus, and Castellaneis suis, quod curarent, quatenus Loca Regia ubique
Regio Usui Custodirent, non obstantibus quibuscunque Privilegiis
Ecclesiasticis. Then it follows at large, that the Cathedral Men going out of
the Castle in Procession, had the Gates shut against them by the King's
Soldiers or Servants at their Return.

Sect. 6. Sixthly, The Church, after it was built (as well as the Chapel
before there was a Church) was evidently situated within the King's Castle,
Infra Castrum Domini Regis, as is attested by the Printed and Written Records
of those Times, which my Lord Bishop contradicts gratis; but I suppose through
their Failures, whom his Lordship entrusted and employed. The Ancientest Writer
extant, who mentions that Church, writes thus expressly: Flor. Wig. A. D. 1092.
with whom agrees Hoveden; and Simeon Dunelmensis, and Petrus Blesensis cited by
Camden in Wilt.
Osmundi Searesbiriensis Episcopus Ecclesiam quam Searesberia in CASTELLO
construxerat cum adjutorio Episcoporum Walcelini Wintoniensis, and Iohannis
Bathoniensis, Nonis Aprilis, feria secunda dedicavit. Others who are Ancienter
than Matthew Paris, and more Authentic have the same Words: To which agrees
that Ancient Distich, which is cited by Bishop Godwin, and by Camden in Wilt.
page 180.

Quid Domini Domus in Castro, nisi Faederis Arca, In Templo Baalim? Carcer
uterque Locus. And this with very great Reason. For All the Prebendaries or
Canons (two Words for one Thing, not two Things, as the King's Attorney was
made believe) and All other Churchmen, except the Dean (who had an House and
Demeasnes by the Rivers side, about half a Mile below the Castle, called still
the Dean's Court, as Mr. Barker's House in Sunning is to this Day called the
Deanery) were but as Prisoners in the King's Castle (compared with what they
are now (for above One Hundred Thirty Four Years. And accordingly Bishop Poor
made it the Ground of his Complaint both to the King, and to the Pope, as that
on which he then built* his Petition to Both for a Removal. -- Ecclesiam de
Castro and de Regist. Jo. Davysoni. s. 3. -- a. etc. inter gesta Richardi
Episcopi Sarum.
Carcere Regalis Potestatis laborabimus aedificare, etc. posthaec autem
acccessit ad Regem Angliae, petens ab eo Licentiam, etc. -- and postulans ab eo
tanquam a Domino suo manus adjutrices. Cui Rex benignissime praebuit assensum,
etc. Lastly, it is confirmed by those words in the Bull of Pope Honorius the
Third. Evidentiarum. Tom. 20. f. 120.
Quod non patet aditus ad Ecclesiam sine Licentia Castellani. Peter of Blois
agrees with all these.

From all the Premises it is clear, That the Church was not only within the
Precincts of the King's Castle, which yet is sufficient to prove it stood on
the King's Soil (however denied by his Lordship:) But also within the Castle it
self, strictly and properly so called.

Sect. 7. Seventhly, As the Castle and the Guard of Soldiers in it, and the
Ground in which it stood, have been evidently proved to have been the King's;
so it is evident that the Bishop held the Castle but as a Keeper, or as a
Maistre d' Hostel, or as a Tenant to the King, or at most as All Governors of
Garrison-Towns and Castles, do hold them pro Tempore for the King; and even so
both the Bishops, and Earls of Sarum (the Earls longer; very much longer than
the Bishops) held it only in Trust, and during Pleasure. Whence it was they
were so Camden in Wilt. names but one or two Bishops, whoever had it, But a
Long Train of Earls, who had part of the Old Castle for a dwelling House a
long time after the removal of the Cathedral and Townsmen.
often put in, and out, as our Kings saw good; and as I shall hereafter show at
large, even out of such Public Monuments as are confessedly the Best. This
appears by the Grant of it to Bishop Roger, as Great a Man with Hen. 1. as
Osmund was with his Father William, though of a far more contemptible and Base
Beginning, and one who grew Great by the basest means. Malmsbury sets it forth
thus.

Castellum Salesberiae (or Sedberiae, as Eadmer calls it) Quod Regij Iuris
proprium esset, ab Henrico Rege impetratum muro cinctum, Custodiae suae
attraxerat. Thus Osmund held it as a Custos, of Will. 1. and Will. 2. and Roger
as a Custos, from H. 1. who found it encompassed with a Wall, which Wall about
the Castle seems to be all, which gives any Color for that saying of my Lord
Bishop, That Roger encompassed the City with a strong Wall. Whereas the Castle
so encompassed was not Civitas, but only vice De Pontif. ubi Supra.
Civitatis, as Will. of Malms. precisely words it: Thus the word Tenet is
explained in Doomsday-Book, Episcopus Tenet Saresberry. And thus what follows
aserted by my Lord Bishop's, [ That the Castle it self did belong to the
Bishop] does of it self fall to the Ground, without any stricter Examination of
the Proofs, which do not say any such thing, as that for which they are
pretended to appear: But the contrary rather is from thence to be inferred. Nor
do I see to what purpose those words are added by my Lord Bishop in the Margin,
[ vid, Be. fol. 2351.] unless it be to confute the Text. The Place is in Henry
Knighton Leycestrensis, who did not write till 300. years after, reaching to
the Death of Rich. 2. about 1400. and who speaking of the King in Council,
commanding the removal of Bishops Sees, does add these words -- Hoc anno
Hermannus Episcopus Primus Sarisburiensis Obiit. Cui Successit Osmundus Regis
Cancellarius 24 annis, Qui Ecclesiam Novam, not Renovatam ibidem construxit.
Thus his Lordship's Malm. Novel. l. 5.
Citation makes quite against his own Pretentions. Osmund did not only repair,
but first built the Church, which Herman at most did but design. So Matthew.
Paris in the place cited, calls it (not the Bishops, but) the Earl of Sarum's
Castle. For Will. 1. gave it to Walter d' Evereux Castrum Comitis, ( non
Episcopi) Matthew. Paris fol. 439. Camden in Wilts. Bishop God win p. 280.
Earl of Rosmar in Normandy, as to a Keeper; so Hen. I. gave it to Bishop
Roger, from whom it was taken by King Stephen, as from a Monster of
Ingratitude, and as from a Perjured Rebel. Then the Custody of it was given
(not to the Bishops, but) Earls of Sarum, and was continued in them by Caeur de
Lion R. 1. and King John; after whom it was taken by Hen. 3. from the Grandson
of Will. Longespee, and given to Margaret Countess of Sarum, whose husband
being attainted, 'twas resumed by Ed. 2. and after given by Ed. 3. to Will.
Montacute, of whom though bought by Bishop Wivil for 2500 Marks, (not recovered
by Law, nor won by Combat,) 'twas yet soon resumed; and given by Hen. 4. to
Rich. Nevil, whom he made Earl of Salisbury. 'Twas after given by Ed. 4. to his
Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester. At last Hen. 8. restored the blood of
Margaret, and made her Countess of Salisbury. After whose Attainder and
Decapitation, (when she was 70 years old,) in the year 1605. King James gave it
to Sir Robert Cecil, and his Heirs, in whom it is at this day, and is rented
by the Good Relict of the most excellent Bishop Earl.

Thus we see to how few Bishops, and to how great a Number of Earls, the
Custody of the said Castle was Concredited by our Monarchs from time to time,
as its Keepers were esteemed more or less worthy to be entrusted. And to argue
it was the few Bishops Soil (two or three at the most,) or the Soil of the many
Earls, because our Monarchs made them Governors during Pleasure; is as if a
man should argue, that the City of Oxford (when it was Garrisoned) was not the
Kings, but Colonel Leg's, Sir Arthur Aston's, Sir Thomas Glenham's, etc.
because they were the Governors, unto whose Custody 'twas committed. Or that
the Castle of Windsor is the Earl of Arrundel's, exclusively of the King,
because the King gave him lately the Honor of it.

Now having proved that the Castle of Old Sarum was the Kings; and that the
King's Servants Minist^^. D. Regis,
were in it, for more than 130 years; and that the Cathedral Church of Sarum
was Inf^a Castrum Domini Regis.
within the Kings Castle; (which yet was confidenly denied to the Lords
Commissioners;) and that our Kings from the Beginning have Acted in as Absolute
and as Despotical a manner in and over the Church of Sarum, as in any of their
own Mansion Houses within these Realms; Common Sense will infer, and inform the
most indocile, That where the King (William the First) had a Castle and Family
in it, he had a Chapel for God's Service, and his Chapel was Free. How
strange a thing therefore is it, for men to lessen that Monarch in his
Prerogative, who did not only make them, but does still keep them Great. How
often had the Hierarchy been trodden utterly under foot, if the King singly had
not Sustained them? How many Parliaments may be convened, who will Vote down
All Bishops, and Deans, and Chapters, (ab Actu ad potentiam optime valet
Argumentum,) if the King will prompt them to it, or but Consent when it is
done? They who look downwards upon themselves, but neither backwards, nor
forwards, on the years that are passed, and the years to come, do not consider
what Protections they have received from the King (at the King's great cost,)
or what Protections for the future they may have a sad Occasion to wish and
pray for.

And here I should have ended this 2d. Chapter, but for a Passage out of the
Annals of Burton Abbey, MS. 1245. Which shows that even then, in the Time of
Hen. 3. (long enough after Osmund, and Will. 1.) the King of England had Many
Free Chapels, and was resolved to keep them Free. Indeed so many, that diverse
Parish Churches which did but Neighbor on the King's Castles, were apt to
pretend to that Privilege. Yea the Chapels in the King's Castles were
Confirmed in their Immunities, Exemptions, and Liberties, by Popes themselves:
As appears by that Kings Proclamation Dated, at Westminster March the 3d. in
the 30. Year of His Reign. Wherein he strictly Commanded, that the said Freedom
of his Chapels should be Volentes Privilegium Illud in perpetua firmitate
manner.
Perpetual. Et ne Aliquis contra praedictum Privilegium aliquid audeat
attemptare. Nor has any of our Monarchs taken away or surrendered that
glorious Branch of their Prerogative; whatever Subjects have attempted by
joining with Boniface the 9th. Burton de Liberate Capellarum Domini Regis, 1245


CHAP. III.
WHereas 'twas affirmed by the Bishop of Sarum to the Lords, That there never
was a Time when either the Dean and Canons were exempt from all Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Sarum. The contrary to it is confessed and strongly proved by his
Lordship himself in the very next Words following, wherein his Lordship cites
The Composition that was made between Bishop Waltham, Dean Montacute, and the
Then Chapter of the said Church, which was no longer since than in the Year
1391. whereas the Absolute Exemption of the Dean and All the Canons from the
Bishops Jurisdiction, was in the Year 1095. Between which two Dates, there was
an Interval of almost 300 Years.

Which Composition, so called, was indeed a Conspiracy of the said Bishop, Dean
and Chapter with Pope Boniface the Ninth, by whom it was confirmed, and for
which by the Laws of England (even ( c) Then in force) they did incur a
Praemunire: Which All the Bishops ever Judge Ienkins, p. 24. say, It Is Treason
to pay Obedience to the Pope, or to any other than to the King. For which he
cites 23 Eliz. cap. 1. and 3 Jac. cap. 4.. 22, 23.
since are humbly conceived to have incurred, who have presumed to Act
according to That Conspiracy, I. Against the Supremacy, and Prerogative of the
King; II. Against the Common, and Statute Law of the Land; III. Against the
Fundamental Statute of our Subordinate Founder Osmund; IV. Against their own
Souls in two respects, first in respect of the Several Oaths, which 25 Ed. 3.
c. 22. 7 Rich. 2. c. 12.
have severally been Sworn by all the Bishops, Deans and Chapters. That they
would keep, and cause to be kept (as much as in them lay) that Fundamental
Statute of Osmund, with all the Privileges, Dignities, Immunities, and
Exemptions therein contained; of which Oaths the said Conspiracy or Composition
is a Professed Violation, as shall be shown in its proper place. Secondly, in
respect of the heavy Curse, which Osmund denounced against All those who should
dare to pervert the said Fundamental Constitutions in any kind. V. Against its
own Being, by reason of its several Inconsistences with it self, and of the
several Nullities contained in it. Lastly, Against the Well-being, if not
against the very Being of the whole College within the Cathedral Church of
Sarum, by reason of its most scandalous and most mischievous Effects. But of
each in its Order.

. 1. First, It was a Conspiracy against the King of England and his
Prerogative, who is in Law declared to be the Founder as well as Patron of all
the Archibishopricks and Bishoprics in England, but took care in his Original
Charter granted to his Favorite Osmund, (sealed first with the Seal of Will.
I. and then with the Seal of Will. II.) to exempt his Dean and All his
Prebendaries or Canons from the Bishops Jurisdiction in as full and as plain a
manner, as Latin words could express an Exemption by. In words so carefully
contrived against all possible Affectation of Jurisdiction over the College of
Dean and Chapter in any succeeding Bishop of Sarum that what the present Lord
Bishop of Sarum would make an Argument for himself and his Affected
Jurisdiction, makes quite against him. For the Voice and the Place which the
Bishop has in Chapter (common to him with all the 52 Canons) he has as
Prebendary of Pottern, not as Bishop of Sarum; nor has he so much as a Second
Voice as he is Prebendary of Blewbery, because he was never admitted to it by
Installation, nor lawfully could be. For when Hen. 2. had given two Prebends to
One man in one Church, Pope Alexander the Third complained of it in his Letter,
as Unlawful, and Uncanonical. (Not denying the King's Right of conferring
Prebends, but the Evil use of it.) So that the Bishop in Capitulo has but one
single Vote, and the liberty to propose what he thinks may tend to the good of
the Church, or to complain of what he takes to be amiss, (as every other
Prebendary has as free liberty to do,) and to be punished or amended by the
Authority of Dean and Chapter. Nor is it said to be the Duty, but the Dignitas
est Decani, and omnium Can^nicorum, etc.
Dignity of the Dean and of all the Canons, ut Episcopo in nullo respondeant,
nisi in Capitulo. To which it is added in the next words, (what his Lordship
does not mention) and judicio Tantum Capituli pareant, where the word Tantum
excludes the Bishops Judgment or definitive Sentence of any matter, and limits
it wholly to the Body of the Great Chapter (consisting of All the Canons
Non-Resident and Resident) whereof the Dean is the Head, and the Prebendary of
Pottern, a worthy Member; but the Bishop as Bishop is neither of them. Nor was
this Signal Exemption only in the Foundation of the Cathedral, made at once by
the Supreme and the Subordinate Founder; but it was Repeated and Confirmed by
Hen. III. and Bishop Poor, in the Removal of the same from Old to New Sarum, in
the years 1220. And the same Oaths for the due observance of it, have been ever
since Sworn by all the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters without Exception. All
which was alleged with effect in the Chapters Accusation of Bishop Erghum to
Archbishop Sudbury (1375,) whom they charged before his Grace at once with
Perjury and Usurpation, for affecting a Jurisdiction over the Canons when the
Dean was Dead, and the Deanery Vacant, at a Time wherein the Bishop had a little
color for it, which might excuse his Sin a Tanto. Much more might they have
done whilst the Dean was yet Living, if such an Incroachment had been
attempted. Besides it was against the Imperial Crown of this Realm, by being
against the Decanal Jurisdiction, which is Dignitas est Decani, and omnium
Can^nicorum, etc.
for ever and inseparably thereto annexed, and granted unto the Dean under the
Great Seal of England.

. II. Next it was against the Common and Statute Law of the Land. Against the
first, because the King's Prerogative is Law, and the Principal part of the
Common Law, as that from which our Statute Laws are derived; and it is a
Principle with my Lord Coke, The 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2.. 3. 1 Eliz. cap. 1.. 17, 18,
and 8 Eliz. cap. 1.
Common Law disallows Acts done to the prejudice of any Subject of this Realm
(much more of the Sovereign) by any Foreign Power out of the Realm, as things
not Authentic. Such was the Power of Boniface the Ninth merely Foreign, and
Prohibited as such by several Statutes then in force, and ever since. ( g) Cok^
1. Inst. l. 2. cap. 11. 134.
Against the second, because there were ab Antiquo (before the Petition made to
the Pope by the then Bishop, Dean and Chapter for the Papal Confirmation of the
Conspiracy aforesaid,) Acts of Parliament in force, against Appealing to, or
Petitioning the Bishop of Rome, or any other foreign Power, either for Grants
or Confirmations of any Acts, or Combinations, or Associations whatsoever,
within these Realms; and therefore one Abbot Moris in the 46 of Ed. 3. incurred
the Pain of Praemunire, for sending to Rome to 27 Ed. 3. Cit. Praem. cap. 1.
With which Statute compare 25 Ed. 3. cap. 22. and 7 Rich. 2. cap. 12. where
that King delares^ against his granting any such License as is pretended.
be confirmed by the Pope in his Election to his Abbey, which the Pope
(forsooth) gave him of his Spiritual Grace, and at the Request of the King of
England, as he fictitiously pretended. The Bull was considered of in Council,
before all the Judges of England, and by them All it was resolved, that this
Bull of the Pope was against the Laws of England; and that the Abbot, for
obtaining it, was fallen into the King's Mercy; whereupon All his Possessions
were seized into the King's Hands. The same Penalty was deserved by them who
made the Composition we are upon, and petitioned the Pope for his Confirmation.
And though it is pretended to have been done at Rich. 2. his Intercession; yet
it is but pretended, according to the Usual Trick, the Practice and Policy of
the Popes, to feign Requests from the Kings of England, who scorned to make
them; as they did often pretend to Give, what they could not deny, or durst not
offer to withold, and knew they had not either a Right to confer, or a Power to
hinder. Choice Examples of which are given by the Learned and Reverend
Archdeacon Fullwood, in his Subversion of the Romanists Pleas for the Pope's
Supremacy in England; and though Rich. 2. was so incomparably careless of his
every thing that was his, even to his Kingdom, Crown and Dignity, which brought
upon him his Deposition, as Historians are wont to call it. And although such
an Act of Intercession to the Pope, as is pretended, had had an absolute
Nullity in it self, had it been True; yet hardly any man can believe it, who
shall consider the Statute made in the 16 R. 2. cap. 5. Hist. Council. Trident.
l. 5. page 101. An. 1551.
same Kings Time against all Papal Usurpations, which to own, and to use as
things of Right, is to incur a Praemunire. Besides that Rich. 2. had acted
against other Parliaments also, as well as against his own, and against his
Declaration, in case he had done, as is pretended. But that the Trick I now
mentioned was often used by the Popes, we cannot prove by a better Testimony
than that of the most Learned and most sincere Padre Paul, who speaking of the
Times of Paul the Fourth, in giving that to Queen Mary which was her own long
before, and inherited from her Father, King Hen. 8. concludes with this signal
Observation: Cosi spesso i Papi hanno donato quello, che non hanno potuto
levare a possessori; and questi per suggire le contentioni, part hanno
ricevuto le Cose proprie in dono, and part hanno dissimulate di saper' il
dono, and la pretensione del Donatore. Add to all this, that the said
Conspiracy was expressly against Magna Charta, by which the Deans and Chapters
Liberties, Exemptions, and Jurisdictions, were confirmed and secured, and that
by no fewer than Of the 32 Acts are those of 50 Ed. 3. cap. 1. and 2. A. D.
1376. and 1 Rich. 2. cap. 1. and 34 Ed. 1. St. 4. cap. 4. and 4 H. 4. cap. 3.
32 Acts of Parliament. And Magna Charta is not only a Statute Law, as old as
since the 17th year of King John, though made more full and with more Solemnity
in the 9th Year of Hen. 3. But moreover by the Act of 25 Ed. 1. 'twas adjudged
in Parliament to be taken and held as The Common Law. (They are the Words of
Chief Justice Coke, in the Preface to his Comment on Magna Charta.) In a word,
The Application made to the Pope at that Time against the Laws of this Realm,
was a strong proof of its Corruption. For 'twas the Observation of the most
wise Padre Paolo Sarpi. N. 74. p. 22.
Paolo, that None went to Rome out of Devotion, but only out of some Design
against the Canons and Customs of the Church, which being unable to get
approved in their own Country, they fled to Rome, where Dispensations were
vendible for every thing, and the Avarice or Ambition covered over with an
Apostolical Dispensation or Confirmation. So he in his Treatise of the Alms of
the Faithful in the Primitive Church.

. III. Thirdly, The foresaid Composition was even knowingly and professedly
against The great Fundamental Statute (commonly called in our Books Magna
Charta Osmundi,) of the Subordinate Founder Osmund, and by a Consequence
unavoidable against the Sovereign Founder also, whose Royal Seal alone was
affixed to it. That 'twas against the said Charter and Fundamental Statute, and
against the Exemption of the Dean and Canons, and all Inferior Members also
belonging to the Kings Free Chapel, (which any man may deny whose Tongue is
his own, but no Man living can disprove,) has already been evinced, and shall
be further, as Occasion shall be offered. But that 'twas knowingly and
professedly against the same, is moreover to be proved from the Conclusion of
the Conspiracy. For as there is a Contradiction to the Fundamental Statute and
Charter both Legal and Episcopal, fol. 76. so in the next page of that Leaf
there are these bold and unexcusable Words -- Non obstante Statuto, and
Chartapraedicta, The King himself in Parliament could not have spoken in a more
Imperial strain. Archbishop Boniface on the contrary, A. D. 1262. had most
tenderly provided for the Liberties of all in the Church of Sarum, according to
the Tenor of Lib. Statut.
Osmund's Statute; though he was in all his time the most assuming Archbishop
of Canterbury, even from that to this day. Whereas in the Conspiracy of the
aforesaid Pope Boniface with the then Bishop, Dean and Chapters, there is this
aggravation of the astonishing design against the King; that it has a special
Salvo for the Popes and his Cardinals, and the Dean of Sarums Rights, but none
at all for the Kings: Yea, as if that were not enough to affront the King by,
it takes upon it to decree the whole Revenue of the Deanery, Decanatu vacant,
to the Chapter; which, (as well as the Revenues of all the void Bishoprics in
England,) belong by Law to The King alone. Lastly, The Goods of the Church (as
the Chapter words it) which Osmund gave to the Dean and Canons, he gave them
even so, as he had received them of the King, with a Libere, prout Ipse
obtinueram; (meaning his Master Will. I.) and adds a little after, in his
repeated Exemption of all the Prebendaries or Canons from all Intermedlings of
any Bishop who should succeed him, Habeant etiam Curiam suam in omnibus
Praebendis suis, and Dignitatem Archidiaconalem, ita ut nulla omnino Exigentia
vel in Dono, vel in Assisa, aut aliqua alia Consuetudine ab Episcopo vel aliquo
alio fiat, etc. Sed ( ^ contra) omnes Dignitates, and omnes Libertates plenarie
and pacifice habeant, quas Ego Osmundus Episcopus in iisdem Praebendis habui,
aut aliquis That is, The Conqueror himself, from whom Captain Osmund had all he
had in the World, and did hold by Knights Service, or any whom ^he said Osmund
might have entrusted or employed.
alius, cum ^as in Nostro Dominio haberemus. 'Twas in contempt and relation to
this Emphatical Exemption, as well as that which was instanced in before, That
the Bishop, Dean and Chapter, conspired with Boniface the Ninth against the
Statute they were sworn to keep inviolate, with a prodigious Non obstante
Statuto, and Charta pradicta. And therefore.

. IV. Fourthly, It was against their own Souls. For it follows in the same
Charter, or the great Fundamental Statute, (wherewith all after Statutes must
stand or fall,) that every one of the Foundation must take an Oath at his
Admission, Se Dignitates and Consuetudines Ecclesiae Sarum inviolabiliter
observaturum. And if any one shall presume to violate or pervert the said
Statute of the Foundation, perpetuo Anathematizetur, is the Form of the Curse
used by the King and Bishop Osmund on the Transgressor. Nor is it meant of the
Lesser, but Greater Cursing, which the Old English Festival and the Articles
found in St. Paul's Church at Canterbury, A. D. 1562. Sir T. Ridley's View of
the Civil Law, part 3. cap.. 2. page 172, 173.
do define to be Such a Cursing, or Vengeance-taking, that it departs a Man
from the Bliss of Heaven; from Housel, Christ, and all the Sacraments of Holy
Church; and betaketh him to the Devil, and to the Pains of Hell without end.
Such was the force of the word Perpetuo, when such Cursings were in use. In a
due fear, and for the prevention of such a Curse upon such a Perjury, the
Chapter of Sarum in their Complaint to Archbishop Sudbury against Bishop
Erghum, for violating his Oath by usurping a Jurisdiction, and by presuming to
visit certain Prebends whilst the Deanery lay void, did present how All the
Privileges which had been settled in the Foundation, were continued and
confirmed in the Removal of the Cathedral, and that by a Bull from Pope
Honorius, cum hac clausula in Literis Apostolicis inserta, [ Salvis ipsius
Ecclesiae Sarum Privilegiis, Dignitatibus, and Consuetudinibus.] Ad dictas
etiam Ordinationes, Consuetudines, Libertates and Dignitates fideliter tenendas
and inviolabiliter observandas Episcopi, Decani and Canonici Sarum
Praebendarii, eorum temporibus successivis, omnes and singuli, juramentis
Corporalibus ad Sancta Dei Evangelia, praestitis, realiter fuerunt and sunt
astricti. Whereupon they prayed the Archbishop of the Province, so to interpose
his Metropolitical Power as that the said Bishop of Sarum, for the salvation of
his Soul, might revoke and retract the Visitation he had begun, and the Chapter
enjoy their own without disturbance. Place at igitur Paternitati Vestrae
taliter interponere Parts Vestras, ut dictus D. Episcopus Sarum omnia
praemissa illicite attentata, and praecipue Visitationem sicut praemittitur
Decanatu vacant de facto inchoatam, pro Salute animae suae revocet, and
praefatum Capitulum and Prebendarii omnes and singulos commodo Fundationis,
etc. -- libere gaudere, in solidum exercere, quoad omnia praemissa in Pace
permittat in futurum. Lastly, The Fundamental Statutes and Customs of our
Church were so confirmed By Hen. 8. in his Regal Visitation of it, An. Dom.
1535, that the Bishops of Sarum for ever are as much subject to them, as any
other. The Bishop there by Name is the first bound up; and bound up to the
observance of no other Statutes and Customs, than do agree with the Word of
God, and with the Laws of the Land, with which the said Papal Composition has
been proved to disagree; and as it professedly does oppose the Royal Charter,
and the Fundamental Statute, on which our whole Endowment stands; so I set This
against That, the Fundamental Charter and Statute, against the Novel
Composition or Combination.

. V. Add to this, that the Composition has several other Nullities in it,
arising from its several Inconsistences with it self. It Is inconsistent with an
Episcopal Jurisdiction, 1. Not to be empowered to Visit Triennially, and 2. To
be interdicted a Procuration; 3. De Septe^nio in Septennium dunta^at.
Only once in Seven years; 4. And then Fol. 67. 2.
without any Regard; 5. And in the Fol. 65.
Chapter House only; not where he will, excepting the Archdeacons, whom it is
said he may Visit 65.
elsewhere: 6. A fault or default in a Prebendary at large to be corrected, (
not by the Bishop, but) by Dean and Chapter, or by the Dean alone, as is usual
without a Visitation; ( fol. 66. b.) 7. Fol 63.
A Power is pretended, to inquire what is amiss among all the Secular
Inhabitants of the Close, and to reform, or correct, if the Dean does not; ( f.
66.) which has an absolute Inconsistence with the Salvo made before for the
Rights of the Dean, in these words, [ Visitatione and Jurisdiction Fol 63.
Decanali in omnibus, and per omnia Decano and Successoribus suis semper
salvis.] Now when it shall be made to appear, not only by immemorial Practice,
but by Decisions of Authority, and by the Confessions of this present Bishop,
(yes, and by his earnest Contentions for the Dean against himself,) that the
Close is the Dean's Peculiar, and not the Bishops; that the Dean has All the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the Bishop none at all; that all Persons and
Causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance within the Close, yea, within the Bishops
own Palace, are to be Tried and adjudged in the Deans Court alone, not at all
in the Bishops; Then I trow 'twill be granted to be a monstrous Absurdity and
Inconsistence, for One Ordinary to be the Visitor of Another, who has a
Coordinate Jurisdiction with himself in many other places of Wilts and Berks,
and a Superior to him in One, and a sole Jurisdiction in that very Close
wherein the Bishop pretends to be the Deans Visitor; which is to take upon him
a Regal, or Metropolitical Authority, to which two alone the Dean of Sarum is
subordinate in his Peculiars, as all others are who have Episcopal Jurisdiction
within the Province; even abstracting from the Relation the Deans of Sarum ever
had to the King's Free Chapel, whereof the Privileges remain, and were ever
reserved, though the Formality is obscured in a Great Cathedral Church. This
last Absurdity spoken of, may be made to appear by these following Degrees.

N. I. First, There never was a Time since the Foundation of the Cathedral
within the Kings Castle of Old Sarum, or since its Removal to the Close of New
Sarum, (which Close must be distinguished in all our Discourses from the City,
which no body denies to be in the Bishops Jurisdiction, and in the Sub-Deans
two Years in three,) wherein the Bishop was, or wherein the Dean of Sarum was
not Immediatus Loci Ordinarius. Let them name it, and prove it, who were bold
enough to say there was such a Time, as the Dean has named plainly, and also
proved the Space of Time of almost 300 Years, between the Kings and Osmund's
Charter on one side, and the Infamous Composition on the other side, by which
the Bishop has pretended some Jurisdiction over the Close, five days in seven
years, though none at all before or after so great a space as seven years:
Which (by the way) is another Absurdity and Inconsistence. No Instance can be
given of any Will proved within the Close by any Bishop, or any Letters of
Administration granted, or any matter of Instance tried, or any Fornication
punished by any Bishop since the Foundation: but only by the Dean of Sarum, who
is confessedly in the Statute of Bishop Roger himself (though an high-flying
Bishop) Loci Ordinarius Immediatus. See the Statute De Testamentis Decano
insinuandis. Now that is clearly an Immemorial Practice and Possession of the
Dean which has been a Tempore, and per Tempus, cujus contrarii memoria hominum
non existit. Which Allegation to the Archbishop, for the Chapters Exemption
from the Bishops Jurisdiction, Bishop Ralph Erghum could not deny, and
thereupon was decreed against. 2. Next, the Decisions of Authority have been
for the Dean, and against the Bishop, as often as Authority has been appealed
unto, which has been seldom.

1. In the Year 1301, when the then Bishop Simon de Gaunt endeavored to invade
the Decanal Jurisdiction over the Canons and other Members of the Cathedral
Church of Sarum, Petrus de Sabaudia then Dean of Sarum, did by his Instrument
in Writing, on the Third of October, Prohibit the Prebendaries or Canons, and
all other Members of the said Church, and discharge them from submitting to the
said Bishops Visitation.

N. II. No longer since than in the Year 1665, John Elliot, LL. Doctor,
Chancellor then to Dr. Alexander Hyde Lord Bishop of Sarum, cited one John
Wickham, Servant to Mr. Chafin, living then in the Close of Sarum, unto the
Bishops Consistory for Incontinency, etc. Wickham not obeying the Summons, was
by the said Chancellor de facto Excommunicated. Whereupon Mr. Richard Kent,
then Prebendary of Sarum and Surrogate to the Reverend Dr. Richard Baily, Dean
of Sarum, perceiving the Invasion committed upon the Dean's peculiar
Jurisdiction, by Dr. Elliot the Bishops Chancellor, in citing Wickham within
the Close, Absolves the said Wickham. Whereupon the Bishop makes his complaint
to the Archbishop Dr. Gilbert Sheldon. The business came to an Hearing in St.
John's College Gallery in Oxford, before the said Archbishop, and Edward Earl
of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England; (the King then residing in Oxford.)
And the Issue was this; That the Bishop should not intermeddle with any
Ecclesiastical Censures, things, or Persons, out of his own Palace and Family;
but that the whole decision of Ecclesiastical Matters within the said Close,
did, and do purely, wholly and solely belong unto the Dean.

This is a True Copy of the whole Relation of the Matter from the Reverend Dr.
Richard Baily, received by me the Surrogate to the said Dr. Richard Baily, Dean
of Sarum. It a testor Ricard. Kent, primo Jun. A.D. 1678. Sub-Dec. Sarum.
N. III. Yea, since the present Lord Bishops, and the present Dean's Time,
there was a Crime committed within his Lordships own Palace, and by his
Lordships chief Domestic; which being a Crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
was by consequence to be punished by the King's Ecclesiastical Laws. The Bishop
applied himself first by Letters to the Dean and Chapter conjunctim, for the
Punishing of the chief Party in that Commission; proposing the Composition to
them, whereby his Lordship was in hopes a Correction de been esse might be
favorably inflicted. The Dean and Chapter met on purpose in Dr. Drake's House,
to Read and to consider of the said Composition. Which having done, They
unanimously agreed in this Judgment, (of which they sent his Lordship word,)
That the whole Composition (supposing it to be valid,) was wholly impertinent
to the Matter in hand: And that none but the Dean alone, as the Sole Ordinary
of the Close, could Summon both Parties into his Consistory Court, and put the
Law in Execution. The Dean however made a delay, because the Principal Offender
had committed the Fact in the Bishop's Palace, which he was willing to esteem a
place Exempted from the Decanal Jurisdiction. And this he pleaded to the Lord
Bishop, whom he desired to correct his own Domestic in his own Family, or in
his own Court, which the Dean said, he would warrant his Lordship the doing of
by Letters Dimissory, or License under the Seal of his Decanal Office. But his
Lordship urged with great strength of Reason, as well as Earnestness; (1.) That
such a Liberty in the Close, was more than either the Dean could give away
lawfully, or the Bishop receive. (2.) That the Party cited into his Court might
appeal to the Arches from the Bishop tanquam a non Iudice, and make the very
Judge of that Court a Criminal. (3.) That the Dean might Summon a Prebendary to
appear in his Court by a certain day from any part of the Kingdom; but (4.)
That the Bishop could not cite him into His, however nearly an Inhabitant.
Whereupon the Dean of Sarum, acknowledging the Bishop too hard for him in the
Contest, was forced to own his Unavoidable Authority in the Close, as
inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of these Realms, (which is the
language of See 25 Hen. 8. 20. and 26 Hen. 8. 1. and 1 Eliz. 1.. 17. n. I. and.
18. n. 1. and other Statutes recited 8 Eliz. cap. 1.
several Acts of Parliament,) and not without Trouble and Self denial, did
satisfy the Law upon both the offending Parties.

N. IV. Since which time also, no longer since than on the 15th of September
1681. the present Dean was desired by Mr. Archdeacon Woodward, then the Bishop
of Sarum's Surrogate, (Now the Chancellor of this whole Diocese,) to permit and
allow the People of Broad-Chalk in Wiltshire, to ask the voluntary Benevolence
of Persons living within the Close of Sarum. To whom the Dean gave his leave,
or permission rather, in these words following: As far as the Laws of this
Realm permit, and being earnestly requested, as well as moved with the
Resentment of so many men's Losses within the Parish of Broad-Chalk, I do allow
the said Sufferers to try the Charity of the Inhabitants within my Peculiar of
the Close of New Sarum, though not in any other Place under the Decanal
Jurisdiction of

Tho. Pierce, Decan. Sarum.

Now it is to be noted, that the Parish of Broad-Chalk, is under the Bishop's
Jurisdiction; and that the Lord Bishop was then at home, in his Palace within
the Close; and that his Leave had been sufficient without the Deans, had he had
any Jurisdiction within the Close; much more had his Jurisdiction been
Archiepiscopal, or Regal, and so Superior to the Deans. Lastly, That the
Bishops Surrogate, knowing well that his Lordship had none at all within the
Close, (though his Lordship and the Sub-Dean have all between them in the
City,) did therefore make his Application, to the Dean, and the Dean only. In
like manner the Collection which was made within the Close for the rebuilding
of St. Paul's London, the Redemption of Captives, and the like, was made and
returned by the Dean only and his Officers, according to the King's Order and
Direction.

N. V. If we step as far back as to the Year of our Lord 1584. we shall find
the great difference between a Bishop of Sarum, who was first Dean of Sarum,
and a Bishop who never was Dean of the same Church. For Dr. John Pierce, whilst
Dean of Sarum, did in conjunction with his Chapter, and by Command of Queen
Elizabeth, (to whom he was Almoner many years,) upon the 17th of October, 1573.
Testante Blacker Notar. Publ. f. 89.
begin the good work of abolishing Superstitious and Popish Statutes, without
the consent or the assistance of the then Bishop Edmund Ghuest. (Though he so
swept the Church, as to leave some Dust behind the Door.) But being afterward
Bishop of Sarum, (as after that, Archbishop of York,) he got a Commission from
the Archbishop of the Province to visit the Church upon occasion of the Case of
Dr. Zouch, and said, he was fultus Jurisdiction Metropolitana; knowing well,
and confessing, that, as Bishop of Sarum, he had no right to Visit the Choral
Vicars, much less the Chapter, much less the Dean; for if he had, he would not
have needed any Commission from the Archbishop of the whole Province.

N. VI. The said Exemption of All the Canons of the greater and lesser Chapter,
who make a Superior Corporation whereof their Dean is the Head, may be yet
farther proved by the Exemption of All the Vicars, who are an Inferior
Corporation, from the Bishop of Sarum's Power and Jurisdiction. For it appears
by the Vicars Charter, which they enjoy from the Crown of England, (as the Dean
and Chapter do Theirs,) that they are only subjected to the correction of Dean
and Chapter, not at all to the Bishops, who can neither put in, nor punish;
much less, put out a Vicar, or a Lay Clerk, however criminal. And accordingly
the Vicars, (as well as the Lay Clerks) take an Oath at their Admission of
paying Obedience unto the Dean, and to the Dean only whilst he is present, and
in the Dean's Absence to the Deans Locum-tenens, authorized under the Seal of
the Decanal Office: But none at all to the Bishop, whether Present, or Absent;
which was eminently acknowledged by this present Bishop in his own Palace, when
in the presence of the Dean and Chapter, and all the Vicars, his Lordship
protested three several times to Mr. Hardwick, the Vicars Procurator, and
Prolocutor, and to his Brethren then present, That if it were in his Power, he
would expel them every one, for their then Recalcitration and Opposition, both
to the Bishop and to the Chapter, when good Lawyers told the Vicars, they had
the Law on their Side. The Vicars were not a little pleased at his Lordship's
Brutum Fulmen, and confession of his No-Power over the Vicars within the Close,
three times repeated. Nor could any but the Dean bring those Vicars to a
Submission and full compliance, which he soon after did with the best effect.

N. VII. Even since my coming to keep my Residence at Sarum, the 20th. of this
instant June, I find two Notorious and Public Confessions in effect, of the
Lord Bishop of Sarum his having no Power to Visit within the Close, whether the
Dean will or no, or without the Dean's Leave, Concurrence, and Consent, under
the Seal of his Decanal Office, as well as under his own Hand; which being
sought, but refused (very honestly and prudently) by the Dean's Surrogate in
his absence, and without his knowledge; the Dean's Locum-tenens, for the
Chapter, (as the Sub Dean Mr. Kent* is the Dean's Surrogate for his Court and
his peculiar Jurisdiction, wherewith the Chapter has nothing to do, nor any
mortal Besides the King, and the Archbishop of the Great Province,) did as
absurdly, as unfaithfully, clap the Common Seal of the Dean and Chapter, (of
the Dean chiefly as the Head, and of the Chapter as his Members,) by usurping
my Name in it, and by counterfeiting my Will, against my Will, my Interest, my
Jurisdiction, without asking my Consent or Permission, without so much as
saying, By your Leave Sir, yea studiously and in haste without my knowledge,
even when He and the Rest knew I was but few Miles from them, and even then
coming (though not yet come) to my House at Sarum. Being come, I soon found Two
Citations in the Choir, made by a Fiction of my Name, and of my Name only,
beginning Thus, Thomas Pierce Sancta Theol. Professor, Ecclesiae Cathedralis
Sarum Decanus, and ejusdem Ecclesiae Capitulum, Universis and Singulis, etc.
Finding This to be done 1. Without my knowledge; and 2. With my very great
Abhorrence; 3. Against my Judgment; 4. Against my Right of Jurisdiction; 5.
Against the King, of whom I hold my Jurisdiction under the Great Seal of
England, (and unto whose Imperial Crown my Jurisdiction is annexed by 32 Acts
of Parliament; 6. Against my self in mine own name, and Poetically brought in
upon the stage, Citing my self, and the Bishop, as the Prebendary of Blewbery,
but not as Prebendary of Pottern, (which the Bishop is also) Comically
personated whether I will or no, like a Puppet St. fol. 44. b.
moving by Wires; 7. Against Express Statute to the contrary; 8. Against the
Oaths of the Members of the Chapter, who had an Hand in the usurpation (which I
am sure but few had;) 9. Against the Trust reposed in my Deputy; and 10.
Against the very License or Constitution, whereby I had enabled him in my
Absence to call Chapters for the taking care of God's worship, the keeping of
Statutes and Laudable Customs of the Church, as far as they agree with the Word
of God, and with the Law of the Land, and for the Correction of the Canons and
Members, but so limited, as I have said, not for the using the Common Seal at
all, much less at his Pleasure, without my knowledge, and consent, and against
my self; I say finding This, and a world of Absurdities (too many, and too
great to be recounted in this Pinch of Time;) I inferred their Conviction of my
sole Right, as Dean, to cite the 52 Prebendaries and all other members who had
sworn obedience to me, from their conceiving themselves forced to run so great
a Risque, as that of D. D. Longland. Harwards Acts. page 61. 125.
Crimen Falsarii, Rather than set up such a Citation without* my Name, or in
Any man's Name but Mine; and for their false using the Common Seal of Dean and
Chapter, for want of the Decanal Peculiar Seal, which Alone had been
Authentic. Therefore under my Seal of Office belonging to me, and me only, as
an Ordinary, and Judge, of the King's Ecclesiastical Court within my Peculiar
the Close of Sarum, and elsewhere, I made my Dated Jun. 20. 1683.
Protestation against That usurpation of my name, declaring it unlawful, Null,
and Void, as shall be set forth at Large in the Second part of my Defense, if
Occasion shall serve, or Need require.

. 6. Having showed the Inconsistencies of the Conspiracy with it self, and the
monstrous Absurdity of a Bishop's taking upon him a Regal Power, or at least an
Archiepiscopal, whereby to visit the Dean of Sarum within that Close which is
the Peculiar of the Dean, not of the Bishop, and whereof not the Bishop, but
the Dean is the Sole Immediate Ordinary, and wherein the Dean has the whole
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the Bishop none, and where the Dean's Jurisdiction
which was derived from the Crown is united thereunto by Acts of Parliament,
which the said Composition does grossly violate: I come to show in the last
place, that it is against the Well-being, if not against the very Being of the
whole College within the Close and the Church of Sarum, by reason of its most
scandalous and most mischievous Effects.

N. I. First, The Statutes which have been made by Deans and Chapters without
the Bishops, and others made by several Bishops with the Permission or Consent
of Deans and Chapters, being no way obliging beyond the Time of the Contrivers,
(nor even Then but by our Monarchs having no notice of them,) succeding Setts
of Legislators, as good as Those who went before them, and as destitute of
Authority to take upon them a Legislation, made other Statutes at their
Pleasure, as inconsistent with the former as Light with Darkness. Insomuch that
they who swear to keep the Statutes, as they are now, (without any distinction
of Good or Evil, Valid or Invalid, Loyal or Disloyal, Protestant or Popish,
made by Sovereigns or by Subjects without Commission, Obsolete or in use,) do
take an Oath they will be perjured, so far forth as they are not saved by a
Quatenus convenient cum verbo Dei and cum Statutis hujus Regni; which is a
necessary help, but not sufficient, because there is not added to it another
Quatenus or Qousque convenient Statut^ inter se, and sibi invicem non
repugnant. For standing All as they do, partly lawful but laid aside, partly
unlawful but yet observed and in use, and flatly repugnant to one another, (as
shall be demonstrated by and by) it plainly fallows that for a man of the
Church of Sarum to keep one Statute, is ipso facto to break and violate another.

N. II. Before I come to prove This, by descending to some Particulars, I think
it useful to premise this General Observation, to wit, that the Statutes which
are Authentic, both by Law, and in themselves, as having been made by our
Founders, the King and Osmund, and by our Later Monarchs of England, Hen. 8.
Ed. 6. and Q. Eliz. which alone are obliging both to the Bishop, Dean and
Chapter, are of All other Statutes the most neglected and out of Use, (to say
no more at this time) whilst the Statutes of several Popes, and of several
Popish Bishops and Deans and Chapters of Sarum, however selfish and
presumptuous, against the Law of the Land, and the Canons of the Church, and
very oppressive to Posterity, and therefore fit to have perished with Those
that made them, have been hitherto observed (to the hazarding of Souls) with
too much strictness.

N. III. Now to demonstrate the Contradictions, and other Mischievous effects,
which have been principally caused by the Infamous Composition of the said
Boniface the Ninth, with the then Bishop, Dean and Chapter (Birds of a Feather
every one at that Time, during the loose and weak Reign of the most careless
Rich. 2. of whom Historians give This Character, That of All Counselors and
Councils he did constantly take the Worst,) I cannot better begin than with the
Words of Bishop Henchman, once the Chantor, and a Residentiary, and after
Bishop of Sarum, and at last Bishop of London; when being consulted by Dean
Brideoak about the compelling of certain Prebendaries at large to confirm their
Leases by the Common Seal of Dean and Chapter, and also to pay the Fifth part
of their Prebends for their Non-residence Thirteen Weeks in the Year, according
to Osmund's Constitution, and the Statute of Bishop Jewel with the concurrence
and combination of the then Dean and Chapter, sent his From London House, May
7. 1668.
Answer in these Words following. You must also understand, that the great
Vicissitudes and Changes which Those H. 8. Ed. 6. and Q. Eliz. Of whose
Visitations the Bishop had written a little before.
Princes applied themselves unto, did require Rules and Statutes, fitted to the
disturbed Condition of Church Affairs Then. And you may observe in your Books,
that Continual Controversies did arise, partly because they did enjoin Things
Contrary to each other, and partly because they were adapted to Those Times
only, and were not practicable in after times. I will give an Instance. Do you
think that now a Prebendary not admitted into Residence may be mulcted at
Quinta part Praebendae, because he does not Reside in the Close of Salisbury
Thirteen Weeks in every Year? Yet this is the Statute of Bishop Jewel. Rogatu
Fratrum nostrorum cum consensu Capituli (the Dean was absent) statuimus veterem
Antecessoris nostri Osmundi Constitutionem, quam de ea retulit, in integrum
esse restituendam; hoc est Canonicos hujus Subaudi Residentia.
Ecclesiae nostrae Omnes and Singulos, nisi juxta formam Veterum Statutorum,
adsint and resideant, Quinta part Praebendae suae mulctandos esse; Pecuniam
autem omnem ita collectam ad Fabricam Ecclesiae nostrae Cathedralis conferri
volumus. What think you? Can a Prebendary not Residentiary be compelled now so
to Reside? Indeed he that lives upon his own Land, or Farm, and not in his
Parsonage with Cure; nor where his Residence is by Law allowed, is a great
Offender. But if an Archdeacon or Prebendary take upon him to Reside in Sarum (
being no Residentiary) he is liable to a Sore Mulct upon an Information in the
Exchequer. Will you admit every one into Residence that shall offer himself,
and protest de Residendo? You will soon be weary of that. Or will you tax a man
at Quinta part Prebendae, because he does not Reside, and yet you will not
admit him to Reside? Thus far Bishop Henchman exposed those Statutes to
ridicule, by which All the Canons (in number 52) are obliged to Residence, yet
not allowed to Reside; Have a Right to be Residents, yet no permission to enjoy
it. It Is their Duty and their Crime, to Reside in the Close and the Cathedral
Thirteen weeks every Year. They must, and yet they may not perform the Will of
the Founder, confessed by Bishop Jewel to be expressly the Subordinate Founder's
Will, and by consequence the Will of the Sovereign Founders, Will. 1. and Will.
2. whose Seals were set to Osmund's Charter. Men are punishable for That, for
which they ought to be rewarded. Not permitted to keep a Residence, to which by
Statute they are compelled, and compelled to pay money for Not doing That which
they must not do. The work is incumbent on 52 Canons or Prebendaries; but Six
of their Number ingross the Wages unto themselves. This Absurdity is so great,
that hardly any can be greater, unless it be That which follows. For

N. IV. In flat contradiction to the Fundamental Statute, and Oath of
Residence, and to the late repeated Statute of Bishop Jewel with the then
Chapter, the present Bishop and the then Chapter made a New Statute ( October. 3.
1672, Sethi Anno sexto) to this effect, That if they who have taken the Oath of
continual Residence, keep not so much as Three Months Residence, they shall pay
Five Pounds for each Months Non-Residence, or 15 l. for the Non-Residence of
the Year: so that for 15 l. per annum they may be Residents good enough without
Residing, and save 100 l. per annum (which any man's Residence will cost him,)
by paying only Fifteen Pounds. So as the Residentiaries are tempted, (not to
keep, but) to violate their Oath of Residence, (if such a Titulary Statute can
have any force in it,) by Compounding or Commuting for breach of Oath, the
Price of which Sin is but Fifteen Pounds. I do not know if Men are Taxed for
the Sins by them committed at so favorable a Rate in the Court of Rome. Now
considering, that the Residents were shrunk and reduced long before, from 52 or
53, (for the Prebendary of Pottern was Per Stat. Decani Richardi and Capituli,
a Rogero de Mortival Episcopo confirmati. 1214.
bound to Residence at first,) to the Dean and 12, and after that to the Dean
and 6, and now at last by this last Statute (so called) to None at all, if each
of the Residents will redeem himself from that Duty, or buy out his Residence
for the said Sum of 15l. (as some have done, and all may do,) here seems to be
a way made to the very Dissolution of the whole College, if not in Time of the
whole Cathedral Church of Sarum, notwithstanding his Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Laws, which do oblige unto the Residence of 90 Days, or 3 Months. And all Local
Statutes have a Nullity in the making, which are repugnant to the Modo Verbo
Dei, aut Praerogativae Regiae non repugnent, Can. 42.
Prerogative of the King, to the Law of the Land, or the Word of God.

N. V. Another Statute has been made since his Majesty's Restoration,
enjoining Prebendaries to bring their Leases to be Confirmed by the Common Seal
of the Dean and Chapter, to which they cannot be compelled, unless by the King,
or an Act of Parliament. Of whieh the aforesaid Bishop Henchman in his Letter
to the said Dean, did write these words -- [And I must add, That since
Prebendaries and their Tenants have understood, that Leases Demised by Sole
Corporations (according to the Statutes of the Realm) receive no strength by
Capitular Confirmation, you shall do well to persuade and invite the Members of
your Church to observe the good Rules lately made concerning Leases; but be not
hasty to compel by Censures or Penalties, etc. -- A little after, touching the
Statute enjoining Prebendal Contributions, by way of Tax toward the Repairing
of the Church, the Reverend Bishop adds thus, -- Take the best and surest
course you can to have the Help of the Prebendaries; but take heed you
adventure not to compel them, lest you meet with Consequences which may to a
good degree frustrate a Work of so high Importance.]

N. VI. All the Oaths which have been Administered, much more those which have
been imposed, by Bishop, Dean and Chapter upon Prebendaries or Vicars, in any
Matter not belonging to their Spiritual Jurisdictions, or not in a way of
Administering Justice, have been against Law, and the King's Prerogative. The
power to give and impose Oaths being so peculiar to the Prerogative Royal, that
it is punishable to do it, without, or beyond the bounds of the King's
Commission, by way of Indictment or Information, as an high Misdemeanor: Nor
can any Custom legitimate such an invented Oath, unless it had a Lawful and
just beginning. The House of Commons are so sensible of the want of this Power,
not only to impose, but administer Oaths to Witnesses, (who, being voluntary,
are as ready to Swear, as to appear,) that they often accept of Evidence upon
bare Averments. Nor can the Voluntary Submission of the Prebendaries or Vicars
create unlawful Power in the Bishop, Dean and Chapter conjoined, which
otherwise by Law they have not, either to impose or to administer an Oath, nor
excuse them in so doing. For however such Oaths so administered and taken, not
to let a Lease upon such or such Terms as the Law allows, (as for Example for
Three Lives without License,) do bind the Takers of them in Conscience, yet in
Law they are illegal, null, and void. And so 'twas declared by the late Lord
Chancellor upon occasion of a Suit in that Court depending.

N. VII. By a Statute or a Decree of the Bishop, Dean and Chapter of Sarum,
made in October 1671. no Lease is to be Let by any Prebendary (however he is
singly a Corporation,) without three Conditions, (by Law allowed, but
prohibited by them,) and all Three under the pain of Excommunication; which yet
('it is well known) cannot lawfully be inflicted for any matter or crime which is
not made to be so punishable by some Statute of the Land: Nor can any thing
less than the King or Parliament de novo create, or make a thing criminal. And
though the breach of such Conditions in the letting of a Lease (which
Conditions are wholesome) be supposed to be a Crime in such as have consented to
them, yet the Matter being Temporal it is not punishable in Law by an
Excommunication. Yet this is another of the sore Mischiefs, whereof the
aforesaid Composition has been the Occasion of the Cause.

N. VIII. But there are other effects of it, whereby Simony seems plainly not
only to be allowed, but even established by a Law, (such as a Bishop and the
Chapter can make de facto by the aforesaid Composition, which owes its chief
force to Pope Boniface the Ninth;) whilst men are made to pay dearly for their
Places of Preferment, which by the King are freely granted. For no sooner have
the Residents in the Church of Sarum taken their Oaths, That they neither have
given, nor will give any Sum or Sums for those Places unto which they are
admitted; but presently, by the De Finibus Canonicorum ad Residentiam
Receptorum. St. fol. 58, 59.
Statute of Pope Eugenius the Fourth, even after he was deposed by the Council
of Basil (when for Money he would do any thing,) there is (besides all other
payments by way of customary Fees) a great Fine for Entrance, Finis pro
Introitu, to be paid in ready Money, or well secured by Obligation. And though
at first no more was paid than Forty shillings to the Fabric, ( A. D. 1319.)
yet by the Statute of Dean Sydenham, and his then Chapter, (1428.) Authorized
at Florence by the said Titular Pope, (1442.) each Resident with Dignity is to
pay for his Entrance 105 l. and each without Dignity is to pay for the same 71
l. 13s. 4d. (besides a greater Sum required by a much younger Statute, of which
hereafter.) This Statute is bad enough; but the Custom is worse: For besides
that the Fines for Entrance are diverted from the Fabric, and divided among
the Residents of the Chapter; the Custom has violated the Statute, in exacting
no more from men with Dignity, than without it; so that the latter pay too much
(though less than the Statute does require,) and the former too little, because
much less than is due by Statute, which yet they pretend (and that with
Contention) to be in force. Only the Dean of all four Dignities must be
excepted, who pay by Custom to the height of what the Statute does enjoin, and
by Custom much more. Nor is this all: For Tyrant Custom which keeps up that
Statute, does beat it down at the same time in five remarkable degrees, for
which no Creature was ever yet able to give a Reason. Yet these are Customs and
Statutes, which they who take to be Obliging do Swear to keep. But as if this
were not enough, for a Learned poor man to be beggared by in his Advancement,
(as how many the most deserving have the least Portion of Money, and none to
spare, and often dye without Re-imbursement?) there was another Statute made by
a Bishop, Dean and Chapter, as well without the King's as the Pope's
concurrence, and without the concurrence of Common Sense: For by force of that
Statute (another effect of the Composition) every Resident who is living, must
fast a Year from all Commons; and every Resident when he is dead, must eat a
Years Commons in his Grave. At least in Aristotle's sense, (...) for what he
does by his Executor, he interpretatively does; and accordingly it is said (with
as much Pithiness, as Impropriety,) to be the Dead Resident his Annus post
Mortem; that is, his Unius anni proficua undecunque Provenientia. 'Twas not the
Christian Self-denial of those Usurping Legislators, who first invented this
Law in their own behalf. A Law resented very deeply by some Publick-spirited
Bishops of other Churches, who have expressed their Resentments to the now Dean
of Sarum, with a great deal of holy Indignation; and heartily wished for a
Remedy of this and other Impositions.

N. IX. But hardly can a Remedy be brought about, but by the long and mighty
Arm of Sacred Majesty, which in a Royal Visitation can abolish Old Statutes,
and make us New Ones; Statutes suitable to our Religion, by Law established.
Statutes not repugnant to the King's Honor and Prerogative. Statutes agreeable
with themselves, and to be sworn to the safety of all men's Consciences and
Souls. Lastly, Statutes not expiring with the Breath of them that make them,
like those Royal Statutes which were made heretofore for the Church of Sarum:
For those of Edw. 6. and Q. Elizab. were never yet so much as entered into the
Statute Book; insomuch that the former and present Dean could never get a sight
of them. And those of King Hen. 8. by one of his Masters of Requests, Sir John
Tregonwell, (Commissioned under the Great Seal of England,) were only entered
like an Old Almanac, and stand as a Monument of Contempt, which for many years
past have been put upon them; no more regarded than the Great Charter both of
the Sovereign and Subordinate Founders. Notwithstanding our Monarchs are
declared by Acts of Parliament to have all such This is a short account of the
Statute at large 1 Eliz. cap. 1.. 17, and 18. compared with 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19.
and 26 Hen. 8. cap. 1.
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, and Preeminences Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has
heretofore been, etc. And have full Power by Law to Commission whom they
please, and for so long time as they please, to Visit Reform, Redress, Order,
Correct, and Amend whatsoever is amiss in any Ecclesiastical State or Persons,
and over All to exercise all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Preeminences, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power,
Authority or Jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be Reformed, Redressed,
Corrected, Restrained, or Amended. Which Right and Power being united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and that for ever, may be extended
unto the Visiting even the Visitors themselves, (and that with an endless
Visitation, and by any mean Subject commissioned under the Great Seal of
England,) especially such as take upon them to Visit the Ordinaries themselves,
and that within the Jurisdictions which are exempt and peculiar to them, which
none can Visit by Law in a Protestant Kingdom, who is not a King, or a
Metropolitan.

N. X. Now because the Dean of Sarum's Ecclesiastical Court and Jurisdiction
over the Close of New Sarum and the Liberties thereof, and elsewhere in four
Counties, is for ever united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
even as firmly and as fully, as the Courts and Jurisdictions of any Bishops.
(those of Sarum, Exeter, and Bristol in particular;) it concerns the Bishop of
Sarum, as much as all he has in the World is worth, not to usurp the King's
Authority, nor to invade the Metropolitan's Right, by invading the Dean's; nor
to attempt a New Dominion (from Pope Boniface the Ninth) without a new Act of
Parliament, which none were ever yet able (in almost 600 years) to prevail with
any King, or any Parliament to endure.

N. XI. upon the whole matter, All the Premises being considered, there can be
nothing more desirable, if it is not absolutely necessary, than that His MAJESTY
now in being, will be graciously pleased with the Assistance and Advice of the
Archbishop of the Province, (if His Majesty thinks fit) to make and
Authenticate such a Body of Statutes for His Majesty's Free Chapel and
Cathedral Church of Sarum, as King CHARLES the First, of Glorious Memory, did
make and constitute for the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, with the Assistance
and Advice of Archbishop Laud. The Church of Sarum having as much, if not a
much greater need. For,

The Statutes there at present are partly Stat. fol. 62, 63. bought at Rome of
P. Boniface the IXth, 1392. and Stat. fol. 59, 60. bought of a Pope and no
Pope, Eugenius the IVth, 1442.
Popish; partly Injurious to See. 1.
the King's Prerogative and Supremacy; partly inconsistent with the. 2.
Laws of the Land, and common Honesty; partly Repugnant to one. 6, n. 3.
another, and so a snare to their Souls who are Sworn to keep them; partly
impertinent and impracticable, as the state of the Church now stands; partly
impossible to be observed, without a very great detriment to the Service of
God, and the credit of the Choir, or else without a most grievous and most
scandalous Violation of the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, to wit, the Canons of
the Church. Besides that such as they, they are Tumultuary, and Immethodical,
according to the different Times wherein, the different Occasions whereupon,
and the different Authorities whereby they were made. E. g. those of Hen. 8.
Stat. fol. 72, 73, 74. which compare with fol. 12 and 13. and with that made
lately, An. Dom. 1672.
Some are antiquated and grown out of use, by the Deans and Chapters ceasing to
live together, as in a College, to eat and drink together upon the Common
Revenue, in one common Refectory, or Hall, (as in Oxford and Cambridge those of
Colleges do still,) and by converting Meat and Drink into Money, whereof all
have their Proportions, and wherewith they keep their Families apart. The like
Change is made in the Corporations of Vicars Choral. All occasioned (as I
suppose) by Marriage permitted to the Clergy. None of our Statutes can be
obliging to any beyond the Contriver's Time, unless as made or confirmed by the
Law of the Land, or the Kings of England. But our Royal Statutes, which alone
are Authentic, are most despised, as has been showed.

N. XII. Without a Body of Authentic and Reasonable Statutes, such as may be
agreeable to the Word of God, the King's Right of Prerogative, the Law of the
Land, the Church of England as it is by Law Established, and our present
Metropolitans Provincial Letter, Aug. 23. 1678, (the Vindication of which has
cost the present Dean great Pains and Trouble, to say no more,) it will be
hard, if not impossible to break the Old Popish Custom of thrusting the most
unqualified and most scandalous Singing-men, (not so much into Holy, as) unholy
Orders, because unlawfully conferred, and sacrilegiously received. The
mischievous consequences of which are too many and too great, within these last
Twenty years, to be expressed without a Volume. Whereas our Two Universities
can furnish us with men of very good Learning and Degrees, who have much better
Voices and greater Skill in Music, than our Illiterate and Ungraduated
Songsters. And it is but too evident, how sadly the Church is overstocked with
men of Learning and Degrees: the Universities sending out yearly many more of
such Men, than the Church has Employments, (I do not say Preferments) to
entertain.

N. XIII. We need say no worse of the Composition, made on purpose to overthrow
the Fundamental Charter and Statute, than what was said by Paolo Sarpi of the
Concordat, purposely made by Leo the Tenth to overthrow the Pragmatic Sanction.
If the Bishop of Sarum had no Jurisdiction within the Close, without, or before
that Composition, why was it not Invented almost 300 years sooner? And if he
had it from the Foundation, or at any time after, before and without that
Composition, to what purpose was the Invention? and why was it ever made at
all? and why with a Salvo to the Dean's Right, whereof it is a Violation? And
why with no Salvo to the King's Right, to which it is an Opposition? and why
with a Non obstante Statuto and Charta Praedicta? These were evident
Confessions, that what it sought to legitimate, was illegitimate till then, and
utterly unlawful for almost 300 Years. Lastly, Why was it called a Composition,
or a Compromise, a Concord made between Parties Litigant? A Superior having a
clear Right of Jurisdiction, treats his Inferiors as a Judge, by executing Law;
not as a Party, Compounding for a Law, and a Jurisdiction, which before he had
not, The very word Composition confesses Novelty, and Guilt, and Usurpation;
from which, according to his Oath, his bounden Duty, and Allegiance, appellat
Caesarem Decanus; in imitation of St. Paul, and a Case like his, the Dean
appealeth unto Caesar; and immediately after Caesar, to the Archbishop of the
Province, whose Metropolitical Prerogative and Jurisdiction, as well as that of
the Nullus alius, praeter Regem, potest habenti Iurisdictionem Episcopalem,
demandare Inquisitionem. A Maxim somewhere in my Lord Coke.
King himself, the Bishop of Sarum (whilst I am writing) is Now presuming to
Usurp; which I can prove he does wilfully, and against his own Light, because
he knows he has earnestly, and to my Face, disclaimed all Pretenses of
Jurisdiction in the Close, and cast it wholly upon Me, as on the Stat. fol. 21,
and fol. 86. Rog. St. de Test. Dec. insinuandis.
Ordinary of it, (and as having within it solely the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction,) when he refused perseveringly to punish a Fornication committed
in his own Palace, the Correction of which I sought to cast upon his Lordship.
His Lordship knows the Determination of my Lord Chancellor Hyde Earl of
Clarendon, and of Archbishop Sheldon, for Dean Baily, against the then Lord
Bishop of Sarum. He knows that none but the Deans Court could ever Try or
Condemn any One Person within the Close, in any one Case or Cause of
Ecclesiastical cognizance. He knows, St. de Admissione and Residentia
Canonicorum. cap. 2.
an Oath of Obedience to the Dean is ever Sworn, and to be Sworn, by every
Prebendary or Canon at his Admission; and this according to the Statute, (not
only of the King and Bishop Osmund, but) even of Bishop Stat. Com. fol. 9.
Roger Himself. But no such Oath unto the Bishop (throughout the whole
Statute-Book) is to be taken by any Member of our Cathedral. His Lordship
knows, that All are liable to the Corrections Vet. Charta Osmundi ubi supra.
of the Dean within the Church, but not One unto the Bishop. Decanus omnibus
Canonicis and Vicaries praeest, quoad Regimen Animarum, and Correctionem Morum.
His Lordship knows, that at Morning and Evening Prayers, after the Tolling of
the Bell, no Fol. 12. b.
Person is to be staid for, ( ne Episcopus quidem Ipse) except the Dean. His
Lordship knows, in defect of Residence, the Canons were to be Mulct or Fined
Fol. 13. 2.
secundum Consilium Decani, (not Episcopi,) and that by a Statute which was
confirmed ('it is an Argument ad hominem) Autoritate Apostolica. His Lordship
knows, that the Dean (as Fol. 8. fol. 12. fol. 21. and fol. 25. b. and alibi
passim.
Petrus de Subaudia) made Statutes of himself, aproved of, and ratified, by the
Bishop and the Chapter ex Part Post. But never any Bishop presumed to make any
Statute, without the Concurrence of Dean and Chapter. His Lordship knows, the
Dean's Power Vet. Regist. fol. 3. and Antiqu. St. 89. and Prancisc. D. Bridges,
p. 175.
to give leave of Absence, or to deny it, without the least notice ever taken
of the Bishop. His Lordship knows, or should know, that the Dean was
acknowledged by Bishop Stat. de M^niis Clausi reparand. p. 60.
Jewel, to be Totius Collegii Pater, and Sanctae Societatis vinculum; that the
Dean, (not the Bishop) has Power by Statute, to admit the Clergy of the Church
of the higher and lower Degree, to Possession and Commons, Reg. Bridge. 172.
suo Iure, in one place, and (in another) sua sola Autoritate; and to receive
Ibid. page 175. and in Cod. Originali fol. 3. Stat. Rog. fol. 9. b. 1319.
an ounce of Gold from every Canon whom he Installs, though now it is dwindled
into a Mark; and to challenge for Himself and his Retinue St. Com. fol. 47. a.
Lib. Statut. Nigr. page 93.
, de Iure and Dignitate sua, from every Prebendary or Canon, by whose Corpse he
shall pass in any Journey, one days plentiful Entertainment, with a laute
percipiet, and ad Libitum. Briefly, Our Statutes give more respect unto the
Dean, than the Dean can desire, or look for; and such as I am loath to mention.
But it Page 89
appears by the Old Statute-Book, lent by Dean Brideoak to the present Bishop
Ward.
Lord Bishop, July 10. 1672, by whom it is not yet restored, as D. Brideoak
left it under his hand, when he went hence to the Sea of Chichester. That, and
Bishop Poor's Register are to this day concealed from me.

I will Conclude with this one signal Observation, That of All the Monarchs of
England, who have deprived the Bishops of Sarum of many Jewels in their Mitres;
not any One of them ever took any thing from the Deans, because Originally the
Deans of their Royal Chapel, and Virtualiter ever since.

AN APPENDIX TO THE PREMISES.
Showing the Dean of Sarum's Innocence (if not his Merit) in his Services for
the King, by the Lords Commissioners special Order; and in his Obedience to
their Lordships express Command; and also in his perfect Ignorance of Mr. Yeats
his Address to the said great Lords with his Four Heads of Information, until
the Lord Bishop and the Chapter of Sarum gave the Dean his First knowledge and
notice of it. So that the Controversy, ensuing it, might possibly have been
Raised by the said Bishop and his Adherents, Before it was so much as possible
to have been Raised by the Dean, without his knowing any thing of it, till so
informed. But seeing All men are subject to be Mistaken and Abused by men of
Malice; it is the honor and the duty of All the Dean of Sarum's Friends (in
the number of whom I profess my self) to convert, or to shame those Fanatical
Enemies to the Government, who do pretend to suspect him, though indeed they do
not, and cannot suspect him in Reality, of having dealt underhand in the Design
of Mr. Yeats, or of having acted otherwise toward any the least Occasion of
any Controversy or Difference with any Creature Antecedently to the Command of
the Lords Commissioners, the Evidence of the contrary is so manifold and
convincing. But yet they hitherto Resolve to pretend suspicion, (when they have
None) whereby to justify, or excuse, their Diabolical Defamation of an innocent
Man. (If yet it is a Defamation or a Crime, to prompt a Pious and Learned
Person to serve his Sovereign as he is able.) The Real cause of their
Malignity, being too Criminal to be owned; to wit, the Dean of Sarum's Loyalty,
and Love of Truth, and Compliance with the Commands of the most Noble Lords
Commissioners, who are empowered by the King to command us All. This alone is
the True Ground of some men's Pretending to a Suspicion, whereby to revenge
themselves on the said Dean, for having dared to be Dutiful to his Superiors.
These Artificers and (...) Romans 1. Cap. 30. Comm:
Inventors of Evil Things having not at all either the Grace, or even Humanity
to consider, that They Themselves must have obeyed, (as ill-affected as they
are to Any Commissioned by the King,) had they been so commanded, as the Dean
of Sarum was. But I will no longer detain the Reader (in this Preface to an
Appendix) from Mr. Yeat's his own Letters, sent to several Persons of Honor,
and to some others of lesser Quality, strongly asserting unto Himself the whole
Design of the Four Heads, which he addressed to the Lords Commissioners; and
confuting those Malignants, who out of Envy to his Performance, would have him
taken (to his Disparagement) for Another man's Tool. Nothing is added to the
said Letters, besides a few Deductions Thence, and some Reflections thereupon.

An APPENDIX to the Three foregoing Chapters.
. 1. MR. Yeats was so unwilling, that either the Dean of Sarum, or any other of
that Church, should have any share with him in the Honor or in the Blame of
his Project of the Four Articles, that he writ an honest Letter to a Person of
Quality in the Country, (as before to some at Court, and to the Lord Bishop
himself) who permitted the Dean's Son to transcribe as much of it, as he
thought would conduce to his Father's Service and Satisfaction: And it is as
fallows.

[ I am heartily sorry that any should be so Atheistical, as still to suspect
the Dean's privity to my design, after so much evidence and conviction to the
contrary; and therefore to shame them, I am ready to undergo whatever Test
shall be put upon me, to declare that the Dean was neither directly nor
indirectly, nec per se, nec per alium, acquainted with my design, but every way
as ignorant thereof, as the Child unborn; and much less abetting me therein,
than the Bishop himself from whom I had indeed two Inducements, but from the
Dean none, nay less than none; this being the only way I had to incur the
Dean's Displeasure, but withal to procure a Favor from the Bishop, or at least
from the King himself. The only offense that I Can charge my self herein to be
guilty of, and for which I do, and must ever beg the Pardon of Mr. Dean, is not
only that I drew up those Articles without his Privity, or Assistance, but also
without his knowledge or consent, referred my self for Proof of them to Books
and Papers in his Hands. Truth is, the knowledge I had of the chief things
suggested by me to the Lords Commissioners, was principally from a Sheet of
Reasons whereof Copies had been dispersed into several men's hands, as well of
both Houses of Parliament, as private Persons, One of which Copies I have here
with me, penned by the Dean about Six Years since, which Sheet was Entitled, --
Certain Memoirs of things pleadable against a Bill then prepared for the taking
away of all Peculiar Jurisdictions, etc. wherein among others, I found this
very observable Passage.

The Dean and Note that this was an error in those Memoirs. For the Dean was
Alone before the Conquest, and some while After without any Chapter, as now the
Dean of the King's Chapel at White Hall is.
Canons of Sarum had their abode before the Conquest in Old Castle called
Caesar's Burg, and corruptly Sarisberg, by the Britains, Sorbiodunum. It was
at the first the King's Free Chapel, as Windsor is at this day, wherein the
Dean ( under the King) had more than Episcopal Jurisdiction. Vide Vetus
Registr. Miscell. and Registr. Dom. Richardi Episc. Sarum.

[ 'Twas from this, and certain other Passages there following, (seconded by
what I heard from some N. B. He consulted with others, though not with the Dean.
Persons better known, as I thought, in the Affairs and Records of that Church,
than I can be supposed to be,) that I thought I had reason enough humbly to
tender those Four things to be inquired into by their Lordships. But for the
Reverend Dean of Sarum, he had no manner of knowledge of my Design, or of my
Two Inducements ^o it, nor of the Petition of the Mayor and Magistrates of
Marlborough, nor of those Noble Persons who did promote it; and therefore as I
have highly though undesignedly disobliged him, by acting as I did, without his
Privity, and (as I found since) against his Will; so I have, and do, and ever
will beg his Pardon; which whether I ever obtain, or not, I will be ever his
Vindicator in the bottom of my Heart, from his having had the least share, or
so much as knowledge of my Rashness and Precipitancy.

. II. Thus far Mr. Yeats word for word; and as truly as ever any man spoke: He
offered also to confirm it in open Court upon Oath, which makes me say, that
those men are unworthy, and must not expect to be believed upon their Oaths,
much less upon their Words, who will not believe the Dean of Sarum, and Mr.
Cornelius Yeats of Marlborough either upon their Words, or upon their Oaths.
Mr. Yeats his Character is no where fitter to be seen, than in the famous
Petition of the Mayor and Magistrates of Marlborough to the King, Presented by
the hands of the Lord Bruce in his behalf, whose great Parts and greater Piety
are celebrated by Them, (both to the King, and the Lords Commissioners,) who
have the best experience and knowledge of him. And not yet to mention those
Horrid and Scandalous Reports, which Mr. Yeats his bitter Enemies have labored
under, and still do labor.

There are not any either of his, or of the Dean of Sarum's Enemies, who can
prove so convincingly that they had not any hand in, or Assent to, or
Connivance at, or Knowledge of the most execrable Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, (until they had it by report,) as the said Dean has proved, and can
prove, that he had no hand in, or Assent to, or Connivance at, or Knowledge of,
Mr. Yeats his Project of the Four Articles, until he was informed of it by the
Lord Bishop of Sarum, and by the Chapter of the same, in a Letter from Mr.
From. For Sir Edm. Godfrey being dead, can attest nothing on their behalf; and
they have nothing but their own Oaths whereby to clear their own Innocence, to
which they have forfeited all Belief with considering men. But Mr. Yeats is
still living to clear the Dean of Sarum upon his Oath, the which he offered in
open Court, and will be ever ready to take, and who will ever find Belief from
All who are acquainted with his unblameable Conversation, which will every
where have credit, where his Enemies have None. Nor has he, or the Dean of
Sarum any Enemies they know of, who are not Enemies at the same time, both to
God, and the King, and the Church of England. It Is the Nature of Christian
Charity, not to suspect others hastily, of any ill thing which it abhors;
whilst they who are wont to do Injuries, suspect others of the like. Nothing
hitherto can be said to clear the Regular and Episcopal Clergy from a suspicion
of being Papists, or Popishly affected, with the whole Dissenting and
Schismatical Party; and they who suspected, or rather pretended to suspect the
Dean of Sarum of a Plot to deprive the Bishop of a Right to give Prebends, even
immediately after the Bishop had promised a Prebend to the Dean's Son, (of his
own accord, and undesired, which added most of all to the Obligation,) are like
those most Malicious, and Unexcusable Fanatics, who pretended to suspect the
King himself, not only of contriving the Fire of London, but also of being in
the plot against his own Life and Kingdom. See the excellent Address to all the
Freeholders and Freemen of England; part. 1. page 45, and 50. and part. 2. page
2, 3, 5, 6.

. 3. But now suppose the Dean of Sarum had not only permitted, but persuaded
Mr. Yeats and the Magistrates of Marlborough, to apply themselves unto the King
for a Prebend of Sarum, and to plead, that the Supremacy of Right to give
Prebends is in the King, from whose Original Right, the Bishops Right to give
them is but derivative, (and therefore only a good and undoubted Right, because
derived from the Crown,) he had not abjured the doing of it, but rather had
owned it with Ambition. The only Reason why he denies it, is because it is a
Lie; and because he is a lover of Truth and Justice; and because he will not
willingly fully the Merit of his Obedience to the very express Commands of the
Lords Commissioners; who finding him averse from his being a Voluntier, were
therefore pleased to press him for his Majesty's Service, wherein he had not
been else employed.

. 4. In compliance with the said Order and peremptory Command of the Lords
Commissioners, (to which no Churchman could refuse to pay Obedience,) the Dean
of Sarum drew up a Narrative of Matters of Fact* which he had found in Old
Registers; wherein he took occasion to censure Mr. Yeats,. 9. and to assert the
Lord Bishop of Sarum's Right to dispose of Dignities, Sub-Dignities and
Prebends at large,. 10. as well as the Right of the Dean singly, together with
the Rights of Dean and Chapter in conjunction. And all upon the same principle
or ground, on which he humbly did conceive the several Rights were all held: He
did conceive, that all Rights are either Subordinate or Supreme: He thought it
dangerous to assert the Subjects Rights to be Supreme, and therefore called
them Subordinate: And lastly, He thought their Rights the Firmer, for being
derived from, and depending on, and standing upon so sure a Bottom as the
Supreme. He showed what our Monarchs had done de facto in and over the Church
of Sarum, which was not to reveal a Secret; for some of the Alienations of
several Prebends, and one Archdeaconry, from that Church, are publicly written
in Letters of Gold on the several Stalls, and exposed to the Reading of all
Mankind. But whether such Alienations were, or could be de Iure, the said Dean
left humbly to the Consideration of his Superiors.

What more or less could have been said to that purpose, by any of the Chapter,
or by them All, or by my Lord Bishop himself, if either of them had been so
commanded to speak his Knowledge, or his Sense, as the Dean of Sarum was, they
themselves can best tell; but the Dean of Sarum is yet to learn.

. 5. One thing is fit to be considered by those Pretenders to a suspicion of
Persons more credible than themselves; which suspicion it is thought they have
not, and cannot have in good earnest, against the Evidence and Conviction they
have several times met with; if at least they have Faith and Charity, and do
really believe there is a God, and a Devil, and Heaven and Hell. Suppose that
two of their Number shall be pretended to be suspected of two grand Crimes, the
one of Simony, and the other of Incest; and that the Whispers of those
Suspicions shall be disseminated and spread into public Fame. Will not those
Persons be glad to be allowed to prove the Negative upon their Oaths? Will they
not take it extremely ill, to get no more by their Vindication, than to have
the Fame of Perjury, superadded to the suspicions both of Simony, and Incest?
Will they not expostulate, si accusasse suffecerit, Quis erit Innocuus? Will
they not probably break out into the Learned Diatribist's Exclamation, (...)!
They cannot hope to be believed upon their own single Oaths, who dare pretend
not to believe honester Men upon their double ones. Besides that Simony and
Incest will be accounted more scandalous, even by the Whigs in these worst of
Times, than to be zealous for the King's Rights, or to obey the Lords
Commissioners. And therefore, if the Inventers of silly Jealousies and Lies,
shall at any time chance to suffer the heinous things which they have done,
they will learn for the future to deal with their Neighbors and their Friends,
as they would that their Enemies should deal with Them.

Part of Mr. Cornelius Yeats his LETTER to a Person of Great Honor, an Eminent
Officer at Court, and afterward to another of lesser Quality; giving an
Account of his Undertaking, after the Petition of the Mayor and Magistrates of
Marlborough to the KING in his behalf.
BEsides my appearing for the King's Prerogative and Right, which was a
principal Motive to this so strange Attempt of mine, I had likewise two other
Inducements, which I hope may in some measure take off the blame, and very
tolerably account for a Procedure of this Nature.

The One, that the Bishop of Sarum some years since voluntarily promised, and
that with repeated Asseverations, ( I do not say the next Prebend, but)
whatever lay in his Power to do for me; though being since that time, again and
again Requested by me, and by many Others, ( not considerable Persons) on my
behalf, at what time there were vacant Prebends many in one Year, yet he never
did any thing toward the Augmentation of my Poor Maintenance: so that indeed I
was weary of depending any longer upon Complements.

Next, I did but follow ( as I was led,) the Bishops own Example; for having
observed, that his Lordship applied himself to the King for a Royal Mandate,
whereby to over Rule the Dean and Chapter of Sarum to Praeelect his Nephew Mr.
Seth Ward into the next Place of Residence which should be void, ( the only
Good Thing which is in the Gift of the Dean and Chapter, when the King does not
oppose his Original Right to their Derivative,) I thought I might with greater
Reason apply my self ( in such a way as I did, viz. by asserting the Kings
Original Right,) to obtain from His Majesty a Prebend at large of a lesser
Value ( not the only Good Thing in the Bishops Gift, by a Derivative Right,
whereof the Original is in the King,) because that Nephew had been before
provided for by two Uncle-Bishops, with as much as would have served five or
six Worthy men, and did not want an Augmentation; as I evidently did; nor was
his Task so great, as mine is very well known to have always been; nor did his
Uncle want Things in his particular Disposal, as most of my Patrons did, and
do; nor had the Bishop more Right Derivative to bestow a Prebend at large, than
the Dean and Chapter to bestow the Places of Residence: and his Lordships
applying himself to the King for such a Canonry was ( accoring to the Rules of
all the Logic that I ever have been acquainted with) a Confession of his
Judgment, that All Promotions in the Cathedral Church of Sarum are in the King
by an Original Right, though by a Derivative in the Bishop partly, and partly
in the Dean and Chapter; and truly Sir, I had a fairer Opinion of his Lordship
than to think he would blame that in me, which he approved of in himself: Nor
did I imagine, but that a Poor Vicar might beg what he wanted of his King, as
well as a Great and Rich Bishop, who wanted nothing.

Sir, I have here freely and fully discovered the very sense and thoughts of my
Heart to you, and do humbly hope, that I may from You at least obtain a
merciful and candid Opinion of my Proceedings. But I am afraid I have wearied
you with the unusual length of this Letter; I am sure I have wearied my self in
writing it, having already preached twice this day, and being also to prepare
another Sermon at a Funeral to Morrow Night, which may serve to excuse what
slips may have here fallen from my Pen. I hope I shall always deport my self,
as become him who is

Your most, etc.


Part of Mr. Yeats his Letter of Dec. 14. 1682. to the Lord Bishop of Sarum, in
Vindication of the Dean.
My Lord,
NO Person can be more highly displeased with me, than I am with my self, for
having ( under the impatience of some disappointments) attempted a thing so far
above my reach in that Paper delivered to the Lords Commissioners; especially
since I find, that hereby I have not only provoked your Lordship, but also my
Worthy Patron the Dean of Sarum, ( once my Friend, but now I fear made my
Enemy,) as being hereby wrongfully drawn under the most unjust Suspicion of his
having been privy to my Design: when as the Truth is, (which merely to do him
right I think my self bound to declare, and if your Lordship require, I will
affirm it upon Oath,) He had no hand in, or knowledge of, those Informations,
nor (as I verily do believe) of any my proceedings thereabout, till my Letter
to him at Canterbury in Nov. last, which he answered with sharp Reproofs, and a
Declaration of his Absolute Refusal to assist me in any thing, or to deliver
what he might know of that matter: so that I was forced ( seeing my self
Summoned into your Lordships Consistory) to use my utmost endeavors with all
my Friends, to procure a peremptory Command to him from the Lords
Commissioners, which I hear is now sent; but with what effect I do not as yet
understand; only that it has brought him to White Hall. Besides, my Lord, the
thing speaks it self. Articles so unskilfully penned, and with so many
disadvantages to the Cause undertaken, can never be supposed to have been drawn
up by his Advice, or so much as Connivance, or Permission, etc.


This is all of that Letter wherein the Dean is concerned.

FINIS.
Connubium Regiae Praerogativae, cum Magna Charta Anglorum.
AN Compositio (quae vulgo dicitur) a Papa Romano Confirmata, A D. 1392.
Ecclesiae Sarum Fundamenta convellat penitus evertatque, An cum ijsdem
nequaquam pugnet, Quae sequuntur perlecturis liquido admodum Constabit.

. 1. Osmundi Charta in ipsa Fundatione edita, ac Dugd. Mon. Angl. vol 3. page
378.
Sigillo Regis Willielmi communita, Id. ib.
ex cujus Dono and Concessu de Dominio suo Regali tam in Ecclesiis quam in
Terris, Ecclesia Cathedralis Sarum Originem duxit and Incrementum, inter
caetera, Haec habet.

Dignitas Lib. (...) Eccl. Sar. fol. 86. a and b. Quicum Confer. c. 39. f. 36,
37.
est Decani, and omnium Canonicorum, ut Episcopo in nullo respondeant nisi in
Capitulo, and judicio tantum Capituli pareant. Habeant etiam Curiam suam in
omnibus Praebendis suis, and Dignitatem Archidiaconi ubicunque Praebendae
fuerint assignatae in Parochia nostra, sive in Ecclesiis, vel Decimis, vel
Terris. Ita quidem quod Nulla omnino Exigentia, in dono vel in Assisa, aut
aliqua alia Consuetudine, ab Episcopo, vel a quolibet Alio fiat in Praebendis
eorum; Sed Omnes Libertates and omnes Dignitates Plenarie and Pacifice habeant,
Quas Ego Osmundus Episcopus in eisdem Praebendis habui, Aut Aliquis Alius, cum
eas in nostro Dominio haberemus. Quando vero aliquis constituitur Canonicus,
debet coram Fratribus in Capitulo jurare, praesente Evangelio, se Dignitates
and Consuetudines Ecclesiae Sarum inviolabiliter observaturum. Decanus omnibus
Canonicis, and omnibus Vicarijs praeest, quoad Regimen Animarum and
Correctionem Morum. Testes sunt Hi; Willielmus Rex Anglorum, Thomas
Archiepiscopus, and Alij multi Episcopi.. 2. Virtute Hujus Exemptionis
Fundamentalis, a Regibus Angliae per V. Dugd. ubi supra, and Lib. Stat. cap.
40. f, 38, 39, 40,
Chartas suas Confirmatae, Decanus solus cum Capitulo Statuta Authentica
Confer. Praes. Rogeri de Mortival, cum cap. 41, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52.
Confecit, quae Episcopi deinde cum Decanis and Capitalis assistentibus
conjuncti, grata and rata habuerunt. Hujus rei sunt Exemplis Richardus Poor,
cum adhuc esset Decanus Sarum, A. D. 1213. Nec non Petrus de Sabaudia A. D.
1305. Episcopis tunc temporum nequaquam adhibitis in Concilium. Denique Rex
Henricus Tertius in Charta sua apud In Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 376.
Dugdallum, Translationem Ecclesiae Sarum de Castro suo Saresberiae, etc. ratam
habuit, and Canonicis ejusdem Ecclesiae and hominibus suis Omnes Libertates and
liberas Consuetudines quas habuerunt Temporibus Praedecessorum suorum, etc.
sicut Cartae ipsorum testantur.

. 3. Inde est quod Decanus (non Episcopus) ab ipsis Episcopis Declaratur In
Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 376.
Immediatus Loci Ordinarius. Testamenta Decano sunt insinuanda, Bona tam in
Clauso Sarum quam in Praebendis sequestrari possunt per Decanum. Admissus
Canonicus per Decanum, vel per ejus Locum-Tenentem, Cap. 1. f. 9. b.
jurabit, quod exit obediens Decano. Lib. Stat. c. 23. fol. ^1.
Dominus Decanus, seu alius ab eo missus Visitationem faciet, Errata corriget,
-- Correctionis stimulum apponet, Dispersa recollige^, etc. -- Et ad libitum
ipsius, unius diei procurationem laute recipiet.

. 4. Jurisdictionis Decanalis in Clauso Sarum mature habita Contemplatione,
Aegidius Brideport Episcopus Sarum Integerrimus (Is qui Ecclesiam Cathedralem
consecravit dedicavitque) omne Jus jurisdicendi Visitandive in Clauso Sarum,
Sibi Suisque Successoribus ex tote Cord Abjudicat; idem Jus Decano Sarum
diserte asserit vendicatque; Visitationem Designatam ex certa Conscientia
Retrectat illico, damnatque; nec non in omnem Rei memoriam, Dictus Praesul
(...) (ceu Cygneam Probitatis Pietatisque suae Vocem) seris Posteris infra
scriptam dulcissime canit Palinodiam. Cap. 52. f. 46. a,


Universis Regist. Burg. Evident. Tom. xi. fol, 79. Anno 1264.
Christi Fidelibus praesentes Literas visuris vel audituris Aegidius Dei
patientia Sarum Ecclesiae Minister humilis salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum
nos visita tionem faciendam in Capitulo nostro Sarum tam in Capite quam in
Membris dicimur demandasse; Ad certam and 1. plenariam deliberationem supra his
revertentes; 2. Inspectis Institutis Beati Osmundi Sarum Ecclesiae Fundatoris,
and 3. Libertatibus and Immunitatibus quas idem Fundator in dicta Ecclesia
stabilivit; 4. Consideratis consuetuetudinibus quibus Sarum Ecclesia usque ad
nostra tempora regebatur and usa fuit, tam temporibus vacationis quam Sedis
Ordinatae; 5. Intellecto etiam quod nullus Antecessorum nostrorum hujusmodi
visitationen exercuerit, nec demandaverit; Nos dictum mandatum sub quocunque
genere verborum factum ex certa Conscientia penitus 1. Revocamus, and ex
ulterius ob id quicquid sequitur 2. Pronunciamus, and 3. Decernimus non valere.
4. Protestants, and 5. Statuentes, pro nobis, and Successoribus Nostris
Episcopis in Ecclesia Sarum, quantum ad nos pertinet, quod dictum Capitulum
Sarum, tam in Parsonis Canonicis, Vicariis, Rebus, and Familiis ipsorum, tam in
Clauso Sarum, quam in Praebendis Sarum Ecclesiae, a Visitatione Episcoporum
Sarum perpetuis temporibus existunt 6. Liberi, and Immunes. Maxim cum hoc ad
Decani 7. Officium and Dignitatem ipsius Statuimus pertinere. Praeterea
vacantes Vicarias Praebendarum Sarum and Ordinationes ipsorum tam in
taxationibus faciendis, quam in Parsonis praesentandis, admittendis, and
instituendis, simul and correctiones Vicariorum Praebendarum, nec non and
ipsorum Vicariorum qui in Ecclesia Cathedrali deserviunt, plene 8. and
totaliter ad dictum Decanum and Capitulum 9. Recognoscimus pertinere; 10.
absque omni Jurisdiction and Potestate Episcoporum Sarum pro tempore
existentium. 11. Salvis nobis and Successoribus nostris praesentationibus
Vicariorum per Canonicos Praebendarum faciendis in Nostris duntaxat Maneriis.
IN HUJUS REI fidem praesentes Literas Sigillo Nostro fecimus communiri. Dat
Sarum Die Martis Proxime post Festum Sancti Michaelis Anno Domini Millesimo
Ducentesimo Sexagesimo Secundo.

Hujus Chartae Confirmatio per Decanum and Capitulum capitulariter Congregatos
in haec verba sequitur.

Omnibus Christi Fidelibus praesentes Literas inspecturis vel audituris R.
Decanus and Capitulum Ecclesiae Sarum salutem in Domino. sempiternam. Cartam
Venerabilis Patris Aegidij Dei gratia Sarum Episcopi inspeximus in haec verba.

[Universis Christi Fidelibus, etc. ut supra.] Nos igitur proescriptas
Revocationes, Pronuntiationes, and Decreta, Protestationes, Recognitiones, and
Statuta habentes and grata, unanimi Consensu ea duximus confirmanda. Et ad
majorem rei fidem and firmitatem, Sigilli nostri communis Impressione praesens
Scriptum duximus roborandum. Hiis Testibus, Domino [ Roberto de Exceptio firmat
regulam in Non exceptis. Ibid.
Hartforde] Decano Sarum. Domino R. de Hengam Cancellario. Domino R. de Warmill
Thesaurario. Domino Simone Archidiacono Berks. Domino Nicolao Archidiacono
Sarum. Johanne Subdecano. D. Waltero Succentore. Nicolao Longespe. D. Waltero
de Merton. D. Martino de Halebury. Roberto Deswood. Rho. de Ripton. Roberto
Foliat, and aliis. Dat. Sarum die Mercurii prox. post Festum S. Michaelis A. D.
1262.

. 5. Porro in Registro vocato Hemings by conceptis verbis sic Scriptum legimus.
Huc usque visum non extitit, quod Alius quam Decanus Sarum offlcium
Visitationis exercuit in Praebendarios, fol. 77. Constabat enim ex Statuto
Richardi Poor, quod Lib. Stat. cap. 41. fol. 41. A. D. 1222.
quandocunque facienda fuerit generalis Convocatio Canonicorum, tradet Decanus
Literas Vicariis Canonicorum Vocandorum, and injungent iis in Virtute
obedientiae, quod Dominis suis transmittant ad Praebendas, a quibus Sumptus
propter hoc faciendos percipiant. Neque aliter hoc fiebat, quam per Mandatum
Dccani, 1355. in Registro Corf. p. 111. and in Coman. p. 73. A. D. 1387. and in
Pountney p. 29, 30. A. D. 1413.

. 6. Notatu dignissima est Regist. D. Davyson, fol. 13.
Querela Archiepiscopo Cant. oblata contra Radulphum Ergham Episcopum Sarum
Visitatorem Praebendas Decanatu Vacant circa An. 1375. A. D. 1346,


Ex part Praesidentis and Capituli.
Infra Castrum Domini Regis, and in ipsius solo, (nullatenus Episcopi Sarum,)
primitus extitit fundata Ecclesia, ut Libera Capella, ejus, ab omni
Jurisdiction Dioecesani Exempta; plena Liberate, more Aliarum Regiarum
Capellarum Angliae, gauderet. Quam Beatus Osmundus, tunc Sarum Episcopus,
Consensu Willielmi Regis Patroni praedicti tunc praesentis, solenniter de
certis Praebendis fundavit, ac Canonicas Dignitates and officia Primus
constituit in eadem. Ac per sua Statuta in ipsa Fundatione edita, de consensu
ejusdem Regis Ecclesiae Patroni, tam Deeanum quam Canonicos Sarum Omnes and ab
omni Jurisdiction Episcopi Sarum Exemit Totaliter in haecverba. [Dignitas est
Decani and omnium Canonicorum, ut Episcopo in Nullo respondeant, etc. ut supra.
1. p. 1.] -- ac omnes Libertates and Dignitates, quas Idem Osmundus in dictis
Praebendis habuit. Item translata est Ecclesia a dicta Castro per Rlchardum
Episcopum de Consensu and Licentia Regis Angliae Patroni ejusdem cum omnibus
suis Dignitatibus, Libertatibus, Statutis, Exemptionibus, and Consuetudinibus,
Autoritate Apostolica. -- Ad dictas etiam Ordinationes, Consuetudines,
Libertates, ac Dignitates fideliter tenendas, and inviolabiliter observandas,
Episcopi, Decani, and Canonici Sarum Praebendarii, qui pro tempore fuerunt and
sunt, eorum temporibus Successivis, omnes and singuli Juramentis Corporalibus
ad Sancta Evangelia praestitis, realiter fuerunt and sunt astricti. Verum quod
(Reverendissime Pater) post and contra omnia praemissa, Reverendus in Christo
Pater and Dominus Radulphus Dei gratia Sarum Episcopus sciens se ad praemissa
omnia and singula sui juramenti Debito observanda, ut praedicitur, obligatum
fore and esse, Praebendas nostras nonnullas de facto, cum de Fundationis
Statutis and Consuetudinibus praetactis non deberet, Visitavit, and pet alios
Visitare fecit, and mandavit, and a quibusdam Canonicis and Vicariis
Canonicorum in Praebendis, Decanatu Sarum Vacant, asserens eos Subditos suos
immediatos, cum non erant, neque sunt, obedientiam juratoriam extorsit injuste,
and Nonnulla alia Gravamina circa Praemissa dicto Capitulo and Praebendariis,
Decanatu hujusmodi vacant, intulit, and infer minatur. Placeat igitur eidem
Paternitati vestrae, intuitu Charitatis, taliter interponere parts vestras, ut
dictus Dominus Episcopus Sarum omnia praemissa illicite attemptata, and
praecipue Visitationem, sic ut praemittitur, Decanatu vacant, de facto
inchoatam, pro salute Animae suae revocet, and praefatum Capitulum and
Praebendarios omnes and Singulos, commodo Fundationis and Liberatatem
Statutorum and Consuetudinum praehabitarum libere gaudere, and in solidum
exercere, quoad omnia praemissia, et in pace permittat in futurum.

Post hanc factam Apellationem and Querelam, Ita praefatus Archiepiscopus (
Simon Sudbury) parts suas interposuit, ut Radulpho Episcopo Visitatione
attemptata interdixerit; and deinceps Ecclesia Sarum usque ad Tempora atque
Tyrannidem Bonifacii Noni (...) Beneficio Fundationis gavisa sit.

. 7. Pari modo Provisum fuerat a Reverendissimo Bonifacio Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi (ex Nobilissima nascendi Prosapia oriundo) de Libertatibus Decani
and Canonicorum Ecclesiae Sarum. Lib. Stat Eccles. Sar. cap. 55. De Ordinatione
Bonifac. Archi^p. Cant. p. 50. b. 51. a.
Maxim quantum ad Ltbertates, Instituta, and Statuta, quae Beatus Osmundus and
Successores sui in eadem Ecclesia statuerunt and concesserunt. Iurabit etiam
[Officialis Archiepiscopi] coram Canonicis in Civitate Sarum praesentibus, quod
Libertates and Consuetudines Ecclesiae Sarum pro posse suo in omnibus officium
suum and Iurisdictionem suam tangentibus servabit Illaesas, and quod fidelis
erit Ecclesiae Sarum, and in executione Iurisdictionis fideliter se habebit, ut
superius est expressum. Acta est autem Ordinatio vere Metropolitana A. D. 1362.
praesentibus Waltero Dei gratia Wigorn. Episcopo. Thoma de Cantelupo D. Decano.
D. Cancellario and Thesaurario Sarum. Waltero Scamell, Galfrido de Mileburn
Canonicis Sarum, and post Alios Complures Testes; in before rei testimonium
and munimen, praesenti Instrumento in modum Chirographi Confecto Sigilla nostra
alternatim apposuimus. Et ut praesens Compositio firmior habeatur, Prior and
Capitulum Cant' ipsam expresso ratificantes consensu, presens Instrumentum
Sigilli sui munimine roborarunt.

. 8. Neque aliter Res stetit dum Cardinalis Regist. Hemingsby p. 42, 43.
Raimundus Decanus Sarum audiebat, and Cardinalis Arnoldus ejusdem Ecclesiae
Thesaurarius. Uterque A. D. 1330. His horumque Successoribus salvae semper and
integrae Libertates praedictae permanserunt. Tandem vero Compositio (...), non
in alium duntaxat sensum, verum etiam in Contrarium confecta est, Quam (...)
(proh dolor!) vocare licet. Inde enim videtur ingens Malorum Ilias effluxisse.
Inde Regum Decreta contemptim habita. Inde Osmundi nec Institutio, nec
Execratio aut cordi aut Curae est. Inde Statuta (nomine tenus) sibi invicem
adversantia, ab Episcopis, Decanis, and Capitulis Sarum emanarunt. Spretis
Legibus Anglicanis jam Praesertim 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. A. D. 1392.
tum latis fixisque; and in super habita Magna Charta, ut ut per Acta
Parliamentorum (Triginta ad minimum) corroborata, Ipsa praefatas Immunitates ab
Osmundo fundatas Vide Stat. 25 Ed. 1. cap. 4.
sub ultima poena corroborante.

. 9. Summatim dico. Quod Episcopo Aegidio ejusque Antecessoribus nequaquam
licuit per Iuramentum, per statutum Fundationis, per Consuetudinem Ecclesiae,
per Magnam Chartam totius Angliae Compluribus Actis Parliamentorum Confirmatam;
Qui fieri potest, ut ejusdem Aegidii Successoribus (non obstantibus Praemissis)
Id ipsum liceat? Quaecunque dedit, dedit Lib. St. C. 39. f. 36.
Libere Osmundus, Ita nimirum prout Ipse eadem obtinuerat a Domino Rege
Willielmo. Concessitque Libertates quas Ibid. fol. 86.
Ipse habuit in Praebendis, cum adhuc in suo Domino essent. Et Coronidis loco
edixit -- c. 39. f. 37.
Quisquis haec pervertere voluerit, perpetuo Anathematizetur.

Quod Anathema reformidas Episcopus Sarum Johannes Regist. Holt. fol. 76.
Jewel, existimavit statuitque, non tantummodo consensu, sed et rogatu suorum
Fratrum, (ab eodem Anathemate sibi pariter metuentium) Veterem Constitutionem
Antecessoris sui Osmundi in integrum esse Restituendam.

. 10. Praemissis (...) hoc unum addo;

Quod sicut Papa Honorius Tertius non approbavit Translationem Ecclesiae Sarum
de Castro Regis ad locum Inferiorem, nisi clausula hac addita Apostolicis
Literis inserta, Regist. Davyson f. 13.
[ Salvis ipsius Ecclesiae Sarum Privilegiis, Dignitatibus, and
Consuetudinibus,] Ita Bonifacius Nonus non omnino confirmavit ipsam
Compositionem toties a nobis decantatam, nisi solenniter interposita hac
notabili Cautione and Condition insignissima, Lib. Stat. cap. 63. fol 68.
[ VISITATIONE and Jurisdiction Decanali in 1. OMNIBUS and per 2. OMNIA,
Decano and Successoribus suis 3. SEMPER salvis.] Si in omnibus, tum in Clauso,
cujus Decanus est Ordinarius in confesso. Si per omnia. tum per Ecclesiam, quae
pars est Clausi Eminentissima. Denique si Semper, tum in quolibet Septennio,
and de septennio in septennium, sed non Duntaxat.

Hinc aut probatur Decanum eximi ab omni Visitatione Episcopali in Ecclesia and
Clauso, aperta vi and virtute Ipsius Compositionis, aut ipsam Compositionem
Sibi ipsi repugnare; contra se ipsam militare; gravissime propriis perire
Pennis; and si Homerico Hemestichio hic uti liceat, -- (...) --

. 11. In the Statute of 25 Edw. 1. A. D. 1296* in Confirmation of Magna Charta
Compare the Statute of 16 Rich. II. c. 5. A. D. 1392. with 25 Edw. I. A D.
1296. and both with the Composition which made against both, 1392.
All things done and Judgments given contrary to the Points of the said
Charter, shall be undone, and holden for naught. Cap. 2. The said Charter is to
be sent under the King's Seal to Cathedral Churches throughout the Realm, there
to remain, and is to be read before the People two times by the Year. Cap. 3.
(with which compare Coke Inst. 2. Parag. 527.) All Archbishops and Bishops
shall pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against all Those that by Word,
Deed, or Counsel, do contrary to the aforesaid Charter, or in any Point break
or undo it. And the said Curses twice a year are to be Denounced and Published
by the Prelates aforesaid. And if the same Prelates, or any of them, be remiss
in the Denuntiation of the said Sentences, the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York for the Time being, shall compel and distrain them to the Execution of
their Duties in Form aforesaid, Cap. 4.

This is over and above the Curse of Osmund.
. 12. In the Statute of 16 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. The Pope's Assumings then in
England are said to have a Tendency to the open Disherison of the Crown, and
Destruction of our Lord the King, his Law, and all his Realm, if Remedy be not
provided. For want of which Remedy then made, it is there added, that) the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm would be avoided at the Pope's Will, in perpetual
Destruction of the Sovereignty of the King our Lord, his Crown, his Regality,
and of All his Realm, which God defend. This repeated Assertion of the Then
House of Commons (. 1.) was assented to, and repeated twice by the Then House
of Lord (. 2.), and All in Reference to Pope Boniface the 9th, who then
presumed to intermeddle in the Cathedral Church of Sarum, and took upon him to
Authorize the Composition there made, even the very same Year wherein the said
Statute was made against him. Unto which Papal Authorization King Richard II.
did either consent, or he did not. If he did not, the Pope hely'd him: If he
did, he therein acted to the open Disherison of his Crown, and contributed too
much to his Deposition.

This was prefixed in Writing to this Piece by some one of its former Readers.
The Sum and Upshot of the Difference between the Bishop and Dean of Sarum, is
briefly This, if there is Any.
THE Dean is of Opinion, That the King and the Bishop have both a Right to give
Prebends, with this Distinction.

The King's Right to give them is Original and Supreme; the Bishop's Right to
give them is Derivative and Subordinate.

Of this Distinction his Lordship does, or does not allow. If he does, his
Lordship is of the Dean's Mind, and the Difference is at an End: If he does
not, the Dean wonders at it; and the more, because the Greatest of Lawyers, and
the Greatest of Divines, do all agree in the said Distinction.

Which is proved in the First Chapter of the Dean's Vindication of the King's
Sovereign Rights. And all besides that, may stand or fall with that
Distinction; or be as if it had never been.

AN INDEX To this BOOK.
AAron, Page 304 Abbendone, Edmund de, Page 291 Abendon, Richard de, Page 331
-- William de, Page 285, 326 Abingdon, John de, Page 311 -- William de, Page
298 Abney, John, Page 244 Abbot, Robert, Page 276 Abraham, Page 291 Abyndon,
John de, Page 327 Adam, Page 288, 304 Addison, Lancelot, Page 332 Adelelmus,
Page 304 Aermyn, Richard de, Page 289 Aiscough, William, Page 274 Akkeburne,
Lawrence de, Page 273 St. Albano, Elias de, Page 289 Alchmund, Page 270 Alcock,
John, Page 310 Alchorn, Edward, Page 236 Aldhelm, Page 269 Alexander, Page 294
Alfar, Page 271 Alfius, Page 270 Allfftan, Page 271 Alfred, Page 270 Alfrick,
Page 271 Alfwold, Page 270 Allix, Peter, Page 294 Alleston, Robert de, Page 301
Alnewyke, William, Page 294 Albert, Joseph, Page 138 Andrews, Nicholas, Page
328 Andrew, Ric. Page 296, 321 Arche, Richard, Page 293 Arena, Andreas Ammonius
de, Page 322 Arundel, Francis, Page 258... John, Page 312, 314 Ashley, Anne,
Page 57... Francis, Page ibid.... Gabriel, Page ibid.... Gertrude, Page 54...
Margaret, Page 55, 58 Asser,.... Page 270 Atwater, William, Page 281 Atwood,
Thomas, Page 186 Aubrey, Thomas, Page 332 St. Aubyn, Anne, Page 213 Audley,
Edmund, Page 274... Richard, Page 287... Robert, Page 303 Axford, John, Page
203... Margery, Page 203... Mary, Page 203, 204 Ayleston, Robert, Page 298,
316, 330 Ayscough, Robert, Page 305, 318, 319... William, Page ibid.
B.
BAber, Benjamin, Page 245... Elizabeth, Page ibid. Babyngton, Henry, Page 329
Backs, Peter, Page 223, 224 Bailul, Josceline de, Page 272 Bainbridge,
Christopher, Page 317, 324, 327 Balgay, Nicholas, Page 307, 333 Baldock, Robert
de, Page 298 Baldwin,... Page 288 Banqueto, William Raymond, Page 314 Barbo,
Peter, Page 296 Bardus, Adrian de Page 327 Barford, Tho. Page 151 Barkesdale,
William, Page 324 Barlow, William, Page 297 Barnaby, Jeremy, Page 333... John,
Page 315 Barn, John, Page 299 Barnes, Bartholomew, Page 210... Hesther, Page
191... Robert, Page 332 Barnston, J. Page 91... Mary Page 90 Basing, Richards
Page 322 Bassingborne, Humphrey de, Page 294 Bates, Roger, Page 329 Bath, Abbey
Church of, Page 162... Library, Page 199, 200 Bave, Hesther, Page 196... John,
Page 202 Bauf, Samuel, Page 194, 195 Baylie, Richard, Page 282, 283 Beach,
Edmund de la, Page 301 Beard, William, Page 206 Beauchamp, Richard, Page 274
Beaufort, Henry, Page 326 Beaumont, Robert, Page 314 Beck, Thomas de, Page 304
Belingham, Edmund, Page 311... John, Page 201 Bello, Richard de, Page 301
Bellomont, Lewis de, Page 291 Bellot, Renatus, Page 227... Thomas, Page 217
Bennet, Patience, Page 46.... William, Page 305.... Walter, Page 287, 300....
William, Page 305 Bear, John de la, Page 327 Berghes, William de, Page 305
Bertrard,.... Page 305 Bevile, Elizabeth, Page 227 Bicovil, William, Page 321
Big, John, Page 206 Billesdon, Nicholas, Page 280 Bilson, Leonard, Page 339
Bingham, Robert de, Page 272 Bird, Elizabeth, Page 58 Birkhead, Daniel, Page
314 Bisse, Robert, Page 317 Bishopston, Henry de, Page 279 Blackborow, Frances,
Page 24 Blanchard, James, Page 183, 185 Blithe, Daniel, Page 328 Bluntesdon,
Henry, Page 304, 305.... Robert, Page 306 Blythe, Godfrey, Page 292, 296....
John, Page 110, 274 Bocton, Thomas de, Page 307 Bone, Robert, Page 329 Bosco,
William de, Page 288 Boteler, Thomas, Page 312 Bottiler, Thomas, Page 295
Bourchier, James, Page 337.... Thomas, Page 337 Bowls, John, Page 282 Bower,
Robert, Page 330 Bowsheld, Thomas, Page 324 Boxall, John, Page 322 Boxton,
Thomas de, Page 331 Boy, Bishop of the Choristers, Page 70, 71, 72, 73, etc.
Bradbridge, Augustine, Page 322.... William, Page 281, 329 Brandeston, Henry de,
Page 273, 279, 304 Braybrooke, Robert, Page 280 Bremsgrove, John, Page 314
Brent, Thomas, Page 27 Brereworth, Stephen, Page 302 Bretton, Thomas, Page 151
Brewer, Lydia, Page 57.... Thomas, Page 209, 250 Brideoake, Ralph, Page 284
Bridges, John, Page 282 Bridport, Giles de, Page 272, 301.... Simon, Page 301,
304 Brightwell, Ralph de, Page 285 Brither, Henry, Page 309 Brithrick,.... Page
270 Brithwin,.... Page ibid. Brithwold,.... Page 271 Bromwich, James, Page 296,
327 Brown, Thomas, Page 280, 302 Brygon, William, Page 321 Bubbewith,
Nicholas, Page 274, 315, 318.... Thomas, Page 316 Buckingham, William de, Page
334 Buckno, William, Page 297 Budden, John, Page 337 Burbach, Thomas, Page 314
Burbank, William, Page 324 Burchet, Thomasina, Page 215 Burd, William, Page 211
Burdon, Walter, Page 326 Burnell, William, Page ibid. Burnet, Gilbert, Page 277
Burton, John de, Page 285 Burton, John, Page 326 Burwardescot, Roger de, Page
298 Bury, Richard de, Page 314 Bush, Anne, Page 268.... John, Page ibid.....
Judith, Page 181 Bushel, Agatha, Page 266.... Edward, Page 262, 266.... John,
Page 267.... Susan, Page 266.... Tobias, Page 262
C.
Camden, William, Page 328 Campegius, Lawrence, Page 275 Capella, Stephen de,
Page 295 Carew, George, Page 287, 328, 332 Carne, Berkeley, Page 235.... Mary,
Page ibid. Carpenter, Henry, Page 342 Carr, Edward, Page 218 Carse, John, Page
313 Carsidony, Anthony, Page 332 Cartwright, William, Page 309 Case, John, Page
311 Cassineto, William Ruffatus de, Page 279 Castle, John, Page 302, 318
Castleton, Philip, Page 258 Caunton, Richard, Page 296 Cergeaux, Michael, Page
305 Chabaum, Thomas de, Page 306 Chadderton, Edmund, Page 296 Chaddleshount,
William de, Page 298 Chambers, John, Page 320, 333, 338 Chamber, John de la,
Page 285 Chapman, Anne, Page 263.... George, Page 264.... John, Page 258....
Peter, Page 264.... Richard, Page 265.... Robert, Page 261.... Susannah, Page
ibid..... William, Page 262, 263 Chapel, John, Page 320 Chaundeler, John,
Page 274, 280, 292 Chaundler, Richard, Page 297, 329 Chedworth, John, Page 299,
312, 326, 333, 343 Cheston, Stephen, Page 313 Cheyne, Edward, Page 281
Chichele, Henry, Page 289, 294, 305, 312 Chichester, John, Page 214.... Robert,
Page 278 Chickwell, Robert, Page 329 Child, William, Page 264 Childrey,
Joshuah, Page 297, 342 Chillingworth, William, Page 290 Chittern, John, Page
295, 299, 326 Clarke, Roger, Page 316 Clayton, Richard, Page 110 Clement,
Vincent, Page 299 Clerk, Thomas, Page 343 Cleyton, Richard, Page 332
Cloterbooke, Giles, Page 135.... Rachel, Page 136 Clown, Richard de, Page 295
Clungeon, Elizabeth, Page 69 Cobham, Thomas, Page. 306 Cockerell, Edmund, Page.
307 Codeford, Philip, Page. 285.... John de, Page. 299.... Ralph de, Page. 334
Coldwell, Thomas, Page. 307 Cole, Henry, Page. 343.... Thomas, Page. 281 Coals,
Dolly, Page. 66.... Dorothy, Page. ibid..... Margaret, Page. 65.... William,
Page. ibid. Collibee, Edward, Page. 203 Collins, Susannah Maria, Page. 91
Colman, Anne, Page. 30.... Edward, Page. 32.... Elleonora, Page. 39....
Frederick Page. ibid. Coleshull, William de, Page. 335 Colet, John, Page. 321
Combs, Sarah, Page. 228 Cook, Mary, Page. 29 Cooth, John, Page. 325 Corbet,
Richard, Page. 315 Corner, William de, Page. 273 Coryndon, John, Page. 310
Cotterell, John, Page. 306, 322 Cottington, Dorothy, Page. 251 Cotton, Henry,
Page. 276, 287, 317, 322, 326 Coveney, Thomas, Page. 329 Coverham, Abraham,
Page. 323 Court, Mary a, Page. 186 Courtney, Peter, Page. 299, 318, 333
Cranfeild, Edward, Page. 262 Craven, Sir Robert, Page. 216 Crawley, Thomas,
Page. 325 Crayford, John, Page. 290, 303, 311, 318 Creed, William, Page. 300,
329 Creting, William, Page. 320 Crew, Philip, Page. 157 Crofts, Herbert, Page.
332 Crull, Robert, Page. 324 Crump, Thomas, Page. 309, 324 Culpepper, Martin,
Page. 303 Curll, Walter, Page. 329 Curteys, John, Page. 313 Cusacke, Robert,
Page. 244
D.
DAniel, Nicholas, Page. 326 Davenant, Edward, Page. 125, 303, 319, 328...
John, Page. 126, 276, 293 Davison, John, Page. 315 Dauntsey, Dr. John, Page.
257 Davie, Henry, Page. 206 Davyson, John, Page. 281 Deane, Henry, Page. 274
Deel, Francis, Page. 290 Denefrith,.... Page. 269 Denis, Anthony, Page. 342
Derby, John, Page. 311 Dilworth, Thomas, Page. 307, 322 Dogett, John, Page. 289
Domerham, Nicholas, Page. 318 Dove, Francis, Page. 158 Douglass, Anne, Page.
219.... Charles Page. ibid. Dowke, John, Page. 336 D'Oyly, Edmund, Page. 206
Drake, John, Page. 61.... Margaret, Page. 61.... Richard, Page. 60, 62, 291,
311 Drokensford, John de, Page. 320 Druce, Alice, Page. 202.... Richard, Page.
ibid. Duck, John. Page. 296 Dudley, Richard, Page. 331.... William, Page. 343
Duke, James, Page. 64.... Mary, Page. 63 Duppa, Bryan, Page. 276, 290 Durell,
John, Page. 311 Dyer, Elizabeth, Page. 138.... Genevera, Page. 137
E.
EAlshstan,.... Page. 270 Earl, John, Page. 277, 291 Eboraco, Radulphus de,
Page. 288, 307 Eborard,... Page. 294 St. EDMUNDS, Church in SALISBURY, Page.
141 Edmunds, John, Page. 290 Eedes, Richard, Page. 342 Effington, Thomas, Page.
310 Elmar,.... Page. 270 Elwold,... Page. ibid. Ely, Thomas, Page. 332 Elyon,
William, Page. 316 Elyot, Robert, Page. 307 Ellyott, William, Page. 289
Embleburne, Thomas, Page. 306 Emwell, John, Page. 287 Ergham, Ralph de, Page.
305 Erghum, Ralph, Page. 273 Ernele, Walter, Page. 253 Estmond, John, Page. 331
Ethelbald,... Page. 270 Etheleage,... Page. ibid. Ethelnold,... Page. 269
Ethelricke,.... Page. 270 Ethelsius,.... Page. ibid. Ethelstane,.... Page. 271
Ethelward,... Page. 270 Evans, Anne, Page. 247.... Lewis, Page. 340
Eustachius,.... Page. 278 Ewre, William, Page. 296 Air, Sir William, Page. 93
Eyton, James, Page. 230
F.
FArgis, Betrand de Page. 279 Farley, William Page. 327 Farmer, Edward Page.
290 Feak, John Page. 154 Ferdinandus, Gondesalvus Page. 322 Finch, Anne Page.
221, 222... Edward Page. 300, 318, 322 Fi^er, Samuel Page. 309 Flower, Alice
Page. 146.... George Page. 145.... John Page. 146 Fodering, William de Page.
335 Foliot, Hugh Page. 294 Ford, Jane, Page. 191.... John, Page. Ibid.
Fordhere,.... Page. 269 Fotherby, Martin, Page. 276 Fountney, John, Page. 333
Fox, Edward, Page. 305..... John, Page. 335, 336.... Richard, Page. 315, 324
Frampton, Mary, Page. 248, 249... Robert, Page. 339 Frank, Thomas, Page. 286
Freke, Edmund, Page. 281 From, Jane, Page. 61 Frowde, Sir Philip, Page. 245,
246 Fullborne, William, Page. 315 Fuller, John, Page. 319.... Nicholas Page.
340.... Thomas Page. 327, 332
G
GAndavo, Iswyn de, Page. 285, 298.... Simon de, Page. 273 Ganstead, Simon,
Page. 299 Gandy, John, Page. 339 Garbrand, John, Page. 319, 331, 344 Gardener,
Dorothy, Page. 115... Francisca, Page. Ibid.... James, Page. 338... Margaret,
Page. 117... Thomas, Page. Ibid. Garrard, Edward, Page. 116.... Elizabeth,
Page. Ibid..... Florentia, Page. 116 Geddes, Michael, Page. 291 Geldewin,
Savaricus Fitz, Page. Ibid. Geoffrey, William, Page. 290 Geoffry,.... Page.
294, 301 Geraldus, Page. 285 Geste, Edmund, Page. 97 Gheaste Edmund, Page. 275
Gibbes, Walter Page. 254 Gilberd, Robert, Page. 286 Giliis, Silas de, Page. 319
Gilbert, Robert, Page. 318 Glanvill, Joseph, Page. 247 Glass, Elizabeth, Page.
228.... William, Page. ibid. Glover, Thomas, Page. 134 Glynn, William, Page.
292 Godfrey, Charles, Page. 180, 218 Godewyke, John, Page. 316 Goldwell, James,
Page. 280.... John Page. 276.... Nicholas Page. 336 Good, Henry, Page. 135,
342.... Margaret Page. 135.... Marmaduke Page. 332.... Thomas Page. 134
Goodwin, William, Page. 337 Gordon, John, Page. 99, 107, 282 Gorges, Sir
Thomas, Page. 83.... Thomas Page. 342 Goth, Reymund de la, Page. 279 Grace,
John de la, Page. 330 Greece, Roger de la, Page. 298 Greensil, Edward, Page. 233
Gregor, Thomasina, Page. 226 Gregory, John, Page. 70, 341 Gresley, Henry, Page.
64 Gray, William, Page. 303, 327 Grosthead, Robert, Page. 298 Groves, William,
Page. 323 Gunterius,... Page. 294 Gunthorp, John, Page. 310, 316 Gurganny,
John, Page. 341 Gwynn, Thomas, Page. 287 Gyare, Elizabeth, Page. 187, 188 189
H.
HAckluyt, Giles, Page. 307 Hadsy, Gracia, Page. 153.... John, Page. 152
Hakeney, John de, Page. 321, 322 Hales, Christopher, Page. 342 Hallum, Robert,
Page. 274, 316 Hamilton, William, Page. 227 Hanborough, Henry Page. 286
Harburgh, Henry, Page. 292, 318 Harda, Henry de, Page. 335 Harding, Thomas,
Page. 293 Hardwick, Charles Littleton, Page. 48.... Edward, Page. 99, 338
Harewell, Robert, Page. 316 Harris, Catherine, Page. 52.... Dorothy Page.
53.... Gertrude, Page. ibid..... James, Page. 56.... Thomas. Page. 54 Harrison,
William, Page. 233 Harwell, John, Page. 301 Harvey, Catherine, Page. 24....
Edward, Page. 25 Hawkins, George, Page. 114 Hawkyns, Robert, Page. 341....
Thomas, Page. 287 Hawles, Anne, Page. 44.... Anthony Page. 317.... Elizabeth
Page. 42.... Frances, Page. 49.... Thomas, Page. 42 Hawthorne, Adrian, Page.
340 Hay, Robert, Page. 42 Hayman, Richard, Page. 315 Hayward, Elizabeth, Page.
241.... Henry, Page. ibid..... Robert, Page. ibid..... Samuel, Page. ibid,
Hearst, Edward, Page. 50.... Elizabeth, Page. 52.... Margaret, Page. 51....
Mary, Page. ibid..... Robert, Page. 52.... Sarah, Page. 51.... William, Page.
50 Heath, John, Page. 208.... William, Page. ibid. Hedges, Henry, Page. 103
Hernerford, William Page. 337 Henchman, Eleonora, Page. 150..... Humphrey,
Page. 277, 287, 325, 339, 344.... Thomas, Page. 300, 332, 337 Hennage, George,
Page. 213, 318 Henry, Walter, Page. 295 Henry,..... Page. 278, 284 Herbert,....
Page. 304 Herbert, The Dormitory, of the Family of the Earls of Pembroke. Page.
107 Herford, Robert, Page. 288 Herman.... Page. 271 Hertford, Edward Earl of,
Page. 86, 87, 88... Richard, Page. 89.... Thomas, Page. 90 Hertford, Robert de,
Page. 279 Hernewald,... Page. 269 Herny, Walter, Page. 314 Heron, Anne, Page.
267 Heskins, Thomas, Page. 290 Hethcott, Ralph, Page. 327 Hethe, John, Page.
315 Heytham, Kalph de Page. 288 Hicks, Anne, Page. 225.... Walter, Page.
ibid..... William, Page. 339 Hilley, Richard, Page. 292 Hill, Adam, Page. 287,
309, 325.... Gartrudis, Page. 152.... Marshall, Page. 148, 149, 150....
Richard, Page. 314.... Thomas, Page. 317........ Page. 26 Hinton, John, Page.
340.... William, Page. 43 Hispania, James de, Page. 329 Hobart, Henry, Page.
219 Hobbes, William, Page. 315 Hobbs, Anne, Page. 266.... Emanuel, Page. 265
Hody, John, Page. 305 Holes, Andrew, Page. 289 Holland, John, Page. 295....
Thomas, Page. 341 Holles, Thomas, Page. 316 Hollinsworth, John, Page. 218
Holmes, Rebecca, Page. 100.... Richard, Page. 315.... William, Page. 101 Holt,
Catherine, Page. 49.... John, Page. ibid. Hooker, Richard, Page. 307, 334
Horton, Francis, Page. 311, 313 Hoskyn, Charles, Page. 183.... Lydia, Page.
ibid. Hotest, Thomas de, Page. 305 Hotman, John, Page. 328 Houghton, Edward,
Page. 46.... John, Page. 325 Hubert,..... Page. 284 Hulling, John, Page. 307
Hulton, Ralph, Page. 311 Humbald,.... Page. 294 Humphrey,... Page. 294, 298,
304 Hungerford, Sir Giles, Page. 159..... Margaret, Page. 60 Hunt, Durantius,
Page. 70.... Edith, Page. 137.... Thomas, Page. 136 Hutchins, Edward, Page. 319
Hyde, Alexander, Page. 31, 277, 307, 325.... Barbara, Page. 37.... Catherine,
Page. 36.... Edward, Page. 35.... Elizabeth, Page. 30, 33.... Henry, Page. 34,
35.... Laurence, Page. 37.... Richard, Page. 307, 340.... Robert, Page. 37,
38.... Thomas, Page. 288, 328, 338, 339, 343
I.
JAmes, Charles, Page. 235... John, Page. 307.... Thomas, Page. 293 Iden,
Henry, Page. 328 Jecock, Samuel, Page. 66 Jewel, John. Page. 275, 319
Joceline, Reginal Fitz, Page. 294, 298 John,.... Page. 288, 291, 306 Johnson,
Benjamin, Page. 317 Johnston, Father, Page. 224 Jordan,.... Page. 278, 291, 294
Joyner, Robert, Page. 309 Ivelcestre, Adam, de, Page. 279 Ivy, Sir George,
Page. 179.... Susannah, Page. ibid..... William, Page. 289
K
KEeling, Jane, Page. 151 Keigwin, James, Page. 190 Kelsey, Joseph, Page. 118,
297 Kenion, Thomas, Page. 235 Kent, Elizabeth, Page. 52... Richard, Page. 308,
330 Kenton, Herbert, Page. 100... Susannah, Page. 99 Kerevil, Robert de, Page.
291 Key, Thomas, Page. 338 Keymer, Gilbert, Page. 292 Killingworth, John, Page.
205 King, Oliver, Page. 302 Kingston, Anthony, Page. 246.... R.... Page. 318
Kinnamon, Henry, Page. 316 Kington, Roger de, Page. 295 Kirkeby, John de, Page.
305 Kirkby, William, Page. 331 Kirkham, Robert, Page. 287 Mr. Knill,.... Page.
185 Dr. Kymer,.... Page. 124 Kymer, Gilbert, Page. 280
L.
LAder, Anne, Page. 205 Laking, Nicholas de, Page. 306 Lambert, Anne, Page.
32.... Ruth, Page. 112.... Thomas, Page. 93, 297, 30.... Dionys, Page. 105
Lancaster, Thomas, Page. 293 Lane, Elizabeth, Page. 217 Langford, Charles,
Page. 47 Langrith, Robert, Page. 321 Langton, Ralph, Page. 316.... Robert,
Page. 305, 318.... Thomas, Page. 274 Lapworth, Edward, Page. 250 Larmer,
Herbert, Page. 146.... Rebecca, Page. 147 Lathom, Paul, Page. 341 Latimer,
William, Page. 342 Laugharne, Rowland, Page. 25 Laurence, Giles, Page. 300....
John, Page. ibid..... Thomas, Page. 328 Laws, Thomas, Page. 58 Leach, Thomas,
Page. 300, 317 Lee, Edward, Page. 290, 336.... John, Page. 293 Leman, Dorothy,
Page. 197 Lentwarden, Richard, Page. 335 Lenyton, Edward, Page. 296 Lexington,
Henry de, Page. 291 Leyett, Richard, Page. 280 Leyott, Richard, Page. 325
Light, Susannah, Page. 114 Lilly, Peter, Page. 325 Lilly, Edmund, Page. 300
Lincoln, John, Page. 312, 330 Lineden, John, Page. 299 Lloyd, William Page. 342
Lobenham, William de, Page. 306 Lockey, Thomas, Page. 310, 313 London, Barbara,
Page. 67 Louthorp, George, Page. 292 Low, Hellena, Page. 33.... John, Page.
109 Loyd, Roger, Page. 234 Luffenham, Robert, Page. 295 Lulbenham, Will. de,
Page. 306 Lundon, John, Page. 336 Lupset, Thomas, Page. 335 Lupton, Roger,
Page. 336 Lushington, Thomas, Page. 315 Luttrell, John, Page. 311 Lynch,
Aylmer, Page. 338.... John, Page. 311.... Stephen, Page. 218 Lynewood, William,
Page. 315
M.
MAckay, Aeneas, Page. 214 Mackworth, John, Page. 305 Magot, Richard, Page. 299
Mallet, Francis, Page. 275 Manning, Thomas, Page. 292 Marshfeild, Hugh, Page.
325 Maplet, Anne, Page. 254, 256 Mardefeld, Michael de, Page. 307 Marler,
Thomas, Page. 297 Marsh, Samuel, Page. 335 Marshall, George, Page. 148
Martinus, Francis Stus Page. 292 Martin, Edmund, Page. 314.... John, Page.
334.... Nicholas, Page. 309.... Richard, Page. 302 Martival, Roger de, Page.
273, 333 Martyn, Thomas, Page. 196, 313 Masham, Damaris, Page. 212, 216 Mason,
Edmund, Page. 282.... Charles, Page. 313.... Robert, Page. 242, 243.... Thomas,
Page. 310 Masters, Elizabeth, Page. 267.... John, Page. ibid. Matrevars, Alice,
Page. 202 Matthews, Tobias, Page. 287, 339 May, Francis, Page. 308 Medeford,
Walter, Page. 289, 295, 302, 330 Mepham, William de, Page. 314 Merick, William,
Page. 331 Merrick, Thomas, Page. 219 Merton, William de, Page. 301 Metford,
Richard, Page. 273 Mews, Peter, Page. 303 Micham, Simon de, Page. 279
Middelton, Gilbert de, Page. 326, 333 Migfred,.... Page. 270 Migliorveccio,
James Anthony, Page. 192.... Peter Joseph, Page. ibid. Millbourne, John de,
Page. 329 Miphin, Will de, Page. 331, 335 Mitchell, Edward, Page. 309 Moleynes,
Adam, Page. 280, 296 Mompesson, Barbara, Page. 127.... Charles, Page. 128....
Katherine, Page. ibid..... Sir Richard, Page. ibid..... Sir Thomas, Page. ibid.
Monte Sancti Sylvestri, Arnoldus de, Page. 280 Montacute, Thomas, Page. ibid.
Moreland, William, Page. 313 Moreton, Robert, Page. 327 Morgan, Elizabeth,
Page. 182.... Meredith, Page. 317.... Richard, Page. 182 Morris, Stephen, Page.
67 Morton, John, Page. 302, 322, 330, 343 Morysyn, Richard, Page. 343 Mot,
Samuel, Page. 331 Mottrum, Adam de, Page. 286 Mountague, James, Page. 238,
239.... Sir Henry, Page. 217 Mulcaster, Richard, Page. 344 Mullens, Thomas,
Page. 25
N.
NAish, Hugh, Page. 341 Nassington, William de, Page. 310 Nevill, Robert, Page.
274 Nicholas, Matthew, Page. 324 Nicolls, Mary, Page. 252 Norman, Thomas, Page.
312 Normanton, William, Page. 315, 321, 340, 344 Northborow, Michael de, Page.
329, 332 Northburgh, Ralph, Page. 343 Norton, John, Page. 289, 295, 302, 314,
326 Noyes, Nathaniel, Page. 158
O.
ODo, Severus, Page. 271 Oking Robert, Page. 296 Oldham, Hugh, Page. 310
Oliver, John, Page. 339 Onslow, Edward, Page. 322 Osbert,.... Page. 278
Osborne, William, Page. 317 Osmund,.... Page. 271 Osulf,.... Page. ibid.
Overton, William, Page. 344 Owen, Richard, Page. 302 Oxeneford, Henry de, Page.
278
P.
PAce, Richard, Page. 305, 320, Pade, Reymund, Page. 281 Pain, William, Page.
317 Parker, Thomas, Page. 290 Parry, Henry, Page. ibid..... Hugh, Page. 299
Pasch, Thomas, Page. 331 Paslew, John, Page. 315, 319 Paseley, John, Page. 331
Pate, Robert, Page. 229 Pays, Thomas, Page. 305 Pearce, Dorothy, Page. 260....
Hester, Page. ibid..... John, Page. 259.... William, Page. 260 Pearson, John,
Page. 334 Pierce, Anne, Page. 187.... Charles, Page. 188.... Elizabeth, Page.
186, 187.... Robert, Page. 187, 188, 317.... Susannah, Page. 186.... Thomas,
Page. 284 Pelling, John, Page. 237 Percy, William, Page. 312 Perin,
Christopher, Page. 340 Periton, Peter de, Page. 304 Petow, Peter, Page. 275
Phelps, Richard, Page. 155 Phelips, Robert, Page. 178 Phillips, Joseph, Page.
182.... William, Page. 328 Philip,.... Page. 288 Pickenham, William, Page. 335,
343 Pickering, Charles, Page. 323, 328 Piers, John, Page. 276, 281 Pickeover,
Ralph, Page. 297 Pinnock, John, Page. 321 Pitman, Alicia, Page. 150.... Edmund,
Page. 151 Pocock, Edward, Page. 321, 331, 341.... John, Page. 254 Pole, Edward,
Page. 287.... Reginald, Page. 335, 343 Pollard, John, Page. 300, 328 Polton,
Thomas, Page. 325 Poole, Hannah, Page. 181.... John, Page. ibid..... Mary,
Page. ibid..... Nicholas, Page. 309 Poor, Herbert, Page. 272.... Richard,
Page. 272, 278 Potyn, William, Page. 295 Pouldon, Richard, Page. 210 Powell
David, Page. 328.... Edward, Page. 312, 329.... Susannah, Page. 133 Pratty,
Richard, Page. 289 Prentys, Edward, Page. 286 Preston, William de, Page. 301
Priaulx, Anne, Page. 111, 112.... John, Page. 110, 111, 297, 333. Price, John,
Page. 327 Prior, Christopher, Page. 337 Proast, Jonas, Page. 303 Proctor,
George, Page. 336.... James, Page. 323.... Samuel, Page. 339 Pie, William,
Page. 303 Pyle, Philadelphia, Page. 98 Pyper, Granville, Page. 229
Q.
QUeendon, Ralph de, Page. 299 Querendon, Ralph de, Page. 307
R.
RAndolph, Joan, Page. 207.... Robert, Page. ibid. Ranulfus,.... Page. 291
Rashleigh, Nathaniel, Page. 154 Ratcliff, Roger, Page. 296 Rawlins, Henry,
Page. 296, 320, 321, 327 Rawlinson, John, Page. 332.... Thomas, Page. 348
Rawson, Richard, Page. 321 Raynsford, Robert, Page. 332 Read, Innocent, Page.
317 Reed, John, Page. 257 Reeve, Catherine, Page. 223.... George, Page.
ibid..... Henry, Page. 222.... Mary, Page. ibid..... Spencer, Page. ibid.
Richard,.... Page. 298 Richards, Prudentia, Page. 156.... Thomas, Page.
ibid.... William, Page. 157, 297, 303 Ridley, Mary, Page. 201 Robert,.... Page.
278, 284 Robertes, Christian, Page. 28.... Francis, Page. 28, 29.... Jane,
Page. 28.... Punchardon, Page. 29 Robertson, Thomas, Page. 293 Robinson,
Charles, Page. 338.... John, Page. 307 Rochefoucauld, Frederick, Page. 215
Rodeburne, Thomas, Page. 327 Roger,... Page. 272, 278, 298, 301 Rogers, John,
Page. 319.... Samuel, Page. 328 Rope, Thomas, Page. 319 Rotherham, Thomas,
Page. 333 Roucliffe, Guido, Page. 326 Rowthall Thomas, Page. 281 Ruggenhall,
Robert, Page. 305 Russel, John, Page. 327.... R.... Page. 338.... William,
Page. 312 Ryves, John, Page. 303, 323.... Robert, Page. 316
S.
SAdler, Elinor, Page. 40, 41 Sadler, Ursula, Page. 45 Salernitanus, Gulielmus
de, Page. 302 Salladin, Anne, Page. 147.... Herbert, Page. ibid. Sall, Arthur,
Page. 312 Salutus, Boniface de, Page. 285.... George de. Page. ibid. Sambrooke,
Elizabeth, Page. 70.... Francis, Page. 69.... John, Page. ibid. ^ampson,
Richard, Page. 293 Sandys, Milo, Page. 44 Sarisburiensis, Goodwin, Page. 285
Sarum, Roger de, Page. 284 SARUM Prebendal Corpse in that Church. Page. 310...
Aulton,.. South, Page. 310... Aulton,.. North, Page. ibid.... Axford,.... Page.
311.... Bedminster and Radeclyve, Page. 312.... Bedwynd,... Page. 313...
Bedmister,.. Prima, Page. 313.. Bedmister,.. Secunda, Page. 314...
Bishopston,.... Page. 315.... Bytton,... Page. 316.... Chardstock,... Page.
317... Cherminster and Bear, Page. 318... Chute and Chesenbury, Page. 319...
Comb and Harnham, Page. 320... Durneford,.... Page. ibid.... Faringdon,...
Page. 321... Fordington and Writhlington. Page. 322... Grantham,.. North, Page.
323... Gillingham,.. Major, Page. 323.. Gillingham,.. Minor, Page. 324...
Grantham,.. South, Page. 324... Grimston and Yatminster, Page. 325...
Highworth,... Page. 325... Horn,... Page. 326... Husborn and Burbach, Page.
327... Ilfracombe,... Page. 328... Lyme and Halstock, Page. 329... Major pars
Altaris, Page. 330... Minor pars Altaris, Page. 331... Netherbury, in Ecclesia,
Page. 332.... Netherbury in Terra, Page 333.... Netherhaven, Page 333....
Preston, Page 334.... Ramesbury, Page 334.... Roscombe, Page 335.... Rotesfen,
Page 335... Shipton subtus Whichwood, Page 336.... Slape, Page 337....
Strafford, Page 338.... Stratton, Page 338.... Teynton-Regis cum Yalmeton, Page
339.... Torleton, Page 339.... Ulfcomb, Page 340.... Warminster, Page 340....
Winterborn-Earles, Page 341.... Woodford and Willsford, Page 342.... Yatminster
prima, Page 342.... Yatminster secunda, Page 343.... Yatesbury, Page 343 St.
Barbe, Francis, Page 27.... John, Page 28.... Thomas, Page 102 Saunders, Anne,
Page 204.... John, Page ibid..... Mary, Page 205 Savoy, Peter de, Page 279....
Thomas, Page 298 Sayer, Joseph, Page 315 Sayntlesse, Thomas, Page 286 Sayward,
John, Page 155 Scammell, Walter, Page 272, 279, 285, 291, 301 Scarborough,
Edmund, Page 326 Seaward, Hen. Page 343 Securis, Thomas, Page 314, 343
Sedgwick, John, Page 150 Selby, Nicholas de, Page 298 Selton, William de, Page
343 Serlo,.... Page 278 Seward, Henry, Page 309 Sey, Edmund, Page 112 Seymore,
Anne, Page 43 Sharp, Lionel, Page 303.... John, Page ibid..... Richard, Page
63 Shaxton, Nicholas, Page 275, 293 Shellick, John, Page 335 Shepley,
Bartholomey, Page 341 Sheppard, John, Page 309 Sheriff, William, Page 331
Sherman, John, Page 297 Sherwood, Henry, Page 192.... John, Page ibid.....
Mary, Page ibid. Shireburne,.... Page 270 Sidenham, Simon, Page 295, 302
Sigelm,.... Page 270 Singewike, William, Page 132, 306 Siricius,.... Page 271
Sketley, John, Page 334 Skypp, John, Page 306.... William, Page 306 Sloan,
William, Page 154 Slye, Edmund, Page 321 Smedmore, Johanna, Page 131 Smith,
Andrew, Page 226.... Eleanor, Page 227.... John, Page 331......... Page 330
Snachenburgh, Helena, Page 84 Sommerhull, William, Page 307 Sotwell, William
de, Page 298 South, John, Page 288 Southam, John, Page 302.... Thomas, Page
ibid. Southouse, Henry, Page 230.... Thomas, Page 231 Sparrow, Alexander, Page
295 302.... Anne, Page 203 Spencer, Edward, Page 101.... Prudentia, Page ibid.
Spinckes, Nathaniel, Page 330 Sprint, John, Page 293, 300, 316 Stacey, Richard,
Page 220 Stafford, John, Page 289, 295, 318 Stallworth, Simon, Page 287
Stanbridge, Giles, Page 307 Stanford, Ralph, Page 330 Stanley, James, Page 287,
313.... Mary, Page 113 Stanton, Richard, Page 333 Staunton, Thomas de, Page 285
306 Stephen,.... Page 295 Stephens, Jeremy, Page 328.... John, Page 309
Stevens, Thomas, Page 293 Steward, Richard, Page 311 Stibbs, Alice, Page
260.... John, Page ibid. Still, John, Page 323, 342 Stillingdon, Robert, Page
302 Stokesley, John, Page 305 Stokys, John, Page 286 Stopyngdon, John, Page 305
Stratford, Ralph de, Page 292 Straytbarret, James, Page 310 Stretton John, Page
312 Stubbs, Henry, Page 239, 240.... John, Page 324 Sudbury, Simon de, Page 289
Sugden, William, Page 224 Sutton, Henry, Page 292, 319, 336 Swanton, Anne, Page
56.... Dulcibella, Page 104.... Elizabeth, Page 105, 113.... Francis, Page 104,
259, 260.... Jane, Page 104, 259, 261.... Laurence, Page 105.... William, Page
104 Swayne, Robert, Page 185 Sweit, Sir Giles, Page 337 Swindon, Thomas, Page
310 Swineley, Christopher, Page 303 Swithelm,.... Page 270 Swymmer, Aune, Page
233 Sydenham, George, Page 296.... Simon, Page 280 Sylvester, John, Page 299
Symondsburgh, John, Page 292, 299.
T.
TAlbott, Edward, Page 304.... William, Page 277 Tanner, Thomas, Page 159
Tatham, Robert, Page 335 Taunton, Richard, Page 299 Tailor, John, Page 232
Terrant, Jeremiah, Page 334 Terry,.... Page 330 Teshmaker, William, Page 220
Thatcher, Peter, Page 159 Thistlewayte, Gabriel, Page 339 Thomas,.... Page 299
Thomson, John, Page 331 Thornborough, Edward, Page 334.... Giles, Page 307
Thorp, John, Page 319 Tichborne, Michael, Page 244 Tilheto, Gerald de, Page 298
Tingwick, Nicholas, Page 330 Tofte, William, Page 308 Tonstall, Cuthbert, Page
281, 320 Tookie, Bartholomew, Page 140 Tooker, William, Page 331 Tounson,
Margaret, Page 125.... Robert, Page 276 Townsend, Roger, Page 290 Townson,
John, Page 326.... William, Page 331 Triplet, Thomas, Page 334 Tryme, Anne,
Page 197.... Elenor, Page ibid. Tucker, John, Page 68.... Joseph, Page 319
Turberville, Anne, Page 24, 252.... Dawbigny, Page 22, 23 Tutt, Robert, Page
308
V.
VAleyns, Theobald de, Page 294 Vannes, Peter, Page 281, 313, 324, 336 Varesio,
Tydo de, Page 301 Vavasour, John, Page 257.... Katherine, Page 258 Vaughan,
Francisca, Page 44.... Frederick, Page ibid..... Walter, Page 48, 49 Vause,
Nicholas, Page 331 Vennard, Anne, Page 145.... George, Page 144.... Mary, Page
144.... Richard, Page ibid. Venner, Dr. Tobias, Page 198 199 Vesey, John, Page
311.... Robert, Page 310 Villers, Betty, Page 221 Vincent, John, Page 334
Ullerston, Richard, Page 312 Upton, Nicholas, Page 286 Ursinis, Marinus de,
Page 299 Ursinus, Reynald, Page 280 Urswyke, Christopher, Page 300, 313
W.
WAde, Richard, Page 314 Wakeman, Richard, Page 240.... Theodore, Page 241
Walden, Roger, Page 315, 326 Walesby, William, Page 322 Walker, William, Page
309 Waller, Jane, Page 193 Wallis, Mary, Page 183.... William, Page ibid.
Wally, John, Page 209 Walter,.... Page 284 Walter, Hubert, Page 272 Waltham,
John, Page 273.... Robert, Page 286 Ward, Seth, Page 118, 119, 120, 121, 122,
123, 124, 277, 291, 294, 300, 320 Warlewast, Robert, Page 278 Warner, John,
Page 340 Warton, Mary, Page 153 Wastell, Margarett, Page 64 Watson, Richard,
Page 317, 341 Webb, William, Page 207, 321 Welewick, Thomas de, Page 285
Wellborn, John, Page 286 Wenda, William de, Page 279 284.... Francisca, Page
133 Wentworth, Lady, Page 212 Westby, George, Page 292, 313 West, Richard, Page
303.... William, Page 309 Wetenhall, Anne, Page 228 Whitby, Daniel, Page 288,
328, 334, 344.... Richard, Page 292 White, Samuel, Page 214.... Thomas, Page
98, 290, 293, 303, 340, 344 Whitechurch, John, Page 299, 311, 327 Whitwell,
Francisca, Page 100.... Dulcibella, Page 102.... Jana, Page 103 Wibert,....
Page 269 Wickham, Nicholas, Page 299 William,.... Page 289, 304 Williams,
Henry, Page 312.... John, Page 282 Wilson, Elizabeth, Page 139.... Stephen,
Page 296 Wilton, Stephen, Page 315 Wimundus,.... Page 306 Winchelsey, John de,
Page 316 330 Winter, Thomas, Page 289, 313 Winterborne, Thomas, Page 321
Winton, Richard de, Page 316 Wise, Jane, Page 132 Witherig, William, Page 214
Wocumb, Giles de, Page 301 Woodville, Lionel, Page 274, 319 Woodward, Robert,
Page 284, 291, 300 Worth, Richard de, Page 306, 310.... Robert de, Page 321
Wotton, Matthew, Page 293 Wright, Walter, Page 323 Wyatt, Thomas, Page ibid.
Wyke, Nicholas de, Page 307 Wykeham, Nicholas, Page 289.... William de, Page
312 Wykehampton, Robert de, Page 272, 279 Wyle, Henry de la, Page 288, 320,
322, 331.... Nicholas de la, Page 285.... Walter de la, Page 141, 160, 272,
304, 306 Wylton, William, Page 289 Wyvill, Robert, Page 96, 273.... Walter,
Page 292
Y.
YEate, Cornelius, Page 300 York, William, Page 223, 272 Young, Edward, Page
117, 284, 324 Younger, John, Page 284, 342
Z.
ZOuch, Richard, Page 322.... William, Page 337
FINIS.

