A Prophylactick FROM DISLOYALTY IN THESE Perilous Times.

IN A LETTER To the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God,
Herbert, by Divine Providence, Lord Bishop of Hereford.

To which (at some distance) will be added A Short Discourse upon The Anchor of
the Soul of the said LORD BISHOP.

LICENSED, Aug. 13. 1688.

The wrath of a King is as Messengers of Death; but a wise man will pacify it,
Prove. 16.14. Whosoever provokes him to anger, sins against his own Soul, Chap.
20.2. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that
are given to change, Chap. 24.21. I counsel thee to keep the King's
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2.

LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers Hall, 1688.

A Prophylactick from Disloyalty in these Perilous Times, etc.
Right Reverend Father in God,
BEing one of those Thousands to whom your Lordship's Short Discourse,
concerning the Reading his Majesty's late Declaration in the Churches, has
brought Conviction and Contentment; I think it my Duty to give your Lordship my
very humble and hearty Thanks, for defending so many Sons of the Church of
England, from the great Sin of Disobedience to God's Vicegerent; into which
they might have fallen, with a World of blind Guides, had they not happily been
upheld by your Lordship's Example and Discourse, which is indeed very short,
but withal very sufficient, for the attaining of those prudent and pious Ends,
by which your Lordship was induced to Pen, and Print it.

Together with my said Thanks, I humbly present Another Discourse to your
Lordship's Patronage and Protection, grounded upon the same Text, and the same
Authority of St. Peter, which represented it self unto your Lordship as an
Anchor whereby to fix and hold fast your Soul, and compose your Conscience, (
p. 5.) to which is added the equal Authority of St. Paul, and the yet greater
Authority both of the Precept and the Example of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in
his Person and by his Apostles, has made Obedience to Higher Powers, and most
especially to the Supreme, in whatsoever he commands which God does no where
forbid, a principal Doctrine of the Gospel; A Fundamental of Christianity; A
great Essential to all Religion; And (I crave leave to add,) the very greatest
Characteristick, whereby a Genuine Son of our most Holy Mother, The Church of
England, is to be known; even our Heartiness of Submission to every Ordinance
of man and that as well 1 Pet. 2.13.
for the Lord's sake, as for our own; not only for fear of wrath, but for Romans
13.5.
Conscience sake.

Why I choose to call this a principal Doctrine of the Gospel, a Fundamental of
Christianity, and the great Essential to all Religion, ^ seem to my self to
have so many and great Reasons, that if they were every where urged and laid to
Heart, (especially by the Parties who are the least aware of them, but most
concerned to take them in,) they might suffice to put an end to those numerous
Schisms and Part-takings, which now do threaten to put an end to our whole
Religion. Your Lordship knows better than I, that the Doctrine of Obedience to
God's Vicegerent upon Earth, is certainly the aptest of any other, (next to
That of our Obedience to God Himself, whereof This Doctrine is a most necessary
Part too,) to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace: and to
congregate into one Body the most disjoynted and scattered Members in Church,
and State. A Doctrine laid for this purpose by God the Father from the
Foundation of the World, and that in the Law of the first Creation. A Doctrine
propagated by Moses, as taught by God to teach others. A Doctrine perfected by
Christ, as by the Wisdom of the Father, who prayed his Followers might be One,
even as his Father and He were One: which yet without Obedience to this very
Doctrine can never be. A Doctrine inculcated and enforced by God the Holy
Ghost, as by The Spirit of Love and Meekness, of Peace and Union. A Doctrine
extended to all Authority upon Earth, not only Regal in the first Place, but
Ecclesiastical in the second. A Doctrine in absolute Opposition to the Church
and Court of Rome, because to the Hildebrandine Doctrine, Deposing Kings, and
freeing Subjects from their Allegiance, and so Authenticating Rebellion against
God himself in his Vicegerents. To sum up all, in a Word, There is not a
Doctrine in all the Gospel, either more earnestly, or more assiduously, either
more plainly, or more expressly prescribed to us, (and that under the pain of
Damnation too,) than That of our Uniform Obedience to all that are over us in
Authority, and above All, to the Supreme, from whom all inferior and
subordinate Authority is derived. I say to All; not only to the Best, ( the
Good and Gentle) but as well to the Worst, 1 Pet. 2.18.
and most Froward Governors.

For with your Lordship's Approbation, I beg leave to say, It is not only most
foolishly, but most nefariously pretended, (and that by some in these Dregs of
Time, acted by that unclean Spirit, which now is every where working in the
Children of Disobedience, that the Piety, or Impiety; the Religion, or
Irreligion of them that are over us in the Lord, can either widen or contract
our Divine Obligation to strict Obedience. For never was any Incarnate Devil
more incomparably impious than those Emperors of Rome, Tiberius, and Nero whom
yet our Savior and St. Paul commanded their Followers to obey, and obeyed
themselves. For Obedience to God's Anointed being of Divine Right, strongly
founded upon the Will, and the Word of God, and even a Part of our Obedience to
God Himself, (whilst it is paid to that Authority which God has commanded us to
pay an Obedience to,) cannot possibly be due to the Men, as Men, or to the
Good, as they are Good; but to the Magistrates, or Masters, reduplicative, as
they are Such. It Is due to the Governors, as they are Governors, and as the
Ordinance of God; Romans 13.1, 2.
let their Practices and Opinions be what they will.

My Lord, I wish some of our Clergy would pay at least as much Obedience to our
present most Gracious and Rightful Sovereign, as they paid (when time was,) to
a most Scandalous Usurper; when there lay an Exception to their Obedience, Due
to God, rather than Man. But this Exception makes strongly for your Lordship's
irrefragable Discourse, and now for mine in Pursuance of it: and that by Virtue
of the Old Axiom, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis. So that by this
Rule and Reason, that when God and his Deputies do stand in Competition for our
Obedience, God must have our whole Active, and his Deputies our Passive
Obedience only; It cannot but follow, that when our Governors are Rightful,
and do only command what God does no where forbid, or do only forbid what God
does no where command us, There we must obey God, by obeying Man: there being
no other way of paying God our Obedience in such a Case. For there our
Governor's Command is the Command of God also. There the very same Command
which is immediately Humane, is also mediately Divine. Seeing we There are
commanded by That Authority upon Earth, which in the Old and New Testament God
has commanded us to obey. Nor is there any one Duty, belonging to us, as Men,
or Christians, which God is pleased to make a stricter provision for: we are no
more commanded to fear God, than to honor the King; 1 Pet 2.17.
as your Lordship most loyally and most religiously observes, ( p. 5.) nor are
we more forbidden to worship Idols, than to resist or disobey God's
Representative upon Earth.

This (my Lord) I do the rather insist upon, in my common conversation with Men
abused by these Times, because I am of Opinion with the Learned and Reverend
Dr. Sherlock, in his Seasonable Treatise, for Non-Resistance, (more seasonable
now than when 'twas first printted) that to reproach and vilify Government
(much more fl^^y to disobey it in things not forbidden by God in Scripture) is
(...) Degree of The Case of Resistance, p. 180. P^shed in the Year 1684.
Resistance; and none are so weak but they may do that without Valiant Leaders
and Force of Arms. Nor can I any more separate the Sin of Disobedience, from
some Degree of Resistance of God's Vicegerent, than I can separate Resistance
from Rebellion against the Gospel, or a State of Damnation from either of them.

My Lord, I observe, the Lords Commissioners for Ecclesiastical causes, (who
are not less able to judge of things than their Inferiors) do call a wilful
Omission or Neglect of Dispersing and Reading the Declaration, a manifest
Contempt of his Majesty's Authority Royal. An Assertion very dreadful, in my
Opinion. For a manifest contempt of Supreme Authority, linked with an Obstinate
Contumacious fomenting Jealousies and divisions, is such a Monster, that the
least Error of Judgment which had been Venial in it self, is by these
Aggravations made great and grievous; and contracts unto itself as well a
diabolical, as damning Quality.

The following short Discourse upon your Lordship's well-chosen Text, may not
unfitly be called a Sermon; though never preached in any Pulpit, or in any
particular Congregation, either by the Author of it, or by any other Person he
ever heard of: but only from the Press to all in general, who may stand in need
of such a Preservative from Disloyalty, in times of Trial, and Temptation. Or
who pr^tend to Fears and Jealousies of a most obliging and gracious Sovereign,
who supports and protects us in all we have, and particularly, in that which is
dearest to us, the Great and National Church of England, as it is now, and will
be ever (by the Blessing of God, and his Vicegerent) by Law established. I am
as absolutely persuaded, as of any thing in the World, the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against the established Church of England. Our King's Declaration is
clearly for it, and as clearly against Three or Four General Councils, as
Bellarmine and others think fit to call them. It Is also against the Bulla
Coenae, and quite against the rigid Practice of the potent French King toward
his Protestant Subjects. So that however our present Sovereign may be and
continue a Roman Catholic, he cannot possibly be a Papist (in the true Notion
of the Word) whilst his Royal Declaration does stand in Force, and affords
Liberty of Conscience to all sorts of Haereticks, (as the rigid Papalins make
bold to call us.) All Recusants and Dissenters are but permitted. We alone are
allowed, who are of the truly Catholic, and Apostolic Church of England,
whereof our late gracious King had so transcendent an Esteem, for her
Faithfulness and Abhorrence of all the Hildebrandine Doctrines in all degrees,
that He thought fit to say to the Cambridge University waiting on him at
New Market, Sept. 18. 1681. That He would constantly own and defend the Church
of England, as established by Law. Giving them this for his Reason, that there
is no other Church in the World, that taught and practiced Loyalty so
Conscientiously, as that did. Your Lordship's Assertion is tantamount to it, in
the 15 th. Page of your Discourse, and from Both I make this Inference; That
they who will not obey the King, in whatsoever he commands, which God does no
where forbid, are No true Sons of the true Church of England, let their
Professions and Pretenses be what they will. And if God shall ever permit our
ever dear though dread Sovereign, to be provoked out of his Patience, by the
Undutifulness of Subjects, (to whom his sacred Majesty has been the most
munificent and meritorious,) to the hazarding of Truth and Peace among us, They
will have much to answer for (to use your Lordship's own Words p. 13.) who
shall have been the Authors of it. But the great and good God of Heaven and
Earth, in whose Hand the King's Heart is, will never suffer him (I believe)
through any the greatest provocations, to violate his Promises to the
established Church of England. And as our late King of blessed Memory, in his
said Printed by Authority in the Gazette of that time for Public Use.
Speech at New Market to that most Learned University, Bid them all be assured
that he would never break his Word, notwithstanding whatever Representation
either had or should be made of him to the contrary; So, what ever unworthy
Jealousies others may have of our present King, and his gracious Promises; yet
long Experience being my Mistress to convince me by all Enjoyments of the
King's Truth and Generosity, I do protest unto your Lordship, that could I
possibly be willing, I should not be able to distrust him.

My Lord, when I observed the different Judgments, of Seven Bishops on one
side, and Six of another, I stood pendulous for a time between Six and Seven;
like an hovering Piece of Iron between two Loadstones; But after due
Deliberation, (like that of your Lordship p. 4.) I thus determined within my
self, That supposing (though not granting) Both sides to be Erroneous, it would
concern me, (if I must err) to err as safely as might be possible;* and of Two
supposed Evils to take the Least. If (thought I) the Six Bishops are in an
Error, their Error is on the Right hand, because on the side of strict
Obedience to the Lord's Vicegerent, for the Lord's sake, though in a doubtful,
or undue Instance. But if the Seven Bishops are in an Error, their Error is
on the Left hand, because on the side of Disobedience to God's Vicegerent, (not
for the Lord's, but) for the Law of the Land's sake, as all but the Judges and
other great Lawyers do expound it. Now this Left handed Error (if an Error)
is an Error with a Witness; and like Sinon's Trojan Horse in the Second Aeneid
of Virgil, carries an Army of Destroyers within its Bowels, and endangers the
very Palladium; after the Loss of which Security, Down goes our Troy: For St.
Paul grounds Obedience to the Higher Powers among Men, upon their being all of
God, not only permitted, but ordained of God, and thence infers, That whosoever
resists the Power, Romans 13.1, 2.^
resists the Ordinance of God. And, they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation. This would have frighted me into m^ Loyalty, if the
ingrafted Law of Nature, and the Law of all Nations, and the Law of the Land
also, (antecedently to my Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) had not most
sweetly, though invicibly induced me to it.

Hence, (My Lord) I took my final Resolution, to follow my King, with my
Obedience, through thick and thin, usque ad Aras, though not a whit farther.
And rather to mark the unerring Judgments of St. Peter, and St. Paul, and of
those great Divines, now with God, Dr. Hammond, and Bishop Sanderson (two the
most exact Casuists in all the World) and now at last of your Lordship also;
than the more obnoxious Judgments of all the other Bishops of Christendom,
which are, or shall be. I do expect to be a Sufferer from the one side, or the
other, at least of Obloquy and Railing, ( for hereunto we are appointed, 1 Pet.
2.21.) But my Study is for whom, and for what to suffer. If I suffer for doing
well, from the Sons and Daughters of Disobedience, I suffer wisely, and as a
Christian; and St. Peter does assure me, This is acceptable with God, (v. 20.)
yea, This is Thank worthy, (v. 19.) But if I suffer for a scandalous
Recalcitration and Disobedience to God's Vicegerent, and follow a Multitude
into the Pit, I only suffer as a Fool, and an Evil Doer. And for all that shall
follow, must thank my self; am not worthy of Thanks from God, seeing, I would
not (like the Israelites, 1 Samuel 8.7.) That God himself should reign over me by
his Vicegerent.

Now that God will ever bless, and reward your Lordship for your Loyalty, with
a Continuance of the Blessings you now enjoy, even the Blessings in the Left
and in the Right Hand of Wisdom, Riches, and Honor, and Length of Days, is,
and shall be ever the Vote and Suffrage of

Your Lordship's most Obedient and Humble Servant, Theophilus Philobasileus.


