AN OLD WAY OF ENDING NEW CONTROVERSIES; IN A SERMON PREACHED To the
COMPTROLLER, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the Honorable Society of the
Inner Temple: On Sunday the 8th of January 1681/2. and at their special Desire
Printed.

By THOMAS PITTIS, D. D. one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Quisquis ab Ecclesia segregatus adulterae jungitur, a promissis Ecclesiae
separatur. Cypr. De Unitat. Eccles, Cath. Page 181. (...). Isidor. Pelusiot.
Epist. Lib. 4. Epist. 67. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Joanna Brom at the Gun
at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

To the Honorable the Comptroller, and the rest of the Society of the INNER
TEMPLE.
Gentlemen,
THat I expose an accidental Sermon to the world, who have always been so shie
and wary; is only from the force of your command, delivered to me with that
usual state (though complement too) which became men who at the time of
preaching it had the Government of their house in their own hands. I owe much
excuse to the world but cannot reasonably owe any to you, because your Judgment
upon it justified the Discourse; and your Authority enjoined me to deliver up
the Copy. I was the more encouraged to do it, because I heard you had made a
Loyal Address to the King; with which, I hope the Sermon does not interfere. If
you, or others may receive Advantage by the Perusal, I care not whether it
please the Multitude or no; (for Physic is not acceptable to the Patient) but
shall rest satisfied that I have observed your Commands: and that a Learned
Body of Ingenious and Gentile Men are engaged to defend it, whilst I remain,

Gentlemen, Your most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, THO. PITTIS.
Jan. 13. 1682.
1 John 2.24. former part. Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard
from the beginning.


AMongst all those various broods of Sects that ignorance and wilfulness have
spawned in the World, there is none but is covetous that Antiquity should
Patronize it; never decrying its venerable Testimony, nor fearing its oraculous
Answers, but when they distrust its votes opposite to their present espousals;
Gray hairs being as well the Glory of an Opinion, as the Crown of the Old man.
Hence is it that both Nations and Families have had such severe Contests with
each other, concerning the time of their first rise, that from thence their
Pedigree may appear Ancient, and they might gain renown from the date of their
Original. And as in Persons and Opinions, so in things too, quo antiquius eo
melius, by how much the more Ancient a thing is, by so much the more is it
prized and valued by those that covet a strict inspection into the Periods that
did preceed their own, who measure the proportions of an infant World, and thus
antedate their own Beings: How precious is a Script of Trismegistus? Or the
least Workmanship of an inspired Bezaleel? The smallest Leaf of Solomon's
Herbal would be deemed a Present Noble enough for the greatest Monarch; How do
we prize an old piece of Roman Coin? Or an antiquated Grecian Monument? Nor is
this a Truth receiving a general impress and confirmation, in respect of
Artificial and Philosophical Objects; but even Divinity too, having for its
Author the Ancient of Days, values that which carries Age furrowed in its Face,
and has Gravity and Years visible on its Brow: And nothing seems more to
asperse and disparage whatever wears the Title of Religion than to accuse it of
Novity, and to bear the date of a late Invention: Hence Haman endeavored from
this Topic to brand the Jews, in that they used other Customs different from
the ancient Laws of the Persians, Esther 3.
that their Novelty might render them odious to the King, being a crime it
seems sufficient to ruin them, when Mordecai could not bow to so insulting a
Favorite: St. Paul when he Preached the Gospel at Athens, Acts 17.
had prejudice raised against the Truth of his Doctrine, by affirming him only
to be a setter forth of strange Gods, and introducing new propositions into the
World; Celsus when he professedly wrote against the Truth and Divinity of the
Christian Institutions, Orig. contra Celsum. Lib. 1.
thought he had cast sufficient blemish and contempt upon its Authority, when
he had satisfied the World that it was new and unheard of: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
And Eusebius assures us that it was a common stratagem, and usual contrivance
for the Christian Religion from its first entrance, to be reproached with its
strangeness and novelty; all mankind (as it seems) measuring the truth of
things by their Antiquity, and general reception; and if we approach nearer to
our own Confines we shall find the two great struglers for the Western Empire
of Conscience and Religion, still endeavor to Crown their Opinions with old
Age, and to gain both Strength and Honor to their Establishment from time and
duration. The Romans would have the World to understand that the Pillars of
their Church were founded with Christianity, and that our Savior himself once
held those Keys which he afterward delivered to the Papal Succession. But
though they had a firm Foundation, they have built upon it a tottering
Superstructure. The Protestant would willingly obliterate the odium of a late
Reformation, and will antedate Luther and the German heats, searching in the
midst of a bloody Inquisition; some being willing to Travel to Bohemia to
derive their Principles from John Hus, and Jerome of Prague, not only sending us
to our own Wiccliffe, but eating through the Mountains to find out the more
Ancient (though obscure) Waldenses: others (and that more justly too) as if all
this will not yet evince their Principles Aged, will Travel farther to the
Churches Cradle, and find out the Manger in which our Savior himself was laid,
and from his Mouth receive their Doctrine, reviving what might seem dead,
having for some time been buried in the dust and rubbish of men's Inventions;
and freeing it from those Burdens and Corruptions which a gainful Interest, and
bold Presumption had loaded it withal, thus cause that to abide in them which
Christians heard from the beginning.

Antiquity then being so powerful a motive to persuade to Religion, that all
strive to catch and grasp it; I shall easily prevail for a diligent attention
since what I deliver shall be that which has been heard from the beginning.

In which Text we have an Exhortation both Grave and Seasonable; Grave it is,
avoiding those levities and varnish which Novices use to wrap their late and
uncouth Opinions in, that they may be snatched at with the more greedy
Appetite: As Physicians put their bitter Pills in sweet Conserves that the
Patient may swallow them with the greater delight: and seasonable was this
advice too; since Simon, and the Gnostics, did now attempt the murdering
Christianity when it was just born; as Herod's cruelty, drinking in, with an
insatiable thirst, the blood of Infants, would have Crucified our Savior in
his Cradle, before Age had given him Strength and Stature, not only to publish
his Fathers Message, but even to bear his own Cross. Nay least this accursed,
and Antichristian Sect, provoking their desires to unlawful Lusts, detracting
from Christianity by an impious and incoherent intermixture of Jewish and
Heathen Rites and Practices, with what was now Solemn in its proposal, and
Sacred by its establishment, should not be able to impede, or retard, the most
glorious flourish of Gospel Truth, and forbid the spreading of the Christian
Church, that Noble Vine but newly Planted; Cerinthus also now advanced, with
all the wild Boars of the Forest, if possibly, to undermine and root her up,
denying the Divinity of its first Author: An Heretic so foul and polluted,
that the blessed Penman of my present Text would not come into the same Bath
in which the wicked Cerinthus washed, least he should be defiled with that
water which had touched so filthy and loathsome a Carcass; and the Bath it
self, sensible of its own pollution, should immediately fall to make a Grave
for its self and possessours.

In the Exhortation then there are three Parts presented to our view (1.) A
Duty, Let that therefore abide in you, (2.) Its Object, Which ye have heard,
(Lastly) The Motive and Inducement to the Duty, Because it was from the
beginning.

I must crave leave to invert the Parts, though it shall make no alteration in
the Sense; that first the Object being explained, and the Motive proposed, the
Duty may be with the greater facility pressed and embraced. (1.) Then, Let the
Object in the Text exhibit it self; and this is nothing but what ye have
already heard. As Faith it self is generated by the Ear, so what you have heard
is nothing else but the Object of your Faith; for thus does the Apostle
conclude the inference; Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God, (Romans 10.17.) But as Hearing is the Conduit to convey Faith, so sometimes
is it the decoy to infidelity; because there are many false Prophets gone forth
into the World; and a seeming truth may make the same impression with truth it
self. Nay, our blessed Savior, that he might not leave us without due Caution,
has informed all Ages and Generations, that there shall arise false Christ's,
and false Prophets; yea! and shall superadd Wonders to their Oratory, not only
to amuse the World, but to gain credit and reputation to their Doctrine;
insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall prevail to the dismal shaking of
the strongest Oaks, and the rooting up the tallest Cedars of Libanus; even to
the putting a falacy upon the very Elect, ( Matthew. 24.24.) The Ear of Man,
being the recepticle of all Sounds, no wonder that it admits the sounding Brass
and tinckling Cymbal, as well as the Trumpets of the Sanctuary. Simon Magus may
be as as welcome to the Samaritans, as Paul and Barnabas to the Disciples at
Antioch. If a vainglorious Herod has but Confidence enough to make an Oration,
though repugnant to the first Principles of Religion, nor wonder that it makes
such an impress upon the Multitude, that they give shouts, with the loudest
Acclamations, and attribute to him the Wisdom of a Deity, who is scarce endowed
with the Prudence of a Man; ( Acts 12.22.) If a mechanic Silversmith, prompted
with no other motive than what Avarice and Interest can dictate, shall
confidently plead for the Shrines of Diana; the clamorous Multitude shall soon
cry out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, (Act. 19.28.) So easily captivated
are vulgar Affections, and of so slender a value is popular Applause. The
mutable Crowd will change their Religion with their Garments, and is of that
still which is of the newest fashion. As if novitas essendi were the Being of
Devotion, and Age were not the Measure of Divinity. As if the newest Stamp were
to be deemed always the truest Metal; and the last dictate of a fallacious
Understanding were the best object for the Wills embracement: Then indeed our
Saviors Argument would be nothing but a Sophism against Pharisaical Devorces;
From the beginning 'twas not so, (Matthew. 19.8.) nor would the Advice in the
Text be solid; Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning.

But it is not every thing that pleases the Ear that must be closeted and
lodged in the Heart, lest Tares being sowed amongst the Corn, they spread, and
flourish, and o'er-shadow the Grain: Our Savior therefore knowing our
promptitude to imbibe what might seem pleasant, and to swallow Poison if wrapped
up in gilded Pills; leaves a grave and severe Caveat, Take heed what ye hear,
(Mark 4.24.) and lest our strict observation of the matter should make us
regardless of the manner of performance; St. Luke delivers it, Take heed how
you hear; (Luke 8.18. Eccles. 5.
) As well knowing that too too few look to their Feet when they approach the
Sanctuary of the Lord, but are more ready to offer the Sacrifice of Fools, then
to hear their Vices redargued as they ought; not allowing themselves so much
either of time, or seriousness, as to consider that they do evil. These are
such Auditors as St. Austin reprehends, Aug. de bono persever. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Audientes corporis sensu qui non audiunt cordis assensu; who use the Word and
Doctrine of the Gospel only as an Ornament to deck the Head, not as a
foundation to establish the Heart; that hang it only as a Jewel in the Ear, but
reserve it not as a choice treasure to enrich the Soul; whose practice is just
opposite to St. James's advice, they will not lay apart all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, that they may receive with meekness the engrafted
Word which is able to save their Souls; ( James 1.21.) Too too many sooner bow
their Ears to what may irritate and provoke their lust; to the frothy
discourses of deceitful Tongues; to bold Rants, and jovial Catches; to those
lewd Sonnets that are the loose composures of looser brains, which being heated
with vice, boil over in scum and filth: men are more attentive to new Oaths,
and unheard of Blasphemies; to such as jest, and droll down Religion, that it
may no longer interrupt the pleasant wickedness of a degenerated Age; to such
as are so hardy as to Lampoon Heaven, and make Satyrs against the Quire above;
that would, if either method might prevail, Flout, or Hector, God Almighty from
his Throne; whose Language is more exalted than railing Rabshekeh's. These,
that are spots in our Feasts of Charity, become the only Persons worthy of
Entertainment; their black Language is viewed, and gazed on, as the brightest
Oracles; every shrug raises admiration, and a little smile is enough to
authorize a great jest: as if these wandering Comets were of more solidity than
the fixed Stars; and the Language of Hell to be more diligently attended than
the Voice of Heaven. God at once pardon and remedy it. The Ambassadors of the
Most High may take up the Lamentation of him that first gave them their
Commission. To whom shall we speak and give warning that they may hear? Behold
their Ear is Uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; Behold the word of the
Lord is to them a reproach; they have no delight in it. (Jer. 6.10.)

Some indeed are much for the Ear; attending to those scandals and reproaches
that the envious man will cast upon him whom his malice ruins, or his ambition
undermines: others, even in Sacred things, reduce devotion all to the Ear; and
when God, principally requires the Heart in Prayer, these will give little else
but the Ear in Hearing; being as partial in their Sacrifices toward God, as
they are in their Censures toward their Neighbors, as if the Decalogue were
now abolished, and the only Command were, Hear O Israel. 'Twas the error of the
Euchites to be always Praying, and it is as great an error to be always Hearing:
as if the School of our Savior should not only be enjoined Biennial silence,
but be for ever mute. Porphyry indeed, (that great Blaspemer, big with malice
against the Heavens) when checks of Conscience forced him to speak out
something of the results of his own Reason, teaches us to Sacrifice our Souls
to God in silence with Chaste thoughts; How Chaste men are at those seasons that
ought to be attended with Solemnity, and Devotion, it would be presumption in
any to judge: but sure I am that they put in practice this sage advice of their
Father Porphyry, who thus pretend to Worship God in silence: As if he that made
the Tongue as well as the Ear, did not require the one to make Oblations of
Prayer and Praise, as well as the other to Hear his Word; or he that Created
the whole man would be contented with a partial Sacrifice. And now if any one
has Ears to hear let him hear; and not only so, but retain also what he has
heard; so will the Exhortation in my Text be embraced: Let that therefore abide
in you which ye have heard from the beginning.

Having thus endeavored to free mankind from such diseases and distempers in
Religion; I must now crave leave to attempt the recommendation of our duty; and
persuade men to the diligent attention to that Sacred Word, which is able to
make us wise unto Salvation, and be greedy to receive it, when not extended in
an adulterated hand: For as we cannot hear without a Preacher, so he cannot
Preach that is not sent, ( Romans 10.15.) Some men are like those large tongued
women in Tertullians time, Tert. de prae. Scrip. Hae. et. cap. 41.
who though a person of excellent Language, was yet forced to inveigh against
them that being so liberal of their Speech in Private, conjectured they had, if
not Rhetoric, and Reason, yet yet words enough, to declame in Public; whom
the Father reprehends in this Prohibition: Tert. de virg. velandis. cap. 9.
Non permittitur mulieri in Ecclesia loqui, sed nec docere, nec tinguere; nec
offerre; nec ullius virilis muneris, nedum sacerdotalis officii, sortem tibi
vindicare: or like those that St. Austin complains of, in the second Chapter of
his first Book of the Trinity, that are garruli ratiocinatores, elatiores quam
capaciores; that are prattling Disputants, more shrill than rational: How many
dismal mourning souls, whose Education never advanced them to any degree above
Mechanism, steal away the Priests Office, as Neanthus did Orpheus's Harps, who
thinking to effect the same wonders Orpheus did, and make Woods and Trees dance
after his melody, played so ill, that the very Dogs, being affrighted at his
strange noise, tore him all in pieces. When we hear therefore, we must not
throw away our attention upon usurping Schismatics; whose very Preaching is
their Crime, because without a Sacred and Divine Commission; and since giving
them Audience is their encouragment, it can no less involve such easy Auditors
in a snare and guilt.

And yet, since the Text exhibits something that always has been heard, it does
not only imply our duty of attention, but presents us with what we ought to
hear; and that's the Gospel; what both the Apostles and Disciples were
acquainted with from the beginning: And since, in that Sacred Testimony to our
Savior, there are various Truths which make up its Contexture; those things
are first to be heard and received that are in themselves most Fundamental;
Primarium dogma de Christi divinitate, (says Justinian) the chief Doctrine of
the Divinity of our Savior, without which the Foundation being sunk, the whole
fabric must of necessity be demolished: For since his Divinity gives merit to
his Passion, by which his temporal punishment bears proportion to an infinite
offense; detract from his Deity and you spot his sufferings; and then if he be
a Lamb with blemish, though he be slain, he cannot satisfy; and so the series
of our Salvation becomes disordered, and our eternal safety undermined.

And now perhaps some wise person might take advantage to exhibit, or
adventure at a Catalogue of Fundamentals; and a clamorous Adversary might with
as much confidence and triumph demand them; but when we receive a particular of
Explicits, we may then attempt a Catalogue of Fundamentals. In the mean time,
since Faith is the general condition of the Gospel; and, He that believes, and
and is baptized, shall be saved (Mark. 16.16.) Methinks we need disturb our
selves no further for Fundamentals, than to define what compleats that one
thing, Faith. And though Interest and Opinion have rendered it as different
from it self as one man's fancy from another, and we have created almost as many
varieties of Faith, not only as there are Nations in the world, but men too;
(multitudes dealing by it as Caligula did by the Image of Jupiter Olympiacus
when he took from it its head of Gold, and put upon it an head of Brass;) yet
if we will admit the Father of the Faithful: to explain the difficulty, we
shall find that the practice of the Patriarch Abraham, (who is exhibited as a
pattern for Gospel believers;) will give us a prospect of that Faith which had
its being from the beginning. And though there are many acts of this ancient
Faith presented to our perusal in New Testament Pages, yet there are two
comprehensive of all the rest, to wit Belief and Obedience. For when he to whom
all things are possible, had promised a branch should sprout forth from this
dry Root; and that he would be his shield, and great reward ( Genesis 15.1.)
Abraham did not question the word of a Deity, who, he knew, was able to
control the world, and alter the power of second Causes according to the
pleasure of his own will: but steadfastly assented to the truth of what God had
promised; relying on it with Faith and Expectation. And as this Action includes
belief of the Promises, so the second prescribes obedience to the Commands; and
it was that work which St. James says justified him, even the offering up his
Son Isaac upon the Altar ( Jam. 2.21.) So that to sum up the whole Gospel in
one word, that you may here have presented in an Epitome, what I humbly beg may
abide in you: He that believes the Promises, so as to obey the Precepts; that
accepts his Savior as a King to rule, and a Prophet to teach, as well as a
Priest to make atonement; and, consequently, submits to the authority of his
Laws, and to the conduct of his Ministry and Discipline; that relies upon the
merits of his Cross, and persues the steps of his virtuous Life, in order to
the securing his eternal Safety: He is the Person who retains what he has
already heard; and he need not fear any deceiptfull Imposition, since he
embraces that which was from the beginning. Which minds me of the Motive here
proposed, to fortify our resolutions, that what we have heard may abide in us,
since it is no more than what was delivered from the beginning.

In Philosophical Propositions we usually deem those most certain that later
experiments prove, and evince: but, in Divine Truths, those are best that were
from the beginning. Time, which is in a continued flux, being in this like the
swiftest Torrents, that carry down to us what is light and frothy; but sink
that which is grave and ponderous: and indeed Reason, which is the result of
our nobler part, if not disturbed by passion or interest, is the surest guide
in the midst of perplexities; and this does, upon the first prospect of
Religion, lead us to that which was from the beginning. And Christianity being
that which pretends to be first begotten in Heaven, though brought forth here
on Earth, owning not less than a God for its Author, whose great propositions
are made up of Eternal Truths; and since the Apostles were inspired to a
complete delivery of what was at first Preached by our Savior, the same
Doctrine, by a continued succession, having been derived and conveyed to
Posterity; it follows, by an inevitable conclusion, that the surest way, for
us, to whom these Principles are exhibited, when any Objection, or different
Opinion, presents it self, to startle our apprehensions; is to pursue the first
Rule, and follow that which was delivered from the beginning.

But since the various subdivisions of those that entitle themselves to the
names of Christians, pretend to those infallible Maxims treasured up in the
Sacred Book; there must be left a Judge of Controversies; or else there will
remain no way of freedom from present disturbances, or certain method of
reducing those who, being too fond of their own fancies, resolutely adhere to
their private Opinions, to the detriment of Christianity, and ruin of
themselves, and the obstruction of Peace and Unity in the world. The Doctrine
of the Gospel, although certain in it self, being conveyed to us in Words and
Language which may admit of different Constructions, suitable either to the use
of words, or the apprehensions of men, cannot, (without such a judgment upon it
as may oblige the various extravagancies of mankind to silence, and a passive
submission, whatever may be their internal belief;) be sufficient Clue to lead
us out of these Labyrinths: Though had the multitude of its Followers justly
measured and proportioned Understandings, rightly to discern the Fruits wrapped
in those Leaves, it must appear to every man, the best, and only Conductor in
the world. But, because every person usurps Authority to interpret, and every
Illiterate and Enthusiastical head, if he has not reason to confirm his Gloss,
has confidence however to pretend an Inspiration; necessity inforces us to seek
some method to quiet our minds, and to allay the briskness of our own fancies,
and those heats and fury, that our warmer contrivances introduce into the
world: that so we may arrive at such certainty as is possible to be obtained,
of what was heard from the beginning.

And though I shall not attempt the leading any to St. Peter's Chair, nor beg
that Rome may be the place of Umpire; because there is no need of fetching
water from Tiber when we have clear Fountains at our own doors; yet reason must
force this confession, that since it is not the letter, but the sense, of
Scripture that is the proper Guide of life; there must be allowed some
Interpretation, since our demands to one another may be the same with the
Eunuch to St. Philip, how shall we Read without some Interpreter? And then the
last question will be who are those that are most likely to exhibit to us the
exact design of Scripture Phrase, and the infallible Rule that leads to Life?

To produce therefore some conclusions touching this controverted, and
difficult, Question; Those must certainly best inform one of the meaning of a
Sermon, that have had the most familiar acquaintance with the Preacher;
Capacities also to apprehend, and Fidelity to deliver what they have received
from the mouth of the Orator: upon which proposition those persons, that seem
most rational, attempt the proof of the Apostles Writings that are but the
first Commentaries upon that Gospel which our Savior Preached and Ushered into
the World. From hence (secondly) it follows that the persons who were the
immediate Disciples to those Holy Penmen of Sacred Writ, having the advantages
of Converse, and the benefit of Audience, must of necessity be the fittest
Judges of what is Controverted in matter of our Religion, which we pretend to
derive from their Books and Writings: and there seems to remain nothing to be
doubted, but either their Capacities to receive, or their Faithfulness to
deliver, what they heard from the beginning. Their Capacities and Parts their
Writings publish; their Integrity and Honesty their Lives declared; neither had
they either reason, or advantage thus to cheat, or impose upon, the world. And
therefore those Writers, who lived in the first Ages of Christianity, are first
to be believed; that in difficulties and straits we are to have recourse unto;
and consequently the later to be less confided in, as having met with greater
and more subtle opposition, and therefore subject to more intermixtures of
heat and passion; and like Rivers, the further off the Fountain, the less do
they retain of their first purity, and the greater mingling of different
waters. As the nearer we are to the Fountain therefore, the clearer will the
Stream be; so the nearer we Travel to that which was heard from the beginning,
the more certain and infallible will our Guide and Rule be. But because the
reports and sayings of Fathers are like melted Wax that receives the Image
suitable to the Seal which makes the impression; and persons of diverse
Churches, and Persuasions, deal with their Sentences, as young Sophisters with
a Text of Aristotle, by a distinction, or a figure, force them to countenance
the various Sentiments of their disturbed minds: If we rest here, we shall
still be as far from the end of Controversy, as the Controversy from the
beginning of Truth. To proceed further then, by the assistance of those means
our Reason dictates, together with prayers and humility of mind, to the
investigation of what we are to rest in, as that which was from the beginning.
A General Council would quickly determine it, did not an Empire now Cantonized;
the opposite Interest of Princes among themselves; diversity of Factions sprung
up among their Subjects; the great Prejudices that are in the world; and above
all, over grown Popery, clearly obstruct its Justice and Freedom; and I might
say, its Possibility too. As every Episcopal Church, therefore, was Planted, at
the first, Independent of another; yet, to preserve a Church Catholic upon
Earth, admitting an Universal Union, Correspondence, Advice; and, by consent,
an Obligation upon particulars, by Authority from the whole. Every particular
Episcopal Church had a power of Discipline as well as Doctrine, committed to
her trust and managery; the first Planters conveying downward, through a Sacred
and uninterupted Succession, their Authority and Jurisdiction to this Age, and
this Church, to which we now pretend a Relation. In Controversy and difference
(as the Case now stands with us) there can be no Example, or Rule, or more
Rational Pattern, or Guide of Action, than that of the Primitive Planters of
the Gospel; which is, that the Inferior be regulated by the Advice and
Authority of the Superior, and all submit to the reasonable resolution of a
National Council. Thus when the great dispute about Circumcision was raised at
Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria, they Appealed to Jerusalem, to which Antioch
was subjected, being a place of Superior Jurisdiction; and the determination of
the Bishops of Judea, with Paul and Barnabas, Representatives of Antioch, fully
silenced any farther Dispute, and was the infallible sentence in which they
acquiesced. Acts 15.

But now, let not any men wonder that I call the Sentences of such Councils
Infallible; since it is only using a Popish word, to express Protestant sense,
to our selves, which overthrows the Roman claims over us. For this being
applied to our Councils here; our Church neither erring in Fundamentals, nor
pretending to usurp upon the Natural Privilege of mankind to judge for
themselves as far as they are capable; but only assists and helps their
Understanding in what they are deficient for want of Education; creating no New
Articles of Faith: nay imposing nothing on the belief of any, but what the
Scriptures have Authorized before; and Ordaining nothing by its own power, but
a limitation of the outward actions of men: its decrees in things that are thus
the subject of human Laws, are either to be actually obeyed, or not publicly
or tumultuosly contradicted. And this is what I intend to be the sense of the
Infallible Sentence of a National Council, without which, Controversy can
never be ended, no Legislative Authority maintained, nor Peace and Order remain
among us. For want of this moderate and sober apprehension of things, men make
themselves liable to those Penalties of Laws which good natured Magistrates so
unwillingly inflict, and well meaning Christians pity, and at the same time
admire the Confidence of those who are so hardy, and willing to deserve them;
especially when they consider, also, that the same persons can be tamely
silent, in Forain Countries where Principles of Religion more severely
contradict the Sentiments of their minds.

It Is true, indeed, a Council may err, unless they could put off their manhood,
or to every decree have a fresh Inspiration, or receive a Divine Testimony from
Heaven; and yet it is to us Infallible; (i. e.) to silence our open Disputes
against it, and to be the Rule for our External Obedience. For frail men cannot
possibly proceed farther in the searching out Divine Truths, than in the means,
and way to find out the Revelation; and to understand it when it is found;
leaving other indifferent things to the determination of those who have
Authority over us: and those means that I have mentioned seeming to be all that
Reason and Discourse, when not disturbed by Lunacy or Enthusiasm, are able to
propose; and since the only Evidence we have to prove the objects of sense
against the bold denial of a confident Sceptick, is to call in many, against
the obstinacy of one, to give Testimony to what we see, or hear; and so to
decide the difference betwixt us: If I err with submission to that Authority
which I find the ultimate mean to determine, my Crime, certainly, will not be
so great, but a pardon will as necessarily attend it; since the most gracious
God does not require my action to be beyond the Sphere of my capacity; nor my
apprehensions to exceed the Powers of my being. But the Authority of Councils,
as hitherto stated, may seem too naked to be submitted to; and yet we observed
in the first times, a ready obedience to their decrees, when backed by no
Secular Power: It therefore they were obliging then, they engage us by another
addition, and are strengthened by a Civil Sanction. For as, when the Emperors
became Christians; what was before Established by our Savior and his Apostles,
and asserted by Pious Bishops, and Divines Congregated for that purpose, and
drawn into Sacred Canons, or Rules, received a Sanction from the Legislative
Power resident on Earth; and were so embodyed with Imperial Laws, that the
Magistrate was Custos utriusque Tabulae: so the Protestant Church, among our
selves, has its Foundations, in the Word of God, (derived downward from prime
Antiquity) so inlaid with the Temporal Laws of our own Kingdom, that the one
cannot be invaded with Triumph, but the other nods; nay totters, till it falls
into inevitable ruin; and we need not a new Experiment to show it. This every
one, at length, believes, that is not, by being engaged in past mischiefs, an
enemy to both, and like Cataline, resolved on future evils to justify, or
secure, those that are past. But they, more distinctly, are acquainted with
this, who are Learned in he Laws, than we, who being Divines, are willingly
supposed ignorant of them. Yet this seems to be the great Reason why such as
design to invade the Crown, make a pass at the Miter first, because the Church
is a Guard to the Palace, as well as the Palace a defense to the Church. Till
this therefore be wounded, or removed, the disturbers of the Peace of both,
cannot, in probability, ascend the Throne, nor place a Duke of Venice there.

But, to return from this digression; a National Council ought more especially
to determine the Controversies among us, so as to oblige us to Peace, because
their Decrees are our own Acts, having chosen the persons who represent us in
it. Yet to silence doubts, and scruples, about this matter: whatever regard we
may all have to tender Consciences, that are not raw; the different thoughts of
Worship among us, being such as produce squabble and contentions, these, for
our necessary ease and pleasure, dividing us into separated Clans; and these
making us fit for Conspiracy, which, without any more Devils than our selves,
may advance it self into an actual Rebellion: And when various, and severe
Contests about Religion have openly distinguished men from each other, till
they are hardly able to know themselves; when private Dispensations, shall, in
some cases, vacat Public Oaths by single Interpretations, and in
Equivocations, and Mental Reservations men are able to outstrip the Jesuit
himself; this is a way to remove the Pope, only by bringing him into our own
Bellies, and instead of a Union of Protestants among our selves, is the direct
way to introduce Popery in Masquerade (that I may use some Rhetorical words)
and to embrace what we declame against, and every Protestant is bound in his
own capacity, to withstand. But when Trade and Occupations determine our
Option, and past Acts (though evil in themselves) must regulate our present,
and future, deportment: when persons choose their Articles of Creed, as well as
various ways of Worship, suitable to what they gain from those with whom they
seem Religiously to associate: Conscience and Christianity do no longer guide
them, but they give away their choice to Clients, Trade, and (amongst Divines)
to the preferments of this World; and, all this while, it is Earth becomes their
Supreme God, and Secular Interest governs their Religion. When Affairs
therefore, through our own indiscretion, or the wickedness of others, are
brought to this pass, that men will violate their Oaths to preserve Religion,
or neglect Prayers to serve God; or attend Prayers to serve the Devil, and
when, by such methods as these, the Prologue is made to the dismal Tragedy of a
general Confusion, it is time to call for a solemn Consultation and for a
Christian Magistrate to interpose by Law, least the Disorders in what we call
by the Ancient and Venerable name of Religion, may have too severe an influence
on the State, and both be ruined by the same hands; since these are like
Hypocrates Twins, that weep and laugh both together. It Is time therefore (at
such a Season) to call upon our sleeping Laws to awake, whose Penalties have an
equal Sanction with themselves: and more especially, because punishment of
Extravagant Offenders can be no Persecution, when the Christian Religion is not
concerned, but the various Interests of this World; and Penalties (in this
Case) will only restrain the inordinate Affection of some men to their private
Concerns in relation to their abode here; and teach them how to be Crucified to
this World, that they may more easily ascend into Glory in the next. 'Twill
keep them steady whilst they walk upon the Earth, when the Wings of their
Ambition are clyp'd and poised; and cause them to grow better, by Religion, and
Loyalty; that by a peaceable departure out of this Life they may enter into the
Joy of our Lord. This (though, to some, it may seem severe) can be no violence
offered to Conscience, where we plainly see there is none at all. 'Twill be at
most, no more than a limitation of Trade and Covetousness, by restraining the
Contentions and Ambition of mankind. And now, if upon all this Discourse, a
carping Protestant, or angry Romanist, should blunder upon this Objection; that
if the Church be infallible, quoad nos; so it was at the time of our
withdrawing from the Roman Communion, and therefore we then breaking the
Principal Bond of Truth and Union, must remain guilty of the greatest Shism,
unless we return to that Church from whence we have departed. It is, without
any difficulty, replied, that he supposes that granted which we will not yield;
for we were never lawfully subject to the Roman Church, in respect of
Spirituals, any more than we were to the late Monster of Traitors, in respect
of Temporals: a prosperous Usurpation giving them no better Title over our
Church, which was distinct at its first reception of Christianity, than the
others possession gave him right to his Sovereigns Throne; both being effected,
by Subtilty, Force, and Usurpation.

Thus having, through this Discourse, exhibited a great Character of Truth,
which is prime Antiquity; and given some slender account of what has been heard
from the beginning: All that remains is to enforce the Apostles Exhortation to
the duty, and beg that ancient Truths may abide in you. We have now had the
Trial of all things, let us therefore hold fast that which is good: we have
been too long tossed in a storm, but having at last, arrived at a safe Harbor,
let us no more sail out among the Rocks, nor put to Sea whilst the Winds rage,
and the Waves roar. The True, Ancient, and Apostolic Faith was, for some time,
like the lost sheep; it wandered about in a Wilderness of Error, and the by
Paths of Heresy and Schism, being torn and scratched with Briars and Thorns,
not only till it was smeered with blood, but at last it became Naked Truth:
Naked, indeed; for being void of Hypocrisy, it became Naked of Friends too:
But now, since we have found the lost sheep no wonder that I Exhort you, as he
did his Friends in the Gospel; Rejoice with me for I have found the sheep that
was lost. And since the search has been no less tedious, than in these times,
full of hazard; let us no longer shift the Principles of our Religion, nor
permit the wry Face of a man to draw our Souls and Bodies asside; but let those
Truths abide in us which we have heard from the beginning. Why should I use any
Rhetoric to persuade, when there is the Authority of God to command? Tacitus
informs us of Caesar's Soldiers; Imperium potius quam concilium sequebantur; A
word of Command was more to them than persuasion or advice in a formal Speech.
And shall we that march under our Saviors Banner be more disobedient than a
Heathen Militia? Why should we not for Edification submit to true Decency and
Order, that we may no longer be like Samaritans and Jews, refuse kinder
Correspondences with each other? As the Apostle therefore Exhorts those Jews,
who, though dispersed, were united in Christian Faith and Discipline: so let
me, with all Charity and Affection beg, that you would hold fast your
Profession ( Heb. 4.14.) Can we reasonably part with the Glorious Gospel which
promises Crowns and everlasting Rewards; that takes care of us after we are
Dead, and leaves us neither in Purgatory or the Grave; nay, that free us from
the Torments of Hell, and advances us to the Joys of Heaven: We cannot once
depart from our Religion, but at the same time we abandon our selves, exchange
our Reason for Folly and Madness, and barter our precious Souls for trifles;
and what proportion in this exchange? What is a man profited (says our Savior)
nay, how is a man utterly undon if, to gain the whole world, he loses his own
soul? (Matthew. 16.26.) Understand what you are capable of apprehending, and when
you have found a Doctrine to be sound, take St. Paul's advice to Timothy; Hold
fast the form of sound words, (1 Timothy 1.13.) Many of our fierce and staring
Seperatists, like their Ancestors of another denomination (the Papists I mean)
embrace Principles and Ways of Worship, though they understand them not. As
Quintilian speaking of the Toscan Rights and the Soothsayings of the Salian
Priests, Vix Sacerdotibus suis intellecta, sed quae mutari vetat Religio.
Scarce apprehended by their Priests themselves, but yet their Principles and
Religion forbid a change. But that Gospel which has been heard from the
beginning, is no Airy Doctrine to be condensed into a Cloud; nor so hot, as to
be raised into a Pillar of Fire: we are not to be conducted as the Israelites
were of old; nor, thanks be to God, and a Christian Government, is the Church
yet in a Wilderness condition; our Principles are as Plain as Honest; and our
Religion as Intelligible, as it is Rational; and the Doctrine and Discipline,
if our Practice Corresponds, which the Church of England pretends a reverence
for; by Gods blessing, being submitted to with meekness, will be sufficient to
save our Souls, through him who first published it to the World, and died to
make satisfaction for our sins. Let this therefore abide in you; that you may
not be, like Waves of the Sea, always rolling, and driven which way a Storm
pleases; but settled, and immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord;
which let God Cooperate and strengthen you in, for Christ Jesus's sake; To whom
with the Father and his Eternal Spirit, be all Glory, and Honor, now, and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

