PLAIN DEALING: Or, A Dialogue between HVMPHREY and ROGER, About Choosing the
Next Parliament.
Humph. WEll met, Neighbor Hodge: How do do? We have strange News, man;
Do hear it? What do think, but the Parliament's Dissolved again?


Roger. Ay! Is it so! By my Brown Cow then, Numps, I think our Statesmen
nowadays take Parliaments for Nine-Pins, which they Set up, like the Boys,
only to Knock down again for sport.


Humph. Hold you there, Neighbor: for whether the Boys learn of our Statesmen,
or our Statesmen of the Boys, is too hard a Question for us to Resolve. This
I Am sure of, they could never endure the breath of a Parliament, since they
discovered the Popish Plot; which makes me think those Statesmen had a finger
in it, and are mad to see such a hopeful Project in danger of miscarrying. But
prithee tell me, which be these Statesmen? Are they those of the K's Private
Council?


Roger. No, you Fool; they are called the Private Council, because every thing
of moment is kept private from them. You may see by the Proclamation for this
Dissolution, that they did not know of it, till it was Resolved. But the
Statesmen are called by a Name which I have almost forgot, somewhat like
Cupboard-Councilmen, and in truth are a sort of Whisperers, that Advise such
things in Private, that they dare not own, and cannot justify with reason, in
Public.


Humph. But what kind of men are these? For I never saw any of them.


Roger. Troth nor I, since they were so; but whilst they were honest Country
Lords or Gentlemen, as all Statesmen must be, before they can be made free of
that Trade, I have seen some; but they say they alter after, like a Country
Gentleman's Daughter, that sets up for a Town-Miss, who presently grows much
Finer, much Falser, and less Sound. Yet to know something more of them, I read
all the matter of fact that is published, never minding the interpretation they
give it, which generally is a cheat, but by their Actions it seems to me that
they are a sort of English Frenchmen, and Protestant Papists, for all they
Pretend is for the Protestant Religion, and the lessening of France, and all
they Do is for the growth of Popery, and the French power.


Humph. Oh plague, now I see the reason why they advised the dissolving of this
Parliament who resolved to discover their tricks to the whole Nation.


Roger. I Would have these Fellows go like the Sergeants men, dressed party-per-pale,
the right side after the French Mode, the left after the English; with a Book
in their hands, the one leaf of the Mass, the other of the Common Prayer: and
then my Lord Chief Justice should order Ketch to hang up the right sides of
them, as high as Haman; and let their left sides get down as well as they
could, and this is my sentence of an English Monsieur.


Humph. Since they preserve the Protestant Religion, by bringing in Popery,
maintain our Liberties by making us Slaves; Secure England by Betraying it to
France; to be even with them in their own Coin, I would use them as the
Spiritual-Courts do those that offend them, deliver them to the Devil for the
Salvation of their Souls.


Roger. Peace, peace, man, they fear no Devil but an Executioner, nor no day of
Judgment but the meeting of a Parliament.


Humph. Why there is to be a new Parliament to sit presently at Oxford, but who
shall we Choose now Neighbor? You for the City, and I for the Country.


Roger. Why, who should we Choose man, but such as have in these last
Parliaments, approved themselves to be strongly and heartily against those
cursed twins, which our Statesmens Brains are in labor to bring forth, Popery
and Arbitrary Power? and those we will Choose whether they themselves will or
no; for we choose them more for our own good, then to Complement them: and since
they are not born for themselves but their Country, they must be content to
take the necessary trouble; and we must be careful to put them to none that is
unnecessary; that is, let us Choose them without the expense of a penny, or the
trouble of a Journey, and if they will not then be at the pains and charge of
Attending in Parliament, let Topham take them, as they, the Abhorrers and all
other Betrayers of our Liberties will justly deserve?


Humph. But shall we Choose them before they come to desire it.


Roger, Desire it, you Simpleton! Prithee tell me, If a pack of Rogues and
Papists had seized on thee, brought thee to the Gallows, tied the Rope, and
were just ready to turn thee off the Ladder, and some honest Gentleman coming
in sight should fright the Rogues a little off: If thou should then in a
Sheepish tone tell those Gentlemen, If they would desire you to slip your neck
out of the Noose, and come down you would do it, do not think they would have
reason to Answer, They were for the Liberty of the Subject, and would press
nothing of that nature, but leave it to thy own pleasure, either to go along
with them, or to stay and let the Rogues make an end of their work when they
were gone?


Humph. By the Mass Hodge thou say well, I have a woundy mind to do as thou
say* but,


Roger. But what, Tony? Is this a time to be at Ifs, and Ands, and Buts?


Humph. But Mr. H. you know is a pretty civil Gentleman, a fine bred man, ask
our Country Ladies else, treats us nobly both at Table and Tavern, has a good
estate, and needs no Pension, and may vote on our side, unless now and then he
give the Courtiers a vote in a Civil way out of gratitude for the new fashions
and good breeding they teach him; or help to save a Statesmans Neck, that hugs
him and feasts him all the Parliament time: though he does not know him as soon
as it is up. And he swears dam him he is as much against Popery as our Bishops
themselves, and would have all men hanged that are not as high for increasing
the power of the Clergy as Bishop Laud was. Now this Courteous Gentleman has
desired me of all Loves to vote for him but this once, and says its
unreasonable to make the former Members bear the burden or enjoy the honor of
it still, and I vow methinks I can hardly find in my heart to deny him.


Roger. Find in your heart! Can you find in your heart to be made worse then a
Gally Slave, have Red-Coats come rifle your Pockets, ravish your Daughters, and
burn your Houses, and then let the Priests singe your Hides like Bacon in
Smithfield, for this you know you must expect if your Members will be either
bribed, threatened, or complemented out of their votes: Will his good breeding
help you to pay Taxes when they come as thick as in the Pensioners Parliament?
Will his meat and drink stick with you as long as Chimney-mony, Excise, and
those other fettering Laws that such civil Members have made us? as for his
Estate experience shows that well bred-men can spend the greatest Estates, and
quickly come to need a Pension; but I say if he vote as a Pensioner, though he
be not so great a Knave, yet there is more danger to us from such fools; for
these will give us up for fair words, which is a Coin never wanting at Court,
but those will sell us as dear as they can, and prolong the time to get the
more by it, as we found by the Pensioners Parliament, who whilst they were
thinking to make the best of the bargain, God put it in His Majesty's heart to
disolve them, and now we are freemen again, unless such easy believers as you
will be so courteous as to enslave us again. For what he swears about Popery,
are men's words or actions more to be credited? he he may swear so, and those
learned Gentlemen preach so long enough ever they persuade me that they stickle
for a Popish Successor for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and
strive to make the Prerogative arbitrary, for the Liberty of the People; flesh
and blood, Neighbor, cannot endure such impudent lying.


Humph. Ay but my Landlord would have me do it, and he is an honest Gentleman, you
know.


Roger. I think he is, and I am sorry to see he has more Estate and Privilege
to lose, then Wit to know his own Interest. But prithee tell me, if he should
invite thee to Dinner, take thee by the hand, and tell thee thou must needs do
him one courtesy, that is, Surrender thy Lease gratis to him, which thou
payd'st his Father 500l. for, would thou not do it?


Humph. No by my Faith would I not.


Roger. Why then will thou give up thy Liberty, thy Religion, and all the rest
of thy Estate to his dispose? Pay him his Rent well, and all Respect
imaginable; send him a Present at a good time, if he use to invite thee; lend
him thy Teams for his Carriages now and then, or any other common Civility; but
in cases of Religion, Life, Liberty and Property, no Complements. I beseech
thee, Numps.


Humph. Well but our Parson says I am bound in Conscience to vote for those
that are for Absolute Obedience to Prince and Prelate, cites Texts of Scripture
for it, says all are Rebbels that do otherwise; and that it is a damnable Sin to
Vote for these that were against persecuting Dissenters, or that inquired into
the Grievances of the Bishops Courts. And what can thou say to that, Hodge?


Roger. Faith I shall say of him as I did even now of his Superiors, I shall
trust my own Senses more then what they all say: Believe him in the Pulpit,
when he preaches of Faith and a good Life, join with him in the Public
Prayers, pay him his Tithes, and receive the Sacrament of him like a good
Christian; But when they undertake the Politics, either in the Pulpit or out
of it, to persuade me to part with my Birthright, 'cause it is profound
Obedience; and to submit to Popery, because it is the Providence of God; and to
suffer the Cheats and Oppressions of the Bishops Courts, because they have Gods
Authority; I cannot much blame them, for all men are apt to follow their own
Interest; and this is theirs: But I must desire to be excused, for as good
Reasons as they press me to it: For if Arbitrary Power will Raise the Clergy,
by consequence it will Depress the Layety; If Popery will add to their
Benefices Absolution-Money, Indulgence-Money, Purgatory-Money, and a hundred
other Perquisites, besides all the Abbey-Lands, and take nothing from them but
their Wives; I am sure it must take just so much from our Pockets, and add so
much more of their kind Blessings upon our Wives: And if our Spiritual Courts
must be more burdensome, they may very well supply the place of a Purgatory,
and torment us sufficiciently without it. I do not speak this to reflect on our
Clergy, which I think as good as any other, but to show they are not so proper
Judges in these Cases: If the Law were to be Regulated, would you refer it to
Lawyers in general? If the Physicians Fees, would you consult the College? If
the Oppre^sions of the Spiritual Court, would you trust the Civilians? And for
the same reason, will you rely on these men as to Arbitrary Power, who have
neither Dignity nor Bishopric, but from the Court? Or as to the danger of a a
new Religion, by which they are to have twice as much Power and Wealth as
before? And to do them right, whilst the Pope gave the Preferments they were
generally for the Liberty of the People, and keeping the Prerogative iu its due
Limits; but all is now in the Crown, the Reason is altered, and their Practce
with it.


Humph. I vow, Hodge, I never understood till now why they Talked so Much
against Popery, and Acted so Little, why they hate Fanaticism, that would
lessen their Power, more then Popery, that would enlarge it; and why they
weaken Protestantism, not only by Disallowing the Foreign Churches, but by
Disowning the major part of those at Home, all that do not, like Fools, espouse
the Power of the Clergy more then the Articles of their Creed. But what shall
we do with those Old Members that voted as the Statesmen would have them?


Roger. Turn them off, and get others in their Places that we know to be of
good Principles for the Freedom of an Englishman; but do not believe too
easily: Remember one bad Choice may inslave you for ever* and one bad Vote turn
the Scales, when the question is, Whether we shall be Freemen or Bondmen. But
talk no more of it, all hands to work, and about your business, your All is at
stake; inform those you find ignorant how their case stands; and I hope we may
have as good a Parliament as the last, and then the Statesmen will despair of
playing any more tricks, and we and our Children may be happy.


Humph. Well I vow thou speak so much reason, I Will do as thou bid'st me, and
about it presently. Farewell.


LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.


