A Plain and Uninterested Reflection Upon the present CASE OF THE East India
COMPANY, Under its following Circumstances, Viz.
I. -- OF having been established and supported by an Uninterrupted Series of
Royal Charters of Incorporation, from Queen Elizabeth, and her Princely
Successors, down to those of his present Majesty; from whom, and from her late
Majesty Q. Mary of blessed Memory, it received Confirmation, by like Charters,
in October and November, 1693, for 21 Years then to come; Whereof more then 16
rest yet unexpired.

II. -- Of having had, in Virtue of these their Majesty's last Charters, few
less than 800 New Adventurers, incorporated into it; but not without 740000 l.
first Subscribed, toward the enlarging of its Stock, and rendering the Trade of
it, more extensive, and more beneficial to the Nation.

III. -- Of having, notwithstanding these Grants, and though in manifest
Diminution of their Rights thereby, and to the known prejudice of its Trade,
submitted with all Alacrity, to a later Charter of Regulations in 1694, by
which it is in particular made dissolvible upon its appearing to the King, not
to be profitable to him, or this his Realm; but yet not till after three Years
Warning first given it, under his Privy Seal or Sign Manual.

IV. -- Of the Unspeakable Charge, it has undergone in Purchasing the Freehold
of diverse Forts, Factories, Buildings, and Lands in India, for the necessary
Carrying on of its Trade; besides other immense Sums, in fortifying, building
on, and Accommodating to its Service, the Islands of Bombay and St. Helena,
both invested by the Crown in the said Company, as its perpetual Inheritance.

V. -- Of its like extraordinary and Unavoidable Charge, in the Purchase and
Fortifying of its Forts on the West Coast of Sumatra, and Coast of Mallabar,
for the preservation of its Pepper-Trade; as that without which, the same must
have been exposed to an obvious hazard of being lost to the Nation.

VI. -- Of its having (besides the Public Benefits, otherwise arising from
these its Expenses, to the Nation's Trade there) acquired to its self a
Standing Income of Rents and other Duties, to more than 40000 l. per Annum; and
that Yearly increasing.

VII. -- Of having, besides its forementioned 740000 l. Subscription-Mony, paid
upwards of 85000 l. to the Crown for its Stock, during the late War, over and
above its Proportion for the present Year; and 295000 l. more for Customs,
since the Date of that Subscription.

VIII. -- Of its having, notwithstanding and besides all these Burdens and
Payments, and particularly that of its Customs toward the security of its
Trade; undergone within the five Years of its present Charter, the yet more
heavy Calamity of losing 12 Ships, to the Value of above a Million of Pounds
Sterling more.

IX. -- Of having from these its losses, joined to its other Charges, been
necessitated (for preserving the Remainder of its Unhappy Stock, and supporting
of its Trade) not only to the making further Advances of its own, but taking up
Considerable Sums elsewhere at Interest, for which both it and its said Stock,
stand at this day answerable.

X. -- Lastly; Of finding it self no sooner brought within View of enjoying its
Share at least, with the rest of his Majesty's Trading Subjects, in the
benefits of PEACE; after so great an Over-proportion of Sufferings, from the
Calamities of the WAR; but that, without the least Default assigned for it on
the part of the Company, or regard shown to the Provision even in that Case
made by his Majesty himself, in the three Years Warning: A Project has been
concerted by Persons ( Merchants and Others) not interested in the said
Company, for the utter Supplanting it, and gaining to themselves, exclusive of
all Others, an immediate Propriety in its Trade by Act of Parliament; in plain
Derogation of his Majesty's Charters; to the manifest Oppression of the present
Company, the much greater part of whose present Members, have not to this day
(from the many forementioned Charges and Losses) touched one Penny of clear
Profit, from the day of their Subscription; and to the Obvious Ruin of
Thousands of Others, interested with them in the same.

In which their so Unaccountable Enterprise, should these Gentlemen, by the
Strength of what they have without any or at most with little Adventure, been
gathering from the Public, succeed; to the spoiling the Company, of the little
which this Accumulation of Evils in the Service of the Public has left it, of
the Trade it has so dearly paid for the sole Title to: It seems worthy of every
ingenuous Dealer's Reflection: Viz.

REFLECTION:
What degree of Oppression, Circumvention, or Violence to Public Faith it can
be thought to be; that these Gentlemen can ever pretend to find fault with:
When (as none will now think it impossible) another Juncture may arise, wherein
Themselves, under the best Securities either of Right or Merit, may be attacked
with the same Irresistible Argument they now glory, in being able to over-bear
the present Company with?

One Plain REFLECTION Upon the Case of the East India Company.


