The Plain Dealer.

AN ESSAY, Wherein are some REMARKS upon Mr. THOMAS LONG;

But more particularly upon Dr. HOLLINGWORTH's Book.

WHERE The Character of King CHARLES the First is inserted from the Declaration
of Mr. Alexander Henderson: Which Book he calls, A further Defense of the
King's Holy Book. etc.

London, Printed in the Year 1692.

THE Plain Dealer.
THere has been a vile Bustle between one Richard Hollingworth Doctor, and an
unknown Author, in two or three Answers to some Papers came abroad under the
Name of Lieutenant General Ludlow. The great Struggle is, Whether Charles the
First wrote that Book entitled (...), or was the Martyr asserted in the two
last Reigns, under Charles the 2d; and that most Religious, Merciful, Brave and
Wife Prince, the late King James of Blessed Memory, In Mr. Henderson's
Character of Chapter I. page 3. in Dr. Hollingworth's Remarks.
two Princes the hopefullest that ever were in these ingrate Nations. The
Doctor, like a Politic Clergyman, to say no more of him, has took the
strongest Side; and I must say, the Gentleman that provoked him, must be a bold
Man, whenever since Sixty, (the Time we date the Prosperity and Glory of these
Nations, when Luxury ceased; when one of those hopeful Princes already
mentioned, exemplary in Piety, Virtue, Religion, Chastity and Frugality,
influenced all about him) a Law was on his Side, a Man's Head was the Price of
but Whispering against, The Anniversary preaching up of the Martyrdom of Chapter I.
of which the Clergy (to whom the Doctor is related, and who never fail to
flatter Power) were the Interpreters. It signfies not much to our present
Affairs, (though the Church-of- England-men think themselves Long in his
Preface, is in such a sury upon it, that when he reads it in his calmer Temper,
he will blush to find his gray Head guilty of such intemperance.
ruffled to their undoing) though in both, with submission, all the Arguments
seem against the Doctor, whether Charles the First wrote that Book, or was the
Martyr; nor should either have made me set Pen to Paper, had not the Doctor's
indirect and malicious course to have his Book gain Credit, and the base
Treatment he and Mr. Long make the Gentleman, whose Name (and they know it)
without his privity (though he ought not to think himself affronted at it) the
Author there makes use of, (...) been the occasion. As to the malicious' part
of which, should I make Remarks of all the Doctor writes, I should grow
tedious, and as Impertinent as our Clergyman; therefore I shall only observe
the Doctor's Darling, his last Answer, for which I expect Cannonading with
double Shot, if the Doctor out of his languishing Magazine has any left, to the
vile Book, etc. I protest it seems to me as ill-natured a Piece as any e're
sent abroad; and the Declaration in the Front the Doctor values so much, wrote
by a Man highly disobliged.

For there, Page 3. Mr. Henderson's words are, That which we esteem a God-like
Kirk-Policy, instituted by the Lord Christ and his Apostles, is no better to
them than a kind of Slavery; and some do not stick to call it worse than the
Spanish Inquisition; nay even the greatest part of those who invited us to
assist them in it, and sent hither their Commissioners, to induce us to enter
into a solemn National Covenant for that Effect, having served their Turn of
us, to throw down the King, and the Prelatical Party, and to possess themselves
with the Supreme Government both of Kirk and State, are now inventing Evasions
to be rid of us; and to delude it, some of them publishing openly in their
Pulpits, and Print, that the Sacred Covenant was never intended for the Godly,
etc. Was not the Doctor put to his last Stake, sure he would never have
inserted the Character of King Charles the First, given by this Man, apparently
disgusted Tho I have been lately informed this Character said to be Henderson's
was not writ by him, but soisted in by this, or such another Author.
? In one place of his Books the Doctor expresses vehemently an aversion to
Presbytery, and says, He never was a Presbyterian in his Life, and by God's
Grace never will: for I neither liked the Principles of that Government, nor
the Spirit of too many of that Party. Yet the Doctor gives you a taste of what
he may be upon occasion; for though he says, he will not be, etc. he makes use
of one of the Ridgedest.
worst of them to serve his Turn. And I am afraid, should the Government once
turn upon that Point, since the Doctor so profligately makes use of
Presbyterian Prejudice, was it for his Turn, he would be persuaded to be one of
them; but whilst it is not, I conclude with the Doctor, that he will love the
Constitution of the Church, and the Sweets of the Church of England, and as he
says, Page 22. what in him lies promote its true Interest, while he has a
Tongue to speak, or a Pen to write.

But we will leave the Doctor to his Resolution, and make some other Remarks
may back our Opinion, that this last Piece of our resolute Gentleman's has in
it much of Malice and ill Nature; for, Page 15. he suggests nothing will
satisfy the Person he pretends to answer, and his Party, but extirpating
Monarchy, the Church, and all good Men: for there he says, barbarously enough,
the Ends of them are to destroy Church and State, and therefore not one word of
the Virtues of this Prince I warrant you. But this is not the only rancor'd
thing our good-natured Answerer has subtly couched in this his notable Paper;
for Page 17 and 18, taxing the Author of the Lewd Book, as the Doctor with his
usual Rhetoric calls it, for asserting that the Condescension of King Charles
the First, in passing so many Bills the first Year of the Parliament, were no
Favors, nor deserved Thanks, he observes (for this Man and his Party must
design against all Kings) such an Assertion takes off all Obligations to their
present Majesty's, and their Successors, from the People, as to any future Acts
of Grace they grant; for which, says he, he deserves no Thanks from the Crown;
and indeed, for which he ought to be looked upon as a downright Enemy to the
future Intercourse and good Understanding betwixt their Majesty's and their
People, and hopes the saucy Assertion will be taken notice of. One may boldly
aver here, was our good-natured Doctor in Power, saying should not gratify his
Spleen; but thanks be to the humble Sphere of our Divine, though the Author has
the Grinn, he remains out of the reach of Biting. Knowing little of the King's
Book, though I may as well pretend to write against it, upon that little
knowledge I have of it, as the Doctor does for it, having only seen under the
Earl of Anglesey's own Hand, that King Charles the Second, and King James when
Duke of York, denied it writ by their Father; which Dr. Walker has made out to
all but those that, like the Doctor and Mr. Long, will not be convinced. I
intended by this Paper, only to arraign the Doctor's malicious Bitterness to
the Author, and to the Gentleman his Book owes his Title to; but there are two
things in it so downright false, though asserted with the same Spirit of
Confidence as runs through his whole Book, that I had been an Enemy to Truth,
had they patted me: I shall incur Censure for it, and come under the Doctor's
unmannerly seventh Query, viz. That all are great They must be Knaves and
Fools, (to use our civil Gentleman's own words) that do nor, when the whole
Nation then assembled in Parliament was of a contrary Opinion. This, I think,
is answering one of his Queries to the purpose. And any one may guess what
Honor the Doctor has by the following eighth Query, who gives himself the
trouble of reading it.
Fools, or designing Knaves, that believe any thing, the Libeller writes
against King Charles the First.

One is, his asserting so boldly, that Charles the First began not that unhappy
War with the Parliament; and mentions ( Page 21.) the words of King Charles the
First upon the Scaffold, as his Argument for it. It Is Christian-like to let the
Ashes of the Dead rest: And heartily I wish, instead of raking therein, a Vail
drawn over the Actions of that unfortunate Prince, might cause them never to be
thought of more. But our bold Divine, should we use more modesty than he is
acquainted with, upon mistake, would presently conclude the Advantage his, and
bulkely, in a conceited Triumph, troublesomely appear again. Therefore to do
the Town a kindness (without unexampled Impudence) in hindering it, it may be
truly affirmed, That the Doctor shuffles abominably, when he taxes for it, in
the same Page, our Author; and that what the Doctor calls shuffing, is an
apparent Truth. And the sending the Crown-Jewels into Holland, (let our Doctor
sillily insinuate never so much, that the Actions of Princes are above our
reach, and ought not (as in the said Page 21.) to be so narrowly pried into,
and his dare says, etc.) was infallibly the beginning of that War: for the
Crown-Jewels were conveyed by the Queen into Holland in 1641, that with them,
and the Assistance of the Prince of Orange, a sufficient Party might be raised
for the King. Whitlock (the Doctor in several parts of his Book seems so
plausible with, being in this against him) probably will not be allowed this
Truth, asserted in his Memoiers, p. 52. He farther tells you, Page 57. that a
Ship of Ammunition was taken; coming to the King from Holland; and that both
the carrying the Crown-Jewels, and taking this Ship, was before the Parliament
had voted an Army should be raised. Several other Instances of the beginning
the War on the King's Side, are there mentioned; the least would convince any
Man, but those (bribed and biassed ever since Sixty, by the State, upon the
30th of January, with good Benefices) to say the contrary; and their Auditors,
implicitly contenting to these thus interested and influenced-Men, who like
these, telling a false thing too frequently, at last take it and tell it for
true, and steadily believe it so. But let them go on with their Buffoonry, they
can, I hope, do little hurt now; Time, and the sad Effects of the last
dissolute Reigns, under the hopeful Branches of the Doctor's great and virtuous
Prince the Martyr, has convinced many, and will more, the Government under him
was not so regular as it should be: And I am confident the time will come,
though there are The bringing back the late King James.
Designs to hinder it, possibly too by some of those Thirtieth-of-January-Men,
when the Government will think it scandalous to celebrate that Day; and that
none need to take pains to convince the World, that the Unfortunate Charles the
First, was breaking through our Laws and Liberties in general; nor for his
Credit in particular, that he both began that Unhappy War, and countenanced
that Rebellion in Ireland. The excusing him of which last, is the other of the
two things in the Doctor's Book I have already told you in this Paper, is so
apparently false; for which there are at hand such Arguments, and convincing
Reasons, that our Doctor ought to be told, the World for the future,
notwithstanding the honest Account, (mentioned Page 21.) he says he has given
of himself, will have no great Opinion of his Modesty or Integrity, nor wonder
at the falsity of any thing comes abroad with our Clever Divine's Name to it;
some of which were so obvious, the most partial Writers of these Times cannot
help taking notice of, caressing and countenancing the Heads of that Rebellion
long before it actually was so, none does or can excuse, nor after the
admitting and encouraging the Negotiators of a Cessation; so fatal to Ireland,
at a time when the whole Bent of his Arms, for the Good of Mankind, should have
been for their Destruction, Not only only Dunkirkers by their means, having the
King's Warrant for it, but Sir John Pennington, who commanded the King's Ships,
had Orders for it.
admitting of their Counsels for the interception of Provisions designed there,
when the miserable Necessities of that Place most wanted them; and also for the
Seizing and Imprisoning the Messengers of the Parliament, and taking their
Money from them raised in the Country by Loans, intended for the Relief of
that Afflicted Place, and converting it to other Uses. But probably this
neither relishing with our Doctor, he may, according to his honest Education
and old Sincerity, be very plain with me, in the Language he treats the
Gentleman he pretends to answer, and put this Paper among the scandalous Books
(in this Clergy-man's Opinion) writ since the last Revolution against Church
and State, and with the utmost Effort of Malice; as in Page 13. of his Book
invoke, the Archbishops, Bishops, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commons of the
Nation, for endeavoring with Trifles like these, to sully the glossy Virtues
of that Prince; and if I tell him, wherein is all the double-dealing in the
World, of Letters under this Prince's own Hand, to the Marquess of Ormond for
making Peace with the Irish Rebels, some of which came over with Colonel
Earnely to serve him, to bring that Army (which in the Irish Shambles had
learned the Bloody Trade of cutting Throats) into England. Nay, It is something
unhappy for our Doctor, that the Gentleman is yet alive that owns he returned
the Money: He is a Person of Learning, Honesty and Honor, and will be
believed; I would name him, but have too great a value for him, to do it
without his leave. I presume we may have the Doctor as gross against this, as
the other Truths of his Martyr's Reign; if he is, this Gentleman has no
inferior Pen to our Doctor, and will give him an Answer, and the Truth of that
Affair.
if I tell him, and make it appear, which I can do, that Money was returned, by
this Martyr, into Ireland, to some of the Heads of that Rebellion, he will have
recourse to his old Cant, rail at the Assertion, give blackning Language, say,
it is the old Leaven and Spirit makes me say all this; and. conclude, I have
Designs upon Church and State, conjure them upon their Guard, and to erect a
Gibbet immediately. But let this reviling Man go on, asserting his own
integrity; Time has begun, and will pull off the Mask, and show our mouthing
Doctor, and some of that Tribe, in their Colors, when their Dishonesty, want
of Morals and Humanity, will appear so plain, the honest Men (if such there
are) will blush to think they have been misled so long. It is no easy matter,
when a set of Men, for politic Ends, with full swing has beat the Pulpit for
thirty Years, and more, upon one Subject, to remove the Prejudice, for the most
part, of an unexamining Nation, gained by such means; and indeed nothing less
than what was intended, altering Religion, breaking the Laws, and enslaving the
Nation, could have done it: yet these Men justify, and, like the Doctor, cry up
their Honesty, when their whole Bent was for encouraging (as Laud, our Doctor's
Saint and Bishop, and others, Men of the same Principles, did the unhappy
Charles the First) Arbitrary Designs. How supinely remiss was Charles the
Second, upon their full Cry for Passive Obedience, Jure Divino, Kings can do no
wrong; that the Kingdom was by Inheritance; the People made for the King, not
the King for the People; and that they were accountable to none for their
Actions but God Almighty. Their Expressions upon these Subjects, (some of which
as a taste, though enough to nausiate the Stomach of an honest Man) I have here
from themselves inserted.

I have not mentioned the Authors, who, because upon the extremes, which are
seldom or never lasting, may be now (and I believe some of them are) of another
Opinion.
That the Prince's Patent is from God; that no Accident or Occurrences, can
dissolve it to make us resist, unless (which we are assured he will not) God
himself should revoke the Grant.

The Church of England gives to all Princes the Supremacy in their respective
Dominions, as well over Spiritual as Temporal Persons, in Sacred as well as
Civil Causes: Which we count (speaking of its Members) not as an Act of Grace,
or any base flattering of Authority, or fawning upon the Crown, but it is the
expression of a just Debt, and a bare Recognition of what is their undoubted
Right, and what they always did enjoy.

That they cannot be Supreme, if Minor Vniversis, and may be resisted in the
tyrannical and exorbitant use of their Power.

These Arguments too often asserted, made the Monarchy so absolute, and the
Nation in general so careless, that the Growth of France, like to be the Ruin
of Europe, was taken no notice of. The most sauntring Prince that e're governed
these Realms, magnified to Idolatry; and the meanest-spirited Prince, incapable
both of Friendship and Valor, celebrated as the greatest Hero, the greatest
Friend, when Popery was tiding in upon these Nations chiefly by his means. How,
when some few Men in Parliament opposed it, by offering at a Bill of Exclusion,
did the Pulpit One of our Churchmen, in a Sermon preached June 21.1685. says,
It is now the Season for every Man to show his Readiness, Courage, Love and
Loyalty to his Prince, who is the Care of Heaven, whom God long preserve and
strengthen to overcome all his Enemies; and let us bless God who thus thought
us worthy of so gracious a Prince, every way Great and Good, kind to us to the
utmost of our Wishes, which past Ages have not known, and future will sooner
admire than believe, whose Wisdom, and Justice, and Mercy, whose Munificence,
Magnanimity, whose Bravery and Conduct has been showed in 1000 Occasions. A
Prince whose Royal Virtues, and Royal Merits entitle him to the Crown above all
others, if he had not been born to it. See p. 27. of S. Rich 's Sermon, printed
for Charles Broom, 1685.
roar, (our Honest Doctor in the Number) and call these few worthy Men (for the
greatest Number gives the Character) Forty one-Men, that the Nation was to look
upon as Monsters, involving their Country again under the Mischief of that Age?
Nay, such Encouragement was given by it, that upon that Foot it was the
Patriots of our Country and Religion were destroyed; and the Nation so
infatuated by the Principles abovementioned, that Juries were found (I do not
admire at Judges and Lawyers) to drain the Blood of their dearest Friends; for
those must be called so, that fell Sacrifices for their Country's Liberties.
After this, what stood in Charles the Second's way? Did he not, like a Torrent,
dissolve Corporations and find base servile Lawyers, of all Qualities, (some of
which by their Clergymen.
means in this present Government, were chose Members in Parliament, and there
sitting as Judges of their own Crimes, escaped unpunished) to wrest the Letter
of the Law, shaking the very Basis of our Ancient Government to serve his Turn,
resolving to have no Parliaments, (though he was never so long without one as
his Father) till he got one of his own choosing; and would, thus encouraged,
have perfected the Ruin of these Nations. But Providence, in its secret Wisdom,
thought he had gone far enough, and by his Death removed the Reins of
Government into a Rider's Hand, that forced the willing Titts upon their Breath
too far; then, almost jaded, 'twas, they kicked to throw their Rider. Here
'twas the danger came in view, foolish Bigotry was discovered, and this
dreaming Nation waked from its Lethargy, the flattering Churchmen saw their
Interest, (their only God, without any respect to their Services done the
Crown) in danger; and now began to urge for their Excuse, in a thing plain as
the Sun at Noon, That King James was a Papist.
Who would have thought it? And proceeded to promise, [then in Danger] Temper
to their The Bps Petition to K. James; when they refused to read his
Declaration. In all probability that Petition had the Consent of all the noted
Clergymen in England. Of which if our Doctor and Mr. Long are Samples, how
truly they intended it, let the Reader judge.
dissenting Brethren, they for more than thirty Years together had had that
distance with, the two Poles has not greater. Here any impartial Man may
observe what set of Men these are, and what the generality of Mankind, thus
influenced, must be. These very Men stamped Characters upon their dissenting
Brethren; if true, would make Mankind start at the The Churchmen in the last
Reigns made no difference, though this Government does, between the Papists and
Presbyterians; they asserted them like Sampson's Foxes, their Faces contrary;
but they were tied fast together in the same mischievous Design, of putting
Church and Kingdom into Combustion and Flame. Jos. Pleydell's Sermon, p. 11.
Aag. the 7th, 1681. printed for Joan. Broom, 1681.
sight of them, yet can sneak, cringe, and flatter the Men they made such
Villains of, to a Reconciliation, as soon as they wanted their Assistance; but
being out of Danger, as soon forget all their Promises. They preached up
Passive Obedience, and for their Kings; and as soon as one touched them to the
quick, deserted him, contrary to a thousand Promises, made in the presence of
Heaven, of Loyalty and Obedience. The Gentlemen of 1640.
The Villains these Men will not be compared to, were never such, they never
professed Principles, and left them. The Gentleman, our conceited and huffing
Pamphleteer, and his Reverend Crew, call Traitor, never forfeited his Morals,
his Honor, nor Opinion; he often bravely looked Danger in the Face to justify
'em; which Providence then and since has wonderfully appeared for; nor would he
ever, having opposed those Designs of Charles the First, be He was offered
Pardon by King Charles II. the Earldom of Essex, and an Estate answerable when
Lieutenant General in Ireland. They make part of his Crime his addressing his
Books to Sir Ed. Seymor, chief Counselor of State, known and owned by Mr.
Long, ( Page 4.) not write by him.
bribed into the Arbitrary Interest of Charles the Second, from the True
Interest of his Country, when an Exile, and from a plentiful Estate bended low
as the Ground. That the Doctor, Mr. Thomas Long, and the rest of their Coat,
should rail at, and call this worthy Man Impious Regicide, Insolent, Defier of
the Laws, making barbarous Insinuations upon all those excusing him, calling
them by unheard of Names, for which we want their Explanation, together with
the Names of Look Mr. Long's Preface, and beginning of his Book.
Villains, Common-Wealth's-men, Exploders of Monarchy and Episcopacy is no
wonder, having always opposed the topping Points that misled the late King; to
which this Nation, if it happens, owes its Ruin. But at this time, when the
Blind, at which these Men kick, is removed: Now we want all the Hands of
faithful and brave Men, that the Insinuations of these Grumblers for Interest,
Mr. Long's Character of the Clergy, Preface, page 2.
these stupor Mundi, should influence the Parliament) a great Number of whose
Members are as worthy Men as this Kingdom ever had, to Address to the King to
issue out his Proclamation against a Gentleman, with a Reward for his Head,
offering himself so seasonably, To serve in Ireland where formerly he had been
Lieutenant General.
that employing him, had in all probability saved thousands of Men, and Pounds,
of whole Fidelity both to himself and these Nations, the King was abundantly
satisfied, is so wonderful, it is beyond all Belief and Example.

Though I have been a little warm in this Paper, for which I think my self very
excusable; yet Heaven is my Witness, though they seem not of my Opinion toward
wards those they call Common Wealth's-men, I intend nor desire their Ruin, no
not so much as Hurt to them; all I intend, is to convince, if not them, others,
that Interest is in their Thoughts more, at least as much, as Piety; and that
they are not so innocent as they unite to make themselves; that their Church of
England either had not that Purity in the last Reigns they boast of, or if it
had, that they cease to be the Professors of it: and I would gladly be the
Occasion, when they find themselves no whiter than others, of their laying
aside Bitterness and ill Language, dividing their Power, (tho I am afraid, this
Advice will be taken as our Savior's was to the young Rich Man in the Gospel)
and to come to that Temper promised, those, they think they cannot call worse
than Common-Wealth's-men, and not endeavor, by that Name, to bring the
Government upon their Backs, nor invite the Soldiers (for that must be the
meaning of Mr. Long in his Book, page 4.) to cut their Throats: Such a Union
will keep the Crown upon the Heads of our present King and Queen; which
Providence, as Mr. Long in the Preface, Page 4. of the said Book, (the only
thing to be granted him through it) by a Series of Miracles wonderfully has
placed there, to make us, if we will our selves, a happy People, maintain
Monarchy upon its old Basis, and the Laws in their proper Channels, keep out
the old Dispensing Judges from filling again the Seats at Westminster, to whom
the Government and Posterity will wonder at it, by the The Power of these Men
they still depend upon; and after accused as false Interpreters of the Laws,
and hazarding three Kingdoms, for which they stand excepted in an Act of
Indemnity, dare appear, and are countenanced at those Bars they should be
brought to as the greatest Criminals. The Lord Chief Justice Hales was almost
prophetic in his Opinion, That there was more danger of introducing Arbitrary
Power into these Nations, by the Red-Coats in Westminster Hall, than by those
without.
Wiles of the old True-paced Church-of England-Men, has been too favorable to;
'twill break the Hearts of your Old and New Arbitrary Men, who expect to enter
at the Breach our eloquent Doctor and Mr. Long are unwarily making, defeat Rome
and France, and may contribute much to the stopping of that Issue of Blood
through Christendom. Which that God of his infinite Mercy may grant, with all
Prosperity to our present King and Queen, is the Prayer of one of those
Common-Wealth's-men our Doctor and Mr. Long would have the Nation frighted at:
and I am sure 'twas the Prayer of that worthy Man they gave such bad Language
to, his dying words affirm it; for almost his last were Wishes for the Good of
England, and Peace of Christendom: and all the Concern upon him was, that he
had not the Honor of having his Eyes closed in averting the Eminent Hazards he
sensibly perceived too much threatened his Country. He died in October last
1692, lamented and commended by all that knew him.

FINIS.

