THE Plain Man's Essay FOR ENGLAND'S Prosperity: More particularly REFERRED and
SUBMITTED To the Consideration of the LORDS and COMMONS In Parliament
Assembled, School.

LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCVIII.

THE Plain Man's Essay FOR England's Prosperity, etc.
THE Advantages of Religion and Government are of so Universal Influence and
Concern, that since every one in their respective Spheres must bear a part in
both relations, it will scarce be denied, but they may, nay ought to act one
also, according to their several Powers and Capacities.

This may Apologize for my thus casting a Mite into the Public Treasury: And
while I but offer at preserving Your Honors in the distinguishing Characters
and Consideration Your Ancestors and Predecessors have been eminent for, and
deservedly enjoyed beyond Us of a Lower and inferior Rank, I presume to promise
my self, That my Attempt will not be held inconsistent with that branch of duty
to our Neighbor, The ordering my self lowly and reverently to all my Betters,
according as we are taught in our Church Catechism.

For though the Advantages are many and great which we have sensibly recovered
by means of the late Happy Revolution, yet the Nation was too long a dividing
and corrupting* and too far sunk with narrow, mistaken Notions of Christian and
Civil Liberty, to be at once freed from all Danger, and restored to that
extensive Charity, which bears 1 Cor. 13. 7.
all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, etc.

This makes me hope, and willing to persuade my self, That though men's Notions
and Actings have seemed in many respects very opposite, and too too passionate
and exasperating, that this however has proceeded from a mistaken first, and
then a misguided Zeal, rather than from any inbred Malice of one toward
another, or ill will at bottom to their Native Country: For when our common
Danger was grown to that height as became sensible and apparent to them, we
have seen men of the most suspected Pretensions strike in, and close with,
under God, the happy Instrument of our Deliverance, Our present Gracious King,
in his glorious Expedition for Preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for
P. of O's Declarat.
Restoring the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and Ireland.

But though I apprehend we may easily err, and so judge amiss, in imputing
overmuch to men's Wills, and too little to our Sins and Misdoings, the grievous
Pressures the Nation was reduced to, and which further threatened it; yet it is
every one's duty to prevent, what in him lies, the pernicious Principles and
Practices that brought both Church and State to such Extremities, and which may
again obstruct their Settlement; so that there may be no more danger of the
Nation's falling at any Ibid.
time hereafter under Arbitrary Government.

But as the watchman woketh but in vain, except the Lord does keep Psalm. 127. ^.
the city; so altogether in vain is it to presume and expect that human Means
should prosper for our preservation, if we continue by our Sins to work our own
destruction.

There are so many excellent Discourses full fraught with such cogent Reasons
continually almost both preached and published, showing the indispensible
necessity of a good Life, and withal of a Reformation of Manners in the Age we
live, that I shall not pretend to insist on that part; and indeed I think it
altogether needless, here especially: For I do not observe that this bears any
part in our Modern Controversies* nor do I meet with any body that contradicts
it in particular: For which Reasons I choose rather to hint one Occasion (among
many others, it is not improbable) whence it comes, that a matter so obvious in
it self, so universally acknowledged, so strenuously enforced, and in its own
nature and consequence so beneficial to Mankind, takes so little place, That
nothing in Religion seems near so like a contradiction, as men are to
themselves.

I am partly aware, that in this licentious Age, rather than of perfect
Freedom, the common cry goes so much of a rank Infidelity and gross Atheism,
that some will be ready to suggest men's Lives are* not such a contradiction to
their Sentiments, as I here insinuate: But under favor, and in the words of a
Reverend and Learned Prelate of our Church, A Lord Bishop of Sarum's Pastoral
Care. Lord Bacon's Essays.
Learned or Contemplative Atheism is so hard a thing to be conceived, that
unless a man's powers are first strangely vitiated, it is not easy to see how
any one can bring himself to it; and therefore it is that God is observed (as
the Great Lord Bacon remarks) never to have wrought a Miracle to convince
Atheism, because his Ordinary Works convince it. But the truth seems rather to
lie here (as the same excellent Person further expresses it); Ibid.
That all that impugn a Received Religion or Superstition, are by the Adverse
Party branded with the Name of Atheists; so I remember, it likewise noted, by a
Modern Author, That in Germany an Atheist once signified a Person that meddled
with the Pope's Mitre, or the Monks fat Bellies; and thus nearer home in some
past times; It was little better to question the Divine Right of a special Form
of Ecclesiastical, or Civil Government, exclusive of all others.

There are indeed but too too many, who in a profligate way take, it may be, a
sort of fantastical vain pride in talking after an Atheistical manner, as well
as in living so too, which is what I with others deny not, but bewail; and
because I look not on this, as I said* to proceed from a formed and settled
Judgment, but as a prejudice they have imbibed from men only; I will now give
some account whence I take both the one and the other in great part to arise
and prevail so far.

Though no Human Authority in* Religious Matters is decisive and absolutely
binding among men, no not where Infallibility is pretended; much less with such
who renounce a Claim so empty, but withal so artificial, yet in fact I incline
to think, it will be owned that nothing sways so much as the Authority and
Example of Professors, especially Superiors of all sorts (it matters not to
distinguish here, any more than to instance particulars) and that men for the
most part, even in the weightiest Concerns of this World, and another, judge
more from what they see and hear, than what they understand; and consequently
form and regulate their Speech and Actions more by Sense, than true Knowledge:
Which made that Great and Good Man, the late Archbishop Tillotson, say, That
Fifth Vol. of his Sermons, p. 118.
he could not see how Christianity can ever gain much ground in the world, till
it be better adorned and recommended by the Professors of it. Nor is it easy to
conceive, how in this state of Nature it can be otherwise, since God in his
wisdom has constituted the make and frame of Mankind such, That Speculative
Arguments do not Lord Bishop of Sarum's Pastoral Care.
reach the Understanding of the greatest part, who are only capable of sensible
ones; whence it is the less to be wondered at, if so many (considering besides we
are so continually beset with outward Temptations, and inbred Passions) take up
with plausible Colors, rather than just Causes of Atheism and Immorality, Le
Clerc of Incredulity.
who cannot go back to the very Spring, and examine the Christian Religion in
it self, and such as it is in the Writings of the Apostles: And from hence it
seems naturally to follow, That most Peoples false Notions and evil Practices
spring from Prejudices taken up among men, without any real Sentiments of their
own: And if this be so, we may well reckon our selves so much our Brothers
keepers, that it imports us more than a little to beware, in our respective
stations, how through our defaults we scandalize our Neighbor, lest, while we
severally in our turns admonish one another, our selves become Castaways, and
withal draw our Brethren into the like condemnation.

This more especially imports the Clergy, as the peculiar Ash^am of Confus. and
Revol. of Government.
Ambassadors of God, and as they, who deriving neither from Prince nor People,
but from Jesus Christ, as the Immediate Dispensers of his Mysteries, interpose
with greater assurance than any of another Robe.

Then the Nobility and Gentry, as who by their great Advantages of Birth and
Education, have not only stronger and more particular inducements, and who
cannot be without clearer Light for the promoting our Sovereign Benefactor's
Glory, and our Neighbors Good; no more than they can be without great
influences on those of low Degree: And how generally is it even demanded in the
common Affairs and Fashions of life, to be honored and imitated by Inferiors;
and how ready and obsequious, for the most part, are these to mimick those
above them; but, as the Nature of Man is prone to ill, in the worst things more
especially? And herein is one circumstance so peculiar, and so proper to Men of
the first Quality, that it gives great assurance of their being touched
therewith; for since they appear upon all occasions so piqu'd in Honor, to be
outdone in what they take to and affect; that few things continue longer a
Mode, or very valuable, but until others take in with* them; I humbly move them
to resolve themselves, What Vice or Immorality it is, in which the very meanest
among us, in their way, are not capable (I dare not say of excelling, but) of
exceeding even the Highest and the Greatest? Which alone, methinks, is
sufficient to make men truly and thoroughly affected with the Principles of
Honor and Distinction (which their Blood and Degree naturally enough inspire)
head and maintain a just and necessary Reformation of Manners, since the very
scum of the People are so universally infected with all sorts of Vice and
Immorality, and I wish it was not to be added (as before intimated) from the
Contagion of the Highest: But Corruption, and so too Reformation, of Manners,
descends as naturally as Love is said to do: How necessary then and commendable
is such a Revolution as this? And how would it work and prove a mighty
Deliverance indeed to us and our Posterities? And without it, suffer me to say,
The being hitherto spared (while the very Heavens have continued lowering as of
late for some time past; tho our Neighbors at present seem to feel the more
immediate and pressing effects of unkindly Seasons, etc. suffer me however to
say, That this or any such like Forbearance of God toward us) is so far from
securing a Blessing in the End* that the Mercies which the Almighty's
Long-suffering and Forbearance has hitherto extended to us, will one day (if a
timely Repentance and Amendment do not follow) become our most certain, just,
and terrible Confusion: This we cannot but know, as we all acknowledge by our
public Profession of Religion, and a Form at least of Godliness and Divine
Worship: But what avails it to confess God with our Lips, if by our Lives we
deny him? Or with what face can we expect God's Blessing on us and our
Endeavors; unless we are found doing his Work, which is most properly our own
too?

Not that we may however take up our Rest here, as if no more was required or
necessary, than the abstaining from evil, or at most, the gaining in our selves
a holy disposition and temper of mind; or that both our Religious and Civil
Duties were not more Positive than Negative, more Active than Passive: No, the
former is but a just and due preparation for the latter; for there are sins of
Omission no less than of Commission; and we may, and I fear often do, tempt and
provoke Providence as well by neglecting as by abusing it. Lest therefore we
incur God Almighty's displeasure through our own default, we must not stop
short here: And because generals are for the most part uncertain, and
oftentimes fallacious, I will now with humble deference and submission, proceed
to hint at some few particulars, which to me seem to affect the Essence of
every well Constituted Society, whether we consider it in a Religious or Civil
Capacity.

I observe it then in the first place, as, in my poor apprehension, a capitol
Error, and which seems to hold some parallel in Church and State, that whereas
Christ's Church extends Romans 10. 13.
it self to all that call on his name; and that all ought to be embraced upon
the plain and direct Terms of the Gospel, whom coming to him, himself will in
no wise cast out: And whereas, John 6. 37.
in like manner, all Mankind ought to consider themselves as so many Members,
making up one great entire Body throughout the Universe, to whose happiness and
welfare all the divided and subdivided Societies, Parties and Denominations of
Men should be subservient, and esteem their own private separate Good as
therein included: it is but too often seen, that in all particular Societies,
whether for Religious or Civil purposes, Men consider themselves and their
small separate Parties as the whole, rather than as parts; and so cause Schisms
and Factions in Church and State, by taking upon them more than of right
belongs apart; and through each Party's pretending to usurp, and that all
others should observe and obey them disjunctly; instead of their cooperating
reciprocally according to their Stations, Ranks and Capacities, to the
respective good and edification of the more entire Body of that Society, and
instead of such Societies acting (as much as may be) for the common universal
benefit and advantage of Mankind collectively.

It Is easily seen whither this in a great measure tends; and there has so very
much ill accrued, and withal so little good, to the several distinguishing and
contending Parties within our selves in their several turns, and according to
the various Scenes of public Affairs: And particularly we have lately had
(under the weight of Taxes, the misfortunes of War, and more especially the
notorious impairing the Coin of the Nation; and all this, etc. too in a young
Government, and scarce thoroughly settled) such sensible and immediate effects of
the Toleration hitherto allowed, that it is the more amazing to see any People
so blinded, at least, toward their Country's and the public Interest, as to
think the permission that is, too much; whereas Religion, as well as Policy,
inclines rather to Lord Bacon's Essays.
extend it further: For as it is noted, Christ's Coat indeed had no seam, but
the Church's Vesture was of diverse colors; whereupon it is said, In vest
varietas sit, scissura non sit; They be two things, Unity and Uniformity: Then
as to Policy, What greater security, under God, can there be to any regular,
well-constituted Government, than the making all People easy, especially in
their highest and most tender concern of this World and another; and that it be
their special Interest to maintain it, and then withal to teach men so? Thus
all men (as is equal in Nature, and so also under Government) are, according to
their respective Demerits, let in to run the hazards, bear the burdens, and
share in common the Profits and Honors of the Government they live under, as
well as enjoy its common Protection together with the rest of their Brethren,
who are all such by the Bonds of Nature, of Religion, and of Society.

Another ill consequence of men's narrow Notions and partial Consideration for
themselves; besides their muttering at Liberty of Conscience (the great and
special Blessing of Heaven, as well as of this Reign) is the grumbling some
discover at the Liberty of the Press, which has been, and is so peculiarly
instrumental for the dispelling Popish Ignorance, and all such blind and
passive Superstitions, that the Reformation it self had proved Abortive, had
not God of his mercy brought to light the Excellent Art of Printing; whereby we
are mutually enabled to reap the Advantages of one another's Labors: And there
can be nothing of a civil nature assigned so much the cause why that has
hitherto made no greater progress, but seems rather in many places at this day
to lose ground, than Persecution, and the Restraint of the Press. Papists
indeed may be said to be so far in the right, as to take right Measures for the
upholding their Temporal Hierarchy, or Spiritual Usurpation; but it is
unaccountable why Protestants, with a Cause that needs only a true Liberty and
Light to render it amiable and prevailing over the face of the whole Earth, and
to bring in in God's appointed time the fullness of the Gentiles, should tread
in their steps and paths of Darkness, which is their chief, I may say their
only, Subterfuge; or that we should turn Inquisitors upon our selves, because,
God be thanked, it is not yet in their power to set any over us.

There are against this (as against what not?) some Objections may be started,
but they appear either such Cavils, or Prejudices, or at most affect only some
wild Excesses of Licentiousness, not a Just Liberty, and which may be well
enough and easily regulated, without denying or destroying such a Liberty of
men's publishing their Thoughts to the World, that I here purposely pass them by
in silence, as of no weight to the merits of the matter, nor altogether
consistent with my proposed brevity; only, lest it seem to thwart what I have
contended for but even now, the Reform of Manners, I crave leave to add, That
there need no Supervisors of the Press to prevent the publishing of Principles
or Notions, in themselves Scandalous, Immoral or Profane, because it was
scarce ever, or rather never known, that under the Inquisition of the Press,
any have sought an Imprimatur for them.

A second fatal Error, and of somewhat like kind with the former, I take to be
the Opinion some seem to entertain of the Perfection of our Church* Reformation
and State-settlement; for as soon as they become so possessed, they no longer
strive after any thing beyond themselves and their present Circumstances: And
the nature of Man, and of all human things besides, is such, that if they grow
not, nor improve, be their height and degree of Perfection, Settlement, or
Establishment what it will, they stand not long at a stay, but decline,
degenerate, and grow worse and worse; non progredi est regredi: But the
Reformation was never looked upon, nor can be understood to be or to have been,
complete. The first Reformers were eminent indeed to a degree, but the Evil had
been too long contracting, and was grown to too great a Head, to have its
Reform be the Work but of a Day, of a Reign, or even of an Age. That Reverend
and Learned Prelate of our Church, who has so incontestably Reformed and
Imbelish'd its History, will scarce be rejected as an incompetent Judge or
Witness in this Case; and he has not long since assured the World, That there
remains yet a great deal to be done for the completing of our Reformation. But
the Account he gives of its having made a full stand for above an hundred
years, would not, it is like, be so properly inserted here, as it is in the
Preface to his Discourse of the Pastoral Care. But put the Case, That those who
succeeded our first most worthy Reformers, had gone on, and taken the same
liberty in examining theirs, as they did their Predecessors Opinions: And that
thereby, as it could scarce have failed, they had happily discovered much more
Truth: If any say, That then the same would have continued to us and to
Posterity; by the very self-same Reason may they say too, That no Errors or
Corruptions have ever been since our Savior Christ's and his Apostles times:
And so farewell at once all Reformation, past, present, or to come. But I would
only ask (in the Lord Bacon's words), Resuscitat.
why the Civil State should be purged and reformed by good and wholesome Laws,
devising Remedies as fast as time breeds Mischiefs? And contrariwise, the
Ecclesiastical State should still continue upon the Dregs of Time, and receive
no Alteration. But if it be said to me, That there is a difference between
Civil Causes and Ecclesiastical; they may as well tell me, That Churches and
Chapels need no Reparations, tho Castles and Houses do. Whereas commonly, to
speak truth, Dilapidations of the Inward and Spiritual Edifications of the
Church of God are in all times as great as the Outward and Material.

Then as to the State-Settlement, let any body, without going further, but look
into His Majesty's most just and righteous Declarations, upon his so Charitable
Expedition hither; and then, considering the many notorious Breaches on our
Civil and Religious Rights therein expressed and implied, let him, I say,
satisfy himself, if he can, that there is nothing more to do, notwithstanding
the great Advance toward the promoting a Settlement of the Religion, and of
the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects, upon so sure a Foundation, that
there P. of O's Addit. Declarat.
may be no danger of the Nations relapsing into the like Miseries at any time
hereafter; which we are abundantly assured was his Majesty's only design in
that Undertaking.

It would be no hard matter to suggest diverse Particulars, that have a natural
Tendency to complete so Pious, so Glorious an Enterprise; and men are apt, with
a good and laudable Intention, to instance in what occurs for that purpose,
according to their various Sentiments and Turns of Imaginations; as, among
others, in a General Naturalization, and a Public Registry, etc. But I shall
content my self here to point at only in short some few of the many Instances
particularized in the forementioned Declarations, as carrying with them both
their own Evidence and Authority; referring the rest to the more accurate,
able, and discerning Considerations of those and* such the Lords and Commons,
as upon the Agreement and Concurrence of both Houses, having entire Confidence,
That his Highness the Prince of Orange would perfect the Deliverance so far
advanced by him, etc. did resolve and declare the Prince and Princess of
Orange, King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. And did pray them
to accept the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions
accordingly.

The Particulars then that I shall here on this Head touch upon, are in order
as I find them there; where the 10th Paragraph runs thus, They have also
invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most of those Towns that
have a Right to be represented by their Burgesses in Parliament; and have
procured Surrenders to be made of them; by which the Magistrates in them have
delivered up all their Rights and Privileges, to be disposed of at the pleasure
of those Evil Counselors; who have thereupon placed new Magistrates in those
Towns, such as they can most entirely confide in; and in many of them they have
put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the Incapacities under which the Law
has put them. Again in the 18th Paragraph we have these words, And contrary to
the Charters and Privileges of those Boroughs that have a Right to send
Burgesses to Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be made, as they
thought fit and necessary for assuring themselves of all the Members that are
to be chosen by those Corporations. And in the 21st it is declared, That in
order to (the having a free and lawful Parliament assembled) all the late
Charters, by which the Elections of Burgesses are limited, contrary to the
ancient customs, shall be considered as null and of no force: And likewise all
Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their
former Employments, as well as all the Boroughs of England, shall return again
to their ancient Prescriptions and Charters. But whether the bare restoring
these to their ancient Proprietors and their Successors, especially after such
bold presidents of manifest violations committed upon them, be a sufficient
security against a precarious Tenure in times to come, I submit to your better
and more deliberate Considerations; and may it please your Honors to consider
withal, what His Majesty, Prince-like, adds in his concurring second
Declaration, That the seeming release from their great Oppressions offered to
the City of London upon the hearing of his Preparations to assist the People,
was done only, hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to divert them from
demanding a secure Re-establishment of their Religion and Laws: And that such
security might not in aftertimes prove fallacious, His Highness, out of his
deep foresight and Princely Wisdom ( whose care of the People has been all
along transcendent) at the same time subjoined, That the defectiveness of the
redress was apparent, while they laid down nothing which they may not take up
at pleasure, and they reserved entire and not so much as mentioned their claims
and pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the Root of
all their Oppression, and of the total Subversion of the Government: Hinc illae
Lachrime. His Majesty herein has abundantly done his part; the preceding
Parliaments have gone a good way, and it is not to be doubted, but Your Honors
will proceed. And that the good people of England will persevere and adhere to
His Majesty, his most Just and Gracious Declarations; as also to the present
Government founded thereupon and thereafter.

The next particular in course that follows, and which also depends much on the
preceding Article (as the foregoing References do plainly intimate) is the
Being and Business of Parliaments, concerning which the 18th Paragraph
uncontroulably asserts, That according to the Constitution of the English
Government and immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament Men ought to he
made with an entire Liberty, without any sort of force, or the requiring the
Electors to choose such persons as shall be named to them: And the persons thus
freely Elected ought to give their Opinions freely upon all matters, that are
brought before them, having the good of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and
following in all things the Dictates of their Conscience. This manifestly
relates, as to the Freedom of Election of Members, so also to the entire
freedom of such Members acting afterward: Toward the former of these
especially, there have been some good things Enacted; but yet the laying
Penalties or Incapacities on Candidates may not probably be sufficient (I say
not to cure, but) to prevent the evil, without laying the Electors themselves
under like Penalties and Incapacities; nor is there good reason why the former
should be interdicted, and not the latter. In case it be said, That if no body
did Tempt, no body would be Corrupted; I reply, if no body was to be, or would
be corrupted, no body would tempt; so that by this means there would, at least,
be both less Temptation and less Corruption. As to the other branch, their
Freedom of acting, the name of the Pentioner Parliament is not so stale as to
be forgotten, nor of the nature of sour Wines, which by turning Vinegar come
again in vogue. God Almighty has taught man, that to be delivered from evil,
he must pray, not to be led into temptation. There is a Reverend and Worthy
Class among you, whose Predecessors lay some time since under the imputation of
the dead Weight; which yet was not owing so much to men's aversion, or their
objections to the Order it self (however craftily it has been given out and
vulgarly taken) as to their D^pendencies, and the effects that these have
wrought in times past; and if ever the like effects appear in the other House,
as the consequence would not be less fatal, so the Parties themselves would not
be less obnoxious. It would be well therefore, if such modest and reasonable
provisions were herein timely made, as consist with the public service; and
that this Rock of Offense be so done away, as that our Enemies may not at any
time whatever, have it, or take it, for a handle to pervert, blast, or
invalidate any Parliaments Proceedings.

The last thing that I shall here mention of this nature is, That His Majesty
was so very cautious of endangering the Nation, though by a temporary or
occasional means of its preservation, and of even giving umbrage of any such
offense, that after he had represented in a peculiar instance (. 19.) the
failure, or rather neglect, of the then Evil Counselors, in not doing more to
satisfy the many good Subjects of these Kingdoms, or to put an end to their
doubts; He declares in very express terms (. 21.) that he brought over with him
a force sufficient, by the blessing of God, to defend him from the violence
(only) of those (the then) Evil Counselors. And further promises (. 23.) That
as soon as the state of the Nation will admit of it, he would send back all
those Foreign Forces that he had brought along with him. Not only so, but in
his additional Declaration (we all may remember how occasioned) he most
emphatically disclaims, abhors, and renounceth all suspicion of a wicked design
of Conquering the Nation. And as jealous for the People, of their abandoning
themselves altogether, and their Deliverance too at last, after such Instances
given of their overgreat and too easy Passiveness, he yet further there minds
them of the fatal Consequences of putting the Free People of England under a
Force, as that which would make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors,
Estates, and Interests. This as it shows His Majesty's great Wisdom and
Goodness together, so it serves to speak and make appear the Considerateness
and sound Reasons of the late Parliaments Proceedings in relation to the Army,
and also strongly implies the Defectiveness of what is yet done therein, which
may not be unworthy your further Consideration. For as it was one of the
State-Policies, calculated to serve the sinister Ends of the late Reigns, to
neglect, discourage, and discountenance The Militia of the Kingdom, thereby to
render it both contemptible, and in a great measure useless, in order to the
superinducing in process of time, and as time should serve, A Standing Force;
so it appears but a reasonable Jealousy or Conjecture, That notwithstanding
what is already done in this matter, if more do not follow, and that the
Militia of the Kingdom at least be not new-modell'd and better formed, than it
can possibly be on the Foot it now stands; it may yet prove, for want of some
ready, disciplined, domestic Power of one kind or another, to withstand and
oppose any Foreign Attempt; but as a Postern-gate to let in at one time or
other, A Standing Force upon the Nation; and then they that would have Honors,
Estates, and Interests, (according to what goes before) must have them there or
no where.

Or if Gentlemen, notwithstanding our present sure and happy Peace, apprehend
it requisite as an immediate Guard and Defense of the Nation, to continue on
foot for this one Year longer, a certain Number of Men (call them Regular
Troops, a Standing Force or Army, or whatever else their Appellation be) yet
taking the real meaning to be, That their Being shall determine with the Year;
it may nevertheless sure with Decency and good reason be expected, not only
that some special Reason be assigned, why These must be continued This Year,
more than The Ensuing; for a Perpetual Reason and a Yearly Expedient correspond
not over-well; and Perpetuity it self is made up, and in some sort consists of
One Year after Another. But further, I humbly presume, it may moreover be
expected, that the same Gentlemen will rather choose to move First, than wait to
Second any Motion for suitable Provisions for Futurity; (suppose one be, for
instance, as before, The new forming the Militia of the Kingdom; that thus,
under the Cover of the forementioned Expedient, this at least may be gained,
that it be better settled, Trained, and become more and every way useful; ^
upon this supposition still, that as yet we want what is sufficient for the
Safety, Honor and Happiness of the Kingdom: The glorious Ends His Sacred
Majesty not only came hither for at first, but which is all (as he, to his
immortal Honor be it ever spoken, continues graciously to assure us in his
late Speech to both Houses of Parliament) he has to ask: After which, I see
not how it can any longer remain a doubt (if any hitherto has been) but that
an English Parliament will (and without prejudice to any their more particular
Engagements) most carefully hold those general Engagements abovementioned, to
the Safety, Honor and Happiness of the Kingdom, in all and every respect
sacred; or His Majesty is but too like to fail of the honorable Expectation he
so graciously expresses of the present Parliament, And they will appear to
come infinitely below the thoughts he entertained P. of O's Letter to the
Officers of the Army.
even of the Officers of the late King James' s Army, who, he had goodness
enough to hope, would not suffer themselves to be abused by a false notion of
Honor; but that they would in the first place consider what they owed to
Almighty God, to their Religion, to their Country, to themselves, and to their
Posterity, which they as men of honor (and it seems to hold much the same with
all men of honor) ought to prefer to all private Considerations and
Engagements whatsoever; but besides the force and extent of these
Considerations, yet even for the obtaining of the present supposed Point in
issue, a certain Land-Force for this one Year; As such provisions and such
concurrence, (by removing all Reasonable Jealousies, and by that means inducing
Men of somewhat other thoughts, to quit their fears of this, or any present,
Expedient, that upon mature deliberation and debate shall be found occasionally
necessary) do both plainly and naturally tend to facilitate the End; so they
also help to make it easy for the time, if not every way and altogether
agreeable to those of such different Sentiments; which, with humble submission
I take it, His Majesty's late Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament.
is of more weight, and better account, than perhaps the bare carrying This,
or, it may be, any Other Point can, in its self, possibly be. It being beyond
all contradiction no less than self-evident, That the flourishing of Trade, the
supporting of Credit, and the quiet of Peoples minds at home, will depend on
the opinion they have of their Security.

I have been the freer to give some before-hinted Jealousies in this place the
term of Reasonable; because I observe, That the raising and keeping a standing
Army in time of Peace, without consent of Parliament, is assigned, in the
Agreement of the House of Lords, with the concurrence of the House of Commons,
as one of the Acts whereby the late King James did endeavor to subvert the
Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and which
(together with all other the particulars therein enumerated) was by them
declared utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Freedom of this
Realm; whereupon followed the Abdication and Vacancy, which made way for, under
God, our present Gracious Deliverer and Sovereign to fill the Throne, thereby
to supply that Vacancy: And that these words, without Consent of Parliament,
stand part of this forecited Article, takes not off the force thereof: For
besides the foreignness of the Supposition, That a Free English Parliament
would e're consent to raise or keep up an Army in time of peace without some
imminent danger apparently impendent on the Nation and Government; This only
obviates the Exceptions and Offense that might be taken from the Ways and Means
of coming by, or of retaining, such a Force, but by no means provides against
the many and great Dangers (if no more immediate Evils) naturally accruing and
arising thence; which is by far the greatest part of the difficulty, as it is
most evidently of the last and utmost Concern to a free People: Now, how any
can think it (if any do) altogether unreasonable to be, though but thus
remotely, jealous for His Majesty, and our own sakes, of any thing that had
such a part in the late King James's Fate, and the Nations Sufferings under
him, is beside, I confess, (or it may be rather, it surpasses) my small
Capacity and Understanding, which way soever the merits of the matter turns, as
to a Standing Land-Force, being a present necessary Expedient for preserving
the safety, honor and happiness of the Kingdom: And as to what consideration
it may have Abroad, His Majesty is also pleased in his beforementioned late
Speech, (so full of Wisdom and Grace,) to give us this fresh Information and
Assurance, That to preserve to England the weight and influence it has at
present on the Councels and Affairs Abroad, it will be requisite Europe should
see, we will not be wanting to our selves.


But as to this, (and indeed in what not?) His Majesty moreover had before
acquitted himself in so solemnly declaring ( 21.) the design of his Expedition
to be, That so the Two Houses may concur in the preparing of such Laws, as they
upon full and free debate shall judge necessary and convenient, both for the
confirming and executing the Law concerning the Test, and such other Laws as
are necessary for the security and maintenance of the Protestant Religion; as
likewise for making such Laws as may establish a good Agreement between the
Church of England, and all Protestant Dissenters; as also for the covering and
securing of all such who will live peaceably under the Government, as becomes
good Subjects, from all persecution upon the account of their Religion, even
Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing all other things, which the
Two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the peace, honor and safety
of the Nation, so that there may be no more danger of the Nation's falling at
any time hereafter under Arbitrary Government; by which he fully refers to your
Honors (as he still continues to do); And there, in all humility, I leave
these Considerations, at a Season, which in many respects appears proper, and
adapted to such Cares and Endeavors: For an end being put to the growing
Expenses and Hazards of a tedious War, the time is come, that the Nation, by
report at least and speech of People, has been referred to: The Time is also
come, that (such as for distinction-sake have been called) Whiggs are said to
be more in play, and have greater Parts and Interests in State Affairs than
formerly, who have hitherto loudly called for a full Regulation and better
Settlement in these Matters: And God be thanked, our Case is not at present so
forlorn, and past all remedy, that it should seem to be with us (as Bishop
Sanderson on another occasion expressed himself) as with decaying Merchants,
almost become desperate; who when Creditors call fast upon them, being hopeless
of paying all, grow careless of all, and pay none: And if These neglect their
Opportunities which God and the King have, and do put into their hands (and
more if they withstand them) in so dishonouring their own Principles, and
sinning so much against knowledge and conviction, they will endanger the rendering
themselves contemptible, and of becoming more a common scorn, than I am willing
to say; for thus, as Popish Policy sowed Divisions among us, that we might do
their work by, in our turns, devouring one another, when they, without our
help, were not sufficient to effect our Ruin; so Tories (as men have been
distinguished) might well laugh in their Sleeves, (nor scarce would they stop
there) if the Whiggs, but through neglect or indiscretion, suffer those Evils
to overtake Posterity which the Others could not (whether wittingly or
unwittingly) bring upon the present Generation; and so it would be justified
beyond dispute, that (though it would be hard perhaps, nay next to impossible
it may be, to establish the Government altogether by Tories, yet however that)
it is also possible it may not be preserved with Whiggs; Quod Deus avertat.

It were, it is confessed, to a high degree vain to imagine, that so general a
defection and corruption as well in Politics as Manners, as has overrun the
Nation since the very Remarkable Restoration of King Charles the Second,
should be wiped off, corrected, and set right in an instant; but so your Faces,
my Lords and Gentlemen, are but seen and observed to keep looking toward the
peace and prosperity of our Jerusalem, that we continue not still under a
Government of Expedients, the Nation, it is not to be doubted, will repose
themselves on you as their present best and ablest Physicians, when to apply,
and how to proportion either Remedies or Preservatives; and thus persisting,
you will still more ennoble your selves, by giving more glory to God, in doing
more good to men; and beyond any thing besides, thereby also will you endear
His Sacred Majesty (whom God long preserve a public Blessing to those Nations)
yet more and more to all His Subjects universally, render His Reign happy, and
His Memory precious to all Posterity; agreeable to the judicious Observation of
a Wise and Experienced Gentleman, now living, That a King of England at the
head of His Sir W. Temple in his Essays.
Parliament and People, and in their hearts and interests, can never fail of
making what figure he pleases in the World, nor of being safe and easy at home;
and may despise all the Designs of factious men, who can only make themselves
considered, by seeming to be in the interest of the Nation, when the Court
seems to be out of it: But in running on Councels contrary to the general
humor and spirit of the People, the King indeed may make his Ministers great
Subjects, but they can never make Him a great Prince. Which, notwithstanding in
its true and genuine sense and signification, concludes not, but that at long
run too, the King's is as truly and properly His Ministers Interest, as the
People's is always His.

I come now to the Third and Last Error (or rather it may be Failure) that I
shall at present mention, as affecting Society in general, and which too is
oft-times a consequent of the preceding; and that is, The want of a Regular
Exercise of good and wholesome Discipline in Church and State: For Execution (as
has been ever held) is the Life of the Law; and far better is it that Laws be
not in many cases made, than that they should afterward be neglected, and so
fall into contempt; for which reason it is a noted Rule, That Penalties ought
not to be too great, because any overgreat Penalty (besides the Acerbity Ld
Bacon's Resuscitat.
of it) deads the Execution of the Law. And there is a further Inconvenience
(as) of Penal Laws obsolete and our of use, or in disuse, That it brings a
Gangreen, Neglect, and Habit of Disobedience.

Some, on behalf of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may possibly reply, That
admitting the Error or Failure, it is not to be imputed so much to want of
Good Will and Intention, as of Wealth, of Credit, and of Power; and that this
particularly may well be reckoned one among the Deficiencies of our Reformation
it self; which neither will I altogether deny, but 'twould be more easily
granted, if our Spiritual Guides and Governors were seen to exercise those
Powers they have, more strictly to Edification, and in a more especial manner
over their own Body; so would they by thus first casting out the beam out of
their own eye, not only avoid the Reproach of Hypocrisy, but also see clearly
to cast out the mote out of their brother's eye.

To say That they, who wait at the Altar, should partake with the Altar, That
the Labourer is worthy of his hire,
is not to say That they must partake with the Altar, who wait not, or but
little, there. That he is worthy, who does not labor.


To say That we may not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn,
That men should eat of the Milk of the Flock, they seed,
is not to say That the Ox which treads not, may not be muzzled. That such
should live of the Flock, as do not feed it.


And such like. No; so far from it, that it is a known Maxim founded upon
Natural Reason, That the Benefice is given for the Ld Bp of Sarum's Past. Care.
Office. But what shall we say, when we find often the poorest Clerks in the
richest Livings? Whose Incumbents (not content to d^vour the Patrimony of the
Church, while they feed themselves and not the Flock out of it) are so
scandalously hard in their Allowance to their Curats, as if they intended
equally to starve both Curat and People. And yet the outcry of the Contempt of
the Clergy, is upon occasion given out to proceed from the insufficiency of
their established Maintenance. However, I find it queried, and that too by a
Reverend Divine, Whether it be rational to proceed in this matter Ascendendo,
to bring up the Lean Vicariges to the Corpulency of Fat Parsonages; or
D^scendendo, to reduce the Gouty Benefices to the Medium of the Meagre
Vicariges; and not rather, to make an Equality, that they may Both meet in the
half way? And when these Fat Kine shall have thus laid themselves out to raise
the Lean ones, a man without risquing over much might possibly ensure, That the
Laity, after this is done, shall readily and cheerfully fill up and supply any
then remaining Deficiency: For you will Le Clear of Incredul.
hear those, for example, preach Charity and Impartiality, who have neither the
one nor the other; but are wonderfully pleased to find those they have to do
with not selfish or uncharitable, because it makes for their advantage. I have
read besides of, for a season, a Painful Labourer in God's Vineyard, and who,
being preferred by his Bishop for his Work sake, to a much better (as it is
called, i. e. a bigger) Benefice, fell off from the Exercise of his Ministerial
Function; and being asked how such a Change was wrought? replied only, Parvae
loquuntur Curae Ingentes stupent. To the same purpose Q Elizabeth was wont to
say often upon the making a Bishop, That she lost a good Preacher. And so the
Woman in the Fable not content with one Egg a day, over fed her Hen, that she
laid none at all. And thus it may fall out with men nowadays; for they who do
not in a good degree employ the Faculties and Powers they have, would no more
make due use, and improve greater, than people who neglect the present
opportunities would retrieve the loss of time past (was it to return again),
tho scarce any thing is more common than to hear men speak so; but their
present Behavior shows evidently, how apt we are herein to deceive our selves
more than others; so that it cannot be absolutely said, That it is always the
want of sufficient Powers, etc. as before, that is the cause no more is done
toward the Reformation and Regulations necessary; nor that such Powers, etc.
alone can work those effects, but as Men and Things are therewith also
circumstantiated. In short, Religion is a thing cannot be long kept Reflection
the Gr. of Deism.
up, as Secular Factions may be, by Interest or Grandeur, or any thing of that
kind: No, it must have real internal esteem in the hearts of men, otherwise the
effect is very like to be, that they will leave that (i e. any separate Mode or
Establishment) for some other, or else look upon all Religion to be only Trick
and Design. These Prejudices lie so much and justly at the doors of many such
Complainants, that they are themselves in a great measure to answer for the ill
consequences of this want of Powers (if so it be) which because I do not wholly
deny, but wish rather a Regulation first of those in being, and then a Supply
of what is deficient, I will here observe another Prejudice which seems to have
no less obstructed the increase of these Powers, than the former, and till
removed will go nigh to continue an invincible Obstacle to the enlarging them
for the good, it may be, they might otherwise do, and which themselves may
charitably be supposed to intend; and this is, their so strongly and so
strangely affecting a separate and distinct Headship, Superiority, and
Jurisdiction from, and over, the Laity; whereas the Powers of the Church
(except the immediate Power of the Keys, which is purely indeed Spiritual) is
wholly Civil, however at any time exercised by Spiritual persons. The
Magistrate, it is true, has been acknowledged to be Custos utriusqueTabulae;
but I do not understand that Priests are held to be, or are, so. And it is truly
noted by a modern Writer, and well worth our Observation, That the tearing the
Ecclesiastical Power from the Essay of Magistr. Power. Postsc.
Temporal, was the cursed Root of Antichrist; those Powers were not distinct in
England, nor in most Nations, till the Sea of Rome got the Ascendant; then, and
not till then, did the Clergy attempt to bind the Laity by those Laws they
never consented to. And in another place, That the Powers the Clergy claimed to
themselves, being inconsistent with the Principles of the Reformation, and, in
England, with the Oath of Supremacy, and that Power the Laws have invested the
King with, there is nothing so contradictory as their pretended Power, and that
which they are forced to own does belong to the Magistrate: So that our High
Churchmen are not consistent with themselves, no, not in one point; but (what
is worse) assert such Principles as make the Reformation it self criminal; and
which must unavoidably oblige a man that acts agreeable to those Principles, to
return to the Popish Yoke. I find it likewise queried by the same Reverend
Divine before referred to, Whether it be not more agreeable to the Primitive
Times, and the Nature of the Christian Religion, that the Clergy should have
some dependence on the People as to Temporals, who depend so much on their
Clergy as to Spirituals?Who thereupon also notes, That we consider the
Inconveniences of a Depending Clergy, but not the greater ones of having them
Absolute and Independent. No wonder then if the Laity be, it may be, over and
above jealous of intrusting more Powers with men of such Pretensions; but
remove the Obstacles, and the Effect follows, in a manner, as naturally as the
Cause being taken away, the Effect is said and known to cease.

But then again as to the State, I am far from exciting Rigor, or stirring up
an extreme Execution of the Laws, as convinced that summum Jus est summa
Injutia. And tho agreeable to what goes before, I hold that a due regard should
be had to a Regular Exercise of Civil Discipline, yet I readily confess withal,
that Example goes as much beyond Penal Laws and Human Penalties, as beyond
Precepts; and therefore I desire to be understood to lay the far greater stress
there, according to what is said at the beginning of this Paper; but yet the
one may be done, without leaving the other undone. I will therefore conclude
this Head, with an Instance assigned as a Cause of the Deism of the Age, in
some Reflections on an Account of the Growth thereof, in further Proof of the
Force of Example, beyond, as I said, or Law or Precept; and which the Author
seems at least to allow as it were ( propter duritiam cordis) as a Plea for the
common practice he complains of and decries; and that is (in the Author's
words) this; That by the false Laws of Honor now in vogue, they see they
cannot live and act like Gentlemen, and at the same time keep to the plain
Rules of their Religion. Christ commands us to forgive Injuries, Not to render
evil for evil: But if a Gentleman at present will not cut his Neighbor's Throat
for a small Affront, he must be contented to suffer himself, what is very hard
to be born, to be exposed, and counted a Coward, and be perhaps kicked out of
Company: By which means the Christian Religion is really in a state of
Persecution. Now this is a great snare to young Gentlemen, and must make very
many of them resolve rather to leave their Religion in that point, than undergo
what is so hard to be born. And tho the Case do never happen to them, yet the
very Resolution must debauch the Conscience, take away much, if not all the
Authority Religion has over it, which must needs make that very uneasy, and so
incline him for his own quiet to throw it quite off, or come to despise it, as
not being fit to be the Rule of the Life and Actions of a Gentleman. Which
practice notwithstanding, however evil in it self, and destructive in its
Consequences, is hardly, scarce possibly, to be superseded, till and unless the
State so take upon it to inspect, protect, and preserve all particular men's
Reputations, and to judge and determine between them in those nice and tender
Points of Honor; so as by this means, or some other of the like or more
efficacy, it become Reputable to appeal and submit in such matters to its final
and peremptory Decision.

But after all; the Business of a Religious and Civil Reformation, does not
wholly lie on any Set, or any sort of men whatever (tho such as sit at the Helm
of Church and State, should no doubt lead, and may steer and influence a great
way): But this is so much every one's own in one kind and degree or another, as
in his respective Station to bear a part at least (wherein, by the way, the
voluntary Societies of one and another Denomination now associated for any of
these purposes, are particularly commendable, deserve encouragement, and are
worthy imitation) in animating and encouraging our Heads and Chiefs, and in
manifesting in our selves, and helping to work in others, for that purpose, a
disposition to so noble and such generous Impressions, without which even the
utmost care and endeavors, whether of preaching, or due punishing etc. in our
Superiors, will be labor in vain: For though men's Wills are often found very
perverse and obstinate, yet there is nothing in Nature so stubborn and
inflexible as the nature of things themselves, which yet may be, and often is
subdued, overcome and corrected; but it is more by humouring it in some sort*
than opposing it; more by going, as it were, along with it, than against it:
This His Majesty in His Princely Wisdom has admirably well considered in His
late Royal Proclamation for preventing and punishing Immorality and
Profaneness, (issued as thereunto moved by the pious Address of the Commons in
Parliament assembled;) as appears not only by his exciting in us a due sense to
whom we owe our peace, His so judiciously pointing at the unquestionable
occasions of the Nation's being so universally overrun with those Enormities,
His declaring His Royal Purpose and Resolution to discountenance and punish all
manner of Vice, Immorality, and Profaneness, in all persons, from the highest
to the lowest degree, within this His Realm; and particularly in such who are
employed near His Royal Person: But more especially by His adding, That fer the
greater Encouragement of Religion and Morality, He will upon all occasions
distinguish men of Piety and Virtue, by Marks of His Royal Favor. For the Bulk
of Mankind is so made, that there is no working on them, but Ld Bp of Sarum's
Past. Care.
by moving their Affections, and commanding their Esteem; who yet with all
their Natural Propensions to Evil, are not such utter Enemies to Godliness, as
to the Forms of it; nor such Abhorrers of the Priesthood, as of the Craft: But
would thus (without the mystic Appendages of men's Inventions) be soon more
thoroughly persuaded, That

Religion is neither the Effect of Chance; because it is universal. Gent. Rel.
Nor of Ignorance; because it possesses the most Learned. Nor of State Policy;
because it is received among the most barbarous and unciviliz'd people.

Nor of Frenzy or Madness (which sometimes possesses men with very strong
Imaginations); because there was such a multitude of them who exactly agree in
the same Sentiments; and also because it appears both from the Writings and
Actions of the Primitive Christians, that they were men of Reason and sobriety,
and some of them persons of great Learning, etc.

But that there is a God, who has made all men, and has (as a Token of his
Work) stamped and engraved this his Mark and Character upon them.

Which is yet abundantly cleared and confirmed by the Inestimable Revelations
of himself superadded to the Impressions, Light, and Law of Nature. In short,
if we, however dignified or distinguished, did but severally seek the praise of
God more than the praise of men: were we found doing the Lord's work more than
(what we too fondly call) our own. If we sought Good, rather than a Great
Living: In so asking, and sincerely seeking first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, all these things would be added unto us; according as we find
God dealt with Solomon.

So would Religion no longer suffer under the opprobrious Nickname of a Trade;
but the Gospel would run a-pace and be glorified, which wants nothing, but its
false Lights, Colors and Obscurities to be done away, and its Vails to be
taken off, to spread far and near its true and native luster.

The Clergy would be renowned beyond expression; since Reverence and Esteem is
so inseparably annexed to that high Calling and Office, that it may be said of
them, as our Savior Christ says of his own Life, No man takes it from them,
but they lay it down of themselves; and in John 10. 18. Lord Bishop of Sarum's
Past. Care.
this we have good reason to rest assured, since we do not find many Instances
of Clergymen, who live and labor, who preach and visit as they ought to do,
that are under any eminent degrees of contempt; This shows evidently how pious
also and just is the Observation, That the most capital and comprehensive of
all Abuses is, That the false Opinion of the worst Ages of Popery, that made
the chief, if not the only obligation of Priests to be the performing Offices,
and judged that if these were done, the chief part of their business was also
done, by which the Pastoral Care came to be in a great measure neglected, does
continue still to leven us; while men imagine that their whole work consists in
public Functions, and so reckon, that if they either do these themselves, or
procure and hire another person in holy Orders to do them, that then they
answer the Obligation that lies on them. And thus the Pastoral Care, the
Instructing, the Exhorting, the Admonishing and Restoring, the Directing and
Conducting, the Visiting and Comforting the People of the Parish, is generally
neglected; while the Incumbent does not think fit to look after it; and the
Curate thinks himself bound to nothing, but barely to perform Offices according
to Agreement. And how natural and just is it, that such, whoever they be, as in
their own persons neglect and contemn the great Duties of Religion, and of
their proper Ministerial Office, should thence in conclusion draw contempt upon
themselves.

Our Church also would be united and established upon a Rock, that not men, nor
Devils, could prevail against, as (in the particular it relates to) is
agreeable to the observation of its Right Reverend Dignitary, That Ibid.
it was the Opinion many had of the Dissenters strictness, and of the looseness
that was among us, that gained them their credit, and made such numbers fall
off from us: They have in great measure lost the good character they once had;
if to that, we should likewise lose our bad one; if we were stricter in our
Lives, more serious and constant in our Labors, and studied more effectually
to reform those of our Communion, than to rail at their's; if we took occasion
to let them see, that we love them, that we wish them no harm, but good; then
we might hope, by the blessing of God, to lay the Obligations to love and
Peace, to Unity and Concord, before them with such Advantages, that some of
them might open their Eyes, and see at least upon how slight grounds they have
now so long kept up such a Wrangling, and made such a Rent in the Church, that
both the power of Religion in general, and the strength of the Protestant
Religion, have suffered extremely by them.

His Majesty, under God, our Great Deliverer, would be still more and more
esteemed and revered as a Soverain-Benefactor, more than Sovereign; and so will
His Throne be established by righteousness.

All State-Ministers and Magistrates too, as ruling well, would be counted
Ashcam of Confus. and Revol of Gover.
worthy of double honor, while they abandoning the dominion of their own
persons, take care of thousands of others. So also will they in a great measure
avoid the Envy and Designs of many, who might otherwise aspire to their
Dignities and Offices; and in an especial manner would they elude and divert,
if not altogether prevent, the reproachful Malice of Criminals of all sorts and
sizes, who are ever forward to recriminate, and it may be, too too apt to hold
themselves excused, (by the Judgment they usually, but corruptly, make from
comparison, not by the Rules of Eternal Truth and Righteousness) if they can
but retort, Thou art inexcusable. Romans 2. 1.
O man, whosoever thou art, that judge: For wherein thou judge another,
thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do the same, or the like,
things.

In fine, No more could the People hence fail of their particular Accounts, who
would hereby find, that they enjoy the quiet, easy and pleasing, as well
fruits, as much better hopes, of their retirements, from such persons watching
over them, and for them, that, as it were, encumber themselves for their
Service with

That gilded Nothing, being Great; Mrs. Philips' s Poems. Le Clerc of
Incredulity.


We should all soon learn, and better understand, That (as) we should not court
Honor, Riches, etc. but by lawful ways; (so) not as a means to live great, But
to be useful to the Society wherein we live; and (that) this cannot be, except
we are capable of duly discharging those Offices which we seek, and of using
those Honors we are ambitious of, to good purpose.

This would teach us to try, find out, and know our own Strengths and
Abilities, and thereby prevent, it is probable, much trouble both to our selves
and others: For not every one, that, whether by feeling or seeing, finds a
fault, is fit to be entrusted with its cure; it is not every Goose, that some
how takes an alarm, can save a Capitol; no, not even many, that are masters of
reading, men of good Notions, and competent Judges of the Theory, are capable
of the Practique; and that, among other Reasons, for this material one, That,
though they study Books, they read not, nor understand, Men.

Thus it would be no such hard matter to convince men, That all mandane Goods,
Pleasures and Enjoyments whatsoever, are but permissive, in some sense rather
negative, than positive, to be considered and accounted only as means, not as
ends, and as such, and no otherwise, are to be sought after.

This would instruct us how effectually (and that not without pleasure, and the
truest Delights we are yet capable of) to moderate our Passions, and subject
our Ambitions, contenting our selves respectively with Church-Catechis. Mr.
Collier of the Stage.
doing our duties in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call
us; as knowing, that, in earnest a Christian's time for entertainment is not
yet; that we are too craving and ill-manag'd, if we are so violent for delight
-- who (by these means, at least, would better) know, Death ought to be our
pleasure; and therefore, it is hoped, Life may be a little without it: For as God
makes Virtue the condition of Glory, and trains men up to happiness by
hardships and Industry; so the Devil's Road to Destruction lies through
Sensuality and Epicurism; and as pretended Evils lead us on to uncounterfeited
Bliss, so Visionary Satisfactions are the causes of Real Misery.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere Mecum.
Philalethes. FINIS.

