Plain Dealing IS A JEWEL, AND HONESTY THE BEST POLICY.

Both set forth In an Answer to a Letter received by a Gentleman in London,
from his Friend in the Country.

Wherein is plainly demonstrated, the Grounds and Reasons of our present
Distractions.

And Methods proposed for preventing the same for the Future.

By a Lover of Truth, and a hearty well-wisher to the Prosperity of the King,
and his Three Kingdoms.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1682.

Plain Dealing IS A JEWEL, AND HONESTY the best POLICY.
SInce the Arguments I have used for obtaining your excuse, have been so far
from prevailing, that on the contrary, you are pleased by your last, positively
to Command my sentiments of the Present Conjuncture of Affairs and Thoughts
concerning those scandalous reports industruously spread throughout the Kingdom
of His Majesty's, having had (for many years past) a design carrying on (and
which is still kept on foot) for the Introducing Arbitrary Power, setting up
Popery, Invading Liberty and Property, and extirpating (if possible) the
Protestant Religion Established by Law.

I shall with sincerity account to you my oJudgment, and offer such Reasons as
I hope will convince all sober and unbyassed Readers, to be of opinion, that
these reports are as false as malicious, having nothing of truth in them, (...)
occasioned as follows.

There are a sort of Malcontents amongst us, most of them men of mean
Fortunes, turbulent and restless Spirits, who design Troubles and Commotions in
the Kingdom (in hopes thereby to gain advantage to themselves by the miseries
and sufferings of others.

These make it their whole business to create in the minds of the Kings
Subjects, Fear and Jealousies of His Majesty's designing to Govern Arbitrarily,
Introduce Popery, Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and Invade Property by
setting up Abbyes and Monasteries, and restoring to them their Anciant Lands
and Revenues, now dispersed into the hands of most of the Nobility and Gentry of
the Kingdom.

In process of time, by these (and such like) evil Practices, the Ignorant and
unthinking men's minds (whose Capacities will neither give them leave to examine
whether these Reports be true or false, reasonable or unreasonable to be
believed; possible or impossible to be accomplished) are become greatly
disturbed, and such jealousies are risen in them concerning the King, as has
abated the fervency of their former affection to his Royal Person, and their
Zeal for his Service and Government, occasioned such Divisions, Animosities and
Contentions between Subject and Subject, put their Spirits upon such
firmentations, divided and subdivided them into so many several Parties,
Factions and Interests, (each Diamatrical opposite to the other) that unless
Almighty God in his Infinite mercy, goodness and wisdom, please to direct a
speedy way for the Uniting them in Love together: I fear the consequence may in
a short time prove pernicious (if not fatal) both to King and People, which it
is dreadful to consider, should be the Effect and Consequence of some men's
Credulity on the one hand, and others Impudent falsity on the other.

Pardon me Sir, I beseech you, if I happen to differ from you in Opinion, when
I possitively affirm, that by all my own observations, and the Scrutiny I have
made by inquiring of and conversing with others; I never yet found the least
ground to believe His Majesty had ever really any design (as is falsely
suggested) to set up Arbitrary Power, or Introduce Popery, nor is there any
shadow or coulor for the Fears and Jealousies of this Nature, with which men's
minds are so ^trangly possessed.

If His Majesty had ever designed so to Govern, sure it would have been show^
at his first ^^turn into England, to take Possession of his Royal Crown (...)
Government for having lived most part of the time of his horrid Sufferings,
under an Illegal and Unjust Banishment, in those Countries where the Government
was absolute or nearest to absolute, (their Laws being Enervated and deprest by
their Princes) it might have been reasonably expected he would then have
brought over (considering how barbarously his Royal Father had been murdered,
and himself, and the whole Royal Family been dealt with in their Exile) a
Scheme of such Government with him, the which if he had done, no Prince in
Christendom ever had such an opportunity to have accomplished the same, as our
King then had.

Was he not upon his return to his Kingdoms, absolute Lord and Master of all
his Subjects Lives and Estates by the Law of the Land, occasioned by their own
forfeiture, either by open Actings, or silent acquiessing under the late
Rebellion, Services done for, or Taxes paid to the late Userpors; whereby they
were all guilty of high Treason, and stood in need of His Majesty's Royal
Pardon.

Might not His Majesty after his Restoration (when all his Subjects either
adored or feared him) being brought in with the Hearts and most Zealous
Affections of his People; have had at that time any thing from his Parliament,
that he could have demanded.

If therefore he had then had a Design ever to Govern Arbitrarily, there never
was such an opportunity for accomplishing thereof, as when he first came over;
when he could not have asked that Sum of Money for his present supply, or annual
Revenue for the future Support of his Royal Prerogative, and such his intended
Government, but it would have been granted by his Friends in hopes of Reward,
and durst not have been opposed by his Enemies (tho never so unreasonoble) for
fear of being called to account for their Treasons, no Act of Oblivion being
then past, of which the meanest Subject stood in need, and could not have been
long safe without.

So that if His Majesty had any Intention ever (tho not at that time) to set up
for Arbitrary Government, he lost it for want of asking, for His Majesty well
knew, that the Interest he then had in his People was such, that he need but to
have demanded, and it would certainly have been given to him; Notwithstanding
all which, to show his Subjects that he valued Reigning in their Hearts and
Affections, much more, than to be Master of their Lives and Fortunes, forfeited
to him as aforesaid; he was graciously pleased himself to press his two first
Parliaments to pass a general Act of Indemnity (which they did with great
regret) and threw himself upon his Parliaments for such supplies as they then
thought necessary for the present support of the Government, without making any
Bargain, or entering into any Capitulation with them, as he might have done, for
a constant and certain Revenue for the future.

Nor did His Majesty (if he had any such design) deny himself in his respect
only, but in many other, that were in his power, whereby he might have Inricht
himself, and brought Immence Sums of Money into his Coffers to have been kept in
readiness, (when ever he had been pleased to set up for such a Government)
wherewith to have defrayd the necessary Charges thereof, as for Instance.

His Majesty might have taken all the Church Lands into his own possession,
where the Incumbants were dead, (and there were very few living when he came
first in) all the Rents belonged by Law to him, till he filled up the
Vacancies, and he might have renewed all their Leases, and taken the Fines to
himself (without doing any wrong) and was offered 850000 l. for so doing, as
also that the Yearly Revenue of the Church should be doubled, and every
Purchaser in England satisfied (which would have been a great Security to his
Government) notwithstanding all which, he could not be prevailed with to accept
of, or close with, that offer.

Again, if His Majesty ever had any such design, how easy had it been for him
to have taken the same course that Henry the 7th and other Princes formerly
did, and if he had so done (when the Parliament in few years after his
Restoration, had given him above five Millions of Money to carry on a War with
Holland) how easy had it been for His Majesty to have closed a Peace, got vast
Sums of Money for so doing, and put up that and the greatest part of what the
Parliament had given him into his own Coffers; whereby, and by means
aforementioned (had he been parcimonious, and designed mischief to his
Subjects:) he at this day would have had all the Coin of the Kingdom in his
Exchequer, and therewith might have Governed his People, and commanded their
Liberties and Properties at his pleasure.

But our Kings Design and Practice has been hitherto, so far from taking this
Course, that his Subjects have taken occasion rather to condemn him for
expending so great a Treasure, as has been given him, and yet at the same time
rejoice, and please themselves with the consideration, that it is gone,
accounting nothing a greater security against Arbitrary Power, than their
Princes being under a necessity to fly to his People in Parliament for supplies
upon the least extraordinary accident, or Emergency of State; and tho they
know, and are well assured this is the Kings present Condition, yet, most
maliciously, would they impose upon his Subjects, and force them, contrary to
Reason, to believe that he designs to Govern Arbitrarily, when at the same time
they are well assured it is impossible for him so to do.

For no Prince can Govern Arbitrarily without a Force, nor raise and maintain
such Force without Money, nor come at that Money without Credit, nor can our
King, if he would, so Govern, raise such Force, and get Money to pay them with,
but by the consent of his People in Parliament, neither can he change our
Government here, but by a long tract of time.

Wherefore, no wise or considering person ought or can ever believe (whatever
they say) that His Majesty (who has never attempted any such thing since his
Restoration, notwithstanding the many opportunities before mentioned, which he
had to have facilitated the work) especially coming in after the greatest
Tyrant that ever Reigned, finding an Army raised, which would not only have
served him, but made his Government more tolerable (being agreeable to the
pattern left by Oliver, who raised and kept them on Foot) if His Majesty, I
say, has neglected such oppertunities as these of setting up Arbitrary
Government, in the vigor of his Youth, when newly Married, in height of
Reputation, beloved and feared of all both abroad and at home, in expectation
of Issue of his own to Succeed him, and having a Parliament to assist him, such
as never any King of England before had, (a Parliament that would have denied
him nothing he should ever have desired of them) how can any rational man think
or imagine he will attempt it now, when his Exchequers is empty, his Reputation
(by the horrid false and scandalous Misrepresentations aforesaid) low, and
himself growing into Years, and without Issue of his Own to Inherit, especially
at this time, when his Kingdoms are awakened and on their Guard to oppose it.

The rather ought we not to believe this, if we seriously consider what most
men certainly know to be true, which is, that our King is a Prince of a most
peaceable Disposition, merciful in his Nature, hating Cruelty. Oppression and
Trouble, a Prince under whom, (as the Author of that saying most truly said,
and by experience has since found) the unfortunate fall gently; if so, then
ought no man easily to believe that he should now divest himself of his Glory,
by changing his Nature and Disposition, to live the remainder of his time in
Confusion and Trouble, and pass from that Estate of Hapiness and Security which
he now Injoys in the Affections of his People, to a necessity of being afraid
of all mankind, and beholding to the assistance of an Army for his future
security, (which is the height of Slavery) a Prince under their Guard and
Protection being as unsecure as his people, and as much at their mercy, as the
Roman and Ottaman Princes ever were.

Neither can such vain fancy enter into any man's mind that has common sense,
so as to create in him a belief thereof, when he shall Consider what Laws His
Majesty has past, for securing the Liberty of the Subject against the Bugbear
of Arbitrary Power, which so many pretends to be afraid of.

1. To wit, the Petition of Right against quartering Soldiers, by which all
power of marching with an Army, without Money wherewith Constantly to defray
their Quarters, is taken away, and without an Army there is no danger of
Arbitrary Government.

2. The Act for taking away the Courts of Wards and Liveries, and that for Sale
of Fee farm Rents, before which most Subjects held their Lands of the King,
and were obliged to do him Suite and Service, and their Children during their
minority liable to be his Wards from all which they are now Discharged.

3. The Habias Corpus bill, in passing whereof, His Majesty has in a manner at
once Discharged all his menial Servants, from his Royal protection, and put it
out of his own power to Imprison any Suspected Person, so as to hold him long,
tho for Treason itself.

These were the Acts the wisdom of our Parliments conceived best for the
security of the Subjects against Arbitrary Power and Government, and these Acts
the King most readily Condiscended to pass, and now to Imagine he should design
a change of Government, were to conclude, he follows Councills and takes
Measures unknown to all Ages before, and contrary to all former Examples, and
it argues great Pusilanimity in his Subjects to be afraid of that which
(morally speaking) is in its own nature impossible.

The rather for that His Majesty who might (as I said before) have carved out a
standing Revenue at his first Restoration, sufficient to have supported such a
Government as we fear; he to show he had no such Intention contented himself
with a Revenue, the greatest part whereof is only for his life (as the
Customs) and accepted of the Hereditary part of Excise amounting but to 300000
l. per annum, in lieu of his Court of Wards and Liveries (which was of twice
that yearly value) besides the Interest he had thereby in almost all his
Subjects Estates.

If then His Majesty has hitherto done nothing tending to the setting up the
Government pretended to be feared, (for it can be but a pretense) tho he has
sometimes had two Millions, and never till of late less than about 150000 l.
per annum, certainly having now not much above a Million per annum (and no
power to raise any but by Act of Parliament, and his Parliament of late years
been so unkind as to give him nothing) its nonsense and malicious for any man
to talk (and as great folly to believe) that there should now be a design on
foot, to set up, or Introduce a new method of Government.

In my opinion it is so far from it, that the aforesaid Acts, have taken away
all possibility thereof; turned things to another Extreme, and so limited the
Civil Magistrates Power, that in many cases they will find it dificult to
mentain the Government in so headstrong and stubborn an Age as ours now is.

This that has been said, being seriously Considered, I hope will leave room
in no Man, for so much as a Suspicion, or jealosy of any Design in the King to
Introduce Arbitrary Government, without which it is Impossible to set up
Popery, or Invade Liberty and Property.

Not but that I must acknowledge and confess there has, since His Majesty's
happy Restoration, been some things done which seemed to have a tendency, to
all these mischeifs; These I shall briefly give Account of, show how they came
about, the evil Effect they have had, what Inconveniences they have
occasioned, who advised those Councils and since have Endeavored to bring His
Majesty, his Ministers and Government in Contempt with his people, for the
mischiefs that have happened as the Events and ill Consequenses of such, their
own pernicious Machinations.

And when I have done with this point, I shall Endeavor to show how little
Danger there is of Poperies coming into England, tho a Popish successor should
happen, and that all the noise made about that, is only a design set on foot by
the French King, and managed by his Pentioners in secret Conjunction with our
Malcontents, and men of Commonwealth Principles on purpose to create
Jealosies, fears and troubles amongst us, and hinder our King and his people
from Uniting till the French King has made his Game sure, finished his
Conquests, destroyed the Protestants and their Religion abroad, that with the
more Ease he may destroy us and it together in England, and I will endeavor to
demonstrate that nothing else can be or is designed by most of the hot headed
Gentlemen (whatever pretense they make to the contrary) who spend their whole
time keeping several Companies purposely to exclaim against His Majesty, his
Ministers and Government) but to promote Popery (which they so cry out against)
and advance the Popish Interest (which they so much pretend to fear) and show
that they are ruining the Protestants and their Religion, even when they so
highly enveigh against Popery and Papists, therefore by true Protestants ought
to be avoided as Wolves and Bears designing to devour them.

The most remarkable passages that have happened, and which first occasioned
these Jealousies and fears, of Introducing Arbitrary Power, and Popery; were
transacted about 10 Years since; I Will mention them briefly, and leave the reader
to recollect who steerd then at Helm, in whose Cabals those Resolutions were
not only taken, but by whom also they afterward were put in Execution.

First, His Majesty's gracious Declaration for suspending all penal Laws, and
granting Indulgence to Dissenters, the only thing, to my remembrance done since
the Kings Restoration, that had the least tendency to the setting up Arbitrary
Power or Popery; and this I must confess prima facie seemed to aim at both;
tho neither of them was, as I believe, designed by the King, who granted the
same on no other account, than for the Ease of Protestant Dissenters, and upon
their solicitation, therefore ought rather to have been with all humility and
thankfulness accepted and acknowledged as His Majesty's great Grace and Favor,
than with such high Ingratitude turned upon the King to his prejudice, and the
disadvantage and dishonor of his Government.

It is undoubtedly in the power of the King by His Royal Prerogative to
despence with the penalty of any Statute whatsoever pro hac vice, upon any
Emergency of State (where the matter dispensed with, is not malum in se, but
only malum quia prohibitum,) by granting Liscences with a non obstante of the
several Statutes in force against the matter Dispensed with, and so he might
have granted Licenses to Dissenters, to meet for the Exercise of their
Religion, and appointed places of meeting, and Parsons to Preach amongst them,
which the Law and former practices of his Royal Ancestors would have warranted
and could never have been Questioned.

But to Suspend a Law is in the Nature of an Obrogation, and he that can
obrogate may as well assume the power of making Laws, and that Prince who has
power to make one, may make any Law, if any Law, a Law to raise Money and
Forces, and that Prince that has such Authority shall never need call a
Parliament, he himself having Power, to raise what Money and Force he shall
think sit, ergo may govern his Subjects Arbitrarily at his Royal Pleasure.

This was the chief Reason why the next succeeding Parliament after this
Declaration was Issued, (tho they were willing Dissenting Protestants should
have had Ease) Addressed His Majesty for the Cancelling that Declaration, to
which Address, His Majesty most graciously was pleased to give his Royal
Concession, but a second ground of such Address, appeared to be.

The Consideration the Parliament had, that the said Declaration suspended all
Sanguinary and Pecuniary Laws, against Priests, Jesuits and Papists, which if
continued long, might silently and by degrees have Introduced Popery, and
caused its growth amongst us, this they had great reason to suspect might be
designed by some of those who advised the King thereto, who now endeavor to
throw the odium (due to themselves for such pernicious Councils) upon the King
(who our Law says can do no wrong.)

Again, who was it that about the same time advised the shutting up the
Exchequer, when so many thousands of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, whole
Estates and Fortunes were lodged therein for security; than which no Security
in England was better till this stop of Payments was prevailed for.

Who was it that when they had given this advice (and the same was agreed unto)
stopped the Declaring thereof for several days, till they had drawn their own
Money out of the Bankers hands, well knowing such stop must ruin them, and
resolving they would not lose any thing themselves by what they had advised the
King to do, to the utter ruin of so many of their fellow Subjects.

Was there ever so high a violation of Property committed in any Age, as this,
or any thing done besides this since His Majesty's Restoration tending in the
least to Invade the same.

When this was put in Execution, and the Creditors of the Bankers began to sue
for their Money, and they flew into Chancery for Injunctions which were denied
by the Lord Keeper Bridgeman as being contrary to Law.

Who was it advised His Majesty to remove his Lordship from the Seal for his
tumidity? Who was it that afterward Succeeding him in that Office granted the
Injunctions before denied, and continued them till he knew the Seal was like to
be taken from him, and then to Ingratiate himself with the Populacie dissolved
the same.

This Stopping of Payments in the Exchequer will appear the more hanious, and
an act that all (who are Loyal, love the King, and concern themselves for his
Honor, Princely Dignity and Royal Government,) must obhor if they do but
reflect back and seriously consider for what end this was done, and the sad
consequences that have happened to England thereupon, which take as follows.

Those who had advised His Majesty to Issue out the Declaration aforementioned,
and stop the payments out of the Exchequer, had also thought it convenient that
the Triple League should be broken, that His Majesty should join his Forces
(which they then had advised him to raise, and were afterward Incampt on
Black Heath) with those of France, and that the Dutch Smerna Fleet then coming
home richly laden should be seized, before any War with Holland Declared,
perhaps the most pernicious and dishonorable Act that ever Prince was put upon
by his Ministers (dilenda est Carthago). and from whence this poor Kingdom may
justly date all its late Miseries and Distractions.

For hereby was the Peace of all Christendom Disturbed.

This has occasioned the loss of some hundred thousands of Christian lives,
Exhausted the Treasure of England, as well as all Europe besides, weakened the
Protestant Interest throughout the World, and strangly advanced the Growth and
Power of France, helped him in all his late Conquests, and made him at this day
(who is the Common and Grand Enemy to the Protestant Religion) a terror to all
Nations about him, as well as a most cruel Persecutor of all his Protestant
Subjects at home, of whose miseries and intolerable sufferings we have every
day fresh Instances before our Eyes.

Whilst these Gentlemen, who gave His Majesty these Advises, were in his
Councils and Prerogative Royal, proved subservient to their private Interests,
it could never be thought high enough, tho now they are of opinion (as appears
by their Actions) it can never be too low, nor too much exposed and brought in
contempt.

Who was it that declared the Prerogative of the King to be Law, and not only
the Law, but the principal part of the Law, and his Royal Edicts above Law.

Who was it that before the sitting of the Parliament, advised the Issuing of
Writs for the Electing New Members, to serve in the House of Commons, in the
rooms of those Deceased, during their recess, and when the Parliament met, and
the Commons had Voted those Elections void, and ordered new Writs to be Issued,
for the choice of others in the rooms of those, so unduly Elected and Returned.

Who was it that for some days refused to Seal the same, declaring it to be an
Intrenchment upon Prerogative, and when obliged thereto by His Majesty's
possitive Commands, went home and turned his back upon the Sealers, whilst the
Seal was affixing to those Writs, to the end (as he said) that his Eyes might
never behold Prerogative trampled upon by a House of Commons.

I shall forbear to name any persons, it being fresh in every man's memory, that
took any kind of notice of public transactions, who were then our Premier
Ministers of State, and took mighty care to maintain Prerogative and advance it
to the height, the better to improve the same to their own Advantage.

But no sooner upon the Adresses of the House of Commons had His Majesty
resolved to Cancel the before Mentioned Declaration, and Issue out Writs for
new Elections, then one of those Noble Peers, finding he could not deswade the
King (as he Endeavored) from Complying with his Parliament therein, aplyed to
the Commons, Rigled himself into their Cabals, and by subtle Insinuations stopped
the Impeachment designed against him in Parliament, for such his Pernicious
Councels.

Which done he presently fell to work and played his Exploits in the House of
Lords where being one day Privately Charged with high Ingratitude, in having
deserted his Master, his Lordship made answer, It was the King that had left
him by departing from his Declaration, and not he the King, and Immidiately
with some other Lords closed with the Mobile, set up for Populer Interest, and
Endeavored in all parts of the Kingdom, to possess the People with Prejudice
to His Majesty's Royal Person and Government on pretense that his Majesty
really designed to Introduce Arbitrary Power and Popery amongst them, and that
they for opposing the same were removed from his Councels and all places of
Trust, when as (if any such Intreagues were then on foot) they had been the
first advisers and chief promoters thereof.

By these and other such like false Suggestions, they fomented differences
between the King and his People, Created in them Jealosies and Distrusts of
each other, prevented the Parliaments giving His Majesty the Suplies necessary
for Enabling of him to have Joined his Arms with those of the States General
and their Allies (which he declared himself ready to have done) for preventing
the further Growth of the Power of France; and yet all that while, alarmed and
frightened the Subjects with daily Printing and Spreading abroad Pamphlets
wherein they Represented, how dangerous a Condition they were in by reason of
the Increase of that Kings Power, with whom they seemingly pressed His Majesty to
make War, though certainly they never Intended he should so do, for if they had,
they would have Endeavored to have gotten him the Sinues thereof, To wit
Money wherewith to have defrayd the Charge thereof, and not used all their Art
and Skill as they did to hinder him from the same.

By way of degression give me leave here to offer two Questions to serious
Considerations.
First, wither those who advised His Majesty to break the Triple League, Seiz
the Dutch Smirna Fleet before a War with Holland, was declared, Suspend all his
Penal Laws, stop payments out of his Exchequer, and Join his Arms with those
of the French King, against the States General of the United Provinces, may not
reasonably and without breach of Charity be suspected to have been (at the time
of such advice given) Pentioners of France and whether (if any thing done since
His Majesty's most happy Restoration ever had any tendency toward the
Introducing of Arbitrary Power and Popery into this Kingdom) It was not His
Majesty's proceedings upon those Councils.

2ly. His Mejesty (upon the Adresses and advice of his Parliament, having
Resolved to depart from the aforesaid Councils cancel his Declaration, Issue
out Writs for new Elections, withdraw his Arms from the French Kings
assistance, and send them in Aid to the States Genreral of the United
provinces for preventing the further Growth of the power of France, whether
those Persons who ever since have made it their business to devide between the
King and his Subjects, and prevent the Parliaments giving him when he desired
600000 l. to have Enabled him in time to have Joined his forces with those of
the States General and their Allies for the End before mentioned, may not as
reasonably and with as little breach of Charity (as the former) be suspected to
be French Pentioners; The first Designing only to advance France, by bringing
Holland Low, and these Contriving how to keep Holland under by hindering His
Majesty from Assisting them for the pulling down the power of France; If the
latter may be Equally suspected with the former; I am sure all who have taken
any kind of notice of the Transactions of Affairs amongst us, for this Eight or
Nine Years past, must needs know who they are, that have been guilty of both.

But to Proceed,

Whilst these Noble Lords were in Power, and one of them, either as Chancellor
of the Exchequor, or one of the Lords Commissionors of his Majesty's Treasury,
had the almost sole manadgery and dispose of every Branch of His Majesty's
Revenue.

No Sum of Money could be granted the King by his Parliament, that by them was
Esteemed sufficient, a Million and half, Two Millions and half, at a time
signified little.

But no sooner were they Dischardged from their Ministration, then the Cry
(every where set about by them) was, You Freeholders of England, you Gentlemen
of the House of Commons, have a care what you do, keep close your Purses, if
you give Money you are undone; Prerogative will be advanced too high, Arbitrary
Power and Popery will certainly be set up, and the Subjects thereby Enslaved,
like those of France; as if Prerogative Power, though Vested in the King's
Person, were not to be Exercised by himself, but by his Premier Ministers, and
as if there were no persons in England fit to be made such Ministers, or to be
Entrusted with the Exercise of that Power, save only they who for the Reasons
aforesaid, His Majesty had thought fit to remove from their Trust, and out of
His Concils.

This amongst simple Honest people gained belief, was looked upon as wholesome
Council, the which they Embraced with thankfulness, and diligently persued,
every where agreeing to instruct their Representatives in Parliament to this
purpose, and upon the choice of the three last Parliaments, chose sew or none
to Represent them, but such as they were assured would pursue this their
Direction, which accordingly hitherto has been done.

Now give me leave, in short to account the Sad Consequences that have Insued
upon these Evil Practices; His Majesty, for want of Supplies necessary, (which
these false and subtle Insinuations put into the Ignorant Peoples Heads, kept
from him) has hitherto been rendered incapable of carrying on the War against
France, which the Parliament still pressed for, and His Majesty promised to have
begun, and would have vigorously pursued (if they would have given him 600000
l. when he desired it, the which they refused to do) neither have they since
given him any Money, but what by the Act that gave it, was appropriated to
particular Services.

The Consideration of this gave Courage to the French, and so disheartened the
Dutch, that they for their own preservation, were obliged to agree a Peace
without the consent of their Confiderates, who since have been necessitated to
enter into the same, though to the unspeakable Damage of Christendom.

For hereby was the Confideracy broken, between the Emperor, Spaniard, Dane,
Hollander, and all the Princes of the Rhine.

By this the Duke of Brandenburgh was obliged to deliver up all his Conquests
in Pomerania, and Bremen, which had cost him so dear.

By this means the Confiderates Army, for want of Money, has since been most of
it Disbanded; whilst the French Army, with his Immence Revenue, is still kept
on foot, and daily Increased, to the Terror of all Europe.

The Incursions he has since made upon Flanders, Alsace, Strasburg, and Cazal
(the Keys into Germany and Italy) has Alarmed all parts of the World, none
knowing where he will design next, nor what places he will Demand as
Dependences belonging to his new Conquests.

I know this is all Charged upon our present Ministers, as the effect of their
Male Administrations, and the People are labored hard to believe the same.

But in my Oppinion all these Mischiefs proceed from, and are the ill Effects
of the aforementioned Evil Councils, which the King so long since had given
him, and were put in practice as aforesaid, and proceed chiefly from the
Male-contentedness of some of the Persons that gave those Councils, who being
used to Govern, and now removed from all places of Trust, know not how to Obey,
and sit quiet, therefore endeavor to Confound all His Majesty's Councils, break
all his Measures, and obstruct all Proceedings for Public Good, in hopes to
oblige His Majesty to a necessity of Restoring them to His Favor, and their
former Trust, as not being able to Manage the Government without them.

I cannot say these are the sole occasions of our present Mischiefs, for there
are a sort of men, about the City, and all over England, in every County, of
Turbulent Spirits, Active Minds, Subtle Wits, little Fortunes, and less
Consciences, Credit or Reputation sufficiently Debauched, and Vicious in their
Principles and Conversations, these are found out and made use of by the
French, are Pentionors to that King, and Employed to fall in with our own
Malcontents, and seemingly to take their parts; these run from place to
place, tell the Danger the Kingdom is in, of Popery and Arbitrary Power, and of
the Plot on foot to destroy the King, and Protestant Religion, and what Danger
the Protestants are in, of being Massacred, these Improve their Interest with
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in every Parliament, to hinder giving any
Money, least they Inslave the Kingdom thereby, these Roar about Streets, and at
every Coffee-House, and in all Companies they come into, what Danger the
Protestant Religion is already in, and that it will certainly be Destroyed, if
ever a Popish Successor should happen in England, flock like Bees to the Court
of Request when our ^arliament sits, bussing in the Ears of our
Representatives, That there is no way to be secured, but by passing an Act for
Secluding His Royal Highness, the Duke of York, from ever Inheriting (let him
now, or hereafter be of what Religion he will) the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, which for the Three last Parliaments, has been vigorously Endeavored,
and with success to their Designs, by having hindered all other Affairs, and
prevented all Remedies for settling and composing our present Differences, and
securing us against future Mischiefs.

These Pentioners are so subtle, and seem by their Carriage so real fierce and
violent against Arbitrary Power and Popery, and Zealous for securing our
Liberties and Properties, that to our Misery they have gained too much Credit
amongst the Gentry, and down right honest Country-Protestants, because what
they persuade them unto, at first sight seems greatly their Interest.

But by the little Conversation I have had with them, and the best Observation
I can make of their Proceedings, they appear to be Jesuits or Papists in
Masquerade, like Watermen rowing one way and looking another, French
Pentionors, (or at least Act as such) carrying on the Popish Plot apace, which
they so violently Decry, do the French King's Drudgery, promote his Designs,
and instead of preventing Arbitrary Power, and Popery, Endeavor what in them
lies, to Introduce and Establish both; and Extirpate the Protestant Religion,
were it not so (which I pray God every sober Protestant may see through and
prevent) they would never Fndeavor as they do, to divide between the King and
his Subjects, (whose Interests are so inseparable, as that to separate between
them, is to destroy both) nor create Distrust in the King of his People, or in
the People of their Prince, the Consequence whereof will inevitably (if
continued) be the Destruction of both.

Did not these Gentlemen thus design, certainly they would not at this time of
the Day Endeavor (as they do) to widen Breaches, heighten Differences, and
increase Animosities between Protestant and Protestant, divide and subdevide
them into so many several Factions and Parties, but rather study how to close
and make up the Breaches, heal the Divisions, and compose the Differences
amongst them, by Uniting them in Love (though of different persuasions) thereby
to strengthen their hands against their Common Enemy the Papists.

Now I will Endeavor to show, that these men act quite contrary, and that what
they are doing tends to the Interest of France, the advantage of Popery, and is
destructive to the Protestant Interest.

For this purpose I lay down as my Foundation, That the King of France, his
Grand Design is to make himself Universal Monarch of the World, this he knows
he can never do, if the King of England and his Subjects were heartily United,
and did Love and durst Trust each other, for that People that Love and Trust
their Prince, will never deny him any Supply necessary, for his own Support,
and their Defense; therefore if all those Jealousies and Fears, which these
sort of Caterpillars have fixed in the minds of the Subjects, were removed, and
it were possible to undeceive them, and show how they have been Imposed upon,
to their prejudice, and that all Reports of His Majesty's design to Invade
Liberty and Property, and Introduce Popery and Arbitrary Power, were false,
then would the King have their Hearts entire to himself, consequently their
Purses, and could never fail of sufficient Subsidies for support of his
Prerogative, and the Government, and securing Us against all Attempts from
abroad, as well as at home.

This the King of France well knows, and therefore Endeavors to prevent,
foreseeing that such an Union would be fatal to him, for then would our King be
able to stop all his Proceedings, hinder not only his making farther, but
oblige him to vomit up all, or the most part of his new made Conquests;
therefore his Design by these his Emissaries and Pentionors, is to keep up
Jealousies and Fears, and to prevent all means used for Reconciliations amongst
us; by crying out still of the Danger of Popery, how that Religion increases
in England, (though they know there is not one Papist in the Kingdom for One
Hundred Protestants) this is done with design to oblige His Majesty, for
avoiding of Clamor upon himself, to proceed against Jesuits and Papists at Law,
to Convict them of Recusancy, and Seize Two Thirds of their Estates, the which
is prosecuted by a few covetous Persons) only with design to get Devidents of
their Estates to themselves.

By which Proceedings here, the French King does his works abroad, goes on to
finish his Conquests, takes advantage of the Prosecution of a few Papists here,
to make that his Example to Persecute, with all Imaginable Cruelty, innumerable
multitudes of Protestants in France, with Resolution to Extirpate that Religion
out of his Dominions, (and if other Catholic Princes should follow his
Example, which God forbid) it will not be long er'e his Most Christian Majesty
will have finished his work, made himself Universal Monarch, have totally
destroyed the Protestant Religion abroad, which done, I appeal to all good and
wise men, who Love England, and the Protestant Religion, and desire its Growth
and Preservation; how soon, and with what Ease, that King may overrun us, and
Extirpate that Religion from amongst us, which we seem so Zealous to promote,
but by the wilful mistake of many (I fear) are Destroying.

Now that I may convince all honest, plain hearted, and well meaning
Protestants, that there are a sort of Persons amongst them who make it their
business to Inveagle their heads with false and scandalous Stories, (thereby to
possess their minds with prejudice to His Majesty, and Government, and that
those so Employed, are either all, or most part of them Pentioners of France,
who betake themselves to this work, with design to destroy the Protestant
Religion, rather then to preserve it, and Inslave Us, and the Kingdom, instead
of preventing Arbitrary Government from being set up over us, and that all the
World may see, that their Actions (when laid open) have no tendency to the
advancement of the Protestant Interest, or securing us against the Growth of
Popery, nor to deliver us from the Grievances they pretend the Kingdom Groans
so much under, give me leave to offer to your serious Considerations, these few
following Particulars.

First, If they designed to promote the Protestant Religion, and did heartily
desire its flourishing in England, certainly they would then consider the
miserable Condition of the poor Protestants in France, what Cruelties they
Endure, and that would beget such Pity and Compassion toward those, as would
put them upon Petitioning His Majesty for Mercy to the few Papists in England,
and to stop their Convictions upon their present Prosecutions, for some time,
rather then to suffer multitudes of Protestants, and that Religion, to be
Destroyed abroad merely to Enrich themselves, by receiving shares of the
Estates of Papilts Convicted here, such Pity would be more acceptable to God,
more agreeable to the Spirit of a true Protestant, more for the Honor of that
Religion, and in the End prove as advantageous to their private Interests in
this World.

Did these busy Gentlemen I speak of, design good to England, desire its
Prosperity, or to promote the Protestant Interest, and had believed the Kingdom
in such danger of Popery and Arbitrary Power, or that the Subjects had suffered
under such Grievances, as they Endeavor to represent to the People.

Then certainly ever since their apprehension of such Danger, they upon the
opening of every Parliament, or Session of Parliament, would have put the
several Members of the House of Commons (as well as the Lords) upon a right
Course of preventing the Mischiefs they seemed to fear, and delivering us from
the Grievances they pretended the Kingdom suffered under, but as if they had
not believed what they reported, they took the contrary Course, and instead of
persuading the Parliament to moderate sober Councils and Proceedings, studied
to put them into Heats and Passions, and upon Exclaiming against particular
Persons, to whom they owed prejudice, as being His Majesty's Servants and
Ministers.

These upon common Fame, before heard, or Witnesses examined against them, must
be Removed from the Kings Presence and Councils for Ever, on Addresses from the
House of Commons, no Body knew for what, save I ancies and Immaginations.

But some of them being too Great, and their Integrities and Abilities for His
Majesty's Service, better known to him then them, His Majesty not thinking fit
to Remove them.

Thereupon some of these worthy Patriots of their Country, for several
Sessions of Parliament, made it their business, to do nothing save to contrive
Differences between the Two Houses of Parliament, for which purpose, they
questioned the Lords Jurisdiction, in matters of Appeals, particularly in the
Cases of Sherly and Fag, and others, which Controvercy they carried so high,
that Sir John Fag, and several Lawyers, were Committed by the House of Commons
to the Tower, for only appearing before the Lords at their Bar, and owning
their Judicature in Cases of Appeals, from Courts of Equity, this single Point
caused several Prorogations, and rendered several Sessions Fruitless, though the
same was never before called in question since His Majesty's Restoration.

Now if those Gentlemen, who so highly concerned themselves in these matters,
had been of such public Spirits, as to spend their time in laying open the
Dangers they apprehended we were in, and the Grievances we suffered under, with
Design to have prevented those Dangers, and redressed those Grievances.

They would certainly then have applied to the several Members of Parliament,
pressed for Moderation, desired them to avoid all Heats and Passions, and to look
into the Plot, search it to the bottom. Try the Lords in the Tower, and examine
the Truth of the several Grievances complained of, and find means to prevent
the Danger of the former, and secure us for the Future against the latter, in
doing whereof, they must necessarily have found who had occasioned both, and
after securing the Subjects, then to have fallen on the Persons Guilty, would
have been more proper, for if then these Persons had been too great for the
Parliament, and procured Prorogations and Dissolutions, yet had the Parliament
discharged their Consciences, done their Duty, preserved their Country, and
deserved Thanks and Honor from those they Represented,

But to fall upon particular Persons first, and to do nothing for our
Security, because they could not have their Ends against those Persons, they
had prejudice too, give me leave to say for them, to be persuaded to this
method of Proceedings, in my apprehension, did not argue, that either they
themselves, or those persons that informed them of the Grievances and Dangers
the Nation was said to lie under, believed the truth of either; and if so, then
was it a Barbarous Act, to amuse, alarm and frighten the People from their Duty
to their Prince, with groundless Noise and Clamor.

If really there were at those times such Grievances and Dangers, as
Represented, how could the Parliament have answered it to God, and their
Country; if through their private Heats and Animosities, the Mischiefs
threatened, (and which the Nation seared) had fallen upon us, if they had then
believed our Danger so great as they discoursed it to be, and had not known,
that more Noise and Clamor was made, then there was just occasion for, I am of
opinion, they would for their own Honor, as well as the public Good, have
first endeavored to have secured our future Happiness, rather than hazarded
the same, out of some private Peak they had to particular Persons.

Again, If these Gentlemen, by the Endeavors they used, to have obtained an Act
for Secluding his Royal Highness from the Imperial Crown of England, had
designed to secure the Protestant Religion against a Popish Successor, had that
(I say) been their single Intention, certainly they would have made the Act
general, to bar for the future all Persons of the Popish Religion from
Inheriting, or wearing the Imperial Crown of England; but to bring in a Bill
against James Duke of York, alone by name, and that whether he be Papist or
Protestant at the time of the Kings Death (provided he should happen to survive
him) this kind of procedure seems rather to be the effect of the Malice and
Revenge of some particular persons against the Dukes Person, (who have gone so
far as that they judge, they cannot be safe, if ever he Reigns,) than a Design
to secure the Protestant Religion against a Popish Successor.

For First, If such Bill was past, and his Royal Highness should die before the
King, that Act dies with him.

Secondly, If the Duke survive the King, he being near as Old, it cannot be
expected he should live long after him, so it would do little good, nor will it
be any great Security to the Kingdom, to have him barred, and no Body else.

Besides, the offering of such Bill was unmannerly, and put a hardship upon the
King, to Exclude by a Law his only Brother from Inheriting the Crown of
England, though he should be a Protestant, and at the same time, (out of Zeal
to the promotion and preservation of the Protestant Religion) leave room for
the King of Spain, (or any other Popish Successor, except the Duke of York) to
Succeed our present King, and bring in the Spanish Inquisition with him.

What savors this of, or looks it like, but a malicious Design of particular
persons against the Duke of York, I am sure I can find nothing of a real Design
in it, to Secure the Protestant Religion and Interest.

Whereas if the Bill had been made general, to have barred all Popish
Successors, it would have been more excusable, and might perhaps have been
judged the effect of the Parliaments Care of the Protestant Interest, and it
may be, would not have appeared so difficult for the King to have past, if he
had found reason to believe it for his Subjects Good, and with tendency to the
Security and Happiness of his Kingdoms.

Because in such Case His Majesty had done his Royal Brother no wrong, only by
advice of Parliament had past a general Law, for the public Good, and Security
of his Kingdoms, That could neither hurt the Duke, or bar him the Succession
without his own consent by Declaring himself a Papist.

Besides, if this Bill had past into an Act, what would it have signified, has
not many of the like nature been past against several former Princes, who
notwithstanding thereof, after lived to sway the Scepter in this Kingdom.

I know but they will tell you, they designed to have seconded this Bill, with
another for an Association, whereby to have enabled the People to keep the Duke
out by Force, and perhaps they would have been as angry and uneasy to, if that
had not past, which if it had, then might they have presently Dethroned His
Majesty, the present Possessor of the Crown, and that with as much ease and
Justice, as they can hinder his Royal Brother from Succeeding him, and thereby
Intaile a War Domestic and Foreign upon the Kingdom

Pray Consider, whoever sets up against his Royal Highness's Title, must have
at least Fifty Thousand Horse and Foot constantly in Arms, to Defend himself,
and keep the Crown on his Head; for the Duke is an Excellent Soldier, a
Gentleman of Personal Valor and Resolution; a Prince of great Conduct and
Interest, (beloved both abroad and at home) therefore cannot want Supplies from
his Friends here, or the Aid of Foreign Princes (at least, of those who are
Allied to him) to assist him in recovering his Right, which perhaps may Intail
upon us another War for Fifty Years, and the Miseries attending the same, such
as that formerly, between the Two Houses of York and Lancaster, and if such an
Army must be raised, (though no War happen) must not the People of England pay
them, and what that will cost, or what Arbitrary Power that Prince may set up,
that has such an Army at his Devotion, I leave to Judgment.

Consider, if those that advise to this Course of Procedure, be Friends to
their Country and the Protestant Religion, take care to preserve the Liberty
and Property of the Subject, or rather, whether they are not such as put us
upon Methods to destroy them all, lay us open to Arbitrary Power, (as we were
in the time of the late Horrid Rebellion) and to all the Plunderings,
Freequarters, (Taxes of 60000 l. per Month, as was raised by Oliver and his
Council, without a Parliament) Sequestrations, Decimations, Imprisonments,
Banishments, etc.) God knows how many Mischiefs more, may ensue upon such Force
being raised, and maintained, as a standing Army amongst us, as is absolutely
necessary to be kept on Foot, if the Succession be altered.

I cannot believe any honest man, who is really a Protestant, Loyal to the
King, loves his Country, and desires its Interest, Happiness and Peace,
especially, if he lived in the times of the late Intestine War, and beheld the
Miseries the Nation then groaned under, can or will (if he has any Estate or
Trade) ever desire a change of Government in England, or a necessity of having
a standing Army to support that Government, (which necessarily this Bill
desired, for altering the Succession, must have) therefore none but some few
Malcontents, or such as desire the Destruction of the Protestant Religion,
will pursue the same any further.

Having done with this point, and shown how rediculous it is for men to
distract their minds, with the fear or apprehension of His Majesty's Governing
Arbitrarily.

I proceed to the Second thing proposed, and hope to demonstrate by reason,
That we are in as little danger of Popery prevailing, howbeit a Popish
Successor hereafter should happen to Inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Before I enter upon this, give me leave (for my own Justification, and to
prevent being Censured by the Reader) Solemnly to Declare, in the presence of
Almighty God, and the whole World, That I am a Protestant, and have been bred
up in that Religion from my Youth; I am so far from being a Papist, that to my
remembrance I never was in any Parish Church, Chapel, or other Place, where
Mass was said, or the Popish Religion Exercised, during such Service being
performed; I have an equal Love and Esteem for all Protestants, though of
different persuasions, so that they be Conscientious, and Religious, and submit
to Government; and I would have them allowed all Liberty, so long as they use
it, not to the Disturbance of public Peace, or the Government of Church and
State; therefore hope a Charitable Interpretation will be made of what is here
offered to Consideration; since I argue (not out of any approbation to the
Popish Religion, or desire of its being Established here, or to live to see a
Popish King Reign over us, nor out of any prejudice to any Protestant
Dissenter) but merely to quiet the minds of those who distract themselves, with
Jealousies of Poperies overrunning the Kindom, if ever a Popish Successor
should Reign over us, knowing how dangerus it may be to the Protestant
Religion, for Protestants to be misled by such Idle Persuasions.

Suppose such a Popish Successor should happen, the Question then will be,
Whether that Prince, or his Subjects, will suffer most?

I am of oppinion, that a Prince of that Religion will find himself very
uneasy, and Reign with great difficulty, over the English and Scotch Nations,
whatever he may do over Ireland, there being in the Two former, One Hundred
Protestants, for One Papist; though in Ireland perhaps, there is Ten Papists,
for one Protestant, and yet even in that Kingdom, will it not be in his Power
to Establish the Romish Religion, or Invade his Subjects Liberty and Property,
much less to hurt us in England, in either of these particulars.

It has been observed in History, that Princes of the weakest Titles, have
always yielded to the best Laws, complying with their People, and compounding
with them for the Government.

If a Popish Prince ever happen to Reign in England, though he be Right and
Lawful Heir, both by Birth and Succession, yet will his Religion render him
suspected by his People, of having a design to change theirs, and invade their
Properties (consisting much in Abbey and Monastery Land) so they will always
keep him as uneasy as they can, and never give him Revenue sufficient to
maintain such Power and Force as shall endanger them.

And when the King (to whom I beseech Almighty God to great a long Life and
happy Reign) shall happen to Die, his whole Revenue, excepting about 450000 l.
per Annum, Determines with him; so that if his Royal Highness survive him, and
be King, he will not (with all his own present Revenue, joined to that of the
Crown) have above 550000 l. per Annum.

How can any rational man then believe, that with that Revenue he will be able
to raise and maintain such Force, as must necessarily be kept on foot for his
own Security, if he goes about to change the Government, or alter the Religion
of the Kingdom Established by Law.

Our present King, though he has had a Revenue of Two Millions, or a Million
and half, Yearly; and now had above a Million per Annum, never yet attempted
such alteration, and shall the Duke of York (supposing he had a Will to do it,
which I am confident he neither has, ever had, nor will have) be able to
Establish Arbitrary Government, or Popery, with 550000 l. per Annum, It is in
my poor Judgment, only altogether impossible.

Object. I allow the Duke with such a Revenue cannot hurt us, but the French
King having at least, Two Hundred Thousand men in Arms, and a Revenue
sufficient to pay them, and being obliged to keep those Armies Employed abroad,
to prevent their Rebelling at home; he is so Zealous for Establishing Popery
thoughout Christendom, and Rooting out Heresy, that for premoting so
Meritorious a Work, he will Supply our King, if a Papist, with Arms and Money
sufficient to carry on that Design with Success here.

Answ. It is great folly to Imagine, that the French King, who knows his own
Interest, (though it be true, he neither wants Men or Money to carry on any
Design he undertakes) should assist our King with either, for the Uniting him
and his Subjects under Arbitrary Power, or any one Religion whatsoever (tho
Popery it self) both being Destructive to his Interests, and a putting Power in
the hand of our King to break all that Kings Measures, and prevent his making
himself Universal Monark (than which, nothing is more by him desired and
endeavored.)

For if once the King of England and his People were United under either, the
French King knows he will be able to give check to all his further prosecution
of that design; therefore tho he may (and I believe does) spend a hundred
thousand pounds per annum in paying Pentioners Employed by him or his Ministers
to devide between the King and his Subjects (which being his Interest to have
done, he will spare no charge that may Contribute to the doing thereof) yet
would he not give 20000 l. to make our King absolute, or Unite him and his
People under any one Religion whatsoever, tho Popery it self.

For he is a wise Prince, studies his Interest, knows how he parts from his
Money, and will dispose of none to carry on any design that may turn to his
prejudice, than which, nothing in the World can be a greater than to have the
King and his Subjects United.

What hurt then can his Royal Highness do his Subjects if he Succeed his
Brother, since there will not be left when the King dies Revenue sufficient to
support the necessary Expense of his Royal Family and Government, without
Supplies from abroad or at home, and if no Foreign Prince but the French King
can, and that King will not Supply him, must he not then immediately call a
Parliament, must not the People choose that Parliament, will the People of
England awakened as they now are, and then will be with Fears and Jealousies of
the Danger of Popery coming in upon them, and loosing their Estates,
(consisting of Abbey and Monastery Lands) choose any Members to serve in those
Parliaments, but such as they can trust and depend upon, to provide for the
Security of their Livers, Liberties, Religion and Properties; or will those
Parliaments, when met, (being equally concerned in Interest with their
Electors) ever give such Popish Successor any Revenue to hurt or destroy their
own Interest.

It is Nonsense to believe they will give him a Groat, till they have provided
for their own, and the Kingdoms security, in all these particulars; and they
know not his Royal Highness, that have so ill an opinion of him, as to believe
him so Irroligious, so weak of Judgment, or void of understanding his own
Interest, as to accept the Crown, take the Coronation Oath, if he resolve not
to keep and observe the same, by Governing according to Law, and securing his
Subjects in Peace, by preserving to them their Religion, as well as their
Liberties and Properties.

His Royal Highness cannot be Ignorant of the Jealousies the Subjects of
England have already of him, and well knows, those Jealousies will certainly
increase, when he comes to the Crown, therefore must expect, when he calls a
Parliament, that that Parliament, when it meets, will certainly tell him,

That having left our Church, and Declared himself, thereby a Papist, he cannot
be Trusted with the Disposing any Ecclesiastical Promotions, or with any Sum of
Money, that may Endanger the Kingdom, by assisting the Papists, nor will they
suffer Persons of that Religion to come near him, or his Court, to Influence
his Councils, as we vainly Imagine,

So that in my poor Opinion, The Kingdom under such a Prince, may obtain such
Laws, and other Conditions, for securing their Religion, Liberties and
Properties, (before they give any Money) as they would never dare to propose to,
or could ever hope for, or expect from a King of our own Religion.

Besides, no man that has common sense, (whatsoever he says to the contrary)
can believe that ever his Royal Highness, (if he be of another Religion, then
that professed in this Kingdom,) can if he should live to wear the smperial
Crown of his Realm, ever hurt us, though he should Design so to do.

For being of a Religion, to which the Generality of his Subjects have a great
Aversion and Antipathy, and having but a small Revenue, an Inconsiderable
Party, and that Party Fettered with Laws, and the whole Kingdom Alarmed, and
for their own Security, Armed, and in a posture to defend themselves; it will
be impossible for him to subdue such a Nation, in such a Condition, and under
such Jealousies and Circumstances.

Nor will he be able to break through the Laws, made for the Defense of our
Religion, more then he will to Violate those made for Security of our Liberties
and Properties.

If after all this, we shall persist in our folly, and close with nothing
offered, except an Act for Excluding his Royal Highness go along with it, then
of all Nations on the face of the Earth, is ours (in my Opinion) like to be the
most Miserable.

For such alteration of the Succession (as it is said before) must be
maintained by a Force, and standing Army, (a Crown being always esteemed worth
Fighting for) which Force we transmit to Posterity, with a desputable Title,
for a new Trial of Skill, like that Anciently between the Houses of York and
Lancaster, which every good mand must certainly Dread the thoughts of, when he
seriously considers, that War lasted about Sixty Years, cost the Kingdom its
whole Treasure, besides the Devastation and Destruction made throughout the
same, (especially in the North) and the many Hundred Thousands men's Lives were
lost therein, and yet that War was occasioned, only by varying the Hand from
the Children of the Duke of Clarance, Third Son to the Issue of John a Gant,
the Fourth Legitimate Son of Henry the Fourth, and no Bastardy in the Case.

I do not find in all my Reading, that any Government throughout the World,
since the Reformation from Rome, ever made a Law to prohibit a Successor of
that Religion from Reigning over them; Henry the Third of France, though
earnestly Impottuned by the Holy League, to Exclude the King of Navar, refused
so to do, though that King was a Hugenot.

In Edward the Sixth time, no Statute was made to bar a Popish Successor, then
in prospect, though the Reformation was in its Infancy, and most Subjects were
Papists; so that after his Decease Queen Mary was admitted to the Crown, (from
whom the Kingdom had little reason to expect any great Happiness) rather then
the Lady Jane Gray, who was a Protestant, and this done, because they would not
bring a desputable Title of the Crown, upon themselves and Posterity.

In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, which was after the severe Persecution of Queen
Mary, (a Persecution sufficient to have begot an Eternal Hatred in the Nation,
of any future Popish Successor, and to have Justified that Queen, in passing a
Law, for preventing the same) yet was there no positive Law made in her Reign
to bar Mary Queen of Scots, then alive, who was a Papist, and Her Majesty's
Lawful Successor, all that then was done, was by the Act of 13th of her Reign,
which made it Treason, to say the Queen and Parliament could not dispose the
Crown, but they never actually disposed thereof.

And give me leave to say, That such a President would most certainly be as
dangerous to our King now, as that wise Queen thought it might have been to her
then; for that Prince that shows his People a Method of disposing the
Succession, at the same time shakes the Title of his own Possession.

All the Instances of former Parliaments, settling the Crown upon Henry the
Fourth, Edward the Fourth, Henry the Seventh, and their Issues, comes not to
our point at all, not being done upon account of Religion, but before the
Reformation, when all were of the Religion of the Church of Rome.

Those Acts therefore was made, to quiet the Succession, which Force had
unsettled, (not to discompose a Rightful Succession, undisturbed) and to
prevent that War and Bloodshed, that was rational enough to believe would have
followed, and been the consequence of disturbing the Lawful Succession, (not to
break in pieces an acknowledged and peaceful Succession, and Involve the Nation
in Blood, for many Generations to come) they were so far from doing that, that
rather then the Kingdom should be Distracted, with uncertain Titles; an Act was
past in Henry the Seventh's Reign, to command Obedience from the Subject to the
King, De facto, afterward the Kingdom, though secure, was never satisfied,
till Henry the Seventh Married the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter of King Edward
the Fourth.

Again, If matter of Opinion in Points of Religion, shall be esteemed a reason
of State, sufficient to Exclude a Lawful Successor, from his Crown, then has a
Prince harder measure than the meanest of his Subjects, by any Law yet made,
and the Peace and Happiness of these Kingdoms, hangs upon a very slender Thread,
for then if the People should design Rebellion, they need only pretend a
dislike of their Princes Religion, to bar him from his Crown and Government.

I hope the Wisdom of our Parliaments will give no such advantage against
Protestants, to their Adversaries of Rome, as that Rome shall ever have
occasion to say with Truth, We Protestants in England, have by a Law, made our
Prince incapable of Reigning, because a Heretic from the Protestant Religion,
whilst we our selves are striving to make Rome look black and odious for that
most Damnable Doctrine of theirs, (that Princes may be Excommunicated as
heretics, afterward deposed by the Pope) so detestable a Doctrine, that we
make all persons, that take the Oath of Allegiance, Renounce and Forswear it,
let us therefore have a care we do not Imitate them in that Doctrine we so much
Condemn.

Consider seriously, whither such a Course will lead us, and then Judge, whether
fit to be taken, especially upon such a Contingency as this, (of the Dukes
Surviving his Brother) which perhaps may never happen, but if it should, he is
of too great an Age now, to begin such Change of Government, and Religion, as
is suspected, with any hopes of accomplishing the same, in his own time; if so,
and it be also true, (as it is) that he is without hopes of a Successor of his
own Religion, to carry on such attempt by him begun, (the Prince of Orange and
Princess, and the Lady Ann, being all Protestants) why then should any man
believe his Royal Highness, so weak a Prince, as to attempt such Change, with
so small a number of men as his Religion shall have left him, which will appear
so very small, as not to be feared by English men, when Rome shall assault
their Religion and Properties, and oblige them to Fight for the same.

That Prince, be he who he will, that shall at any time come into England with
Popery, will come in with Weakness and Inability, to hurt his Subjects, by any
Force of his own, nor will any Neigbouring Prince (unless he and all his
Subjects be Luniticks) help to make him Absolute, that being to Endanger
themselves.

What Prince will be at Charges, Exhaust his Treasure, Weeken himself, to
Strengthen his Neighbor, nor is that Prince much less then Mad, that should in
such a Case, rely on, or trust to such Neighboring Prince for Assistance.

And for his own Subjects, they will be more dangerous, and uneasy to him,
then he can be to them, for such Prince being without Reputation, Trust and
Money, at home, will be without Assistance from abroad; and his own Subjects
will never assist him to break their own Laws; well knowing, no Prince ever
attempted the same, but the hazarded his Crown, by making the Essay, nor did
ever any Prince Actually break through the Laws, but he was Ruined, and lost
his Crown thereby.

Nor is it in the Power of the Duke of York, if he Succeed his Brother, to
break our Laws, in either of the respects feared, but if ever they be broken,
it must be with the mutual Assent of both Prince and People, assembled in
Parliament; for as our Law now stands, no Magistrate can do any Legal or
Judicial Act in any Inferior Court of Justice; nor bear any public Office,
Civil or Military, nor accept of, or be admitted into any Ecclesiastical
Promotion, or meet to Vote in either House of Parliament, till they shall have
first Renounced Popery, by taking the Oaths, and Test, and making the
Subscriptions by Law required.

If therefore a Popish Successor should hereafter happen to Reign over us, he
will find it very difficult to Repeal those Laws that Establish our Religion,
the Codsideration that the Subjects will always have (being fresh in their
Memories) of the Fire and Faggot Queen Mary exercised in her Reign, for the
Rescueing the Popish Religion, will oblige them to a steadfast Resolution never
to depart from that of their own, I mean the true Protestant Religion, and
until those Laws be Abrogated by Parliament, it will be absolutely impossible
for any Popish Successor to Establish Popery here.

If then what I have offered to Consideration be true, and it shall appear
impossible to Settle a Government in this Kingdom out of the Royal Family, that
shall continue, (as the late Rebellion has demonstrated) or to hinder the
Crown from descending in its due Course, without Endangering all our Ruins, and
the Destruction of the Three Kingdoms, then am I sure every true Protestant,
that either loves God, or the King and Government, or wishes Happiness to
himself and Posterity, and the true Protestant Religion, must surcease all
further attemps for altering the same.

Since nothing Imaginable can have a greater tendency to the Intailing
Confusion and Misery upon us, and the Generations to come after us.

And the better to persuade to this Method of precedure, Consider, that the
King cannot but have the Resentments of Humane Nature, as he is a man, though
(returning to his Kingdom after the Horrid and Barbarous Murder of his Royal
Father, and the illegal Banishment, and long and miserable Exile of his own,
with diverse Proclamations after him, setting Prises on his Head, to have
betrayed him) he has shown and exercised the mercy of a most Excellent
Christian, and Gracious Sovereign, for who can say with truth, that his Life,
Liberty or Property, has been taken away, or Invaded by him, contrary to Law,
or without Legal Trials by their Peers, since his Restoration.

Blame not therefore His Hajesty, (the Impressions of these former Usages being
fresh in his mind) if he (taking notice of the late violent, and unwarrantable
Proceedings against him,, and apprehending from thence the same Mischiefs now
designed, as heretofore) seem tenacious in some Points of his Royal
Prerogative, least the Government (by the wicked Practiees, and restless
Endeavors, of some aspiring Subjects, uneasy in obeying any Government, in
which they have not a share, and accounting it Userpation to be deprived of
that part thereof, which they heretofore too long enjoyed) should once more
revert and start back.

This will appear at last (if I be not greatly mistaken) the chief occasion of
all our present unhappy (and highly to be lamented) Devisions, and of the
Distrust created between the King and his People, each fearing to be Bound, both
striving to be Free; those who contrive to bind the King faster, believe he
designs himself to be loose, Juding of the Kings Actions, by the measures of
their own Wicked and Fallacious Intentions, and thereupon strive to break all
his Measures, and disappoint him in all his Undertakings.

And if these be the occasions of our present Misery, every Loyal Subject and
true Protestant in England, that loves the King, his Country and Religion,
ought to make it his business, to prevent these misundestandings for the
future, which if they would seriously, and with Sincerity and Truth endeavor, I
am of Opinion, the work would not be so difficult, as our Jesuitical
Incendaries, and French Pentionors, represents it to be, and persuade those
amongst whom they convers, it is.

That Almighty God, of his Infinite Goodness and Mercy, may be prevailed with,
graciously to bestow so great a Blessing as this, upon these poor Distracted
Kingdoms, give me leave to propose to every man's Consideration, the Practice
of these following Directions,

First, Be truly Humbled for, and unfeignedly Repent of all your former Sins,
by which you have provoked God to Anger, and turn from all your Iniquities for
the time to come, that his Wrath may be Apeased, and he may Repent him, of the
Evil intended against us.

Love God with all your Heart, Serve him with all your Strength, make his Holy
Word the Rule of your Life, and the Measure of all your future Actions, dare to
do nothing Contrary thereunto, or Derigatory to his Holy Commands.

Live by Faith not by Sight, walk with God, and be Upright, do your Duty in
your Place, To God, the King, your Country, your Neighbor, your Family, and to
your own Soul.

Make it your Business to be Holy and Humble, value the Love and Favor of God,
and an Interest in the Merits of his Dear Son your Redeemer, above all things
whatsoever, and endeavor to obtain to your self, a well grounded assurance
thereof.

Die to Sin, Self, the World, and all things therein, Daily, and Live to that
God by whom you Live, giving him the Glory of all his Goodness and Mercy,
extended toward you.

Set not your Affection Inordinately upon things below, which are all Vain,
Momentary and uncertain, but on things above, that are External.

Be contented in every Condition, thankful and fruitful under every various
Dispensation of God's Providence, submit to his Will, acquiese in his Pleasure,
Bless him for what you have, and Murmer nor Repine not, because you have no
more.

Envy not those who are above you, and possess more of the Riches and Honor of
this Life, then you enjoy, but behold with Pity, and Christian Compassion, how
many there are better, and more deserving (perhaps) then you, who yet want what
you enjoy, and it may be, sinfully wast; Help and Relieve such with a part of
what you have.

Trust God with the Government of the World, and submit to the Powers that are
over you, as being of him, believe he is a Jealous God, will take care of his
Glory, vindicate his Honor, advance his Kingdom, and the Interest of Christ,
and propogate his Gospel, maugre all the opposition of Men, and Devils, and
that this he will do in his own way, and at his own time, without any
direction, or assistance from you therein; remember that he knows best what is
good for you, and has promised that all things shall work together for good to
those that Love and Fear him, and keep his Commandments; and that he will keep
them in perfect Peace, whose Minds are staid on him, because they trust in him;
be not therefore wise in your own Conceit, and think that you can direct God;
Soloman says, See thou a Man wise in his own Conceit, there is more hopes of
a Fool, then of such a Man.

Judge your self and not another, meddle with your own, and no other man's
Business, search your own Heart, and try your own Spirit, whether it be of God,
look into your own Deformities, and mend what is amiss in your self, before you
undertake, or go about to find fault with, or reform others, every one mending
one, is the only way to mend all; and when by such Reformation and Amendment,
we are fit for Mercy, God will give it, if we seek it in a right way.

Think and Esteem of every man better then your self, the lower a man in his
own Conceit, the higher he is in the Esteem of God, and good men; the Proud,
God sends away Empty, and causes to stand afar off, but to the Humble he will
draw near, and him will he fill with good things.

Live in Love, and as much as in you lies, follow Peace with all men.

Do as you would be done unto, love your Neighbor as your self, forget and
forgive Injuries, recompense good for evil, pray for those that hate you, do
good to those that dispightfully use you, yea pray for your Enemies, and do
them good, if in your power, but not hurt.

Lay aside all Malice, Prejudice, and thoughts of Revenge, against all Mankind,
let not difference in Opinion in matters of Religion, beget difference in
Affection, especially amongst Protestants, but Unite in Love, bear and forbear
with, and hide the Infirmities of each other.

Be easy to believe, and make known what good you hear of any man, whom you
have reason to Judge honest, though of a different persuasion from you, and as
hard to believe ill, unless you know it, and more of discovering it, except to
himself, least it prove false.

Give not Credit to all you hear, neither Devulge all you know, take care not
to invent and spread abroad any false Stories, to the Defamation of any person
whatsoever, especially of those that are set in Authority over you, and to whom
you are obliged to be Subject, whereby their Honor, Reputation, or good Name,
may be called in question, or prejudiced; or their Persons and Government
rendered low, or contemptable, this is abominable, worse then Murder,
Reputation to a man of Honor; being dearer then Life it self.

Lay aside and give over all names of Distinction, such as Tory, Whig,
Phanatick, Tantivy-men, Bruminghams, Masquerade-Papists,
Masquerade-Protestants, Church-Whigs, Church-Papists, and all provoking
scurrulous Speaking, Writing and Printing, against each other; these are
public Mischiefs, tending to the Destruction, rather then the Advancement of
our Government, or the Protestant Religion, and proceeds from the Spirit of the
Devil, rather then from that of our Blessed Savior, whose Example we are
commanded to Imitate.

Be Just, follow Truth, pursue Righteousness, execute Justice Impartially,
Relieve the Oppressed, Cloth the Naked, Feed the Hungry, Visit the Sick,
Release the Imprisoned, be a Husband to the Widow, and a Father to the
Fatherless, always go about doing good, and no hurt; avoid all Frauds and
Deceits, deal fairly, and above Board, with all Mankind, abhor all Tricks and
little Cheats, they will never last long, or do any man good; God will
Discover and Detect them, to the Scorn and Contempt of whoever uses them,
either of one side, or the other, be the pretense what it will, for so doing;
there being nothing, that he who is the God of Truth, more Abhors, then such
base and false Practices.

If every man would make it his Business to Observe these few Directions, and
submit (as commanded) to the Powers that are over him, as being of God, pay the
King the Honor and Duty due to him, as his Sovereign, and prefer (as he ought)
the public good and welfare of the Kingdom; before his own private Interests,
which now too much Governs most men in our Age.

And if the People of England, when they shall next Elect Members to serve them
in Parliament, would choose such Persons to Represent them, as shall (when they
come together to Consult of, and Provide for their Interests and Security, in
their Religion and Property,) carry on their Debates with calm and serene
Spirits, lay aside all Passion, Prejudice and Prepossession; Act with
Moderation, Wisdom and Prudence, and behave themselves with that Loyal and
Dutiful Respect to the King, which becomes them, and is their Duty, as they are
his Subjects; His Majesty would then soon perceive, and easily be brought to
believe, that he need not fear them; and with confidence I will presume to say,
The King is not in such a Condition, as that his Subjects need to fear him,
there being more Danger of a Commonwealth, then of Absolute Monarchy, where
the People Set up for Reformers.

By this way of Proceedings, the King, (who is of a most Excellent Temper and
Disposition, ready to pass by and forgive, whatever has been amiss, so
amendment be made for the future) would quickly be gained by his People; (and
as he is our Sovereign, give me leave to say, He ought to be thus Treated.)
Hereby the Kingdom may obtain reasonable Laws, for their Security against all
their present Fears and Jealousies, and future Dangers, (so as such Laws be
pursued with becoming Humility and Duty, and without Heats and Passions,)
however, if by this Method of Proceeding, the Parliament should not arrive at
those, both reasonable (and perhaps necessary) Laws, they so pursue, yet will
they have Peace, and Satisfaction in their own Minds, remain quiet in their
Consciences, and be Justified before God and Man, for having done their Duty
both to their King and Country.

On the other hand, devise what good Laws you can, for the Nations Security,
though you should get them past, yet if they be pursued in Parliament, with
Heat, Violence, or any unhandsome, or unmannerly way of Proceeding; such
Procedure I am sure cannot be Justified, either before God or Man, let the
Pretenses for so doing, be never so Specious; and give me leave to say, That
the most Just and Reasonable things in the World, may justly be Denied, if
demanded or pursued, in a Method that is Unjustifiable.

Nor does it become so Great and Venerable an Assembly, as the Parliament of
England, when met together, to advise the making Laws for preservation of the
Nation in Peace and Tranquillity, to be themselves Froward, Restless or Pievish;
wherefore I shall comfort my self at present, with the hopes of seeing our next
Parliament come together with all the Qualifications of Wisdom, becoming the
Greatest and Freest Assembly in the Universe, and proceeding with Temper,
Moderation and Prudence, (of which there never was more need than now) and if
they so do, I doubt not but that they may effect that Good they hope for, seem
to desire, and ought to pursue, for their Country, if they do their Duty, and
perform the Trust reposed in them.

So may they gain Glory to themselves, and be Eternally Styled, The Happy and
Healing Parliament, and the Generations to come will have Cause to call them
Blessed; for having healed our Devisions, reconciled out Differences, made up
our Breaches, United the King and his People, restored to us the Paths of
Peace, and transmitted Happiness to us and our Posterities, and to the
Generations that shall come after them.

FINIS.

