OPPRESSION UNDER THE COLOR OF LAW, OR, MY LORD HERCARSE HIS NEW PRATICKS

As a Way-marke for Peaceable SUBJECTS to be ware of Pleying with a hot
Spirited Lord of the Session, so far as is Possible when Arbitrarie Government
is in the Dominion.

PROVERBS 20. verse 21. An Inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning,
but the end thereof shall not be Blessed.

Published by Mr. ROBERT PITTILLOH, Advocat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

OPPRESSION under color of LAW, OR, My Lord HERCARSE his New Practicks;
Published by Mr. Robert Pittilloch Advocat.
As a way to make for Peaceable Subjects to beware of pleying with a hot
Spirited Lord of the Session, so far as possible, when Arbitrary Government is
in the Dominion.
Proverbs 20. verse 21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning,
but the end shall not be blessed.


WHiles in my Solitary thoughts, I began to consider the Nature of Justice,
(which consists in individno) reckoned by the Learned among the principal
Cardinal Virtues, and of Judgment, which is the Lords, and of the long tract
of Judicial sentences past against me, in an Affair depending against me, at
the instance of Alexander Ayton of Inchdarnie, or rather at the instance of Sir
Roger Hoge, personated by Inchdarnie his Son in Law, and how the weakness of my
Judgment could not comply with the said Procedour as just and justifiable
either in the Root or Branch: I conceived it most agreeable to my Duty, to
expose the same to the view of the World, that persons judicious and impartial
may either convince me to a full Submission, if I be wrong, or the Authors of
my suffering to change their course; Seeing in the multitude of Counselours
there is Stability: And as that Noble young Man, Elihu said, Wisdom is not
always with the Ancient, nor understanding with the Men of days, but there is
a spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives knowledge. However,
seeing he that does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, they are wrought in GOD. I hope none has reason to be offended with
the open and plain laying forth of the Truth in this matter.

And therefore to come to the purpose, The case is thus, in Ann^ 1648
Lieutenant General Ruthven then Heritor of the lands of Killernie, and Andrew
Wardlaw appearand Heir to the said Lands, and Reverser upon the payment of
17500 Merks Scots borrowed from Archibald Stuart. Brother German to the then
Lord of Rosesyth 6000 Merks, and from Alexander his Brother 4000 Merks, for
which the said Leiutenant General, Andrew Wardlaw the Appearand Heir, and
Margare^ Wardlaw his Sister, then Spouse to the said Leiutenant G^neral, gave
to each of them an heritable Bond, Oblieging themselves conj^nctly and
severally ^o make payment to them of the said Sums, and all cu rent Annual
Rents; And for their better security, obliged themselves with one Consent and
Assent, to Infeft each of them, in an Annual Rent corresponding to their
respective sums, to be uplifted forth of the said Lands. Hereupon by virtue of
the precepts contained in them, the said two Brethren obtained themselves
infeft severally in the said Lands, the 26 of May thereafter; And received
from Leiutenant General Ruthven, one years Annual rent of the said sums, from
the date of the Bond, till Whitsunday 1649. Margaret Wardlaw her Husband dying
shortly thereafter, Andrew Wardlaw the Reverser entered in possession of the
whole Estate, by the tollerance of the two Brothers Creditors; the Law being
patent to them to have exacted their Annual Rents, in regard Margaret Wardlaw
the Conjunct Fiar was unwilling to stop them; and Andrew Wardlaw her Brother
had no pretense to impede them. But the said two Brothers complying with Andrew
Wardlaw, and intending to bend all their forces against Margaret the Conjunct
Fiar, charged William Ruthven lawful Son and appearand Heir to Leiutenant
General Ruthven to enter Heir to his Father, and she obtained Decree against
him: They charged Margaret Wardlaw then a Widow, to make payment to them of the
principal Sumes, bygone Annual Rents, and Penalty; And likewise, they charged
Andrew Wardlaw, but never insisted against him, to the outmost Diligence, tho
he never suspended them, and was in possession of the whole Estate But Margaret
Wardlaw was forced both for her Son William Ruthven, and for her self to
suspend their Charge; And so far was she from impeding them to uplift the
Annual Rents, that this is one of the principal Reasons in her Suspension, That
the Chargers were abundantly secured in their Annual Rents, by their
Infeftments; and that they or some others in their names were in possession.
Which she had Reason to presume upon the Tollerance abovementioned. And the
Reasons in her Sons is, He being a Child, the Lands were patent, for appryzing,
and he had no other means wherewith to satisfy them.

The Sums being thus rendered moveable by the Charge given to Andrew and
Margaret Wardlaws, personally obliged to make payment; and the Decree
obtained against William Ruthven her Son: Archibald ^tuart in May 1654,
assigned his sum to Alexander his Brother, Principal and Annual Rent and
Penalty, with the whole Heads and Chooses contained in his Bond, and Instrument
of Seasing following thereupon; Whereupon in June 1654, the said Alexander
apprised the said Lands, for Principal, Annual Rents, and Sherriff-Fie; and
obtained himself Infest upon his Apprising under the great Seal; but never
insisted either for their Annual Rents, or for Mails and Duties, so long as
their Comorad Andrew Wardlaw was in possession: Knowing that the Ground was
liable to them for their Annuals, and they being Young Men having no Charge but
themselves, living with their Mother, who entertained them on her Charity.
Hereupon Margaret Wardlaw seeing that a daily burden was running on upon her
Conjunct-fie Lands; and that she had got nothing, but was forced to live upon
her Credit: Warned her Brother to remove, and at length after much Opposition
obtained a Decree of Removing against him, but never made use thereof till the
year 1656, after that he and Mr. Robert Pit. Iloch her present* Husband had
several Friendly communings upon the Affair, And afterward a full Submission
drawn betwixt them: Mr. John Drummond of Leno^h Arbitrator for him, and one
George Knox then a public Collector, Arbitrator for her, and Mr. Robert
Pittilloch her present Husband. But upon sight of her Claim, he and his
Arbitrator brake up the Submission reinf^cta, whereupon at length she was
forced to put her Decree in Execut, or otherwise to live perquire, and the
Annual Rents to run on likewayes.

This being done, Alexander Stewart founding upon his Apprysing with Concourse
of her Brother, pursued her and her present Husband with all Rigor for Mails
and Duties: Whereupon offer was made to him of a Localitie for his Annualtents
during all the time of her Possession, and in time coming; Which he refused to
accept, unless we would satisfy him for all bygones, which (as they then told
him) they judged most unreasonable; in regard she had gotten nothing her self
for the time bygone: And she being but a Liferentrix, might dye before ever she
received as much as would satisfy their bygone Annualrents. And it is referred
to the consideration of all Judicious Readers whither this was not a Rational
offer, seeing they had layen out of their Annualrents, not only through their
own fault, (the Laws being patent) But also they themselves had concured with
her Brother, to keep her of Possession, producing their rights to furnish him
with Defenses, and reason of Suspension against her. And as to the truth of it,
it is tesitified by their own Decree, obtained for proving the Tennor of a
Disposition granted by James Bailly to Lieutenent General Ruthven; Wherein this
is made use of, as one of their Reasons for proving that Tennor, That Mr.
Robert Pittiloch offered them a Localitie for their Annualrents. But this being
refused she was forced to raise a Summonds of Reduction against them of their
Apptising and whole grounds thereof, Whereupon in December 1658, she obtained a
Reduction, Reducing, Retreating and Anulling the Bands whereupon the Apprising
is founded, in so far as they personally oblige the said Margaret Wardlaw with
all Decreets of Apprysings, Charters, Seasings, Decreets of removing following
thereupon; But sustaining them, Quoad the real Right; in regard of her consent,
to the Precept and Procuratrie for Infeftment. This being done, Alexander the
Appryser never contraverted in his time, but the Apprysing was reduced quo ad
eam, and persued for a poinding of the Ground, only for his Annualrents: In
Opposition to which. Margaret Wardlaw the Defender and her present Husband,
considering they might in Conscience and Equity, use all Legal Defenses for
stoping this Procedor, in respect of the offer of payment during her
Possession, and that they themselves were the cause of there not being paid,
First offered to improve their Executions which accordingly they did: Whereupon
their Action was for a considerable time delayed, Thereafter the Process was
lost, whereupon it delayed another while: After this Archibald died, and after
him Alexander, thereafter Mr. William Bailie pretended an luterest, which if it
had been sustained, would have destroyed the Interest both of Pursuers and
Defenders, which was taken away by proving the Tennor of a Disposition, granted
by his Father to Lieutenent General Ruthven, after-this Alexander being dead,
his Son James Stewart succeeded to him, and he not being satisfied with
Annualrents, with concourse of his Mother Katrine Drummond his Tutrix pursued
for Mails and Deuties: To which the Decree of Reduction abovementioned was
always opponed, and as often sustained: Yea when her Personal obligation was
aledged to be sortified upon this ground, Ob non repugnantiam. It was repelled
as a quible: The Lords finding it was not the duty of a wife to repugne her
Husbands deeds. But after all this and a long tract of time; James Stewart and
his Tutrix both died, whereupon the Heritable right founded upon the Apprysing
fell in to William Stewart (now of Rossyth) Cusing German to James, and the
bygone Annualrents to Jean Stewars, Lady Inchdarnie his Fathers Sister, who
assigned them to Alexander Aiton of Inchdarnie her son, and Son in Law to Sir
Roger Hoge then Lord Hercarse, one of the Lords of Session. But before this
right fell into them, at least before it was declared, (the same being
interrupeed by a long contest betwixt them and Alexander Naiper,) Mr. Robert
Pitilloh and his Wife entered in terms of Agreement with William Stewart of
Rossyth, who had right to the expired Apprysing, and to all Annualrents that
were due since the death of James Stewart his Cusing German: Laying out to him
the favourableness of their condition, in that Margaret Wardlaw was both
Conjunctfiar of the said Lands by her first Husband, and Apparent Heir to them
by her Father, who was Proprietar of them, which the said Lord of Rossyth
relished very well: And several times promised he should never agree with any
till we had the first offer. But we fearing that the Annualrents would be
declared to belong to Inchdarine Son in Law to a Lord of the Session; who might
do great things for him, (as it after fell out) were loath to give too much
upon consideration of this Danger: Whereupon we continued still willing to the
Bargain, but conferring upon the price for a long time, without any final
Agreement; till the right of the Annualrents came in Inchdarnies person: And
then my Lord Hercarse, sent for Mr. Robert Pittilloch, entertaining him with
fair Language enough, but withal with many pumping Questions anent the Lands
of Killernie and the condition thereof: Which I confess I answered with more
Ingenuitie then Prudence, conceiving at that time all he spoke to me had flowed
from the like Principles; and among other things he mentioned to me agreement
with him for the bygone Annualrents: To which I answered I could not agree as
the case then stood for two Reasons. 1st. It would be an Homologating of
Rossyths Right. 2dly, My wife being but an Liferentrix If I should agree for
the Annualrents without the Heritable Right; My Wife might die long before I
were satisfied of what I should Deburse: But I was in terms with Rossyth, for
the Heritable Right, and I she and I should agree for that, I would endeavor
likewayes to agree for such Annualrents as were justly due; And in order
thereto with all diligence met with Rossyth, and finally agreed with him, to
give him 12000 Merks for his whole Interest, concerning which write was to be
drawn with the first convenience; It being then late at night. After which a
Gentleman of Credit and honesty, told me that to morrow thereafter, he
overheard a Servant belonging to Hercarse saying to a friend of Rossyths, that
their 10000 Merks was better then my 12000 Merks, endeavoring hereby to take
the Bargain out of my hand. But conceaving it to be below any honest Man, and
far more below a Lord of the Session, to take such base and indirect methods,
after I had told him I was in terms with Rossyth therefore: And after that the
business was fully ended, with which he declared himself noways unsatisfied, as
also my Son in Law Mr. William Hoge having ingenuously told him the same thing,
adding, he hoped his Lordship would not play in our Game: Whereupon he gave him
assurance he would not, but that he would cause his Son in Law quite as much as
Rossyth had done and more, I slighted the Gentleman's Information and friendly
Admonition altogether; However I went down to Rossyth and paid him a visit,
in whom I found no change, only I observed Innermey and his Lady to abide close
by him while I was in his company, after which my Son in Law who was his
Intimat, and had done him several special Services, went to him and desired
that what was agreed upon might be drawn in Write; to whom his answer was. Do
ye thing me so base and unworthie a Rascal as that I will alter what I have
done. Whereupon we rested, not making great haste; But quickly thereafter we
were alarmed with surprising News, that My Lord Hercarse, Inchdarnie, Innermey,
and some others, had meet with Rossyth in Widow Thomsons house, near his
Lodging, and he had granted a Disposition to Inchdarine of his hail Right for
the Heritage and all Annualrents whatsoever he had right to; which we find
since verified by the Disposition granted to him, with consent of Innermey,
Scotstown his Brother in Law, and his Lady, of the date the to of December,
1687. Whereupon he was Infeft the 29 of the said Month thereafter.

Some Reflections upon this Bargain,
It is humbly offered to the Consideratian of the Judicious Reader, whither
this was not Concussion in Uberiore forma in this Bussiness?
FOr clearing whereof, we are to consider, 1mo. The qualities and Condition of
Rossyth the granter of this Disposition. 2do. The qualities and Condition of
Inchdairnie to whom the Disposition was granted formaliter. 3tio. The
Qualifications and Condition of my L. Hercarse, Present, Advysing, Persuading,
and bringing the Bargain to a Conclusion. As to the first, it is well known,
Rossyth is amongst the most ancient Barrons in Fife, (if not the most ancient)
and of a most Honorable Descent, and also a Gentleman who understands his own
business considerably well. 2do, The Bargain he had made with me was not
rashaly contrived nor made use of upon a Surprisal, but after many Conferrences
and Friendly meetings had for the purpose at several of which, his Advocate Mr.
John Stewart was present. 3tio, After it was closed the expression
abovementioned, which he used to my Son in Law, who had done him several
singular Services, insinuats he judged none but a base and unworthy Rascal,
would resell from a Bussiness so fully ended and concluded: But lastly it is
to be considered he was a Gentleman in distress, and under many burdens of Debt
to several Creditors, and he had one great Action depending before the Lords of
Session for a great Sum of Money, which would have much contributed for his
relief, and concerning the delay whereof I have heard him often complain. As to
the second it is well known Inchdairnie was in no condition of himself to do
him any Service; but only by my Lord Hercarse his Father in Law, and it is well
known he was neither so Skilful in Rhetoric, nor Fluent in Oratorie, that
thereby he could effectuate any great Matter: But as to the third, it is as
well known that my Lord Herearse is a Person who has been bred in Sciences from
his Youth, Skilled in the Law, and for his present Condition he was then a Lord
of the Session, and reckoned among those of the first Magnitude, and a man of a
most forward Inclination in Prolecuting or Bussness, whether for himself or his
Friend; as also, he was a Lord of the Court of Justiciary, which was a Court
most terrible to many in that day, and by which Court Walter Stewart, Ressythes
nee^ K^nsman and appear and Heir, and several others in whom he had a special
Interest were declared Fugi^ives. Which being Considered, it is offered to the
Consideration of the Readers, whither this was not Concussion in the highest
Degree? which by the Doctors of the Civil Law, is defined to be Crimen quo sub
pretextu potestatis quam quis h^het terror injicitur pecun^ae vel rei alterius
extorquendi causa, etc. And if it be not a Concussion of the worst nature, in
so far as hereby a Gentleman of Ancient Extract, great Credit and Honor, has
been persuaded contrair to his Faith and Ingadgement to Violat his Obligation.
So deliberately perfected and adhered to for some days therea ter. And in so
far as it was likewise done contrair to the Laws of Gratitude in so far as
concerned Mr. William Hoge, for whose Children the purchase especially was
made, for whose cause he often decl^red he would give me a Thousand Merks down
of the Price; And in so far as it was done by a Lord of the Seossin, who should
have been a Pattern and Patron of Justice, and that accompanied with the
Circumstances abovementioned: And also whither herein there was not Money given
by Rossyth, upon this power and terror injected? in so far as the Bargain was
granted for a Thousaud Merks less then Mr Robert Pittilloch should have given
for it, besides an other Thousand merks which Rossyth declared he gave down,
out of his respect to Mr. William Hoge; To all which may be added, such was his
Confidence of Effectuating his Purpose, Terrore suo; et plena potestate quam
tune habuit, that the Summonds was raised, and execute, for the Annualrents in
Rossyths name; before this Bargain was made, without his knowledge or consent
as he declared to me himself several times but leaving this to the Judicious
Reader; we proceed;

After this Bargain was ended, and the Summonds raised, and execute, in the
name of Rossyth and Inchdairnie, My Lord sent for me the second time, and when
I came to him, he asked me, if I would satisfy them now for the Heretable
Right, and all the bygone Annualrents? To which I answered, looking upon this
Motion as a Jear, I had once bought it already, and his Son in Law had taken
it over my head; I had no mind to buy it the second time, and when I looked for
a reply, carrying Reasons to Justify the deed; All he said was, he had reason
to do for his own security; which my weakeness could not comprehend, to be
any better Justification, then if a Robber with an empty purse, when he had
taken one from his Neighbor, had told him, he behooved to do it for his own
security, in as much, as without Money he could not Travel: As likewise he
told me, it would bid but one Bellum; which I looked upon as the highest of
Threatenings, and therefore answered him with much Sobriety, I could not help
it; his Lordship knew the old Proverb, There was never a Lord of the Session
lost a cause, and there never one of their Bairns wan one. Thus having parted
from him, the Summonds being execute both for Mails and Deuties, and for
Annualrents, die Summonds for Poinding the Ground was called upon the 6 day,
which was the day of Compeirance, contrair to the Pratick of the House; which
is not to call till the day of Compe^rance be past: But as to the other for
Mails and Duties, it was never yet publicly called, in the ordinar manner, nor
any of the two sent out to be seen for six days, conform to the Laws of the
Kingdom, Acts of Sederunt, and immemorial practice in such cases: But tam avide
inhiarunt in legatum adventitium. which had hapened to Inchda^nie in an
unexpected manner; that a new course was invented for a sudden Dispatch of the
business: viz. Inchdarnie gave in a Bill of Suspension, in name of the whole
Tennants, ennumerating them by their names; and amongst them one who was never
a Tennant, viz. Robert Douglas Servant to Agnes Templeman, and se^t^ng down
their particular Duties, and acknowledging, they were resting the same for the
Terms of Whitsunday and Mertimass preceding; and that they were to pay the
same to any having best Right, but they were distressed by two several Parties,
etc. Which Bill being given up to see, these Answers were given to it verhatim.

Primo, If this Bill of Suspension be granted, Writers to the Signet needs
never hereafter to put in another reason of Suspension, but sie volo sic jubeo;
In so far as in the first place, this Bill is given in by Inchdarnie, not only
without the consent of the said Tennents, but after they have disowned and
disclaimed the same, as prejudgeing them of all the Privileges competent to
them in an Ordinar Action which he has stated against them for the said Mails
and Duties: Which (as is humbly concevied) is a Forgerie; if not a Falset.

Secundo, This Bill Lybels the Tennents, as acknowledging they are resting
their hail Mertimass Duties, and that they are willing to pay them to any of
the said Parties who shall be found to have best right thereto: Whereas they
have truly paid them to the said Margaret Wardlaw and her Husband already, and
received discharges therefore, who has been their Masters these 20. years
bygone: And that before any diligence used by the other Party, to put them in
Malafide, which (as is humbly conceived) ought likewayes to be looked upon as a
second Forgerie.

Tertio, In this Bill the Tennents Duties are Lybelled, as acknowledged by them
far beyond what they are, and by some of them who pays no Duty but two
Shearers in Harvest, for their small parcel of Land, to be considerable sumes
of Money; which (as is humbly conceived) is a third Forgerie.

And as to Margaret Wardlaw Conjunct-fiar of the said Lands, and her Husband,
if such a Bill should be past, Inchdarnie having devised this project, and
prepared all his Instructions for Summar discussing; they are most unjustly
surprised, and hereby defrauded of the ordinar terms, competent to them in an
ordinar Action: Which is the more odious in the person of Inchdarnie, Because
this is the first time that ever they heard he pretended an Interest in these
Lands.

2dly, If such a Bill should be past, it puts them in a condition never to
uplift their Mails and Duties, albeit they should loose the Arrestment; upon a
mere Alledgance and pretense of persons who never yet showed any right thereto:
Whereby if any of the Tennents prove lapsi bonis, they are lost for ever.

And if it should be discussed upon the Bill, which Inchdarnie bosts he will
obtain, it is a preparative of most dangerous consequence; contrait to Law or
Pratick, to discuss Heritable Rights, in prima instantia upon an Bill of
Suspension: And if this should be sustained all ordinar Actions of greatest
concernment, may be brought from the Bench to the Side Bar, merely upon a
pretense, that the pursuer has a Competitor: Whereupon the Defender is
defrauded both of his ordinary Dyets for proving his Defenses: and the benefice
of the Roll, ordained for the Leidges, that they may not be surprised in their
just Defenses competent to them in their several Actions. P^t the Business was
with the Son in Law of my Lord Hercarse, which he was to finish with one
Bellum; and none of the Answers were respected, and therefore we put in a Bill
to the hail; Lords of the Tennor following;

MY Lords of Counsel and Session, unto your Lordships, humbly Means and Shaws,
we your Servitors Laurence Mudie, Adam Peacock, John Henderson, and the Remnant
Tennents of Killernie and Bandrum, That where there is a Bill of Suspension
given in to your Lordships, (we know not by whom) upon an alleged Double
poynding, wherein we are alleged to acknowledge we pay great Duties, far
beyond what ever we were in use to make payment of, and that we are resting our
Mertimass Duty for the year last past 1687. And that we allege we are charged
and pursued by Margaret Wardlaw and Mr. Robert Pittilloh her Husband, for the
said Mails and Duties, albeit not resting by us* Whereupon Alexander Aston of
Inchdarnie intends to found a Process against us, and the said Mr. Robert
Pittilloh and his Spouse our Masters. It is humbly represented to your
Lordships, that if the said Bill shall be sustained as the foundation of a
Process as said is, albeit disclaimed and disowned by us under our hands, yet
i^ will make faith against us in time coming, whereby in the first place we
shall be found liable in far greater Mails and Duties then ever were due by
us, and the Mertimass Deutie last past already paid by us, to the ruin of us
and ou^ poor Families. Secondly, We shall be found guilty of accusing of our
said Masters of the hight of Covetousness, in requiring our Duty twice for
one Term, which is a crime superscribed by the highest of all Judges, with the
Name and Title of Idolatry, whereof we never knew them guilty.

Wherefore we humbly pray, that for preventing the utter ruin of our poor
Fortunes, and our disgrace in being pursued for slandring our Masters with so
horrid a Crime, your Lordships would cause deliver up to us that Bill of
Suspension, as our own proper Evident to be cancelled and destroyed. Or if
Inchdarnie shall be so far indulged that it shall be sustained to him as a
Foundation of a Process, binding against us, and our Masters above specified,
as said is, he may be ordained to subscrive che same before two witnesses, and
Judicially to abide thereat; that we may have the benefit of improving thereof
with concourse of his Majesty's Advocate, as false and forged as accords of the
Law.

This Bill being read to the hail Lords, the Deliverance on the back thereof,
was written by the Clerk in these terms,

Edinburgh Feb: 14: 1688.
THe Lords having heard this Petition remit to the Ordinar, to whom the within
Bill of Suspension was presented, to ordain the same to be given up to the
Petitioners; or to be subscrived by Inchdairnie or not as he shall find just.
But my Lord President refused to subscrive it: Whereupon to morrow thereafter I
waited upon his Lordship while he was upon the Bench; And after he had ended
the Subscriveing all his Interloquitors, and Subscriveing the Deliverances upon
other Bills, desired his Lordship would Subscrive this, showing him the Ordinar
would do nothing on it, without his Subscription: To which he answered, he
remembered nothing of it, whereunto I replied I was never known to be a Forget,
and the Clerk whose carriage in all the Bussiness was honest, and impartial
rose up and owned it, whereupon he desired me to move it to Morrow; and they
would do something in it: Which accordingly was done, and as I was informed,
(for there was nothing put in Write) it was Verbalie recommended to my Lord
Drumcairn, to whom the Bill was presented. What the Reasons of my Lord
Presidents refusal were the Eminence of his Station and the Greatness of his
Parts, forbids me by Conjecture to Determine, albeit in that day I judged it as
much his Dut^e, as it was mine to require it. However neither the one nor the
other was grant^d, albeit the said Bill was likewise disclaimed by the Tennants
publicly, their Advocate Mr. William Hoge in their name disowning the same at
the Bar; But all was in vain, the Bill is sustained: It was given in by my
Lord Hercarse his Son in Law. But because neither the Answers given to the Bill
of Suspension, nor the Reasons given in in the Tennants Bill were respected;
we shall add some few Reasons further, which we conceive could not but be
known to the Lords themselves, viz. 1mo, A Suspension in its own nature is but
a Dilatorie sentence, as the word signifies, the deliverance upon the Bill
imports, and the Sentence at Dicussing bears which is either, Finds the Letters
orderly proceeded, or Suspends the Letters simpliciter; and therefore where
there is no charge the Suspension is a Suspending Nothing, and Nothing cannot
be put to further Execution, if it be alleged his Rights gave him a ground of
a Decree; and therefore there was a charge in the Root, though there was no
formal charge: It is answered, his rights were not then produced and judged of,
and de non entibus and non apparentibus idem datur judicium: 2do, If it shall
be sustained that persons may give in a Bill of Suspension whither the Debitors
will or not, then any malicious person at his pleasure may give in a Bill for
Suspending the Creditor, to provock him unnecessarly to distress the Debtor:
Whereupon much trouble and distress might follow. If it be answered they have
not an interest; it is replied as formerly, whatsoever his Interest was, at
that time when his Bill was sustained it was not seen and considered by the
Lords: But because through the weakness of my Capacity, which could not swallow
the Declarations and Tests which other of profounder Judgments received with
full Satisfaction, I have been many years out of Practice, in which the Lords
might have made many Acts of Sederunt, which makes such Fictiones furis lawful,
and Practicable. We shall insist no more on their: Adding only two more, which
are founded upon pure Nature, and these Principles which GOD has implanted in
all Men's hearts, The first is this Bill of Suspension certainly ought not to
have been sustained for the ground of a Decree, against any but such as were
Tennants in the Lands, to which Inchdairnie pretended right: 2do, Nor against
them, for Sums or Duties which they were never resting But so it is that upon
this Bill, and ^nding the Letters orderly proceeded thereon; Decree was past
at least against one who was never Tennent in these Lands, and against many of
them for Sumes they were never due; Whereupon they were denunced, and upon
Caption Incarcerat ten days in the To booth of Dunfermleng; The Lords having
no other Instruction, either who were Tennen s, or what they were resting, but
Inchdairnies word therefore: Whose carriage truly was somewhat Scandelons when
he came amongst us, though his Authority was so great with the Lords: And if it
shall be alleged to be the fault of the Writter who raised the Horning, It is
answered, when a Bill was put in complaining of the Writter, and craving he
might be punished therefore, The Lords answer was, Finds the Writer has done no
wrong. And therefore we leave it to the Reader to consider, where the wrong
lay. Whereas they found out a remeed afterward for Liquidation and proveing the
quantities, it shall have an answer in its own place. But as yet there was
never any thing invented, for succor of him who was no Tennent, seeing the
order for the Tennents to compear and depone, could never oblidge such as were
no Tennents to compear and depone, nor can it in Reason be conceived, why the
Decree might not as well have passed against the whole Parioch, if Inchdairnie
had lybelled them Tennants, the reason being one and the same as to one and to
many.

But the Bill being sustained, tho the Lords were far advanced in their Roll of
Suspensions; Yea so fat that it would not have tempted any ordinar Man's
patience, to have waited till it had come in in the ordinar Course, yet the
reasons of this behoved to be discussed on the Bill; (it was to abide but one
Bellum) for which a Bill was put in by Inchdairnie to the Lords, which received
answer in these Terms.

January, 21 1688.
THe Lords discharges the Clerk to the Bills to expede the within mentioned
Suspension, until the Chargers be heard, before my Lord Drumcairn, Ordinar; to
whom they remit to discuse the reasons of Suspension upon the Bill: By which
deliverance (passing the Solesisme therein contained, in discharging the Clerk
to expede the Bill who never had power to expede a Bill till it was passed by
the Lords, and by the latter part of it making it impossible for either Lord
or Clerk to expede it, in the notion of a Suspension; It being remitted to the
Ordinar to discuss the reasons upon the Bill) Inchdairnie had these Advantages,
1mo, The choice of his own Lord, how much he followed my Lord Hercarse his
Faith shall appear by what follows hereafter: 2do, Hereby he prejudged us of
the benefit of the Roll, which by the Laws of the Kingdom, and Immemorial
Pratick, is allowed to all the Leidges. 3^o, Hereby we were prejudged of the
ordinar dyets, Competent to Defenders in pursuts for Mails and Deuties, in so
far as upon the 25 of Januarie, we were ordained to produce our Interests with
Certification betwixt and the tenth of February thereafter: Which was the
allowing us but 16 days, which in all probability, if we had had the benefit
of the Roll, and other Privileges Competent to Defenders, in Actions for Mails
and Duties, would have been 16 Months; A great part of our righs being out of
our hands, whereupon an incident diligence would have been granted us. But
howsoever this being inacted, we rested secure, till an Act should have been
extracted, as has been the constant practice in all such cases, ever since the
erection of the College of Justice: Ane therefore we paid the Extracter to
give us out a Scrol to see, before the same should be Subscrived. But the day
being elapsed, the Ordinar called it upon the Bench, without any Act extracted;
and because we did not instantly produce Decerned, preferring Inchdarnie to the
Mails and Duties, whereupon we put in another Bill, of the Tenor following,

MY Lords of Council and Session, Unto your Lordships, Humbly Means and shaws,
we your Servitors Margaret Wardlaw Conjunct Fiar of the Lands of Killernie, and
Mr. Robert Pittilloch her Husband, That whereas Alexander Altoun of Inchdarnie
having raised a summonds for Mails and Duties against our Tennants, after the
day of Compearance was past, and Tennants and we were both ready to Answer, he
changed the nature of his Action unto a Suspension of double Poynding (as is
humbly conceived) contrare to Law and Equity, hereby prejudging us of the
privileges allowed to all the Lieges, in such cases by Acts of Parliament,
Acts of Sederunt, and immemorial Pratick: Notwithstanding hereof, we in an
entire deference to your Lordships pleasure, submitted thereto, providing your
Lordships would ordain him to subscrive and abide by the said Bill stuffed with
calumnious untruths, prejudicial both to us and our Tennants, and therefore
disowned and disclaimed by them. And that your Lordships would grant us and our
Tennants the same privileges, which in Law are allowed to all his Majesty's
Subjects in pursutes for Mails and Duties, this being no other but the same
Action in omnibus mutato nomine. Albeit as to the first, your Lordships
referred the causing him subscrive and abide by the Bill to the Ordinar to whom
it was first presented, there is nothing done therein, and as to the other,
when after your Lordships had enacted us to produce our interests hinc inde,
the tenth of February, in regard whereof, upon good and Legal Grounds, we
rested secure till an Act should have been extracted, calling for a scroll
thereof often in the Clerks Chamber, with a purpose to give ready obedience, in
place thereof by an unusual surprisal, without an Act, we were ordained
instantly to produce, which we could not do. And because we did it not, a
Decree was presently put up against us, in regard whereof, we humbly conceive
it ought to be Declared by your Lordships, whether any Process ought to be
sustained upon this Bill, before the Pursuer subscrive the same, and abide
thereat. And 2dly, Whether your Lordships will sustain this for a practick,
that where there is an Act passed, there can be either a Decree of Preference
or Circumduction of the Term, before Extracting and Calling the Act? And if
your Lordships find it can subsist with Law and Form, we shall instantly
produce.

Wherefore, may it please your Lordships, to take the premises to your serious
consideration, and to give us your positive Determination thereanent, and to
Declare whether we and our Tennants shall have the privileges of other
Defenders, pursued for Mails and Duties, or if the same shall be Arbitrarlie
altered in favors of Inchdarnie, because this Action has gotten the name of a
Suspension; And in the mean time to ordain the Decree abovementioned to be
expunged.

The Deliverance and Answer whereunto, was in these Terms.

Edinburgh, February l8th. 1688. The Lords having heard this Bill, remits to
the Ordinar, who passed the Bill of Suspension to allow the Petitioners a
farther Term to produce their Interest or not, as he shall find just.



If the Lords had refused or rejected this Bill, as frivolous and impertinent;
it is like the Petitioners submitting to their Lordships Judgments, would have
acquiesced. But as the things therein desired, are in themselves pregnant, and
most pertinent, so the Lords implicitly at least, have approven them to be
such: by giving them some thing like an answer; but in effect answering none of
the particulars petitioned for in the Bill. For albeit it may be alleged, that
a farther Diet was craved in this Bill; It is easily answered, that albeit by
the granting the just desires of this Bill, it would have followed by
Consequence, that a further Term would have been granted, yet this is no ways
the desire of the Bill; but 1mo, That Inchdairnie subscrive the Bill, and abide
thereat, that a solid ground might be laid of an improbation against him for
his Falset and Forgery. 2do, That the Circumduction of the Term might be
declared Null; That so that Decree might be turned into a Lybell: and no
Circumduction might pass till an Act were Extracted, and called, conform to the
Laws of the Kingdom. 3tio, That the Lords would declare, they would allow us
the Privileges due to other Defenders, in actions for Mails and Deuties: Or if
the same should be Arbitrarly altered, in favors af Inchdairnie, because it
has the name of a Suspension.

But all Petitions being in vain, we produced Margaret Wardlaw her seasin,
bearing her to be infest in the Lands above specified: Which was all the Rights
we had in the Town at that time concerning these Lands. And Inchdairnie
produced his Rights, founded on, whereupon we were ordained to see in the
Clerks hands: though the ordinar Custom according to Law, and practice, is to
send out the pursuers process, to the Defenders Advocate: Which he is not bound
to return till six days be Elapsed, and the Defender is not tied to produce
his, till he propone thereupon, and if his Defense Founded upon his Interest be
founded Relivant, a day is assigned to him, whereupon the Pursuer extracts an
Act, and forces him to produce. But as to the Pursuers Production, we were only
ordained to see in the Clerks hands, who refused to give it up without a
receipt from our Advocate: Which being grented, before or a little after twenty
four hours were elapsed; (a time scarce Competent to Inventar the many writes
given in by the Pursuer) we were urged to deliver them back again: though ours is
keept up to this day. Inchdairnie pretending it is his evident; And an Action
of Removeing Depending against us; though this was the only evident we had
whereupon to found a Defense; And albeit his Father in Law, and Procutor had
declared; there should no such Action be pursued till it were given up, adding
they were not so base, as to fight with a man when they had taken his Arms
from him.

The production being thus satisfied, My Lord Drumcairn called it upon the
Bench: Where my Lord Hercarse compeared with his Purple Gown, and debated the
case as Inchdairnies Advocat, repeating all his writs, it seems relying on the
old Proverb, Quum singula non prosunt, multa juvant. But so far as I remember
there past no Decree that day, but to morrow thereafter his Lordship call it
again, at the Side Bar; where my Lord Hercarse compeared again, in his former
habit, and the dispute was renewed: in which dispute, our Advocates would
propone nothing as to the Annualrents, aledged due by the Infestments following
upon the Heritable Bonds: Because an Action for such Annualrents, and an Action
for Mails Deuties, are toto caelo different, 2dly, Because there was nothing in
Libello: There being nothing in the Bill of Suspension, which was the ground of
the Process, but Mails and Deuties: But knowing there could be nothing in this
process for a ground of Mails and Duties, which are the Emolument of the
property, but the Apprising; This unanswerable Defense was proponed: Offers to
prove the Apprising Reduced, in foro contradictorio, quo ad Margaret Wardlaw,
the Conjunct-fiar, and tho they were bound to say no further; Yet ex super
abundanti, because what he proponed upon a Back-bond of Reversion, seemed to
savor much of Natural Equity: It was answered, primo, This Back bond was
granted by a Wife, stante Matrimonio, and under Reduction, 2do: Finding there
was much weight laid upon it, we offered under protestation that it should not
be prejudicial to our Reduction, to Count and Reckon presently, without an
Order of Redemption; Albeit in Law without an Order, we were not tied to
Answer. To the first it was replied, the Reduction is without prejudice of
Inchdarnies Authors real Right, which Inchdarnie produced to clear the same,
which was true as to the matter, but most impertinent as an answer to the
Defense produced: It was not contraverted but their real Rights were valid; but
they could never be a ground for Mails and Duties in prima instantia; nor any
other Right they produced but the Apprysing, which the Defense abovementioned,
did totally elied. But my Lord Drumcairn being straightened with the Defense,
answered himself, that our Reduction was but as to personal Execution against
Margaret Wardlaw. To which I replied my self, my Lord, The peril of the cause
upon that. And hear we desire the Judicious Reader to consider, whether the
Ordinar who gave such an Answer, had purused the process, or if implicita fide,
he had followed my Lord Hercarse his Faith: seeing the very words of the
Reduction are, Finds the first Reason of Reduction relivant, and proven, to so
far as concerns the personal Obligdment, and all that has followed, or may
follow thereupon as Null; And therefore, Reduces, Retreats, Cassis, and Annuls
the said Bands, in so far as they personally obliege the said Margaret
Wardlaw, with all Decreets of Apprisings, Charters, Seasings, Decreets of
Removing following thereupon, Declaring the same to have been from the
beginning, to be now and in all time coming Void, and of none Effect, quo ad
eam, in so far as the samen are deduced against her, upon the foresaid personal
Oblidgement. Likeas if his Lordships patience would have admitted us a Hearing,
we could showed him further, that she stood in no need of a Security for her
person; in regard the same was already sufficiently secured, by a Suspension
standing yet undiscussed. To the second, there was nothing answered, But there
was no Reduction produced; which was an Answer of no value, it being time
competent enough to produce it, at any time before the Count and Reckoning was
ended: Especially the same being offered, before useing an order of Redemption,
or raising Declarator thereon. But my Lord without further answer, or heeding
what was said, decerned, and so went hastily from the Side Bar, refusing us
the Lords Answer upon a Maund; which in Law is competent to all Subjects in the
Kingdom.

Hereupon to morrow thereafter, I put in a Bill to the Lords, of the Tennor
following:

MY Lords of Council and Session, unto your Lordships humbly Means and Shows;
We your Servitors Margaret Wardlaw, Conjunct Fiar of the Lands of Killernie and
Bandrum, and Mr. Robert Pittilloch Advocate, her Hushand for his Interest. That
whereas on Friday the 24, of this Instant, My Lord Drumcairn at the Side Bar
past a Decree in favors of Inchdarnie, preferring him to the Duties of the
said Lands: For the Demonstrating the Iniquity of this Sentance, Your
Petitioners conceives it their duty, to Represent to your Lordships the whole
tract of this Affair, which is as follows, viz. Inchdarnie having fain in by an
unexpected Accident to some Mails and Deuties alleged, resting to Alexander and
Archbald Stewarts, Uncles to the Lord of Rossyth, and my Lord Hercarse having
sent for the said Mr. Robert, under pretense of Agreement therefore, and
received from him these Rational Answers: That he could not make any Agreement
for any Mails and Duties, till he had agreed with Rossyth, in whose person the
Heritable Right stood, because it would not only be an Homologating of Rossyths
Right, but the paying out of Mails and Duties for a Liferentrix. For the
return whereof he had no assurance, by reason of the uncertaintie of her Life,
and that he was in terms with Rossyth, for the Heritable right in order to
Agreement, for what Mails and Duties should be found due. In place of
expecting the close of this Agreement which your Petitioners hastened, they
being in terms before to this purpose, rationally to have satitfied his
Lordship. Inchdarnie with concourse of my Lord Hercarse, his Father in Law,
after your Petitioners had verbally agreed with Rossyth, for the said heretable
Right, and it was concluded it should be drawn in write with all possible
conveniencie, caused him dispone his Right to his said Son in I am for a 1000.
Merks Scots less then your Petitioner had agreed, for he having a great Action
depending in the Session against my Lord Annandale; and knowing the great
Figure Hercarse made amongst the Lords. 2ly. Having obtained this Right, his
Son in Law raised summonds against your Petitioners and their Tennants for
Mails and Duties in which Action, we were most ready and willing to have
answered him according to the Laws and practick of the Kingdom, but instead
thereof, in an unusual manner, after the day of Compearance was past, he raised
a Suspension of double Poynding in the Tennants names, which (at we are
informed by able Lawyers, was never sustained but in favors of Suspenders
really distressed by Chargers to be discussed upon a Bill, when they could not
find caution: Far less at the instance of the Pursuers, when the alleged
Suspenders disclaimed and disowned the same, under their hands. As also, your
Petitioners alleged Chargers on the other part, Disowned the same. 3dly. When
the said Tennants did put in a Bill, Craving, That in regard they had disowned
the same, and that it was filled with calumnious untruths, it might be either
given up to them, as their own proper Evident, to be cancelled; or at least
Inchdarnie might be ordained to subscrive the same before witnesses, and
formaliter abide thereat, whereby they are prejudged of their Improbation, the
remedy of Law in such cases. 4ly. That in all Actions for Mails and Duties
(of which nature this is mutato solummodo nomine) no Decree can in Law be
pronounced where a term is assigned for producing an Interest for
disobedience, till an Act be Extracted and after Extracting, Called, and the
Term Circumduced for not Production; Yet in this Action before an Act was
Extracted, a Decree was pronounced, while your Petitioners upon Legal grounds
rested secure, and had given money to the Extracter for a sight of a scroll of
the Act, when it was called by their Adversary, my Lord Drumcairn, past a
Decree of Preference in favors of Inchdarnie. 5thly. His Lordship upon an
Address made to him since we produced Margaret. Wardlaws Infefiment, having
called this Action again, we proponed an unanswerable Defense, why Inchdarnie
could not be preferred, viz. That the Apprysing which was the ground of all,
the Process was reduced quo ad Margaret Wardlaw, My Lord Hercarse Procurator
for Inchdarnie answered, that our Reduction did not prove our Alledgance, and
that be would produce the same himself, and added that there was an Backhand of
Reversion granted to Andrew Wardlaw, whose Right stood in Inchdarnies person,
which made it appear that Margaret Wardlaw is paid, for all that she could
crave out of this Estate: To which it was replied, that the Defense being
unquestionably Relevant, the probation ought to admitted to the Proponer, at
least if he produced the Decree of Reduction, which was made use of for
proving our Defense, we ought to see and be heard to object against it. And as
to the Band of Reversion, it was answered it was granted by her tante
Matrimonio merely for Love and Favor, and under Reduction long after she stood
publicly infest. Lastly, My Lord Drumcairn having called this Action again
after he had tak n the Dispute above mentioned to a visandum, My Lord Hercarse
still compearing as Procurator for his Son in Law (a Practick without a
parallel) without giving us a sight of the Decree they produced to object
against it or admitting us Account or Reckoning in referrence to the Reversion,
which we offered under protestation it should not be prejudicial to our*
Reduction, still decerned according to the desire of My Lord Hercarse,
Inchdarnies Procurator, prefering him to the Mails and Duties.

Wherefore we humbly pray that your Lordships for shunning the guilt of an
unjust Sentence, and for vindicating your own Honors before the World, would
seriously consider the Concussions, the overhailings, the Injuries, the
Illegalities, and Informalities of the said Process, and particulars deduced
therein, tending to the ruin of your Petitioners, without any free hearing or
the benefit which by the Laws of the Kingdom is allowed to all his Majesty's
Subjects, and discharge the Extracting of any such Decree, till your
Petitioners be heard fully and freely to debate their Interests as others his
Majesty's Subjects uses to be heard in such cases.

This Bill being read to the Lords, It is given up to my Lord Hercarse to see:
Who (as is informed) went to the Kings Advocat, and consulced it, to make up a
strong Accusation against the ingiver: Who was appointed to answer to the Bill
on Tuesday thereafter, upon which the same being called the said day, in the
Afternoon, the Lords gave their Deliverance in their Terms:

The Lords finds the Representations contained in the said Bill Calumnious, and
therefore refuses the desire of the said Supplication, and ordains Macers and
Messangers at Arms, to apprehend the said Mr. Robert, and incarcerat his Person
till further Order.

Which Sentence in this was the more grievous, that it was passed the Penult
day of the Session, so that if he had been Apprehended on the morrow
thereafter, he must have lain in Prison till the sitting down of the next
Session, being the first of June, seeing no one Lord nor three would have taken
upon them to have enlarged him. But taking this Deliverance into my serious
consideration, I found it 1st. Generally finding the Representations contained
in the Bill Calumnious: And I humbly conceive, there are some of them, which my
Lord Hercarse himself will not avert to be Calumnious: 2dly, I found there was
no mention of the latter part of the deliverance, anent my imprisonment,
mentioned in the Decree, when the said Deliverance is repeated for fortifying
thereof. Lastly. I find none of our Bills, first or last, insert in the
Decree, nor the Answers thereto, tho it be the constant custom in such cases,
always to insert Bills and Answers as a part of the process: Which Fortifies
or Weakens, as they are Granted, or Refused; And as to the Reason hereof, I
leave it to the Judicious Reader, and will not take upon me to judge thereof,
least it be reckoned to me for a second Crime; But come to the Bill it self:
The first Representation bears, the Conference which past betwixt my Lord
Hercarse and the Petitioner, when he first sent for him; And that albeit the
Petitioner hastened the Agreement, Inchdarnie with concourse of his Father in
Law, after the same was done, caused him dispone it to him for a 1000. Merks
less than I had agreed for; He having a great Action depending in the Session,
against my Lord Annandale, and knowing the great Figure Hercarse made among the
Lords. As to what touching the first part of it, anent our Conference, it is
believed Hercarse will not deny the Truth, of it himself, and there is no
shadow of a Calumny in it. As to the 2d: part of it, That Inchdarnie caused
him* Disnone with concourse of his Father in Law, etc. We hope my Lord will not
deny he was present, at the making of the Bargain, which if he do, we offer to
prove it: And if he was present, all the World will conclude he came not there
as a Cipher. Yea, we are free to say, any Man who knows him and his Son in Law
both, speaking his mind with any ingenuity, will conclude he was the chief
Actor. That Rossyth had a great Action depending before the Lords, against my
Lord Annandail, is nottour; and I have often heard it of himself. And that
Hercarse made a great Figure among the Lords, is no less nottour. The Bill
bears neither that my Lord promised to hasten his Action for the Bargain; nor
to do him any good office whatsoever, but simply relates the Truth as it was:
And if my Lord himself makes any such Applications, he may blame the witness
within himself, and not the Ingiver of the Bill: Tho he believes it had been
neither calumny, nor reflecting upon my Lord, tho he had added, Rossyth having
in his view the service such a Lord might do him, far beyond the worth of
1000. Merks or two. The second Representation is, That in an unusual manner, he
raised a Suspension in the Tennants names, which was by them and the other
alleged Chargers disowned, which as we are informed, is not agreeable to Law.
If it be usual we desire the Complainer to condescend but upon three cases
(which is the least makes a perfect number) quadrating with this since the
Erection of the College of Justice, and we shall acknowledge it an Error, tho
it would prove no calumny; but a mistake of the Form of Process before the
Lords* And if it be denied, that it was disowned by the Tennants, it is offered
to be proven scripto; and the Answers given in to Inchdarnies Bill sufficiently
verifies, it was disowned by one of the Chargers, and their carriage all along
in the whole business. As to the third, That the Tennants put in a Bill,
craving the Bill of Suspension might be given up to them to be destroyed; or
that Inchdarnie might be ordained to subscribe the same before Witnesses, and
abide thereat. If it be denied, their Bill is Extant to verify it: And that it
was not granted, is a Negative, and proves it selt, till the contrar be
instructed. As to the Fourth Representation, it is, that where in an Action for
Mails and Duties it is enacted that the Defender produce such a day, no
Decree can be pronounced, till an Act be Extracted, and called, yet without
Extracting and calling an act, this Decree was Pronounced: And as to the first
part thereof, there is hardly a Pock bearer about the house, but will give
Testimony to the Truth of it; and as to the second, it is beliered the ordinar
will not deny he past a Decree upon the Bench; when there was no act
extracted: though afterward he past it de-novo upon as was alleged better
Grounds: To which many others likewise were witnesses. The fifth Reprsentation
contains nothing, but an Abbreviat of the Disput', and that my Lord Hercarse
compeared as Procurator for Inchdairnie: If it be denied that Hercarse
compeared as Procurator, we are ready to prove it by many witnesses: That we
proponed the Defense mentioned in the Bill, and gave in the replies specified
therein to Hercarse his answers, we offer to prove it if denied by Hercarse his
own oath, he being now but a private person, and the Declaration of my Lord
Drumcairn. The last Representation is, that though we offered to count and reckon
without an order of Redemption it was not granted; And that we never had a
sight of the Decree Hercarse proponed upon; For eleiding our Defense; That the
Aprrysing was reduced, which we offer to prove by the oath af Hercarse and the
Declaration of my Lord Drumcairn, and that Hercarse was still Procurator, for
shame will not be denied: Yea only Procurator in this Debate. And that it was a
Practick without a Parallel, we also represented, which we shall acknowledge for
an Error, but no Calumny, when the contrair is instructed: We have seen a Lord
come to the Bar, when his own cause was debating, but behaving himself with
such Modesty, that hardly would he meddle in the Dispute, or any thing, unless
it had been to inform in the matter of Fact, but referred all to his Advocats:
But for a Lord to come to the Bar, and debate as Procurator for another man, is
indeed that which we never either heard or saw, and as to the Precatory part
which desires the Lords to consider the concussions, the overhailings, etc. It
is answered, 1st. Tho therein there were something, which being insert in the
Narrative might infer Calumny; Yet the scop of the Petitioning part, being
merely to desire the Lords to consider, if things be so and so, and to rectify
as they shall find cause: It would be very hard to declare upon a mistake here,
the Petitioner to be guilty of Calumny: There is never a Bill put in, which is
a complaint, but craves something to be rectified, and consequently complains,
at least Implicirly of Injustice; And if it be not in Terms sufficiently
flattering, they must excuse me for this Error: I will not give Flattering
Titles unto Man willingly, least my Maker take me away suddenly: Job 31. ver.
21. But 2dly, We believe we have sufficiently instructed injury, which in the
largest sense, is quicquid fit non jure, overhailing, by precipitating
Judgment, Illegalitie, and Informality, in carrying on the Action in a way
unagreeable to the Laws of the Land: And that there was concussion is
sufficiently made out, in showing the way, how Inchdarnie came to the Bargain,
to which we now add: My Lords engaging the King's Advocat in the cause, unde
abusus est patronatu Caesaris; Laboring to make it a public concernment, and
his influencing the Ordinar so much to follow his Faith: Upon pretense of his
great skill in Law, whom the Ordinar conceived to be of as great Ingenuity as
himself. And if it be alleged that he could not injicere terrorem, in the
Ordinar; who was of equal station with himself, and Cussing German to my Lady
Errol, a great Courtier in that day, by reason of Communon with the Romish
Church. It is answered, granting that he was not only of equal station with my
Lord Hercarse, but also that his Mountain was presumed to stand strong in that
day; because of his near Relation to my Lady Errol a Professed Papist, by whose
Moyan likewayes many believed he was preferred to his place; but all fear upon
Concussion, is not a slavish fear whereof we judge my Lord Drumcairn was least
capable: but there might be a fear of being toped by Hercarse, when matters
came to be Debate in the Inner-house, and a fear of losing his Friendship, with
whom he was very Intimat. Neither is Concussion always taken in so narrow a
sense, as importing only a slavish fear: Cod: Tit: de Concussione lege 4.
Jubemus atque hortamur ut si quis forte honoratorum de curionum possessorum
postremo etiam colonorum, aut cujuslibet ordinis a judice fuerit aliqua ratione
concussus, si quis scit vaenalem fuisse de jure Sententiam; si quis poenam vel
pretio remissam vel vitio cupiditatis injestam, si quis postremo quacunque de
causa improbum jndicem potuerit improbare is vel administrante eo, vel post
administrationem depositam in publicum, prodeat crimen deferat delatum approbet
cum probaverit and victoriam reportaturus and Gloriam. To all which may be
added, that while we speak be way of complaint of my Lord Hercarse; we spoke
against him not as a Lord of the Session, but as Inchdairnie his Procurator, if
a Lord of the Session, should be found in a Plebeian habit, in some base
employment, and meet with some afront which would be esteemed such to a Lord;
but not to one of a vulgar station, he could not complain that there were any
injury done, or a Lord were affronted: And therefore though there were
something in this Bill which might be quarrelled if done against a Lord: (which
we cannot find) Sure there is nothing in it which might not have been said,
against a Procurator, and more also.

But possible it will be alleged, I am presumed to be guilty, because there
was no Compearance for me, In answer to which it is to be considered, the order
was that I should compear on Tuesday, to answer to my Bill, (which whither it
was public or not I do not remember) which according to the Grammatical
Construction, and the letter, seems to be in my favors; for explaining and
clearing something in the Bill, and taken in this sense; I might compear or
not, as I thought good: For any man may renounce jus suum, but I soon found it
was in the scope of it, to answer to Hercarse his Accusations, founded upon my
Bill, in which case I was not tied to compear: till First, they had given me
notice who was my Accuser, 2do. The double of my Indictment, especially it
being founded upon write, and a Complex business. 3tio, I ought to have been
Cited by a Macer or Messengers at Arms, none whereof were done: And therefore I
was not bound to compear; And yet I did compear, and was ready to answer all
the Forenoon, but they delayed the calling of it till the Afternoon; at which
time I judged it no ways mv duty to compear, for these reasons, 1st. In the
Afternoon the Officers of State are Absent, 2do. All the extraordinary Lords
are absent who were unconcerned in the Business: 3tio. It was impossible for me
to get my Advocat whom I had consulted, to attend in the Afternoon, in the
close of the Session, he being a Gentleman of great Employment; and it was
uncertain whither they would call at 2. or 3. a Clock ot at 6. or 7. at Night.
So much for the Clamercus Bill, so called.

Within a few days after the rising of the Session, the Lords meeting for some
concernment of their own, They recommended to the President to agree the Civil
Interest, and for that effect delayed the Execution of the Sentence, for my
Imprisonment for a Month, with power to my Lord President to prolong my
Liberty if he should find cause therefore. Hereupon we made an Address to my
Lord Hercarse, to draw an Absolute Submission to my Lord President, to do in
the matter as he should find just: To which Hercarse cheerfully condescended,
being then in a tender frame, partly through the rescent lose of his Place, and
partly through the sickness and death of his Daughter, who if Fame be not a
false witness, was a Gentlewoman qualified with singular Induments: Whereupon
we caused draw the Submission and subscrived it, I my self and my wife, who was
going out of the Town, Hercase having declared (because Inchdairnie was not in
Town) he would take burden for him. But it being uncivility to trouble him,
while he was in extremitate luctus, we forbear for a time, and when we came to
desire he would subscrive, found he was returned to his old Temper, and he
resiled, alleging a Communing would do the business, and when we told this to
the President, we found him of the same mind, and albeit I well knew a
Communing would be to no purpose, yet that it might appear I was averse from
nothing which might effectuat Peace, I attended a month after the Session
rose; being in a very infirm and Valetudinarie condition, in which at length
having obtained a meeting before the President, I found nothing in his Comuning
but Calumnniating my Person, and justifying all he had done: But concluding
that they might get these Lands with a Blessing, he would give what the
President should appoint. But not being satisfied with his rough discourse, and
knowing he might as well reseill from the Presidents determination by word, as
he did from the Submission: We parted without a Conclusion, only the President
said, he would order his Decree to be extracted, which accordingly was done.

This being done, Inchdairnie with John Law, Hercase his Servant, went along
the Tennents, and with many Threatenings and bigg Menacing words persuaded them
to take their Lands holden of him. But all in vain, their love to their old
Masters was so deeply rooted, that they would take of no other, till necessity
forced them: Hereupon Inchdairnie in July thereafter charged them, to make
payment of their Mails and Duties as he had lybelled them in his Bill of
Suspension; upon 15 days: But his Charge being given upon the 6. of July, they
were denounced upon the 11. which was upon 5. days, all Registrate at the Horn,
and Caption taken out against them. Whereupon (as is informed) Inchdairnie was
upon his way, to have taken all the Tennents, but his Father in Law knowing the
grossness of this Act, sent over Mr. Law and stoped him* And to Palliate the
Illegial Denunciation, and Caption, which was taken out, he and his Guide
abovementioned, came to the Tennents, and Threatened them, if they brought not
their Duty to him, and that to his own house before the 15 days were expired,
he should not leave them a Cock to crow Day: And (as is informed) his Father in
Law took the Messenger to the President, who being a poor man took all the
fault upon himself; giving an Excuse therefore, not worthy of the writing, and
far less of an Answer. But one thing was forgotten by them both, the same
Messenger was thereafter employed to apprehend the Tennents, which no rational
man being free of the guilt, would have done; he being so gross a Criminal,
until he had either been Purged, or Punished. But the Tennnents finding that
the charge it self was judged Illegal, by several Writers to the Signet, it
being but in effect a general preferrence, and a Declarator of
Inch-Inchdairnies right, a Bill was put in to the Lords, complaining upon the
writter, who had raised such a Horning, they being charged particularly, for
the Sumes as Inchdairnie had lybeled them. To which the answer was, finds the
Writter has done no wrong: Hereupon the Fifteen days being near expired, a
Bill was put in in the Tennents names, for a Suspension, as the last remeed,
whereof the reasons were. 1st. The generality of the Charge (for the Charger
disowned the particular Charges given by the Messenger.) 2do. There was no
Liquidation, tho some of their Duties were partly Victual. 3tio, There was no
probation of the quantities. 4to. There were several others not called, who had
an Interest, viz. The Superior for the few Duties, and the Minister, and
Schoolmaster for their Stipends: Which Bill was given up to see, and kept up
till the last day of the Session, that in case there were any necessity for it,
all remeed might be cut off. The reasons were unquestionably Relivant, and
passing by the last, the 3 first were instantly proven being Negatives; all
that ever saw it concluded, it could no be refused, but if it had been past, it
would have cost Hercarse a second Bellum, and it was too strong to be refused.
A new course is invented, for fortifying Inchdarnies Decree, (whether by
Hercarse his contrivance or not, we leave it to the Reader to judge.) The Lords
ordained the Tennents to compear in time of Vaccan^e, viz. Betwixt and the 15
of August, before my Lord Castlehill, and depone anent the species and
quantities who had no Tacks: and such as had tacks to produce, and restricked
the Chargers diligence, to what upon Oath they should depone, and to what was
contained in their Tacks who had any. Which Sentence is never drawn in an Act,
Extracted and Read out of the Minut-Book, to put the Tennents in Mala fide; But
Written by the Clerk upon a Lords Direction, several days after the rising of
the Session: Yea so close it was in the carrying of it on, that the Gentelman
who was Agent in the cause, having inquired of it at the Clerk, he told him he
could not tell him what it was, nor could I my self by any inquiry, have
certainty in the matter, till I came to my Lord Castlehill hearing it surmised,
it was referred to him as it was indeed. Hereupon the Tennents did compear, and
produced there Tacks and Deponed: Only two sent Testificats subscrived by the
Minister, and four Elders, witnessing that in regard of their great Age they
were not fit for Travel, the one being upwards of Fourscore years, and the
other being near about this Age: Which was not sustained because it wanted Soul
and Conscience, concerning which we shall only say this much, that albeit it be
ordinar, in Test ficats under the hands of Physicians and Chirurgions, to
require they be upon Soul and Conscience: It was never required in a
Testificat, concerning a Man's Age, for if so the Testifiers themselves must be
about a Hundred, which is rare in this Age: For he cannot give rationem
scientiae till he be Fourteen; and secondly they must have been witnesses
either to his Birth or Baptism 80 years ago. But we leave their ticklish
questions to my Lord Hercarse to solve. The Tennents having some deponed, and
some produred their Tacks Inchdairnie denunced them registrare and took out
Caption de novo, and upon the 21 of August the same Messenger, at his instance
apprehended the Tennents; being ten in number, whereof two were the old men
abovementioned, and incarcerat them in the Tolbooth of Dunfermling: W ere they
continu d Prisoners ten days, being the time of Harvest: till they were forced
to pay him their Duties; such as could get Money, and such as could not to
give Bond, or find Caution, as also after they had agreed for their Duty, he
forced them to take a three years Tack of him, or else threatened them to return
them again to Prison.

How the Lords will relish this diligence, before advsing of the Tennents
oaths, and a Declaration judicial what was contained in their Tacks, time will
declare hereafter: But we believe up n impartial Examination, it will be found
a clear Spulzie, and also a breach of Arrestment, there being two Arrestments
laid on upon the Mails and Duties, which were not loosed by Inchdairnie, till
the Tennents were brought Prisoners to the Town of Dunfermling. The Chancellor
his Over-awing power being now gone with himself, though not long since,
Inchdairnie foread out his kindly Letter to him, before the Tennents in
Tillo^^ill, to terrify them by his Authority.

FINIS.

