A DISCOURSE Concerning the TRIAL OF SPIRITS.

WHEREIN Inquiry is made into Men's Pretenses to Inspiration for publishing
Doctrines, in the Name of God, beyond the Rules of the Sacred Scriptures.

In opposition to some Principles and Practices of Papists and Fanatics; As
they contradict the Doctrines of the Church of England, defined in her Articles
of Religion, established by her Ecclesiastical Canons, and confirmed by ACTS of
PARLIAMENT.

By THOMAS PITTIS, D.D. one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

London, Printed by B.W. for E. Vize, at the Bishop's Head, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1683.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Edward Worseley, Knight, Colonel of one of the
Regiments of the Country Militia, and Deputy Governor of the ISLE of WIGHT.
Honored Sir,
HAving an unexaminable opportunity of publishing such Tracts as this; And
having formerly, by your Father been presented to the Rectory of the Parish of
Gatcomb; in the Bounds of which, your Mansion House is seated, and in which you
live, having the right of Advowson undoubtedly in your self; I cannot but
present these Papers to you, as being the Inheritor of your Fathers Estate, and
Virtues too, and of his great kindness to me in particular, which you yet on
all occasions continue, and increase by succeeding heaps of favors. I need not
relate the Loyalty of your Family, it bearing date with its Antiquity, and has
been so manifested to the present World, that a Memorial of mine would be its
disparagement, and upbraid the memory of mankind. All know, whose brains are
not sunk into Oblivion, how you would have redeemed King Charles the First,
that most Pious Martyr of ever blessed memory, when he was a Prisoner in
Carisbrook Castle, from the present insolence of the worst of men, to whom, by
violence, he was enthralled, and the designed mischiefs that were likely to
befall him from persons that thirsted after Royal Blood, who were most monstrous
and irreconcilable enemies to mankind and Caesar. You had prudently laid your
design, and were honestly ready, accoutred, and prepared, and at your Post at
the appointed hour. But, alas! all miscarried, through the base treachery of
other men, to your misfortune, and much bigger grief. After this you were
forced to wander, and exile your self; And 'twas happy for us that survive your
misfortune, that you came off so. Since the return of our present and most
gracious Sovereign (with whom you were also expelled, by the rage and malice of
a Pack of unreasonable and malicious men) your great modesty, and unalterable
affection to the Island in which you make so considerable a Figure, (in which I
have the privilege, and honor, of a Native) has been the only cause of your
not being removed into a larger Sphere. But now, your age, and the greatness of
your Merits, together with your old Protestant Church of England Principles, to
which you are honestly, and severely addicted, will hardly permit you to suffer
an exchange in this World (though I always wished it) 'till you advance to the
Glory of the next. I dare not any longer be thus burdensome to your modesty and
contentment, that covet retirement in defiance of all your very large
capacities; But yet, Sir, give me leave to pray, from the true resentments of a
grateful mind, that the great God, who is far exalted above all Beings, would
continue to preserve your most Loyal and exceedingly devout self; Your most
Virtuous and extraordinarily pious, and modest Lady, and the two (Gentile and
excellent Branches happily sprung, and nourished too, from You, who are the
root of both, much longer than I, in this World, shall be capable of remaining,

Dear SIR, Your most affectionate and most humble Servant, Tho. Pittis.
London, Nov. 1. 1683.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the TRIAL OF SPIRITS.
CHAP. I.
THE Third Person in the Sacred Trinity, one God blessed for ever, is
frequently abused by the pretenses of men, to such Revelations as are
inconsistent with the truths of the Gospel, and many Doctrines of the Christian
Religion, which the Holy Ghost at first inspired men to deliver: And though
this began in the Apostles days, when the mystery of iniquity, by the Gnostick
defection, began to work: Yet it has continued and improved men in their
villainies throughout the several Ages of the Church: Nay so far that Treason,
and Murder, and open Rebellion, are consecrated by those that pretend to be
inspired; and they blasphemously make the Holy Spirit of God, that breaths
forth peace and quietness upon the World, to become the Patron of the greatest
and most disturbing impieties that ever infested the Societies of mankind.
This, though, we have been loath to believe it, we are now convinced of by a
woeful experience; an experience which had been purchased by our utter ruin,
unless Gods Providence, assisting, and favoring the wisdom of our Superiors,
encouraged by some Loyal and unwearied resolutions, had happily prevented it*
We have two sorts of men, (both pretending to an infallible inspiration, though
on different grounds) that ruin and destroy the Principles of Christianity
under a show to advance them: And though we were unwilling to think that men
who seemed at so great a distance from each other, should ever reach to join
hand in hand, and that the same principle should reconcile such different
pretensions: Yet as Samson's Foxes were joined together by their Tails, though
their heads looked away from one another; So now we see those that breath
inspirations from the Pope, and they that boast more immediate ones from Heaven
confederating, (though before expected by the most observing and considerate
men) to house the corn and tares together, that Gods Harvest may become their
own, and they may reap where they never sowed: And certainly when such attempts
both by a separate, and united force, are made against all Order and Religion,
intitling God to the Patronage of a lie, making the Spirit of Truth to
contradict himself, and crucifying Christ, under a pretense to exalt him: when
our own Kingdoms are ready to be destroyed by cheating us out of our
Properties, and our Lives, with a specious show of advancing the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and, to lift up his Scepter, our Sovereign's must first be broken
in pieces: when disorders tending to subversion and ruin, are plainly legible
in the affairs of men; coals are blowing to set all our Houses on fire, and we
tread those paths that will lead us to confusion, and all this while men
profess to be serving a God of Order: when multitudes pretend to be sent from
God, that speak contrary to his written word, and have no other Miracle to
prove their Principles, but the strangeness of their villainy in rooting up the
Laws of Nature and Society: when so much brass is current amongst us instead of
gold, and our silver is every day exchanged for dross, and we are ready to be
made the companions of Owls, or what is worse, of Thieves and Murderers; it is
high time to bring forth the Touchstone, to enquire into the value of things
before we receive them, that counterfeit coin may not claim the same privilege
with what is instamp'd with Caesar's Image, nor an entrance opened for the
Pope of Rome, riding in a Kirk, born on the backs of those that know not what
they carry: that they may bring Popery in triumph to us, like the Grecians
lodged in the belly of that Wooden and insensible Horse, that entered Troy and
sacked the City, and so gained that by an easy strategem, which ten years
siege could not effect. For these and such like reasons (if men will now
hearken to any) I have chosen this Subject to Discourse on, that, if possible,
we may separate the chaff from the wheat; distinguish betwixt the Doctrines of
Apostles, and those of Devils, and mark out the Spirit of Antichrist, that it
may be known from that of our Savior, that names may no longer confound
things, nor Satan be received by any of us, though he transforms himself into
an Angel of light; lest we mistake that for Samuel in his Mantle, which only
the Witch of Endor raises. And therefore let us not believe every Spirit, but
try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone
into the world. And from these words, I shall raise my Discourse.

In this Epistle, S. John endeavors to confirm Christians in the profession
and practice of the Christian Religion, notwithstanding all Objections to the
contrary; and therefore gives them sufficient caution to beware (1.) Of such
Heresies as destroy the foundation, such as interfer'd with the great Doctrines
and Authority of the Messiah; such as under some great pretenses of purity, and
preciseness, might introduce Factions and Schisms, and dissolve that strict
love and union which ought to be among the Professors of the Gospel: These
things some were prone unto in the first and early times of Christianity: As
soon as the Church had put forth leaves, the Caterpillars were ready to devour
them: (2.) Because the Church of Christ was planted in the midst of Jewish
Superstition, and Heathen Idolatry; and a Sect was now sprung up in the world
that, under the names of Christians, had provided Principles which in times of
danger might equally suit with both, or either, and so could shelter themselves
from one storm, and raise another, if the wind blew from either quarter: The
Apostle therefore bids men to beware of Idolatry, this being a plain
renunciation of their Religion, as Heresy would both maim and wound it: Little
children (says he) keep your selves from Idols: and what he closes his Epistle
with, is, what we all close our prayers with: And that we may be also delivered
from the insinuations or Society of both these sorts, let all the people say,
Amen.

From the consideration of this design of our Apostle, we may plainly see how
suitable this whole Epistle is to the present humors and distractions among
us, and how soon, were the advice embraced, it would cure us of those
languishing distempers, under which we seem to faint and die: The extremities
of disease vex and torture us, and no sooner have we got off a cold fit, which
makes us almost shake and shiver into ashes, but the hot one comes on, which
fires and almost is ready to consume us; Nay, a strange mixture of both
encounter us, rather than we shall recover and live, and those things which the
vigor and strength of our constitution is able to baffle whilst separate and
apart, being conjoined, create a new disease, which troubles the Physician, and
puts him to the utmost of his skill; though I hope it will never be able to
baffle him, or leave us to be a prey to vermin, or the great disease and pest
of men: Let us follow the rules of this Apostle, that what ever injuries our
bodies may suffer (which in too many are Martyrs already by the great fears and
uncertainties of their minds) our souls may be safe and secure, and kept
unblameable to the coming of the Lord Jesus: Let us be united in our common
profession, not staggered with the high pretenses of others; nor let us yet
relax our diligence from the discourses of any that will at all adventures be
secure among our selves; But whatever notions of infallibility on the one hand,
or present and particular inspiration on the other, shall be presented to us,
to debauch us from our Principles; Let us well examine before we believe;
receive nothing that may contradict natural Religion, or what is superadded in
the word of God, that public and plainly declared revelation, to which there
need no additions to make the man of God wise unto salvation: But let us follow
the Apostles advice, and try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world.

By the word Spirit, here is plainly meant any one that under a pretense of
Inspiration or assistance from the Spirit, publishes any new* Doctrine to the
world, in the age of the Gospel, and so includes both Papists and Enthusiasts;
The one tying the Spirit to the Chair of the Pope, the other to their own
Dreams and Phancies: And this interpretation, as it is generally assented to,
is plain and open to every man that will either consider the scope of the
Epistle, or the reason of this advice of the Apostle, why we should not believe
every Spirit, because many false Prophets are come forth into the world; and
therefore we are to examine the Doctrines, which any pretender to the Spirit
teaches, lest we are led by the authority of any into snares, that may
captivate and destroy our souls.

Now although this caution of Saint John, primarily relates to the Gnostick
defection; yet it is a direction to all Ages, and may guard us from all the
pretensions of men that, under a specious authority from the Spirit of truth,
vent false Doctrines to the World, in any period of the Christian Religion;
Because both the Duty and the Argument to enforce it will be of a perpetual
concernment, as long as false Prophets come forth into the world. Yet because
the Gnostics are most immediately reflected on, as being the Antichrist, so
early appearing in the Christian world, to defeat this Religion under a
denomination from it, boasting some extraordinary knowledge, when they were men
both ignorant and vile; we must enquire into the particular reason, why the
Apostle in this place cautions men to beware of these, whose faults were so
scandalous, that they seem manifest to all: The reason of this (next to that
which is more general, the proneness of men to any error that may gratify
themselves, and become either their security or pleasure) is the same, why the
sin against the Holy Ghost shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come; because the Gnostics plainly destroyed the Gospel, although by
a different Argument from the former: The former against whom that severe,
though deserved, Sentence was pronounced, invalidated all our Saviors
Miracles, which proved his Doctrine to be Divine, and himself the Messiah sent
from God, by attributing them to the power of the Devil; but the Gnostics did
in effect the same thing, by retaining, upon occasion, the Ceremonies of the
Jews, which our Savior had abolished, if he were owned as a person sent from
God to void the old Law, and establish a new: So that those who embraced what
he came to vacate, in effect denied him to be come in the flesh; and
consequently destroyed the obligation of the Gospel, by renouncing the Messiah,
whose authority established this new Law as a Rule to the World: Nay, by this
rejection of the Son, they disowned the Father, who, by a voice from Heaven,
and giving him power to work Miracles, gave a testimony to his Person and his
Doctrine: And therefore our Apostle (reflecting upon these men) says; Who is a
liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist that
denies the Father and the Son: whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the
Father, but he that acknowledges the Son, the same has the Father also, (1
John. 2 Chap. 22.23.) And in the 4 th Chap. 3. v. Every Spirit (or teacher)
that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; and
this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come,
and even now already is it in the world.

CHAP. II.
HAving thus given an account of part of this Epistle of S. John, together with
those, of whom the Apostle cautions men to beware; I shall farther explain and
illustrate the words, to render them yet more useful to our selves by
considering in them, (1.) A Caution, (2.) An Exhortation, (3.) The reason of
both. The Caution is; Not to believe every Spirit: The Exhortation, To try the
Spirits, whether they are of God: The Reason both of this Caution and
Exhortation is, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

I begin with the Apostles Caution: Beloved, believe not every Spirit; If all
that men utter pretending to be inspired, were without any severe consideration
to be entertained, and what they deliver, were to be believed, there would no
more need the Apostles caution than our own care: But when we live in an Age,
in which Propositions and Doctrines are delivered, that too plainly contradict
each other; some of which are impious and abominable; others at first audit,
foolish, and ridiculous; and a third sort, that tend to disturbance and ruin,
wasting Property, making our Kingdoms large Aceldama's, and our Cities the
places of dead men's sculls, and are apparent enemies to human Society: When,
under the pretense of a Catholic Religion, Doctrines of purity, proposals to
advance the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, Principles shall be insinuated, that if
pursued, with that furious zeal, which they require, will effectually destroy
those things indeed, which men endeavor to maintain in words; If our blessed
Savior may thus be fought under his own Banner, the cause of God cover
abominations, murder be acted for the glory of our Maker, Blasphemy be spoken
by the assistance of the Spirit, and the method to render Princes glorious,
shall be by stabbing, or beheading: If the most horrid wickedness shall be
palliated under the cloak of Religion, a new Commandment shall be pretended for
breach of the old, and the Moral Law shall daily be violated by inspiration: If
men under pretensions to the guidance of that Spirit which inspired the first
deliverers of the Gospel, to be a Rule to succeeding Ages and Generations,
shall hang out new lights to the world, that take away all the glory of the
old, and preach to us another Gospel, bearing their Christ only pictured on
their Standards and Banners, and their Gospel to us on the points of Swords:
Nay, when the Spirit, in the propagation of the Gospel, neither prescribed nor
used such methods, but quite contrary, those of faith, and patience, humility,
and self-denial, which did not interfere with the Government of Princes, but
made men actively, or passively, to obey: And when the same Spirit has expressly
declared, that in the latter times there would be such a falling away from the
faith, that men would so far depart from the standing rules of the Gospel, as
to give heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils, (1 Timothy 4.1.): Nay
when the great Lord and Author of our Religion has acquainted the world, that
many false Prophets should arise, with such earnest pretenses, and strong
delusions, that should almost shake the very Elect, (those whom he had chosen
to put his Name and Character upon) with, Lo here is Christ, or lo there;
exalting several, though false Messiahs: It will become us to consider any new
pretensions beyond the rule we have already learned, and not to receive
Opinions at adventure, but to make a more strict, and considerate, enquiry, and
not to believe every Spirit.

And that (1.) Because we have already entertained a standing Rule of Faith and
Manners, by which all Christians ought to be directed to the final period and
consummation of Ages: And though this great and Characteristical Principle of
Protestants, is contradicted both by the Papists and Enthusiasts, whilst the
former equal their Traditions with the Scriptures, and the latter their own
fancies and dreams; both upon occasion, bestowing such ignominious titles on
the Bible, that they would think it uncivil if they should be given to any of
their own writings: Yet S. Paul tells us, that the Scriptures are able to make
us wise unto Salvation; and being given by inspiration from God, cannot be
false without supposing him a liar: Nay, the Apostle goes on in their
commendation, that they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God (much more
the people) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, (2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17.). The design of that Gospel which we have embraced, sufficiently
declares it to be a full and complete rule of life; that, which if followed,
brings peace and welfare to us here; and eternal happiness in that life which
is to come: For it teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in the world; and to look for a blessed
hope and immortality; for which the former way of living prepares us: ( Titus
2.11, 12, etc.). Nay, so perfect and complete is this rule, and so designed to
direct us to the end of the world, that the Apostle denounces a Curse against
any that teach another Gospel, or Rule of life, different from, or
contradictory to, this; though an Angel from Heaven should prove to be the
deliverer: And repeats it twice in the same Chapter, that it may be
sufficiently declared, and stand as a memorial to all Ages: ( Gal. 1.8, 9.).
And Saint John, in the close of his Revelations, sufficiently reproves all new
pretensions, by telling the world, that, if any man shall make additions to
this, which was complete before, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are
threatened in it: And if any shall take away from it, his part shall be taken
out of the book of life, (Rev. 22.18, 19.). The perfection of the Scriptures is
a point which Protestants have always held, as that which, as it is most true,
so it is their most sure defense against all the assaults of Rome, and others:
And this is what the Ancient Fathers tried Doctrines by of old, and reproved
Heretics, by what was written: Although, according to the Education or
disposition of those that opposed them, they wanted not, but made use of,
Arguments from Reason and Philosophy, and the natural Religion of mankind. Now
the Scripture being a safe, because it is a true, Rule; and true because given
to us by Authority from God, who gave sufficient testimony to it, by inspiring,
and encouraging the deliverers of it; and farther, it is attested by signs, and
wonders, and diverse Miracles: And a safe rule it is, because it has all that
tends to the perfection of our natures, and the saving of our souls, and is
complete in the delivery of all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and all
the necessary Rules of life; And is declared to be standing and perpetual; as
well to abolish the old Law to the Jews, as to open a door of hope to the
Gentiles; and to obviate all the contradictions of either: Nay, it sufficiently
becomes its own interpreter, when men are assisted by those ordinary advantages
which Education, and the grace of God gives them; If they consult their Guides,
diligently compare one place with another, and are humble, and modest, in their
enquiries: How then can we believe every Spirit? Rashly receiving Opinions at
adventure; since this standing Rule may be contradicted by them; or opposed
under a seeming shelter of its own; whilst men wrest it to others ruin, as
well as to their own destruction.

Secondly, To believe every Spirit, is to unman our selves, render us
ridiculous, and expose us to the contempt and scorn of all considering men in
the world. For since, not only S. John, but continual experience assures us,
that there are false Prophets in the world, and that they vent contrary
Doctrines to those that are true; To attempt to believe every Spirit, is to
attempt impossibilities; And this is not only foolish, but unreasonable; since
no man can possibly believe contradictory Opinions to be, at the same time,
true. But suppose they are received successively to one another: Yet it argues
great levity and inconstancy in men, to be carried about with every wind of
Doctrine; want of judgment to be so easily persuaded; and that they were
careless in their first choice, who are so readily prevailed upon for a second:
That they never were settled upon the old foundation, who, on all occasions,
remove to a new; and were not true to their first Love, who cannot be constant
upon the sight of another, but alter their affections upon every view of a new
face, and are pleased with all the parts of variety. Now, these are blemishes
in the minds of men; mutable tempers, without any considerable reason, being
blots, and a disparagement to mankind, whose rational souls give them the
privilege of thinking, and enable, and admonish, them to consider well before
they choose: And when thus they have, by argument and judgment, made their
choice; They are not to be easily moved from it: Unless upon as wise, and
deliberate thoughts, and stronger reasons than those by which they yielded to
the truth of the first Opinion, they remove from it, and choose another. He that
is unsettled in his mind, or no longer fixed than another object is presented,
creates such disturbances to himself, that he makes his life troublesome and
tragical, and is much to be pitied, (if his unquietness will permit him to stay
at home, and not make others share with him) and lamented by all those who know
the sweetness of settlement and resolution; that have considered what they can,
upon fitting circumstances, part with; And what they are resolved to adhere to
with all the hazards of their lives, and Fortunes. Alas! the wavering man has
no peace; though, for his own reputation, he may often pretend it: But, as S.
James says, he is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed,
(Jam. 1.6.). Like a diseased, sick man upon his Bed, he tumbles about from
place to place, and carries always a Windmill in his head, which grinds him
according as the wind veers, and turns; He neglects his Calling (if he has
any); Or, if he has none, better employments, to drive with a strange Phanatic
fury about the world, ready to overturn all he meets with, to enquire
concerning news, and projects, that he may embrace all, and be true to neither:
And so the man renders himself unfit to be either a friend or a Christian, and
becomes a fool by those methods by which he would yet be accounted wise. But he
that has well measured his principles by the rule of Gods word, and has
distinguished betwixt what is fundamental, and what is circumstantial; who has
bound his life to a stake, dyed daily in his own thoughts, and resolved well,
when it is Religious to suffer decently; How far he is able, upon just
occasion, to comply with the commands of men vested in lawful Authority; and
where the points and limits are, beyond which he must not step a foot; But, if
he perish, he will perish there, that so he may not eternally perish: This man
stands unmoved at tempests and storms, does his duty according to his station,
and the just commands of his lawful Superiors: And, if the Heavens fall,
justice shall always be done by him: He can be, otherwise than his place
requires, unconcerned at seeming tempests that threaten, or that thunder which
begins the storm: He knows when his life, or estate, or liberty, must be
Sacrificed; when by lawful Authority, willingly; and when by unlawful, it must
be by force taken: And, therefore goes on cheerfully, and faithfully, as far as
he can, on the side of Law, and just Authority, putting it in Execution; and
stops when an higher Rule will permit him to go no further: And certainly, as
this prevents all anticipation of evil, so is it such a steady and well
considered resolution, that is more manly and rational than to be driven like
the Clouds in the Air, and to be always like the Sea in motion, sometimes
forward, and sometimes backward, without any fixed rest or quiet; Or, by being
so ready to believe every Spirit, to entertain none kindly as we ought.

Thirdly, We must not believe every Spirit; because, if we give our selves too
great a liberty, it will be difficult, indeed impossible, to discern those that
are true from the false. If we once get into the Wilderness, we may travel
forty years there, and neither know when we are in, or out of the way, and
wander about, God knows whither: We may murmr and repine, and blame each
other, whilst the fault will yet remain in our selves, and our very travail
becomes our punishment, till at last we die and perish in a Wilderness, which
becomes the entrance to greater darkness. Alas! the Christian Religion (though
much debauched by the corrupt intermixtures, and disgraced by the vicious
lives, of men:) is not now to be revealed to the world; nor are its Records so
hidden or lost, that the Principles of it are no where to be found; nor are
men, yet, so blockish and unlearned, that they cannot read, so as to understand
them: If men were so blind, those that are as blind might lead them into the
ditch. But the principles of Christianity (besides what was revealed in the Old
Testament) are now above sixteen hundred years standing, and have been handed
down, from age to age, with their original records: And therefore this Religion
becomes matter of fact, not invention: And all the question must now be, What
was at first delivered? The wise and grave reason of men, must not control the
Wisdom of God, nor make another thing of that which God sent his Son to declare
to the World, and has been conveyed to us, with as great a certainty, as any
thing antecedent to the time we live in. We are not, now, by discourse or
inspiration to make to our selves another Gospel, under the notion or pretense
of the old: This is not a thing subject to the Maxims of every squirting, and
half-witted, Philosopher; nor to be molded according to the intrigues and
designs of a subtle and projecting Statesman: It is not to be spued out of the
mouth of the Leviathan, nor cunningly to be fleered out of the Works of Plato,
nor blended with any Doctrines of Epicurus, that may prepare men for an
indulgence to their vice, or persuade them to disbelieve some of the greatest
and most substantial points of Christianity. Our Religion is, now, too old to
be made new: nor must we model that, which has run through so many Ages, by any
tricks or devices of our own; nor must it be servant to any men's ambition; as
if their secular interest or opinion were to be their guide; or fancy, putting
on the name and garb of conscience, were to be a Rule for such as call
themselves Christians: To the Law and to the Testimony (says the Prophet), if
any speak not according to this rule, it is because they have no light in them:
(Isa. 8.20.). And we have a more sure word of Prophecy (says S. Peter, Epist.
2. Chap 1. ver. 19.). whereunto you do well, that ye take heed, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place. If we forsake therefore the trial of the
Doctrines and Pretenses of men by the Scriptures, (which rightly understood,
are our only safe Rule) we have no way to distinguish a bold pretender, from
him who is inspired from above; If such persons were now to be expected, after
the Canon of Scripture, the Rule for men's lives, have been so long ago
completed. For by inclining to believe any new revelation beyond the
Scripture, we suppose that an insufficient Rule: (the sufficiency of which
true, English, Church Protestants have always defended with success): And, if
the revelation be contrary unto it, it makes that Spirit that dictated the
first, a liar, if the latter be received and supposed true. But grant what men,
of such an easy belief, and such speedy resolutions, that admit of as speedy
changes, would, without any proof, have yielded to them: Yet I would fain know,
how men, in their circumstances, are able any way to satisfy themselves
concerning the proposition which they pretend to be inspired in, and thereby
authorized to deliver unto others: I am afraid confidence will be their only
argument to recommend it to others, and opinion, interest, and a strong
presumption, or what is worse, Atheism and Knavery, to themselves.

For (1.) supposing the Spirit of God in its Dictates unto men always uniform
and consistent with it self, how can there be different inspirations to
prescribe various Rules opposite to each other at the same time for men to
guide their belief and conversations? The Apostle tells us, that as there is
but one God, and one Lord, with undoubted authority over the whole World; so
there is but one Spirit to influence the minds of men, one Baptism that enters
them into the Church of Christ, and but one Faith to be embraced by them; And
therefore the Church is but one Body; (Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.). How then can we
reasonably admit the pretense of any man's inspiration, that avers he speaks
from the Dictates of the Spirit, which is within him, to publish any Rules of
Religion different from what we have received before? And if such a pretender
means only his own Spirit, the soul which acts within the body, we can
understand no more than his judgment and opinion: Though phrases by such
canting, are rendered equivocal, to startle the infirm; but are foreign to our
purpose, when reflected on by considering men: We well know, that the design of
Christianity, was to unite the World under one profession, and in religious
affairs, to subject it to the same rules of life: How then can any with
Religion or modesty, pretend another inspiration for new directions, when the
former, if they were ever true, are sufficiently in the New Testament declared
to be perpetual, and obligatory till Christ's coming to judgment, when he shall
pass sentence upon the whole World, and deliver us into our everlasting states,
no less than his Mediatory Kingdom back unto the Father? These are such
inconsistent things, that none but mad men can now expect any inspirations, to
deliver new Doctrines to the World.

(2.) I would fain learn of any bold man, that publishes, under a pretense of
inspiration, new Doctrines different from the old, how he knows himself to be
inspired? We find those that were formerly so (besides some certain token to
themselves, which neither we, nor our pretenders, can now give a certain
account of, though we may some probable conjectures) could work Miracles for
the settlement of belief both in themselves and others: But no such things
appear now; though lying wonders are published to the World, carrying only the
testimony of those that invent the story, or others that are hired to sacrifice
the truth to the confidence of an impostor; and therefore one would think, such
things as these, should, at the utmost, only deceive the simple, whilst they
that ensnare them, having other designs, beyond their reach, vent what they do
not believe themselves, that they may accomplish their own carnal ends, by the
religious easiness and simplicity of others: For, upon the view of those
various Sects, visible either abroad, or among our selves, that any way pretend
to be inspired to what they deliver to others; we find them publishing, by this
authority, doctrines to be believed, and Rules of life, quite different* nay,
opposite to one another; and pursue each other according to the advantages they
receive, with a greater eagerness, and hotter persecution, than we at any time
oppose them all: And if the Holy Spirit be but one, (as yet I hope I may
without much assuming or confidence affirm he is) if it be always consistent
with it self, there can be but one inspiration at one time true, and the rest
that pretend differently from this, make, at once, themselves, and God a Liar;
whilst they suppose him to contradict himself, and they become the publishers
of such contradictions. Besides, if the Spirit, these wild men pretend to, does
inform their minds of the principles they deliver by an immediate illumination,
or impulse upon their spirits; either they feel the stroke made upon them by
this invisible power, so that they can tell the time (as the Prophets of old)
when the Word of the Lord comes to them; or else they are raised by degrees
into a presumption, that they have this Spirit which thus forces them to
declare new Doctrines to the World: If they pretend to know when the stroke and
impulse is made; why does not one immediately of a Fisherman become an Apostle
without any study, or former gradual practice? without being bred in the
Schools of the Jesuits; or by long hearing the Cant, at home, by which he is
educated and trained to it; why does he not on a sudden rise up and publish
such consistent Doctrines, as may be suitable to the reason of those whom he
would persuade to embrace them; or at least, not thwarting and contradicting
the natural Religion of mankind? But since we find this impossible among them;
or the utmost of their skill, to be by some mechanic operation, or perhaps, by
an unaccountable influence from the Prince of the Air: Why should any be
startled at, or give credit to new Apostles, when our Rules are completed by
those, that were commissioned of old? If we search into the bottom of these
things, we shall find them, either voluntary Cheats, when those that own them,
make them subservient to bad designs; or such, as men, being deceived
themselves by a bad constitution, a corrupt education, or a suggestion from the
Devil under the form of an Angel of Light, endeavor, either through ignorance
or subtilty, to impose upon easy believers.

For, (1.) There is no promise for such immediate inspirations to dictate new
Rules of life, made to any, but to Apostolical men in the first Age of the
Gospel, who were to deliver what was to be the standing Law to all succeeding
Generations: And therefore there is no ground of hope for such things as these,
in the present Age wherein we live: Because inspiration being an immediate
influence from God himself, his Will enlarges or restrains this power to us;
and whenever men expect with reason any thing from him, it must be grounded
upon a promise, on which we may hope and rely, because all Gods Promises are as
certain as his Truth, and that equally certain with his Being: There being,
therefore, no promise of this made beyond the Age and Lives of the Apostles, as
no men can now rationally expect any inspiration to confirm their pretensions,
so neither can others with sobriety believe them. (2.) Inspirations to
prescribe new Rules to the World are so needless after a complete Law is
already given that is to be so lasting and perpetual as the Gospel, that were
they now to be found amongst men; if they should be contrary to it, they would
abolish and destroy the Gospel: But if the pretenders are inspired only to the
propagation of the same truths revealed there, this second inspiration will
appear needless, and so tax the wisdom of God, to do so great and extraordinary
a thing to no purpose; because there are the same rules already revealed,
written down in the first age, and by the special providence of Almighty God
(notwithstanding the diligent and furious attempts of the powers of the Earth
to interrupt the conveyance) handed down from age to age, and yet remaining
public and open amongst our selves, in our own language, that all may read and
understand: The continuance of men distinct from the multitude, who by a
different manner of living and Education, are enabled, and bound by a special
duty, to read, and interpret these Scriptures to the people, renders a new
inspiration useless to deliver these things to the world, which art and human
industry can do: God might, indeed, if he had so pleased, have continued his
Doctrines and Rules of life, by writing them daily in every man's breast, and
inspiring every individual amongst us; But if he had done so at first, there
had been no need of the Twelve Apostles, nor our Saviors own preaching to the
world, but only to be born and die, and rise again: and if it were afterward
continued, it would render preaching, and reading a written word useless, ease
us of much pains and toil; and all our inspired and blown up men of giving
themselves or others the trouble to come to preach or to hear them at a
Conventicle. And so inspired men compendiously preach away their own Office:
Yet our Savior constituted a standing Ministry, whom he has promised to be
with to the end of the world, (Mat. 28.18, 19.). And S. Paul tells us that when
our blessed Lord ascended up on high, he constituted in his stead, to continue
his Office of teaching, and presiding over, his Church, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers; several orders and
degrees of men suitable to Ages, and various Employments, to preserve the
Institutions, Doctrines, and order of the Gospel; for the perfecting of the
Saints; for the work of the Ministry; for the edifying of the body of Christ;
To remain so long till all that should be gathered out of the successive ages
and generations of men, might come in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, (Ephesians. 4 th. from the 8 th. to the 13 th. Verse:). Now the
establishment of such a standing Ministry throughout the ages of the Christian
Church, which is to endure until the Judgment of the Great day, sufficiently
baffles all expectations of any particular and continued inspirations, to
effect the same which the Ministry assisted by the received Rule and ordinary
conduct of Gods Holy Spirit can well accomplish; The constitution of the one is
so opposite to, and inconsistent with the other, that none but madmen can
believe both; and none but those that are diseased and Lunatic, can expect
inspiration to such purposes, that ever considered the constitutions of
Christianity, it evacuating all the Economy of the Gospel. (3.) Suppose there
were such an impulse or inspiration to be expected; Yet how should those, who
are to be guided by what they that pretend to it deliver, know that they are
really inspired, who so confidently conduct and lead the people; since they do
no real Miracles, nor use such convincing arguments, either from the nature of
those Principles they propound unto the world, their coherence with any thing
already revealed, their agreeableness to the nature of God, or the welfare of
men, to persuade any reasonably to embrace them: If it be pretended that the
inspiration it self is a sufficient authority to him that delivers Principles
to the world, and reason enough for any to embrace them; Yet, however, the
inspiration must still be proved, as it has always been, by Miracles; And
those not false, but real: Because, otherwise, every one, that has confidence
and wickedness enough to pretend to an impulse and Call from Heaven, may impose
what he pleases on the world, and they must, without examination, believe it:
This indeed would be a ready way to render the reason of men useless, and
degrade them into the silly nature of a Beast, that, being bridled and sadled,
is turned which way soever the rider pleases: Nay, it would be an
extraordinary and new method; as miraculous, nay more than the pretenders
inspirations, to make the parts of a contradiction both true, if all those who
presume that they are inspired are to be believed: For nothing can be more
apparent to us than that various Sects, opposite to one another, distant to a
total separation, pretend all to be thus inspired; And if what upon this they
presume to deliver, is to be received by those to whom the message is directed;
And they pretend it is directed unto all: How can we, since their confidence is
equal, know which to adhere to, since all come by the same authority; And it is
impossible to receive the opinions of all, because they contradict one another:
It Is true, we find some men among us that have run through all the signs of the
Zodiac, and their want of constancy and resolution, not being directed to the
Pole, has caused them to tremble and shake like a Needle through all the points
of the Compass; Yet this has been by degrees; not at once, but by succession:
But in the case we have now in hand, many pretend to have things revealed, that
yet thwart and encounter one another, and all at the same time: To embrace, at
once, these several propositions, is plainly impossible; and if we consider, to
make our choice, we are either apparently obstinate and wilful, when all come
with the same authority; or else we openly forsake the Argument of Inspiration;
and stand, and examine these Doctrines by a rule; and instead of believing
every Spirit, we try them. But if men will, notwithstanding these plain and
palpable absurdities, presume still to thrust such wild pretensions upon the
world, and the proof of their Doctrines shall be by confidence, not argument; I
would willingly have them to consider* as well as our selves, what their
pretended inspiration means, and what that impulse usually effects upon their
own minds; that makes them so confident that they are inspired from above? Can
it be supposed (or do they feel in themselves) any thing more than their own
melancholy, or thoughts brooding to hatch an Opinion? Do they find any more
than their persuasions heightened, and their assurance, of what they were before
willing to believe, bold and strong, and thus inflaming them with a zeal to
maintain what inordinate thoughts have produced strong resolutions to propagate
in the world? If it be so, (as certainly it is) every man who is thus raised,
will have the same authority with another; and opposite opinions (which is yet
impossible) must at once be embraced by men, because the authority, upon which
their certainty is grounded, is felt by all, though understood by neither: And
to others there seems the same confidence and assurance in the teachers of
these different Opinions. Our own reason therefore, without an inspiration,
will readily teach us that, since the Holy Spirit of God (to an inspiration
from which all these several men pretend) is but one, and what it delivers,
always consistent; these men cannot be inspired: But they take their dreams
for a converse with Spirits, their melancholy phancies for inspirations, the
diseases of their bodies for the accomplishments of their minds, and their own
thoughts to be Revelations: And, in short, only think themselves awaked when
they are indeed asleep. Nay, we may farther raise our distrust and boldness
toward these men; Because we know that confidence, assurance, and real belief
of what has entered into the minds of men, receive degrees of accession and
strength, as well by thought, conversation, and argument, as by any impulse
that can be imagined; Nay, many times, subtility, pride, impudence and
wilfulness, will maintain a thing with as great eagerness and zeal, as if men
had been really inspired. The Devil can do much to heighten men's persuasions;
and they may do much to heighten their own; and arguments, that men conjecture
to arrive at a complete demonstration of a point, will make them as tenacious
of an opinion (especially where they may appear singular) as any impulse or
inspiration. Now in the midst of such perplexing causes, that are able to
produce the same effect, it will be difficult, if not impossible, for men, that
adhere not to a Rule of trial, to come to a particular and exact determination;
and to satisfy either others or themselves to what cause they may attribute
the effect.

If they pretend to be able to distinguish betwixt a good and a bad cause,
where the effect yet seems to be the same: Or to know the cause by the
different impressions, variety of impulses make upon their Spirits, by which an
object is conveyed to their understandings; and by a distinct method, by which
the images of things become figured in the brain: This can be no conviction to
others, until it is explained; Nor any to themselves, unless they certainly
know, and understand it: Which, if they do, they are as well able to express
this, as they are the proposition which, as they pretend, is revealed to them:
But I fear this attempt will be in vain: Because I cannot find upon strict
consideration and retirement, but that the motions of the Spirits must be
always alike; and the same percussions upon, and convulsions in, the nerves, to
cause the soul to understand and believe; whether it be truth, or falsehood that
is represented, if it be received under the notion of truth; And if the object
seems to be true, it makes a like impression as if it were so: Therefore it is
impossible for the Enthusiast to distinguish an inspiration from God, from a
suggestion by the Devil, if he forsakes the Rule, and the public sentiments of
good and evil. Therefore we see how unreasonable it is either to be startled
with the vain pretenses of men, or to give credit to every Spirit; since, upon
such grounds, the Devil may be entertained for an Angel of light, and the
discoveries we make, may as well be by the flames of Hell, as by beams darted
from the Sun in the Firmament.

CHAP. III.
NOw from the* precedent Discourse, upon the caution of the Apostle, I infer
(1.) The unreasonableness of such men, and their lamentable state, who shutting
their eyes against the Sun, create a perpetual night to themselves, and love to
wander in darkness and error, by being of such unsteady tempers, such easy and
unmanly resolutions; shifting Churches and Opinions at every turn, concluding
every Apparition to be an Angel of Light, and the dreams of men to be
inspirations; And though principles of various shapes and faces are presented
by men with the same confidence and pretense of inspiration: yet too many are
so inconsiderate and easy, as to admit all by a continued succession, and live
altogether in a circle, as if they were fixed like one of the Philosophers
intelligences in an Orb, turning it round, and riding themselves about with it:
Or rather chained by some Magical charm, that they are condemned to run about
the circle, and yet are never able to stand still long enough to disentangle
themselves. And what a dismal state of life is this, never to possess rest and
quiet? How pitiable is the condition of a man, that has his mind always tossed
and ruffled? who has got such a paralytical distemper, as keeps his head
always jogging; who entertains no principles long, and yet Religion is his
perpetual burden: And well may it be so to him, who loads himself with such
variety. These men put a veil over their own eyes, and blindfold themselves,
that they may either be led by others, or stumble on they know not whither:
These discern not truth from falsehood, nor make any difference betwixt opinion
and demonstration; who every day are entangled in the midst of snares and
absurdity, and wander about in a wild wilderness, when they think they are
traveling through an inhabited Country: They are like Fowls flying in the
air, who are hampered in Nets which others have placed on Poles to catch them,
when they think they are mounted above hazard and danger. It Is a dreadful
Judgment, when God, that gave men souls to discern, shall, for their own
wilful blindness, deliver them up to the power of delusion to believe a lie;
especially when we shall reflect upon what the Apostle informs us will be the
consequence: That they may be damned who believe not the truth: (2 Thessalonians.
2.11.). We find that this must naturally become the effect of such a wild
principle: And the experience which we have of the irregularities and crimes of
such persons sufficiently informs us, that their ways in this world lead down
to the Chambers of Death, and in the other to the Vaults of Hell: Unless the
greatest Villainies may be consecrated by such hallowed pretenses, and
wickedness may change its nature, by adding the highest degree to it, when men
make God the Author of it: Then indeed the Government of Christ will quickly be
inconsistent with that of our Sovereign; the Kirk may beat the Throne in
pieces, and men may snatch away the Kings Crown to cover their own heads
withal: And it may be, after a while, an intrenchment on the Triple Crown, to
be the Sovereign of three Kingdoms. The dismal consequences of such an
unreasonable and loose opinion, we have no cause yet to forget: Or, if they had
escaped our memories, and were buried in oblivion, the Authors of them, being
afraid they should remain hid, will cause them to revive by fresh instances,
that Charity it self may no longer cover them; but their repeated crimes may at
once renew and preserve their Principles. God has permitted the pretenders to
these new inspirations, at once almost to make a plain discovery of themselves;
and yet he strengthens the hands of Authority to obviate the designs of both;
and has caused the Religion of his own Church, taking its measures by the rules
of the Gospel, to shine when it was almost covered with a Cloud; Lift up your
eyes then, and behold its glory; Not to envy, but to delight in, it: Always to
profess such a Faith as is Primitive and Apostolical, that delivers no other
Principles to the world, but what our Savior did before, what his Apostles
commented on, and a Faith that their followers lived by: Principles that
entrench not upon the rights of Secular Powers, that do not interfere with the
just and lawful Maxims of State, that give no countenance to ambitious
usurpations, nor any disturbances to the peace of the world; that are not wild
and extravagant, but teach men humanity and obedience; that countenance no
cruelties or murders, but rebuke the inordinate appetites of men, give a check
to vice, and encourage virtue; that men passing the time of their sojourning
here in the fear of God, and justice, and charity with their Neighbors,
thwarting neither the Prerogative of the King, nor privilege of the Subject,
may die with true peace of conscience in the favor of God, and gain a complete
rest from their labors, when their gracious dispositions and habits shall be
rewarded with eternal glory. Let us then, having thus fixed our Rules and
Doctrines, attended with such ample rewards, continue steadfast in the
profession of this Faith, and contend earnestly for it; since it is what was
formerly delivered to the Saints. Let not novelties, that drag such vice and
irreligion after them, that begin with Treason and end in Blood, be any more
named among us with delight; But let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from such iniquity, as turns the world upside down, and makes its
proselytes the real, and continued, troublers of Israel, as well as a sure
plague to themselves; who vex all that give ear to them with the perplexing
passions of hopes and fears about their eternal happiness, so much, that they
lose all temporal peace themselves, and scare and disturb other men; whilst
they keep them by their pretended inspirations in perpetual doubts and
uncertainties of mind: For when they endeavor to believe every Spirit, it is
very certain, they can believe none, and so they abandon Gods Religion and
their own peace, and run a round of endless perplexities and contradictions.

(2.) From the Apostles Caution, and my discourse from it, we may easily judge
of those persons, without the pretense of an extraordinary infallibility, that
run after every new Doctrine, like weather-cocks are turned with every wind,
and follow after every Light, though it be but Will with a Wisp, or Jack in a
Lanthorn, that brings them upon Precipices, or leads them into Boggs: These
men, having vitiated their fight, disposed their organs for all impressions,
and enlarged their eyes by frequent goggles beyond all proportion, that no new
object may escape them, receive false representations of things with the same
greediness that they receive true; and so mistake a Paper-Kite for a wandering
Comet, and an enkindled Meteor for a true Star; Hecuba is as acceptable to them
as Helen, and they embrace a Cloud instead of Juno: To endeavor to fix
Principles in them, is but writing on the face of waters; and to endeavor to
digest the thoughts of these into standing propositions, is to endeavor to
imprint Characters on the Air; you may inscribe more durable Divinity on the
dust, which every wind drives to and fro; or impress more lasting footsteps on
the Shore, which the next Tide washes away* S. Jude tells us, at the 12 th
Verse of his Epistle, that they are Clouds without water, without any weight to
balance them, and are not only light as the Air, but as inconstant too. S.
Peter says, that they are Wells without water; Clouds that are carried with a
tempest; but yet such, to whom the midst of darkness is reserved for ever: (2
Pet. 2. chapter 17.). Certainly, such men must needs be wrong, who, by frequent
shifting, declare to the world, that they do not know which opinion is right;
but, like sticks and straws, are carried with the stream, and always swim down
with the River: Their faith must needs stagger, who thus expose it to every
stroke; and certainly he must dye and perish, that with a naked breast is
willing to receive all the wounds that his adversaries will give him. If such
men are to be deemed religious, sober men would become profane; and if these
are they that make a Church, the more rational part will enter into a
Conventicle, or any place distant from these. What! must a man be a Fool to
become a Prophet? or cannot he be spiritual, unless he be mad? Must Religion,
that brings peace to the world, be the only bone of contention among men, which
they cast at one another heads? Shall that which teaches us self-denial,
patience, humility, and obedience, be pleaded for a breach of all these? Shall
our Savior's Kingdom be of this World, notwithstanding his own protestation to
the contrary? Or those that are zealous for the Doctrine of S. Paul, propagate
it by that Sword which yet S. Peter was rebuked for using? Will men be bold to
assume to themselves the names of Christians, and yet act more cruelties than
the Turks? Or call the holy Jesus their Master, and yet openly violate all his
Laws? Can they bow their knees to him, and yet presently carry him away to be
crucified? Can men think it reasonable, that a faith should be manured with the
blood of others, that was planted at first in the Martyrdom of Believers? Or
can any be supposed to have received power from on high, to constitute our
Savior a divider of inheritances, when he himself has refused the Office, and
gave the person a rebuke that desired him to accept it, by asking him that
question ( Luke 12.14.): Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you? In
vain is it for men, designing disturbances in the World, to pretend that they
follow the commands of Heaven when they knock the Crown of our Savior against
their Sovereigns, or fight withone Scepter against the other; unless they can
reach high enough to pull the Sun and the Stars from the Firmament, that no
light may shine upon the World; Or void the Gospel by inspiration. The
Protestant world is too wise now to be again thus fooled; Men must choose a
night for such designs as these, and stay, yet, a little longer, if they intend
to meet with Bats and Owls; The age is not dark and melancholy enough to bring
in Monkery among these; nor has ignorance, that Mother of Popish devotion, yet
sufficiently prepared our minds to receive the Doctrines of Papists, or
Enthusiasts; Nor are the brains of rational, and sober men yet beat out, that
there may be room for Dreams and Visions; Nor have we so forgotten the
Scriptures, as to be guided only by pretended inspiration, or to be frighted
out of our Faith and Principles, by every new and unexpected apparition: Nor
are we so ignorant of men's devices, as to be baffled out of our Religion by
those that are deceived themselves; Or to accomplish designs of malice, or
ambition, would subtily endeavor to impose on others. We know the difference
betwixt virtue and vice, and have a Rule to judge Doctrines and Preachers by;
and know how to judge of those that now pretend to present inspiration, and
those that follow such pretenders; And we well hope that we shall not twice in
the same age, be caught and entangled in the same snare; To prevent which
dismal and fatal ruin, permit me (in the last place) to exhort you to what I
cannot command, with the sacred Apostle; (though the World was then also to be
gained by entreaty, as appears by his kind compellation, Beloved: A word that
is used (I will not say practiced too, by men that love fornication in
Religion, and too often without a metaphor) by those who are far differrent
from the spirit and life of our Apostle; Yea, so often, that it takes up time,
in their discourses, fills the room of sense, and is therefore worn out, and,
as they manage it, is grown ridiculous:) Yet let me exhort men that are beloved
of the Lord, and not without reason, by me also, and all honest Christians, not
to believe every Spirit: not to be so soft and easy, when you have received a
standing Rule so well proved and conveyed to the world, to admit of new
Doctrines that contradict it; or to attend persons that boldly assume as if
they were inspired, with an equal confidence as if all were Apostles: There are
many in the world that from S. Paul's advice to prove all things; keep
themselves in the midst of doubts and perplexities, and never love to travel
long, but where Clouds cover the face of Heaven, and attend only to such
Doctrines, whose darkness keeps them in perpetual ignorance, and so the sound
is grateful only when it is uncertain; And thus, with them, to prove all
things, is only to hear without examination, and never to hold fast that which
is good: At this rate, a ravening Wolf may be received though he has not so
much as sheeps clothing, and to be real Worshippers of an Asses Head, with
which both Jews and Primitive Christians were falsely charged, would be a thing
of great merit and honor. But shall the cause of God be any longer a cloak for
the malice of the Devil, the infernal Lake be placed in the Skies, or men, that
have their wits about them, mistake the flames of Hell for Heaven? Shall the
Devil lead us with as good assurance, as if he were an Angel of light? Or any
walk by so loose a principle, as cannot distinguish betwixt false Prophets and
true? Many men are such strange fatalists, that they become altogether
indifferent in their Choice; and concluding their Fortunes to be written on
their foreheads, they care not whether they make any at all: This is an
Opinion, which, when in its consequence pursued, will make those that really
espouse it (and with equal reason) to be as regardless of temporal welfare, as
they are of their eternal, and take a great deal of pains and care either to do
ill, or nothing at all to any purpose: Then indeed men might as securely go
into a Pesthouse, as take the Air, receive fire into their bosoms, and yet
never fear burning; One might endeavor to beat a thousand, and we might run on
the points of naked Swords, without more danger of wounds or death, than if we
were at quiet in our Beds, or guarded in the midst of Troops and Armies: But
whatever courage such strange Principles may seem to inspire men withal; Yet to
be sure they are not breathed from Heaven, nor inspired themselves; These
Doctrines may probably make stout Soldiers, but never will make a good
Christian; Suited indeed they are to such as think a Sword the best mean to
propagate Religion; which is the reason why the Turk embraces them: But they
thwart and contradict such a Gospel as brought peace to all who will embrace
it, and not propagate its belief, by war or blood, by open force or secret
conspiracy: Alas! men had need to be wary, when eternal welfare is in hazard,
and endeavor to play their game well, when their own Salvation lies at stake.
We know, by sad and woeful experience, that many false Prophets are gone abroad
into the world: And shall we, still, with an indifferent, though equal,
affection pursue all? We may then lodge a viper in our bosoms, drink Poison
instead of Potions, swallow a Serpent instead of a Fish, and eat the very
stones for Bread: we may thus safely halt betwixt two opinions, and be both for
God and Baal; Christ and Mammon may become equal, and it will be no matter what
we worship, so as we worship any thing at all. But, it is a plain sign of a
wanton palate that must be tasting every dish: And when the Manna is set before
us, it is evident that we loath it if we desire Quails: If the messengers of
Satan may transform themselves into the Ministers of the Gospel, as well as
the Devil into an Angel of light; we had need to view men before we entertain
them, and examine Doctrines before we receive them. Will any rational and wise
man venture on a precipice without necessity? or take pleasure in such hazard
to have the vanity and glory of relating it, when one slip proves
irrecoverable, and his fall bruises him all to pieces? And yet this is the
state of those men who, at all adventures, attend the fancies and imaginations
of others, or without trial receive their own; They are like persons traveling
in a Wood, who may sooner meet with Beasts of prey, than any men either to
relieve or direct them. How easy is it for those that are once out of the way,
and traveling on without knowledge or direction, to be either lost like a man
in a Wilderness, or run among the Tents of their enemies, or blunder upon that
which they have lost their way to escape? They may mistake Rome in the dark to
be their own City, and think Tyber to be the Thames; and may lodge there, if
they are thus deluded, when they think they are safe in their own Beds: The
Wolves are now abroad in the World, nay such as will neither be frightened with
a Drum, nor yet be charmed and tamed by a Fiddle, or a Pipe. Let not the Sheep
then approach them, nor the flock of Christ feed nigh them, lest the Shepherds
themselves are forced to fly, when they can no longer govern, or defend, them:
Those, therefore, that are Baptized into the Christian profession, that have
vowed obedience to the institutions of the Gospel, ought to consider that their
Religion is not now to choose; But that they have engaged in the Christian
profession, and are to live according to its directions; And, therefore, are to
be so far from believing any pretended inspirations, contrary to these Rules,
that they must abandon them as impious and abominable; their everlasting
welfare depends upon it; and eternity is not a thing to be played with; nor
Salvation to be staked at hazard. No zeal, nor confidence, of others must
shake, or alter, our resolutions; Nor must we change upon any extravagant
motions of our own: We must not like Barnabas, (Gal. 2.13.) be carried away
with the dissimulation of the Jews, nor taken with any gaudy Idolatry of the
Gentiles; but hold fast the form of sound words, and contend with earnestness
for that faith which was once delivered unto the Saints: We must adhere to that
standing Ministry instituted by our Savior, and continued to us through Ages
and Generations, not forsaking the assembling our selves together, as the
manner of some is; Because if we thus sin wilfully, in renouncing our
profession, when we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries, (Heb. 10.25.). For if
those that despised Moses's Law, died without mercy, under two or three
Witnesses; Of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy, who tread
under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant a common thing,
and by their wilful revolt, do despite to the Spirit of Grace? S. Paul tells us
that Christ is the head of the Church, (the rest are only subordinate unto him)
from whom the whole body fitly joined together, makes increase of the body
unto the edifying it self in love; And therefore he exhorts, that we be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by
the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive
(Ephesians. 4.14, etc.). And shall we, to whom our Faith is Ancient, be more easy
to be drawn away, than they who had but newly received it? God forbid that we
should so disgrace our profession, when they that are engaged in a false
opinion, can die resolutely, though not for this only, yet without renouncing
it: If they do much upon principles of honor, shall not we do more upon those
of Religion? Shall we that have been bred into settled Maxims, be drawn aside
by a madman or a fool, if he is but able to pronounce inspiration? This is the
way to entertain any Doctrines of men, though never so wild, if they will be so
hardy as to suffer for them, and to take the pack of a common Peddler, for the
burden of the Lord, if we find him to stoop and crouch under it: Thus we may be
carried by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and take him for an Angel that
ministers to us: But we are sufficiently cautioned against such mistakes, if we
will but follow the directions of the Scriptures: For our Savior has cautioned
us against false Christ's, and false Prophets; and the Author to the Hebrews,
advises men, that they should not be carried about with diverse and strange
Doctrines; because it is a good thing that the hearts be established with
grace, (i. e. the Gospel) Heb. 13.9. And we had need all of us to receive it,
and be exceeding cautious and wary in this; to guess at Wolves by their howling
and devouring, let their clothing be what it will; that no subtilty may
circumvent us, nor creeping into houses, lead the silly women captive; nor
cause us to stray after them. We know the Devil is both cunning and diligent,
and that he suits his temptations to the various interests and dispositions of
men; that he walks about like a roaring Lion, but it is only to seek whom he may
devour, (1 Pet. 5.8.). The Scribes and Pharisees were pains-taking men; For
they compassed Sea and Land to make a proselyte; but when they had made him, he
became twice more the child of Hell than themselves: (Matthew. 23.15.). Let us
not, then, under the pretense of new discoveries, forsake that which has been
from the beginning; but let the same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus;
and according to S. Paul's advice, ( Romans 16.17, 18.) Let us mark them which
cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine we have learned, and
avoid them; because they are such as serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple. Then (as it follows) the God of peace shall bruise Satan under our
feet shortly. Let us live in that unity, which our holy Religion prescribes to
us, not raise or abett disturbances in the world, but endeavor to fulfill S.
Paul's joy, and make our Ministers task easy, in being like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord, and of one judgment; that nothing be done
through strife, or vain glory, (Philip. 2. at the beginning.). For if we are
drawn, by hearkening to the various pretenses of men, that yet account
themselves inspired, to be always biting and devouring one another, we shall
be consumed one of another: And this we are not only in our own age taught by
experience; but the Apostle has long ago admonished men of this, ( Gal. 5.15.).
Let us live, therefore, like those that have professed rules of faith, and
conversation; endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace: And then, if we thus live in this world, we shall be entertained in the
glory of the next.

CHAP. IV.
HAving thus discoursed the Apostles Caution, and evidenced to you, that every
one that pretends to Revelation, is not to be believed: I proceed to the second
particular I propounded, which contains a Direction, how we may disentangle our
selves from those perplexities, and different opinions, that various men, under
the same pretension, puzzle us withal. But try the Spirits whether they are of
God. Now as this is a metaphorical expression, taken from those who bring
Metals to the Touchstone, that they may discern the difference betwixt them,
that they may be able to value them proportionably to their worth: So to try
the Spirits, is to examine the Doctrines that such pretenders deliver to the
world, and to discern betwixt true and false; and accordingly judge whether
they are from God or no. It was the duty of the Priests under the Law, to show
the people the difference betwixt holy and profane, and to cause men to
discern betwixt the clean and the unclean, (Ezekiel. 44.23.). And the duty is
continued under the Gospel, in relation to the Doctrines and pretensions of
men. For as our Savior foretold, that many false Prophets would arise in his
Name, with pretensions to his power and authority, so we find them too suddenly
after this prediction to have gone abroad into the World: and even yet
continuing their boldness and impiety, dividing the Church, and not only
troubling particular men, but whole Societies, overturning Thrones, dissolving
Government, amongst mankind, and raising confusions, not only in Secular, but
Religious affairs: To prevent therefore such unsufferable disturbances, that
Religion may not cover malice or ambition, nor give any countenance to the
humors or impieties of men, we must endeavor to preserve this entire without
any mixtures of villainy or imposture, and by some certain characters know what
properly belongs to it, that we may not lie open to the fancies or designs of
those who cunningly ruin our principles and profession. And, since new Lights
are continually exposed to the view of men, which they too easily gaze at till
their eyes are dazzled, we must endeavor to distinguish these blazing Comets
from the true and fixed Stars in the Firmament, by which we are to be guided on
Earth, and directed in our way to Heaven: We must try both Doctrines and those
that publish them, whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are
gone out into the world. If you will take an old Apostles advice against the
pretended infallibility of new, he advises you, to prove all things, but still
to hold fast that which is good: (1 Thessalonians. 5.21.) We must try the Doctrines,
Opinions, Examples, nay, even the Actions of all pretenders to revelation; (for
by their fruits ye shall know them, says our Savior). And what we call Tender
Consciences, as well as those that are very raw, being rubbed often by reason
of their former commissions, when they are not guided by a well balanced
judgment, are most apt to have secret combats within themselves, and to be
sensible of the least touch upon them: For the best things in this World have
some inconvenience still attending them; and that which in some cases is good,
with other circumstances becomes evil; and most men that have an itch upon
their ears, have had a scab first upon their minds. The best Gold is most
ductile, and a Tender Conscience, if the judgment be not the governor of the
affections, is easily enslaved to such principles as suit with passion, and
make impressions on the temperaments and bodily dispositions of men: A seal we
know makes the fairest and most lasting impression upon such Wax as is first
softened, and a tender Conscience, where the head is as soft as the passions
pliable, easily receives the next Image, though to the blotting out and
defacing the old: We had need therefore, when any man comes under a pretense of
some new inspiration, to examine well both the person and his doctrine, and
receive to our own the skill of others, especially those whom God has set over
us in the Lord; we may otherwise forsake the true Israel, when Ephraim and
Manasseh shall combine together, or singly encounter it. And we have been
lately (and are not yet out of danger) so vexed with parties different from one
another, whilst one extreme rides the other, that the caution against believing
every Spirit, cannot too often be repeated, nor our trial of all Preachers and
Doctrines be too frequently urged and practiced. Our Savior gives his
Disciples a caution (who yet had the view of those Miracles which we only
believe) that they should take heed that no man deceive them, (Mat. 24.4.):
that they might not entertain a secret enemy instead of a bosom friend; And
certainly we have much more reason to beware now, although there were false
pretenders then: For if they durst, when our Savior was in the world, design
the subversion of his Gospel, when his infinite understanding could baffle
their arguments, and his visible Miracles, rebuke their folly in setting up any
Doctrine for Divine, that contradicted what he delivered; certainly much more
now, when the Gospel is delivered, and Miracles for its confirmation are
ceased; And men are not now to expect new, but to believe the old: Nay, when
the Gospel it self is often perverted to evil designs, and under a pretense of
men's Offering to God, they Sacrifice to the Devil. The Church is now, and our
Religion in it, like a Ship at Sea, tossed in a storm, and, through the
Providence of God, we are put into a Creek to careen and repair; Let us
examine, therefore, all the leaky parts of the Vessel, and supply all the
defects of Masts, or rigging before we put to Sea again; And mind what
Passengers we take in, that they may neither blow us up, nor sink us. As the
Apostle warns the Ephesians, so must I admonish you, that no man deceive you
with vain words, (Ephesians. 5.6.). As if any wickedness, by what authority soever
colored, could free those who teach or practice it, from the revenge of
Heaven; For because of these things (says the Apostle) comes the wrath of God
on the children of disobedience. Here indeed, in this world, good men
frequently suffer the same temporal evils with the bad; Because, being in the
same community, and the offense being that of the whole Society, when the
greater part become vicious, the Wheat is sindged by those flames that burn the
chaff; For the separation of these is not completed till a future state
renders justice exact and glorious: And communities must be punished here,
because in the other life these shall cease, and every man bear his own burden.
It becomes us therefore, (since we must every one then answer for our selves)
to examine well our belief and practice; and not to deceive our own souls in
being led by the false principles of another: Hence is it that S. Paul advises,
that every man examine himself before he partakes at the Lords Table, (1 Cor.
11.28.). And in the second Epist. 13 th Chap. 5 th verse. he exhorts men to
examine themselves whether they are in the faith, and to prove their own
selves: And that a man should try his own work, that he may have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another; Because every one shall bear his own
burden, (Gal. 6.4, 5.). But yet because many things in Religion, are placed
beyond the examination of every man, whose duty it is to embrace them; I must
here lay down some directions, and rules to limit such as may be otherwise apt
to be extravagant, and extend this duty of trying Spirits, beyond their own
power and capacity. And (1.) We that discourse of the Christian Religion, and
are fully convinced that it is true, must take it as it is expressed to the
world, in those Books of Scripture in which it is contained; Now these acquaint
us that there are some set apart to be Guides to others, and therefore
distinguish the Church, into Pastors and people; Into those that are Guides,
and those that are to be conducted by them; Into learned and unlearned: But
because all rules guide men no farther than they are designed; To render these
proper and effectual, all collateral and subordinate helps are to be used in
the application of the Rule: We must take, therefore, the help of the Learned,
and rely on their honesty, and skill, in those things which an inferior
Education (without such Miracles as are not now reasonably to be expected)
cannot capacitate men to reach; Nor can they pass a judgment upon those things
which they have not the advantage of knowing. Thus, that the Scriptures are
truly Translated, must be taken for granted by those that cannot understand the
Originals: And the Books which we receive, as the Rule of Faith, and directions
for men's lives* must be supposed to have been written by those inspired men,
whose names they bear, among those that have not leisure nor skill enough to
prove them to be so by any argument or authority. And when these principles are
settled, (2.) The Scriptures having some points more difficult to be understood;
we must, farther, make use of our Guides, and those whom our Savior has
appointed over us to interpret to us such points in Religion which we are not
capable of unridling our selves; and not adventure above our strength in
judging things which we have not learned: This becomes the natural modesty of
mankind, and is more especially agreeable to that humility of mind, and those
docile dispositions which become the Gospel: The contrary humors and actions
of men are what make so many Schisms in the Church, and lay them open to the
errors and impostures of those who, out of ignorance or design, easily prevail
upon, and lead, the simple. In plain things (such as most of the duties of
Religion are) every man of an ordinary capacity may well be able to judge for
himself: But if they will enter into Controversy, especially such as have
puzzled the learned, it is no wonder that they are led into mistakes, and their
own obstinacy added to their ignorance, makes their error become an Heresy: Or
if men will proceed in those things, of which they might be capable of
understanding, by false measures and courses which are irregular, not relying,
at all, on those helps and aids which reason dictates, and God has both
appointed, and allowed; It Is no wonder then that they impose upon themselves by
false reasoning instead of true; or that they may be fit to receive the
impressions of others when designing men impose upon them by any fallacious and
alluring pretensions. (3.) Even in plain cases, when private men, that are not
distinguished by any public character, judge for themselves, they ought to
confine their opinions to themselves, and permit them only to have an influence
on their own actions, they having no more power to impose them on others, than
other private men have to impose theirs on them. For all private men being in
this respect equal, none has authority to trouble others; but they must leave
them to their own reason and choice, which is the same liberty that they claim
themselves, by virtue of the natural privilege of men. (4) It must be supposed
antecedently to the trial of the Doctrines of men, that pretend to inspiration,
that under the same claim and title, some are true, and some false; For if all
were true, there would be no need of trying Spirits; But we must, contrary to
the Apostles caution, believe all who confidently affirm that they are inspired
from above: Yet our own experience sufficiently informs us, that opposite
Doctrines at the same time have been, and are still, vented in the world, with
the same confidence, with the same pretension; And we know that the parts of a
contradiction cannot, at the same time, be true; And, therefore, one being
false, must by search and trial be differenced from the other; that men may
discern what Doctrines immediately oblige them, being stamped with Divine
authority; And what are to be rejected by them, being either the product of the
dispositions of men's bodies, or evil projects and designs of men; Or else such
as enter into them by the subtilty, power, or injections of the Devil. Now
these things being thus stated; I proceed plainly to prove that it is the duty
of every man to try and examine all pretenders to inspiration, whether they are
of God or no, before they receive and entertain them as such. (2.) Give you
some Directions how to know when any Prophet pretending to inspiration, comes
from God: And (3) Make some application of the whole, because the expression
and Doctrine is very useful.

First, Then, to prove that it is our general duty to examine these pretended
inspirations will appear, (1.) Not only from the Apostles direction, which, to
those that own S. John's authority, is sufficient to enforce the duty, without
any argument or reason for the thing; But also it is the great reason of giving
rules to be the measure of what is straight or crooked; This is the general
design of Laws, and those innate notions of virtue and vice implanted in the
minds of rational men, and conferred upon them with their very beings. And this
is the reason of Gods manifesting his will to the world, that by it men may be
able to direct their lives, and regulate their belief, so as to preserve order
and peace here, and procure to them happiness hereafter. Now to what purpose
should these things be, were it not men's duty to examine things in Religion by
them, since the revelation of Gods will to any creatures is a sufficient reason
why they should obey it, and is to be the rule of their actions, for that time
in which it is ordained to oblige.

Secondly, It is the duty of men to examine Doctrines, whether they are of God;
Because, in things of a more inferior concernment, it is not allowed
reasonable among mankind to receive or embrace them without trial, and judgment
upon them. No man will deal in the commodities of his trade, without either
viewing them himself, or taking them on the skill and integrity of one whom he
can trust, and confide in: None receives a sum of money, but that he will both
number and examine the Coin; That so his goods may be proportionable to the
price; And the Coin he receives may appear to be true, and not counterfeit. If
we find a Quotation out of a Book, on which is concluded matter of moment, we
will, before we settle our notion and belief, examine the Author on whose
authority the case depends; Whether he is of sufficient credit to enforce that
thing; and whether he be rightly quoted and represented: Mankind would
otherwise continually be imposed upon; They might receive poison instead of
food, and be placed here in this World only to be cheated and deceived; and
enjoy their lives at greater hazards than the most inferior Beast that
perishes. Things that are obvious to our outward senses, may, by their likeness
to one another, or an artificial varnish, many times, deceive us; so that what
our eyes behold, they cannot see: And may not the inward senses of our minds,
by methods that are conformable to our faculties, be cheated by various and
false representations? These things we have repeated experience of, and they
need not any farther illustration. If therefore, in our temporal concerns there
is so great occasion of wariness and observation; Have we not need to be more
cautious in relation to spiritual, and the matters of religion? Or do we think
our bodies superior to our souls; or things temporal, to be of greater
advantage, than those that are eternal? If not; it is evident, that we must use
trial in both; and our diligence must be advanced suitable to the dignity and
value of our concern. Our Savior uses such an example (from any I cannot take
a better) when he rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees, that were so precise and
scrupulous about smaller matters; Who could strain at a Gnat, but yet swallow a
Camel: that could exactly observe the outward face and appearance of the
Heavens; but would not take notice of the reverse, which was yet more to be
considered by men; They could guess at the weather by rule and observation; But
would not discern the signs of the times, neither in relation to the coming of
the Messiah, nor the safety, or destruction, of Jerusalem, (Matthew. 16. 2, 3.).
And is it not strange, after so solemn a rebuke, that men, professing faith in
the reprover, should yet run into the same error, and not examine a business
that is of the greatest concernment, when, yet, they will be extremely
diligent, in what is of a far less value? Alas! what is time, in comparison of
eternity? Or our abode here, when set in opposition to what state we shall be
in hereafter? There is no comparison at all betwixt them; And, therefore, we
ought to be much more inquisitive about what we receive for Doctrines, either
to be believed, or practiced (since on them depends our eternal welfare), than
we should be for the greatest concernments of this world; Which if they dye
not, and perish with the using, and make themselves wings, that they may fly
away; Yet a very small time shall determine their use, as to us: And then,
according to our espousals and practice of Religion, we must enter into eternal
bliss, or misery.

Thirdly, It is our duty to try the Spirits, because the examination of the
Doctrines and Opinions of men, in Gods name vented to the world, is approved
and commended in Sacred Writ. As the Woman's Alabaster Box of Ointment is
recorded in the Scripture, that this persons piety and kindness to our Savior
might not escape the notice of posterity; But wheresoever the Gospel should be
preached in the world, this action should be told for a memorial of her, (
Matthew. 26.13.): So we want not such examples, and approbations of them, as may
recommend the diligence and inquiries of men, before they receive principles
under pretense of inspiration, to all posterity to read and imitate: Thus the
Bereans were accounted More Noble by S. Paul, than than those of Thessalonica;
because, when the Gospel was preached to them, they did not receive it at all
adventures, but examined, whether the relations agreed with the predictions of
the Prophets, and the rules of life were coherent with the principles of Humane
Nature, the Being and Attributes of Almighty God, the Notions and Reason of
Mankind; But, more especially with the Scriptures which they had already
received: Which they searched daily, that they might by them be enabled to
know, whether the Doctrines delivered were true ( Acts 17.11.). Had God
appointed any infallible Judge upon earth, or resolved always to fix his Laws
in the minds of men by any new authorized revelations, or any particular and
extraordinary discoveries: As there would not have been need of any standing
Rule; so the Apostle would not have commended these Jews for comparing the New
Testament with the Old, nor for searching the Scriptures, to know whether the
Apostles Doctrine was true, since he came to preach by virtue of inspiration.

Fourthly, It Is our duty to try the Spirits, that is, to examine the Doctrines
and Opinions of those who pretend to be guided and acted by the Spirit; Because
there are several advantages that accrue to men by a diligent examination of
these things. As (1.) It is the only way to avoid the insinuations of those,
who, under this pretense, captivate and enslave the affections of many, leading
them into a false Religion, and deceiving them of the privileges and rewards
of the Gospel; And so their peace and happiness is dissolved here, and they
purchase eternal misery hereafter. The taking away this liberty of enquiring
from men, is what supports the Church of Rome, when having deprived men of
their sight, they lead them which way they please; and spirit them into the
chambers of death, when they think they are going to the land of the living:
This is what causes many to believe the Priests gain to be their own godliness,
whilst ignorance begets a strange devotion; and instead of being lead by the
Spirit of God, they are hurried away by that of delusion: And then Egypt or a
Wilderness will be as pleasant as the Land of Canaan, and the Night become as
glorious as the Day, to such as have no eyes to see it. The want of trial and
examination of these things, makes the Sects, among our selves, to be catched
and halter'd by the subtilty of others, till they are betrayed into the hands
of those, who use them as Stalking horses to catch others, till the Jesuits
cast their Net over them, and then the Romans come, and take away our Kingdom.
To forbid this trial and judgment of things, is to render the faculties of a
man useless, to degrade him into the nature of a Beast, and to bring a strange
Metempsychosis amongst us, by transplanting men's souls into other creatures,
whilst their bodies live, and act in the world: Or to make them, in religious
affairs, (which are the greatest concernments they have here) to forsake the
Law of God, and the Testimony, to seek unto them that have familiar Spirits:
Or, unto the Wizzards, that peep, and mutter; when a people should seek unto
their God, and not for the living to the dead, (Isa. 8.19.).

(2.) By a serious trial and examination of the Doctrines of men that pretend
to inspiration, we shall, in all probability, keep our faith sound and entire:
For there being, among Christians, but one true Faith as well as Baptism, and
one God the Father of our Lord Jesus; Since there may be many Articles of
Belief exhibited to men different from the true; It must needs become the only
means to keep our faith sound and blameless, by examining things before we
receive them, and trying men that pretend to inspiration, before we entertain
their Doctrines in our minds, or make them the objects of our belief. A Ship
that equally spreads her Sails to all the Storms and contrary Winds, must not
only lengthen her Voyage, and be tossed in the midst of the Waves and Tempest;
But frequently be in danger of a Wreck, if it be not lost and overwhelmed.
There is no less hazard in the matters of our faith: If we permit it, without
care, to lay open to every wind of doctrine, we may then not only be tossed to
and fro, but at once make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. The Devil
is both a Thief and a Murderer; so he was from the beginning; and still walks
about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: And how easy is it for
him to enter the minds of men, and to steal away their faith, or hinder it from
a vital influence upon their actions, if the doors of their souls continually
are open, and are not at all locked or barred? He may then come to us in his
own shape, without transforming himself into an Angel of light; and both
solicit and enslave our minds, whilst we let him pass without examining: And
yet, in Ports subject to invasion, and Garrisons that may be capable of
surprise, we allow continual Watch and Ward; and Orders to them are so strict
in time of danger, that none, who is not publicly known to be a friend, may
enter without a strict examination, lest he betray the place, and let in the
enemy: No less advantage is it to the mind, to preserve our faith spotless and
unblemished, to have a Sentinel always at our Senses, through which our souls
make their sallies; lest the adversary again enters with them, and they are
destroyed by the same way in which they hoped to preserve themselves: We must
guard our minds, and have a watchman always upon the Tower, that our
understandings themselves which govern both our choice and affections be not
ensnared into false principles, which will defile our actions, and ruin our
souls. This is the way to keep our selves harmless and undefiled, the sons of
God in the midst of that crooked and perverse generation amongst whom we live;
and hereafter to shine like Stars in the midst of the Firmament for ever. This
is the design of Saint Paul's exhorting men to hold fast the form of sound
words, (2 Timothy 1.13.); and of his thanking God, that the Romans then (though
since they have departed from it) obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine
delivered to them: (Romans 6.17.); and of S. Jude's exhorting all Christians to
contend earnestly for that faith which was once delivered unto the Saints: (in
the third Verse of his Epistle.). For, whatever any men boldly say, we have as
much reason to examine our belief, as our actions, and to take as great care of
the principles, as we do in the practice, of our Religion: For not only our
reason concludes this, because the understandings are the principal faculty of
our souls; But for that these direct our wills, and influence all the actions
of our lives: And God will not accept of those, who exchange their Creed for
any public faith, that betrays those Articles men should believe; Safety or
ruin depends upon it; Because not only Baptism and the outward Ordinances of
our Saviors institution, are required to the ordinary salvation of men; But he
that believes not shall be damned, (Mark 16.16.). Hymeneus and Alexander, not
minding these things, put away Faith and a good conscience, and shipwrack'd
their belief in the midst of error; and for this, they were delivered unto
Satan, (1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.). If the Orthodoxy of men's judgments and opinions of
things, were not of great and eternal concernment in the times of the Gospel,
the old statutes might be still embraced, or the Law of Nature remain the only
direction unto men, without any farther revelation: But S. Peter tells us of
errors that are damnable, which entitle men unto swift destruction, (2 Pet.
2.1.). And, if there were not great caution to be used in relation to men's
Principles and Belief, Faith would not have been made the condition of the
Gospel, nor the qualification to justify a sinner.

(3.) By a strict examination of Principles and Doctrines, we may preserve the
peace of our own consciences; For if conscience in things pertaining to
Religion, consists in the agreement of our notions, with the will of God
revealed unto men; Then the trial of Opinions (under whatever pretense they
seem to be conveyed) by this rule, and accordingly either rejecting or
receiving them, must much conduce to the peace and quiet of our own minds,
which are regulated by the same rule, by which we examine Doctrines and
Opinions. And can there be a greater advantage to men on Earth, than full
satisfaction, and a quiet conscience, settled upon an unalterable and firm
foundation? Contentment, in the enjoyments of this world, is that which makes
the meanest Peasant as happy as his Prince, and creates a level amongst
mankind; How much greater delight then must that satisfaction advance men to,
which relates to things of an everlasting concernment, that causes the pangs of
death to vanish, and the fears of Hell and torment to depart; that carries us
with all steadiness and peace, through all the billows and storms of the World,
into that blessed Haven of rest and tranquillity, where we shall know no
trouble any more? This is enjoying a perpetual Feast, a pleasure beyond the
greatest sensuality, exceeding what men can otherwise possess, or as much as
invent or think upon: For what are then all the concernments or advantages of
the world* when in matters of Religion I am fixed and settled? If I live in
misery, it cannot be long; nature will soon have spun her thread, if no
accident cuts it off; And if, having my Religion fixed upon such Principles
which cannot deceive me, I regulate my actions by their directions, death must
then be welcome to me, because it gives me the fruits of my hope, and enters me
into the joy of my Master, who from earth (having suffered an antecedent
separation of soul and body) entered visibly into his own glory, and has made a
passage to the same for those who live in the belief of what he has revealed,
and the practice of that Religion which, in fullness of faith and indisputable
assurance, they have had a well grounded confidence in.

(4.) This trial and examination of the Doctrines and Opinions of others, will
make men endeavor to live without disturbance in that Society of which they
are members. Nothing disturbs the Government of the world so much, as doubtings
and disputes about Religion: But this, when found out by a regular enquiry, and
truly established in the minds of men, gives the greatest and most effectual
checks to all the breaches made upon enclosures, and those irregularities and
invasions that are committed upon the properties of men: This forbids the
Prince to be a Tyrant, and admonishes the Subjects to be obedient to the Laws;
to become Subject for conscience sake, and not to rebel against the powers of
this world, lest they receive damnation in the next, (Romans 13.). But when men
are apt to entertain the furious Principles of others, when conveyed to them
under the specious pretense of Spirit, and inspiration; With what ease are they
ensnared, when they are either lazy, or refuse to examine? There is nothing
then so ruinous to Society: nothing that puts men more into confusion; nothing
that dissolves the bands of Community, and breaks Order into a Chaos, but they
will attempt under the covert of Religion; and conclude they do service unto
God, when they are immediately offering to the Devil: For, the sense of
Religion being the greatest tie upon mankind; what will they not attempt or
suffer, when their actions, let them be never so full of villainy, shall under
pretense of the authority, or inspirations, of others, be adopted into the
number of virtues, and heroic acts, and their sufferings be advanced to
Martyrdom? Justice shall be violated, when it shall be the act of Religion, to
gain a Crown from the head of him that rightly wears it; And then they will
make a way to the accomplishment of their design, though they pave it
throughout with the carcasses of the slain. But if such Principles, that ruin
Religion under its name are well examined, and submitted to the trial of reason
and the Scriptures; and new inspirations are measured by those that are old: We
shall easily conclude that such a Doctrine cannot come from God, that teaches
men to do the works of the Devil; nor the Principles that tend to confusion
among mankind, ever proceed from a God of Order; But they are, upon the first
audit, to be damned to the place from whence they took their original, and must
be concluded to come from Hell, which thus fire and consume the world. And so
you see that the several advantages, which accrue to men upon trial of those
that pretend to inspiration, may be so many encouragements to the thing; and so
many arguments to recommend the duty to all those who, by the Devil and his
agents, do not love to be led captive.

Finally, To what purpose were faculties given to us that are able to judge,
and, according to judgment, to make our choice in matters of Religion, if by a
pretense of any ones inspiration, the natural powers of our souls must cease,
or else be rendered useless; They being suspended by a pretension of authority
that, without examination, cannot appear to us to be Divine? Nay, why should
the Apostle impose such a task upon us, which, without the use of every man's
particular faculties, becomes impossible? No choice will then be left in
Religion to the generality of men; But it will become a necessary thing; and we
are bound, like machins, to move always by the impulse of another; nay quite
contrary, to what we were obliged before, if the pretender to inspiration
change his note, and plays to us on a contrary string. Would it not be strange
for any man to preach to, and exhort, stones; Or argue to one that were not
capable of any impression? Or could S. John be so unreasonable as to impose the
trial of Spirits on men that either have no faculties to examine, or have their
senses tied up by a superior power? Must all false Prophets be rejected; and
is there a necessity of men's believing what Doctrines have been revealed from
Heaven; and must they not yet try the Spirits, and use their own faculties to
examine them? To deny this may indeed be suitable to some Doctrines of the
Church of Rome; Yet it cannot but be plain to a Protestant; or any other
reasonable man, that has not his faculties given him in vain; that such
arguing, and such belief serve only to justify imposture under the pretense of
truth, and to blind men's eyes, that they may be led into a ditch; This is to
make fools of others, that they that cheat them may be accounted wise; and
those, who are thus imposed upon, disclaim the use of their own reason, and
have eyes of their own, but see not; which is all one as to have none at all:
And it must appear very strange, that any man, having a clear sight, should yet
refuse to guide himself, but choose to be led about like a Dog in a Halter.

CHAP. V.
THere is yet one Argument more why we should try and examine Doctrines, that
are pretended to be the effects of inspiration; and that is what the Apostle
makes the reason of his Caution and Direction, because many false Prophets are
gone out into the world: Now since these are many, enough to boast the
advantage of their number, to the staggering many weak men, and frightening
that Authority which should suppress them, and yet they remain false Prophets,
under what specious pretenses soever they appear; There is great reason why we
should prove and try them, that we may not be led away with the error of the
wicked, and extremely hazard, if not ruin our souls. For, in matters of
Religion, especially where diverse Opinions of the same thing are exposed to us,
our first business must always be, according to our capacity and power to
settle our minds by a fixed choice of such Principles and fundamentals, of
which we have such good assurance as may fully convince us that they are true,
and not false; and according to these to direct our lives: Which can never be
done without enquiry, and judging, for our selves, of those Doctrines that,
under pretense of a Divine Authority, are, by any, propounded to our belief.
Since, therefore, there are so many false Prophets fluttering in the world,
there is reason that we should examine and try them; and not believe every one
that boldly affirms he came from God; lest we entertain thieves and robbers, in
the room of hearty and honest friends; and instead of receiving a faithful
Guide, we retain one that deludes us out of our way, till at last he lodges us
in the chambers of Hell, instead of carrying us up to Heaven. But since no man
comes with so great a pretense as immediate inspiration, or to deliver Gods
will to the world, but that he will offer something to recommend both himself
and message; since he knows he speaks to men having the same faculties with
himself, who have, at least, their own reason to guide their choice, and
cannot, if they are at all considerate, be rash in their entertainment of those
Doctrines, wherein their eternal welfare is concerned; It must of necessity
quicken our endeavors to try and sift the Doctrines of men to the utmost of
our power, and the more because of the plausible Arguments that deceivers
insinuate themselves by into the hearts and affections of others; whose poison
may appear wholesome to the eye, that yet gripes and swells the bowels: Amongst
many things, therefore, that render false Prophets difficult to be discerned, I
shall instance in some, that, upon the view of them, and discovery of their
deceit, we may use the utmost diligence in our trial, and be the better
prepared to entertain those Rules, by which we may discern true inspiration,
from that which is false, and only pretended.

First, They will inveigh against the Principles you have already received, and
those that are the guides of your souls; As well knowing that a new building
cannot be erected on that ground on which another stood, without demolishing
the old, removing the materials, and clearing the foundation: And this they
always do in proportion, according to the degrees of alteration which they
design; till, at last perhaps, they introduce among you golden Calves, instead
of the worship of the God of Israel: And if their enterprise be thus crowned
with a joyful success, their language will be like that which we read (1 King.
12.18.). Behold, O Israel, the Gods that brought thee out of the land of Egypt!
and then we must with prostration worship them. False Prophets will come to you
in sheeps clothing, the ravening Wolf shall not appear till he has an
opportunity to devour you: The Principles of these would fill us with too much
horror and amazement, should they appear all at once, and that before prejudice
were removed; They endeavor, therefore, to gain by a gradual advancement upon
us; abating the strength of custom and education; first startling, and then
seducing us; using methods to invalidate the old, before they settle new
Principles: Nay, if they can but make us indifferent betwixt both, either by
argument or debauchery, their work then waits only a fitting opportunity: But
if the resistance be so great that they cannot wholly captivate at once, they
will assault where we are weakest, baffle us by degrees, and introduce one
point dependently on another, till at last we become wholly theirs, before we
are sensible of so great a change as they by succession have wrought among us.
It Is a vast advantage they gain against us, if they can but render us lazy in
our enquiries, or cause us to undervalue our Guides; Which they will never be
wanting in, as long as an evil tongue can asperse, or secret whisperings can do
men injury, who are not present to answer for themselves; Nay, as long as
boldness can confront modesty; Or men that assume not equal advantages, may be
either sworn, or Hectored, into silence. Let these designing men but once bring
your Teachers into contempt, and it will not be long er'e they drive them into
corners: The former has been long attempting, and not without considerable
success; God* defend us against the latter, lest the people are destroyed for
want of knowledge, and ignorance becomes the Mother of devotion: For we know
what such devotion means. Thus was it in our Saviors time; the Jews branded
him for an impostor and deceiver, that so they might argue his Doctrine to be
false; and rather than own, that his Miracles should prove divine, they
blasphemously attributed them to the power of the Devil, ( Matthew. 12.24.): And
the Servant is not above his Lord; But the same Spirit, that in this manner,
disparaged* the Master of the household, will not be more kind to the family:
but will make us, if he can, as he did the Apostles, lustrating Sacrifices to
expiate for the City, and a strange spectacle both to Angels and to men.

But ( Secondly) These projecting men that come to you with inspired Doctrines,
till they kill and slay and take possession, will gloze over their false
principles with all possible art and cunning; there shall be no Treason against
the person of a Prince, when it is their pleasure first to depose him; and if
he come to an untimely end, they kill the man but not the King, and all shall
be, not murder, but, the execution of Justice, when they sentence him by a
Church Authority superior to his own: Rebellion then is a just vindication of
their own right, and they only break their Sovereigns Scepter, that Christ's
alone may be exalted: The murdering those that have Sacred Characters impressed
upon them, is taking him that hinders, out of the way, and all the usurping
Tyrannies in tne world, are exercised only to bring in such a blessed
confusion, that ambitious men may from the spoils of others, build their own
Nests on high, and this shall be called, the seating the Lord Jesus on his
Throne, though his Religion be made their own footstool: But if they find the
eyes of men open, or their stomachs too nice to digest such hard things as
these; and that they refuse to embrace Devils when the flames appear through
their thin garments, and they are not cut long enough to hide their cloven
feet: They will effect by stratagem what they cannot by open force, and an
ambush shall destroy what a Field-Army cannot: They will hide their leaven in
some measures of meal, till in the end all is leavened; blend truth and error
together, and like the Gnostics, make a Religious mixture that shall have
something of the Jew and something of the Christian, that may look like what
others profess, but still add something of their own, that poison may be
swallowed in a sweetened potion, where men may take, and yet never taste it: The
Saducees could deny the Resurrection from the dead, and yet adhere to the Books
of Moses: The Pharisees could admit the Commandments of God, and yet void them
by their own Traditions: The Arrians could own Christ to be the Savior of the
world, and yet grant him only to be a Creature; And the Socinians can
acknowledge him the Redeemer of mankind, and yet deny him to be a God by
nature: And amongst all these, and many more, error is entertained for the sake
of those truths that cover it; and, not distinguishing betwixt the precious and
the vile, men often receive them both together: The Papists profess the
Apostles Creed, but add as many Articles of their own: And those that are
averse to these, will yet embrace many errors, and are the more easily led
toward them when they are dispersed amongst a great many truths: But when we
consider, that one mouthful of pestilential Air may infect and destroy the man,
it is but reasonable all should be wary in choosing out wholesome habitations;
and since a little poison may make us swell and burst asunder, this may be more
effectual to destroy, than all the food we swallow with it can be to save and
preserve us in full strength and vigor; and by how much the more difficult it
is to discern it, the more careful we ought to be.

Thirdly, False Prophets, will be more difficult to be discerned, and therefore
more strictly to be examined by us, because they will make their erroneous
Doctrines to receive a seeming countenance from the Scriptures: These are what
we own to be our Rule, and by these we judge of Doctrines and Opinions, and
therefore are unwilling to believe that to be false, which many Texts are
brought to prove: Thus the Devil tempted our Savior, ( Matthew. 4.6.), when he
would attempt the ruin of mankind, and the disappointment of our Redeemer;
nay, of the whole most blessed and glorious Trinity, in contriving and carrying
on such wonderful providence* by persuading him to cast himself down from the
Pinnacle of the Temple, to make him sin in the destruction of himself, and
anticipating that death upon the Cross, by which he was to become our
Sacrifice, he might tempt Providence and hazard himself: If thou be the Son of
God (says he) cast thy self down; for it is written, He will give his Angels
charge over thee, and with their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against a stone; rendering the Text plausible to his
purpose, by omitting that part of keeping him in all his ways: But this was
such a trial of skill, as rendered the Devil exceeding foolish, because he that
knew all things, could not be ignorant of what he had omitted, which was the
key to open that promise. Yet from this attempt of the Devil upon our Savior,
have the deceivers of mankind throughout all Ages endeavored to insinuate
false Doctrines into the belief of others, by bringing Texts of Scripture to
prove them: The instances are many and well known to those that are conversant
in Books and Writings, or have given themselves the variety and temptation to
hear men of different opinion from us: But alas! How easy is it for one of no
extraordinary skill, to wrest the Scriptures, both to his own, and others
ruin? Nay, S. Peter tells us, that it is the common guilt of the unskilful and
unlearned: (2 Epist. 3.16.): How much more then may designing men, that by
guile endeavor to catch the ignorant, this way impose upon their
understandings, by pretending Scripture, to prove and countenance their false
opinions: especially among such as admit Texts for the sake of their number,
not their weight, and more regard the sound of the words, than the sense which
is couched under them? It Is no difficult matter to mistake the sense of any
Writing, and then to plead it according to our own purpose and design: Nor is
it impossible for men to quote diverse Texts, that to ignorant men, may, by
their sound, seem to countenance their opinion, that in their true meaning are
nothing for them, or else confirm a contrary proposition: This the Papists and
Dissenters know; and this we are acquainted with our selves, when we view Books
whose Margins adorn them with multitudes of Texts, which they pretend to prove
the same thing by, and yet, upon a more strict examination, do not at all make
for their purpose: And commonly when men multiply these beyond necessity, to
prove what is certainly confirmed by few that are plain and pertinent, their
Doctrine is either doubtful or false; or else they do it to take up time, and
fill their discourses which their own barrenness cannot supply: Because all
Scripture, being of Divine Authority, if in any place it be plain and pertinent
to the point which it is brought to confirm, one Text is as good as a thousand;
and to quote many, if some be impertinent, the whole possibly may be suspected:
And therefore it is not wisdom to do it, but in points much controverted among
Christians; and in those especially for which the argument to prove them can be
no other than Divine institution.

Fourthly, If false Prophets cannot find (as they never can, and therefore deal
in obscure places, where the Text is as dark, as the places retired, into which
they creep to lead silly women captive) I say if they cannot find plain
Scripture to countenance their opinions, they will yet pretend visions and
revelations; which the perfection of the Scriptures disallows, nor have they
any argument to prove them, besides confidence and a bold presumption: Yet some
are apt frequently to cry a Vision from the Lord, when it is the fruit of their
own phancies, whilst their souls dream when their bodies sleep, or are
indisposed whilst they are awaked: We easily know how far the depraved
dispositions of our bodies work upon our minds, and how easy it is for men,
proportionable to their melancholy or joy, to frame different opinions of
things: (which by the way renders many signs of grace, that some men for their
own advantage exhibit to the world, altogether vain and deceitful). But,
notwithstanding all these things, we find, by too woeful an experience, how men,
either not fixed, or fearful, are prevailed upon by such pretensions: So that
it proves a difficult task to hinder their error, or to reduce them from it.
For all former rules, to those that entertain so wild a principle, are set
aside; and Reason must not be heard against Revelation: Yet since God is but
one, and all Propositions are true or false; since we find different, nay,
contrary Opinions vented to the World, under the same pretense, it is an
argument why we should prove and try them; and the rather by how much the more
difficult true inspiration is to be distinguished from that which is false, and
what comes from God to be discerned from what proceeds from the constitution of
our bodies, the variety of objects presented to our sense, or what the Devil
injects into our minds, and thereby employes, and captivates our thoughts, and
this way frames an Opinion.

Fifthly, False Prophets will give accents to what they deliver, with such art
and elocution, as may make great impressions on a multitude; and suit their
voice to the constitutions of those whom they design to delude, with such
elevations and cadencies as may agree with the joyful, and the melancholy; as
if a man must first be skilled in Song, before he is capable to become a
Preacher; or a Fiddler were in the next capacity to be a false Prophet to delude
the World; But besides these suitable percussions upon the nerves of men, to
make a grateful reception in the understanding; They add to it a great deal of
their own passion, which many mistake for a true zeal, they can be loud when
they are not rational, and what is wanting in sense, they can supply by noise;
and great action shall pass for an argument; and a goggle of the eye for clear
demonstration: They will put their blood and Spirits into such nimble motions,
that they will seem as if they were ravished from themselves, and the parts of
their bodies were just running away from one another. This strange fury is
called zeal, and many men are apt to receive every thing for true, which is
thus recommended by a Religious fury; not thinking that zeal is determined by
its object, and according to what it is conversant about, becomes either good
or bad. With what zealous acclamations and repeated outcries did the Jews call
for the crucifixion of our Savior, whilst they tried, saying, Crucify him,
Crucify him; (Luke 23.21.): and the more Pilate endeavored to release, the
more zealous were they to put him to death, and more instant in requiring his
blood. In this, men of false and corrupted Principles exceed those that are
possessed of true; truth being usually conveyed with simplicity, because reason
and understanding receives and fortifies it; but Error must be managed by art
and cunning, because its nature cannot recommend it: We read of men, in the 7
th of Hosea, that though they devoured their Kings and Judges, strayed away
into the Groves and Woods, from the Worship of God to that of an Idol; so that
none (says God) calls upon me, yet they were as hot as an Oven. And those
false Prophets mentioned by Jeremiah, that spoke peace to those that despised
their Maker, and to such as walked after the stubbornness and imagination of
their own hearts; saying, No evil shall come upon you; were eager to deliver
what they had no Commission to do, and exceeding zealous to publish the Message
of which God refused to be the Author; I have not sent these Prophets (says
God) yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied, (Jer.
23.21.). So that we may be easily deceived, if we are drawn into our belief by
the heat and eagerness of those that endeavor to impose upon us, if we have no
other way to difference a fire that warms and relieves, from that which will
both scorch and burn us.

Sixthly, False Prophets that go abroad into the world, will frequently boast
the number of themselves, and startle men with the glory and multitude of their
proselytes. But Egypt had many Magicians and Sorcerers in Pharaohs time that
could confront the Rod of Aaron, and boldly vye Miracles with Moses: Baals
Priests were four hundred and fifty, and the Prophets of the Groves four
hundred: and what proportion could Elijah bear to such a multitude as these?
The Arrians, among the Christians, were so numerous, that Athanasius seemed to
engage against the World; And the Papists boast an Universality, as well as
Antiquity of their Church; Nay, the Fanatics also tell us of their number, and
take all opportunities to show themselves, in the greatest and most formidable
body; Not only to put frights upon Authority; but to gain beholders and
Proselytes too: Herod and Pilate, for such ends as these, shall become friends;
And Ephraim and Manasseh shall join together to make an argument from the
increase of number, though Manasseh be against Ephraim, and Ephraim against
Manasseh. And abundance of men (especially such as neglect to examine the
Principles of their Religion) are led on by company and example; they follow
the Herd though to their own ruin, and will run on with the Flock or Covey
till the Fowler spreads his Net over them; Though arguing to the truth from the
numbers that profess it, would for some time have concluded our Religion to
have been false, and given the cause both to Jews and Heathens; The Turk may
yet boast the number of his Proselytes, and the Devil brag that his name is
Legion.

Seventhly, False Prophets will often plead the strictness of their lives, and
will come with Holiness written upon their Foreheads, how little soever be in
their hearts; They will often be very precise and scrupulous; and though they
can swallow Camels, yet they will strain at Gnats; they will be very tender in
smaller matters, that they may be thought such as great sins never seize on;
like the Pharisees in the Gospel, they will pay tithe of Mint, Anise, and
Cummin, although they omit the weightier matters of the Law: None among the
Jews were more outwardly grave and formal, than these; they made broad the
Phylacteries, those scrolls of Parchment, on which the Law was inscribed, that
they might be capable of more Texts of Scripture, than other men's, to show
their great opinion of the Law; they enlarged also the fringes of their
Garments beyond the proportions of other men, that they might not only be
badges of their distinction and separation, but evidence them to be exceedingly
Religious; because they were commanded by God to be worn to remember them of
the Law, as well as to difference the Jews from other Nations, and to prevent
Idolatry, as often as they looked upon these Fringes, which the God of Israel
commanded them to wear, (Numb. 15.38.). Scrupulous were these men in relation
to all the circumstances of Religion, but they regarded not so much the
substance of it, nor what these things were ordained to signify and represent.
We read of some in the Apostles days, that had a form of Godliness, who yet
denied the power thereof, (2. Tim. 3.4.). And this continues still in the
World, and will, so long as Religion is capable of being veiled with
hypocrisy, and one man cannot discern the inside of another: It Is but being
strict in outward appearance, and a wicked man may be accounted a Saint; and if
open and scandalous sins be avoided, men's inside may be full of rottenness and
corruption, and they be canonized still: Thus the Devil may be taken for an
Angel of light, if he can but hide his malice and his flames; And men may cheat
their Neighbors, commit adultery, or secret murder, if their actions escape
the notice of others, and they make not themselves a spectacle to the world:
This the Ministers of Satan do, like him, acting deeds of darkness within,
whilst yet a Candle is hung out at their doors; that are earnest for
reformation in other men, but do not at all reform themselves; only they
endeavor to cover those faults which yet they will not strive to amend: If
they bless God with their mouths, they care not if they blaspheme him in their
hearts, because their business is not to recommend themselves to God, but unto
those men whom they designingly delude: God himself complains of such
Atheistical hypocrites, that turn things upside down, that seek to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark; They draw near me
(says God) with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me; but have
removed their heart far from me, (Isai. 29.13.). And there is yet sufficient
cause of lamenting the sad state of Professors of Christianity, who are still
beguiled with good words into ill practices, and under a pretense of Religion
are drawn to renounce it. But yet in the midst of such various Principles
preached to the World with noise and confidence; with great zeal, though little
reason, (which therefore as an enemy some disgrace and vilify) they distract
the minds of those that are unsettled, disturb the peace of all Society, both
Civil and Religious, draw men into Heresy and Schism, and every evil work, and
make them think those Prophets inspired with the breath of God, that swell only
with their own passion, and disgorge themselves in fire and brimstone among
mankind: And the Doctrines that cause these disorders, they manage with such
art, and such suitable applications, and have so many plausible pleas to the
World, by which they spread them with too much success over the minds of men:
That it must fully convince us of a necessity to use diligence in our
enquiries, and to try the Spirits whether they are of God; and so much the
more, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And thus I have
done with the Arguments and Reasons why we should examine the Doctrines of
those that come to preach Religion among us, let their pretensions of Authority
be what they will; Though they arise as high as inspiration, and aver their
Commission to be from Heaven.

CHAP. VI.
I Proceed now to my second Particular proposed, about this duty of trying
Spirits; And that is to give you some Directions how to know when Doctrines
propounded, as coming from God, are indeed revealed from Heaven, and the
Deliverers to be believed as inspired from above, and accordingly to be
entertained in the world. Now because men are apt sometimes to rely on false
characters of trial; and there being several marks set up, by men of various
humors and interests, to guide them in their way to Heaven, by which they
pretend they are able to direct themselves and others, and try Doctrines and
Opinions: I shall make some brief reflections on them, that no prejudice may
remain to hinder us from embracing the true methods of trying men's Propositions
in Religion; Especially those who come with so great an authority as
inspiration.

And (1.) We meet with many in the world, who suppose what they call the
Church, which they make as narrow and little as they can, to be either that
into which they ultimately resolve their Faith; or at least to have such
Authority as to determine all points in Religion, and what rules are to be
accepted as Divine, and therefore by her judgment all Spirits and Doctrines are
to be tried, and determined. But this Guide will many times be uncertain; Nay
false too, if a Society of men, called the Church, agree upon such Principles
as are erroneous; which we find a thing not impossible, when our present
experience may inform us, that Rome, which would be the only Church; and many
separate Congregations in the World, who yet assume the honor of a Church, err
in Articles of the Christian Faith, and in many ways of Discipline and
Manners: And this is no wonder at all, when we consider that a Church is a
Society of men; and that every man is capable of error; and that all Councils
are managed by votes; and these many times are given wrong, not only through
ignorance or inadvertency, but humor and interest so far prevail in the
opinions of many, that we cannot yield their determinations to be infallible:
Especially since we often find great Assemblies managed by the tricks and
devices of a few, whose designs, being beyond the reach of the multitude, draw
them by degrees into the consent to what, had they foreseen, they would never
have yielded. Were the promises, indeed, of an infallible direction from the
Spirit of God, made to all ages of the Church, and tied to the Assemblies which
Christians call Councils; we could not reasonably dispute their determinations,
but must obey them: But the promises of this nature being confined to the first
planters of the Gospel, that were to publish an infallible Rule to the world,
and neither made, nor useful, to future Generations, but only to prove the
certainty of the Gospel, to which every Christian is to submit both his Faith
and Practice, it being a rule in all things necessary to salvation* The things
now ordained by any Church, or Society of men (whatever authority they may
claim above us) as necessary to salvation, have neither strength, nor
authority, unless it may be declared that they may be taken out of holy
Scripture* And therefore General Councils may err, and have erred in things
pertaining to God, as our Church declares in the twenty first Article: It Is
true indeed, the Church of the Jews had the Oracles of God committed to them;
They were, custodes legis, the keepers of the Law: So the Church among the
Christians, has the Gospel committed to her custody, and has a power to
determine in indifferent matters; To order all the circumstances in Religion,
for decency, order and edification; and Authority to restrain such
Controversies as tend to make a Schism and separation, and dissolve that unity
which Christians are frequently exhorted to keep: So that although the Church
be a witness and keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing
against the same; So besides the same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be
believed for necessity of salvation: as our Church declares in her twentieth
Article. I shall not deny, (nor could I without singular pride and Arrogance)
but that Fathers and Councils, and all Congregations of holy and judicious
Christians, much more Bishops and Governors of the Church, treating about a
point in Religion, attempted to be introduced a new, or being old, is
controverted in the world; are with great deference to be attended to: For
every man's reason will urge this obligation to himself; That his own judgment
is rendered suspected, when it opposes the common and united determination of
persons that cannot justly be reproached with want either of skill or honesty;
And it is ordinary for men to mistrust the sight of their own eyes, when a
multitude of others, having the same advantage, cannot behold what a single
person pretends to see. And in Religious affairs, and such matters as are of
great moment, when persons of learning, piety, and authority in the holy Church
of Christ, assemble with solemnity, and have a real intention to employ, with
all faithfulness and diligence, those parts which God has blessed, and
increased, to them by the advantage of a peculiar education and study, invoking
a Divine influence upon their endeavors to find out the truth and meaning of
any difficult and controverted proposition; We have great reason to incline to
the belief of what these shall deliver for truth; Unless the contrary be so
apparent to us, upon sufficient enquiry, that there is no cause of hesitation
at all. This being the moderate opinion of our own Church, we are opposed in it
both by the Papist and Fanatic; The former asserts that major est autoritas
Ecclesiae quam Scripturae. That the Authority of the Church is greater than
that of the Scripture: And that Traditiones sunt pari pietatis affectu cum
Scripturis recipiendae: Their Traditions are to be received with the same
affection and devotion as the Scriptures: And truly the latter come not far
short of these; but as much confine (when it is in their power) the belief as
well as practice of their members to the determination of their Assemblies; and
little differ from the Roman infallibility in the end and design: For if any
Churches among our selves do yet affirm as they have formerly declared, that
the Kirk of Scotland, was to be the pattern of their Reformation; then I am
sure they expect the same submission, both in opinion and practice, to their
Assemblies determinations, as a Popish Council do to their Canons; or the Pope
himself to his Decrees: For to the Assembly held at Glasgow (1638) they swore
that for judgment and practice, they would adhere to the Determination of it;
though perhaps they knew not what it would determine. But to leave the persons
of those that stretch the power of a Church beyond the Authority God has given
her: There are three Reasons which plainly show that any Church, or Council of
men, cannot lay down any Propositions, which derive their utmost Authority from
themselves, that may be the ultimate Rules by which the Doctrines and Opinions
of others are to be judged. (1.) Because God to whom our Religion relates, has
appointed a rule that being superior to the inventions of men, must bind their
fancies and opinions in these things, and determine their Faith with those
general actions that are deemed Religious. To what purpose were the Scriptures
given to the World, if they were not to be Rules and Directions to men? Nay,
God being the Creator of all things, and in reason claiming the Supreme
Sovereignty over the things which he has made; It is in his power to impose
what Laws he will upon the world; and it is most suitable to his goodness to
reveal them: That men may not err for want of knowledge; nor their thoughts
contradict the will of their Maker: Now this he has done in the holy
Scriptures, which are sufficiently authorized by his own Sanction, in that
Miracles attended their first publication, which are, as it were, the Broad
Seal of Heaven, that prove them Gods own Act and Deed, when they no way
contradict the natural Notions, and the prime foundations of the Religion of
men: The Scriptures therefore being thus given and confirmed to us, must either
be our Supreme Direction, and an infallible guide in matters of Religion; or
else they were delivered to no purpose, or to cheat and delude mankind: The
former consists not with the wisdom of God; and the latter would contradict
both his goodness and his truth: All the difficulty then will be, whether this
Rule is sufficient to guide us in the Doctrine and practice of Religion, so
that we need not any new inspiration, or any rules to be superadded, beyond the
sense of Scripture it self, to conduct men in their way to Heaven? And
consequently, whether we may by them judge of all Doctrines and Opinions
without the help of the Roman infallibility, or what is the same in another
dress, the unerring Spirit of the Enthusiast? But admitting the Scriptures to
be of Divine Authority, they themselves are a sufficient testimony of their own
perfection, whilst they declare that they proceeded from Divine inspiration, to
be profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, (2 Timothy 3.16.).

(2.) No Canons or Decrees, of whatever bears the name of Church, or Council,
can be a Rule of trying Doctrines in Religion, so as to be ultimate and
Supreme; Because all the conclusions and propositions of these, are themselves
the Doctrines and Opinions of men, either with, or without, the pretense of
inspiration; and all Doctrines are to be tried themselves; For this must be
included (as I have sufficiently proved) in S. John's direction, try the
Spirits whether they are of God: That therefore which is subject to an higher
Tribunal, cannot be it self the highest; nor what is appointed solely to aid us
in our trial and examination of Opinions; nor the utmost Rule by which we must
examine them.

Lastly, If the Doctrines of the Prophets and Apostles of old, nay, of Christ
himself, the Savior of the World, were liable to the examinations of men; (it
being natural to mankind to try the truth of any Propositions, before they
believe them): Then, certainly, no assembly of men can now in reason pretend
such authority to impose their own Doctrines upon the World, as Rules for all
to submit unto, without any farther examination: And, if they must be examined
at all, it must be by something of greater credit and authority in the World.
Now that the Prophets of old were to be tried, whether true or false, is plain
to any that will give themselves leisure to consider, not only that, otherwise,
there could be no such thing as a false Prophet in the determination of men,
(true and false having the same evidence) but that God himself gave directions
under the Old Testament how to know the one from the other; ( Deuteronomy. 13.1. and
chap. 18.22.), which rules had been vain and insignificant, if, by these, men
were not to try them. Hence is it, that those that attribute great authority to
Christian General Councils, do not think their Canons obligatory (unless the
things included in them bind antecedently, by their own nature, or a superior
Law) till they are received in those Nations and Churches to which they are
sent. (2.) As the Doctrines of the Prophets were to be examined, so were also
those of the Apostles: Hence was it, that S. Paul, who was extraordinarily
called to be an Apostle, God himself supplying him with Unction and Ordination,
by giving him authority from Heaven; and our Savior descending by an
apparition from the Clouds, to invest him with dignity and power: Hence it was
(I say) that this great Apostle, in his Call dignified beyond his Brethren,
commends the Bereans (Acts 17.11.) because they searched and examined his
Doctrines, whether they were true or false, by those Scriptures they had
already received, and by comparing his Doctrines with the Natural Religion of
Mankind, with what our Savior and other Apostles preached; and most probably
with the Scriptures of the Old Testament, that they might be assured, that what
he delivered was consonant to that which was there exhibited concerning the
Messiah: And therefore these were of more pliable, and ingenuous, and gentile
tempers, than those of Thessalonica, who were more regardless of these
concerns; as S. Chrysostom comments upon this Text. (3.) The Doctrines even of
our Savior himself, (though never man spoke like him) were liable to
examination by those that heard, before they entertained them: And certainly if
any might recommend propositions upon his own authority, he might, who was the
Wisdom of the Father; in whom all fullness dwelt; Nay, the fullness of the
Godhead was, as it were, enclosed in his own body: Yet he bids the Jews to
search the Scriptures, and to consider how well his Person and his Doctrines
agreed with the ancient Predictions in relation to him; and, accordingly,
either to receive, or reject, him: For these (says he) are they which testify
of me; And in them ye think ye have eternal life: (John 5.39.) So that it is
plainly evident, from the beginning, that no Doctrines, under pretense of what
inspiration soever, were to be received by men without examination: But, as
those of the Apostles were to be compared with what our Savior delivered; his
again to be measured, not only by his own divine authority, but this also was
to be proved by the Law and the Prophets, and the Prophets themselves by those
Rules which God had given to the Jews to judge by: So is there not reason, that
the doctrines of men pretending to Christianity, under what authority soever
they are published, should still be examined by a superior Rule; even by what
the primitive Planters of our Religion have left for our perusal and direction,
viz. the doctrine of Christ and his holy Apostles? which privilege (whatever
Romanists plead for themselves) to hide from, or deny to, others, is the
greatest cruelty and irreligion; Enough it is to render any doctrine suspected,
that thus hides and runs to corners, and avoids all the trials of men: And we
have great reason to mistrust those who take away men's judgment of discretion,
valuing them only like Beasts that perish, whilst they are not persuaded, but
whipped to their work, and many times cripled under their burden, when yet they
know not what they carry. Thus I have (though more largely than my first
thoughts designed) not only stated the use and authority of the Church in her
Synods and Councils in the examination of Doctrines and Opinions, but showed
you withal, that as their Decrees are not infallible, so neither are they the
highest Rules by which we judge of the Doctrines of men: Had it been otherwise
when our Savior came to plant his Gospel, the infallibility of the Jewish
Sanhedrim had justly condemned him for an Impostor, and all the Christian
Religion delivered, and authorized, by him, had proved only a Fable and a Dream.

CHAP. VII.
THe most considerable Adversaries that oppose this way of stating the Churches
Authority in determining points of Faith, seem to many to be the Romanists: and
therefore this Chapter will briefly confute their high pretenses to a strange
Infallibility, by which they have introduced as strange Doctrines into the
Christian Religion. And, indeed, there was never a Law, yet, so plainly penned,
but that the inventions of men (who make it their business to render Laws, both
Divine, and humane, subservient to their Secular interests) will blunt its
edge, and endeavor to make it their own property, by altering, or over-urging
its design. The same use has been made of Texts of Scripture, by the two
Opponents of the Church of England, enlarging, or diminishing, the
Infallibility promised to the Apostles, that it may the better countenance
their own pretenses: Some restraining the promises expressing the holy Spirits
miraculous assistance in the guiding the Sacred Penmen of the Gospel, to the
Roman Church; And others extending it to every man of their own persuasion, or
at least to the Ministers and Elders of their Churches: I shall here therefore
spend a few leaves to show that the Papists can have no ground in the Scripture
to build their infallible determinations on, nor any reason at all to maintain
their infallibility.

I know not how it comes to pass that other Churches must forfeit their
interests in the promises of the Gospel, that the Romanists may proudly
arrogate them to themselves; Or any reason why the right of others must sneak
or stoop to their bold usurpations: As if their Church could not well be Head
of the World, unless we allow it to have all the Brains too; and dash them out
of the Sculls of others, to fill their head till their understandings become
incomprehensibly infallible, that all the race of Christians in the world, may
receive Rules only from them; and give up the natural freedom of their minds to
enlarge the Pope's Empire and Authority; As if they only were like the Jews of
old, to whom were committed the Oracles of God; And these they might either
keep to themselves, or allow them to others as they see occasion: This makes a
reproof to them (like Rebellion against a Prince) a crime so great, that
nothing but death can sufficiently expiate: Among them, it is but calling any
one Heretic, and a dressing him up with pictures of Devils, and presently he
is exposed to the flames: And this is such a Sovereign power of life and death,
that it reaches not only the body, but the soul. Thus as some flea the truth,
to prove it naked; and instead of declaring it, expose it: So others pretending
to its safe custody, permit none to understand it but themselves; And so the
rest must swallow a Serpent for a Fish, and eat stones instead of bread: As if
imposing cheats upon the World, were the best way to prove a man insallible;
and deluding others, were the only Argument to evidence, that we are not
deceived our selves: This is the great secret of the Roman Empire, that does
not only silence Disputes, but forbid Enquiry: That does not only stop the
mouths, but crack the skulls of mankind, taking away our judgment of
discretion, and our choice, and Metamorphosing men into Beasts: And then they
put the yoke upon us, and whip us on to toil and drudgery; that their own
Pastures may be covered with Flocks, and their Valleys stand thick with Corn,
whilst the high Hills laugh and sing. For if it be once supposed that their
Church is infallible, whatever they determine must be true; And when we have
vowed obedience to them, 'twill be too late afterward to make enquiry. A
powerful way this is to reconcile men, when contradictions themselves may thus
meet, and at any infinite distance embrace, when the Romanists please to
declare them true. If this one point be but admitted, 'twill be ridiculous to
dispute the rest: For all the Articles must certainly be true, which a Church,
has determined that cannot err: This is a new way, indeed, to walk by faith,
and not by sense; to pull out our eyes that we may see the better; And instead
of captivating our understandings to the obedience of Faith, to deliver up our
reason to another man. This is perfectly to enslave our selves, when Christ has
made us free; to entangle our necks in the yoke of bondage, and to leave the
burden of the old Law, for the greater load and oppression of a new: And to
make our selves like gentle Beasts, ready trapped and furnished for others to
ride us. Let the Church of Rome once be infallible, and then they become as
omniscient as Apollo; All their determinations are ex Tripode; And we must then
become as silent as in the Grave, and make our selves a prey to these Worms: We
must kneel down at the Popes feet, and make our selves fit to be trod upon. But
our reason is so properly our own, that as no man has a right over it, so is it
strongly fortified within us, that none is able to take it from us, unless we
will deliver it up our selves: If we will suffer the Philistines to deprive us
of our strength, and put out our eyes, they will certainly, then, make sport
with us; And if we yield so great a Point, as they unjustly challenge from the
Old Testament, and the New, we deserve, then, to be made a Spectacle, when they
have no reason to prove their Authority, but because they have a mind to rule,
and we become such fools as to obey: The Prophets then may prophecy falsely,
and the Priests bear rule by their means, when the people shall love to have it
so; and what will you do in the end thereof? (Jer. 5.31.)

Seneca says, of men that are curious about trifles, operose nihil agunt (De
brev. vitae cap. 13.) that they are very industrious about nothing; and though
the studying of many of our Modern Controversies, is like an Emperors locking
himself into his Closet, that he may be very busy in catching Flies; and we
may say of some great Controvertists in the world, what Seneca says of those
that took abundance of pains to find out a few unprofitable experiments; that
by this they did not appear more learned, but troublesome, (Vid. ut sup.) Yet
when, by admitting a Principle, our reason is destroyed, and our Religion in an
eternal hazard, by being at the devoir of another altogether as fallible as our
selves; and of whose honesty we cannot always be assured: We must then rally
our Arguments to resist, or suffer our selves to be led into slavery. That
there is not, therefore, a foundation from any Text, for the Romanists
pretended Infallibility, nor any Argument grounded upon reason, I shall
endeavor briefly to make appear: And therefore we may, yet, believe our selves
to be men, and the Pope himself to be no other.

Because (1.) There is no absolute promise of entire Infallibility, made to men
in the whole Book of God; but only with limitation and restriction. I readily
grant that there are promises of Infallibility in some Texts; But these were
made good in the Apostles, and the seventy Disciples; And yet though delivered
in general terms, they are to be restrained not only to the persons to whom our
Savior spoke; but to things necessary for them to know, in relation to that
end for which they were inspired: And these were only such truths as our
Savior delivered to be the standing rules for Posterity to guide themselves
by, in relation to their eternal welfare: This is plain both from the latter
part of the Verse, of which the promise of the Spirits guiding into all truth,
(Joh. 6.3.) is the former; And from the comparison of this Text with another;
In the Verse of which this Text is a part, we have this added to confirm the
promise, lest any should think the revelation of the Spirit should not prove
equally certain with the declaration of our Savior: He shall not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: Whatsoever he shall
be commissioned to inspire you with, that shall he communicate unto you: Which
is still included in these two particulars; (1.) In what our Savior himself
had delivered to them; Or (2.) In what he should suggest to them, to make their
defense before Kings and Rulers, which need not at all concern them, whose
ignorance in the Laws might cause them to fear; because the Holy Ghost should
teach them, in the same hour, what they ought to say, (Luke 12.11, 12.). This
only is superadded; And he will show you things to come: Which must either
relate to the Gnostick defection, and the perdition of the Jews, which our
Savior had predicted, ( Matthew. 24.). Or else to the Spiritual nature of
Christ's Kingdom, which the Apostles were so prejudiced against, to inform them,
that this, with some other things, which they could not bear whilst he was with
them in the flesh, they should at last be satisfied in, ( Joh. 10.12.). Or else
it must include those predictions of Prophets, more frequent in the Primitive
times of Christianity; such was that of Agabus, (Acts 11.28.), who foretold the
Famine that should come to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar: And that
prediction of S. Paul's bonds and imprisonment, (Acts 21.11.): All which
considered together, brings the promise of the Spirit, and infallibility, to
the Apostles, under determinate restraints and limitations. But (2.) This will
further appear, if we compare the promise of guiding into all truth, with that
other, relating to the Holy Ghost, (Joh. 14.26.); where the Apostles are told,
that he should teach them all things, (more plainly those which our Savior had
delivered) and bring those things to their memory which they might forget,
though before declared: He shall teach you all things, (says he) and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. So that it appears
that the Apostles had not the Spirit without measure; though they may be said,
to be filled with the Holy Ghost; And that this promise of infallibility to
them, was made in a limited and restrained sense.

Secondly, Supposing the promises of Infallibility were made in never so
enlarged a sense, yet they are to be restrained to the persons to whom they
were at first made, as to the unerring conduct: and I might easily make it
appear, that they cannot in their full sense concern any but the Apostles
themselves, and the first Preachers of the Christian Religion: Because the end
of this extraordinary inspiration was to make them capable of prescribing to us
an infallible and unerring rule; Which being accomplished, there is no farther
occasion of an infallible inspiration. For to what end should this be continued
to one, or a certain number of men, unless they were, upon new emergencies, to
deliver new Doctrine to the world? If it be necessary to the understanding of
what has been already prescribed; the Laws of the Gospel will not only want one
of the most excellent qualifications of a Law, that it be plain and easily
intelligible; But the same necessity will argue infallibility useful to all,
which renders it thus necessary unto some: For if it be therefore necessary to
some, that they may become Guides to others; Since their conduct, in relation
unto others, must consist in advice, and declaring that sense of the Law, which
could not be understood without them; (all which must be expressed by word or
writing) every man has as much need of infallibility that he may not
misunderstand the interpretation, as any have to prevent their misapprehensions
of the Law, if there can be no peace without infallibility. Now that all men
have not infallibility is as readily yielded, as it is to be proved that the
Pope has none.

Thirdly, If there were, now, this infallibility amongst men, there must be a
perpetual revelation: For, if the perfection of the humane nature could here
render any men infallible, we may well conjecture that many might have been in
every age, that might have been Directors to the rest: Or if it had been
founded in humane nature, why should not an equal perfection render all mankind
infallible? Either of them being granted, will invalidate the necessity of a
Divine Revelation; and turn the word of God into a story; and do despite to
the spirit of grace; if rendering it useless and a fable will do it; For to
what end should any men be inspired, when they were, before, infallible in
themselves? The infallibility therefore, which we discourse of must proceed
from a strong, and certain, inspiration; And whatever is delivered by virtue of
this, is of equal authority with the Scriptures themselves: And then none can
be safe in his life, or fortunes, when ever any inspired man makes it his
pleasure to take them away: Nay, if we are conscientious, we must yield them up
upon demand, lest happily we may be found fighters against God. And this appears
in the Romanists themselves, as well as others taught by them; The more
conscientious any of them are, the more readily do they yield to the
impositions of their superiors; and, they have reason for it, if they think
them to be absolutely infallible. For no private evidence of a thing must
subvert their faith in the Churches determination; and so much the more
triumphant is their faith, by how much the more it captivates their
understandings: As it is so much the more meritorious, by how much the less it
has of evidence; So the greater the Objections are that meet and encounter the
Churches determinations, their faith is rendered the more glorious and full of
victory: Let the Doctrine then be never so wicked in it self, or consequences;
the conscientious believer of the point of Roman Infallibility, must neither
see the one, nor the other; But renounce all the evidence of his reason, and if
occasion be, (as there is sometimes) of his senses too. For what evidence can
reasonably be attended to, that bears a testimony against that which is
infallible? This then must be a ready method to change the nature of good and
evil, and the eternal Law instamp'd upon our minds, if the mutation proceeds
from the Roman Chair. Nay, the nature of things need not be changed, if the
Pope please to change their names: Men may borrow then, and never pay, if he
pleases to cancel the debt; Ruining families, and overturning Kingdoms will
become noble, and a glorious exploit; Nay, religious acts, when he is at
leisure to adopt them into the number: Burning Cities, and murdering Princes,
shall be accounted means of propagating the Gospel, if he please once to
determine, that we may do evil, that good may come of it; And blowing up the
Estates of Kingdoms is presently holy, if he will but sanctify the Powder, and
Canonize the man that has the courage to attempt it: So powerful is this
Doctrine of Roman Infallibility, that it can change the Devil into an Angel of
Light: And, let the Pope himself be never so wicked, his determinations are all
true and good, and he may remain his Holiness still: He may subvert by degrees,
or all at once, the whole Doctrine of Christianity, (though from thence he
receives his pretensions of authority) if he pleases to declare it a Fable,
when it shall no longer comport with his advantage; Nay, he has already so
blended it with the Religion of the Jews, and practice of the Heathens, that
Christianity is so buried in an heap of rubbish, that it is an hard matter to
gather it up out of such a great confusion of ruins: The substance is lost in
the midst of Ceremony; internal devotion is interrupted by a pompous Scene of
Pageantry and Show; and yet the evidence of our senses must be rejected in the
Doctrine, which they so much applaud in practice.

And yet ( Fourthly), Notwithstanding all the Roman pretenses to Infallibility;
If there are any promises made of it, they do as well concern other Churches as
themselves: For if these promises were made to the Apostles in general (as is
very plain from the circumstances of their delivery) if they were not
terminated in them, but reached also the whole succession of those by virtue of
whom Christ's promise was made good, of being with the Apostles, always, to the
end of the world; Then either all Churches must be infallible or none;
especially all that are able to derive their succession from any Apostle, or
Apostolical men that were once Bishops, and presided there: And if so, then the
Church of Jerusalem must be infallible, because S. James the less was appointed
their Bishop, either by our Savior himself, (as some say) or else immediately
by the Apostles (as others.). The Church of Alexandria, because this was the
Bishopric of S. Mark, must become as infallible as that of Rome; That of
Constantinople, because founded by S. Andrew; That of Ephesus, because S. John
was seated there. Nay those, also, of Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis,
Philadelphia and Laodicea, because this Apostle laid the foundations of them:
Nay, and our own Church of Britain too (which our adversaries will hardly yield
infallible) because Simon the Zelot preached here, wrought many Miracles, and
at last suffered Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, and our Native Soil has the
honor of his Bones; if the Greek Menologies may obtain any credit amongst men.
But to bring this business nearer to an head: If this infallibility will not be
allowed to all Churches of the Apostles planting, nor to those over which they
more especially presided, (as they certainly will never yield it, whose
interest it is to keep it unto themselves); Yet why should not Antioch become
infallible, which was a Church of S. Peter's planting at least seven years
before he came to Rome? Must the elder Sister become a fool, that the younger
may appear infallible? Or must we deny the privilege of Antioch, because it
would invalidate that of Rome? The latter seems their most probable conjecture;
though it is easily proved S. Peter was at Antioch, but eagerly disputed,
whether ever he was at Rome. But allowing S. Peter to have been at Rome; and
not only so, but to have been Bishop there, and the present Pope to be his
Successor, (which yet is hard for them to prove, especially when the Succession
is to be traced through their Anti-Popes, and Pope Joan must become an Holy
Father too), How came this promise of infallibility to be fixed only upon S.
Peter, when it was spoken to the whole Apostolical College? If you will say,
that the infallibility can be fixed but in one; and that we may as well
discourse of many Omnipotents, as many Infallibles: (and certainly it is to be
proved with equal success, were the infallibility not capable of restraint) Yet
why must it be fixed upon S. Peter, and not on any other of the Apostles? S.
Paul, though a later Apostle, has as much to plead for a settlement of it upon
the Gentiles, as ever S. Peter to fix it upon the Jews. Nay, the Romanists
themselves have greater reason to derive it from S. Paul, than ever they had
for deriving it from S. Peter; Unless they acknowledge themselves to succeed
the Circumcision, of which S. Peter was only Bishop. But perhaps they will
plead Infallibility from Supremacy: and afterward (if occasion serves) plead
Supremacy from Infallibility again. Yet still S. Paul will bid as fair for the
Supremacy too, if we take time to examine his Plea. Saint Paul was not only
designed to his Apostleship by the Grace of God, before he had any merit in
himself, being a chosen Vessel to bear Christ's Name amongst the Gentiles, when
he was appointed to his Office from his Mothers Womb, ( Gal. 1.15.); But his
Conversion was attended with Miracles, and from a Persecutor, when the design
was laid, and his malice big against the Christian Church, he was struck down
with a dart from Heaven, and convinced by that Light which made him blind: He
was brought to this Religion with Pomp and Ceremony, and ushered into the
Church with a train of circumstances that were Heralds to his honor, and
proclaimed him great ( Acts 9.): Nor was he greater in his Apostleship, than in
his sufferings: For, after a large Catalogue of his miseries (2 Cor. 11.), he
made the Tragedy complete by his death: He was thrown into Prison with S.
Peter; And (if Baronius may be credited) the Pillars are yet remaining, at
which they were both bound and scourged: And had he not been a Roman, he might
have been crucified with S. Peter: But being such (like a Person of Honor) he
was beheaded: In the time he lived he labored more abundantly than the rest of
the Apostles; (1 Cor. 15.10.): Nor was he in any respect behind the very chief
of them (2 Cor. 11.5.): He neither yielded to the argument of interest, when he
received his first conviction; nor did he, when he was baptized or illuminated
from above, and by inspiration had received a sufficient Commission to preach
the Gospel, go to derive his authority from the Apostles, as if he had been
inferior unto them; But he straightway preached Christ in the Synagogues;
though to the amazement of all that heard him ( Acts 9.20, 21.): He was not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, though his former zeal another way, might be
and was objected to him; And, that he might sufficiently evidence the truth,
and the honor, of his Apostleship, he went into the untrodden paths of the
World, where none had adventured to preach the same Doctrine before him: For so
(says he) have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should build upon another foundation, (Romans 15.20.): All this we have
drawn into a narrow compass ( Gal. 1.16, 17.); But it pleased God, who
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his
Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen; Immediately I conferred
not with flesh and blood; neither went I up to Jerusalem to those which were
Apostles before me. As he was most justly styled The Apostle of the Gentiles;
For the care of all their Churches lay upon him, (and I hope the Romans were
not then Jews; let them be whatever they will since) and came more upon him
every day (2 Cor. 11.28.). He opposed the principal Officers of the Church at
Jerusalem, and gave no place by subjection, no not for an hour, since they that
seemed to be somewhat, added nothing in conference to his knowledge; but
perceived him to be appointed the Apostle of the Gentiles, as well as S. Peter
was the Apostle of the Jews; when they came to Antioch, he withstood Peter to
the very face, because (says he) he was to be blamed, for that both he himself
had dissembled with the Jews, and had persuaded James and Barnabas into the
same compliance; And, upon the whole, neither of them walked according to the
truth of the Gospel; And all this difference was upon no smaller point than
this, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Jesus Christ, (Gal. 2.): It Is plain S. Paul had here, in a proper sense, the
right hand of fellowship; not only in that they admitted him into the society
of the Apostles; but they gave him the pre-eminence among them: And S. Peter
had a great deal of reason to do it, if a Scholar ought to respect his
Instructor: For it is plain, that S. Paul informed him in a point that he knew
not, or dissembled before; though he knew enough to be the Apostle of the
Circumcision, a Province, to which he was then designed: so that the Romanists
claiming Supremacy from S. Peter, will add no great proof to their
infallibility; nor this be sufficiently evinced by the derivation of their
succession from him: Unless the second Chapter to the Galatians be razed out of
the Sacred Canon; Or the denial of a justification by faith, without the
ceremonial works of the Law, becomes a point, in the determination of which,
infallibility is not at all concerned: Or else it is lawful for them to reject
this authority of S. Paul, if they still embrace the doctrine of S. Peter.

Fifthly, Supposing there had been an infallibility made to S. Peter, and from
him derived to the Church of Rome; yet what shall we now do for direction?
since neither they nor we know where to find it, upon a diligent search into
their own opinions of it. For some place it in a General Council; some in the
Pope and this together; some in himself and College of Cardinals; and some
again in the Pope alone. If this Infallibility be placed in a General Council,
it will be as eagerly disputed when it may be said to be General; Some giving
Councils so fair an Epithet, when others do as confidently deny them to be
such: The infallibility therefore cannot be found here; Unless it remains in
such a Council, where all the circumstances and qualifications can be found,
that are able to give it such a denomination; When the interests of Princes and
Churches shall be determined previous to the Assembly; and all are agreed who
shall summon it: And when this difficult (if not impossible) task is
accomplished; If they must all conclude in one opinion; I fear this can never
be: Or if things must be determined by the major Vote, and this makes
infallible truth, how came the greater part to be infallible, when the lesser
number are so far from being inspired at all, that they give their Votes
contrary to the truth? Nay, by shifting the Tables to a new point, many of
those may, by these rules, become infallible who, in another, had erred just
before: but if the approbation of the Pope must be added to the determination
of the Council, the infallibility, then, will rest in himself: Because, if he
pleases to be of a contrary opinion, he can make void the Votes of the Council,
by refusing to comply with their determination; And consequently they are not
infallible in that which wants the Supreme evidence of the Popes assent. But,
if after all this (supposing their united concurrence) infallibility should not
rest in this Assembly; but in the Pope and his College of Cardinals; Then the
Arguments for obedience to the General Council, taken from their infallibility
in determining, are superseded by an higher Authority; Though the same
inconveniences obviate the infallibility of these, which do attend the former
opinion: Finally, suppose that it rests in the Pope alone: Then if it be his
privilege as a man, it will be the endowment of the rest of mankind; And then
they will need none of his single determinations: If he is infallible as he is
Pope; Then, either all his Speeches are infallible, or else when he determines
about matters of Faith: If the former be true; Then he cannot possibly deceive;
And consequently, he would not prove so able, and successful, a Statesman as he
is, if he could not sometimes dissemble his opinion: If the latter position be
affirmed to be true; Then either all his Propositions concerning Faith, must be
infallible, and there is no disputing with him; Nor is it lawful for him at any
time to oppose in a School question, where the Orthodox part is usually held by
the respondent, for fear his Propositions should become infallible, and truth
be rendered incapable of being held; Or else he becomes only infallible, when
he is gravely seated, and determines from his Chair; And if this be the case of
us mortals; We must not only stay for resolution, till he is dressed and
clothed in all his Robes, and Pontificals, any of which (for ought I know)
being wanting, he may fail in his determination, and our Faith fail for want of
some Ceremonial accoutrement: But supposing all this to be done, if he cannot
be infallible till he is in his Chair; Then the Chair seems more infallible
than himself: Yet when all this is accomplished (for ought we know, or ever
can) he may not be a lawful Pope: For if he be unbaptized, he cannot be a
Priest; and if he is no Priest, he cannot be a Pope; And if the intention of
the Priest that Baptized him, and of the Bishop that gave him the order of
Priesthood, be required to make both valid; If, at his Baptism, he met with an
untoward Priest; Or, at his Ordination, with an ungodly Bishop, that performed
the Ceremonies, without minding what they were about, suspending their
intention, at those times, either through malice, or inadvertency, or designing
the contrary, the whole business is still spoiled; And the Chair will not
bestow infallibility upon one that is indeed no lawful Pope. But what shall we
think of the Anti-Popes, when two are chosen, (as it has been possible) and
they both struggle for the Chair, where rests the infallibility then? Or what
becomes of it in the interval betwixt the death of the last, and the Election
of a new? Let even the Chair keep it for the next that shall possess it; And I
wish it would always sit there, and never endeavor to trouble us: If they
will perish in their own folly, I know no help, being quite tired with exposing
their Opinion. Upon the view of the whole, we see the Proposition is made good,
that, since their own Opinions are so different about the Seat of
Infallibility, neither they, nor we, know where to find it.

Sixthly, If there were this infallibility in the Church of Rome, and they had
agreed where to fix it; so that they are sure they once knew how to find it:
Yet it plainly appears that it is now lost; since their whole Church has
determined, and yielded to many things plainly erroneous; and quite opposite to
the authority of the Scriptures: I shall at present only instance in three,
though I might produce a Catalogue of more. The (1.) Is the taking away the Cup
from the people. (2.) Prayer in an unknown tongue. (3.) The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

First, I instance in taking away the Cup, in the blessed Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, from the people; as an error determined by the Church of Rome.
By Cup, I mean the Sacramental Cup, and not that of Ablution, by which the
Romanists have shifted from the doubts of some ignorant Objectors. Now that the
detention of the Cup, (notwithstanding all endeavors of an evasion) is a
palpable error, is apparent from the institution of our Savior as recorded by
all the Evangelists that mention it in all the Gospels where this is repeated:
For as the essential parts are always set down, so we have prescribed Bread and
Wine, which by a solemn consecration, are blessed and separated from common
uses, to signify Christ's Body and Blood, and in a separate manner to represent
Christ dead, and not united under one Symbol; And to whomsoever he gave the
Body represented by the Bread, the same person received the Blood, signified by
the Wine contained in the Cup; As it appears upon the view of Christ's own
institution. If it be Objected (upon the grant of this, which none can deny)
that the Apostles then only received; And that the Romanists themselves allow
it to the Priests: It may, from thence, with a greater color be argued, that
the whole Sacrament ought only to be continued to the Clergy; And that the
Laity should not receive so much as a part; And then the argument will sooner
deprive them of all, than any one part of it. But that I may totally invalidate
this scruple, and, at the same time, prove the Papists to be erroneous; Let us
view the institution as repeated by S. Paul, who has in this proved Rome to
have erred, and clearly frees us from their imposture; Though S. Peter says
nothing of it; (1 Cor. 11.23.). I have received of the Lord, that which I also
delivered unto you; That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, this do for a remembrance
of me. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; This do ye as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me: Now the whole design of this repetition of the first
Institution, is to rebuke those disorderly practices of the whole body of the
Church of Corinth, and to regulate all by the Institution of our Savior; And
all together, as well people, as Clergy, are told, that as often as they eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, they show forth the Lords death till he come.
If this, then, is to be continued in the Church as a Memorial of Christ's Death,
till his coming again to judge the World, (which the Church of Rome will not
deny): It must be an error thus to depart from the first Institution of Christ,
and the succeeding practice of his blessed Apostles, (to say nothing of other
Ages of the Church) to give to the people an half Communion, (which the Priests
will not be contented with themselves) and to deliver them only a part of the
Sacrament. This, certainly, is such an error, as does not only void their
infallibility, but a crime too; Unless the greatest Sacrilege be a virtue:
And, in plain language, it certainly concludes that either the Scriptures or
the the Romanists are not infallible.

Secondly, I instance in their Prayer in an unknown tongue; I mean a language
unknown to the people. I cannot but wonder (if we had no directions in the Book
of God concerning this matter) that any persons should be so stupid, as to
petition from God they know not what, and to offer that under the notion of a
reasonable service, which they do not understand: For how can that be presented
with Faith, which they know not whether it be such as God will accept, and as
becomes them to offer? The Priest here may curse the people in the name of the
Devil, when they think they are blessed in the name of God: But not to
prosecute any absurdities consequential to this irrational practice, besides
what the Scriptures mention, (designing not at present to handle these things
at large): It Is a direct contradiction to that of S. Paul, (1 Cor. 14. Chap.
14, 15. and 16 Verses). For the Apostle having laid down this general
direction, that all things, in the public Worship, should be done to
edification; He affirms, that praying and blessing in unknown tongues, did not
accomplish this end, ( verse. the 12 th and 17 th). (1.) Because he that prays
in an unknown tongue, though he understands it himself, becomes unprofitable
unto others, v. the 14. (2.) Because no man, that understands not, can give his
assent, or breath forth a wish, by saying Amen, to a Prayer or Blessing, in an
unknown tongue, ver. the 16 th. And the Apostle, from the whole, inferrs this
as a rule unto himself: That when he prays with the Spirit, (i. e. in an
unknown tongue, which was then an immediate gift of the Spirit) he would pray
with understanding also; (i. e.) so as he, understanding it himself, might
become fruitful unto others, by giving them its just interpretation; that they
who understood not diverse languages, might be able to say Amen, when they were
rendered into their own. So that it must be an error in the Church of Rome, to
enjoin their public Prayers to be made in an unknown tongue: Unless they will
invalidate the Scriptures of S. Paul, by a blind and unwritten authority, from
S. Peter.

Lastly, They have lost their pretended infallibility, by determining that
monstrous and absurd Doctrine of Transubstantiation. It cannot be expected,
when I introduce this point as a proof of another, that I should expatiate upon
all the absurdities that attend so prodigious a determination: As that the same
Body may be in a thousand places at once; that there may be admitted a
penetration of dimensions; That a Body may be somewhere, where it was not
before, without changing its place; That the whole Body of Christ may be
contained within the small compass, nay, in every little part, of a Wafer; That
it may be eat every day, and yet remain the same still; That an irrational
creature (a Mouse for example) may feed upon the Body of our Lord; That one
thing may be changed into another thing, which did exist before; That a Body
may be in a place after the manner of a Spirit: Nay, that Christ may give his
own Body to be eaten by his Disciples, whilst, yet, he remained alive, and
entire at the Table. These, and such like, are the absurd consequences of
Transubstantiation, which men must swallow with the substantial Body and Blood
of Christ, in the Roman Sacrament of the Lords Supper: And they require too
large a discourse for me to expatiate upon each severally, and apart. I shall
therefore instance in one absurdity, or rather a foundation of great impiety,
such as destroys the authority of the Gospel (if this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation proves true, and is not an error): And that is; That it
destroys all the certainty of our senses. For, if that which has the color
and appearance of Bread; That which my taste informs is such; That which by
touching and handling of it seems to be Bread, by as great an evidence as can
appear to my understanding, by the testimony of my senses, concerning their own
proper objects, where there is a true medium, and a just distance: If this,
which thus seems to me to be Bread and Wine, may yet not be so; but the
substantial Body and Blood of our Lord: Then, I can have no sufficient evidence
that the Christian Doctrine was revealed from Heaven. For the proof of this
depending upon the certainty of those Miracles which were at the first wrought
for the confirmation of it. And these depending upon the certainty of their
senses, who were then eyewitness to the Miracles; And, if the senses of all
mankind may together be deceived about this Sacrament, the same possibility
might make them so, when the Miracles were wrought to prove the Gospel: And
then we have no certainty of our Religion; but the whole Gospel may prove a
fable, and its greatest confirmation be nothing but an imposture. This is
enough to make the sin against the Holy Ghost, to be introduced into the World,
with pomp and ceremony, and to render it authentic, by an infallible
authority. If it be said that, in relation to the first confirmation of the
Gospel, our senses were free, and then could not be deceived; But that now,
since the Christian Religion was sufficiently authorized, this very Doctrine
thus confirmed, ties up our senses; since it is rational to submit them to
Divine revelation: I Answer; That, if the New Testament did, any where, thus
impose upon the faculties of men; It would (1.) Be difficult, upon the same
grounds, for me to believe that mine eyes were not imposed upon, when I read
the words. (2.) Supposing that I did read them true; And that were sufficiently
confirmed, that I understood what I read; Yet since no other Text can be
pleaded for Transubstantiation besides, This is my Body; Why must I, of
necessity, understand that by these words I am commanded to believe contrary to
my senses; When, by a plain and easy construction, agreeable to the usual
Sacramental phrases, particularly those which were used about the Passover, my
senses are still left unto their liberty? And no more than saying, This is my
Body, That is; This Bread represents, or signifies my Body; will express the
sense, and baffle the Objection. It Is so common to parallel this expression,
with I am the vine, the way, the door, and That Rock was Christ; This is my
Covenant; This Cup is the New Testament, etc. Where the Verbs are construed by
represented, signified, and the like; That I am ashamed we should be put to
continued repetitions, by the daily appearance of a baffled Adversary. Thus we
see, by these three instances of erroneous determinations of the Church of
Rome, that, if ever they had infallibility, they have lost it: Unless truth and
error are reconciled, and infallible falsehood be a proper expression.

Seventhly, If notwithstanding all the premises, the Romanists will yet hold
the conclusion, and affirm themselves to be infallible; We must call upon them
to prove it by Miracles. For this can no way become the privilege of the
Church of Rome, but by immediate inspiration to those that pretend it; And
whoever pretends to inspiration, ought to prove it by Miracle, when the
Scripture does not command us to believe it. The Apostles proved their
infallibility by Miracles: We must demand, therefore, the same from those that
will pretend to the same privilege; Since the promises they challenge to
themselves, are completed in the Apostles. Nay, 'twill not be enough to tell
stories instead of Miracles; Nor to produce something done among them, of
which, the cause being behind the Curtain, no natural account can be given: But
they must be attended with such circumstances as may sufficiently prove them to
be Divine. And, when this is accomplished (which is impossible), the
infallibility pretended must be proved necessary to the Salvation and conduct
of men: Otherwise we shall doubt of the Miracles themselves, because they
confirm an unnecessary thing, and what supposes the insufficiency of the
Scriptures. I might add more Heads of Argument; but these are sufficient to
baffle the strength of this proud Capitol.

CHAP. VIII.
HAving in the former Chapter spent a very large Parenthesis upon the Roman
Infallibility; for fear that I may not be well understood by some, whose
unthinking honesty may make them jealous of their power, and cause them to
conclude, that I allow not Authority enough to Synods and Councils; And that
being no more than a private Minister, I assume too much judgment to my self,
in making use of my faculties without leave. I answer, that I have sufficient
leave from the Articles and Canons established in the Protestant Church of
England, for what I have already wrote concerning this matter: Yet I shall
farther explain the same thing; to show that I am willing to attribute as much
Authority and Honor to the best established Church in the World, and the
Governors of it, as any man can possibly do who does not pluck out his eyes to
do them service. Therefore, notwithstanding what has been said of the Roman
Infallibility; I readily yield that Fathers and Councils, and all Congregations
of holy, and judicious Christians, much more the Bishops and Governors of the
Church, solemnly assembled to treat concerning the truth or falsehood of any
Point, introduced into Religion, are reverently to be attended to; Reason
urging a regard to those who, by the advantage of study, or the prospect they
have obtained from an higher ground, and according to the age in which they
live, are probably capacitated to assist our judgments, and to determine a
Controversy better than our selves. When persons of learning, piety, and
Authority, also, in the Church of Christ shall assemble in his name, with a
real intention to find out the truth of any difficult, and disputed,
Proposition, humbly begging the Divine assistance, and blessing on their
endeavors; We have great Reason to incline to their determinations, when
neither secular interests, or a blind passion, or the force of others gains
their Votes, and procures their assent. Nay, when these are our own lawful
Governors, (though nothing can force our belief) we may, in an improper sense,
call their determinations infallible ( quoad nos); Because, for the peace and
Government of the Church, to avoid Schism, and to preserve an Ecclesiastical
union among us, it will be necessary that they bind us not to contradict them
publicly, by any external solemn act, since we our selves have our assent
virtually implied in Canons or Laws made by those who publicly represent us:
Although we are not obliged to believe every Proposition, thus determined, to
be exactly true; Unless it be propounded to us with sufficient evidence to
convince our judgments, if we have abilities to enquire into the Proofs
themselves. To restrain the external acts and discourses of men, when they
oppose the public Sanctions, and constitutions of those who are fixed in such
places of Authority, is plainly necessary to keep peace and order in any
Society; much more in such a one as is purely Christian, that we may be regular
and uniform in our practice; and that there may be no divisions among us; And
that the common Acts which we are to join in, as a Body or Society of Christian
men, may not be disturbed by particular members withdrawing from them, or
rendered indecent, or invalid, by noise, or confusion. But yet there is no
obligation upon any man to resign either his sense or reason in any point of
which he is a capable Judge; But only to captivate it to the obedience of faith
in such points as are apparently revealed by God, though the points themselves
may be above the determination of the faculties of men. And therefore no
Authority can oblige us to contradict the Scriptures, in their standing Laws of
Faith and Manners; Because these ought to be a Law both to our Governors and
our selves, antecedently to the Laws and Canons of men. Hence is it that we
reject the pretenses of aspiring men, to any absolute and complete
infallibility, by virtue of any promise supposed to be made to the Successors
of the Sacred Apostles: Because there is no such promise made to any but the
Apostles, and the first Writers and Publishers of the Christian Religion, whose
Writings are to be our standing Rules in all things absolutely necessary to
Salvation: Nay, the end and design of the first Divine and infallible guidance,
was only to introduce a new Law, superstructed upon the Old Law of Nature, and
to free Religion from the corrupt glosses and customs of men, who abusing their
Authority, had falsely imposed things on others; To obliterate the old
Ceremonial injunctions prescribed to the Jews; To draw the Gentiles from their
Heathen Idolatry, and to erect the Christian Church among men, that all Nations
might flock to it, be sheltered in one Fold, being redeemed from the power of
the destroyer, and feed together under the Government and conduct of Jesus
Christ, the great Pastor and Bishop of our souls. Hence was it that our Savior
promised the immediate and infallible guidance of the Spirit to his Apostles,
that, being before of meaner capacities, they might be able to understand his
Laws so well as to publish them to the World, as the standing Rules to all
future Generations. But this rule being once completed, by the informations
which our Savior gave to his Apostles whilst he was with them; And by the
continued inspirations and assistances which they received from the holy
Spirit, after his Ascension into Heaven, to explain some things, and bring
others to their remembrance, and to enable them to preach the Gospel to the
World, and to publish the Doctrines and Rules of it, in Writing, to be the
standing Law of Religion, to which all future ages might have recourse for
guidance, both in Faith and Manners: When this Law was fully and completely
written, which was to be the great and only Rule of men's Religion, there was no
need of a standing infallibility, to interpret what was so fairly written, that
in things absolutely necessary to Salvation, none but Idiots can possibly be
mistaken, and none but Knaves will endeavor to mislead them. For there is no
man, who has humility enough to use the help of the learned in Religion, and
grace enough to implore the ordinary assistances of the Divine Spirit, (which
God gives to those that ask him) but, if he endeavors, with sincerity, to live
according to what he already knows, and faithfully, and honestly, applies his
rational faculties, to the diligent search of Divine truth, he shall certainly
attain such degrees and advancements of knowledge as shall be sufficient to
make him wise unto Salvation, if he does not too much strive to be wise above
what is written: And if after all this, he chance to fall into any error,
through the naked infirmities of human nature, it shall be such as will be
consistent with the foundation; nor will it be so severely laid to his charge,
as to be the cause of condemning him hereafter, when it was not in his own
power to help it. The Scriptures, certainly, were first designed to be the Rule
of Faith and Manners. And a rule ought to be so plain, that all, who are to
take their measures by it, may be able, by some means or other, to compare
their belief and actions with the Rule, and also to pass a judgment upon the
whole: Nay, if we reflect upon our own rational powers, together with those
assistances we are directed to, and make use of these when we consider the
Scriptures themselves, we must of necessity yield this to be true; Unless we
will be perverse and obstinate in every thing. For if we think upon the quality
of those persons to whom our Savior and his Apostles applied themselves in
their usual discourses, we shall find that they spoke not, in their Sermons,
nor wrote their Epistles, only to the Rabbis among the Jews, nor only to the
Philosophers among the Gentiles; Nor were there, at the first, many Rich, or
Noble, called; But the Poor had the Gospel preached to them. The Apostles
declared their Doctrine, freely to the multitude; Nay, so did our blessed
Savior himself; And, therefore, they must preach it in such language as all
might be capable of understanding, and receiving, it, if prejudice did not
resist the impression. For their design being to plant Christianity in the
World, to make Proselytes to the Kingdom of Heaven, and, in the belief and
practice of this Religion, to bring the lapsed race of men once more to God, by
dissuading them from the error of their ways, and by guiding their feet into
the way of peace; Why should any think that they delivered the matters of men's
future, and everlasting concerns, and the present Laws to guide them by, in so
mysterious a manner, or such muffled language, that the end of all their
discourses might be lost by their speaking unintelligibly to the people? Now
since the souls of men, that are not too much hindered by a very bad
constitution of their bodies, have all the same principles of Reason, and every
Individual has a proper judgment peculiarly his own, and either we understand
the languages, and schemes of speech, in which the Doctrines, and Rules of life
delivered by Christ and his Apostles, were written: Or, else, we receive them
faithfully translated, (especially in necessary Doctrines and rules, which the
Critics themselves cannot well torture, because they are oftener than once
delivered) from several pious and learned men, who more perfectly and
completely understood them. Why should things, therefore, that were, at first,
plain to the capacity of the meanest, be so obscure to us, that we must want a
guide who is infallible to direct us, almost, in all our ways; and what is
worst of all, he splits us, at last, against a stone? If God has not thought it
fit to bridle mankind so, as to curb them from becoming sinners, but has, in
this, left them to their own choice, that if they will sin, it may be their own
act and deed; Why should we think that he has chained them so fast one to
another, that they cannot err, or wander out of the way, unless they break that
link which ties them all to an Infallible Chair? But, alas! such is our
condition here, that we may as well expect to free mankind from the commission
of sin, as to restrain all men from error; Nay, there is as great a necessity
that the lives of men should be void of the one, as there is, that they should
be free from the other: As much reason there is for men to be holy in all
manner of conversation, as there is for all to be sound in the faith; since if
we have faith, we may have it to our selves, but the actions of our lives have
an influence upon others. Why, therefore, should there not be an irresistible
power, set up to restrain men from vice, as well as a standing infallibility to
keep them from error? Since God then, who will judge men hereafter for those
things which are properly their own, has not thought it fitting to set up the
one, I cannot but suspect that he never designed to fix the other, but to leave
men to their own faculties, to which he has added sufficient assistances, to
judge and to choose fairly for themselves; And therefore, methinks, it is more
reasonable to believe that, since men cannot pretend to both, it would be more
modest to pretend to neither; especially since we have no authority (whatever
power any have gained or usurped among us) from reason or revelation to advance
any among the Race of men to be an infallible Judge in Religion, farther than
his sentence proceeds according to the Laws of the Gospel; And by this I cannot
find that he has done any more, beyond the faculties we have received as we are
men, than to give us a Rule sufficient to judge Doctrines by, and Laws by which
we are to govern our practice, together with some superadded means to help our
judgments, and direct our Opinions by the Authority of Magistrates, who are an
Ordinance of God, by the instructions of his Ministers, who are also of Divine
institution, and the common assistances of his Holy Spirit, to guide us into
all necessary truths, which tend to the promotion of our eternal happiness; And
so the final success is left to our own liberty and choice, either in a refusal
or compliance with them; Because I cannot believe but that God acts suitable to
the nature of human creatures in all his general dispensations to men, that so
he may, in our future state, with equal justice inflict punishment, or give us
a reward according to his promise. And, indeed, to (write strictly) to be sound
in the Faith, would not be praise worthy, if it were so ordered, that we could
not err; Nor need S. Paul have so carefully exhorted to this, if we might have
been so easily preserved from all diseases, and deviations in Religion, by the
infallibility of S. Peter, and those who plead their Title from him. I am sure
that an Apostle acquaints the Church of Corinth, that there must be also
Heresies among them, that they who are approved, may be made manifest, (1 Cor.
11.19.): By which he proves, and fore-tells, matter of fact, though he does not
signify Gods approbation; but only his permission of them; And the reason, why
he suffered error and division to be introduced among them by the perverseness
or curiosity of any, was, that such as united in the true Faith might brighten,
and shine forth with the greater glory, and like the Sun in the Firmament might
triumph over Clouds and darkness. There is no foundation therefore to erect the
Popish infallibility on, nor for any Church to set up such a Tribunal among
themselves.

Having thus (as I hope) cleared my self from any great and unpardonable
miscarriage in this point; I shall briefly proceed in reflecting upon some
mistakes of others, that are false Rules to judge Doctrines and Spirits by:
Wherein private Enthusiasts are most notoriously guilty. These smell Popery at
a distance, and can hardly promote any design without pretending that it is
suddenly to be introduced into the most Protestant and best established Church
in the World: But they too publicly discover themselves to be Popishly
affected, who are very apt to spy errors in the Pope, and yet so transfer them
to themselves, and steal them away, that they may have the Monopoly of them,
and retale them to others under new names, when they are in the possession of
another Master. These will not allow the Pope to be infallible, but are apt to
conclude themselves to be so; And thus they fetch Candles from Romes Altars,
that they may set them up in their own Breasts: As if there were no difference
betwixt the holy Spirits guiding men into truth, and walking by the light of
their own fires: What either a disease and weakness in their bodies, or their
minds, has made a representation of to their phancies, so long, till their
brooding thoughts have, at last, produced something which they may justly call
their own; These things they are apt to think, or at least to say, are the
dictates of the Spirit, and accordingly they will adventure to guide
themselves, and impose their own enjoyed phancies upon other men: But if every
thing of this nature, and men's wild discourses, the effect of this, were to
receive the stamp of Divine Authority, and become infallible guides of action;
So strange a confusion would be made among us, and such a monstrous Babel would
be erected, that Trowels would be called for instead of Mortar, and men would
cry out for Bricks, before they had gotten Straw to make them: Their tongues
would be so various and unintelligible, that a Teutonick language could never
reconcile them, nor be able to discover them, nor give marks to know the first
Builders by, when they are dispersed into diverse Countries: But every man's head
would still tilt against another, and bring a kind of damnation upon the World:
The Society of Devils would be more regular than men, who must live without
God, or Beelzebub: The births of reason would be deemed abortive, and the
fruits of madness would receive the characters of sobriety and discretion: The
greatest Lunaticks would be most Religious, and we should pay the greatest
veneration to a Fool.

But since things are not come to this pass yet; I shall briefly examine a very
few false Rules, by which some among us satisfy themselves in the trial of
Spirits, and guidance of themselves.

First, There are some that build much on what they style the Return of prayer;
when they have made a Fast the Prologue to contention; and a long Prayer has
been the Breakfast, when they resolved to dine upon Widows houses; yet they
have too frequently thought, or at least endeavored, to cause others to
believe, that what has happened after their prayer, has been the return from
Heaven to it, and a sufficient guide to future action, and an assurance that it
was both lawful and just. Many men when they have for some time brooded upon a
thing, they are apt then to petition Heaven, to inform them of the lawfulness
or convenience, or the unlawfulness or inconvenience of it: And having ended
their devotion, finding their thoughts to run still in the same chanel, into
which they had turned and confined them before, they conclude this to be a
sufficient warrant for them to prosecute, and accomplish their design; And the
eagerness of their intention, which proceeds only from their predeterminated
resolution, they foolishly take for the conduct of the Spirit, which, they are
willing against all reason to think, thus guides them to conclude the
lawfulness of their desire. And this is no inconsiderable hint, because, in
this method, many wicked and unlawful actions claim Gods patronage to justify
and defend them: And what impious, and most bloody designs have been attempted,
and carried on, by the impressions upon men's minds, after they have pretended
to seek the Lord, and thus gained what they have called a Return to their
prayers, I need not now particularly relate; History has reported, and will yet
more discover them to the World: This one thing has raised Rebellion, Murdered
Princes, in design and act, violated all Sacred Obligations, and lays Religion
at the feet of every fresh and fanciful pretender. At this rate we shall cheat
our neighbors by a secret impulse, and murder Gods Anointed by a special
command, and no man can be safe in his Life and Fortune, if a praying Hector,
or a dreaming Enthusiast has a mind, and power, to take them away: Nor will he
long be without a Warrant, when by winking hard, and directing his thoughts, he
may impress his own mind as he pleases, and with a melancholy, or sturdy
confidence, proclaim God to be the Author of it. But, alas! God is then only,
in a true and proper sense, said to hear, or make returns to our prayers, when
he bestows on us, those good and lawful things which we have, with humility and
devotion, begged; And if any man, pondering on a wicked design of his own
contrivance, in this case prays to God for his direction; and, after his
prayer, finds the sinful impression still remaining; This proceeds from his own
vicious, and Diabolical inclination, but not from the impulse of Gods Spirit;
And it can, by no reasonable person, be accounted Gods answer to his prayers;
Unless he will suppose the great Maker of Heaven and Earth, to be willing to
offer the greatest violence to his own nature, and to nurse and cherish, what
he would hate in himself, in those who are the workmanship of his own hands. No
greater reproach can be given to the Divine Majesty than this, by those who
acknowledge, and adore, his Being: For they make him the Patron to men's sins;
as if his essential purity and goodness could permit him to instigate any to
the commission of those things, which his justice, notwithstanding, must, and
cannot choose but, punish: Such apprehensions of the Supreme God, would,
oftentimes, make the Author of peace, to be guilty of the worst War, and the
shedding the best blood in a Kingdom; The God of Order, would become the cause
of the greatest confusions among mankind, and, in plain terms, give himself the
Lie. It cannot be safe, therefore, to make what we are apt to call an answer to
our prayers, a rule of actions, unless they agree with Gods written word, and
then there will be no need of a new Warrant; For the word of God as it is the
best, so it must be to us the only, general direction in our taking the
measures of good and evil.

If, at any time, the following strong impressions made upon our minds may be
safe to guide us, after we have sought to God for particular directions, it
must, as I conceive, be only in things that were indifferent before, that he
may influence our prudential choice in matters which he has left to our own
option: And, even in this case, we must have a care that we do not fully
resolve beforehand, lest we are found to be dissemblers with God, and have no
real hesitation in our own judgments; But if, in such things, we have occasion
to make any applications to him, we must be sure to leave room for his
direction, and that we know not which way to determine our selves by any of the
Laws of Good and Evil: The lawfulness of either part must be evident, and we
must desire an influence on the government of our choice only in the prudential
determination, with reference to the good consequence, or success. I cannot
apprehend that any evil can attend this, it being a solemn acknowledgement of a
Supreme Being, who has the Government of the whole World, of our own weakness,
and inability to guide our selves without his assistance, and consequently of
our dependence on him, which are great reasons for our adorations and prayers:
But yet the good that may, in particular, attend the pursuance of this must be
left to Gods secret conduct, and to the intrigues and influence of his
providence, which no man is able to discover; Unless he could pry into the
consults of Heaven, and disclose the secrets of an infinitely wise, and
powerful Being, when, besides what he has already revealed, there is not a
keyhole to peep through. For my own part, I love not to be wise above what is
written, or to be bold in prescribing Rules in those cases in which God has
been pleased to give us none; but shall confine my self to the Law and to the
Testimony, and look upon the Scripture as my certain Rule, thus guiding my self
in this World, that I may at last through Gods mercy and the Merits of my
Redeemer arrive at my proportioned glory in the next.

But, Secondly, Another false Rule of trying Opinions, Doctrines, and
resolutions in Religion, set up by some* is every man's private judgment and
determination; When, in the mean time, it takes not its measures from Gods
Word, nor the general notions of Good and Evil, but from a peculiar, private
Spirit got into a single man's thoughts and apprehensions. Now to this head may
be reduced what madmen call lights, and revelations; What those Enthusiasts,
that will be Saints in spite of all their profane actions, and dub themselves
Holy in the midst of their own irreligion, call Conscience; And what others, of
a more smooth and gentle disposition, style Reason, that they may advance the
powers of mankind to the degrading, if not expelling, the benign operations of
the Holy Spirit of God. In a word; This seems to be the foundation of
judgment, and the Rule of discerning Spirits and Doctrines amongst Quakers,
Anabaptists, Independents, and the rest of our Separatists (speaking in the
general), of all that follow the Socinian Principles, and is the foundation of
Popery it self, when those of the Roman Communion mistake the result of their
Governors Opinions, enacted into Laws, for the true dictates of the Holy Ghost
inspiring the Pope, or presiding at their Councils, and infallibly assisting in
their determinations. But none of these things taken as they are propounded,
can possibly be a safe Rule, much less, the highest conduct in matters of
Religion: When we shall consider, that though they may be helps to judge upon
the view of the Rule; Yet fancy and opinion may frequently be mistaken for
reason, illumination, Conscience, nay, the dictates of the holy Spirit it self;
and, according to the common inferences about these matters, are so concluded,
and believed by men that consult their own faculties. But this will yet be more
evident if we consider, (1.) That the holy Spirit of God does not, in any ages,
since he inspired those that delivered the Scriptures to be the rule of life,
either illuminate, or direct mankind in the things relating to their eternal
peace, in any other manner, than (1.) By those Scriptures (allowing the
faculties of human nature, and the general propositions of Religion among
mankind) which he inspired the Sacred Penmen to record. (2.) By inclining as
well as authorizing some men, being prepared by education and study, to
continue a succession of that Ministry, which our Savior appointed, to endure
to the end of the World, to explain the difficulties in Religion unto others:
And (3.) Confirming by a secret and inexplicable operation (which is easily
believed by all that affirm Gods Grace, or Providence; and in consequence his
Being) the propositions contained in the Scriptures unto the minds of men, and
inclining their faculties to believe and embrace them; Which influence is
obtained by prayer, (to him that is of a docil disposition) as well as given in
our Sacred Baptism, till such time as we either resist or renounce it, all
which shall be more evident, before I make an end. Now none of these, (though
great privileges) can entitle any to that illumination, or immediate guidance,
which wild men make the rule of their faith, and conductor of their actions;
But they may mistake (and be confident in it) their own fancy and high
opinion, proceeding either from thoughtfulness or disposition, for immediate
motions from the Spirit of God. And (2). As for the consciences of men, if they
mistake them not for fancy, opinion, or a strong persuasion of their own
minds: they are nothing but the agreement of our judgments with Gods word,
(for thus much (...) imports, which is knowledge with another, and includes the
relation of our understandings to a Rule: These are so far therefore from being
a rule themselves, that they are to be governed by another, and cannot be
proper consciences without it: Being therefore guided by a Superior Rule, they
cannot be safe conductors themselves; and if conscience, (as taken by those
that plead hardest for it) were once allowed its full latitude; fancy,
interest, and the humors and impious mistakes of men would pass for
conscience, and a safe guide, and introduce such a medly and mixture in
Religion, that every one, under the covert of this, would do what is good in
his own eyes; even as when there was no King in Israel; The Church of Christ
would be turned into a Babel, and our houses of Prayer, into dens of Thieves,
being filled with nothing but Sacrilege and confusion.

Thirdly, Some make such Providence as crowns their opinions with success, to
be an argument that their opinions are true: But to evince the invalidity of
this needs no other than this observation; That when the same things are
covered with a Cloud, their Authors punished, or the propagation of their
tenets becomes improsperous, the same men will not admit of the same argument;
Nor permit others to defend their opinions by the same medium, with which they
proved their own. When the Sun for a season shines upon them, and the Heavens
smile; then, behold! the hand of the Lord is with them: But when a prosperous
ray refreshes others, and they receive not the countenance they had before, but
have the frowns and discouragements of Superiors: Behold now! wickedness is
seated in high places; The holy Seed are led into the Wilderness, and
persecution attends the Elect of God, and Canaanites possess the Holy Land.
But, if success were an argument for inspiration, and smiling Providence a
rule to judge Doctrines by; Numa Pompilius might have had an argument for the
inspirations from his Nymph Aegeria, and for the truth of his Religion he
established among the Romans: The Jews might have been lost in the Wilderness,
and have justified the making their Gods to go before them: They had ceased to
have the marks of a Church, and would not have been the people of the Lord,
when they were carried into Egypt or Babylon: Nay, by this, they might have
justified their condemning the great Messiah; and Pilate, and the Roman Guards,
might have had an argument for executing him: The Primitive Christians must be
condemned, and the Apostles inspiration be proved an imposture, if a dark
Providence be that, by which the Doctrines of men are to be judged: Mahomet
must have been deemed a true Prophet, when he gathered so many Proselytes in
the East; And the great Turk be yet as holy, as he has been for the most part
prosperous in the World: Nay Popery it self, must then be embraced, if the
glory and prosperity of opinions must prove them true, and success becomes the
measure of Religion: This is a way to justify all lucky Usurpations; To
determine right and wrong by combat; and the longest Sword may justly measure
out the largest Possession, and the property of mankind, must submit to power:
A Rebel then may lawfully possess his Sovereings Throne, if he has strength
enough to force the brightest Majesty to an exchange; And if this principle be
fully pursued, the men that own it, may bow the Knee, and say to an Usurper,
God save the King: This will make, many times, the greatest Villainy to have
more Authority, than Virtue and Innocence, and force true Religion to be
vanquished by a false: Nay, he that by this rule is taken for a Prophet to day,
may be an Impostor to morrow, though he continues in the delivery of the same
Doctrine; Because a man may receive Hosanna's from the multitude, and their cry
shall shortly be, Crucify him, Crucify him: These things are the subject of
common observation; It was holy David's long ago; And it will be so to the end
of the world, (whatever Jews or Millenaries may dream); That the wicked will
sometimes be in great power, when the righteous hang down their head like a
bulrush: When the Psalmist spoke of the prosperity of the wicked; He observed,
for some time, that there were no bands in their death, but their strength was
firm and sound; They were not in trouble like other men; but plagued less than
those that were better: Therefore pride compassed them as a chain, and violence
covered them as a garment, their eyes stood out with fatness, and they had more
than heart could wish, (Psalm. 73.). And Solomon observes, that, as to the
changes of prosperity and adversity, all things come alike to all, there is one
event to the righteous and to the wicked; to him that sacrifices, and to him
that sacrifices not; As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears,
as he that fears an oath, (Eccles. 9.2.): This indeed may prove that there
shall be a future account; But neither can the goodness or wickness of a party
be evidenced by such external characters; much less the truth or falsehood of
opinions, confirmed from the smiles or frowns of Providence. But I need not at
present argue this point farther; since those that when prosperous, invented it
as a rule to walk by, and as an argument to confirm their party, and a bait to
draw Proselytes, and Abettors, to them, are now confuted by their shameful
overthrow; And it would sink them more, should it be used with any severe
enlargement, since their honor lays in the dust, and I hope it will never
rise again. I shall leave this therefore as a term of Religion, and a fallible
rule only taken up to serve a turn, and proceed to those methods and ways, by
which we may discern true Doctrines from false inspirations.

CHAP. IX.
ANd ( First,) As to the Trial of the Doctrines and Opinions of those that vent
them with great confidence and zeal, as if they were divinely inspired; we must
consider, that those to whom these Doctrines are propounded, are reasonable
creatures, And this will be yielded without any reasoning about it, unless we
have a mind to degrade our selves, as well in speculation, as many do in
practice, to the beasts that perish: nay, any objection formally framed against
this supposal, would prove what the Objector endeavors to deny, that men had
discursive faculties, and his own confutation would be included in his
Objection, whilst that would prove him able to syllogize, and reason.

Secondly, Men being rational and intelligent beings, it follows, that they are
able to discern the truth or falsehood of propositions, sufficiently propounded
to their consideration, in terms that exceed not the expressions of the sense
of one man to another; and in matters that are not elevated above humane
capacities; our discourses otherwise to one another, would be no more, than the
chirping of Birds, the speech of Parrots, or the jabbering of Monkeys to each
other; and would be nothing more than an uncertain distinct sound, without any
signification.

Thirdly, We must consider too, that it is not suitable to the Nature of God to
impose upon the faculties of men, so as to delude and cheat them with any
equivocal and false propositions; especially when he designs them as a Rule to
men to guide them in their concerns and actions in this World, or in the way to
their everlasting peace: Because the notion men have of him, the truth of which
he has evidenced to the World, renders him a Being of all possible perfection;
otherwise we should suppose God to be liable to the common frailties and
infirmities of men. Now, if he be supreamly perfect, he must, according to our
own reason, and those faculties that are implanted in us, be one of infinite
Truth and Goodness, If he be the first, he will not deliver propositions unto
men, that are plainly, or more obscurely, false; And, if he be a good Being, he
will not give Rules that may deceive us, if we use those faculties he has
bestowed on us, to find out their meaning and intention; The contrary to this
would cheat the World, and then he would make creatures (or at least seem to do
it) that he might, with great circumstance and solemnity, subtly lead them
into eternal ruin; Which to suppose, is as great blasphemy against the Divine
Nature, as can be invented by the worst of creatures that have made themselves
malicious; And as foul an infamy as can be cast upon Gods being, by the worst
of men; since he desires not the death of sinners themselves; but rather that
they should return from their wickedness and live: This is confirmed by those
threats he denounces against them to frighten them from eternal ruin; by all
those promises he has annexed to repentance; by all his exhortations to them to
amend their lives; by all the instruments and helps to Religion which he has
graciously afforded them, by all that sorrow and trouble he expresses whilst
men remain in that state of sin which entitles them to eternal misery; And by
sending his only Son into the World, to offer himself a Sacrifice for them,
that Divine Wrath and Justice being appeased, they might be capable, according
to the Rules and Directions he proposed, and the Aids and Assistances he has
given them, to recover themselves out of those snares in which they were
entangled, and to guide themselves into the way of peace.

Fourthly, From hence it follows, that there are sufficient Means and Ways
afforded us, by which we may, as reasonable creatures, judge of true directions
and false; so that we may not spend our time in uncertainties in matters of
such vast and infinite concernment. Gods promise of Heaven and eternal bliss,
would be to as totally insignificant, if it were made either upon such
conditions as we knew not, or had not sufficient abilities with his influence
to perform them: And to what purpose would it be, to tell the World, that in
keeping Gods Commandments, there is great reward, if we knew not what the
Commandments were? We could not make sense of that Thanksgiving of our Savior,
( Matthew. 11.25.) I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, (the Rabbis amongst the Jews,
and the Philosophers among the Gentiles) and have revealed them unto babes; to
persons of a more inferior rank and capacity; if those whom he here calls
Babes, had not means to know the certainty of the Revelation, and to arrive at
complete and distinct notions of the things that were revealed; And in vain
would it have been for S. Paul to have spoken the hidden things of God in a
mystery; (the Doctrine of Christ's coming into the World, hid under Jewish
Types and Shadows, and obscurely treated of by the Prophets, in comparison to
the Light which then appeared) or to have treated of such Doctrines of the
Gospel, which discovered things, which neither eye had seen, nor ear heard, nor
did they ever enter into the heart of man, when God revealed them by his Spirit
(1 Cor. 2.) and not by any Logical demonstration; which blinded the Governors
amongst the Jews, and confounded the Philosophers among the Greeks, who,
according to their accustomed way of proof, expected another method of
probation, than the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: It had been,
notwithstanding, an impossible attempt for the Apostle to have endeavored to
reduce any of these, or other men, that knew themselves to be endued with
reason, to the belief of the Gospel, which was proved Divine by the testimony
and revelation of the Spirit, if sufficient means were not afforded them to
know, and distinguish Divine Revelation, from imposture and pretenses. The
things delivered were above the reach of humane reasonings, and Philosophy then
gave check to their belief, and custom and education had impressed them with
different, nay, contrary notions of things: It must be supposed therefore,
antecedently to their reception of the Gospel, that as S. Paul was able to give
them evidence, that those Doctrines he delivered to them, were revealed from
Heaven, so there were some Methods and Rules, by which they might be able to
know the revelation, and not receive it upon his bare testimony: Nay, to what
purpose would it be for S. John to direct men to try the Spirits, if we had not
sufficient means to know, whether they were from God, or no?

Fifthly, This must be granted too, that there are false Pretensions and
Doctrines of men vented in the World, under the notion of true; And true and
false under the same pretense of inspiration: The Apostle tells us, that many
false Prophets are gone out into the world: And our Savior (to prevent a rash
belief, and thereby an Apostasy from the Gospel, or trusting in another
Messiah,) acquaints the World, that there would arise false Christ's and false
Prophets, (Mark 13.22.): And therefore they should not believe and entertain
them, although according to their different principles and designs, they should
cry out, Lo! here is Christ; or Lo! there: And S. Peter tells us, that, as
there were false Prophets formerly amongst the people, so there should be false
Teachers among the Christians, who should privily bring in damnable heresies,
denying the Lord that bought them; and, that many should follow their
pernicious ways: (2 Pet. 2.1, 2.). Nay, S. Paul tells us of those, who, in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruded into those things which
they never saw; being vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds; who, yet,
departed from the head, Christ himself who is the head of the Church; making
the coming to God by the Mediatory application to an Angel, a demonstration of
their humility, and so rejecting the intercession of our Savior the only
Mediator betwixt God and man, (Col. 2.18.). But our own Age is so fruitful in
examples of this kind, that the possibility of men's false pretenses to
revelation, and of their venting corrupt Doctrines to the World, needs no other
argument to prove it, than our own experience; Nor need we rake in the dust of
false Prophets, in past Ages, when we have, to our great grief and trouble,
living monuments, on which these things are to be read, and seen.

Yet ( Sixthly,) Notwithstanding all this, we must maintain that there is such
a thing as true inspiration; This is plainly implied by S. John, to whom I must
adhere; For it would be ill Logic to infer that, because the Apostle advises
us not to believe every Spirit, therefore we should give credit unto none; But
rather that some are to be believed: Especially when we take in his direction
with it; Try the Spirits whether they are of God: This argues that some
Doctrines came from Heaven, and some men were inspired from above, although
many false Prophets were gone abroad into the world. Should the contrary be
held by any among us, it would not only invalidate the Doctrine of Moses, and
the Prophets under the Old Testament; But of Christ, and his Apostles under the
New; it would conclude the intercourse betwixt God and men to be an impossible
Chimera, and turn all Divinity into a Fable; And at once render our time
misspent and lost, whilst I am writing, and others reading such Doctrines as
these, and all disputes concerning any positive and instituted Religion, the
foolish talkings and inventions of men, that busy themselves to deceive
others, and give trouble to their own flesh; When man's reason might supply all:
But such a fancy I suppose to be too wild and extravagant, to be admitted in
such an age of the world as this; Especially among those, who have frequented
Christian Assemblies, and have heard discourses, proving the truth of the Old
Testament, or the New; That have read the Jews Arguments for their Law, or the
Christian Fathers Apologizing for the Religion of the Gospel: Nor indeed, can
any deny the truth of Gods conversing with men, that reject not his
Omnipotence; or else doubt of the nature and capacity of their own souls: To be
sure they must deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and affirm all his
appearances to men to be a fable; Since from them we are assured, that all
Scripture was given by inspiration from God, (2 Timothy 3.16.). And therefore to
men, that acknowledge this, I must be supposed to direct this discourse, as
well as S. John does in the Text so frequently recited, who supposes that there
is a Divine inspiration, before he advises men to separate the pretenses of
false Prophets, from the Doctrines of those that are true: It Is in vain
otherwise to persuade men to exercise their faculties, assisted by Rules; or to
make any discrimination at all, where there is no foundation for the conclusion
of a difference.

Seventhly, Therefore, The trial of the Doctrines and Rules of men pretending
inspiration, having thus far been brought on toward a conclusion: The
determination of our assent and choice in matters of such huge and vast moment,
on which the welfare of our souls depends, must be directed by what,
sufficiently, without fallacy, evidences those Doctrines which we receive from
others, or are led into the belief of from our own reasonings, are certainly
such as came from God, and that we are not imposed upon by our own temperament,
or the subtilty of others: The evidence therefore for a Divine revelation must
be greater and stronger than any argument framed to the contrary; Because in
all the discoveries of truth, my belief is to be determined according to
evidence, and the greatest probability guides the rational choice of men; And
all that act suitably to themselves, embrace the proposition that comes nearest
to truth and certainty: But where two things seem equal in their proof, a
rational man only hesitates and doubts, and gives up his assent to neither: And
therefore had the Magicians of Egypt equaled the Miracles Moses wrought in the
presence of Pharaoh, as well as they did in turning rods into Serpents, and
Rivers into blood, and causing Froggs to come up before him; They need not, at
that time, have acknowledged Moses's power disproportionable to their own, nor
distinguished their own Miracles from his, by saying, This is the finger of
God; And Pharaoh himself might have had an equal argument to detain the
Israelites, as they had for the command of God to depart out of the Land of
Egypt. But when the Miracles on their side, far exceeded the Wonders on the
other, his own resolution became his Law, and Pharaohs obstinacy still
increased, till it was the ruin of himself and followers, who all perished in
the Red Sea. Ahab forsook the commandments of God, and worshipped Baalim, and
led the people into Idolatry, joining the Service of Baal with the God of
Israel; And thus halted betwixt two opinions, till the trial betwixt their
Sacrifices was determined on Elijah's side, who was the Prophet of the Lord;
Whilst fire came down from Heaven, and consumed the Sacrifice upon Gods own
Altar, which Baal could not effect on his: But then the people determined their
choice, and gave their assent, that the Lord is God; and presently slew the
Prophets of Baal, for whom before they had great esteem, (1 Kings 18 th Chap.).
Hence was it also that our Savior said concerning the Jews, who, by Miracles
evidencing Moses's Commission, had justly received the Law of Moses; That if he
had not superseded their Religious Customs, which till his coming were justly
established, by showing his Authority, and Gospel, to be Divine, by greater
Miracles than those that introduced and established the Law, they had done well
to adhere to it, and to look upon the Gospel as an imposture: Because, a new
Doctrine pretending to be Divine, and evacuating that which, having proof from
Heaven, was established before, must be confirmed with greater Miracles, than
that which it pretends to abolish: Therefore (says our Savior) If I had not
done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin, (John
15.24.). Which way of trial will (by the way) hold good to the end of the
World: From all which, it is plainly manifest, that all the Opinions and
Doctrines of men, pretending to inspiration, if they are rationally to be
received by us, must come with such Evidence and Authority, as may surmount all
difficulties and Objections to the contrary. So that if any men should now
pretend Miracles to give testimony to any Opinions that contradict the
Doctrines of the New Testament, they are not sufficient to command our assent,
and to determine our belief; Unless they are greater than any which Christ and
his Apostles did, to confirm their Doctrine, which these new Opinions do oppose
and contradict.

Eighthly, In this trial of men pretending inspiration for the Doctrines they
deliver, we must be sure that the evidence they give for such inspiration, be
peculiarly Divine, and such as cannot be given to men by any thing inferior to
the power of God. It is not the grave deportment of the inspired; nor the
color or shape of their faces; Nor the seeming innocence of their own lives,
extraordinary austerities, or a less decent, and morose, living, that retires
them from the conversation of the World; It is not a peculiar habit; nor any
uncouth or sluttish garments; it is neither feeding upon Locusts and wild Honey;
nor yet eating with Publicans and Sinners, that proves a Prophet to be Divine:
Nor is it a full and copious expression, attended with abundance of zeal and
passion; nor, yet, a slow and pumping delivery, as if their notions were too
bigg for their words, and their words too large for their mouths, that will
evidence them to come from God: It Is neither their natural parts, or acquired
ornaments; the antiquity of error, nor the glory, or number of those that are
proselyted to it; it is neither the rendering error plausible by distinction, nor
glozing it over with misrepresented testimonies of others, or pretending some
latent Authority from the most obscure places pf the Scripture, or rendering
those obscure, to countenance their Dotrine, that are plain and open to the
contrary, that must lead us from Divine truth, into Diabolical error, and make
the God of truth to patronize a lie. In a word; It Is not an Argument from the
success an Opinion has in the world, (though Providence, thereby, seems, with
some, to be entitled to it) nor any countenance from the Authority of men, nor
the iterated affirmations of him that pretends to be thus inspired, that are
sufficient to prove his Doctrines true: Because all these things have
frequently been public attestations to those that are false: But there must be
such evidence to those Propositions which are pretended to come immediately
from God, as that by which he has always confirmed his Laws to the world;
Something beyond the power of nature, that cannot be paralleled by men or
Devils; The Broad Seal of Heaven must be annexed, that neither nature nor art
is able to counterfeit.

And this ( Ninthly,) must be real Miracles, (in which the Spirit of Prophecy
is included.) There have been many wonders effected in the world, and more
stories of these than are true, which the Romanists glory as much in, as if
they were Miracles, if their art can hide their craft and subtilty from those
that are more curious and inquisitive: The Pagan Priests led the van, assisted
by the power of subtle Demons, to gain the peoples worship to themselves, or
to those Images which they animated, and moved: And how far the Romanists have
followed them in this cheat and imposture, has been sometimes too apparently
discovered; And would be more, would they but be as ingenuous in their
confessions, as they are witty in their subtle, though impious, inventions. The
philosophical knowledge of natural causes, together with an industrious
application, will make some extraordinary and unusual effects look like
Miracles: For the most of men, being, by reason of an inferior education,
ignorant of many effects of Art and Nature, which men of more refined
understandings easily discover the causes of, are apt to attribute those things
to the immediate operation of the first cause, which are results from those
that are second; Art will do much, and Nature more: And the Devil, many times,
makes more strange and unusual appearances, being assisted with the knowledge
of both: And how many times do men admire the slight of a Jugler, till,
perhaps, they make discovery of his Craft; and attribute that to the power of
the Devil, which he ingeniously does by slight of hand? Nay, the sport that
Devils make in the Air, we often take as the voice of Gods Thunder, and
tremble, and are afraid at the Storm: But, yet, there is as much difference
betwixt true Miracles, and very real Wonders, as there is betwixt Heaven and
Hell; or the power of Nature, and that which first made and continues it, who
can either suspend its power, or alter its effects. Or as there is betwixt
Nature and Art, which though the latter imitates, it can never equal; no more
than the former vye with the God of Nature: Miracles (especially such as are
above the power of any thing inferior unto God) have always been received by
men, as sufficient attestations of Divine Truths: These were those Divine
Testimonies, by which the blessed Jesus evidenced his Commission to the World,
and added Gods authority to the reasonableness of his Doctrine. When S. John
the Baptist sent his Disciples to him, to know whether he were the Messiah, of
which he knew himself to be Forerunner; our Savior returned no answer but
this, Go your way (says he), and tell John what things ye have seen and heard;
how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,
the dead are raised, to the poor the Gospel is preached: (Luke 7.22.): By this
intimating, that such Miracles were sufficient to convince him that he was the
Messiah, to whom such power was given from above: Thus he endeavors also to
convince the Jews by the argument of his Miracles; The same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me -- (John 5.36.). Now, as by
this argument our Savior proved his own Commission; so when he sent forth his
Apostles and the first Planters of his Religion into the World, he gave to them
the same power to work Miracles for confirmation of their Doctrine. Heal the
sick (says he) cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils, (Matthew.
10.8.): And accordingly they proved their Doctrine to be Divine, and confirmed
their Commissions to the World; preaching (as S. Paul did, (1 Cor. 2.4.) not so
much by Logical argument, or in the manner of the Grecian Philosophers way of
reasoning; But in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: When they argued
from the Old Testament to the New, and did Miracles to confirm all. This has
been Gods method, in the World, of evidencing his Mission of Prophets unto men,
to declare his Messages to them, by which he attested his own inspirations;
which, the most confident affirmations of the persons inspired, without such
plain and public attestations, could never have created a belief of;
Especially if they delivered Articles of Faith, and things not demonstrable to
the reason of mankind. Thus when God gave Moses authority to lead, and preside
over the Israelites, he endued him with a power to work Miracles to attest his
Commission ( Exodus 4.): And when the Prophets were to make any new Revelation
to Princes or people; or when God sent them on any strange errand, he added
confirmation to their authority, by giving them power to foretell something
which he brought to pass; or else to work some extraordinary Sign, or Miracle;
that those to whom the Message was sent, might be convinced, that God sent the
Prophet.

But yet, because it is often so difficult for men to distinguish betwixt a
Miracle and a Wonder, who know not the utmost power of Art or Nature;
Especially, they are ignorant of the skill and force of Devils; God has still
(in the last place) given Rules for our farther direction in this weighty
affair; That the fancies of men may not by any subtilty whatsoever be imposed
upon with the seeming authority of Divine Inspiration: God knew that the Devil
would endeavor in this to imitate the Divine Power, as well as appear like an
Angel of light, when either might impose delusions upon the World; That the art
and industry of designing men, might, by a previous acquaintance with Natural
Causes, so alter their simplicity by mixtures and experiment; or meet with such
a strange disposition of nature, lucky to them, as by the application of these,
to the present conjunction of their own intentions, they might take advantage
to insinuate their subtle and false Doctrines into the minds of the vulgar, or
credulous, and many times into those that were more rational and learned; Or
else by a fortunate prediction of something that might come to pass, assume to
themselves the honor and authority of Prophets, and then impose upon, and
delude, the World. For the prevention, therefore, of such great, and otherwise,
unavoidable mischiefs; the most gracious God, out of his infinite love to
mankind, has given them three other Rules, by which they might, and may,
measure Prophets and their Doctrines. (1.) If any pretended their authority by
foretelling things to come; If they failed in any of their Predictions, 'twas
a sign that God never sent them to deliver that, which the Prediction was an
argument to confirm: And that, not only because the great God never confirms
his Truths to the World by falsehood or deceit: But, because he has cautioned us
not to believe them: In the 18 th of Deuteronomy. v. 22. When a Prophet speaks in
the Name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, this is the
thing which the Lord has not spoken; but the Prophet has spoken it
presumptuously; Thou shall not be afraid of him.

(2.) Supposing that one who took upon him the name of a Prophet, and should
work Wonders (as Antichrist and others under the New Testament) for
confirmation of his Doctrine and Authority; Yet, if his Doctrines tend to the
evacuating principles implanted in the minds of men, and destroying the
reasonable propositions of the Natural Religion of mankind; it was an apparent
sign of a false Prophet. For, says the Text, If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the
sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go
after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them; Thou shall
not hearken to the words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams, Deuteronomy. 13.
at the beginning.

(3.) In relation to both Natural, and Instituted, Worship; God having now
given us a Rule, no pretension of Prophecy, or Miracle must ever draw us into
the opinions of men that thwart or contradict the Divine Establishments already
confirmed by the same argument; And this is evident, partly from that
fore-quoted Text ( Deuteronomy. 13.), where the reasons, why that false Prophet should
not be received, that endeavored to draw men from the innate Principles of
Natural Religion are* (1.) Because God, by permitting that false Prophet,
proved men's stedfastness in Religion. (2.) Because, whatever Signs and Wonders
were done to confirm a Doctrine, men were so far to adhere to the true God, as
to walk after him, and to fear him, to keep his commandments, to obey his
voice, to serve, and to cleave unto, him. But this is yet more fully proved
from Isa. 8.20. When any should endeavor to draw the people unto Wizards, and
to such as had familiar Spirits; The Prophet advises them to try all by the Law
and the Testimony; because, if any speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. And if these directions were good under the
Law, much more will they satisfy any reasonable men under the Gospel; this
being the last public declaration of Gods Will, that he intends to make to
mankind, till the final period and general dissolution: For though we, says
the Apostle, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, let him be
accursed (Gal. 1.8.). And he tells the World, that, at the final period, God
shall judge the secrets of men according to the Gospel, (Romans 2.16.). Therefore
the Gospel is to be the standing Law to the end of the World: Nor needs there
any other, it being the end of the Mosaic Constitutions, and such a complete
System of Divinity, as is sufficient to make a man perfect, thoroughly furnished
to every good work, and thereby to prepare him for that eternal inheritance,
that fades not away. And thus I have now considered all the chief parts of
what I design, and with all faithfulness, according to my knowledge, discharged
my self: The discourse on such a point has been long* but I hope it will not
prove unuseful, in such times as these, in which truth is blended and beset
with error. Strange Doctrines have insinuated into the minds of men; And we are
now sailing betwixt Sylla and Charybdis, and God knows, which may swallow us:
When truth, like pure and clean Wheat, is put betwixt two Millstones, that
seem to join to grind it in pieces: And Religion, like our Savior upon the
Cross, is almost crucified betwixt two Thieves: But blessed be God, his
Providence is over all his works, and through his help, we hope for
deliverance, from all our troubles; For vain is the help of man without him.

CHAP. X.
HAving hitherto, for the most part, treated concerning False Spirits, and
argued against the pretenses to inspiration among Papists and Fanatics; and
given some directions, by which we may be able to discern what inspiration is
true, and what false: That it may not be objected against the body of this
Discourse, that I have left neither Soul, nor Spirit, to animate it; but have
hinted only some operation of the Divine Spirit, and restrained that to the
first Age of the Christian Religion, as if it were not needful for future
Generations, to guide men into all truth: I shall spend some Sheets to prove,
That as there were Promises that the Holy Spirit of God should conduct men
after our Saviors Ascension; so that these Promises were made good, by the
apparent Descent of the Holy Ghost; And to show, in what manner the Sacred
Spirit informed the Apostles, and the first Publishers of the Christian
Doctrines; And how he still influences the minds of men in the understanding,
and receiving, them.

The Wilderness of this World is very thick of Briars and Thorns, that scratch
and tear the Church of Christ in her passage through it; And since the most who
profess themselves to be Christians agree in the design, and end, of their
journey; Yet because we are apt to fall out by the way, and differ about the
determination of the paths that lead thither; Hence is it, that I have hitherto
endeavored to hinder men of good intentions, and different judgments, from
entertaining a delusion, by reason of any shortness in their sight; that they
may not be deceived by their own fancies, or the suggestions of others, and so
miscarry in their greatest concernments, and fall short of eternal happiness
hereafter: And lest we should complain, as if we were, in this errable state of
life, left without sufficient means to conduct us to the great end of all our
Religion; And, in the glorifying of God, to save our souls; I shall now show
some things before hinted, more plainly, and openly; That we are not left
without sufficient conduct from the Holy, and true, Spirit of God; But that he
was in the World, at the first delivery of the Doctrines and Rules of life,
expressed in the Writings of the New Testament, and still continues to
influence the minds and actions of men.

In order to the discharging this that I am now to engage in, I shall first
prove, That the Holy Ghost did come according to the Predictions of the
Prophets, and the Promise of our Savior: For (1.) He came upon our Savior
himself. (2.) He inspired and comforted his Apostles, and the first Planters of
the Christian Religion: And (3.) He still influences the hearts and minds of
those that seek, and do not resist, him.

First, That this Holy Spirit rested upon our Savior, accompanying him
throughout the actions of his life, none that pretends to the embracement of
Christianity can possibly contradict: For his Miracles attest this Divine
residency, and loudly proclaim it to Ages and Generations: And, if there had
not been this irrefragable testimony; yet, that there was such a Divine
impression upon his mind; the purity of his Doctrine, and the holiness of his
life sufficiently attested, and that the Divine Spirit inspired and did assist
him: As his Conception was by the power of the Holy Ghost, so did it
continually breath upon him through all the periods of his whole life: It gave
a visible attestation to his Person and Doctrine, and witnessed his Commission
to the World, when at his Baptism it descended in the shape of a Dove, and
lighted upon him, ( Matthew. 3.16.): And this was seconded by an audible voice,
loudly thundering from the very Skies, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. In his life he had the Spirit without measure, (John 3.34.); He
was not limited to the same proportions of power and assistance with S. John,
who preached the Doctrine of Repentance, and by this prepared the way for the
Messiah; Nor with those Prophets of old, who were inspired at sundry times, and
in diverse manners; to whom divine and unaccountable impulses were neither
constant in their method, or continuance; But the Holy Spirit accompanied our
Savior throughout the several stages of his life; so that he could upon any
emergent occasion, make discovery of it to others, and always knew it to be
resident in himself; he carried it with him to his Cross and Death to support
him in his misery, and to cause him to triumph over his temptations, and
enemies; It hovered, as it were, over his Grave, guarding his body with a
security beyond the Soldiers power; and at last raised him with triumph from
the dead, ( Romans 8.11.): and thus baffled the arguments for infidelity.

Secondly, This Spirit promised came also upon the Apostles of our Savior. In
the second of the Acts at the beginning; It descended with noise, and a
glorious splendour, and came with such a train of solemnity, and its appearance
was so gay and pompous, that it amused Nations, and confounded the multitude;
It shook the great place of their assembly, and sat gloriously, in the shape
of a Cloven Fiery Tongue, upon the head of each Apostle, giving them at once a
character to distinguish them from others, and ability to execute that
Commission which our blessed Savior had before given them; They were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues as the Spirit
gave them utterance. Here was the Prophecy of Joel accomplished, that God would
pour out his Spirit upon all flesh: when the Holy Ghost thus descended with
power, in the lap of a Cloud, with a rushing wind, to blow open the doors of
men's hearts, that the King of Glory might come in; It came with Cloven Fiery
Tongues, to teach the Apostles to sound forth the Gospel to all the World with
a becoming zeal, and warm affection: The Tongues were Cloven, that they might
be sure to divide the Word aright; and Glorious, like the streams of Fire; not
only to represent the Majesty and Divinity of the Holy Ghost, or to signify
the clearness and perspicuity of the Gospel; but to inflame the zeal, and warm
the devotion of these Apostles: Nay, they were both Fiery and Cloven, that
their zeal might not be divorced from knowledge; but one might administer to
the other, and both to him who influenced them with this Spirit. This made them
at once the admiration and envy of the World; This made their Doctrine glorious
and triumphant, and confirmed it with Miracles, beyond the force of malice and
contradiction: This caused the Church to spring from the Blood of Martyrs, made
it live in the midst of spite, and flourish on the tops of Crosses and
Gibbets; to shine gloriously in the midst of flames, and triumph over death it
self, though its members were killed all the day long. This gave the Apostles
the prevision of those things, which, in our Saviors life, they were not able
to bear, at the same time giving them a prospect of their misery, and their
comforts too: This brought to their remembrance what their Master had before
taught them, and inspired them to the instruction of others, that they might
build the Christian Church upon that Cornerstone, which, though rejected of
men, was in it self elect, and precious.

Thirdly, The Holy Spirit came also, upon the hearts of believers. The
Samaritans that believed received the Holy Ghost, (Acts 8.17.); and whilst S.
Peter was preaching (occasioned by the conversion of Cornelius), the Holy Ghost
fell on those that heard him, (Acts 10.44.): And though, as to those glorious
effects of that power which at first was frequent in working Miracles, and
inspiring men to speak diverse languages for the proof and early propagation of
the Gospel, it now withdraws its force and operation; yet it still continues
that necessary influence, which impresses the minds of devout men, and assists
them in the performance of their duty, and arms them with patience and
resolution: This Doctrine of the Spirits working upon the minds of men, is too
frequently contradicted, even by such as seem to want the assistance of some
strength superior to their own, whilst to avoid one Rock, they run upon
another: To escape that Enthusiasm which has too much disturbed the World, and
led men into darkness and error, they reject the conduct of Gods Holy Spirit,
when he would lead them into the way of truth. Men are so cautious lest they
should infringe the uncontrollable liberty of their own wills, that they
entrench upon the Divine Providence, and endeavor to bind their God in chains,
that he may sit fast in Heaven to very little purpose. If there were no such
thing as a Divine influence and benediction from above, to what purpose would
our prayers be? Why should we petition for those things which we are assured we
shall never receive? Or how can any pray in faith, for what they believe will
never come? We mock our Maker to his very face, when we say, Turn thou us O
good Lord, and so shall we be turned; if God has no hand in the conversion of a
sinner: and it would be profane and ridiculous to pray for the being or
increase of grace, if God did not influence our minds; Nay, he that rejects
this principle, boldly pleads the cause of Epicurus against Christ, and the
Philosophy of an Heathen countermands the Divinity of a Christian; For how can
God rule the world, and exercise his Empire over the Powers of the Earth; how
can he control the purposes of men, and rebuke their actions, when they
contradict the counsels of his Will, and the designs of his Providence, if he
does not immediately influence their wills, as well as propose objects to their
senses? I know, we are too apt to disbelieve those things which we do not fully
understand; and to expunge that out of our Creed, which is not plainly evident
to our reason; But can it appear to be just and equal to reject a Being,
because we understand not the manner of its existence? Or to deny such effects
as we see, because we have not a view of the Cause, which is invisible? If so,
then farewell the sublimest Articles of the Christian Faith; And not only so,
but the first Principle of all Religion, the Being of a God, which no mortal
eye ever saw; nor can a finite Being frame a complete Idea of him. Shall I deny
the Creation of the World, because I know not the manner of its Makers
operation, when he sent forth his Fiat; Nor how so rare a Systeme of things,
could be produced out of nothing pre-existent? Must I reject Spirits because I
cannot see them, or all the operations of immaterial Beings upon the corporeal
substances of this World, because motion amongst bodies, is made by contact,
and I cannot apprehend how a Spirit can work upon a body, when none but bodies
can touch one another? Who can tell how our souls work upon our bodies? And yet
none is so senceless as to deny it: Nay who can describe the manner of our
souls union to our bodies? And yet no man will refuse to own the thing; or will
any one deny the parts of bodies, to be united to each other, because the term
of their union was never yet so fully resolved, as to baffle all objections to
the contrary? Why should we then doubt of the holy Spirits influencing the
minds of men, because the manner of operation is intricate and inexplicable?
When we find it by the independence of our thoughts, and those good suggestions
crowded into the midst of some evil contrivances, where no other reason can be
given of them, but that they are injected from above, that we may fully
convince our selves, by our own experience, that God works by his Spirit, and
concurs with the motions of rational beings, when they incline to comply with
his operations. The wind blows where it lists (says our Savior), and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it
goes; so is every one that is born of the Spirit, (John 3.8.). We all believe
that the wind blows, when it becomes obvious to our senses; And yet the causes
of these different winds, and the reason of this swift motion of the Air, have
puzzled the wisest and most inquisitive Philosophers; God is, therefore, said,
by the Prophet, to bring the winds out of his treasures, (Jer. 51.16.); And, in
the Book of Job, we find that they break out of the chamber, and secret places:
So we discern the fruits and effects of the Spirit, though we cannot account
for the manner of producing them: And, therefore, it is not unreasonable to
believe the influence of Gods Spirit upon the minds of men: For (1.) It Is
possible. (2.) Necessary. (3.) From the Scripture infallibility, certain.

First, The operation of the Holy Ghost upon the souls of men is possible. Our
Savior, to rebuke the wonder of his Disciples at a Doctrine of his that seemed
harsh and difficult, tells them, that with God all things are possible, (Matthew.
19.26.). The possibility therefore of a thing, prepares us for the belief of
any proposition, when either certainty or greater probabilities do not plainly
determine the contrary: Now, what does not imply a contradiction that it should
be, is possible to be: But the Holy Spirits operation upon the minds of men
does not imply any contradiction: And, therefore, it must be, at least, a
possible supposition that it may be so. Nay further, what has been, is,
certainly, possible to be: But that there has been such influences upon the
minds of men, the sacred Inspirations of the Prophets, and Apostles, do
abundantly evince; And to assert the contrary, must shake the very foundation
of Religion, and invalidate the whole Canon of Scripture. And certainly, if it
admits no contradiction, to affirm Spirits working upon Bodies; it must be less
to suppose one Spirit to operate upon another; there being a nearer affinity
betwixt their natures, and a greater capacity to apprehend the notices they
receive from one another: For, if the Soul of one man may apprehend what are
the thoughts of another, when they are expressed by the words of the tongue, or
some external signs, and representations; There is as great a probability, that
there may be more easy and quicker methods for one soul to converse with
another, were they freed from their bodies, than by the mediation of external
senses, which may, and often do, convey false representations to the mind. And,
therefore, for the holy Spirit of God to influence the minds and affections of
men, is not only rendered possible; But a very probable, and easy,
supposition: Though, whilst we remain in these bodies, it is all one, as to the
being of the thing, whether we conjecture, (for it can be no more) the
influence to be made immediately upon the soul, or by percussions on, or
dispositions of, the nerves, and by determining the Spirits, so as to make
representations to the mind, to cause in it desire, or aversation, and from
hence just and proportionable actions, suitable to the design of the holy
Spirit.

But ( Secondly,) this influence and operation of the holy Spirit, is not only
possible, but necessary too; if we consider our own weakness and infirmity; or
the circumstances we are frequently surrounded with in this vale of tears, and
region of misery; We have still a proneness and propensity to sin,
notwithstanding our being washed by an holy Baptism, and dipped in the sacred
Laver of regeneration: And, though grace were then conveyed to us, and power to
perform our part of the Covenant which at last gives us the possession of the
promise; Yet this cannot well be apprehended to be tied about us with such
indissoluble bonds, as not to forsake us upon the violation of our vow, when by
sinful courses we rescind Gods obligagation to us: Or, if there were no
forfeiture to be made; Yet we cannot apprehend this Grace and Spirit, given us
at the first, to be so constantly and powerfully residing in us, as never to
need any new supplies, or accessions of degrees; Or to be like our souls,
always tied continually to invigorate us without any new influences from
above: God governs the World by his Providence, and supports this great systeme
of Beings by the constant and continued influences of his Power impressing
things, by his Divine concurrence, to accomplish the end and design of their
beings, to continue their stated motions and order, and to repair their
decays, by a new and uninterrupted succession; Now it would not be more false
and unsuitable to his nature, to suppose him at first to have put things into
their orderly motions, and to impregnate nature with all the power, at once,
that shall at any time be requisite for its support and conduct, when things
are subject to such various misadventures, that it is impossible for any but
himself to foresee; Than it would be to suppose him to give a child, in his
sacred Baptism, sufficient strength to influence his whole life, and afterward
leave him to his conflicts and misfortunes without any new assistances from
above: This would, still, make the Great and infinite Being of the World,
instead of a wise and active God, nothing but an idle and lazy Spectator: We
need not, then, pray for grace, and continued accessions of strength and power;
But only use those words of David; Cast us not away from thy presence, and take
not thy holy Spirit from us, (Psalm. 51.11.). The Apostles and Primitive
Disciples, of our Savior were sensible of new accessions, or incomes from the
Spirit, as the difficulties increased which they encountered: For as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us (says S. Paul), so our consolation also
abounds by Christ, (2 Cor. 1.5.). And when we shall consider that our
assistances are necessary in proportion to our duties, or our sufferings, (all
men being not in the same circumstances, but some have an easier passage to an
eternal rest, and a blessed eternity, than others who are made a spectacle to
the world; who have greater difficulties to encounter, a longer race to run
upon the Earth, and are surrounded with a larger number of duties, and
perplexities) certainly God, who is the God of all grace, will reasonably give
the influences of his Spirit suitable to the degrees of men's necessities, and
the employments, or conflicts that his most wise Providence calls them unto: As
the Apostles were not sufficient of themselves to preach the Christian Doctrine
to the World, and to obviate those difficulties that attended the publication;
so neither can any of us, in our ordinary course of affairs in the World, being
placed in the midst of snares and temptations, keep consciences void of
offense, without the influences of Gods grace, and the assistances of his
Spirit: S. Paul justifies himself to the Corinthians, by giving them a prospect
of his joy, and innocence: Our rejoicing is this (says he), the testimony of a
good conscience; that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and
more abundantly to you wards, (2 Cor. 1.12.). And when, in the third Chapter,
he re-assumes the argument; lest they should think that all was effected by his
own power; he introduces also this acknowledgement: Not that we are sufficient
of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of
God, ver. the 5 th. God is not an hard and austere Master, to reap where he did
not sow, nor to gather where he did not scatter; He expects an account of his
own talents, which every one does, or may, receive, in proportion to his wants
and necessities, that he may grow up unto that measure of stature to which
Christ has appointed him in the world; And doubless we may obtain Divine helps;
If men have but that love to themselves, as to pray with fervency and devotion
for them: For, if ye, being evil, (says our Savior), know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him? (Luke 11.13.). And since God is so bountiful
to us, let us not be wanting to our selves: For, when we shall, with
retirement, consider, how numerous and potent our sins are, which must all, in
their habits be mortified, and subdued; how many turbulent or enticing
temptations we have to oppose, that are ready every day to conquer us, and
steal, invisibly, to our most secret entertainments; how many passions we have
to calm, and moderate, which, upon every suitable, and tempting, occasion
endeavor to make an insurrection against our reason; How many personal, and
relative, duties we are to perform in a wise and pious ordering our
conversation; how the suggestions of our own flesh, the injections of Satan,
and the malice and defilements of the world will endeavor to oppose, and
obstruct, our progress: When we consider the black passage of death, and the
grave, (and God knows what dismal encounters we may meet with in our way to
them); What fears will then suddenly arise to baffle our hopes, and make our
faith ready to expire; And upon the whole, when we reflect upon our weakness,
and miserable infirmity; In a word; When we consider how much work we have to
do, how little time to perform it, and what great disproportion there is
betwixt our duty and our power; It will not only appear, that it is high time
to awake out of sleep; to rise and be doing: But to take the Armor of God for
our defense, and to pray to Heaven for the assistance of the Spirit; Since this
appears to be so necessary in relation to our weakness, and our duty: And,
certainly, what is so necessary for our safe conduct to that Haven where we
would be, and which God designs for our eternal rest and shelter, from all
tempests and future storms; There is no reason why we should distrust the
Spirits influence and operation; Nor to make our selves incapable of the
favor, by testifying our unwillingness to receive it, by perpetually opposing,
and disputing against it.

For ( Lastly,) this influence of the holy Spirit upon the minds of holy and
good men is, from the Scripture, infallibly certain to those that, at once,
both want, and beg, it, and do prepare themselves for the reception of it: Why,
otherwise, should our Savior give this assurance to his Disciples, that God
gives the holy Spirit to those that ask him? Nay, what becomes of those
promises in the Scripture that engage Gods truth and faithfulness, to assist
good men in the discharge of their duty, and to support them under all their
misery and misfortune, if we were altogether left to our selves, to pursue the
dictates of our own reason, and to stand only upon our own legs without any
superior help or influence? The Apostle tells us, that the Spirit does help
our infirmities, (Romans 8.26.): But this would be false, if we had, either, none
that required his assistance; Or that he would not condescend to supply our
wants. S. John makes this vinculum unionis; this bond of union, betwixt Christ
and us, the Spirit of God to be a character by which we may distinguish our
selves; Because he has given us of his Spirit, (1 John 4.13.). And S. Paul
fully agrees with S. John: For (says he) if any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, (Romans 8.9.). I know with what great industry these
and other Texts have been restrained to that Divine temper of mind, by which we
know, and discern, our condition; This indeed, being the gracious effect of the
holy Spirits co-opperating with our endeavors, is by no means to be separated
in our judgment upon our selves; And we have no other way to judge of the
cause, but by this Divine and glorious effect: But yet, where this is visible
in an holy life, and virtuous actions, we have no reason to exclude the cause;
Especially when it is principally included in the expression; For the Apostle
supposes this Spirit, that Christians have, to be the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead; Nay a branch, also, of that power which shall hereafter
raise us too: For, it follows; He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall
also quicken our mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in us. Because our
Bodies are here the Temples of the Holy Ghost; God will not suffer them to
remain eternally in their ruiues; But will, hereafter, re-edifie, and raise,
them, because they were once the habitation of his Spirit. Hence are Believers
said to be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of
their inheritance, (Ephesians. 1.13.). And, therefore, they are advised, in the
same Epistle, not to grieve this holy Spirit of God, whereby they are sealed
unto the day of their redemption, (Ephesians. 4.30.). Now, though we may be said to
be sealed up for Heaven, by a Divine temper of mind upon Earth; that this
prepares us for future glory, and that, if this disposition be not in us, we
are none of Christ's: Yet it would be as harsh a speech as can be admitted in
any language, to say that this holy temper of mind shall raise us up at the
last day; Since the wicked are then raised too: Or to say, that any man
voluntarily grieves this Divine temper and disposition of mind, when the man
then grieves himself. These expressions therefore must, certainly, intend more
than this; And they can scarcely admit of a fair interpretation, without
expounding them of the holy Spirit of God, which, now cooperating with our
faculties, produces in us divine tempers and dispositions, and so prepares us
for that inheritance which he shall raise us up from our graves to possess. The
Holy Ghost was first promised to the Apostles and Christian Disciples, under
the names and notion of a Comforter, and the Spirit of truth; and how could he
be both, or either, if he did not influence their minds with joy and knowledge?
The Spirit it self (says the Apostle) bears witness with our Spirits, that we
are the children of God, (Romans 8.16.). It did not only testify unto others by
those Miracles that did confirm their Religion, and consequently proved those
that did sincerely embrace it to be born of God, as well as their Religion; But
it evidenced these things also, to their own consciences, by a sacred
benediction, and a Divine, and more immediate concurrence with them, when they
compared their lives with the Rules of their Religion; And, consequently proves
to them, that they were heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ; which is the
argument the Apostle is there prosecuting, to give them comfort in the midst of
tribulation, and to animate their courage, and resolution, against the
sufferings of that present time. The graces and virtues visible in a Christians
life are said, in Scripture, to be the fruits of the Spirit, (Gal. 5.22.). Not
only that they are the fruits of the Gospel, which is, sometimes, phrased by
the word Spirit, in opposition to those legal observations which, being carnal
ordinances, are called flesh: But, they are so the fruits of the Spirit, that,
as he first dictated the Rule, so, does he also concur to the actions. If the
Evil Spirit could carry Christ to be tempted in the Wilderness; Shall we not
think the good Spirit could relieve him too! If the Prince of the power of the
Air, can be a Spirit working in the children of disobedience, (Ephesians. 2.2.);
Shall we conclude the Holy Ghost less active, or powerful, to work in those who
resign their wills, by the direction of his Laws, to his most sacred and safe
conduct? The promise of life and eternal salvation is made to us upon this
condition, that through the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the body, (Romans
8.13.): And though many things concur with the influences of the holy Spirit to
effect so great and victorious triumphs; Yet all causes act with a dependence
upon this glorious power which works in us both to will and to do, when we
prepare our selves for its reception, by endeavoring, what in us lays, to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, (Philip. 2.12, 13.). Preaching,
Prayers, Meditation, and hearing the word of God, are ordinary means to convert
a sinner from the error of his way; And yet S. Paul (though he sufficiently
magnifies the Preachers Office) says, that we are only workers together with
God, (2 Cor. 6.1.). And, it is well for us all, when God assists, and blesses,
our endeavors: And, God grant that those who attend such sacred institutions,
being swift to hear, may never be so swift also as to depart without a blessing.

Having thus both asserted and explained the coming of the holy Spirit to
influence men, the certainty of its operation, and the necessity of its
influence, which makes up this Chapter of my discourse; I shall close it with a
brief request to all who desire so to approve themselves to God here, that they
may not be rejected by him hereafter; That they would use all possible
diligence to obtain, and keep, the blessing, and influence of this holy Spirit,
which gives them such great assistance in sanctifying their minds, and ordering
all the actions of their lives: That they would well use the grace they have
received, that so they may be capable of more in the hour of trial, and at the
day of temptation: That they would pray frequently for new supplies of aid and
assistance; And that they would never by a vicious and unholy life, grieve the
Spirit, and cause it to desert them, lest through too much confidence in
themselves, they at last prove both Cowards and Apostates.

CHAP. XI.
HAving in the former Chapter, in some measure, proved that the Holy Spirit of
God descended, according to the predictions of the Prophets, and the promise of
our Savior; I shall now enquire into his work and business in this world,
amongst men who were rational and intellectual Beings; Who might (as some men
are apt to think) have, well enough, propagated Christian Doctrine, when they
had heard it from our Saviors own mouth; and had, for some time, daily
conversation with him; Without any other new assistance, besides the miraculous
gift of tongues. And what employment the Spirit of God could possibly have
among other men; As they will not be Religious enough to know; So, truly, they
are yet, very much to seek. However I shall adventure (without calling any men
names) to show, according to my steady, and long continued (though mean)
thoughts, what the sacred Spirit of God has done, and yet does, to guide men
into the ways of truth. In the promises where Christ (who was truth it self)
engages for the Spirits corning into the World in a more plentiful manner than
in foregoing periods; He seems to be described as a person different from the
Father and the Son: And I shall instance in one eminent promise to this
purpose, ( John 16.13.): Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth. Now that our great, and most blessed, Redeermer of
men speaks of a person here; And not of what is said to be an afflatus divinus
only, (as some have interpreted this place, to void the Doctrine of the most
glorious Trinity; Which is the great, and, I had almost said, the
distinguishing Article of the Christian Faith) is plain from the terms of this
Text; Because (...) is prefixed to (...); He, the Spirit of truth; And this
latter part, (which is a Periphrasis) does but acquaint us who the Person was;
Even the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the most Glorious Trinity, God blessed
for evermore. Now this profound mystery of the Trinity, however inexplicable it
may seem to be, in all particulars, to the understandings of men, who are loath
to think that any Beings are above their great capacities and reasonings: Yet
it has been always believed by the Orthodox, through all the Ages of the
Christian Church; And it is a point sufficient (if there were no other) to
baffle the Heathen Objection against our Religion, viz. That it cannot be
Divine, because there is no Mystery in it. But I design not to treat, in this
discourse, with any that own not Christ to be the Messiah; The great King and
Savior of the World: And therefore shall only acquaint the Reader; That Jesus
himself seems to take great care to insinuate, and fix, this fundamental point
in the particular promises of the Holy Ghost; Lest any persons, mighty in
reason, and wonderful in argument, should refuse to believe such a Mystery as
this, when apparently revealed, because their own reason is not able to
conclude the thing, or their language cannot fully explain it. In the
fourteenth of Saint John's Gospel, the sixteenth Verse, our blessed Savior
acquaints his Disciples, for their comfort and encouragement, with this great
promise; I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of truth. Here is one praying;
another sending; and a third given. So is it also at the twenty sixth Verse of
the same Chapter; But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to
your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Here is the Father sending,
in the Sons name, or (upon his account) the Holy Ghost, to teach the Apostles
those things which our Savior had more briefly hinted to them; And such things
also which the Apostles, through prejudice, could not then receive: And, to
bring those parts of the Christian Doctrine to their remembrance, which they,
through human frailty, might forget: That so they might be fitted to be the
publishers, and the sacred and infallible Penmen of the most excellent
Principles of the Christian Religion; And that it might, by their means, be, in
its purity, free from mixture, delivered to all the succeeding generations of
mankind. And now (by the way), what a slender plea have any Enthusiasts, of
this age, for any new revelations of Doctrine beyond what Christ preached to
the World? Since the Holy Ghost himself was never promised to the very
Apostles, to any such end and purpose. For, it cannot, with any reason, be
supposed, but that Christ whilst he was preaching in the world, delivered a
complete Body of his Doctrine: And had he not; (whatever becomes of a jus
divinum, for the government of the Church) He had, certainly, been less careful
than Moses. And, yet, the Author to the Hebrews says; He was faithful to him
that made, or appointed him; as, also, Moses was faithful in all his house,
(Heb. 3.2.). But, not to endeavor to work Miracles, and restore sight to such
as are resolved to be still blind, and to shut their eyes against the light of
the Sun; because it will discover that their deeds are evil, when darkness does
at once as well increase, as inspire, wilfulness or melancholy: To leave, also,
any farther explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity; Which I have hinted to
you, as well to mind you of the solemnity of a necessary Festival of our
Church, as to cause men to adore what they cannot understand; to admire that
with which they cannot be familiar; to praise what they cannot comprehend; and
to believe that Mystery which is plainly revealed; Though they cannot unriddle
the thing it self: To come more closely therefore to the business I have in
hand; The Holy Ghost promised, is said to be the Spirit of truth: And this not
only, (1.) Because he is Spiritus verax (as Slichtingius would have it, to
comport with his endeared notion of afflatus divinus); Nor, only, is he a true
Spirit, either in original, or operation; in opposition to what is gross, and
sensual: Nor (2.) because he truly and really proceeds from the Father; And
consequently has Authority enough to produce a faith in us, which must be
Divine: Nor (3.) because, being in unity with that Father and Son, from whom he
does proceed, he must be truth it self, (as S. John styles him: 1. Epist. 5.
Chap. 6.); and, consequently, cannot be guilty of a falsehood, unless we suppose
that God may lie; which the Apostle assures us is impossible, ( Heb. 6.18.):
And reason also concludes such a Being to be void of this, to whom we ascribe
all possible perfection. But ( Lastly,) he is called a Spirit of truth, in
relation to his Office and Employment; Because he guides others into truth;
Though from the precedent acceptations, and account given, of his appellation,
we may reasonably infer his capacity to instruct, and guide, others into all
truth: And that the Apostles, who were so miraculously guided, delivered
nothing to be the rule of men's lives, but what was true and came from God, and
therefore what they delivered, is to be both believed, and obeyed. And thus I
am come to the last and principal particular, that I aim at in this Part of my
Discourse, in which is contained the Office of the Holy Ghost in this
particular, and the substance of this promise; viz. He will guide you into all
truth.

Now this Conduct of the Spirit of truth, must be considered two ways, (1.) As
it related to the Apostles, and first Disciples of our blessed Savior. (2.) As
it concerns the whole Church of Christ, that is, or shall be, Militant in this
World.

First, Let us consider the holy Spirit of God, as influencing and directing
the Apostles, and first planters of Christianity, to whom this promise was
principally made; And, as it did concern all, so was it promised to all, to
guide them into all those truths that completed the Articles of the Christian
Faith, or were to be left as standing directions for the lives and actions of
those, who should embrace this Religion. He does not call S. Peter out, and
make this promise of infallibility to him, excluding all the rest from this
advantage: Nor does he here accost him in the name of the other Apostles; as he
does in that other Text, on which the Pope superstructs his Supremacy: We find,
indeed, S. Thomas, S. Philip, and S. Jude interrupting his discourse, by
proposing questions for him to explain: But, the last time he spoke to Peter,
we find him at once rebuking his confidence, and foretelling his sin; Nay, a
crime so great, as to deny him, (John 13.38.). And, therefore, all the rest of
his intervenient discourse, can concern him no more than it did his Brethren:
And it is well if, at present, it did as much; which, if others would be
contented with, we might easily grant it, and must do so, if we would not prove
his Epistles to want an inspiration from above. This promise then, concerning
the Apostles and primitive planters of the Christian Doctrine, so far as it was
useful to their extraordinary conduct, we must examine, and enquire what
assistance the Spirit gave them, to guide them into all truth. And this he did
in five particulars.

First, By an improvement of their understandings; Ordering, and directing, the
Ideas of their minds, that they might be able to frame adequate conceptions of
the truths, which they were to deliver to the World; And as he that created the
eye, can see, and he that formed the ear, can hear; So he that made the Soul it
self, and endued it with all its faculties, and powers, must needs be able to
impress the understanding with any notions he is pleased to infuse by the
powerful operations of his Holy Spirit. Now that he did exert such an
influence, had we no testimony* from the Scriptures themselves, will easily
appear to any sober and considerate inquirer, that shall compare the education,
and condition, of the Apostles with those admirable Doctrines, which they
delivered unto the world. Though S. Paul was bred at the feet of Gamaliel, yet
his learned Education made him but the greater persecutor of the Christians,
and more prejudiced against the Doctrine of our Savior; 'Till he was converted
by a Miracle, and a light had first dazzled his eyes, and struck him blind,
whilst a greater did illuminate his understanding, and, by its brighter glory,
darken and blot out those prejudicate notions that seemed before to irradiate
his mind: Though S. Luke was born and bred in an University, the City of
Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria, a place furnished with Schools of literature;
Though he had applied himself to the study of Physic, to which Philosophy was
a necessary preparative; Though be had studied in the Schools of Greece, and
Egypt, and seasoned his mind with learned accomplishments, so far improving the
abilities of his nature; And, though, to all this, he was a Jewish Proselyte,
and so far prepared for the Kingdom of God; Yet all this signified but little,
and would certainly have opposed Christianity with the greater strength, and
more subtilty, had he not been first converted to this Religion, and
accompanied Saint Paul; received the notices of those early, and first,
transactions of our Savior, and his Disciples, and been guided by the Holy
Spirit of God, in recording the History and Doctrine of our Savior, and his
Apostles. But, if we make the strictest enquiry into those twelve Apostles,
which our Savior sent to preach his Doctrine abroad in the World, we shall
find them all by their Education, either too much prejudiced, or unprepared, to
invent, or propagate, such a Religion: The greater part were a few rugged and
inconsiderable Fishermen, that knew only to catch Fish, and mend their Nets
when they were broken, and either eat, or sell their Fish when they had caught
it. And how unfit these were to preach rules of life to the world, to make
known Riddles, and explain Mysteries; To maintain their Faith against the
learned disputes of Rabbis, and Philosophers, or to commit a System of
Christian Doctrine to writing for future ages to live by, and that it might
become the rule for men's actions; Let any reasonable men judge. It must needs,
therefore, be a greater argument of a larger inspiration, that these men were
so slenderly prepared by nature or Education: And, by how much the meaner these
were, by so much the more powerful were the operations of the Spirit, to guide
them into all truth. But, besides the consideration of this, we have a more
sure word of Prophecy, to ascertain their inspiration from above; Since all
Scripture is given by inspiration of God; (2 Timothy 3.16.). And, since no man can
possibly know those Laws by which God will govern the World, 'till he pleases
himself to make them known; It must needs be, that he must impregnate the
minds, and inform the understandings, of those whom he designs to be the
Penmen of his Laws; And this he did, as to Moses and the Prophets under the
Old, so, to the Apostles in the New Testament, by his Holy Spirit: Therefore
was he to teach them all things, by informing their understandings, ( John
14.26.). And, by guiding them into all truth, (John 16.13.)

Secondly, The Holy Spirit of truth, guided the Apostles, and first publishers
of his sacred Doctrines, by quickening their memories; That what their Master
had, before, taught them, the Disciples, now, might remember for the benefit of
others. The memories of men, by reason of their own weakness, and the multitude
of objects which daily present themselves to the mind, and that variety of
converse, and numerous disturbances they meet with in a World, full of noise
and humor, are very apt to slip many things which they ought to register, and,
when they are entered, to lose the record. Hence is that admonition of the
Author to the Hebrews; that we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip; (Heb.
2.1.). The Apostles, therefore, (who were men of like passions with our
selves), had an extraordinary power assisting their memories; That those things
might again recur, which they had heard from our Savior, at that time when by
his-absence he was incapable of repeating, and orally to deliver that Doctrine
which, before, they had the advantage of hearing: The Spirit, then, by an
immediate impression, put their Spirits into such a motion, and proposed such
objects to their consideration and understanding, and so ranged the particles
of the brain, that the same images presented themselves, and they had the same
Ideas, and apprehensions which possessed their minds, when the trutns were
first delivered to them: Or, if I may be any way extravagant in endeavoring to
describe the manner of framing this miraculous effect; Yet sure I am that some
way or other, this was done, or the promise of the Holy Ghost was not fully
accomplished; For (says the Text) the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you, (John 14.26.).

Thirdly, This Holy Spirit of Truth inclined the wills of the Apostles and
first Planters of Christianity, to publish those things which were impressed
upon their understandings, and their memories now perfectly retained; and to
commit these truths to Writing, that future Ages might be able to read, what
they could neither see nor hear: To exhibit no more than what they had received
for the Divine Rule; and to live, also, suitable to their Doctrine, to avoid
the suspicion of Cheat and Imposture. Now, though this influence might seem to
be unnecessary to such as had imbibed the Christian Doctrine with their
understandings, because their wills might seem immediately to follow what their
understandings dictated to be true; and the reasonableness, and admirable
excellency of this Doctrine might be motive enough to persuade, as well to its
practice, as belief: Yet we find, by a woeful experience, that the wills of men
do not always follow the dictates of their understandings; But that we violate
Laws, which yet we are convinced to be true and good: If it were not so, few
men would embrace vice, and offer injury to the Precepts of Christianity; which
all men, of reason and discretion, must needs acknowledge to be excellent in
themselves, and infallibly sealed and authorized by God; who has by a
miraculous hand, attested them to the World. It was necessary therefore, that
the Apostles and first Publishers of the Gospel should be made willing, as well
as able, to accomplish all those things which might tend to the propagation and
assurance of the Gospel: And we cannot conjecture that so sudden an alteration
could be made, as we find in the Apostles, who, by their Trade and Education,
were rough and stubborn, (this being generally observed of Mariners) so as to
be brought to acknowledge such gentle precepts so opposite to their customs,
and inclination, without a superior influence mollifying their tempers, and
the powerful operation and persuasions of God to make them willing in the day
of his power. When Paul therefore was converted by a Miracle, and brought to
the acknowledgement of that Jesus whom he had persecuted; that glorious light
which shined upon his understanding, rectified also the perverseness of his
will, and inclined that to follow his Conviction; so that he became not
disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, but showed both to the Jews and Gentiles,
that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance,
(Acts 26.19, 20.).

Fourthly, The Holy Ghost led the Apostles into all truths of the Gospel, by
working Miracles to confirm their Doctrine. These are the great Seal of Heaven,
that sufficiently authorize whatever they are brought to give testimony unto:
For these being either visible effects beyond the power of natural Causes, or
some strange and extraordinary alterations of nature, by laying a restraint
upon its usual operations; Or causing it to take a different course by a
strange composition of second Causes, or a powerful concurrence of some Agent
not included in the immediate Cause; They argue some superior operation: And
we must attribute them to God, or the Devil. Accordingly have men used to
difference them, as they tend to a good, or a bad, design: Hence we find in the
Old Testament, two characters of a false Prophet, and consequently as many of a
true, as I have hinted immediately before, (1) If the sign, or wonder, that he
gives for confirmation of what he pretends, in its design destroys natural
Religion, i. e. what proceeds from the common reason of men. For if there arise
among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and the sign or wonder come to pass
which he gives thee; If this be wrought to draw men from the Worship of the
only one God, to pay Divine homage to a false one, or to many; The sign was
permitted only to prove them; And such a Prophet was not only to be accounted
false; But to be put to death for his villainy and imposture, ( Deuteronomy. 13. at the
beginning). (2.) When the Prophecy was not true, and the thing foretold followed
not, 'twas a sign that the Prophecy was bold and presumptuous, and what he,
that is a God of truth, never commissioned the Prophet to deliver, ( Deuteronomy.
18.22.). When signs, therefore, and wonders, were really effected, that tended
to the advancement of Religion; establishing what was written in men's hearts,
and destroying all that God had forbidden; and fixing nothing contradictory to
what had been confirmed to the Jews, but what did prefigure this new method,
and, at such a particular period of the World was predicted that it should be
destroyed; They must needs confirm the truth which those men delivered, who had
sufficient power and authority to work them. Miracles were things rationally
acknowledged to be sufficient signs of the Divine Commission of those who were
permitted to work them; when they carried, especially, such characters of a
Divine Power in their nature, or in their frequency, and continuation, as no
Devil could be supposed to have granted to him; Nor any man could possibly
effect to do mischief in the World: Thus, when Moses delivered the Law, his
Speech was followed with Thunderings and Lightnings, and the noise of the
Trumpet, and the smoking of the Mountain ( Deuteronomy. 20.18.). Which sufficiently
confirmed the Divinity of the Moral, and prepared the people for an obedient
reception of the Judicial, and Ceremonial, Law. And thus was it also at the
delivery of the Gospel. When S. John the Baptist sent two of his Disciples unto
Christ, to know whether he were the true Messiah, that was to give Laws unto
the World; Our Savior returns this answer; Tell John what things ye have seen
and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised, (Luke 7.22.). These Miracles, so full of
goodness and Divine influence, were a sufficient attestation of his Doctrine.
Hence he makes the same reply, also, to the Jews, when they proposed the same
question: The works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me,
(John 10.25.). And therefore says he of the same persons; If I had not done
among them the works which none other man did, they had had no sin; If I had
not done Miracles far beyond Moses and the Prophets, whom yet, upon the
authority of what these did, they believe; they might reasonably have pleaded
their Law against me; Which, then, had been blessed with as noble an
establishment, as what I now pretend to deliver: But now that I do such works
which no man ever yet did before me; they have no cloak at all for their sin,
nor any excuse for their unbelief, (John 15.24.). Now, as Miracles argued the
truth and Authority of our Saviors Doctrine; So they led his Disciples into
the same truth: For, from those Miracles which they saw him do in confirmation
of his Doctrine, they might reasonably be induced to believe what he delivered
to them; and when the power was yet continued to themselves, they might well
infer that they were still guided into the truth: Since the Holy Ghost thus
sealed it to themselves and others; and they had so powerful, and Divine, a
testimony to what they apprehended, and delivered. Thus when they had received
that Commission from our Savior, to go into the world, and to preach the
Gospel to every creature; They went forth and preached every where, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the word with signs following, (Mark 16.20.).
The same is attested by the Author to the Hebrews, that God bare the Apostles
witness, with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and distributions of the
Holy Ghost, according to his will, (Heb. 2.4.). This is the testimony he gave
unto the truth, by the Miracles which were wrought by those who published and
owned the Doctrine of our Savior, evidenceing its Divinity to themselves, and
others: For we (say the Apostles) are witnesses of these things, and so is also
the Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him, (Acts 5.32.).

Lastly, The Holy Spirit guided the Apostles and Primitive Disciples into all
truths of the Gospel, by an extraordinary support in the midst of great, and
raging, persecutions. Both Scripture, and Ecclesiastical History, informs us,
what trials and conflicts these had for the profession of their Faith, and a
firm adhesion to the Christian Religion. Their whole lives were a continued
tragedy, which did not end, but in blood, and death: The state of the Church
was such in those days, that All that would live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer persecution, (2 Timothy 3.12.). Nothing but cruelties from their severe
Adversaries, attended the profession and publication of the Gospel; Which was
the principal foundation of that Argument, of S. Paul, to prove the hopes and
certainty of the Resurrection, If, in this life only, we have hope in Christ,
we are of all men most miserable, (1 Cor. 15.19.). Hence the Apostle argues the
Hebrews to patience and courage in the midst of sufferings, from the
reflections upon what they had already overcome; That they might not, by a
future cowardice, lose the reward of their former adventures. Call to mind
(says he) the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a
great fight of afflictions: By having their Estates made a prey to their
enemies; by being made a gazing stock to the world; by bearing reproaches and
tortures themselves, and being companions to those, who were so used, ( Heb.
10.32.). They gat their bread with the peril of their lives; As the expression
is ( Lament. 5.9.); And, for the sake of Christ they were killed all the day
long, and no more accounted of than as innocent sheep appointed to the
slaughter; As S. Paul applies that of the Psalmist, ( Romans 8.36.). And, if we
view the ends of their lives, we shall find nature always anticipated, and
they snatched away by a violent fate, still swimming to Heaven in their blood.
One is crucified, another beheaded, a third is stoned, a fourth has his brains
beat out with a Club; Another is hanged by the neck against a Pillar, after
whips and scourges had made a Prologue to the Tragedy; One is flead alive,
another thrust through with a Spear; and a third dragged about the craggy part
of a street, till his flesh was torn off, and horrid pains compelled him to
expire. It would be endless to account for the dismal tortures which the
Apostles, and Primitive Disciples endured, their whole age being full of clouds
and storms; And the release from one torment, was but the entrance upon
another: They daily went in danger of their lives, which, were, indeed, but
continued deaths, and repeated tragedies: Now, what a wonderful confirmation
must this add to their own faith, as well as seal its truth to posterity, that
they should have such multiplied tortures, as anxious and cruel, as the malice
of enraged Adversaries could invent and execute; and yet would not accept
deliverance, if they must purchase it with the denial of their Faith; They must
needs be animated to the belief of those truths, in the profession of which
they were so encouraged, by a Divine power, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost,
that they suffered torments beyond their own strength to endure; Nor did the
rage and persecution of their Adversaries overcome them; Especially when we
shall consider too, that they could smile in the midst of flames, and look upon
their own blood with joy; When they could account Martyrdom a Crown, and such
deaths as were most painful and cruel, they could travel through, as the
nearest passage to their eternal reward: Which, whilst they viewed in a steady
and well fixed contemplation, they were able to conclude their afflictions to
be light, and to endure but for a moment; And that the future reward
overballanced them both in weight and duration. They could glory in what the
justice and custom of the world accounted shame; and rejoice that they were
deemed worthy to suffer for it (Acts 5.41.). They were always dying, and yet
lived; were able to account tortures chastisements, and could still rejoice in
the midst of sorrows, (2 Cor. 6.)* They could approve themselves the Ministers
of God in patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments; and that black Catalogue which S. Paul has recorded to
posterity; It must certainly convince both themselves and others, that the hand
of God did yet support them, and that the Doctrine was true which they
delivered, for which they were miraculously prepared, and now strengthened in
their sufferings for it, by the comforts* and assistance of the Holy Ghost.
They knew themselves to be a company of rude and illiterate men, (or at least
some of them were) not polished either by art or Education, for converse with
the learned Rabbis amongst the Jews, or the subtle Philosophers amongst the
Gentiles; and yet they baffled, and could silence both, had not their force
reached farther than their argument. And therefore (says S. Paul) where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? (1 Cor. 1.20.). S. Stephen; who was but
a Deacon to the Apostles, was yet so full of faith, and so endowed with the
power of the Holy Ghost, that he did not only amaze the people with the
greatness of his Miracles; but when many disputants were ranged against him, he
did not only smartly encounter, but overcame them too; For they were not able
to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke, (Acts 6.10.). They were
fain to leave their reasoning, and consult their subtilty; and had no way to
stop his mouth, but by a shower of stones, that took away his breath; What
could such men as these have done, when they were brought before the Council of
the Jews, or Tribunals of the Romans? Where all the subtle quirks of Law, and
all the inventions that malice could contrive, should be used to entangle their
innocence by craft; had not the Holy Ghost assisted them in making their
defense, loosened their tongues, and informed their understandings. This was
what was promised them before, and now as certainly and fully accomplished; For
when our Savior sent forth his twelve Apostles, and told them how they should
acouter themselves; what were the contents of their Commission; and how they
should demean themselves: He acquaints them also what dangers they were likely
to encounter with; They were sent forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; Every
one would endeavor to devour them; And therefore they should be scourged in
the Synagogues; and be brought before Kings and Governors, upon their Masters
account. But (says he), When they shall deliver you up, let it not trouble
you, that ye are not well skilled in the Law, where subtilty may cause a
Criminal to escape, when ignorance may draw the innocent into punishment: For
it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak; For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you, (Matthew.
10.19.). Now men that had such extraordinary confirmations of their
Apostleship, and found these assistances from the Holy Ghost, must needs be
fully convinced of those things that were imprinted on their understandings,
and would attest their Divine authority unto others, to whom they were obliged
to declare and publish them, when they themselves were so fully persuaded, as
not only to suffer all the inconveniences of this life, that could be brought
upon them by the subtilty of the Politicians of the World, but all the tortures
and cruel deaths, which malice was able to inflict. And thus did the Holy
Spirit of truth, guide the Apostles into all truth.

But yet (notwithstanding all this) It must be considered that though the
Apostles and primitive Disciples of our Savior, had thus the conduct of the
holy Spirit; Yet it was never intended to guide them into all truths of all
kinds; For this were to extend a promise beyond what was ever designed by the
Holy Ghost. Truth is a word of a large interpretation; it runs through all Arts
and Sciences, and is as comprehensive as all the objects and understandings of
men: For, wherever there is a conformity betwixt the object and a rightly
prepared intellect, there is truth: Nay, there is too often truth in that which
we do not understand. The Spirit therefore did not design, in his sacred and
infallible conduct, to extend the capacities of the sacred Apostles, to an
infinite comprehension, so as to cause them to know omne scibile; every thing
that is capable to be known: For that were not only to make a new creation, but
to put them beyond the capacity of Creatures; Nay, though he is Omnipotent, to
go beyond his own power, in making Beings as infinite as Himself. Nor did the
Spirit in the guidance of the Apostles into all truth, intend their
information, in the truths of all the Arts and Sciences extant in the World: He
did not design to instruct them in the art of Syllogism; Nor that they should
read natural Philosophy to the World; He did not intend to teach them to call
the Stars by their names; or that they should, by virtue of his instruction,
know their several motions, distances, or altitudes: He did not intend
Aphorisms in Physic; Or to give to them Geometrical proportions; Nor to breed
them curious and expert Artificers, though some of these have made themselves
Apostles; Nor to teach them the numbers of Arithmetic; Or the Astrological
signatures of things, or times and seasons; For, these were not for them to
know; because the Father had put them into his own power, (Acts 1.7.). And
therefore, as they were never so proud and bold, so neither were they so
unlucky, as the Pope, who must needs condemn a point in Geography, and the
tenet of Antipodes, for a destroying Heresy: So little did he know the
universal Empire he pretended to, that he did not understand the extent of it,
nor the Figure or Bounds, or Inhabitants of that Earth over which he yet
pretended an Authority. The Holy Ghost, therefore, guided the Apostles into
those truths only, in Divinity, which included the full Doctrine of the Gospel;
which our Savior delivered, that they might be able to preach them to the
present age, and commit them to writing for the use of all succeeding
Generations. The Spirit was not given to them to make them great Historians, or
Philosophers; but Christians; and to capacitate them, to be the planters and
founders of Churches, not the posts and standards of dispute; Or to be the
leaders of Sects and Factions in Philosophy: They were to erect a Pillar of
truth settled upon a firm foundation, Christ himself supporting the Building,
and this neither for Pasquins or Poetry, but for a Rule and directory of
standing Religion and Devotion.

CHAP. XII.
THE souls of men whilst housed in these bodies of clay, are darkened and
obscured, notwithstanding all the windows of sense, to let in the light of
external objects to an intercourse with the mind: For supposing our senses
could always make true and exact representations to our souls, which yet we
know are often deceived; yet these could only convey such things as are the
proper objects of the souls of men: Those of an higher, and more exalted,
nature, that are not capable of an image, must needs escape the perception of
our outward senses; and, if reason it self, when most disentangled from those
fetters which our senses too often impose, should endeavor to make
propositions and inferences about the essences of those things, whose spiritual
natures evade our sense, our notions could not be adequate to the things
themselves, nor could we fully comprehend what is infinite, nor have a positive
Idea of spiritual Beings, though reason might conclude their existence. Hence
is it that all our definitions and descriptions of these are therefore
imperfect, because negative; and, though we may conclude what they are not, we
never could, by humane power, yet resolve completely what they are; which makes
Divine Revelation necessary, and that we should have faith beyond our reason,
though we never believe without reason, to assure us of the authority we
confide in: This being, therefore, our state and condition in this World, we
must as well praise Gods Goodness, as admire his Power for sending us that
Spirit of Truth which guides us into all truth, that is necessary to conduct us
to eternal happiness. Now this Promise I told you, I would consider two ways,
(1.) As it related to the Apostles, and first Disciples of our Lord and
Savior. (2.) As it concerns the whole Church of Christ, that is, or shall be
militant on the earth. The first of these is already dispatched. And therefore
I now proceed to the second, To view the Promise of the Spirits guidance, as it
concerns the Church throughout the several Ages, and Periods, of the Christian
World. I have already proved the divine influence on the minds of men, (though
its immediate operation is too difficult to be explained, as to the manner of
its energy and work), and that we have no reason to disbelieve the thing, for
that we know not the manner of its operation: What, therefore, is now to be
discoursed (supposing the truth of its influence in general, and that
extraordinary assistance he gave unto the Apostles) is; How the Holy Spirit of
God possesses the minds of those with truth, who make themselves, by holy
dispositions, and a due exercise of their rational faculties, capable to
receive it; and what truths those are that the Spirit of God guides men into?

As to the first; supposing that which has been already proved; That the
Apostles were inspired from above to receive a full revelation of those truths,
(by opening their understandings and quickening their memories) that concern the
salvation of mankind, and that they committed them to writing, faithfully
recording them for the use of posterity; and that these are to be standing
rules for all ages and generations to come: I cannot find any other method the
Spirit has used, or does continue, to guide the ages succeeding the Apostles
into all truth; but what is contained in these three particulars. (1.) By those
Scriptures which he inspired the Apostles to publish and deliver. (2.) By
inclining the hearts of some men to continue that Ministry, which must endure
to the end of the world. And (3.) By confirming those truths contained in the
Scriptures, unto the minds of men, by cooperating with the external
ministration, by an internal work upon the understanding, will, and affections
of those who are inclinable in the day of his power.

First then, The Spirit of truth guides us into all truth, by those Scriptures
Christ and his Apostles delivered to be the standing rules for posterity; These
are those lively Characters, in which we may read the Nature of God, and the
directions of our lives; These are such an infallible rule of truth, that they
certainly guide those into it, who soberly and conscientiously apprehend and
follow them: They convey peace of conscience here, which is a thing, valuable
above Crowns and Kingdoms; and hereafter give us such possessions, as
infinitely transcend the power of our thoughts, and exceed all humane
expectations. These Holy Scriptures contain such a complete body of Doctrine,
that they need not any additions to be made to them; Let their own sense be but
sufficiently explained, and if they are permitted to speak their own mind, they
will neither want Apocrypha, nor Traditions, nor any new Revelation neither, to
render them a complete System of Divinity; Men's own Doctrines, and not Christ's,
want Traditions to confirm them, and it is the pride and covetousness of a Sect
of men, that would make all Christians groan with their burden, and void Gods
Word with their own pretensions (however they are varnished with the plausible
Epithets of ancient and Apostolical, that make such additions to the
Scriptures). But the Holy Scriptures, which were, at first, given by
inspiration of God, are able, of themselves, when rightly understood, to make
the man of God perfect: And, if they are able to furnish the Minister;
certainly, they are sufficient to instruct the people: Nay, to make them
thoroughly furnished to all good works, and are able to make them wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Jesus; (2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.). Hence is it
that these are so far from being taken from the adult, that they are to be
exposed to Childrens Learning; Or else, it would not have been Timothy's
commendation, that, from a child, he had known the Scriptures; And if such
Elogiums were made in the honor of the Old Testament, much more praises must
be given to the New, which shows us a way to be justified from those things,
from which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses (Acts 13.39.); and
brings life and immortality to light (2 Timothy 1.10.). The Doctrines, in the
Gospel, preached by Christ, and enlarged upon by the Apostles, through the
powerful inspiration of the Holy Spirit, are sufficient, accompanied with those
means appointed for their delivery, and the ordinary assistances given to those
that attend them with humility, to guide men into all those truths requisite to
be known in relation to their eternal welfare. And, therefore, blessed are
they, (says our Savior) that hear the word of God and keep it (Luke 11.28.).
From hence draw we the water of life; and these are the fresh springs of
salvation, at which mankind may satisfy themselves. Here have we directions to
demean our selves in all our various conditions in the World, that we may
endure both the Sunshine and the Storms: that prosperity may neither swell,
nor adversity consume us: S. Paul's advice, therefore, to Timothy, must be
attended by us also; To continue in the things which we have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing of whom we have learned them; and that, because evil
men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived (2 Timothy 3.13, 14.). Let the infallible men of mystical, and unintelligible,
demonstration, endeavor to prove what they cannot defend, but by their old
argument of force and fire; Let them blaspheme the Holy Ghost in the Apostles,
whilst, yet, they pretend to its inspiration themselves; Let those argue
against the Scriptures being a Rule, when rightly understood, that can defend
their Doctrine, only by a counterfeit tradition; Having no greater argument
against the sufficiency of the Scripture but because it consumes their Hay and
Stubble; And that they can there neither fetch Wood to burn us, nor Stones to
destroy us: But, let us, who are of the day, be sober, and be wise to that
which is good: And, then, as God formerly subjected Satan to the seed of the
Woman, for that by the Serpent he deceived their simplicity, and stained their
innocence; so, though now he endeavors by subtle impostors to beguile soft
and ignorant minds; he shall not always triumph in his villainy; But the God of
peace shall bruise him under our feet shortly (Romans 16.20.) The Providence of
God is a great deep; the reason of man is not able to fathom it; And, though he
may, for the punishment of our sins, the trial of our virtue, or to make our
adversaries ripe for destruction, permit some to erect their Plumes, and lead
captive unwary souls in triumph; yet, though he that stands must take heed
lest he fall, let us, according to S. Paul's advice, hold fast the form of
sound words (2 Timothy 1.13.); and contend earnestly for that faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints (Jude, ver. 3.); and withdraw from every brother that
walks disorderly, and not after what has been delivered (2 Thessalonians. 3.6.); And,
if we walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon us, and mercy (Gal.
6.16.): We need not then be afraid of the winds and storms, nor yet of him that
kills the body, if we truly fear him that can destroy the soul; Which none but
God himself can do: For (says our Savior), whosoever hears these sayings of
mine, and does them, is like a wise man who built his house upon a rock; and
though the rain descend, the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon
that house, it falls not ( Matthew. 7.24.). The God of truth, having now given us
a standing rule by the glorious inspiration of his Holy Spirit, expects that it
should be the general measure of our actions: And, as no sign would be given of
our Saviors death and resurrection, besides that of the Prophet Jonas; so no
rule can be expected by us, besides the Gospel, to the universal period and
general Conflagration: Hence is it that S. Paul puts all under the severest
curse, that pervert this, or preach another Gospel; And he does not only
anathematize men, but passes the same sentence upon Angels, if at any time they
should prove so bold and impious; Nay, he doubles the curse, to testify his
faith, and proclaim the irrepealable duration of the Gospel: But though we, or
an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, let him be accursed,
(Gal. 1.8.). What was indicted by the inspiration of the Spirit, is certainly
true, and we may confide in it; What is added by the wit of men, may possibly
be false; and therefore it is not to be be looked upon as infallible, any
farther than it can be proved, either directly, or by consequence, from the
Scriptures themselves. This is the rule which the ancient Fathers disputed
against the Heretics by; and this must be the measure and rule of our faith,
it being so full and plain, that no new Article must be added to our Creed; nor
any other rules of duty contradictory to these; all necessary things being so
easy, that any person of any ordinary capacity, using the methods of Gods own
institution, may soon arrive at knowledge enough to save him, if his will does
not rebel against his understanding, and he faithfully practices what he
knows: Nor could the end of Gods Law ever be obtained, or men be left
inexcusable, if it were so obscure, that it could not unriddle it self. For the
end of all Laws, being the obedience of those that are bound by them: How can
men obey that, which they cannot, by any means, understand? And, if it cannot
(by the ordinary helps of the learned in it) interpret it self, there must,
then, be a new inspiration to interpret what was inspired before: And then
there will be two inspirations, where one would have served: Because he that
can interpret a Law plainly to the World, might have made it plain at its first
delivery: Unless, perchance, we may think it wiser to do any thing with toil
and pains, which may be performed with ease and pleasure: It Is true indeed,
that many men by ignorance or wilfulness, when they forsake the Guides of Gods
appointment, heaping Teachers to themselves, having itching ears, may be, and
are, led into diverse errors, under the specious pretense of truth. And thus
those amongst the Galatians, who in those early days troubled the Church,
perverted the Gospel of Christ, (Gal. 1.7.): But this is no argument against
the sufficiency or plainness of the Scripture, in things necessary to our
eternal salvation: For they are, usually, more obscure Texts, that are to
exercise the more Learned and Critical part of men, upon which Heresies are
founded; And this, too frequently is occasioned by men that wrack and torture
their understanstandings, to conceive such things as are not here perfectly to
be known; Or, if they are to be fathomed by other men, yet are above the reach
of those, who thus ignorantly and erroneously apprehend them: Thus S. Peter
(speaking of S. Paul's Epistles) says, that in them there are some things hard
to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest (as they do
also the other Scriptures) unto their own destruction, (2 Pet. 3.16.). But
another sort there are too, that have too much subtilty to be accounted
ignorant; Who are some of he perverse disputers of the world, that first suit
their Tenets to their interest, and, then, violently press the Scriptures to
prove what they were never intended for: We should never, else, have heard,
This is my Body, brought to prove that absurd Doctrine of Transubstantiation:
Nor Feed my Sheep, to prove the Popes Supremacy: Nor He will guide you into all
truth, to prove his Infallibility: Nor, He shall be saved, yet so as by fire,
to prove a Purgatory: When all these Texts are capable of fairer and more plain
interpretations to another, and more coherent, sense; But that the ambition of
some men would entitle themselves to the government of the rest; And then frame
others belief to render them tame for such a tyranny, and to be subject to
whatsoever they will impose, when all this while they suit the Articles of the
Churches Faith, to the increase of their own Wealth, the better to support
their Pride and Usurpation. Nay, on the other side, we have those amongst our
selves, who call the Pope names, and yet embrace his Doctrine; And tie that
infallibility, which they rob the Roman Chair of, to their own single and
Enthusiastic determinations; Who, by misunderstanding some Texts of Scripture,
direct themselves by a private impulse, and then muster these to defend it: But
the Flower is not the less fragrant, for that the Spider thence will suck for
poison; Nor does the Scripture cease to be a safe, and sufficient Rule to
those, who soberly apprehend and follow it; Notwithstanding some may wrest and
misapply it: Nor does the Spirit, at any time, contradict it self: He having,
therefore, inspired some men to commit a Rule to writing for future
Generations, to read and understand, and put forth a Law that is sufficiently
plain and perspicuous; And men having reason and understanding enough, assisted
by the Spirits ordinary directions to guide themselves by the measures of this
Rule and Law into all truth: He expects, now, that they should order themselves
as they do by all human Laws; That is; to believe upon the Authority of the
Imposer; and live proportionably to so great a favor; and labor to understand
what he has put into their power to know: Remembering that of wise Agur; Add
thou not unto Gods words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar,
(Prove. 30.6.). The authority, God has given to the Governors of his Church,
empowers them to command or alter circumstantials, that all things may be done
decently and in order: In these we are to obey them that have the rule over us,
and to submit our selves, ( Heb. 13.17.): But no men are authorized to usurp
the Throne of God himself; To create new Articles of Faith; Or impose other
primary rules of duty, than what they find written in the Scriptures; They are
only to confirm, and explain, them: For, as we must not think of men, so
neither of Doctrines, above what is written: Our language and design, must be
the same with S. Paul; To deliver that which we also received, (1 Cor. 15.3.);
So may we be workers together with God; And when the world in the wisdom of God
(that is; by the works of God, which demonstrate his wisdom) knows not God; it
may please him, by the foolishness of preaching, (i. e. what some men account
folly) to save them that believe, (1 Cor. 1.21.). And this leads me to the next
particular in which the Holy Spirit of God guides us, that are remote from the
Apostles Age, into all truth which they delivered: By inclining the minds of
some men, to continue that Ministry that must have its succession unto the end
of the World: And this is the second way of the Spirits conduct.

That in all Religious Constitutions, which have been in the World, there has
been a separate, and appointed, Ministry, is more notorious than to spend words
in the proof of it; It Is too deeply planted in the minds of men, and it bears
an equal date with the Law of Nature fixed in us: Without this, public Worship
cannot have its constant and orderly Being; And had not this been established
with the constitution of Christianity, it would not only have been in a worse
condition, than any Religion which has possessed the world; But, than any
Trade, or Occupation among us, to the obtainment of which, men must be
learners, before they become able Workmen; Or* are permitted to exercise their
particular Callings amongst any well ordered, and embodied, Society.

The separation, therefore, of some men from the generality of Christians was
first made by our Savior himself; When he called the Apostles, and sent forth
the seventy Disciples to preach the Gospel unto human creatures. And, when the
time of his departure from the world was come; When he was to be received into
his Fathers Kingdom, in such a triumph as became a Conqueror, and one to whom
all power was given; He delivers his full Commission to his Apostles;
substituting them, in his own stead, to rule his Church, and to ordain their
Successors; That, like the Tribe of Levi, they might be legitimate, and by a
continued and distinguishable descent, they might be perpetuated to the end of
the World. As my Father sent me (says Christ) so send I you, (John 20.21.).
Or, as S. Matthew describes it; All power is given to me both in Heaven and in
Earth; Go ye, therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo! I am with you always (to wit; in
the exercise of this power, by your selves, and Successors,) to the end of the
world, (Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.). These are some of those gifts our Savior gave
unto men, when he ascended upon high, ( Ephesians. 4.8.) For, he gave some
Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors, and
Teachers: For the perfecting of the Saints; for the work of the Ministry; for
the edifying of the body of Christ: This is to endure, 'till we all come into
the Unity of the Body of Christ, to increase our knowledge in the Christian
Doctrine, and prevent our being deceived, and led into error. Hence was
Timothy's Office, which he had received by the Ordination of S. Paul, styled a
gift, (2 Timothy 1.6.): And lest these appointments should not be accounted the
products, and designation, of the Holy Spirit; These gifts are attributed to
the Spirit; Who is in himself one uniform Being, though these were diverse,
according to the variety of times and seasons; And they are all such
manifestations of the Spirit, as are given to men to profit withal, (1 Cor.
12.) Now as Gods Providence Rules the World, though we can neither discover his
Councels, nor are able to account for the manner of his operation; As he
disposes of Crowns and Kingdoms, determines our days, and disposes our
Habitations; though these things are accomplished, by an order and train of
second Causes, severally designing, and concurring to the end; So does the Holy
Spirit dispose the way of the Education of some, and incline their minds to the
Office of Ministers in the Church of Christ, that Gods people may not perish
for want of knowledge; But there may be some always to preach the Word, and to
convey Christ's Doctrine from Generation to Generation: That his Church being
built upon the true confession of an Holy Faith, as on a firm and well fixed
Rock, the gates of Hell may never be able to prevail against it (Matthew. 16.16.
and 18.). Now a sufficient number of such men, distinguished by their
Education, and manner of living, from those that are more encompassed with the
noise and disturbing affairs of this life, being prepared by a previous train
of circumstances, and having the advantages of their own parts and
understandings; And being by such means able to see into the notions of those
that have gone before them, having been used more to reading, consideration,
and retirement, than other men, and to weigh the just consequences of things;
They must needs attain a competent ability in the matters of Religion, to which
they most apply themselves; And they may be capable, through the assistance of
that Spirit, who calls and gives them Authority in their Office, to become
instruments in his hands, to guide men into the ways of truth. In all the Arts
and Mysteries of the World, we deem it a natural way to learn, by obtaining
one, that is skilful himself, to teach us the Principles and Grounds of his
Knowledge; And, we more certainly, and easily, obtain our design when we have
such a one to instruct us: So is it in matters of Religion; It Is a natural way
to inform our selves in those things that concern our Salvation, when we have
not only an an inspired Rule; But men Educated into the knowledge of those
things that prepare them for the understanding the Mysteries of Religion, and
are afterward appointed by due Ceremony and the direction of the Holy Ghost,
to guide us into all truth.

Especially (if in the last place) we consider that the Spirit of truth
confirms those truths, contained in the Scriptures, unto the minds of men, by
cooperating with the external appointed Ministrations, by an internal work
upon the understanding and affections. That there is such a thing as a Divine
illumination yet continued amongst Christians, as our Church owns it by her
Prayers; so no man can reasonably contradict it: Not that it does render any
man infallible, as the Romanists affirm; Nor inspire men with any new Doctrine
or Rules of life, besides what it has revealed in the Scriptures; as some
Enthusiasts adventure to determine: Yet, we must not, to avoid the extremes,
forsake so useful an Article of belief, that gives God the glory of his power,
and keeps us dependent upon him, and is so great a foundation of our prayers
and praises. Truth is not to be forsaken by the Jews, because the Samaritans
may be of the same opinion; Nor shall I (like the Jews in Barbary) refuse to
eat of that Meat which is dressed by one of a different persuasion: Or to drink
in the same Cup with a Moor, when he is a person of a wholesome Constitution,
until it has undergone the Ceremony of Washing: Truth, in this World, will be
blended with error; and it is the prudence, as well as piety of a Christian, to
make a separation of the Wheat from the Chaff, and not to slight and refuse the
one, because the other has been mixed with it. It Is true indeed (as Mr. Hales
expresses it). The Promise of the Spirit to the Apostles, which should lead
them into all truth, was made good unto them by private and secret informing
their understandings with high and heavenly Mysteries, which never entered into
the conceit of man: And, to us this promise is made good, because what was
written by Revelation in their hearts, for our instruction, they have written
in their Books: But yet this is not all the assistance the Spirit gives us:
For, though he does not inspire us with any new Doctrine; you he opens our
understandings to the apprehension of the old: I am far from admitting the
conceit of an impulse to be the rule and measure of our lives; because we know
what mischiefs have overspread the World, when propositions have been veiled
with such a pretense, and it may be our own as well as S. Austin's observation;
Tanto sunt ad seditionem faciliores, quanto sibi videntur spiritu excellere:
Men are the more prone to sedition, by how much the more they seem to excel in
their inspiration; yet there cannot appear the same danger, where the Spirit
only assists our understandings to apprehend those truths which are already
delivered, and inclines our wills and affections to embrace them; when
according to the direction of S. John, we are not so credulous, as to believe
every Spirit; but to try the Spirits, whether they are of God or no, (1 John
4.1.). Now, then only may we reasonably conclude, our understandings to be
influenced by the Spirit, when our notions agree with the written Word; For, to
the Law, and to the Testimony, (says the Prophet); if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no morning, or light, in them (Isa.
8.20.). There are diverse means natural in themselves, and rationally appointed
by Almighty God, for the informing men in the truths that concern them;
Reading, meditation, and hearing the Word, are proper methods to inform our
understandings, and to guide us into the way of truth; But prayer is,
therefore, wont to be superadded, not only to compose our minds, and make them
fit for Divine Contemplation, by a sequestration of our thoughts from those
external objects, that by intermixing themselves with those that are more
spiritual, confound our Idea's and notices of things, and render our minds more
loose and extravagant; But because Prayer supplicates those aids and
assistances of the Spirit, that facilitate our apprehensions of truth; by
removing objects that crumble and disorder them; and it renders our notions
more clear and durable. We use the means that are within our power, and set our
reason and faculties on work; and then the Spirit, by a secret operation,
enlarges our minds, and blesses our endeavors. Thus Paul must plant, and
Apollo water, although it is God that gives the increase (1 Cor. 3.6.). And
thus the Lord opened the heart of Lydia to embrace the Gospel, whilst she
attended to it, as it was spoken by S. Paul; (Acts 16.14.). When the Apostles
were yet diffident concerning the truth of our Saviors resurrection, though
they had the Books of Moses and the Prophets, and the Psalms by them, in which
these things were sufficiently predicted; yet Christ himself opened their
understandings, before they could apprehend the meaning of those Scriptures, (
Luke 24.45.) As we may do all things through Christ strengthening us, (Phil.
4.13.); So, separated from him, we can do nothing, (John 15.5.). The Spirit of
God has put much of our duty into our own power; yet has still reserved
something to himself; that we may be kept humble, depend upon him, and beg his
aid: For the animal man, that is not possessed with the Divine benediction and
influence of the Spirit, (who admits not of propositions proved only by
Miracles) receives not the things of the Spirit of God, because they appear
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, whilst he remains in that
condition, because they are spiritually discerned, are proved by Miracles, not
Logic, (1 Cor. 2.14.): Hence is it, that S. Jude describes sensual men, to be
such as have not the Spirit, (ver. 19. of his Epistle): Now, upon the view of
all this; As we have no reason, by our unbelief, to deprive our selves of what
is promised, and to shut out those assistances from our souls, which bless and
facilitate our endeavors; so we have no cause to say, that our safety is
beyond our power, and that Heaven is too high for our reach; since if we
solemnly prepare our hearts, and devoutly petition the assistances of the
Spirit, we may obtain it, and God will not be wanting to us, if we are not,
first, wanting to our selves. This is what S. Austin says, Facienti quod in se
est, Deus non deneg at gratiam; That God does not deny his grace to him who
does what is in his power: And that promise of our Savior, may relieve and
encourage us; That our heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask him, (Luke 11.13.) Let us act then with the dependence of creatures, and
yet not relinquish the reason of men: Let us not think to be drawn into an
understanding and belief of those truths contained in the Scripture by the
strength of a Miracle, and upon the wheels of an extraordinary Providence; to
be snatched out of the pit of ignorance by an irresistible force, and informed
by an Apostolical illumination: But, let us use those means that are now put
into our own power, for the full apprehension of all divine and necessary
truth, and walk according to what we have already attained the knowledge of;
that our obedience, according to what we have received, may attest the
sincerity of our minds: And then, if any thing yet remains, which is necessary
farther for us to know, God will use some method or other to inform us; and, by
his Spirit, dispose our understandings to receive it; For God shall reveal even
this unto us; and we have S. Paul's word for it ( Phil. 3.15, 16.). And thus I
have now, at length, considered this promise of leading men into truth, both as
it concerned the Apostles, and as it also relates unto our selves: I have
showed how it guided them; and how it does still lead us into Truth. There is
now but one thing more that will want only a brief reflection, before I arrive
at some practical Inferences from the whole discourse; and that is the latitude
of this Promise, in relation to its object; which, as it has been already
discoursed on with reference to the Apostles; so must it be explained in
relation to our selves: For this universal, all truth, must not be understood
in the utmost extent it is capable of, no more than it was with reference to
the Apostles; but it must be limited, in these following particulars.

First, The Spirit guides us into all truth, which may be necessary for the
ordering our conversations in this World, suitable to the Religion, we are
baptized into. There are directions published in Sacred Writ for our Christian
deportment in all our various states and conditions: From whence S. Paul, in
the general, exhorts, that our conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ (Phil. 1.27.). Which would be a strange and insufficient direction, were
there not in it a complete rule for our lives: The duties of a Christian are,
either concerning God, others, or our selves: As to the first, we are commanded
to worship God in spirit and in truth: The devotion we pay him must be suitable
to his being, and the general rules given in the Gospel ( John 4.24.). And we
must love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with
all our mind (Matthew. 22.37.). As to the second, we have this direction, To do
to others as we would have them do unto us (Mat. 7.12.); And to love our
neighbors as our selves (Matt. 22.39.): And as to our selves, we must walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying: (Romans 13.13.). Nay, our whole duty is
comprehended in one Text of S. Paul; who tells us, that the Gospel teaches us,
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in the world (Tit. 2.12.): Piously toward God;
Righteously toward our Neighbors; and soberly in relation to our selves. Nor
have we only these general directions, but those also that are so particular,
that we may hence take the measure of our duties; and such prudent advice is
given in all the conditions that may happen to us: That we are neither left
without proper counsel, nor yet without comfort and relief.

Secondly, The Holy Spirit of Truth guides us into all those Divine Truths
which we ought to believe; and of these he has given us so exact an account,
that no new Article is to be added to that Faith, which has been already
delivered to the Saints. The Apostles Creed, in which are contained all things
necessary to complete our belief, is in every Article revealed in the
Scripture; And men that go too far beyond it, are apt to be wise over much, and
to think, and conclude, beyond sobriety: and therefore,

Thirdly, The Spirit thus guides us into all truth that concerns our future
happiness, and salvation: It has informed us, that there is such a state, by
bringing life and immortality to light, in the Gospel: and it has laid out and
smoothed the way that leads to it: It has given some description of the state
it self, as far as it was fit for us to know, or our frail capacities can
receive: so that we may accommodate the words of the Psalmist to the Holy
Spirit; Thou shall guide us with thy counsel, and afterward receive us to
glory (Psalm. 73.24.): These are the truths the Holy Ghost still guides us into,
as far as our frailty is able to comport with his methods and influence: He
does not now come amongst men, to cause them to speak diverse Languages; or to
work Miracles amongst those who have the Records of the Gospel: Nor yet, to
reveal such secrets, as the Father has put in his own power, and properly
belong to God alone. He does not help us to search into the Closets and Decrees
of Heaven, no more than he discovers the Councels of Princes; nor does he
elevate men's understandings, to distract themselves with things that are above
them; But, having given the Law of Life, he guides our feet into the way of
peace.

CHAP. XIII.
HAving thus far accomplished my design, in confuting men's false pretensions to
inspiration from the Holy Spirit of God, upon due examination of others
writings, and mine own thoughts raised for ought I know to the contrary, either
by my converses with, or observations from, other men, (for I dare not call any
thing mine own, so as to be any first inventor; Having no Common-Place-Book to
direct me): Or else from some Superior benediction upon human endeavors,
which I have attempted in some part, to prove, and vindicate; And to show, in
this, all that I believe, or can, at this time explain, in any measure unto
others: That there may be some farther use made of this writing, I shall
conclude all with a few brief Observations and Inferences from the whole, or
some parts of this Discourse.

And, First, Every man ought to judge for himself in matters or Religion that
are proposed to his belief, or practice, as far as he has abilities, and
capacity to understand. Because S. John exhorts all men to try the Spirits
whether they are of God: And this will neither seem to be absurd, or
impossible, when we shall consider, that we are men endued with rational
faculties; that we have the use of the Holy Scriptures, in which all things are
plain, that are universally necessary to the Salvation of mankind; That we have
Guides appointed to help us in the interpretation of what is difficult, and the
Holy Spirit promised to assist us in all; Which God gives to every one who, in
earnest prayer, devoutly asks it; And which is present with him, in all
emergences, 'till, by a vicious life, he strangely grieves him, and by an
obstinate continuance in the habits of sin, he provokes it totally to withdraw
from him. Were there an human Throne of infallibility erected, to which all
others might appeal, and rest satisfied with the determinations of him that
possesses it; There would be no occasion of an Apostles direction to* try the
Spirits; But, since we are exhorted to prove all things, that we may hold fast
that which is good; And the Scriptures direct us to no such human
infallibility, but assure us that what is not of faith is sin: As it produces
the greatest satisfaction to every man to settle his own notions in Religion;
So it is his duty to examine the Doctrines and Opinions of men, propounded to
his belief, or which are designed to guide his practice before he believes and
entertains them; Making Gods Word his rule in all things that are plain and
evident; And taking the assistance of those Guides, and Teachers, which God has
appointed and set over him, in those points that are more difficult and
obscure: And this, if done with that humility, devout prayer for Gods
assistance, and true industry which becomes a man in so great a concernment, as
that of Religion, will either find out all truth; Or, if he remain in any
error, it will be such as God will never condemn him for; Since the most
gracious God will never expect from mankind, that their apprehension of things
should exceed the cacapacity of their reception, and what the means of his
appointment cannot help them to: Nor that either their belief, or actions,
should ever exceed the power of their Beings: And those that so studiously and
industriously endeavor to give a check to men's reasoning and examination about
the Doctrines they propound, render their opinions things to be very much
suspected; And will give us to understand that their deeds are evil, when they
hate the light: And as for that peace among Christians that the pretended
infallibility in the Church of Rome, or any where else, boasts an establishment
and continuance of; Whilst Protestants are crumbled into Sects and Divisions:
We may easily reply, that they have their Controversies as well as we; and
parties among them that oppose each other with an equal heat, and eagerness, in
dispute with other mortals, and are distinguished by their several
denominations; Even as the Jesuits difference themselves from all, being such
sworn Vassals to the Court of Rome, that they endeavor to support it to the
ruin of the Church; Let the Romanists and others, therefore, first pull the
Mote out of their own eyes, and then they may the better see to pull the Beam
out of another. But why may not such peace and order, as are convenient, (and
perhaps as much as can ever be obtained) be preserved among men professing
Christianity, by the public Authority, checking the disorderly actions of men,
without imposing setters on their belief? Which it is altogether impossible to
compel, or punish either, if men were so wise as to keep it to themselves, and
not trouble others by discourse: I doubt not but it may be done, as well as
Authority keeps men in a tolerable order, in relation to the management of
secular affairs, though he that administers it, is not infallible; Nor do all
that are Subjects still concur in Opinion with him. Preserve, therefore, your
judgment of discretion, and use it too, that you may not be led like blind
men; when you have eyes to see, and helps to assist them when they wax dimm:
And then having settled your selves in the true Religion,

Secondly, Let me exhort you to stand fast in it; Not to be, like waves of the
Sea, rolling to and fro with every tempest, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine; Not to be pleased with every new appearance in the world, because
variety, in other things different from Religion, is so grateful to the
generality of men: For in such things they may have their choice, and not be
limited by a superior power: But our option, in relation to Principles of
Religion, must be directed by a superior rule and guide; And, having once
found out this, we must not vary, upon new pretensions, from what this
prescribes to us; Lest, having left those paths that should direct us, we
wander about we know not whither: Satan gets great advantages upon unsteady
minds: And it is easy to make a new impression upon those heads that are always
soft, and therefore fit to receive any: Who have no notions of things fixed and
settled, but the images and representations, that are the Book in which they
read all their Propositions, interfere with each other, and are either
confused, or else are crumbled and broken in pieces: Besides, Religion is of
that nature, that if we play with it, as a thing indifferent, or change the
true Principles for those that are false; We either lose it quite in the midst
of variety, or it is with great difficulty, if ever we recover it: This the
Apostle plainly tells us, ( Heb. 6.4.). It is impossible, or (as the word (...)
there signifies) very difficult, for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; If
they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance. Hence is it that our
Savior charges men to take heed what they hear, (Mar. 4.24.): And S. Paul
exhorts men to hold fast the form of sound words, (2 Timothy 1.13): And S. Jude
urges, that we should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered
unto the Saints, (third ver. of his Epistle). Let us, therefore, that are
grounded in our Religion, behave our selves as men that are resolved; And not
by any means, be frightened from our Faith, by the ghastly looks, the bold
threats, or the pretenses, of new Revelations from any: But, let those
Scriptures we have already received, and our shorter Creeds drawn from them, be
the standing and perpetual Rule of our Faith: For variety will disturb us while
we live, and almost distract us when we come to die; and, in all probability,
deprive us of our future happiness. We cannot but be sensible of the dreadful
condition of those men that are ready to depart out of this, before they have
prepared for another world; Who have all their guilts standing round about
them, and affrighting them with their ghastly appearances, when they are tossed
and tumbled upon a Bed of sickness, when they can see nothing but death before
them, and the dismal prospect of a blacker and worse state beyond it. And when,
to all this miserable and frightful scene of things, shall be added inward
pangs and convulsions of mind, doubled and heightened either by the falsehood or
uncertainty of those Principles by which we direct our eyes in this view; How
tragical and horrid must our condition be? When our Spirits, that should
support us under the infirmities of our bodies are so wounded within us, that
they are a torment to themselves; and our own doubts and vexatious
uncertainties about those Principles of Religion, that can only guide us
through the Chambers of death, and let in the light from some glorious Regions
beyond the grave, so increase upon us, that we are miserably tortured betwixt
hope and fear; when our settled belief of future things can only render our
passage pleasant, and our condition tolerable. Now, since a settlement of our
Principles in matters of Religion, is of greater concernment to us, than the
settlement of our Estates; Because these only serve to defray the charges of
our Bodies, whilst they ride Post through a shorter stage, when those prepare
us for, and enter us into Heaven, and must maintain us through all the Ages of
an endless Eternity: And since the Principles of Christianity are the most
excellent in themselves, and have the best evidence of their Divine Authority,
of any precepts of Religion extant in the World; And we have exhibited, in
Sacred Writ, a method to find out what has been revealed from Heaven; Let men's
pretenses be what they will, under whatsoever plausible denomination, Who, that
is rational, will not conclude it to be both his duty and his interest, if he
has a veneration for God, or a due reverence and regard to his own being, to
settle himself upon the foundations of Christianity, and upon these to build
his belief and practice, till at last, through the merit of the great Redeemer
of men, he reaches Heaven? Not to pluck the Stars out of the Firmament, but, by
the will and favor of Almighty God, to ascend above them, and enjoy an
happiness suitable to man's glorified capacity in those blisful Regions, that
can neither admit of a decay or period; but shall continue their state, and to
true Christians their happiness in them, through all the endless, unmeasurable,
spaces of a boundless and incomprehensible Eternity. And now to conclude this
exhortation with Arnobius's Argument, and persuading Rhetoric, at the latter
end of his First Book against the Gentiles: If men have gentle souls, capable
of impression, they cannot (under pretense of other rules) offer any injury to
Christ, nor reproach his Religion, but embrace both, if but upon this account
only, that they promise to them prosperous things; Things to be wished for, and
earnestly desired: Can any one refuse to give honor and obedience to the Son
of God, who was the Messenger of glad tidings, who vanquished the shades and
darkness of the grave, and brought life and immortality to light; Who always
preached such Doctrines as cannot hurt the minds of any, but fill them with a
more secure expectation? O ingratum and impium seculum! as he goes on; O
ungrateful and wicked Generation! If a Physician should come to you out of a
far Country, and should promise you such an universal Medicine, that would
infallibly cure you of all diseases; would you not presently run after him, pay
all the signals of Courtship and Honor, and receive him with all kindness and
hospitality? Would ye not wish his Medicines to be infallible, by the
application of which you are promised freedom from those miseries that attend
your bodies even to the utmost period of your age? Nay, though the thing were
yet doubtful, would you not (being inflamed with the love of your own welfare)
commit your selves to his conduct, and not obstinately refuse to drink even his
unknown potion, in hope of your own health and safety? Eluxit atque apparuit
Christus rei maximae nunciator, etc. Christ, the proclaimer of great tidings,
has now shined, and appeared in the World; What cruelty then, what barbarous
inhumanity, what insuperable pride is it with a supercilious disdain, to
contemn him who brings such glad tidings unto men? Let us embrace therefore his
joyful Message, give credit to that which affords such hope, and pay all
reverence and honor to him, who is the messenger of him that made us; Who came
into the World, to seek and to save that which was lost; And to give to us
eternal life; Men may (if they please) contradict the kind promises of our
Savior, and suppose a future state impossible; But it is more impossible for
any man to prove his denial; Or, with any certainty, to convince himself, that
there is no such state of men hereafter: Since therefore it must remain
doubtful to those that will not believe the Gospel, is it not more reasonable
to receive this Revelation so well attested, and to renounce others that are
not so, than to leave things of such an infinite concernment at so miserable an
hazard? Nay, since there can be no other than probable proofs of future things,
when Arguments are taken from their own nature, without the admission of Divine
Revelation; Is there not greater reason even when two things seem uncertain, to
adhere to that which is more probable; And to that which gives us some hopes,
rather than to that which affords us none at all? In this there can be no
danger, to believe there is a future state, there may be great in the denial of
it; If it be not true, it makes us yet live with more comfort, and die with
less trouble and reluctance.

But perhaps all may now be willing to believe the Scriptures to be true; Yet
such Faith, alone, will not gain the prize, though we finish our course in
fighting for it; Therefore let men's belief of a future immortality, and a
joyful state, evidence it self in endeavors to obtain it: For that faith is
only fancy that thinks to be crowned without obedience; And to believe the
History of the Resurrection of our Savior, and not raise our selves to newness
of life, will leave us still dead in our sins: Credere se in Christum quomodo
dicit (says S. Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae) qui non facit quod Christus
facere praecepit? How can he be said to believe in Christ, who does not do what
he commands him? And a little before in the same Tract; Immortalitate potiri
quomodo possumus, nisi ea, quibus mors expugnatur and vincitur, Christi mandata
servemus? How can we enjoy eternal life, unless we keep those Commands of
Christ, by which death is assaulted and overcome? S. John tells us, He that
does righteousness, is righteous; And though men pretend other signs which are
as easily confuted, as they are made; Yet, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments, (says our Savior, Matthew. 19.17.). And S. Cyprian, will
vouch the application, if I suppose this to be the condition to obtain it, For
though the Christian Law be a Law of liberty, yet it is a Law still, that
commands us to act like Religious men, and not think to be drawn to Heaven upon
the wheels of an extraordinary Providence, and craned up to Paradise by an
irresistible Power; We ascend to Heaven by gradual advancements of virtue and
devotion, nor can we think that all mankind are perpetually to be saved like
the Thief, upon a Cross: We must not think to mount above the Clouds, through
the vapors of repeated Debaucheries, to rend the Skies, and make Heaven open
by louder Oaths, and thundering Execrations; Or to jump out of Dalilah's lap
into Abraham's bosom. No, surely, they that have done good, shall go into life
everlasting; But they that have done evil, into everlasting punishment.

Thirdly, We learn from this discourse, to praise God for giving us the Gospel,
and to admire and extol the Holy Ghost himself, who in such an eminent manner
assisted the Apostles to commit so excellent a systeme of religion to writing,
that we, of the latter ages of the World, may read, what we could not hear; And
by the ordinary conduct of the Spirit of truth, be guided to the knowledge of
those things, which they were extraordinarily inspired to deliver. Not to
commemorate so great a favor, must be the highest ingratitude imaginable: Let
us be as thankful then as we are knowing, and as we increase daily in the one,
let the other run parallel in the enlargement. God is pleased to own himself
glorified by our praises; This we do when we praise him with our tongues; But
then does it become most glorious, when it is followed with an holy and
Religious life: The former may proceed from hypocrisy; But attended with the
latter, it makes the whole Trinity to rejoice, and secures to our selves those
Graces we already have, and engages God to give us more, as our future
conditions shall want supplies: To him that has, shall be given (says our
Savior): Nay, this in an especial manner rejoices the holy Spirit of God,
whose proper work it is to sanctify; And a vicious life is said to grieve him:
And how acceptable a Sacrifice the whole is, appears in what he says by the
Psalmist, (Psalm. 50.23.): Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; And to him that
orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. Praises and
thanksgivings are the natural results of a sense of mercies and favors
impressed upon the minds of men: And we conclude those to be unworthy of a
benefit, that will not acknowledge the goodness of their Benefactors; And the
proportions of thanks, must take their measures from the benefits received; How
much therefore the sending the Holy Ghost to inspire the Apostles, and by them
to convey light unto the World, to conduct mankind to glory and immortality,
exceeds all the temporal favors we do enjoy; By so much the more must our
hearts be lifted up, and our lives express our gratitude to him that sent him,
and to him who by his merit and intercession, procured him.

Fourthly, Did the Spirit of truth, guide the Apostles into all truth necessary
to the Salvation of men; And does he still influence our minds, and promote our
endeavors, in making enquiry after the things that conduce to our peace? Then
let us pray frequently to Almighty God, for this influence and benediction of
the Spirit. Prayer was that which prevailed with God to send him in so eminent
a manner, and for such glorious designs into the World, and prayer will still
continue him here; I will pray the Father (says Christ) and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
truth, (Joh. 14.16.). Prayer has not only an influence upon our selves, as it
fixes our minds, and makes our holy resolutions steady, but mightily prevails
with God himself, who will crown what he has commanded with success; In this,
therefore, lies our greatest strength, in the performance of which duty
soberly, and with a suitable devotion, and intention of mind, we may be said to
wrestle with God; Nay it conveys to us those assistances of the Spirit, that
are useful to us for the sanctifying our natures, and carrying us through the
hazards and various circumstances of our lives; For if ye being evil (says our
Savior) know how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? (Luke 11.13.).
Let us not then be wanting to our selves in this duty of Prayer, since so great
an advantage attends its devout and hearty performance; and to public Prayer,
whereby God is most glorified, the pains are only presence, and devotion.

Fifthly, If God sent his Spirit upon the Apostles, to guide them into all
truth, that we might have safe and infallible Rules to order and direct our
actions by; Then see how God values soundness in the Faith, however men too
much disregard it: If either any Creed, or none at all, could have carried men
to their future bliss, Christ need never have come into the World, to deliver
an universal Doctrine in the Gospel; Nor sent this Holy Spirit of truth, to
guide the Apostles into all truth. This necessity, therefore, of being sound in
the Faith, was the reason why our Savior, and his Apostles, cautioned men
against Prophetical pretenders, and false Teachers; to take heed what they
hear, (Mark 4.24.). To have a care that the light which is in them be not
darkness, (Luke 11.35.). And to take heed lest there be in any of them an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, (Heb. 3.12.). Hence is it,
because (as S. Peter says) there are damnable Heresies, that the unsound
Cretians were so severely to be reproved, that they might be sound in the
Faith, (Tit. 1.13.). Hence is it that S. Paul commands Timothy, to hold fast
the form of sound words, (2 Timothy 1.13.). Which probably referred to some brief
Creed, or summary of the Christian Faith* delivered to him by the Apostle;
Though we find them now Burlesqu'd, and flouted at* But, alas! with as little
wit as reason. From hence finally was it that S. Jude exhorted those, to whom
he wrote his Epistle, to contend earnestly for the Faith, which was once
delivered unto the Saints, (3. ver. of his Epist.) We are not now to make our
own Faith, nor is it indifferent what we believe* Let us receive therefore what
has been delivered out of the Scriptures, through all the several Ages of
Christianity, and endeavor to make our lives as pure as our Faith.

Lastly, We may learn from this Holy Spirit of truth, to speak truth; and by no
methods to impose upon one another; That we may evidence to God, our selves,
and the world, that the Spirit of truth has still an influence upon our minds.
There are a generation of Vipers among men, whose teeth are Spears and Arrows,
and their tongue a sharp Sword; That ingross the whole trade of lying, and yet
pretend to be men inspired; These receive false News in gross, and then retail
it out to others; Their tongues indeed are very sharp, and no wonder neither,
since they keep the Whetstone wholly to themselves: These are your itinerant
Historians, that, to consume our Corn, carry, always, firebrands at their
tails; Who lie so often, that they can hardly believe themselves when they
speak truth, and give to all, that have had the curse of their conversation, a
plain testimony who their Father is: But, let not any of our souls enter into
their secrets; But resolve to resemble the Spirit of truth, in abominating all
lies and hypocrisy, and to qualify our selves for our future ascent to Gods
holy Hill, by speaking the truth in our hearts, (Psalm. 15.) Our Savior had no
guile found in his mouth; And we must follow so good an example; unless we
think lying the Character of a Saint, and perjury to put on a Martyrs Crown; S.
Paul did not think so, when he forbad the Colossians, to lie to one another,
seeing they had put off the the old man with his deeds, (Colos. 3.9.). Let us
therefore beware of Arrogance, and Calumny; Of detracting from others, or
attributing too much to our selves; And let us imitate the Holy Spirit under
the Gospel, by guiding our selves into all truth; So shall we avoid both sin
and shame, and eternal confusion at the great and terrible day of the Lord,
that we may then give up our accounts with joy, and not with grief. Would we
but endeavor to follow the sacred Spirit of God, who is so ready to influence
our minds, in truth, and faithfulness, Commerce and Trade would be more
innocent, we should neither betray our own selves by any false, or glozing
language, nor should we suffer by plain dealing: Oaths would again become
Religious among English men, nor would any be unjustly executed by guilty, or
scandalously freed by an Ignoramus; Our gracious, and truly Great, Monarch
would be safe, without the base attempts of any to secure him; He would be our
own, and we at his wise, and lawful, disposal, by his Coronation Oath, and our
sworn Allegiance to him: Every man, were there truth among us, might enjoy
peace in his own capacity; he might sit under his Vine and his Fig tree, and
Liberty, and Property, would never be bones of contention more: But if we
remain Hypocrites in Religion, and false to each other, we can neither expect
that God or men should be our friends; Because what in us lies, we peck at the
foundations of the World, and make the whole Creation groan; We shake the main
Principle of Trade and Commerce, when we are such wretched creatures, that no
body can believe us; And, we cannot but enrage the Great God, who, being truth
it self, has sent his Holy Spirit unto us, to guide us into the ways of truth:
Whatever guilt, therefore, any person may, by the iniquity of times, striking
in with his own easy inclinations, have contracted to himself in this point;
Let him now repent while it is called to day, lest the night come, in which
terror and astonishment will surprise him, whose obscure shadows will, by
degrees, withdraw the pleasing light from him, till it lodges him in a state of
blackness for ever.

The Conclusion.
WE are here placed in a World so full of objects, that affect our external
senses, that we are naturally led more by these, than we are by faith; And when
by degrees we abstract our thoughts, and fix our minds on things above, we
either weary the powers of our minds, and make them sink into a stupid
inadvertency, or else are so pleased with the sprightliness of our creating
fancies, that we nimbly make Idea's in our brains of such seeming things, as
never were, nor ever shall be; And so we lead our selves into the belief of
what was not designed to be the object of our understanding, no more than it
shall be the subject of our possession. Sometimes these things are projected
before hand, by the cunning politic men of the World, who by such means intend
to impose upon others to carry on secular interests, that may, in the end, be
gainful to themselves; And, sometimes, men by reason of their weak and unable
constitutions, acting contemplation beyond their own capacity to manage it,
impose upon themselves, till they really believe their own thoughts of objects
that yet have no real existence, nor are ever like to have a being in the
Universe. Some think too much, and others too little; Too much learning makes
one sort mad; and others are mad, because they have so little. Some men by
sinking themselves into a deep melancholy, and others by a nimble and
exorbitant agitation of their blood and spirits, command themselves into
ecstasie or frenzy; And then their pretensions grow so big, that they become
proportionably tall too, till they aspire to the storming the Walls of Heaven,
attempting to blow open the everlasting Gates, that they may pry into those
things which are locked up from the inquiries of men; And thus being puffed and
swelled up, it proves only to be Tympany and disease, when we think we have
true conceptions, and when our own thoughts have raised our fancies, we
conclude, that the Spirit overshadows us, and our obscure opinions, or strange
propositions, raised by the sudden transports of our minds, are too often, with
confidence enough, boldly averred to be the immediate dictates of the Holy
Ghost. Want of true and ingenuous education, and thereby the more exact
assistances of reason, causes many of those who would be accounted more
spiritual than other men, to think themselves inspired from above, when an
unusual fear, a sudden joy, or a powerful disease has brought Convulsions into
their Nerves, and seized their reason and judgment with a Palsy, so that all
their notions are jog'd into a confusion, and their faculties can neither
embrace or pursue their proper objects. But by what means soever the thoughts
or expectations of such men are lifted to an height, waiting for an impulse,
sighing and groaning for an unusual influence: Vain are those hopes, where
there is no promise, and uncertain that rule of determination of things which
appears to be fallible and deceitful; And yet thus are all the expectations of
those who think the Spirit guides them into truth by other means than what I
have already showed you, or to any rules and measures of religious actions,
than what are plainly laid down in the Word of God, or thence drawn by a fair
and truly Logical deduction: If you should be at the trouble to examine a
little all the pretended impulses of men, their great variety will evince their
folly, and their opposition to each other, their deceit and falsehood. Is there
any Sect, pretending to Enthusiasm, that does not peremptorily, and with the
greatest confidence, assert the Spirits internal seal to their principles,
although just opposite to each other, and all perhaps contrary to the
Scripture? This is the great fountain, which yet divides into so many streams,
whose waters all have different tastes according to the channels in which they
run, and the variety of soil through which they pass: This is made the cause of
separation, which in it self is still but one; This makes men divide from one
another, and all from that Church to which they should belong; proving each
others Doctrines erroneous, and all still by the same Spirit: As if the God of
order delighted in division; and different Religions, like variety of
creatures, proclaimed Gods Wisdom and his Power; When he has now enjoined one
faith to the whole World, and sent his Son to set up his Banner for all Nations
to flock to it. Diverse Languages indeed were once a character of inspiration
from the Holy Ghost, but different Creeds were never yet the fruits of him,
that is but one. That truth which the Spirit guides men into, can be no other
than the plain uniform rules of the Gospel; and whoever pretends to any
inspiration to deliver a Doctrine different from this, blasphemes the Holy
Ghost, and makes God a liar, whilst he pretends his inward seal publicly to
attest an open falsehood.

But if there were such a thing as the Spirits impulse in these ages of
Christianity, we should have some certain characters, by which we might know
it, as the Prophets and Apostles must be supposed to have had; and, if we make
it an argument to convince others, we must work Miracles to attest its
original: The latter none of the Enthusiasts pretend to; Or when ever their
madness has attempted this testimony, no sooner do they dubb themselves by the
names of Prophets, but they are discovered to be plain Cheats: If they pretend
a way to evidence to themselves that they are inspired with a divine breath, to
give them a warrant for doctrine or action not consonant to the Writings of the
Apostles; it does not only render the Scriptures insufficient, but makes God to
contradict himself, and wounds that Eternal Truth of the Deity into which we
ultimately resolve our belief: But let us come to the examination of the
impulse it self, and we shall perceive in the midst of what uncertainties such
men must be miserably tossed, who suppose what they deem such to be sufficient
warrant for what they then think on and propose to themselves: What strange and
impious actions have been the consequences of such supposals, I need not now
relate, because they have made such noise and ruins among our selves, that
they are still fresh among us.

But to proceed with this supposed impulse or impression upon men's minds, by
which, deserting the Scriptures, some Enthusiastical men will take the measures
of their doctrines, or actions: I know not what they mean by it, unless it be
the heightning our persuasion, making our belief of a thing bold and strong,
and our resolutions to act and maintain it, fixed and zealous; And if this be
what they make a rule, or a character of the Spirits guidance, since we find
but little difference, when we view this supposed operation in persons of
various, nay, opposite principles, we must either conclude what all deliver
under this pretense to be true, or else it is not safe to conduct any: The
former is too wild a position for any that pretend to sobriety, to espouse; and
therefore the latter must be true: Besides, every man's reason may sufficiently
inform him, that our persuasions, and determinations of things, become as well
settled and fixed, and have their various elevations or depressions, as well by
the strength or weakness of arguments, duly weighed and attended to, as by any
impulse which can be imagined: How then shall we be able to know what our
reason dictates, and what we are confirmed in by strength of argument, from
what the Holy Spirit now seals by an impulse, or impression upon our minds? How
shall we distinguish betwixt a strong fancy, a settled opinion, and this
pretended inspired Doctrine? Nay, how can we difference (without recurring to
the eternal Laws of good and evil, which will render this new impulse useless)
the impressions of the Spirit, from a secret temptation, and a subtle
suggestion from him who is our greatest adversary?

If we dare adventure to be so Critical, as to pretend to new discoveries, and
such a rare ability to distinguish betwixt the motions which these several
impulses make: Since there can be but one sort of action in the spirits of a
man, (if the perception be not above reason miraculous) the same convulsions
and percussions on the Nerves, to cause the soul to understand and believe,
whether it be a truth or falsehood, that is represented; a truth from God, or a
diabolical delusion; How can the rarest and most artificial Enthusiast
distinguish betwixt actions where there is no difference at all? For as it
matters not, whether the object proposed to the Wills embracement, be either
real or apparent good, the same passion is used in the reception; so in respect
of the understanding also, If the object seems to be true, it makes the same
impression with truth it self. If we pretend a difference in the Images
represented in the brain, which the soul, contemplating, does according to
their beauty or deformity, own or reject the objects represented by them; since
we find still that an error presented under the notion of truth, as long as we
receive it, is as pleasant to us as truth it self, there can be no such Idea's
supposed, of such different aspects, that in them we can read good and evil,
without some more superior direction: For, if there were, it would be
impossible for a man to be deceived, that gave himself time to contemplate
these Images: But if we shall, (as we must indeed), prove the truth of the
Spirits impulse, from the agreement of the thing it impells us to with the
truths revealed in Gods Word; then the impulse it self is but a weak direction,
that must have another more convincing to determine it: Nay, not the surest
confirmation of things, that admits a proof beyond it self, whilst the
Scripture becomes its Judge, either to condemn or acquit it. If this were not
so, why should our Savior give the World such admonitions, and caution men
against false Christ's, and false Prophets that should arise and deceive many, (
Matthew. 24.), but that he foresaw the false pretensions that would be made to
inspiration? S. John need not otherwise have cautioned us not to believe every
Spirit, nor exhorted us to try the Spirits, whether they are of God; but that
he knew that many false Prophets were gone out into the world. But,

( Lastly) Let us consider too, that God does not use to make bare his arm, and
put his power to an immediate work, when the thing may be accomplished as well
by other means, which he has appointed to that very end: For, though this might
demonstrate his Power, yet, it lessens his Wisdom, to exert more strength, and
use more applications to produce an effect, which fewer might as well
accomplish; Nay, it would subvert that scheme of causes which his contrivance
has, already, ordered; It would both render Gods rules, and man's endeavors
after the knowledge of the truth, useless and ridiculous: At least, those
Scriptures which are already revealed, would not be able to make the man of God
perfect; which is not only contrary to the Apostles affirmation (2 Timothy 3.17.):
But S. Paul's argument must be inverted; and he might justly: he ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, because it would not be the power of God unto salvation;
whereas he plainly and confidently affirms it to be so, ( Romans 1.16.). Why
should any therefore; now the Rule is given, vainly expect revelations and
impulses, and extend their belief to a bold presumption, deluding themselves
with vain hopes? since these now are neither promised nor in that manner,
Enthusiasts wait for them, ever intended. Let us rest satisfied, therefore,
with those truths already received, since no more Divine Rules of life, can
rationally be expected, till the Day of Doom: And, with Gods benediction, and
the ordinary concurrences of his holy Spirit upon the Gospel, let us frame our
lives according to its Precepts and Commands; that walking according to these
Rules, we may at last receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls.
These the Holy Ghost has sealed to us, not only by inspiring the Sacred Penmen
to an exact delivery; but he has confirmed them also by such Miracles, as at
once exceed the powers of the creation, and surmount the objections of men and
Devils. Upon this we build a rational belief, though some mysteries in our
Religion exceed our full and perfect comprehension: Other pretensions, however
backed with great names, being confidently averred with boldness and zeal, are
no other than wild notions, and, exorbitant fancies; Things, that if Satan, who
pants and breathes for our eternal ruin, can once persuade us to an
embracement of; he then presents a deformed Monster for the most beautiful
Truth. He has then cast a veil upon our minds, and leads us blindfold into what
errors he pleases: He spreads his Nets and entanglements for us, and certain he
is to catch and ensnare us: For who cannot lead the blind into a ditch? or
bring him upon a Precipice, when he thinks himself safe and secure? How easy
is it for the fallen Spirit, that envies men the very hopes of bliss, since he
himself is in eternal despair, to dart into persons, who forsake the written
Word, to attend new impulses and revelations, those poisoned arrows, that shall
drink up their spirits, and persuade such to embrace any thing, who have no
better rule, than their own persuasions? Listen not then to the fond fancies of
any bold and passionate men, who, making use of their hot constitutions,
convert their own natural rashness into a seeming zeal* pouring forth thick
words, and thin sense, whilst they impudently pretend the Spirits impulse for
all their rude and unreasonable notions, and give the stamp of Canon to their
Doctrines: Nor must we yet, on the other hand, so far make our reason Judge, as
to destroy our faith; but taking the Gospel for our sufficient rule, let us use
our faculties to explain and apprehend it: But by no means let us curtail or
extend it, beyond what was the design of the imposer. It Is a strange Age in
which we live, when Religion is almost lost, by making too strict an enquiry
after it, and too much curiosity in our speculations, has rendered us almost
regardless of our practice; We discourse the gravest and most serious points of
our holy faith, with so much levity and disrespect, the indecency of the places
in which we hold such Conferences, adding to our vanity, that we first make our
Religion common, and then slight it as mean and inconsiderable: But whatever
the Sons of Darkness do, let us who are of the Day, be sober, and with due
reverence and a godly fear, receive those impressions of the Spirit, which he
has made in Sacred Writ; so shall we avoid the blasphemies of those, who so
confidently assert Diabolical suggestions, and the black fancies, which are the
fruits of a corrupted constitution for Divine inspirations. For no zeal or mode
of delivery, can possibly persuade any rational man, that duly exercises his
own faculties, that profound nonsense, or unaccountable propositions are deep
Divinity: Nor that men whose natures are envious and Diabolical, can possibly
receive instructions from God, to promote division, raise disturbances, or to
continue any, which have already had their auspicious beginnings, and, as I
hope, their full progress among us. For, that wisdom which is from above, is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy*
and good fruits, without wrangling, and without hypocrisy: And the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace for them that make peace. Thus I have
endeavored to free the inspirations of the Holy Spirit, from the bold claims
of Papists and Fanatics, when they plead its conduct, and appropriate it to
themselves, in those false Doctrines which they publish to the World.

What now remains to finish this Discourse, but only to beg, that we would be
persuaded to avoid these obstructions to the compleatment and perfection of our
Religion; and to practice the contrary that may perfect our obedience to the
truth; that we would give unto God an undivided heart: that we would not halt
betwixt two opinions, and mix Christianity with other principles different from
it. That we would not think the Cross so grievous to be born, when the reward
of a Crown is proposed with it. That we would not be so fond of our natural
dispositions, but submit our inclinations to Gods commands; that we would more
seriously endeavor to make our faith conquer our senses, in things that are
not their proper objects; that the spirituality of that Worship which the
Gospel prescribed, may be more strictly practiced and intended by us. That we
would endeavor to alleviate the burden of those duties, that Christianity
prescribes, by the rational considerations of their excellency and rewards.
That we would allow our selves more leisure for consideration, and
thoughtfulness, by a retirement from the hurries and business of the World;
that we would banish the love of the World from our hearts, especially when
detracting from the love of God, and the interest of Religion. That we would
distinguish well betwixt zeal and passion, and let good things determine our
affections. That we would not wilfully misunderstand the Gospel, to support
either a principle or a faction. That we would watch against the insinuations
and subtilties of the Devil, who like a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking to
devour us. That we would beware of pride and obstinacy of mind, which hates
conviction, and strengthens error. That we would not be partial in the choice
of the duties of Religion, since the same authority enjoins all, and true
obedience must be universal. That we would banish coolness, and not be
indifferent in our choice of Religion, but be strict in the examination of our
principles; that in the proof of all things, we may hold fast that which is
good. Finally, That we would not imbibe such Opinions, as in their nature or
consequences, are destructive of Christianity, that we may not ruin by
particular conclusions, what we seem to hold to, and profess in the general.
And (Lastly), That we would admit such evidences of what Christianity enjoins
us to believe, as the nature of the things are capable of, since the
expectation of more is unreasonable, and a farther demand is altogether against
the Laws of discourse; and we require what is impossible to be done. This
advice, if we cordially embrace, will prepare us for obedience to the truth,
and hinder us from being shaken with every wind of Doctrine, and tossed always
in the midst of uncertainties; our judgments then will be fixed and settled;
and if we add our sincere endeavors to live according to the principles we
receive, and pray to God to assist us in our duties, we shall gain peace of
conscience here, and hereafter an eternal Crown of Glory: Which God of his
infinite mercy grant to us all, for Christ Jesus sake, to whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by all rational creatures, that are capable of
performing it, all Glory and Adoration now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Vize at the Sign of the
Bishop's Head, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
A Discourse of Prayer: Wherein this great Duty is stated, so as to oppose some
Principles and Practices of Papists and Fanatics; as they are contrary to the
Public Forms of the Church of England, established by her Ecclesiastical
Canons, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament. By Thomas Pittis, D.D. one of His
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Advice to the Readers of the Common Prayer, and to the People attending the
same: With a Preface concerning Divine Worship. Humbly offered to
Consideration, for promoting the greater Decency and Solemnity in performing
the Offices of Gods Public Worship, administered according to the Order
established by Law amongst us. By a well-meaning (though unlearned) Laick of
the Church of England, T. S.

The Life of the Learned and Reverend Dr. Peter Heylin, Chaplain to Charles I.
and Charles II. Monarchs of Great Britain. Written by George Vernon, Rector of
Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire.

The Crafty Lady: Or the Rival of Himself: A Gallant Intriegue. Translated out
of French into English, by F. C. Ph. Gent.

FINIS.

