A True and Impartial Account OF A Great and Bloody Fight Between part of the
ENGLISH FLEET, Commanded by Sir Clovesly Shovel, AND THE FRENCH at SEA. With an
Account of the Men Killed and Wounded. Together with the great Bravery and
Courage of Captain Hoskins.
From on Board their Majesty's Ship the Crown, this Ninth of December, 1690.
Riding Plimouth-Sound. Licensed according to Order.
My Loving Friend,
AS I promised at parting to acquaint you of any thing of moment betwixt the
French and Us that might be: Take this from me as a Real Account being an Eye
witness.

Last Sunday Morning being the Seventh, by Break of Day, being Crusing with Sir
Clovesly Shovell in his Squadron, about Twenty Leagues South-West of the
Lizard: In all of us Five Sail of Men of War and one Fireship, whose Names are
the Monk, Rear-Admiral, the York, Crown, Debtford, Dover, who all Espying a
French Man of War in a League off us, we all Bo^e after her, which the French
seeing, made the best of his Heels; but the Crown Sailing best, we got on Her,
and about Twelve got up with Her, and had a Bloody Fight for the time of half
an hour, till at last we Clapped her on Board, carried her Mainmast, and so made
our selves Masters of her: The Number of what Men the French had Killed is
uncertain, some say 40, some 50; we lost but one Man* besides several wounded:
We brought Her in last Night. The French are yet on Board us; a great many of
them wounded: She is a Rich Prize, and has in some Measure requited the
Courageous Seamen for their Valor: Her Name is the Slut, 28 Guns 10
Patereroes; we asking the Prisoners what made them Fight at so great
disadvantage, they say, the French K^^^ will Hang up every Captain that does
not Fight, though with a (...) The French Captain is Killed, the Lieutenant
dangerously wounded in the Thigh, and almost all the Officers.

And now I cannot but acquaint you of the Gallant Behavior of Captain Hoskins
Encouraging his Men, every Officer particular to their Charge, he exposing
himself to the greatest Dangers: A great Sh^^ coming close to Him, almost
Mortally Wounded another. But to (...) short, both Officers and Seamen Behaved
themselves truly Couragio^^ to the Honor of our Nation: I have not time to
write any more particulars; but do desire you to take a Copy of this as soon as
you (...) Read it. You may Assure your self, this is the first come to you, and
(...) Truth. My Service to your good Lady.

I Rest yours to Serve. Tho. Pitts.

Advertisement
I. THE Anti-weesels; a Poem sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers Hall. Price
6 d.

II. The Wonders of Free Grace; or a complete History of all the Remarkable
Penitents that have been Executed at Tyburn, and elsewhere, for these last
Thirty years. Price Bound 1 s.

III. The third Volume of the Pocket Library (completing the two former)
containing a further account of the Juvenile Rambles of Don Kainophilus, with
his first project of girdling the World. The whole work intermixed with Essays
Historical, Moral, and Divine, and all other kinds of Learning. Price 1 s. 6 d.

IV. A Treatise of Fornication; occasioned by the late Birth of several
Illetigimates in the Parish of -- To which is added, A Penitentiary Sermon
preached before the guilty Persons in the public Congregation upon John 8. 11.
Go and sin no more.

V. Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately preached in a Congregation in London, by Timothy Rogers, M. A.
after his Recovery from a Sickness of near two years continuance.

VI. The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology, whereby men undertake to
foretell future Contingencies, especially the particular Fates of Mankind, by
the Knowledge of the Stars, by Francis Crow, M. A.

VII. The Abdicated Prince; or the Adventures of Four years. The second
Edition. Price 1. s. The Bloody Duke; or the Adventures for a Crown. Price 1.
s. The late Revolution; or the Happy Change. Written by a Person of Quality.
Price 1. s. The Royal Voyage; or the Irish Expedition. Price 1 s. These Four
last Books contain a full Account of the Private Intreagues of the two last
Reigns, and of all the most Remarkable Transactions that have happened since.

VIII. The Present State of Europe; or the Historical and Political Mercury,
giving an account of all the Occurrences that are most considerable in every
Court for the Month of November.

All sold at the Raven in the Poultrey, where are to be had all the Months
beginning from July. 1690.

Printed for Richard Newcome. 1690.


