^^^^imatur,

^o. Tomkins RRmo in Christo Patri ac Domino ^m- Dno Gilberto Divina 14.
Providentia Archi-Ep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.


A PRIVATE Conference, BETWEEN A Rich Alderman AND A Poor Country Vicar, made
Public.

Wherein is discoursed The Obligation of OATHS which have been imposed on the
Subjects of England.

With other Matters relating to the Present State of Affairs.

-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quid vetat? --
LONDON, Printed by E. C. and A. C. for James Collins, at the King's-Head in
Westminster Hall, 1670.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THis following Discourse (being a cursory Dialogue) cannot admit exactness of
Style, nor endure the Test of too critical reflections. The matter, in the
general, may not be unworthy the perusal of those who, knowing their
Obligation, better than they are acquainted with its discharge, may perhaps be
persuaded, at last, to be instrumental in our settlement and Peace; nor of such
also who, being just to themselves in relation to their present quiet and
future bliss, would shun the espousals of such Principles are contrariant to
the great Maxims of their Reason. Nothing is designed derogatory to Grandeur,
or to detract from Authority even in little Towns; but all to establish Empire
and Power, in just and equal subordination. There are some Expressions jocular,
and merry, to render the perusal more pleasant: (and it is no wonder to see
Passion kindled in so large a Discourse, where the concerns of both Parties
seemed so great.) But yet it is hoped none that may give just offense to any
that is faithful, either to his Prince or Religion. Though the Vicar, by reason
of his Poverty, and dependence, is forced to an high Contest with the Alderman,
before he can obtain the liberty of his discourse; yet what urbanity or
submission is deficient in his expression, is abundantly made up by the modesty
of his deportment: Nor would you at all wonder at the boldness of his Language,
if you knew either the Actors, or the Scene, all, alike, mean, and obscure: The
inequality of the match is only in this, that the Alderman is too big and
weighty for the Vicar, and the Vicar, again, too nimble for the Alderman, both
proportionable to their Table, and Revenue.

A Private Conference BETWIXT A Rich ALDERMAN AND A Poor VICAR.
Alderman GOod morrow M. Vicar, How fares it with you this Morning?


Vicar. The better Sir, I thank your good Worship, for the large Supper I had
at your House the last night.


Ald. Truly, all reason in the World we should be kind to our Minister, from
whom we receive the bread of Life: You shall be welcome to me at any time: Will
you walk now with me, and take your mornings draught?


Vic. Verily, I am much bound to this Town for their kind Respects: For indeed,
they have very much advanced my Profits in this place, the Dues of my Vicaridge
being being (as you well know) but twenty Marks per annum, and amongst you it
is now raised to full fifteen Pounds: And more especially am I obliged to your
Worship, for I have of you both Money and Provision; you do not only entertain
me with Friendship at your own House, but also give me my Loading home.


Ald. You are a Person, Sir, so meek, and humble, that indeed the Corporation
have as great an esteem for you, as for any man that has been in the Town
within my remembrance. For sometimes we have had those, who have been so
stubborn, and self-willed, and so prodigiously proud, that they have made no
more reckoning of the Mayor and Aldermen, than if they had Country Gentlemen to
deal with; that would pass along with little salute, unless we quite put off
our Grandeur, and dispensed with all gravity and decorum, in moving our Hats to
them again. And (as if the State did not command the Church) if we did not come
to the place of hearing within half an hour after they were in their Pew,
(contrary to all duty both to God and man, and what is more, the Ancient
Customs of this Town) they would begin Prayers. So that if we had any Customers
(as sometimes you know we have) that we have not quite dispatched, or any Post
Letters to write, which you know may be of great consequence, or had staid out
something late Saturday night, we should lose some, if not all our Devotions.
Nay, what rendered our lives more full of trouble than all these losses; their
Wives were so scandalously Proud, that they would wear their long Scarfs down
to the ground, and now and then, by a wilful mistake, get the upper hand of a
Shopkeepers Wife, whose Husband may be worth an hundred or two of pounds, and
within a little time may be an Alderman of the Town.


Vic. Truly, Sir, like not such peremptory men; and as for their women, because
I my self am a single man, I can neither blame, nor excuse them; because I find
an infectious air in the World, that swells womankind generally beyond their
own, or their Husbands proportion. But I know your goodness is such, that you
would not lay the Clergy too low.


Ald. No truly, I would not have them made contemptible in the places where
they are, and even in this Town, I could be content they should take place of
all, but the Corporation and their Wives. And the reason why we Townsmen have
such cause to assert the dignity of our Wives, is not only because I married my
Maid out of mere love, and so affection commands much from me, but because they
assist us with their advice, in the management of the most weighty Affairs of
the Town, and help support that great Burden that our Heads and Shoulders are
laden withal, so that by these our honor is much exalted.


Vic. Sir, There is none that shall more cordially with welfare, and exaltation
to that than my self, and I am sorry that I am not in a capacity to advance
your Honor more; nor shall I trouble my self in reference unto place, but
yield to the advancement of what (like a worthy Townsman) you zealously desire.


Ald. I thank you, Sir, for your kind respects to the Town and Corporation, and
I perceive you will every day merit and increase our love to you: but indeed
that Minister that was here last, was too remiss in his duty unto us, though he
was a man of good parts, and would Preach very well in the Pulpit; but his
Conversation was not answerable to his Doctrine, nor did his Deportment, toward
us and our Wives, evidence that Humility that ought to have been in him, or
that regard that was due to us.


Vic. Truly then he was to blame; for I have heard that (besides his twenty
Marks duly paid him) he seldom made a Meal at home, but was, as it were, the
Common Almes-man of the Town, and a true Trencher Chaplain. And yet (left I
should seem, through Interest, to consent to the staining of mine own Coat) I
am willing to excuse him, and think the best; sure your Worship may be partial,
and charge him too severely.


Ald. How Sir? You were as good say that I am unjust. Do you think I would
offer to scandalize a man; or to blame him that were not blame worthy?


Vic. Nay, Sir, I humbly beg your Worships pardon, if my words have been rash,
or unadvised.


Ald. You do well to own your subjection to us, and to submit with modesty,
where your words shall seem to carry any imputation, or disrespect.


Vic. Sir, If I could not mortify, and deny my self, I were unfit to be a
Minister in this Town. And yet I hope you will pardon me, if, for my further
information that I may be the better able to limit and bound mine own Actions)
I am a little inquisitive into the deportment of my Predecessor; I suppose
that when (according to his duty) he did not stay beyond the Canonical hour,
when the greater occasions of the Corporation would not permit them to be at
Church so soon as usually; he presumed your Worships would not come that time,
or else that the Congregation would attend no longer.


Ald. No: Sometimes when we have chid him for not having more regard to the
Authority of the Place, and punished him with the loss of his Sundaies Dinner,
he has performed his Duty for all that: Nay, and when we have enjoined him,
with the gravest Aspect, and the most frowning Countenance Mr. Mayor could
make, and what is worse, on pain of losing all our Gratuities; Nay, when some
Chapmen expected us at home, or some Parish Business was to be done in the
Church, or some Rents to be divided at the Town Hall, and he has been commanded
to cut off but half the Prayers; this audacious and rebellious Person,
notwithstanding Mr. Mayors Order, read all his Prayers, and Preached too, and
conjectured in his ungodly and wicked heart, that the Rules and Canons of the
Church (so called) were to be observed, notwithstanding Mr. Mayors, not only
discountenance but, commands to the contrary.


Vic. Truly (Mr. Alderman) with humble leave first begged of your good Worship,
I conceive, the Canons of the Church are to be obeyed, non obstante Mr. Mayors
counter Order; both because they are established by Act of Parliament, and the
Duty of Obedience to the King and Church persuades us; and lastly, because we
are sworn to their strict observation.


Ald. But Mr. Mayor represents the King, and therefore may dispense with Penal
Laws.


Vic. Although the King may dispense with Penal Laws, and may suspend the
inflictions due to Offenders, it being his great Prerogative, derived fom
Heaven, that makes him more properly a God on Earth, to be able to pardon
faults, and the Executive Power of the Law being in him, he may withdraw what
he cannot abrogate: Yet pardon me, if I say, that Mr. Mayor is not in this the
Kings Representative, unless he could exchange his Mace for a Scepter, quit his
Gown for a Robe of State, turn Calve-skins into Ermins, and bartar his Satin
Coife for a Crown.


Ald. Sir, You are now grown a little too bold, I shall be angry, if you thus
speak against Mr. Mayors Prerogative.


Vic. I hope you would nor have M. Mayor accounted a King, and Majesty added to
his Worship; you have for several years made him Right Worshipful, and been (as
I am told) outrageous with your Minister, if he has not informed God Almighty
of it once or twice every Sunday.


Ald. I hope your passion will not make you peremptory too, and cause you to
forget with whom you are discoursing.


Vic. I humbly beg your good Worships pardon; 'twas only zeal for his Majesty's
Prerogative that thus transported me; I must still beseech your excuse, if I
conjecture a possibility of mistake in you, to think that Mr. Mayor can
dispense with Law, as the Kings Representative.


Ald. Now you seem to relent for the misdemeanour of your words, I can more
willingly hearken to your Discourse, especially when your Language is so
placed, that it does not affront, but acknowledge Superiority. Pray tell me why
Mr. Mayor, as the Kings Lieutenant, and Representative, cannot dispense with
Law.


Vic. You know Law is not my Profession, but yet I can exhibit Reason enough
against such strange, and (if it might be pardoned) I would say, uncouth
Positions.


Ald. Come then let us hear yours, and the rest I shall enquire of the
Town Clerk.


Vic. First, Because the King himself does not pretend to dispense with Law,
and therefore his Court of Chancery (as I have heard) does not judge contrary
unto Law, but either mitigate, and abate its rigor, or give relief where
Common Law gives none; that not the least oppression may be heard in our
Streets. And, secondly, supposing the King did dispense with Law, yet Mr. Mayor
has only so much power as is committed to him in a certain Charter, which
indeed gives the Corporation power to make Bylaws, for the benefit of the
Town; but by no means liberty, by themselves, to violate Acts of Parliament, or
to permit the breach of them in others: But, as to what we are at present
making our enquiry into, viz. the Laws of the Church, these are without the
verge of the Corporations Power, and they can neither protect us from the
Penalties and Punishments due for such wilful Disobedience, nor absolve us from
the guilt by the default contracted.


Ald. Well, but admitting then, that Acts of Parliament are to be obeyed; I
would fain know how your second reason becomes argumentative, and evinces your
Obedience due to the Church, notwithstanding our Injunctions to the contrary.


Vic. If your Worship please to suspend your censure of my discourse for a bold
presumption, I shall give you an account of that too.


Ald. I would not have you to think me so critical, or captious, but that I can
hear Reason and Argument in any dress; especially when you are so civil, as to
beg leave for the familiarity of your discourse.


Vic. I thank your Worship for your candor and condescension; and shall give
you to understand, that I ought to be obedient to the Church, not only as I am
a Member, or a Minister, by virtue of which relations I am more especially
obliged: But as all Government does suppose Obedience and Submission due, and
we therefore combine in a Common Body, for the preservation of Propriety, as
well as Society; so the defect of sense of such an Obligation, violates all the
bonds of Authority, breaks down the Pale by which Government and Rule is
fenced, and lays it open to every bold Usurper, and Intruder. Thus not only
Empires and Kingdoms have been laid waste, and made pastures only for Birds and
Beasts of Prey; but by this means the Wall, both of separation, and defense,
being once assaulted, and, in an hostile manner, scaled and battered, the
Temple of God is not only left without its Bulwarks, but invaded and shot at by
its Adversaries, until the structure becomes demolished, and there is scarce
one stone left upon another. The Church (you know) is compared to a Vine,
fenced in not only by an immediate Providence; but its own Laws, and Authority
to enforce them, are not only that which supports the branches, but also
defends the very root: Now withdraw but the Obligation, and sense of obedience,
and all the branches will desert the root, the Foxes will devour their present
fruit, and the wild Bore will dig up the root, and thus shall the whole
languish and decay.


Ald. But cannot you prove, some other way, than from the nature of Government
in the general, that obedience is due to the Churches Laws? This seems only to
be composed of good words, without significancy of an Obligation.


Vic. I had thought, to discourse from Principles of Policy had been the surest
way to convince you; because your Age and Wisdom have called you to the degree
of an Alderman, by which sharing in Authority and Government, you would, from
the view of your own experience, collect the misery, and destroying fate of the
least disorder, much more when disobedience dares put off her Mask, and come
abroad with open face, hurling all into an Ataxy and Confusion: when an
embodied Society have agreed upon certain Laws and Principles, by which they
have both constituted and empowered a part of the whole to take care of the
rest, wherein particular interests are always to submit to the preservation of
the general commerce and universal welfare; If the actings of particulars shall
not only appear disorderly and mutinous, but the very Magna Charta, the
foundation of the Government shall be undermined by a flat denial of any
Obedience or Homage due, it must needs dissolve the very Principles, make the
Empire crack with its weight and burden, and reduce this Community into an
universal Chaos.


Ald. But since your Office is Divinity, and you are not called to any place of
trust in the Government of the State, it will (as seems to me) best become you
to keep within your own Confines, and tread only upon holy ground.


Vic. Why? I hope your Worship does not think your Office profane.


Ald. No, Friend, but I think you will profane my Authority if you dare (not
withstanding all my advice) be skilled in the Principles of Policy and
Government, and lay down Rules of Confinement to your Superiors: I must not
suffer my sage ears so far to disparage my head, as to endure to hear one to
teach me mine own Trade. Pray prove obedience to your Church some other way,
than from Rules of Policy, for by this you seem to encroach upon us so far, as
not only to take away our Privileges and Prerogative, but defraud us of the
very Arguments to defend us.


Vic. If your Worship please but to keep one eye open for the Churches Cause,
and let your other sleep to your own Interest, I suppose I may, in mine own
habit, without any damage at all to your Ears, in a few words, evince my duty
of submission and obedience to the Church, even from the second Topic
mentioned; that Obedience to it is our duty.


Ald. That I would have, not only promised, but performed; for I have sometimes
seen Reasons, where the Stems have weighed more than the fruit.


Vic. Now your Worship seems to be pleasant; a man would scarce expect such
light wit from so grave an head, but experience is that which makes men rich in
all things. And yet that I may remember your Worship, of some thing which you
already know; I shall not trouble you with the ready submission (though uneasy
obedience, by reason of those raging and persecuting thorns from Jewish Malice,
and Heathen Fury, which continually, like the Soldiers Spear in our Saviors
Side, tormented and grieved them) unto the Christian Church, in its Bishops,
and Representatives, in its first plantation; though not without the public
assaults, of open Heretics, no more than free from the secret thrusts of those
that seemed bosom Friends. But I know you expect Scripture should be judge,
and prove what it seems you account a Problem. For the Jews submission to their
Sanhedrim, I hope you will not trouble your self so much as to doubt: Nor for
the Apostles subjection to our Savior, as to him who had the Government upon
his shoulders, who received his Jurisdiction and Authority from the Father, and
was anointed from above. Nor will you question, I suppose, the submission of
the Christian Church to the Discipline, as well as Doctrine of the Apostles,
whom Christ invested with the same Authority that he had received from his
Father, in relation to their Presidency and Jurisdiction over the Church; in
that Consecration of His; As my Father sent me, so send I you: Only, perhaps,
you may still doubt, whether this Rule and Authority requiring submission and
subjection to its Decrees, was conveyed from the Apostles to others. But you
will have no cause to mistrust that neither, when you shall seriously reflect
upon the Epistles of the Apostles to the several Churches; and more especially
to those Angels and Bishops, who were there entrusted with the Discipline and
Government, as well as feeding the Flock of Christ, which he had purchased with
his blood. Or if you will observe matter of fact, and from thence draw the
certainty of our Conclusion; You may read St. Paul sending his Orders to
Timothy and Titus, giving them directions how to govern the Diocesses of Crete
and Ephesus. And it would be endless to enumerate all the Exhortations and
Commands to obey our Church Rulers; Obey them (says the Apostle) that have the
Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls as they
that must give an account. This last Clause plainly restrains it to the Bishops
of Judea, and therefore (...), says St. Chrysostom. But in the fifteenth of
the Acts you have enough to silence all doubts of this nature, and bring your
Worship not only to Reverence, but to a resignation of your self as to your
Souls direction and guidance into the Churches hands; and then you will the
easier dispense with us, for obeying that so cheerfully, and fideliously, which
we earnestly persuade others to a submission to.


Ald. I like this discourse indifferently well, only have a care that your
Church does not entrench upon the Authority of our Town; and compel the
Corporation to come and bow to your Altar.


Vic. I Will warrant your Worship, by the grace of God, if you can but defend your
selves from the Women's Tongues, you shall not be offended with Church Music,
nor knock your shins when you bow toward the Altar.


Ald. Come on then pleasant Mr. Vicar, let us hear the conclusion of this
matter, you promised me something out of the fifteenth of the Acts.


Vic. I did so (Sir) and by Gods help I shall perform it; we find there that
there was a great difference arose at Antioch about Circumcision, for it seems
there had come down men from Judea, who taught the Brethren, that except they
were Circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved; They
presently therefore select their Clerks, and depute their Delegates, and
Representatives, to go, and join with the College at Jerusalem, that so they
might have a full Convocation, and their Sentence, thus assembled, fully
silenced all disputes, and was to them a Rule and Canon, to which they
presently yield obedience.


Ald. But this was an Apostolical Canon, therefore infallible because inspired.


Vic. I hope I shall obtain your pardon, if herein I rectify your mistake;
First, Others went with Paul and Barnabas that were not Apostles. Secondly, The
Council consisted principally of the Bishops of Judea; whereof one, to wit,
James of Jerusalem, was President. Finally, Upon strict view of the whole, we
find that probably there were but four Apostles there, to wit, Peter, and John,
who were there before, and Paul and Barnabas sent from Antioch. And this,
craving your Worships pardon, I must look upon for my Rule.


Ald. But is not the Temporal above the Spiritual Power? In all this that you
have said, there was no countermand of any Temporal Magistrate, but, in our
discourse, we supposed Mr. Mayor to have commanded the contrary.


Vic. Indeed, Sir, but that necessity enforces me to have respect to your Port,
rather than Wisdom, I could be passionate, to see you mistake Mr. Mayor for the
King, and think the Supreme Authority of the Land still confined to your own
Corporation: Should your Argument be put on to the full, and urged with
relation to the right Person, you would put me an hard Chapter to read, and I
must submit, or lose my Vicaridge: But I hope a blind man's mistake will not put
out others eyes.


Ald. Sir, You are something too confident to conjecture me so old, that I
cannot see; I tell you, you have no establishment in the World without the
Temporal Authority; this supports you, this gives you leave to perform your
Ministry within the Kings Dominions This gives, and confirms all your
maintenance.


Vic. Indeed, Sir, we have great reason to thank Almighty God, that he has
given, a this time, a nursing Father to his Holy Church; and that he not only
permits Christianity, but encourages it, both by his ow^ example, and liberal
maintenance of both a able, and Orthodox Clergy. And I hop^ whilst we remember
our duty to the Church we shall never forget Loyalty to our King.


Ald. But he that will be Loyal to the King will submit also to Governors, and
those that are Commissioned by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well. You seem to be very tender of his Majesty, but
you still forget the Mayor and Corporation.


Vic. I do think I have sufficient cause to remember them all days of my life;
and have once mentioned their liberality already; I shall readily obey Mr.
Mayor, in all things that the King and Laws command a submission from me in.


Ald. You still have your Tacit Conditions, and leave room for a mental
Reservation: Let me advise you, to do in all things according as Mr. Mayor and
the Corporation shall direct; and let not a Lawn Sleeve prevail more with you
than a Scarlet Gown. Corporations make Parliament men, and they make all the
Laws, and -- Give some credit to an old man; Corporations, upon the matter,
rule the Land: and therefore have a care you do not wrong your self by
affronting them.


Vic. I am so far from affronting of your Worships, that I shall be ready, upon
all occasions, to testify my submission and reverence to you; still with a
salvo to mine own Conscience, and that I may keep mine Oath of Canonical
Obedience, by which I have tied my self up to the Commands of my Diocesan in
all lawful and honest things.


Ald. But stay a little! I have one Argument beyond the care of any Bishops, or
any other that I know of, for your total resignation to our disposal; And that
is, That your income is not established by Law, nor does any Bishop at all
encourage Ministers that are in Market Towns, but suffer them to labor without
reward; nay, not only so, but sometimes they have nothing for all their pains,
but severe stripes from their Officers. And therefore you are more especially
obliged to submit to our wills, because your dependence is wholly upon them.


Vic. Sir, I confess, Interest is a great temptation, especially to us that
have little hope of larger Possessions, should this be withdrawn from us; but
although I shall always be dutiful and obedient to your Worships, I cannot
violate the Obligation of mine Oath and Conscience both, and so make a wound
upon my self, that the whole World cannot cure.


Ald. Come, come Mr. Vicar, I would advise you to escape that snare that some
of your Predecessors have been entangled in, and for want of a due reverence
and submission, have lost almost all their Benevolences.


Vic. Truly (if it shall please your Worship, we were better sustain some
Temporal losses, with the preservation and safety of a good Conscience (though
I should be very loath to incur your displeasure) than, by a violation of our
Oaths, to forfeit all our faithfulness and honesty here, and hazard our welfare
hereafter, only to humor some few men, and enjoy a something more plentiful
Revenue.


Ald. All this will be readily granted; but surely God Almighty has not tied us
up so strict, as that we must be religious to our own prejudice. He never laced
our Consciences so strait, but that we might, upon occasion, widen them. Alas,
this making Religion such a closs Garment, causes it to become like Steel
bodies, that sometimes reduce the extravagancy of a shoulderblade, but breed an
Ulcer and Consumption in the Lungs. If we weigh out but a pound of Prunes, we
allow Paper and Packthread with it; If we sell but a Pipe of Wine, we suffer
the Vintner to be drunk into the bargain. These Cases of Conscience have
spoiled the World: If you pursue the Consequence of your Discourse, I think you
will quickly condemn us all, and then we shall not have the benefit of our
Clergy.


Vic. Pray, Sir, be not so outrageous, I do not at all sentence you, but prove
mine own Obligation; and as a natural Son of the Church, I must be dutiful and
obedient to my Mother: Do you think (besides the Bond of my Relation) an Oath
to be so slight a thing, as to be violated and broken, with all the heat of
passion, and deliberate wilfulness, and yet the person burdened and loaded with
all this guilt, to escape the imputation and the Crime of Perjury?


Ald. Pray, Sir, be modest in your Expressions, and impute what you please unto
your self, but have a care that you speak not of Oaths in general, lest you
despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.


Vic. Although, Sir, your Cautions and Commands would make any one, that had
not a great respect to himself, and a greater for you, warm with passion: Yet I
shall beg leave only to tell you, that he that makes a Promissory Oath, is
bound (if the matter of the Oath be lawful, and there be no Error in the
Imposition) as much as in him lies to perform it.


Ald. You were as good say, that the Mayor and Justices are all forsworn.
Truly, I could find in my heart to acquaint the whole Bench with it, and have
you punished for talking against Perjury.


Vic. I hope, Mr. Alderman, your Worship will not make a Private Discourse of
Public Concernment, nor injure me to the whole House, for performing my duty
in discourse with you. But however it shall fare with me in relation to that, I
think it incumbent upon me as a Minister, to endeavor to convince you of the
truth of what either Ignorance or Irreligion causes you to mistrust.


Ald. I hope you will not be so presumptuous, as to suppose that men, arrived
at our Age, and Grandeur, can be so ignorant, as not to know our duty, or so
vile and Atheistical as not to perform it.


Vic. I shall neither presume to be accuser or judge of any person in
particular, but certainly, in the general, Perjury and contempt of Oaths, is no
less heinous than damning sin; or else the third Commandment will scarce be
Moral; nor would that be repeated with a solemn Sanction, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.


Ald. Well; but suppose that granted, that there is such a thing as Perjury:
Yet it may consist only in this, when we confirm a false thing by an Oath;
swearing contrary to what we know, or are persuaded to be true: And this cannot
at all reach us.


Vic. I do not here speak of Perjury in a Witness, but a Judge; and since you
will not allow mine own Oath of Canonical Obedience to oblige me, let us see
where you are not perjured when you have sworn to put those Laws in execution
that belong to you as Justices of the Peace.


Ald. It seems then you would suppose us guilty of Perjury, for the breach of
such Oaths as no body, that I know, keeps.


Vic. We are told (I am sure) that we must not run with the Multitude to do
evil; and I do not think that the Numbers in Hell do mitigate and abate, but
rather advance and increase torments: For flames are not the less, but more
cruel, for that they have the more fuel to consume.


Ald. Truly, Sir, if you continue and persevere in such Invectives, this Town
will prove too hot for you, and you will sooner, for such tart Speeches,
forfeit all your Welfare, than we shall possess misery hereafter; And you will
sacrifice your bliss in those very flames, that your zeal kindles, and your
breath blows up to devour both our credit and felicity.


Vic. Sir, as to your credit, I would not willingly impair that, because some
of you live upon it; but as to your felicity, most certain it is, if you repent
not in time, you may chance to forfeit that eternally.


Ald. Your discourse seems now to be closs and serious, and therefore pray
arrive at some particulars, that I may understand what you drive at, that so I
may be able to excuse, or else at least to retract my fault.


Vic. You now seem not only to have the port and garb, but the mind and soul
of a Pious Magistrate; and therefore I shall act friendly with you, which is
best demonstrated by plain dealing; but I hope it shall not prejudice my
maintenance.


Ald. Truly it is as you behave your self, for it is the ancient Custom of this
Town, to have our Minister always bound to his good behavior.


Vic. Truly, Sir, Your Worship may deal as you please with me, and entertain
what hard thoughts you will; but what I do is out of Conscience to my duty, and
out of mere charity to your immortal Soul.


Ald. If what you say be real, I see no reason but I may give you leave to go
on, only have a care that no blot be thrown upon the Grandeur of the
Corporation.


Vic. Your Worship may already perceive not only candor, but such respect as
is due to your Wisdoms, and I well knowing there can be no order where
Superiority is not well distinguished from its opposite, and that all
Government requires subordination, you cannot in reason suspect my regard to
duty so much, as to fear any unhandsome reflections, and if there be any thing
that may create offense, it must be in your own application.


Ald. I shall thank you, Sir, for your Doctrine, if you will but permit us to
make what use we please; for we cannot dislike our own actions, for that were
to recant our justice, and proclaim to the World that we were capable of
mistake.


Vic. Though the Articles of our Church forbid us to account any one
infallible, yet we shall be forced to yield your Power absolute, that deems it
a derogation to admit either rebuke or control.


Ald. We must still maintain the Authority of the Place, and not suppose the
least blemish visible in the face of Justice; for that were to cast dust
against the Sun, and cover that glorious countenance with a cloud.


Vic. I readily grant to your good Worship, that the Power and Grandeur of the
Town is to be maintained, and your Orders executed, without the least
violation; for if any Error should be found in you, it must needs be a Scarlet
Crime; and then your Garments themselves would blush for their misfortune. Yet
as the pale Moon, that attempts to rule a dark night, is not without some
Spots, so the Sun has his maculae too; I hope, therefore, if you should
chance, through the Glass of my Discourse, to see some stains upon your own
Garments, though you might suspect the Mirror, you would not conclude, without
due trial, that it made those Spots it pretended to discover.


Ald. I shall be as candid as my Dignity and Office will permit, and will
endeavor to hide that dirt that my Garment has contracted, when it is not
violently cast upon it. But I think indeed, that we are as strict in keeping
our Decorum, and observing the ancient Customs of the Town, as any Corporation
in England; and indeed we must of necessity be obliget to it, since, besides
that they are both decent and laudable, we are sworn to the observation of them.


Vic. Then it seems your Worship thinks there is Obligation in an Oath.


Ald. I hope you do not suppose me so Atheistical and irreligious, as not to
believe that an Oath is a most solemn thing; and binds us, upon pain of Divine
Vengeance, to the performance of all those things that are lawful; with respect
still had to the support of our Authority, and Livelihood; and therefore we
look upon the Obligation so Sacred, that although we are not Popish observers
of Festivals, yet we think it our duty to be punctual in keeping all the stated
and public Feasts of this Town, according to Custom, not only that we may
oblige our Friends at the Town Charges, and strengthen the Sergeants that they
may the better support the great burden of the Mace, and attendance, but those
days we appear in Public, to the terror and astonishment of inferior
Townsmen, in our Satin Doublets made big for the purpose; and so zealous are
we in the performance of this Duty, that you shall scarce have one missing, but
the whole Corporation complete and full. Nay, if we want the least Punctilio
either of time or place, or have any distance in our Ranks broken, or any
Alderman should chance, through inadvertency, to mend his pace, or finally, any
Burgess should neglect or refuse to pay that homage and honor due to our
Grandeur, we presently, in a grave and solemn manner, pronounce him perjured,
and sometimes, for the second or third offense, he is disfranchized, and
removed both from the Honor and Society of the Corporation.


Vic. That truly is strict and severe, and it seems affrightens and terrifies
more than an Excommunication from the Bishops Courts.


Ald. Alas! if our Laws should carry no more force with them than your Canons,
which are Guns only without any thing to charge them; and the frown of an
Alderman should not be more than the rage of a Bishop, we might hang up our
Gowns as Ensigns over the Graves of our Honor, which would not only be dead,
but buried too.


Vic. But the Thunderbolts of Jove were always feared, and when an
Excommunication comes forth, Heaven then discharges its Artillery, and shall
not the Inhabitants of the World tremble and be afraid?


Ald. It Is a great way betwixt Heaven and Earth, and the spacious air will make
the Bullet spend its force before it arrives to hit the Mark; nor do we think
Heavens Ordnance so ill guarded, that any upon the Earth can come to fire them;
and if there were both Permission and Authority, we would trust them at a
Battery so far from us, when we only hear the noise; but do not feel the
stroke: But now the Temporal Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain; when Mr.
Mayor speaks, the inferior Townsmen fear an Earthquake; and when he strikes,
it is not fire to light his candle, but he makes the streets belch forth flames.


Vic. Truly, Sir, I never took his Worship for an Incendiary; and as for his
Speech it is so flow and seldom, that it had need be to purpose when it comes.


Ald. Thus have I seen, when I was in the Straits, the lofty Aetna cast forth
both fire and smoke.


Vic. And thus have I heard an hollow Mountain frequently making great noise.


Ald. I hope you do not account us hollow.


Vic. No, Sir, that were scandalously disingenious, when we are discoursing of
Town-Feasts; the similitude only lodged in the Mountain, to which you may at
this time justly be compared. But that you may not force me any longer to such
wandering discourse; I find by your brisk and pleasant Relation of your Town
Customs (which I must confess so noble and great, that they are
disproportionable to my understanding) that you are not only pleased with their
due and punctual observation; but think this your grand Obligation to perform
them, because you have solemnly sworn thereto.


Ald. I hope, Sir, I did not err in that Assertion, nor have mine old age,
whose eyes are dim, been guilty of an oversight.


Vic. No, Sir, your Worship, in my poor judgment, has in this spoken abundance
of Reason; and in that you also charged the violation of those Customs you are
sworn to, with the damning and odious Crime of Perjury: but from this
Concession of yours I shall deduce that Consequence which, I fear, we shall
have some Controversy about.


Ald. I hope you will not be so presumptuously bold, as to dare contend with
me; I doubt you will get but little by your shot, besides a rebound of your
bullet back into your own face: Pray, Sir, let your Expressions be phrased a
little more modestly.


Vic. I am sorry that it is my misfortune not to talk with one upon equal
terms, it is my perpetual misery to place my words, for the most part (to your
Worship) as to be misconstrued, and mistaken by you. I design no disrespect to
you, nor any dishonor to the Corporation, and I am sure I am used to distance
sufficiently, that I may be acquainted with it better.


Ald. I am glad to hear you so humble, and penitent, as to recant your Error,
and too arrogant Expression; since you seem you to be a person that know how to
be civil, I shall lend an ear to your Consequence and Deduction.


Vic. With leave then from your Worship, it is this, that if you are bound to
observe your ancient Customs (because (as you say) you are sworn to their
observation) much more are you obliged to punish Vice, and unlawful Assemblies,
whether of riotous persons in the Vulgar notion, or of Non-conformists in a new
dress, because you are sworn to that too.


Ald. Did not I first severely admonish you, that your speech should be without
reflections, and that your care should be great that you did not blemish the
glory of our Corporation; and on this condition I would hear your Doctrine, if
you would permit me to make mine own use of it?


Vic. All this (if it shall please your good Worship) shall be readily granted;
nor do I think I have yet broken the Laws of our Discourse; for I have
cordially expressed my self, in relation to the honor of the Corporation, and
I shall still leave you to make what use you shall think fit of my Debate; but
Justice I hope (with which I know your sage head, like a Gold Ring, is
sufficiently enameled) will plead with you for a proportionable, though not
equal, Latitude: and you will give me leave to make some use of your Doctrine.


Ald. I see it is in vain any longer to restrain you, for you will tell truth in
the face of the Sun: Draw what Consequence you will from me, but I Will assure you
I will withdraw my Purse from you.


Vic. I am sorry I must disoblige your Worship so far; for indeed, to say
truth, you were the best Friend I have in the Town; I had two Shillings a year
from you duly divided into half-yearly payments, besides oftentimes free access
to your Table; but if I must forfeit this for performance of my duty, I shall
never offer my Sacred Function at such a Shrine, nor sacrifice truth upon a
Silver Altar: I must plainly tell you then, you seem to me, from your own
discourse, to have brought upon your self the most heinous and abominable sin
of Perjury.


Ald. O abomination! as I am an Alderman, and thereby a person of honor; You
are worse than all that were here before you, I never heard such a rude and
wicked word come from a Ministers mouth before.


Vic. That perhaps may be the reason, why you do no better understand it.


Ald. God Almighty give me patience; surely, if you are not more modest in your
deportment, I shall be forced to call for a Sergeant.


Vic. If your Worship want any thing, I am here ready to attend upon you; but I
beseech you, Sir, be not angry with your own Conviction; for perhaps God
Almighty may make me instrumental, not only to discover your guilt, but, upon
your repentance, to provide a remedy.


Ald. I am glad to hear, that you have Cordials about you, as well as
Purgations; for truly this is strange Physic you are now administering; nor am
I yet satisfied that my wound is of that kind which you would apply your
Plaster to; or as least not so deep as you make it. Do you think then that we
are bound to keep all the Oaths that we have taken?


Vic. No, Sir, I am so far from yielding to such conjectures, that there are
several Oaths, that you and many of your Brethren have taken, that have so torn
and vacated both the Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects Privileges (which are
then only preserved and safe, when both are inviolated) that I should be no
less treacherous to my Prince, than a public Adversary to mine own Interest,
should I in the least concede their Obligation.


Ald. Pray, Sir, what are those; for you seem now to load us with a strange
imputation?


Vic. I do not at all presume to burden your Worship with any guilt, which your
own Actions have not contracted; but out of tender respect to that Soul of
yours, which is now legally committed to my care and charge, I would endeavor
to convince you of the hainousness of your Crimes: that so, if possible, your
tears may quench that fiery zeal, that proved an Incendiary to the whole
Nation, and burned our peace and plenty into ashes; that your repentance may be
as solemn, as that League which caused your guilt.


Ald. Truly, Conscience (which is the little God within us, and does more
sometimes than Swords and Armies) is certainly so prevalent and powerful, that
it will make bashfulness put on confidence, and will speak sometimes though to
the temporal detriment of him that owns it, though there be great disproportion
betwixt the Discoursers; and therefore let me for once be so patient as to hear
the Accusation you have against me, and my Brethren, whilst I deny my self so
far, as to lay aside all Grandeur and State, and become your quiet (though, I
hope, I shall be unconcerned) Auditor: Tell me plainly those particular Oaths
that you think we are not bound to keep.


Vic. I suppose, Sir, you will be so good a Christian, as to be willing to
attend to what may be a means of conviction, and ease you of some of those
seeming Obligations which a great many account Sacred, and Solemn, especially
since you appear willing to disburden your self, even in those things (by your
omissions) where your own power cannot disengage. Those Oaths and Vows then,
which I suppose you are not obliged to keep, are these three: The Solemn League
and Covenant, the Negative Oath, and the Engagement; as too many that may be
more private, let them still remain, as they had their first Sanction private
betwixt God and your own Conscience.


Ald. But bare assertion is no proof; you have seen how many conscientious,
and, what is more, wealthy men too, have departed from their Authority, and
Honor in this, and several other Corporations, because they could not permit
themselves to deny but one of those Oaths, you mentioned, to be Obligatory and
binding.


Vic. I have learned, Sir, to distinguish betwixt Interest and Conscience; and
therefore cannot but hint some by-ends (more prevalent usually with such kind
of men than the sincerity of their Religion) which they may at least be
supposed to aim at, rather than the preservation of their Consciences without
round, or the keeping their Principles disintangled from Error.


Ald. I cannot imagine what those may be, since those that are arrived at our
Grandeur, had rather part with any thing, than their Gowns, and will sacrifice
any thing to their Honor and Authority.


Vic. Any thing, Sir, but their own Interest: but since you think men c^n so
well live by an airy name, I see no reason why you may not entertain in your
belief, that those men who forsook their interest in Corporations, because they
would not renounce the Covenant, might but only change one sort of Honor, for
what they thought another, and so the ambitious humor might still be fed.


Ald. I cannot imagine what honor can be more pleasing, than that which our
Corporation gives; for here we are respected almost to Adoration, and our Acts
of Justice are without control; nor need we take much pains (like other
Magistrates in the Country) to be learned in the Law, since we usually make the
Customs of our Town (though they may sometimes interfere with the Ba^k of
Statutes) the Rule and Measure of all our Actions. And then I Will tell you one
private Principle, that we keep unto our selves (and I hope you will not dare
to tell it abroad) we commonly punish only poor men, that are not able to make
an appeal, for it is absolutely requisite, that men in our places should be
great Politicians.


Vic. I am loath to adventure the discovery of so much confidence, as to tell
you, that this last Item proclaims you kind to Egyptian Taskmasters, as much
as your forlorn Companions deserting their share and interest in Authority,
smells strong of Onions and Garlic: But although you are so well pleased with
your honor, you being Gods (as you say) that are adored, yet it seems your
desertors forsook your Mace, and Scarlet too, rather than to reject their
Covenant.


Ald. That were only those that were so squemish, as to make their Interest
stoop to Conscience.


Vic. I should think rather that their Conscience here stooped to Interest.


Ald. How so?


Vic. Because they had a threefold Cord, which was represented in the Covenant,
that bound them sufficiently to what they did (though perhaps Cords might have
been employed to a better use about them.) First, By their denial of that
renunciation, they gained more honor and repute amongst their own Party (which
(in the Language they threaten the Nation with) are numerous and momentous)
than they could possibly lose in deserting you. Secondly, Hereby they are freed
(together with the honor) from the charge and burden of Public Offices; which
well suits with that beloved Covetousness, that most of that Party are
qualified withal. And, lastly, they still enjoy all the benefits, not only of
Common Townsmen, but of Burgesses too, and lose nothing, but charge and burden,
which they endeavor perpetually to avoid.


Ald. Truly in this, you have told me more than ever I thought of before;
though no question but I had it in my mind, because my assent to it is so
quickly gained. But methinks, they, being now in so good a condition, should
not attempt, what we daily fear, an alteration of the Government.


Vic. Were they men that would but allow natural Deductions from rational
Principles (as they will not, for that they decry reason as carnal) I could
easily, from this, demonstrate, that they must offer violence to their own
Faculties, when ever they attempt an alteration or change.


Ald. Pray do it then for my use (for it is no absurdity for the greatest
Politician to hear advice, though perhaps at last he will make use of his own)
that so I may not join with them again, to the prejudice of my Faculties too.


Vic. You know, Sir, that your Worship, who has been so good to me, may command
any thing from me again; and therefore I shall not at all refuse to remember
you, of what it would be arrogance to pretend an information; That whosoever
attempts the alteration of any Government, it is upon assurance, or at least
presumption, that the constituting of another becomes his particular Interest,
and that it will be better with him under that Authority he endeavors to
introduce, than it is at present under that which has the immediate sway. But
now these persons, that we are discoursing of, cannot place themselves in those
Circumstances wherein they shall be freer from trouble, or enjoy themselves, or
their Estates with less noise, or burden, than in that Condition in which they
now are; and therefore it must needs be an unreasonable attempt, for this Party
to endeavor an alteration of Affairs.


Ald. I understand the general drift of your Argument; and you know the old
Saying, A word to a wise man is enough. But methought I heard you offering at
something but now, to prove to me that those three Oaths, mentioned by you, and
taken by me, and my Brethren, do not oblige; and I the rather mind you of this
promise, because Oaths are such burdensome things, that (though I shall not so
far depart from my Religion, as with the Anabaptist, and Quaker, to deny the
taking of any Oaths) I would be eased of the performance of them.


Vic. I guess that by your Worships actions, and therefore shall, by Gods
Grace, set your Worship at liberty from those three; but perhaps that may make
way for the Obligation of others.


Ald. Well, Sir, I am willing to adventure that, though, to tell truth, I liked
those three, better than some that I have taken since.


Vic. I am sorry your Worship has yet any kindness for Bell and the Dragon,
which (besides that, they are now generally looked upon as Apocryphal) have
devoured the substance of three Kingdoms; and than which, I think, there were
never more impious, and unlawful Impositions.


Ald. But how do they appear to be such deformed and affrighting Monsters?


Vic. To float in generals, were to adventure your Worship in a broad and
dangerous Sea, in a little Boat, without Sails or Oars; and might argue me
(what I never was) a cunning Sophister, rather than a rational and fair
Discourser. I must therefore first single mine Adversaries, that so
encountering them, I may with the greater facility prove a Conqueror.


Ald. If you perform what you promise, truly you shall have my vote for a
better living; not only because the sight of you will always put me in mind of
my Guilt, and so detract from the pleasure of my life, but also for your own
advantage, that a contracted maintenance may no longer hinder the enlargement
of your knowledge.


Vic. I thank your Worship for your respects, both to your self, and me; and
shall, with your good leave, immediately draw up an Indictment against the
Covenant.


Ald. Pray, Sir, be as brief as you can, or otherwise our Dinner may give an
Interruption to your discourse.


Vic. I shall not then take it asunder, although there is in almost every bush
a Thief, and under every hedge an Ambuscado; but shall endeavor to rout the
main body, and then the smaller Parties will separate of themselves. The
Covenant then is not only to be renounced, but abhorred by all the peaceable
Professors of Christianity. First, Because it is quite opposite to our natural
Allegiance to our King, by virtue of which we are obliged, to preserve his
Royal Person, against, not only Private Insurrections at home, but, Public
Enemies abroad; and not to make our selves Judges of his Actions so far, as,
with limitation and condition, only to defend and preserve his Royal Person and
Authority, so far as his shall conserve and defend the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms, as in the third Article of the Solemn League: For if
this Latitude be given to the Subjects of any Prince, his Religion and Actions
must of necessity be arraigned at the private Bars of those Subjects, that are
most inferior, as well as those that attend more immediately upon the Throne;
and every particular must plead a lawful and sufficient excuse for withdrawing
from the preservation of his Prince, if he shall, either through Ignorance, or
Interest, conjecture, that the King does not preserve the true Religion, or the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; which what they are, is sti11 left to the
rashness, or indiscretion of every ignorant and illiterate head. This sets the
Subject above his Prince, and loosens and overthrows the very Foundations.
Nature it self, and that Subjection which reason (without the Obligation of an
Oath) sufficiently enforces, must needs teach us the bold impieties of such an
Oath, that will banish Order out of the World; and lay open Gods Anointed, whom
he has consecrated his Delegate, to every bold usurping Traitor, that will at
any time adventure to drench a Crown in its own gore.


Ald. I easily see your first Pass made at the Covenant, which seems to have
given it some wound. Let us see also your second assault.


Vic. I am glad to see your Worship so cheerful at the wound of such a Friend;
I was afraid you would have wept for it now, since, I know, you shed drops of
blood for it formerly.


Ald. That was in my younger years, when bleeding was as necessary as my
Victuals; I did only, a some are wont to do at the Universities, when you have
a great Creation of Graduates, or when a multitude of Knights are Dubbed on a
day set apart on purpose, run in among the Herd. But pray, Mr. Vicar, you
promised some more reasons.


Vic. I thank you, Sir, for your recalling of a wandering thought. The second
Argument I have learned against the Covenant, is, That it is contrary to the
Prerogative of Kings, not only appropriate to them under the Old Testament, but
also, as soon as they became Christian, under the New; that is, to have the
power of reforming Religion in their own hands; and this was sufficiently
expressed in the Oath of Supremacy (which I question not but that you had
before taken) where the King's Majesty is acknowledged, and under the most
Sacred Obligation owned, the Supreme Ruler and Moderator of the Kingdom,
governing all Persons and Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil: And not only so, but
you added an Oath to confirm and make your promise Sacred and Inviolable, to
defend and preserve, as much as in you lay, his Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Praeeminencies, and Authorities whatsoever, either granted and commended to the
trust and managery of the Kings Majesty, or else joined and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Kingdom. Part of which, there is none that understands
any thing of the State of his Country, or Religion, but immediately reckons
Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, for correction and amendment of all
Errors, and abuses in Church Affairs. To enter therefore into a League and
Covenant, contradicting and violating a former Oath, that plucked also a choice
Jewel out of our Sovereigns Crown, and entrenched upon his Royal Prerogative,
is an Action to be abandoned by Mankind, and damned to that place, to which, it
is to be feared, it has condemned many a Promoter.


Ald. These methinks are hard words, and were it not a derogation to my Honor,
and a blemish upon my Grandeur, I could almost be sorry, and sigh for my taking
it; But I hope, as I was saying but now, I shall pass still among the Herd.


Vic. Truly, Sir, without repentance, it must be amongst the Goats then; and I
would advise you (and if in any thing I may inform, then in this) to be
serious, where Eternity will be the measure either of your bliss or misery:
Will you be pleased that I shall proceed to the third reason?


Ald. Yes, to any thing, so as I may be rid of those I have already heard.


Vic. Then, thirdly, your Worship must easily grant, that it was not imposed by
a sufficient power. For an Oath cannot lawfully be taken by a person subject to
another, in relation to those particulars in which his subjection is due, or to
constitute any thing, or confirm it, by such a Solemn Sanction, concerning
those matters in which he is lawfully subjected, without the leave and
permission of his Superior. First, Because in this he does an injury to
another, and obliges himself to injustice by an Oath; because he determines,
and disposes of those matters, and affairs, that are totally dependent upon
another Commands. And, Secondly, because every one, in those things in which
he is subjected to a Superior, is bound to attend and obey his Will, and be
passive only in relation unto his disposal, to whom he has been obliged, either
by Nature, Contract, or a precedent Oath; which no subsequent can disanul. And
though these Reasons are ponderous enough to weigh down whatever can be
produced to the contrary; yet, if you try them by the weights of the Sanctuary,
you will not find a grain deficient. For the thirtieth of Numbers is,
throughout the whole, a complete confirmation of this particular; where if a
woman, remaining in her Fathers House, whilst she is under his tuition and
Government, vow a Vow unto God, and bind her self by a most Sacred Bond; that
Bond and Vow, though never so solemn, was to be null, and void, if her Father
disallowed it.


Ald. But the Holy League (I hope) was no such thing, that was clothed with
such unluckie Circumstances.


Vic. Yes, Sir, that it was; For, first, the King not only disallowed, but
protested against it, so far was he from giving it the least Contenance, or
Sanction: And had he indeed consented to that, he knew he should seal his own
ruin, as well as violate his Coronation Oath, and make a Deed of Gift of all
his Prerogative.


Ald. Then it seems this way a Net that would have entangled and catched both
King and Subject.


Vic. It was a Net, Sir, that was fit to fish with in troubled waters, for had
not the Rivers been stained with blood, and the Clouds of Heaven, as well as
the Mud of the Earth, darkened the Waters, it is impossible that so much fish
should have come to net; the Web being so monstrously big, that all that had
eyes would have seen the Snare: but so it was, that it had fatal Circumstances
attending it, that it might prove a ruin to such a People that were out of
love with their own beauty, murmured and repined at their own plenty, and were
willing to abandon their blessings and felicity.


Ald. Well, Sir; I have no reason to say much agaiast what you reply; but I can
bear witness to the Old Proverb, that it was good fishing in troubled waters:
But pray make good your second particular, that the matter of the Covenant was
not within our own power.


Vic. That I shall make good to your Worship too. But, first, I must take
notice by the by, that your Worship would make a good Pope; for that you have,
I perceive, got a special Argument to prove your self St. Peter's Successor,
because you have catched such fish as brought money in their mouths.


Ald. I tell you, Sir, I had rather have my Shop full of them, than of Red
Herrings.


Vic. Well, there is salt however in a Red Herring, but I never knew your
Worship so covetous before; however let us throw aside the fish for the
present, and take up the Net. The matter of the Covenant was not within your
own power, because those very things which you Covenanted to alter and
extirpate, and what you swore to defend and maintain, were all contrary to that
duty and subjection which before, both by Birth, and Oaths, you owed to his
Majesty.


Ald. How so?


Vic. But that I must allow to your Worship the infirmities of Old Age, and
account your memory as short as your days: I could else tell you that, but just
now, it was plainly evinced, to be quite opposite to our Natural Obligations,
to our Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, and not only tended to the
diminution, but the total destruction of the Kings Prerogative.


Ald. You are something zealous in your cause, Mr. Vicar.


Vic. Not so zealous as your Worship was formerly in yours, my Zeal is neither
so hot, as to boil over into raging fury, nor yet so blind, as not to see its
own Object; and yet I hope I shall obtain your Worships pardon, if so much
discourse begins to make me a little warm.


Ald. I hope this Town stands in an Air that is able to cool you; and therefore
pray make your last particular a little plainer.


Vic. I shall cheerfully undertake that task, and I most humbly thank your
Worship for your patience; You know, omitting the Proem, and Conclusion, the
Covenant consisted of six Articles. Every one of which is quite opposite to
that obedience, you before were engaged for to his Majesty; besides the
forfeiture of that Religion your Forefathers died for.


Ald. I would fain hear this proved.


Vic. That you shall certainly, Sir, without injury to any thing but your own
patience. As to your Religion, the two first Articles do so palpably offer
violence to that, it not only demolishing the present structure of our most
famous Churches, but utterly extirpating that pious and most ancient Order of
Bishops; (without which some doubt whether the Christian Church can have its
being) and by this means leaving us, as much as in it lies, without any future
hopes of a true Priesthood.


Ald. But how does it oppugn that obedience that we were before engage to
perform to his Majesty?


Vic. That your Worship may with great facility discern; when you shall
consider, that you were before obliged to preserve and defend, not only his
Majesty's Person, but also all his Praeeminencies, and Prerogative; part of
which is, notoriosly known to be, Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Government,
and consequently the power of reforming Religion; and therefore the offering at
an Alteration without him, attempts the destruction of that blessed mixture,
that, Lawyers inform us, is in his Person, and violates his Royal Prerogative;
besides the diminution of his Revenue, by abolishing of the Hierarchy, from
whose First Fruits and Tenths he reaps no small advantage; nay, finally, it
makes part of a Parliament contradict and abrogate, what the whole had before,
by several Acts, and Statutes, established, fixing Prelacy by Laws that cannot
justly be repealed: by a power less than what at first established it.


Ald. Truly, I did not think so much could have been said against what carried
such specious or pretenses; but it seems there lodged a Snake in the midst of
those sweet herbs. Pray, Sir, proceed to your reflections upon those other
Articles that remain unconsidered.


Vic. I would not have your Worship to conjecture, that my discourse will be so
much as a Breviate and Epitome of what many persons have writ in Folio; For
there have scarce been more hunters of the Beast in the Revelation (whose exact
number a melancholy person once found out in the words of the Covenant) than
there has been of this Scotch Monster; however, that we may see also how great
friends they are to his Majesty, we need travel no further than the third
Article, which engages us to preserve the Kings Person, only in the
conservation of true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdom; which lays
him open (as I hinted before) to every Traitor or Enthusiast, that has, either
malice, or, madness enough to conclude him an enemy to both, or either: But
(what may be worth your observation) in the same Article, in which the
preservation of the King's naked Person, stripped of all his Royal Prerogative,
is limited, care is taken, that the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty
of the People be strictly maintained, without an interpretation or restriction
at all; which loudly proclaims to the whole World what friendship this League
designed for his Majesty.


Ald. Methinks I begin to withdraw my affection from that which I had once a
kindness for; and I fear this wound to his Sacred Majesty, was but a kind of
Prologue to that Tragedy that succeeded it.


Vic. Although I cannot but very much rejoice, to see your Worship confirming
that Act with your Judgment, which the Penalty of a Law then only seemed to
extort; to wit, the renunciation of the Covenant: Yet I shall further, I hope,
enhance your abhorrency of this strange Beast, no less than confirm your last
consequence and deduction; when I shall remember you, that the next Article
(besides that it assumes a most Absolute, Tyrannical, and Arbitrary Power, in
bringing men to what we know not who shall deem condign punishment) does
countenance and encourage (and not only so, but bind men by the Solemnity of an
Oath) to Parricide, Regicide, and any the greatest Villainies in the World. How
easy was it by virtue of that for Husbands to ease themselves of unpleasant
Wives, or Wives to divorce themselves from those Husbands that they found their
affections, either out of wantonness, or curiosity, to decline from? How easy
a way was this for the Son to enquire into his Fathers years, before nature
gave period to his life; that so he might be the present Possessour of what he
was only heir to before? Nay, for the Subjects to arraign and condemn their
Prince (since it was without respect of persons) could they but once affix the
Title of Incendiary, Malignant, or obstructer of the Reformed Religion upon
him? The definition of each particular of which was left in their own breasts
to inspire.


Ald. These Inferences cannot methinks but startle all us that have swallowed
down such poison; the regret that is in my Conscience makes me sit very
uneasy.


Vic. I could willingly allow my self, as well as you, a breathing time; were
it not for fear that what I have all this time pursued, would be too long at
rest, and recover strength.


Ald. Nay, I would not have you, by any means, give an interruption to your
discourse; for I have already given order that they should not expect us at
Dinner, but provide some repast for us against the Evening.


Vic. I thank your good Worship, not only for your patient condescension, in
admitting so much familiarity all this while, but for your great care both of
your self and me; though indeed I should not always be so bold an Intruder.


Ald. He never intrudes that is invited, Bagpipes (you know) will not go at
all, if they are quite empty.


Vic. I thank you, Sir, for that Metaphor; for nothing but that could so well
have reminded me of the Covenant: We have already dispatched half the Articles,
and condemned one more to make them even; and the fifth is nothing but talking
of Peace in the midst of War, and boasting of strange effects of reconcilement,
when all know there was no such thing, and therefore here the failing of the
Saints was superadded to the Perjury of the Sinner. And finally, as to the
Sixth Article, it only supposes, in general terms, what we have already refuted
in particular; that the cause of this Covenant was the defense of Religion,
together with the Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, that the whole tended to
the glory of God, the Public Advantage, and the Kings Honor; and therefore
the Jurors here swore to remain constant in the pursuit of the Design against
all opposition throughout the whole course of their lives: Thus did it not only
ensnare a Nation with good words, to dig out their own Bowels, to rage against
Nature it self, and sheath their Swords in their nearest Relations, to pull
down and ruin the most glorious Church in the whole World, and force it to be
truly Militant; but (what may supperadd the Complement to all its deformed
dashes) it made the King a Slave to his Subjects, divested him of all his Royal
Robes, and made him sacrifice his Head to preserve his Crown, which it would
also have deprived him of, but that his Martyrdom eternized it.


Ald. Why, do you think then that the Covenant murdered the late King of ever
blessed memory?


Vic. No, Sir, I should be strangely uncivil if I should draw such Conclusions,
for in that your Worship would be concerned; but this I shall be bold to say,
That the threefold Cord tied him to the Block, and left him there for another
Party to cut off his head. But I expected your Worship should, after all this
digression, have required me to discover the strengeh of the Argument by
reducing the whole to some short Form.


Ald. Truly, that being usually Mr. Mayors work when we, by chance, debate of
any thing, I think the length of our discourse had made me almost forget where
I was, and so expected that should be the work of another; contenting my self
with a serious reflection upon what you have already said; but now my memory is
a little awaked, I must call upon you to discover to me the force of this third
Argument.


Vic. If it shall please your Worship it is briefly this. That Oath which was
not imposed by a sufficient power, was not lawful: But the Covenant was not
imposed by a sufficient power, Ergo, etc.


Ald. But how has that last Clause been proved?


Vic. That has been thus evinced, because the King had no share in the
imposition, but protested against it: And we, being his Subjects, cannot enter
into a League without him, so much especially to the prejudice and detriment of
his Prerogative, and our own Privileges as this is, and by a dissection of the
Covenant it has particularly appeared; I shall add this too, as a final
Supplement to this third Argument; that this Oath was not imposed by that which
the very Imposers declared to be sufficient Authority; nay, not by that which
was pretended most for its enforcement, to wit, Parliamentary Authority: For
then it should have been by a Statute, but this could not possibly be obtained
when neither the King, nor Bishops, nor many other of both Houses, would at all
be present, or consent to it; and so it becomes notoriously repugnant to the
Petition of Right, no less than to an antecedent Protestation, besides the
Obligations before mentioned; sufficient to vacat what a great many have
thought an Obligation, since this Covenant obliges to nothing but Repentance.


Ald. Well, Sir, that you may hasten to a new Theme (for I am sufficiently
informed of the unlawfulness of this Oath, and therefore shall not only beg
forgiveness and pardon from Almighty God, but endeavor to avoid such snares
for the time to come) Have you any thing more that you would add upon this
head?


Vic. I am glad to hear your Worship of such a pious and Christian temper, to
yield to a Conviction, and not be ashamed to confess guilt, and beg pardon,
where Reason and Conscience discovers an offense. I shall add no more therefore
to enforce your Conviction, but only mind you of one thing, which you may, your
self, at your next perusal observe in the Covenant, and that is, the
Amphibologies, and Equivocation. So that it is clear to me, that it was at
first Satan's work; it is so like the Answers of the Delphick Oracle, which
were always capable of a double interpretation, that so, if any thing should
happen to the detriment of one, they might have another ready to preserve its
reputation.


Ald. Though I was always tender of the Reputation of the Corporation, of
which I have the honor to be not one of the least Members; and therefore
according to my duty withstand any thing that may be derogatory to our
Grandeur: Yet God forbid, that I should endeavor to establish Iniquity either
by Authority, or Law; and so far shut mine eyes against the light of the Sun,
as not to acknowledge those beams of Conviction that are at any time darted
into my Conscience: I am heartily sorry, that either the love of Faction, and
change of that Religion which I now perceive to be ancient and good, or the
covetous preservation of my Estate, have formerly prevailed so far with me as
to cause me to espouse such a quarrel as was neither advantageous to the
Public, or safe for mine own Conscience; and that the same Principles should
ever be so prevalent, as to cause me thus, not only to take an unlawful Oath,
but, to seal my Obligation to the League and Covenant with manifest Perjury,
and breach of all my former Oaths; but I hope I shall, by my future Loyalty,
testify my Repentance both to God, and man; and by a double diligence redeem
that faithfulness and reputation which by my rash Acts I have formerly
forfeited. I thank God I have renounced the Covenant, and would with all my
heart forswear it too.


Vic. Truly, Sir, I had not drawn on your Worship to so large a discourse about
this great Dagon, which is now fallen, but that I had (as I have great reason
both from mine own Office and your Kindness) a cordial respect to your future
welfare, that you might have true Peace of Conscience here, and everlasting
bliss in the World to come.


Ald. I must needs confess, I wonder you would adventure so closs a thrust at
the body of the Town, considering upon what terms you stand, and how fickle the
affections of those person usually are, who have thus their Minister for the
most part at their own beck: But truly, Sir, I shall further evidence my
conviction to be cordially entertained, and my Repentance to be true, and real,
by respecting you much more, for that you deny all interest for the
preservation of a good Conscience, which, you know is a continual feast, and
the richest Treasure we can possess. I like your discourse so well, that I must
beg the favor from you to go on to the discovery of those blemishes that are
visible in those other entanglements, to wit, she Negative Oath, and the
Engagement.


Vic. That, Sir, I shall willingly do, not only to evidence to your good
Worship, that there is nothing you shall command, which is within my power to
perform, but I will with all cheerfulness and resolution undertake it: but
because their Villainy does not lie covered with briars and thorns, as this of
the Covenant did; but as Rebellion gained strength, and had Victory and Success
to encourage and embolden it, so it came abroad and discovered it self to the
credulous multitude, without Mask or Vail; and so exhibited its ghastly
countenance to be exactly delineated and proportioned, by those that did not
take Hecuba for Helen, and so far retained their own Reason, as to refuse to be
in love with deformity.


Ald. Methinks, in mine own view, I foresee that many of those Arguments
against the Covenant, will hold good against these Oaths too; and therefore, to
contract our discourse what we can, I hope you will trust me with the urging
those to mine own Conscience, that we may avoid all vain repetitions.


Vic. Your Worship need not fear my Civility in this respect, our discourse
upon these will be brief enough, since to a blind man they will almost appear
at first rehearsal totally to subvert and destroy Monarchy, taking it away both
Root and Branch. First, as to the Negative Oath, wherein you swore neither
directly nor indirectly to adhere to, or assist, in that present War, either
his Majesty, or any other Forces, raised by any Power whatsoever without the
Authority of both Houses of Parliament; and that you would wholly be within the
power and disposal of the Parliament. What did this but plainly contradict both
your Oath of Allegiance, and natural duty that you owed unto the King? And
therefore you cannot but deem your selves Traitors and Rebels to his Majesty,
as far as you abetted, or assisted any against him. And if we superadd the
Engagement to this Negative Oath, we shall easily see how Villainy and Regicide
crept on by degrees, until it had arrived at that height from whence it might
command, and enslave a Nation. You first covenanted to lay open his Majesty to
every bold and bloody Traitor, whilst you would preserve and defend him no
longer, than you had a mind to think him a Defender of the Faith, and, what you
should think, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdom. Thus
did you exalt your selves above your Prince, and make him a Slave to your
wills, exposing him publicly, and that by a Combination, to all the hazards
and cruelty, of malice or misfortune. Then least his Crown and Life should be
too safe in such generals, and all his Subjects should not be alike visited
with the same Vertigo, but might have their souls at liberty from Enthusiasm,
and Zeal boiled to rage and madness; and, consequently, might judge his Majesty
both a Defender of the true faith, and a constant Maintainer of the Subjects
Privilege, as well as his own Prerogative; It was thought good, by those godly
Designers of his slaughter and butchery, to oblige the People to a closer
invasion of his Life and Fortunes, by denying him the assistance of their own;
that so being left naked to himself, his Adversaries might easily bring him to
their Demands, that at last they might offer his Crown and Revenues to their
Covetousness and Lust; and sacrifice his Blood to those infernal Gods, that had
vouchsafed their assistance in so glorious a Reformation. And finally, when
this witnessing time was come, that being free from the noise of Drum and
Trumpet they might serve themselves in their Generation; That there might no
opportunity remain for the dead Ghost to terrify and affrighten, or the living
Posterity to demand or regain their own; you were all engaged to be true and
faithful to the Government that was then established without either King or
House of Lords.


Ald. Certainly, Sir, if we had either seen, or suspected so much villainy, we
should never have swallowed such strange Oaths.


Vic. The best use that your Worship can make of it now, is (next to your
repentance, and resolution of Loyalty) to see what an inextricable Labyrinth of
Vice and Misery we slip into, for want of due consideration: Rashness and
inadvertency, as they damn many an immortal Soul, so do they waste and consume
our Estates and Welfare in this World. But that no intermediate discourse may
give an interruption to our present Scrutiny, and obstruct the discovery of the
horrid Impiety and most scandalous Perjury of those who took these Oaths; I
must further inform you that in these Oaths, first, the Oaths both of
Allegiance and Supremacy were most blaspemously violated, by an Obligation (for
so I call these improperly) that quite contradicted and destroyed their very
intent, and the design for which they were first invented. Secondly, By these
latter Oaths; even the Covenant it self in the third Article (which was
accounted so Sacred and Solemn, and, even to this day, is made an holy Cheat,
and religious Garment, to hide Treachery and Rebellion under) is so notoriously
and publicly violated, and broken, that I cannot but wonder, that any man who
has taken the Engagement, should have the confidence to assert his duty to keep
the Covenant Sacred. Thirdly, They are opposite to the Liberty of the Subject,
in that they were imposed without a Law. And (lastly) they were the most bloody
and scandalous reproach that ever was to the Protestant Religion; to reform our
selves by Sacrilege and Perjury, to blaspheme God for his honor and glory, to
enslave a Prince to his Subjects Lust, and cut off his head to make him
glorious, to pull down Altars that we might offer Sacrifice, and demolish
Temples, to say our Prayers; And finally, to root out, and for ever extirpate
what Nature, and Piety, besides Philosophy and long Experience, had convinced
us to be the best Government in the World.

Tantum religio, etc.
And could Religion all this mischief bring
To wicked Subjects and a gracious King?

Ald. I see, Sir, you begin to be transported, and therefore I must put a
period to this Argument, both because I am abundantly satisfied, as to the
unlawfulness of these Oaths (and I pray God forgive me not only these rash and
unadvised Acts, but my manifest Perjury) and also because I would gladly make
some farther enquiry into other particulars.


Vic. But, before we yet depart from our present station; I would entreat you
fully to disburden your Conscience of whatever you have formerly received, that
might forcifie and strengthen the belief you had of the Obligation of those
forementioned Oaths.


Ald. Truly, Sir, I have not commonly used my self unto too many Scruples, my
Trade engaging me to heavier weights: nor had a Tradesman need have his
Conscience very strait and full, that does not intend to have his purse empty.


Vic. Though your Worships Trade be more large and great, than to be very
strict in Weights and Measures; and I know that Conscience, and its Owners
Purse are ofttimes, not only more alike than you seem to make them, but, in
some things the very same, and as much kin, as Hippocrates's Twins, not only
partake of each others Passions, but open and shut both together; and all the
Difference is only this, that here the Purse is the Elder Brother, to whom the
other serves and obeys: Yet Justice to your self is exact to a Scruple.


Ald. You seem now to be cheerful again, if you suffer the air thus to get into
your brain, it may, perchance, breed some worms.


Vic. Truly, I did it, only to please your Worship, and I thought it was the
ancient Custom of the Town, for the Minister to go behind, and Fellow the
Aldermen; your own Example, and Rule too, I hope, cannot be any prejudice to
you. But yet if the air be got into my brains, I shall give it such speedy and
quick vent in the answer to your Objections (which I now humbly wait and
expect) that there shall not be age enough for putrefaction.


Ald. Though I never was bred to Logic and Philosophy, yet every man has
something natural; and therefore I must take upon me to tell you, that though
(I thank God) I am fully convinced that I offended my Maker, and broke my
Allegiance in taking those Oaths; yet I see no reason why I should yield to
truth of this, that an antecedent Oath must needs vacat all that are
subsequent.


Vic. I am very glad to hear your Worships still persist in that resolution to
repent however of the taking of those Oaths; I question not, but that you will,
within a few minutes, as cordially, and as readily conclude, that there is no
Obligation can rest upon you, or any other of his Majesty's Subjects, to
observe all, or part of either, by virtue of any of those impositions.


Ald. Truly, Sir, you never found me an enemy unto Reason, though I know, in
these things of divine concernment, it has been looked upon as carnal.


Vic. Reason was so carnal, that spiritual men made as much use of it as their
parts and Enthusiasm would permit; only, because for most of their attempts and
actions, they had little or no reason at all; we cannot well blame them for
decrying that, which they saw became so great an obstructor of their procedure:
However I shall adventure to give you some Argument, why a former Oath, legally
taken, whose matter was also just and lawful, must of necessity vacat the
Obligation of any that shall, through Impiety, or Surreption, be future, and
succeed, which bears any opposition to the former.


Ald. Pray do that, Sir, and then the application to the matter in hand will
not be difficult.


Vic. Really, Sir, this debt is so easily acquitted, that your Worship shall
demand it no more: For the Case is plain at the first proposal, and needs no
more than its own Explication. If the former Oath be in all things lawful, and
fails neither in matter nor Circumstances; whatever is admitted opposite to
this is eo nomine unlawful, and consequently has no force or Obligation.


Ald. Though I have no great reason to complain of my want of understanding,
yet really, Sir, I do not perfectly apprehend your Argument.


Vic. That seems to me to be very strange, and yet I have no more reason to be
concerned for that you apprehend not my way of arguing, than I have to disturb
my self for that many times I understand not your way of Justice. But that I
may leave no obscurity in my Phrase, I must still insist that a subsequent Oath
contradicting a former, which was lawfully imposed, and good, both in matter
and circumstances, must either be unlawful, or else the two terms of a
contradiction may be both true; and so, lawful and unlawful become reconciled;
or if this be still to you a demonstration of ignotum per ignotius, I can
otherwise enforce the Proposition.


Ald. But before you do that, let me remember you of one thing that I am sure
is omitted, that must a little limit your assertion, which seems to me to be
too general.


Vic. Pray, Sir, what is that?


Ald. It is most certain, that an Oath may be taken that is contrary to a
former, and yet be Obligatory; As for Example: There was an Act (you know) made
against the Fanatics, whose power was to expire at three years end; now all
those that by their Oaths or Office were obliged to execute that Law, if at the
three years end a Law should have been made opposite to the former, they might
lawfully swear to the execution of this opposite Law, and this latter Oath
would oblige.


Vic. Your Worships discourse is now fallacious (and I hope you will pardon the
Expression because it is a term of Art) were the Laws both running together,
and the former not limited by a time, that took off the Obligation of the
former Oath, the latter Oath would have been so far from accomplishing that
end, that it must therefore have been unlawful, because repugnant to the former
Obligation: but now the former Obligation being ceased, because the matter of
it was already vacated, and the Bond was but for a certain time; and the same
Power, that by Enacting the Law, brought it within the limits of the Executors
Oath, did now void it by the expiration of its Authority, and consequently
vacated so much of the general Oath as related to that particular Law.


Ald. Well, Sir, I apprehend the resolution of this doubt: but as to your
general Proposition, that a latter Oath cannot make void the Obligation to a
former, if the former were lawful, and has the reason of its Bond still
remaining; I cannot yet apprehend your proof, but must expect some Argument
that may evince it to mine own capacity.


Vic. I heartily thank your Worship that you will not permit any promise of
mine to remain unpaid, and I hope I shall have the same Act of Justice
performed to me. The reason to be added then was this; Because a latter Oath,
opposite and repugnant to a former, binds me to what is de jure impossible: For
having obliged my self by my former Bond, that must in equity be discharged;
now to bind my self, by a subsequent Oath, to what is destructive of this
former Bond, obstructs and hinders, nay (should it be obligatory) for ever
prohibits the performance of my precedent promise, and consequently brings upon
me the guilt of Perjury, for not discharging my antecedent Obligations. Thus,
Sir, the taking an Oath contrary to a former, is the same with those that enter
into Oaths for the performance of those things, in respect of which they are
subject to another, and so are not within their own power; which all reason at
first Audit will proclaim and publish both null and void.


Ald. In my Judgment, you have in this, an unfortunate way of explaining your
self; or else long audience and discourse have dulled my judgment and
apprehension: Methinks hitherto I have understood you well, but in this you
seem too obscure.


Vic. I have more charity, and confidence in your Worship, than to conjecture
that you shelter something of strange design under the pretense of ignorance
and defect of satisfaction; will you be pleased to exercise your patience in a
little more attention to this thing?


Ald. I shall hearken to you very cheerfully, and (as much as my business will
permit me) without distraction.


Vic. Then, Sir, be pleased to observe, that a former Oath (therefore
Obligatory because Legal) does bind a person so much to a discharge, that 'till
he has performed, he is not within his own power; but has deprived himself of
his own freedom, either to discharge his promise, or not to discharge it, by
virtue of that Oath and Obligation; and therefore can neither in Justice, nor
Reason enter into a contrary Bond.


Ald. You are sometime, Mr. Vicar, good at a comparison; cannot you make me
apprehensive of your meaning by a similitude?


Vic. Yes, Sir, that I can: Suppose I owed to your Worship an hundred pounds,
which I promised you to pay at such a time; and, after this, I engaged to
another not to pay you your money; which of these promises do you think I were
obliged to perform?


Ald. The former, without doubt, to pay me my money.


Vic. And do you think the latter promise could at all disoblige me from my
former to you?


Ald. No, by no means, for then any man may lawfully play the knave.


Vic. Apply this then to the Case in hand, and you will find that, in a
Promissory Oath, there is not only the Obligation of a promise, but it becomes
a solemn as the strongest Engagement can make it. For you not only call God to
witness the present Contract, and consequently to testify against both your
injustice and unfaithfulness, if you do not perform it; but by your own mouth
you curse your self, and pray God to observe, both your promise,, and
performance, and punish you severely, if you do not faithfully discharge this
Obligation. This is included in the last Clause annexed to your promise; So
help you God by the contents of the Book, which you then kiss to seal the truth
both of the one and of the other. Now then, if your bare promise, in the former
case, where your interest was concerned, was concluded by you, not only
sufficient to oblige to its faithful performance, but also, to supersede all
future engagements, that did attempt to null the former Obligation; much more
must it be argumentative, and convincing, when, to a promise, there is
superadded an Oath; in which not only your own Concerns, both in relation to
your Estate and Liberty, as a Subject of England; and in relation to your Soul
as liable to an account before a future Tribunal; but also the King and
Kingdoms welfare, in relation to the interest of Church and State, are wrapped
up. Much more (I say) must this oblige to a full and faithful performance and
discharge, and be a bar against either the lawfulness, or obligation of any
future Oath to the contrary.


Ald. Your Argument must of necessity now be convincing, and I must be
unfaithful to mine own faculties, and not only so, but (what we account a great
deal worse) reject mine own interest and concerns, should I again have my
belief so imposed upon, as to conjecture, that an Oath, or Promise, is vacated,
by any thing of either kind to the contrary, that may be subsequent to what
went before; and therefore I now see that the Covenant and Engagement (those
accursed impositions, and destructive gins to ensnare souls) oblige to nothing
but repentance; and I must seriously put my mind upon an undissembled godly
sorrow, for that I was so rash and unadvised, as to admit such guilt and
blemishes upon my soul by such manifest Villainies, and horrid Perjuries; and
God grant, that my Repentance may be as true, as my Conviction powerful.


Vic. I am heartily glad to see your Worship so flexible, and that, upon a
rational conviction, you recant your Error. Indeed, I have sometimes met with
men whose hearts have been hard, when their heads were soft; But you are too
much the Master of Reason, and, consequently, of your own passions, to think
that a shame, which is a Crown of glory; and, either through an affected
bashfulness, or proud resolution, to abandon and forsake your own Bliss. I hope
God will bottle up your tears for your former Crimes, which by your future
Loyalty, testifying the reality of your Recantation (I hope) will be converted
into lapses and escapes; and being nailed to the Cross of our blessed Savior,
will not only be suspended in relation to their future Acts, but be dead to
their Motions and Inclinations. Is there any thing else that you will command
my assistance in, before we leave this Subject of our discourse?


Ald. Since you are so civil, in relation to that Office I bear in the Town,
and so industriously studious of my welfare and satisfaction, that you enquire
after what proves your own work and burden; I shall not at all complement you
to a forbearance, though I thought indeed, out of respect to you, as well as in
relation to mine own affairs, to have put a period to our present discourse.


Vic. I had hoped that your Worship had (by sufficient testimony of my Zeal and
Inclination to the discharge of that pleasant and most honorable function,
that the disposal of Heaven, and the Laws of this Nation have instated me in)
been fully persuaded of my cheerful undertaking of any task, that might conduce
to the discharge of the Obligation of that Office, that God Almighty, by his
Delegates, has entrusted me with: And therefore I shall not only forbear any
censure or imputation of incivility, if you please to give occasion to lengthen
our discourse 'till the night interrupt us; but shall make it my humble and
cordial request, that your Worship will be pleased to propose such doubts, as
yet to you may remain unsatisfied.


Ald. Truly, Sir, I am no less delighted with our present Conference, than you
seem to be with the discharge of your duty: and therefore, I hope, you will
dispense with mine Age and Place, if I shall farther enquire into what (though
it has been already treated, yet) is not well fixed, either in mine
understanding, or memory.


Vic. Pray, Sir, what is that?


Ald. You were sometime since urging this as a reason against taking Oaths
contrary to ours of Allegiance and Supremacy, because we were not then in our
own power, and therefore could not oblige our selves.


Vic. Very right, and I think it to be a good Argument.


Ald. So it may perhaps, if I did understand it; but I would fain have you to
use the same way in this, that you did in the explanation of the former reason.


Vic. What! by Similitude?


Ald. Yes, Sir, that is the way I mean.


Vic. Then I shall travel no farther than your own Shop for a Comparison to
explicate this, which is but an easy Riddle. You have, I know, an Apprentice,
or two?


Ald. Yes, Sir, that I have; for they are (according to my management) as good
money as any Commodity I have in my Shop: I had three of them, 'till one of
them ran away from me, and, in another place, bound himself Apprentice to
another Master.


Vic. And do not your Worship look upon him as your Servant, and obliged to
serve out his time still?


Ald. Yes: and I can, in Conscience, and Equity, as well a in Justice, and Law,
force him to come hither again.


Vic. But, it seems, he has since contracted with another.


Ald. That is nothing; his former Indenture is still good.


Vic. But will not his last Contract null and vacat his former relation?


Ald. No: For if it would, we shall not dare trust our Apprentices out of our
Shops; Nor give them any correction when they deserve it; nor make that gain
upon them which we usually do, by a thrifty way we have of dealing with them,
but immediately they would desert our service, and oblige themselves by
Contract to another.


Vic. These are Inconveniences bad enough, especially to you, who (it seems)
drive a Trade in Apprentices; but there must be some formal reason, why your
Servants Contract with another does not vacat his Praecontract with you.


Ald. Methinks your own reason might dictate an Argument sufficient to you.


Vic. You know, Sir, that I have been respondent all this while, and now I
would fain become the Catechist.


Ald- I will not quarrel at that word; for your continual testimony of your
civility and submission, give an uncontrollable evidence, that you do not think
you have boys to deal with.


Vic. I wish we had only those to Catechize; for then there would be hope that
the Nation would be well Principled in time; it gives me some cause of
mistrust, that you think I have a design in these questions; but I would only
know your reason, Why the Contract of your Apprentice with another cannot make
void his Praecontract with you?


Ald. That is plain, and obvious to any; and I wonder you will be so scrupulous
to ask.


Vic. Truly, because I would be informed.


Ald. Then the reason is, because he was my Servant before; and so cannot
become servant to another, 'till his time is first expired with me.


Vic. Then (if I apprehend you) your reason is this; Your Apprentice, being
before bound to you, was not at his own liberty, to indent with any other,
'till, first, he was discharged of his Obligation to you; and therefore the
latter Contract must needs be censured as an undutiful attempt, and becomes
void in the very Act.


Ald. You have now well expressed my meaning, and is not this reason
argumentative?


Ald. Pray, Sir, what say you?


Ald. Truly I think it so conclusive, that it will not admit of any answer.


Vic. Then you have now done my work for me, and I hope you will not by any
means dislike your own actions.


Ald. Your meaning, Sir.


Vic. Did not you ask me, but now, a reason, why he that was not in his own
power, by reason of the Obligation a former Oath, could not lawfully take a
subsequent opposite to the former, and if taken, could not oblige?


Ald. That I did, but what then?


Vic. Then apply but the Case your Appprentice, to the matter in hand, and
then, what you deemed a Problem, is manifest to you, according to your desire,
by a familiar Similitude.


Ald. Indeed (Mr. Vicar) herein you have been too hard for me, and caught me in
a Net of mine own making.


Vic. Nay, Sir, however it is suitable to your Trade, for you to deliver out the
twine, when it is another makes the net.


Ald. Well, Sir, since it has happened so fortunately, I will pardon my Boys
running away, because, by that, he had brought this Argument home to me.


Vic. Indeed, Sir, I am not at all sorry neither, that I had both such matter,
and opportunity to enforce it.


Ald. I think now you have sufficient answered all my doubts, and given me
abundant satisfaction, that what I before renounced out of Interest and
Formality, I shall now do out of Conscience and Duty. But now I think of it,
there is one potent Objection, that a Nonconformist Minister (who indeed I
think is a good man) urged against me the other day, when he would have drawn
me over to his Party.


Vic. Pray, Sir, what is that? And I am the more earnest to know, because men
of that Character, by which you have described that Gentleman you mentioned
without a name, have as little reason for most they fay, as any Party that I
know.


Ald. I know not what reason you suppose them Masters of; but this Argument was
like to startle me, (and I am not well satisfied about it yet) it was the
example of the Gibeonites.


Vic. What! the cheating the Israelites, with their moldy bread, and old
shoes?


Ald. No, Sir; your drolling shall not evade the Argument.


Vic. What was it then, because they had cunning insinuations under the
pretense of Ambassadors?


Ald. Although I take a great many of those that cannot conform to out Church
in all things, not only to be pious men, but als wise, and therefore may be
subtle in their Arguments, by which they endeavor to save Souls; yet they
think themselves (and many sober men own them so too) the true, and not
pretended, Ambassadors of Christ.


Vic. I presume your Worship has not that qualification, and therefore do not
think you own them for the Messengers of Christ.


Ald. You see I come in all my Formalities to your Church.


Vic. Well, Sir, I shall not question your carriage in that particular; nor yet
your Creed concerning those people: that may be reserved for a fitter
opportunity, before we part. But pray, Sir, why should those that daily
endeavor to cast down your staggering faith thus startle you with the example
of the Gibe^nites? Was it because they had Wine Bottles with them? These
possibly might have proved your Customers. For though they were rent, and so
plainly appeared Schismatics; yet, like Fanatics Consciences, were bound up,
and so might prove as much your interest to entertain them, as it is to you to
enter leaky, or decayed Wines at a Custom house.


Ald I wonder how you came to have so great an insight into Trade; you know,
your too narrow inspection into the faults of men, has almost quite undone you.
Why should you think a Non-conformists Argument so weak? You know, the Dutch
were almost to hard for us, merely because we contemned our Adversaries.


Vic. I must confess your Advice is suitable to your self, sage and old; I have
found, by experience, (a word sometimes of great significancy) since I came to
this Town, that the most contemptible person is able to do another an injury: I
hope you will not think I contemn the Non-conformists, because I have not so
great an opinion of them as your Worship has: But pray, Sir, to the Case in
hand; Why should the Gibeonites so much put your Reason to a doubt? Was it
because their Garments were old, and so might be Objects fit for your Charity?
Or because they came out of a far Country, and so might be good Merchandise
here?


Ald. Fie, Mr. Vicar, now you show your self very weak.


Vic. Really, Sir, I cannot imagine what should be able to startle your Reason,
in the History of the Gibeonites craft with Joshua, unless I should this time
blunder upon it: Was it because they rode upon Asses?


Ald. Methinks mine ears begin now to be altogether burdened; Pray tell me the
place where the Text is to be found, and I will then quickly discover the
Argument, which I fear you foresee will be too difficult, and therefore you
study these Evasions.


Vic. It is not because I fear any difficulty, more than ordinary, in that
example you seem so much to triumph in; but because I think there is a great
parallel betwixt the Gibeonites, that cheated Israel into a League, and those
Non-conformists, you seemed to applaud, who religiously betrayed others into a
Covenant: But because I would not at any time baulk a Fanatics Argument, they
being, you know, modest men, I will not only tell you the place, but find it
out ready to your hands.


Ald. Mine eyes indeed are somewhat dim.


Vic. Is not that a Bible that lies in the Window, with gilded leaves, and blew
strings?


Ald. Yes, I think it is my Wives Bible.


Vic. Shall I, Sir, make bold with it?


Ald. Though I do not usually venture to dispose of my Wives Affairs, yet I
shall presume, now she is out of the way, to let Mr. Vicar have the use of her
Bible.


Vic. I thank you, Sir: I shall reach it then, and look out the place.


Ald. But why do you look at the beginning? Surely it is not in Genesis.


Vic. No; I know that, nor yet (whence the Phanaticks usually fetch their
Arguments) in the Revelation; but I would fain know where it was Printed.


Ald. And what was the place?


Vic. Where women's Bibles use to be Printed; at Geneva.


Ald. That I have heard frequently commended for an holy City.


Vic. Very like! but I hope you will hear it so no more; lest Innovation and
Rebellion should be stamped for Piety, and John Calvin get into red Letters.


Ald. I know not who that Calvin was, but I have heard him very well spoken of
in the Pulpit.


Vic. That may be, when Rebellion and Murder was in fashion.


Ald. I fear this diverting discourse makes you forget the Text you are looking
after.


Vic. No, Sir, whilst we are talking of Geneva, I must of necessity mind the
Gibeonites. Now I have found it: There is the Story, in the ninth of Joshua. If
your Worship please to put on your spectacles, you may consult the Text your
self.


Ald. That I shall -- I have been something long reading over the Story, both
because it makes a whole Chapter, and also because I would willingly weigh all
Circumstances, lest any thing, through my treacherous memory, should escape the
Objection, which the Gentleman I told you of urged to me the other day.


Vic. In that you do what very well becomes your Place and Grandeur; not to
speak any thing rashly, and unadvisedly. But pray, Sir, what is your Argument?


Ald. It is in brief this. We find the Israelites making a League with the
Gibeonites, which by the Story appear to be part of those that Israel was not
to be at peace with; this League was sealed to them by an Oath, and so it was
properly (as the Apostle says) the end of all strife. Now this Oath must of
necessity be unlawful, because contrary to God's Command, of the total
extirpation of those Nations: And yet the Israelites think themselves obliged
to keep this Oath, notwithstanding the illegality of it, Ver. 19. Nay, to
confirm, beyond all contradiction, the Obligation of the Oath, not only from
the reason of the Princes of the Congregation; we have sworn to them by the
Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them; but because, somewhere
I am sure in David's time, we find Almighty God visiting the Land with three
years Famine; and the reason of the judgment is particularly expressed;
because, contrary to their Oath, Saul slew the Gibeonites.


Vic. The Text is in 2 Samuel 21. at the beginning. Is this the strength and
force of your Argument?


Ald. Yes; and I wish you may be able to give an answer to it.


Vic. That I hope your Worship shall not have much cause to fear. But,
methinks, I cannot but admire that clemency, which is still kind to such
prodigious Traitors, who dare yet, and that to a person of your Port, who are
an Alderman of a Town, and a Justice of the Peace, urge such an Argument as
this, for the establishment of such an accursed thing as the Covenant was; that
has been plainly demonstrated, by several Pens, to be totally destructive of
the established Government both in Church and State! Are such as these think
you safely tolerated? When they conjecture that Obligatory which brings the
Kings Head to a Block, and binds them to kill all the Bishops, Deans, and
Prebends, if they cannot otherwise extirpate the Hierarchy.


Ald. I am sorry to see you thus in a rage, to express so much of imprudence
and passion against those people, who may be again in a capacity to do you
Mischief. Let the higher Powers look to the answering your Objection, and do
you look to answer mine, for you are not like to escape so.


Vic. No, Sir, I will not now be bribed to silence, though your Worship in
those cases do very frequently command me. But the reflection upon such ruinous
consequences does not a little disturb me.


Ald. I plainly perceive you to be in a Passion.


Vic. Yes, Sir; though age has cast a mist over your eyes, you are easily able
to see mine infirmities, and every moate that is mine eye; you would be angry,
if I should tell you, that you have a Beam in your own.


Ald. And I have reason too.


Vic. I shall not at all question your reason, but yet I think your sight may
fail, when you take a little Mouse for a Mountain, and an ugly Dog-fish for a
Royal Sturgeon.


Ald. I fear your passion has transported you to madness.


Vic. No, Sir, it is Zeal entranced, and sublimated by a Chemical operation.


Ald. I cannot imagine what your meaning is.


Vic. Nor I yours, to think this Example of the Gibeonites so potent an
Objection, that you doubt whether it admits of any answer.


Ald. Pray let me know then from you what may be powerful enough to invalidate
it.


Vic. That you shall, without any more protraction: Your Argument, Sir,
supposes the League made with the Gibeonites to be altogether unlawful.


Ald. Yes, that it does, and with reason too; because God had prohibited it.


Vic. But all Prohibitions are not Universal; for some, being qualified with
certain conditions, become, thereby, restrained.


Ald. Yet this will not admit of such an evasion; for, says God, Take heed to
thy self, lest thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land, whither
thou go, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee.


Vic. I know the place very well: It is in Exodus 34.12. But if you well observe
those words, you have recited, there is contained in them a full solution of
your doubt.


Ald. That is what I cannot discern, and shall be very glad, if you can make
that Assertion good.


Vic. I cannot well fail in this, where the condition is so manifest, and
apparent; You know, in all Statutes, the Preface contains the reason of
Enacting; and therefore an Act of Parliament is usually interpreted by the
Preamble; and the design and intent of any Law is to be discovered from the
cause and reason of its Sanction: Thus is it in the case in hand; God
prohibites a League with these Nations, lest it should prove a snare to the
Israelites.


Ald. This seems to me to confirm the Prohibition to be general.


Vic. No, Sir, for if you please to look farther into the Text; at the 14 and
15 verses, you shall find, that the reason why a League, with any of the
Inhabitants, might prove a snare to Israel was; because, by their example, and
familiarity, the Israelites might be drawn to the Commission of Idolatry: Which
is also the same reason again repeated in Deuteronomy. 7.4. when the cause of this
fear then cease, the Prohibition is vacated, where the reason of the Law is
totally withdrawn.


Ald. But how could the reason of this Law cease, when it is notoriously known
that the Canaanites were most grand Idolaters?


Vic. Just as a Fanatic, when he becomes a Convert to the true Religion, and
subjects himself to that Church, from which before, violently, and without
cause, he made a Schism, is no longer liable to the Civil Mulcts of those Penal
Laws that concerned him before his Conversion; so when these Canaanites, or any
part of them, should relinquish their Idols, and devoutly resign themselves to
the Worship of the God of Israel, they were no longer concerned in the
Penalties of the Laws against the Canaanites, but might be capable of a Truce
and League. And should not the Law have been thus attended with condition,
there would have been no room left for Repentance, and consequently the
Almighty would have offered violence to his own Mercy, which he has declared to
be over all has works, and is an Attribute in which he most delights.


Ald. But the very Action of God is enough, at any time, to justify his
Attributes; and therefore I shall not much trouble my self with that; yet
methinks a Law, so Universal, must of necessity oblige to such a total
destruction of those Nations that the League with the Gibeonites must needs be
unlawful.


Vic. Let not, Sir, this Universality so much disturb your Reason, since I can
easily exhibit an exception of particulars. What do you think of Rahab that
entertained the Spies, was not she a Canaanite? And yet she was preserved
alive, Josh. 6.25. And what can you think of those, which were not of the
Children of Israel, which, remaining even in Solomon's time, were not destroyed,
but brought under Tribute? 1 Kings 11. What do you think also of those
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, who inhabited amongst the Ephraimites, and
served under Tribute? Josh. 16.10. The same may also be concluded from the
Gergasens, Mat. 8.28. who continued to be a People, even till our Saviors
time, for, being omitted in those particular enumerations of the Adversaries of
Israel, that were by divine appointment to be rooted out, we may rationally
conjecture that they yielded at the first.


Ald. Well, Sir; that you may not think me always wedded to mine own opinion,
but that I may by the power of Argument and Reason be sometimes divorced from
my belief; I must of necessity confess your instances have convinced me, that
this great Prohibition was Conditional, and, consequently, not so Universal, as
I supposed it. But what was the League then which was prohibited?


Vic. To answer this, I must distinguish of a double League; there is a Social
League, such as one Prince makes with another upon honorable, and sometimes
advantageous terms to both; and this was simply forbidden: but there is a
League with a conquered Enemy (as upon the yielding a Town to the Besiegers, or
a whole Nation becoming Tributary to a Conqueror) and such a one might be
struck with those, that, relinquishing their Idolatry, were in the nature of
Proselytes; and submitting themselves, would pay Tribute to the Israelites;
which I take at first to be the case of the Gibeonites.


Ald. But, if you have rightly stated the difference betwixt the Israelites and
the Nations, methinks, it is somewhat strange, that Joshua seemed so much
concerned for his surprise; and that the whole Congregation should so severely
murmur against their Princes, for swearing to these Gibeonites.


Vic. All this may very well be reconcilable with our precedent discourse; for
the Princes having made this League, and bound it by an Oath, and not,
according to their duty, enquired of God, they might fear a Judgment for than
omission, and this might be the cause of their discontent and murmuring.


Ald. But why should Joshua, after the League, then pronounce them accursed,
and condemn them to the slavery of the Temple, to be Hewers of wood, and
Drawers of water, if the unlawfulness of the League and Oath had not caused a
burden to his Conscience?


Vic. That I hope your Worship will no longer object, when you shall understand
it to be an effect of Justice; It was a punishment for their deceit and
falsehood; insinuating subtily their remote dwelling, when they were indeed
their near Neighbors. So that, by this, I hope, you discern how much your
canting Objector, but malicious Traitor, would have imposed upon you, in urging
this Oath of Israel to the Gibeonites, as a motive for you to keep the
Covenant; when there was not so much as the resemblance of Parallel; the
Covenant being evidenced to be impious, and unlawful, but the League and Oath,
in relation to the Gibeonites, has been sufficiently proved valid and good. I
hope for the future you will be so just to your self, as well as your Office,
to punish such insinuating Cheats, that, under the pretense of Piety and
Religion, and winning Souls to Jesus Christ (as they call it) most
scandalously, to the ruin both of Church and State, instill poisonous
Principles into the minds of men, that swell them up to Tumult and Rebellion:
and would, as you see, (if possibly they could) infuse their venom into the
subordinate Magistrates; that they, growing big with Saintship, should extend
beyond their just proportion, and their own esteem should render then better
than their Prince; and consequently, he would be so vile in their eyes, that
his Laws should, first, appear ridiculous, and so, not being the effects of
Wisdom, would be unfit to be executed; and then his Person must be, first,
contemned, and afterward set aside, or murdered.


Ald. I hope their Principles are not altogether so bad as you make them; I am
apt to think, that they themselves are convinced by those Arguments which they
enforce to others; and therefore impute all their miscarriages to their
weakness, rather than their obstinacy; and all may be (though it proves
unfortunate in the expression, and those consequences that are deduced from
their Principle) the effect of good meaning. But to leave such discourse,
because you know, at present, they may be bold, having almost the same
privilege with your selves. Since this Nonconformist has given you this
trouble, by his Objection: I would have you endeavor to requite him, by
exhibiting an example that may convince the truth of your former Position, that
an unlawful Oath is not Obligatory, and binds to nothing but Repentance; by
this means you shall discharge your debt to him, by putting him to the expense
of an answer, or, for defect of that, to be liable to the disparagement of a
baffle in his own Trade: As also you will, by this, carry on your main design
of confirming and strengthening that belief, which you have been a means to
raise in me.


Vic. Although, Sir, I would evince my self to be more a man, than to be at all
jealous of another affection; yet, methinks, by your discourse, I have too
much reason to suspect the Non-conformists to be Rivals to the Church of
England, in relation to the winning your Judgment and Opinion: But, because I
should be injurious to my self, in disturbing mine own peace, as well as
disobedient to you, in a denial of my duty, should I at all protract an answer
to your Commands. An example now presents it self to my mind, (so great a
design and promptitude is there even in my very memory to serve you) that will
plainly evidence that an unlawful Oath binds to nothing but repentance.


Ald. Though I am neither able, nor would it become me, in the place in which I
am, to follow your Example of Courtship and Complement; yet, I Will assure you,
not only my Judgment and Opinion, but my deportment and action shall be guided
by the example you produce, if I shall at all find it cogent. Therefore,
without any more Circumstance, pray what is it?


Vic. It is the Example of David.


Ald. That cannot, surely, well be rejected, because he was a man after Gods
own heart, and I cannot but long for the particulars.


Vic. If your Worship please to take your Wives Bible, and turn to the twenty
fifth Chapter of the First Book of Samuel; there you may compare the
particulars of my Argument, with the truth of the Text.


Ald. I thank you, Sir, for that motion, because it will avoid many Doubts, and
Questions, that would inevitably have arisen, should I not have seen your
Argument plainly deducible from the Sacred Example; but also this will imprint
the reason in my mind, and so I shall be the better enabled, upon a view of the
Text, to urge the Argument, in its full strength, to the Gentleman for whom it
is designed; and my own conviction will be the more powerful and lasting. I
have now found the Chapter, and therefore you may proceed to your Argument.


Vic. Your Worship remembers (I hope) what the thing is to be proved.


Ald. Or else surely I must be asleep. The thing to be demonstrated from this
Example is, that an unlawful Oath is not Obligatory, unless to repentance.


Vic. Very good. Thus then the proof is attempted. David being provoked by the
churlishness of Nabal, to whom he had sent Messengers for Provision, made a
Vow, with an Execration to himself, to kill all that appertained to Nabal, Ver.
22. For so, (says he) and more also, do God unto the Enemies of David, if I
leave, of all that pertain to him, by the morning light, any that pisseth
against the wall. That is, let God thus permit the Enemies of David to triumph
and affront him unpunished, if I suffer any of Nabals Family to live 'till the
morning. Here you see David had obliged himself by what most would conjecture a
sufficient Bond: And yet, when Abigail comes, and in the behalf of her Husband,
falls at his feet, begs his pardon, and gives him her Present: David was so far
from pursuing his rash and bloody design, that he acknowledges guilt in his
passionate inadvertency, and gives praise and glory to Almighty God, who had
raised up Abigail, not only to meet him, but to obviate his design also, and to
divert his intention from shedding blood: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel
(says he, Ver. 32.) which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me, this day, from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand. And that he totally
desisted from the accomplishment of this Oath and Vow (which he himself
declared wicked, in that it obliged him to a murder, to gratify his Revenge)
is apparently manifest, from his dismission of Abigail, Ver. 35. Go up in peace
to thine house, I have hearkened to thy voice, and accepted thy person. So that
from this Example it plainly appears, that an unlawful Vow or Oath obliges to
nothing but sorrow and repentance for ones rashness and inadvertency.


Ald. I thank you, Sir, for this full Conviction, not only of my unlawful
entering into the League and Covenant, with those that forsook their own
welfare, and ruined a flourishing and prosperous Kingdom; but also for your
perfect proof that such unlawful Oaths are to be repented of, and not at all
persisted in: I will promise you, the first opportunity I have, to urge your
example (which methinks seems exceedingly Argumentative) to that Gentleman that
would have endeavored to persuade me to his opinion, with a second forfeiture
of my allegiance to my King.


Vic. I cannot well conjecture what reply that woman's Minion may make to it;
but, I hope, if any thing, he should chance to blunder upon, should seem to
startle you, it shall not be accounted any disparagement to your own Judgment,
if you accept of my help and assistance, in confirming your Worship against all
such blasts and storms.


Ald. I hope I have sufficiently learned to trust men in their own Callings,
and to keep (where great advantage does not present) within the limits of mine
own; and therefore, as long as you shall remain my Minister, I shall not
refuse, in what has reference to the welfare of my soul, to consult your
Judgment, as well as mine own. I hope you need not now spend any more of what
time remains (which indeed I could wish lengthened) about the persuading me to
disown the Covenant and Engagement; for I not only renounce them, and hastily
repent of my rashness and inadvertency, but abhor their most prodigious and
bloody consequences with my whole heart. I am very joyful that you had an
occasion of discoursing these things with me, which, I remember, was taken from
that Passage of yours some hours since, that you did not think I was obliged to
observe all those Oaths that I have taken: Is there none other Oath that you
know, I have taken, that does not oblige, for indeed I would have as little
burden upon my Conscience that might engage to action, in such troublesome
times, liable to changes, as I could.


Vic. I can mention to your Worship but one more, which, being a Lawful Oath, I
fear (though there is no great ground for it) you burden your self too much in
making more conscience of its observation, than those of greater, and higher
concernment.


Ald. Pray, Sir, what is that?


Vic. It Is when you swore to observe the Customs of your Town.


Ald. We cannot certainly be too strict in these, for they are the Bulwarks
both of our Credit, and Honor, and the Supporters of all our Grandeur and
State.


Vic. I do confess, indeed, that is an usual Custom, for your blood to rise,
proportionable to your Offices; and the Mayor is dubbed with the Town Mace: And
a Gentleman hardly knows himself to be such, or, at least, others take little
notice of him, 'till he becomes a Member of your Society; whereas Tradesmen are
not only inferior to Gentlemen, but the Yeomanry are by right to be preferred
before them. You must not think that honor is to be weighed in your Worships
Scales, nor conveyed to men in Punchions of Prunes.


Ald. Hold, Sir, your Wit runs before your Wisdom.


Vic. That it does (I must confess) always when it dares speak before your
Worship: It Is strange, methinks, you can permit all the Statutes of the Realm,
not only to live incognito and retired, but, when they dare speak at the
discovery of any Treason or Vice, you can, either by your Authority, or
Connivance, gag them to silence. You can suffer the King, and all the pious
Supporters of the Church, to be spotted by a perpetual reproach; you can,
quietly, and without control, permit Conventicles, both of Drunkards and
Fanatics; and though they load you with affronts, public, and private, if
they, or their Relations, are your Customers, instead of suppression, they
shall have the encouragement of your own Society: All the Laws both of God and
Man (though not only undervalued, and slighted in discourse, but too frequently
blasphemed and reproached, and with impunity violated by persons of the
blackest Character, whom a Pencil, dipped in the Infernal Lake, can scarce
decipher) you cannot only be Stoical and unconcerned in; but oftentimes,
violate your selves, what you ought to punish in others; and then they commonly
fare the better for your own sakes. But if a little Custom of your Town be
concerned, though it be but playing a Dog amiss at a Bull-baiting, or having
but a sheeps hinge the less at a public Feast, there is nothing less than
thunder and lightning; the head is presently shook, to see whether he has not
lost his brains; and the Band is carelessly turned to the Alehouse; and all is
in such disorder, and confusion, as if a fire were raging through the midst of
our bowels, and a present damnation were brought upon the World: and all this
(no doubt) from a mistake, concerning the Obligation of the Customs of the
Town; and though your Wisdoms understand Perjury too well, to be much concerned
at a few Acts; yet here you think your selves forsworn, if an Aldermans Gown
should prove moth-eaten, or the Rats should gnaw it for want of victuals; so
render are men in their own concerns.


Ald. I see, plainly, you cannot live, unless you are allowed a little liberty;
which has been the reason of my patience (though not without violence to my
Place, and Grandeur) whilst you have too severely reflected upon the Customs
of our Town; and, in my judgment, sometimes a little too broad, for one that is
but a Minister. We never used to be served thus, but so great a distance did
our Aldermen keep with men of your Coat, that one of us never came by any of
them that belonged to this Town, but the Minister was down to the ground to
them, and looked upon it both as his duty and interest so to do; though they
perhaps (having so much burden upon their shoulders, by reason of the Public
Affairs of the Town, and other Accidents more private) might for the present
take no notice of him. But, not to disturb, or provoke your passion, lest
respect to you, in forbearing the Law, should cause my Brethren to censure my
lenity, where I ought to be severe: I shall freely pardon your past
Expressions, because they were uttered in mine own house, if for the future you
will discourse only of the Point you have in hand, without particular instances
in our Customs.


Vic. Sir, I am sorry that my Expressions sometimes prove so unfortunate to
offend your Worship; I had hoped you would, now, have suffered me to unbend the
Bow: But, however, since your Reputation, or at least Greatness is such, that
your Will is a Law to the whole Town, all reason it should be so to me: Had I
told you, that Mr. Mayors door had no greater Mark, or Badge of Cognizance,
than the biggest heap of Oyster shells; or that when Qeen Elizabeth came to
Town, and Mr. Mayor and the Corporation met her on horseback, and riding
through the River, his Worships Horse would have been so bold, as to drink in
the same Cup with the Queens; which he being a well-bred Gentleman, repressed,
the reason being asked, he told the Queen in very good Language, that he should
not be so unmannerly to drink, 'till her Majesty's had done. Had I revived
such Stories as these, your Worship indeed might have justly blamed me for
reviling the Corporation, and joining you and your horses together; but since I
instanced only in a few Customs, not much taken notice of abroad in the World,
and that, privately, betwixt you, and I, for an entrance only to the serious
state of a useful Problem; I hope I shall obtain your forgetfulness, and pardon
(since even that is customary to your good nature) for what I have said; and
then, I shall immediately exhibit my present thoughts, and reading, concerning
the Obligation of your Customs in general by virtue of your Oath, without
reflection upon any particulars.


Ald. That is it which will make me retract my power and command, and use you
only with familiarity and entreaty: I must now keep you to this promise.


Vic. I am much engaged to your Worship, not only for your former civilities,
but also, for that you manifest so great a present delight in this discourse,
that though I have, not only by unmannerly interruptions, but frequent
diversions to another Theme, that might sometimes prove ungrateful to your
Worship, attempted to put a period to this present task; yet you have so
tempted the repetition of my former discourse, that by your discreet, and wise
management, there has been a kind of method in what would otherwise have been
confused; and you have still prompted forward a design, that has always been
as pleasant unto me, as I hope it may be useful to you.


Ald. I know not yet what use I may make of the design, nor do I know what you
drive at, which makes me willing to provoke you to the end of the discourse;
that I may be eased of the execution of some of my Oaths, which, I perceive,
are so many, that they will otherwise at last execute me.


Vic. That, Sir, you perceive is the present design; and because I find your
Town Customs to be very many (though perhaps you account none needless) and (if
your Worship would confess) sometimes burdensome too; and I would instance in
some, but that I have promised to speak in general: It will therefore be no
ungrateful attempt, if I endeavor to discover an effectual way, how to save
your Oath entire, and yet abate the rigor of your Action, in the observation
of all particular Customs.


Ald. I shall be very glad to hear any thing proved, though I like our Customs
very well; and they seem to me to be good and laudable.


Vic. Observe, Sir, then (if you please) that you are to look upon your self in
a double capacity; as a Subject of the Realm, and so a Member of the Great
Society, that are governed by the Laws of our Supreme Prince, and gracious
King: Or else you are to observe your self as a Member of a particular Society,
separated from the general body, for the discharge of some particular duties
and designs. As you are a Subject of the Realm, you are no doubt obliged to
observe, and keep, as much as in you lies, all the Rights, which by Law, or
Custom appear to be just, and lawful; and yet you are not bound to observe
those things, that, even amongst the Learned in the Law, are so controverted,
that they become so doubtful, as to be rendered altogether uncertain, and it is
not yet determined in which part duty and obedience is expected. Yet a Subject
ought always to have his will so ready for Submission, that as soon as these
doubts shall be taken away, to subject himself according as Law shall direct
his Duty, and a full determination regulate his Practice. But as to the
particular Laws and Customs of a Town, because Omissions of some inconsiderable
Customs, do neither derogate from the honor of the Place, nor at all tend to
the destruction of the Community, there must a Latitude be allowed: First,
Because many of them may be not only frivolous, but vicious, and no man can be
obliged to sin. Secondly, Because some may now be burdensome, and
insupportable, in the present condition of a Town, or Corporation, which, when
established, might very well be supported; and no man can be bound to be
injurious and unjust, to that Society which he is sworn to preserve. And
lastly, Many Customs of a Town may, either after the Oath be abrogated, or by a
general Omission nullified and withdrawn; and no man can be obliged to support
that which has no being, or is voided by the same Authority which gave it its
first being; for it is an old Rule, that, What institutes, may abolish. To
render the Case therefore plain and practicable; we must distinguish of those
Privileges and Customs that are Fundamental, and those that are only
Accidental and Circumstantial. Those that are absolutely necessary to the
support of the Corporation, and whole Body, in their Honor, and Power, that
is, essential to preserve the whole Community for the ends and designs for
which it was at first instituted; you are necessarily obliged to the strict
observation of: because these being withdrawn, the Society will be ruined and
fall. But, secondly, there are some Bylaws and Customs, that, either may be
less Fundamental, or, only tend to the External Pomp and Grandeur of the
Community, and no way necessary for the Actions of Justice, or Execution of
Law: For the principal end of embodying Towns into Corporations, was for the
better Government of those Numbers that there usually swarm together, not only
for their own advantage, that they might be capable of protecting themselves,
having Laws and Justice to defend themselves from malice, and violence; but
that, for their ease, and convenience, they might have Justice speedily
executed upon Offenders. Now this may be done with an Iron Rod, as well as a
Golden Mace, as well with a Sword, as a Gold Chain, and in ordinary habit, as
well as Scarlet; but yet because External Pomp and Splendor of Magistrates
usually casts a dread upon the People, and makes them timorous to offend; these
things, proportionable to the Wealth, and Dignity, or Populousness of a Town
must be had a special respect to, lest the Building decay with the Pomp and
Ornament; and in this Observation, common Custom, and present Practice of the
general body, ought to regulate each particular. Now even these also must be
distinguished, into what are for the present practiced, having already, either
by decree, or usage received their Sanction; and what shall for the future be
established: Those that are present, are to be observed no further, than by
probable tokens you can conclude their first Sanction and establishment did
intend; so Laws are frequently interpreted according to the intention of them,
where the sense in the Expression becomes dubious. Those that are future to
your Oath, which, you are obliged to the observation of, if confirmed by
sufficient Authority, must always be attended with these Conditions; that they
are possible, that they are honest, that they are just; for no Oath can oblige
either, to impossible, dishonest, or unjust. And lastly, they must not
interfere with any of the Statutes of the Realm: For every particular Society
is subordinate to a Power, that is more general, and supreme. Thus, though your
Town is immediately governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, yet they themselves are
bounded and limited, not only by their Charter, but also by the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm; and, consequently, whatever they act contrary to these,
is not only ipso facto void, but they become responsible for their deportment
before a Superior, and more general Tribunal. So that any Custom, or By-law,
that contradicts any Public Statute, cannot oblige you to the observation of
it, by virtue of your Oath; not only because your Oath cannot oblige beyond the
intention of the first Imposer, but because such a Custom, or By-law becomes
evil and unjust, it being opposite to what you were before obliged to a
discharge of. But yet finally (to close this Case, which would have taken up
too much time, had I fully opened it) lest you should yet think this Obligation
(which most Aldermen, that are past the servitude and slavery of a Corporation,
are fond of) too much unbended and loose; You must have a care, lest in any
doubtful, or confident omission, the circumstance of contempt, or scandal
attends it; that is, lest in your withdrawing from what others think an
Obligation, you do act with contempt of that general Society of which you are a
particular Member; or when you are convinced, that your omission is such a
prevalent example to others, not being fully possessed of the lawfulness of
your forbearance, that they are thereby induced to practice the same thing with
your self, not having the same belief, and so it becomes a snare to their
Souls, and a torment to their Consciences. To conclude this then; He that does
faithfully (as much as in him lies) and without scandal, or just offense to
others, endeavor to observe the Laws, and Customs of that Society, of which he
is a Member; so that he will not, refractorily, and, with his full consent,
violate any thing that tends to the support either of the Being, Justice, or
Honor of his Corporation, which he is convinced is his duty to perform, in
that Place and Station which he possesses; and endeavors also to use his
utmost diligence to be acquainted with the particulars of his duty, does,
without doubt, discharge a good conscience, in disburdening himself of that
Obligation that lies upon him, from his Oath, to observe the Customs and
Constitutions of his Town, and Corporation to which he relates.


Ald. I thank you, Mr. Vicar, for stating this duty; not only for that I
plainly perceive, that the failure in some little Punctilio does not make me
violate my Oath; but also, because you seem to be tender, not only of the being
of the Corporation, but of its Pomp and Honor too, so that I do not find but
that this may be fit to communicate to every Member of our Society, and will as
well oblige Inferiors to their distance with their Superiors, and the dutiful
observance of their just Commands, as engage Superiors to be content with
their own Privileges, without invasion of the Rights of others.


Vic. I know not how your Worship may misconstrue any secular or merry
expression; but otherwise, you know, that ever since I came to this Town
(notwithstanding fretquent disobligations) I have not only endeavored to
conform my self to those Customs that are good, and laudable and so do not
interfere with other duties that relate to my Calling, nor entrench upon those
few Privileges that I can claim, both as a Gentleman, and a Priest: But
always to persuade others, not only to a submission to Authority in the
general, but to a peaceable subjection to yours in particular: and, indeed, I
am so true a Churchman to our present Constitution, and consequently, so, great
a Lover of Loyalty, that I cannot only with all cheerfulness obey his Majesty's
most just Commands, but also submit to all his Subordinate Ministers, as those
that are Commissioned by him, for the punishment of evil Doers, but for the
praise of them that do well; summoned thereto by the Apostles Argument, for so
is the will of God. And therefore you shall never fear me an enemy to
Corporations, but I shall always serve you to the utmost of my power, which
you know (by reason of my poverty, and contracted livelihood in this place) I
cannot make run parallel with my will; But I hope you will not be
irreconcilably angry at what is only diverting mirth, and (as I think)
inoffensive pleusantness; especially, since your Worship has been pleased
sometimes, in your discourse, to put off your gravity, and now and then to dart
forth a Satyr, that has been as sharp as witty.


Ald. I cannot but be well pleased with what you do, especially since where you
seemed to give offense, you presently did beg my pardon; and now that you give
so great a Testimony to Magistratical Power in Towns, and Corporations, here is
my hand, and my heart with it. I wish your maintenance were increased, either
by an equal pound rate upon the houses; or that the Bishop (since he has many
preferments within his power) would bestow some, upon such men, as endure more
than ordinary toil, and burden in Corporate Towns; that so we might not want
such a Ministry, as might be able, by their constant Preaching, to confirm such
as already stand, and by their Learning and Argument reduce wandering sheep to
the Fold.


Vic. I most humbly thank your good Worship for your pardon, and for your
charitable apprehensions of my good intentions, and designs, in order to the
support both of your honor and Authority; and though I have little hopes ever
to see your wishes accomplished, yet I cannot but honor you for your sincere
desire; and I could join with you in your Petition, that a maintenance may be
advanced by a pound rate, not so much for mine own emolument (although this
usually prescribes to the World) as for a future, and perpetual supply. For you
know I am a single man, and so can (though not without some difficulty) make a
shift with my Salary; yet when a poor man comes to this place, with Wife, and
Children, he must of necessity want Supplies for his Family, unless the charity
of others relieve him; which, indeed, in the times in which we live, where
Iniquity does so much abound, is waxed too cold, either to heat, or cherish.
But as to what you would wish, though not prescribe to the Bishops; it seems to
me to be a little unreasonable (unless they may perhaps think it incumbent in a
time of exigence, to abate, for the present season, some Privilege) to be
forced to give their preferments to Market Towns, who are very well able (did
not the penury and contracted hearts of their Inhabitants obstruct and hinder)
to encourage learned and pious men, and may methinks be persuaded to it,
especially since the benefit of enjoying such a Ministry is to be confined to
their own bosoms: And the welfare of their precious and immortal beings (of
more value than their richest Merchandise) are concerned, as to their future
felicity.


Ald. I must needs confess (though some of the Towns (that are yet populous)
are very poor) most places that have any tolerable Trade yet remaining, are
well enough able to maintain their Minister, if their wills were suitable to
their abilities, yet do you think that a voluntary subsistence is so
reconcilable with the Port, Authority, and Dignity of the Clergy, as what is by
Law established?


Vic. No, Sir, nor would I persuade you to conjecture that such a dependent
maintenance is suitable to the ends for which the Ministry was at first designed
by God himself; and therefore the Priesthood, under the Law, had a particular,
although large Revenue, by right, and debt assigned to them; and, under the
Gospel, St. Paul does, more than once inform those that were most contracted
and covetous, that he could claim a privilege, for sowing to them spiritual
things, to have a power to reap their carnal; and that those, who preach the
Gospel, ought to live of such a reward as is due to them that bring glad
tidings, which the word (...) does not improperly signify. For the design of
the Ministry is, not only to be the Public Officers, to put up the Peoples
joint Petitions to Almighty God; but also, in their Homilies, and Orations, to
persuade to virtue, and sharply to reprove the rebellious sinners; and by all
motives, that may be rational, to dehort from the pursuit and practice of Vice,
which they will be tempted to be partial, and remiss in, with relation to those
who are their Benefactors; lest they should peevishly withdraw that portion,
which, whilst pleased, and indulged, they did freely contribute. Besides, the
pitiful and slavish carriage, far below their honorable Function, they must
be guilty of, to those that are their supporters and relief; rendering
themselves mean and contemptible, and with their own shadow will be apt to
darken and obscure others in their esteem amongst whom themselves are usually
conversant. Add to this, their necessity of submission to every humor, and
vain desire of their Auditory; not only in relation to the public discharge of
their most solemn duties; but must sometimes accompany them to their very
Vices, and can only be witnesses to what they dare not for their livelihood
control. And besides all these, not only inconveniences, but mischiefs too, a
dependent maintenance is never certain, but has such continual ebbs and fluxes,
that he can never be at peace with himself, but so filled with what hopes and
fears such an unfixed Revenue can possess him with, that these thorns of the
World, will not only render his studies and contemplations uneasy; but, too
frequently, fruitless also; and his head will be so wounded, that is, crowned
with these, that they seem only to be a Prologue to Crucifixion.


Ald. Therefore, methinke (if mine Option could pass into a Vote, and that were
able to make an establishment) I would rather (as I was saying) that the
Bishops should, by giving them some other preferment, as an addition to their
slender livings; encourage our Ministers, and so withdraw all inconveniences,
that in their present condition, usually attend them.


Vic. I cannot so much doubt of that charity, which I have always found
eminent in your Worship, as to think you design this Argument, under a pious
pretense, to save charges: But yet, methinks you do, with too much eagerness,
pursue the Reverend Bishops Privileges; for they have Chaplains, that are, for
the most part, learned men, and far more deserving, than we poor Vicars (that
have not money to buy those Books, which they are able to read and digest) that
must always have the best preferments that fall in the compass of their Lords
Donation. Besides the Bishops have Kinsmen and Friends. Add to this, that these
are ways by which they commonly oblige persons in Authority, and Power, by
disposing some of these Livings to their Chaplains, and Acquaintance:
Therefore, unless we can find out some other way, I fear there will be little
hope from this.


Ald. But there are some little sine-Cures, and small Livings that so great
persons, of such interest in the Bishops, will not care to accept of, and these
methinks may befriend Corporations.


Vic. How do you mean, that Corporations should be enriched with the spoils of
these?


Ald. No, Sir, I would not be accounted so Sacrilegious; but that those that
have the care and burden of exercising their Ministry in great Towns, where
their duty and work becomes enlarged, but their reward narrow, and contracted,
should, proportionable to their Learning, and Piety, have some of these
bestowed upon them, as a supplement and increase to their short Revenues.


Vic. Now I perfectly understand you; and shall leave you to persuade them to
it. In the mean time, because I think your Petition may miscarry, what do you
think of this way? Let all Corporations, throughout England, that send
Burgesses to Parliament, desire those that serve there for their particular
Buroughs, to cause a Bill to be drawn up, and therein to appoint Commissioners
to Assess in all Market Towns, by an equal pound rate (that pay under an
hundred pound per annum to their Minister) to the value of this hundred pound,
to be from year to year collected, and recovered by Law to their Ministers use:
and this will be a moderate, but certain establishment.


Ald. Truly, I shall be very willing to promote so pious, and religiose a work;
but I fear many Townsmen will presently endeavor to obstruct and hinder it.


Vic. That will not be within their power, if the principal persons in Towns
are for it.


Ald. But what do you think of the Non-conformists interest in such a concern
as this is?


Vic. Truly, Sir, I think it is not their interest at all to have such a thing
accomplished, because then, there being an able and pious Ministry established
in Towns, (where you know is their greatest confluence) their Dagon must of
necessity fall before the Ark of God; for their Teachers will be effectually
confuted in public, baffled, and consequently disgraced in private, and their
Proselytes will daily fall off from them, and be won again to Christianity and
Religion.


Ald. But, they say, they have Friends above, and they, making their
applications to them, by some craft or other will get the Bill to be thrown out
of the house; or else protract it at a Committee so long, 'till the Session be
at an end.


Vic. I heard indeed they did something much like it the last Session, but I
could hardly believe the truth of the report; because it is, to me, a very
difficult matter to believe any thing, almost, that such persons are either the
Actors, or Relators of.


Ald. Why should you be of so little faith?


Vic. Strange methinks that the talking of persons of their Character, should,
by a kind of Sympathy, put your dress into Scripture Phrase, in common
discourse. But the reason why I suspended my belief was, because in their
Actions they are commonly Hypocrites, and in their Words Liars; They will not
swear, nor, if they do, will they perform: Nor will they drink hard amongst the
Wicked, as they style the Kings most Loyal Subjects; but with the Saints it may
be lawful to enjoy the Creature, 'till they are not able to enjoy themselves:
Some of them that abhor Drunkenness, do take a wonderful delight in Gluttony;
for their Teachers greasing their mouths well, makes their Tongues the more
slippery: And (as I am informed) have taken up a new way of wishing health, not
by the Ceremony of a Glass of Wine, or Cup of Bear, but eating a good full
Morsel, for Ceres is as good a Friend to Venus, as Bacchus, and is always less
scandalous. But I cannot but wonder, that you should think such as these to be
so powerful with the Parliament. Do you suppose that they have many Friends
there?


Ald. I do not know the number of their acquaintance, but this I can say, that
they are the most vainglorious boasters in the World, if they are not assured
of some interest now, and have larger hopes, if this Parliament were but once
dissolved.


Vic. As to that, we must leave it to the discretion and will of his Majesty;
and in the mean time, we cannot but praise Almighty God, that has raised us up
not only a nursing Father to his Church, but convened so many pious Patriots,
that, like so many Pillars in his holy Temple, have hitherto supported the
Fabric, notwithstanding all the raging winds and storms: And this not without
exceeding great justice legible in the largest Characters of his Providence;
that as an House of Commons, by Violence and Usurpation, did once deform and
ruin his Church: so an House of Commons should now be made the grand
Instrument to rebuild, and support it. But if these noble and indulgent
Patriots of our beautiful and well-constituted Church, should either by
accident or policy be dismissed; which way could the Fanatics designs, that
are so destructful in themselves, and can no longer, with Fauxe's fireworks,
be obscured in a Vault of Secrecy, but become visible and manifest to all, now
take effect, and prosper in the midst of such a World, as must needs be
cautious, and, like the burned child, dread the fire?


Ald. The same way they did before.


Vic. Say you so Sir? And must the old Game be played over again, that has lost
so many fair Estates, and been apparent to the World in colors of Blood? That
has made the Church crackle with its Ruins, and weltered a Nation in its own
Gore, that, by treading upon the Miter, got high enough to twitch off the
Crown, and bring a Sacred head unto the Block.


Ald. I do not say that all those effects will follow; nor are causes supposed
so unavoidably to be linked together, as to be always the Fathers of such
Children.


Vic. If the old Rule in Logic hold, That the Causes being exhibited, and put
into order, the effects will follow, we have reason to fear nothing but death
will attend their Phlebotomy.


Ald. I told you before, I was not very well skilled in Logic; but this I
know, that the Pot is boiling.


Vic. It must be then the Pot for the Prophets; and I question not but
crackling thorns are the fuel they boil it with. But pray, can you tell what
they would be at?


Ald. Truly, I suppose, at least, part of the old Game.


Vic. But what are the designs they do at present aim at?


Ald. Thus much I am assured of, a present Toleration, and, after that, a
future Sanction.


Vic. But do you think they can well agree, seeing they differ so much in
opinion from each other, upon the certain qualifications, and limits of their
comprehension?


Ald. They will all agree in the ruin and subversion of the present Church.


Vic. That I easily consent to; but will they not then again fall out and
disagree, which Party shall gain Superiority to the rest?


Ald. I cannot but say, they have all designs of being Universal in their
Authority, and Opinions; and no doubt may differ, even to wars and blood, which
shall impose upon the rest.


Vic. Then it seems Impositions will not be unlawful, when they proceed from
such sanctified men as these; and they do (notwithstanding all their canting
and moderation) but pull down our Uniformity, to set up another.


Ald. This they will almost now acknowledge, when urged close by a strict
Disputant.


Vic. I am sure it is plainly deducible from their present attempts, to
captivate and enthral the Judgments of all men to their own; besides the former
example of all Parties, as they took their turn in their Supreme Authority, is
Argumentative even to a demonstration: But if the Case be thus with them, it is
but putting them, at their next motion to the Parliament for comprehension, to
draw up their own Bill; and they will be so long about the agreement for the
bounds and limits of every Party, that the House of Commons, nor King neither,
need fear no more trouble with them.


Ald. That indeed would be a cunning device; for I remember when they had
formerly pulled down Episcopacy, and the Presbyterians would have had their
Discipline established, a few Independents made some Objections; which, before
they were solved, and the dissenting Brethren reconciled, we were all run into
irrecoverable Confusion, and so the Government was never established.


Vic. That was the very example which I had in mine eye, when I was proposing
to you the former mean of securing our selves, and satisfying them, by giving
them a little Countenance and employment.


Ald But they will scarce make their Addresses to this Parliament any more;
because they see they have several times miscarried; and therefore begin now to
mistrust that they are only fooled by Courship and Civility.


Vic. What will they attempt then, shall there be a Resurrection of their
beloved Rebellion? Though I think indeed it has been bedrid only, not dead all
this while.


Ald. It Is hard for you to trust your Adversaries with Swords in their hands,
but they always protest against their Method.


Vic. Their Protestations are but of small Authority; for every one of them is
a Pope to himself, to absolve from any Oath or Protestation: but which way then
will they accomplish their desig^s?


Ald. I Will tell you then (but you must be secret) they hope to get this
Parliament dissolved, and then to get another of their own persuasion.


Vic. That is a way, indeed, that I did not think of; because now the Multitude
have no power to dissolve a Parliament, nor can the Fanatics have their will
in Election of Parliaments, so as to sway the balance to their own side.


Ald. They are scandalous men, you know.


Vic. They are so; and malicious enough, to watch all opportunities, to ruin
those that in the least bear any opposition to them: But Corporations send most
Members to the Parliament, and Fanatics are purged out by a Law; though,
indeed, it is to be justly feared that in many places as there are
Church-Papists, so there are Church-Fanaticks also; and the Ass may be
formidable in a Lions skin, if he has but grace to hide his Ears. But I hope
however, if the State of Affairs should command a new Election, Your Worship
will take a special care that we have such chosen here as may not only take
more care, than others have, of the welfare of the Town, and the support and
honor of the Corporation; but that will faithfully assert the Prerogative of
the King, and the due and legal Privileges of the Subject, not forgetting a
poor bleeding Church, that, betwixt the wounds of too numerous Adversaries, is
ready to die and expire. For should this Party, that now appear in sheeps
clothing, through diligence and treachery, obtain their desire; alas! they
would be but stalking horses to the Papists, who having catched their Prey,
would mount them to ride away with it. I hope therefore that all Towns will
remember, that Civil Wars are ruinous, and destructive to all Trade and
Commerce, that Garrisons fill them with noise, and tumult; that Violence and
Plunder will neither be advantageous to themselves, nor Children; nor can it at
all be delightsome to them to become Servants to their own Apprentices; and
therefore will elect Gentlemen of worth, when ever the present Members shall
die, or be dissolved, that know what it is to become Slaves to Tenants; to be
arraigned before a Consistory of Elders, and to have a Parson curse them by
Bell, Book, and Candle, whilst the Surplice is cut into a white sheet, for the
Gentlemen to wear upon the Stool of Repentance: But pray, Sir, (if I may not
be uncivil to your Worship) How can you arrive at so much knowledge of the
intrigues of that Party?


Ald. I am acquainted with some of the heads of them.


Vic. They may perhaps be some of your Worships Customers.


Ald. Yes, truly, I take a great deal of money of that Party.


Vic. I need not then wonder at your kind and courteous carriage toward them:
But are you acquainted with any of their Ministers, that have formerly been
beneficed?


Ald. Yes, some of them are almost every day in my Shop, or else I meet them up
and down the Streets.


Vic. And so you salute, and pass by one another as freely as if you were of
one Religion?


Ald. Sometimes we make some stop, and discourse with each other concerning
Affairs, either abroad, or at home.


Vic. Yet you are a Justice of Peace.


Ald. What then? May not a Justice of the Peace discourse with any body?


Vic. I do not presume to restrain your discourse; but do not you remember that
there was a Law made, that persons, under those qualifications, by which you
have but now described your acquaintance, should not come within five Moses of
a Town that sends Burgesses to Parliament, upon certain Penal i^ there
prescribed?


Ald. Yes, I very well remember the Law.


Vic. And do you not remember, the Justices of the Peace are to execute it?


Ald. Yes, that I do; What then?


Vic. Then out of your own mouth are you condemned, and convinced of manifest
and open Perjury.


Ald. How? I hope you dare not condemn a person of my Port, and Age, of such a
horrid and Prodigious Crime. Perjury is a name that Christianity abhors.


Vic. If the name seem too rigid and severe to your Worship, I can use the
trick of the late times, and abate the name, if you will but acknowledge the
thing.


Ald. Truly, I must be more convinced of the truth of the thing first; you
mistake, certainly, the nature of Perjury.


Vic. Do you think that a person making you a promise is not obliged to a
performance of it?


Ald. Yes, unless I release him, or his Promise becomes unlawful or impossible.


Vic. Very good, Sir, and will you not tax him of unfaithfulness, and falsehood,
if he fails (as much as in him lies) to accomplish it?


Ald. He must needs be a knave that fails in it, and does not give a
satisfactory reason why he could not do it.


Vic. When a Promise then is sealed with an Oath, do you not think there is a
stronger Obligation?


Ald. I must of necessity conclude so, from mine own acknowledgments, in our
former discourse.


Vic. And do you not think him guilty of Perjury that swears falsely?


Ald. Yes sure, when any one affirms a falsehood upon Oath, or denies what he
knows to be true, he must needs be a Perjured person.


Vic. And how can you possibly excuse your self in the present case?


Ald. I did not in that affirm any thing which was false, nor yet deny what was
true.


Vic. No? Did not you promise before Almighty God to put in execution all the
Laws that belong to you as a Justice of the Peace?


Ald. Yes, that I did; but what then?


Vic. Then it follows from thence that you swore falsely, because you have not
fulfilled and accomplished it.


Ald. But I thought he only had been Perjured that, when called to give his
Testimony upon Oath, did bear false witness.


Vic. I thought your Worship had well known the difference betwixt an
Assertory, and a Promissory Oath.


Ald. I do not know so much in Divinity, but that I can admit a further
information, and (I hope) without any disparagement to that Place and Office in
which I am.


Vic. I suppose that, in this, as well as many other questions, your Worship
has proposed, you pretend ignorance and dissatisfaction, only to try my skill
in Definitions, and Argument. Yet, notwithstanding, lest our discourse should
by any means admit of interruptions, I shall satisfy this scruple, by telling
you, that the very Phrases express their own meaning; and themselves make
complete descriptions of what is designed by those terms.


Ald. Pray discover this in a more particular Explanation.


Vic. An Assertory Oath then is, wherein a thing is by such a solemn
confirmation as an Oath affirmed to be: and because falsehood may be as well in
a Denial of what is, as in an Affirmation of what is not; therefore this Oath
does also include a denial of what is.


Ald. But this Oath will not concern our present Case.


Vic. Therefore I told you there was a Promissory Oath, wherein a thing is
promised, and the Obligation to its accomplishment sealed by an Oath: As in the
Case of David and Jonathan, and between Abraham and Abimelech, 1 Samuel 20.11.
and 21. Genesis 31.32.


Ald. I now well understand the difference, and perceive that Perjury does not
only relate to our Affirmations, or Denials of things upon Oath; but also to
our Promises, that are established with the same Sanction: And so far I must of
necessity make a preparative to the acknowledgment of my guilt in not putting
in execution those Laws against persons of that Character, which mine Oath, as
a Justice, obliges me to perform For I love not self conceitedness in any
body, much less in my self; and shall never stop mine ears against Argument,
nor yet resist mine own convictions; I must confess, from what I have read, and
heard, I have had sometimes war within my self for neglecting, so much, the
punishing of Offenders against the Kings Laws and ^hen meeting with some of
those whom the Penalties of the Laws did most concern; they would persuade, and
tempt me to the relaxation of what would otherwise certainly have provoked me
to action; and so ^^luced peace within my self, by telling me, that to permit
them to live in peace, was that Chatholick Charity so much commended by persons
of all persuasions.


Vic. It is an easy matter to pronounce peace, where the God of peace speaks
no such thing; and to wrap up Toleration, and Comprehension, in the soft Phrase
of Catholic Charity: Thus does the Physician gild those Pills that squeamish
Patients are to swallow. You see then, what strange Cures Mountebanks in
Divinity are able to accomplish, though, when they have used their utmost
skill, they heal the hurt of the Daughter of Gods people slightly (as the
Prophet speaks.) They skin over the outside, and only for the present dead the
pain, when, there being within corruption and rottenness, the anguish returns,
and every touch upon the wound is smart and tender.


Ald. I must confess I have sometimes found it so; nay, the very thoughts of my
horrid guilt of Perjury, in these wilful neglects we are now speaking of, has
made me, for several times together, been guilty of an omission in relation to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.


Vic. And yet, notwithstanding, you could content your self with living in the
guilt of what your own Conscience, it seems, frequently accused you, and, in
your own thoughts, rendered you unfit to partake of the blessed Supper of our
Lord?


Ald. I was loath, methought, to be guilty of adding sin unto sin, and iniquity
to iniquity.


Vic. And do you think you had not the same guilt by forbearing?


Ald. Whatever become of the sin of Perjury, I am sure, I did not incur the
guilt of receiving unworthily.


Vic. The foundation of your satisfaction in this, I suppose, was, because you
did not receive at all?


Ald. Right.


Vic. But do you not know, there are sins of Omission, as well as Commission?


Ald. What then?


Vic. Then I suppose your Worship (admitting your guilt of swearing falsely) in
omitting the Sacrament, upon this consideration, did add this Omission to your
former Commission; and so there was sin added unto sin, and iniquity to
iniquity, both in your own Phrase, and Action.


Ald. But would you have me approach the Sacred Table, with loud Accusations
from mine own Conscience and such perturbations in my mind, as the sense of
such a sin must of necessity raise? This were to have mine own conscience
witness both to mine unworthiness and guilt.


Vic. Do you think then, that out of kindness to your Vice, you may, without
guilt, abstain from the Sacrament, which our Savior has commanded to be
celebrated with solemnity, not only to testify and increase our Charity, and
other Graces; but also for the perpetual remembrance of his Death and Passion,
and that 'till he comes to sit upon his Throne, and pass an equitable sentence
upon the whole World?


Ald. Without doubt, I must not approach those mysteries with sins upon my
Conscience unrepented of.


Vic. Nor are you invited by the Priest in the words of the Church, unless you
both repent of your sins, and are in charity with the World, and intend to lead
a new life.


Ald. Why then should you blame me?


Vic. Because these qualifications are within the compass of your own attempts,
assisted by the grace of Almighty God, which is never wanting to persons of a
sincere endeavor.


Ald. What would you then advise me to, that I may prepare my self against the
next Sacrament?


Vic. Your Worship, I presume, for the most part, are able to give advice to
me; but since you give leave, it will be accounted no unpardonable boldness, I
hope, if I give you some directions, and it will be no disparagement to
entertain them, since they shall be the Churches Rules.


Ald. But let them reach the particular case in hand, that so your resolution
may not be more tedious than the canting and length of a Fanatics Prayer.


Vic. All my fear has hitherto been, that my words have been too quick and
short. If you find then that Perjury has been your crying sin, let repentance,
attended with faith in Christ's blood, wash away the guilt of your former
falsehood and omissions; be in charity with their persons, against whom your
Oath obliges you to execute the Law; and be resolved, for the time to come to
be more sedulous, and frequent in the discharge of your duty.


Ald. This indeed is, like your self Mr. Vicar, short, and sweet.


Vic. It has the greater probability to keep your justice waking; and I am
sorry the advice is no more like your Worship.


Ald. But, all this while, I have led you in a cloud.


Vic. Let your face, Sir, then, that, proportionable to your Estate, is bright
and rich, dispel and scatter it with your beams and rays; that so I may have a
Rubric to direct me.


Ald. You are marvelous witty, good Mr Vicar, thus to reflect upon my very
face.


Vic. I must confess your Worships Face needs no reflections; yet it is but
gratitude to return those rays that before were darted upon mine own body, I
touched only upon your Face, because I would not make a bridge of your nose.


Ald. You think now you have hit that place, where there may be matter enough
for discourse.


Vic. Truly, Sir, you led me to it, and yet I must beg your pardon, if I refuse
thus to defile my Language. Thus it is always, you see, when gall, and passion
begins to stir.


Ald. Really, Sir, I am so much sensible of mine own infirmities, as not to be
altogether averse to the pardoning yours.


Vic. I thank you heartily for your candor and ingenuity, and shall be more
obliged to you for your forbearance, if you please to antidote your own
passion, the better to prevent mine.


Ald. I did not intend any other than a trivial Jest; when I seemed to reflect
upon the stature of your body.


Vic. And I intend none other than earnest, when I reflect upon the proportions
of your mind.


Ald. But stay, Mr. Vicar; your late discourse supposes me guilty of Perjury,
and so, I must needs confess, I am, as far as the case has hitherto been
stated: but are you sure I can plead nothing for my self in bar of your
Accusation, and defense of mine Innocence?


Vic. I shall by no means accuse you, lest you brand me with Sathan's Title,
and call me the Accuser of the Brethren: But I cannot imagine, how you can
excuse or acquit your self from swearing falsely, when you do not put in
execution the King's Laws that belong to you as a Justice of the Peace.


Ald. Yes, I can exhibit London it self, the Metropolis of the Nation, for an
example of omissions here.


Vic. London cannot possibly be looked upon as a pattern and exemplar for
smaller Towns; for because of the populousness, and largeness of that City, it
is impossible the Magistrates can be able to discover those misdemeanors, and
breach of Laws, that are there daily acted, and committed. Great Cities will be
always full of unclean birds, but the Cage is so big, that the Magistrate
knows not how to catch them.


Ald. But do you think that those unlawful Assemblies (as the Statute calls
them) do never make noise enough to come to the Justice of Peace's ears?


Vic. I do not at all question that; no doubt the meetings are tumultuous
enough, not only to reach the ears of those, but sometimes approach so near
them, as to leave the guilt at their very doors; (unless there they have a
trick of restraining their Families, better than we have in this Town.) But our
question now is matter of right, not of fact; and we are to follow Precept,
before Example. What ease can it be to any particular man's torment, to have a
great many more roaring with him? And since we are enjoined in Sacred Writ to
perform unto the Lord God our Oaths, it will not at all detract from that just
misery I must be possessed of, for the wilful and constant breach of mine,
though all the World were also involved in the same guilt.


Ald. What you say indeed are great truths, nor were the Example at all
Argumentative, unless their forbearance of rigor, and execution did persuade
us that there was a supreme connivence.


Vic. I hope Supreme Authority may not only have liberty to wink, but sleep,
when he has both Commissioned, and Commanded others, and bound them, with the
Oath of God upon them, to look to the general performance of duty, and to
punish those that play the Truant, and violate Laws in contempt of Authority.
Thus does the Shepherd go to sleep, when (as he supposes) he has with safety
folded his sheep: Thus does also the Superior Commander quietly take his rest
and repose, when he has set his guards, and appointed to his Army Quarters. The
Pilot has given forth his Orders, and the Ship may be in danger, unless the
inferior Officers, in their several Watches, steer right, and keep the Seamen
from mutiny, or disorder. But you cannot say there is so much as a Supreme
Connivence; since the same Laws are still in force, and the Royal Proclamations
have sufficiently been sounded through the whole Nation, and the Oath of a
Justice is still the same, attended with the same force, and Obligation.


Ald But, notwithstanding all your reply, it is thought, by persons both of
interest, and parts, that there is some countenance given.


Vic. You are easily made to believe these things, that perhaps you may be
willing should be accomplished; but can you conjecture, that God Almighty, who
has declared to the World, that he will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain, will be satisfied for the breach of your Oath with such slight
Arguments, with which you seem to silence the outcries of Conscience, when the
Authority of his Law, and honor of his most glorious name so deeply challenge
the vindication of his justice?


Ald. We know that mercy is an Attribute our Maker so much glories in, that
meekness and kindness, unto others here, making us to partake of the Divine
Nature; he is then most pleased, when this is most exercised.


Vic. Though Charity is the great virtue of the Gospel, not only in uniting the
whole World under one Religion; but because it is so frequently enjoined us;
yet this is never either justly limited, or exercised, when it thus interferes
with justice, or a due discharge of our Obligations and trust; for you are not
to bear the Sword in vain, but you are appointed, as well for the punishment of
evil doers, as for the praise of them that do well: Therefore to punish
offenders, does well accord with the Law of Charity.


Ald. But Non-conformists, for the most part, will scarce acknowledge that they
come within the compass of Offenders, however, are very hardly ranked amongst
evil doers, which the Sword of Justice does properly reach.


Vic. I do not affirm, that these are the only Offenders; nor that all
wickedness rests with them: But you seem to conjecture, that a mortified face,
and a meager look, or a sober twang upon a well-strung Nose, is enough to make
a Saint in querpo.


Ald. Truly, if once I set about the execution of Laws, I shall not have
respect of persons.


Vic. In that, Sir, your Justice will best resemble him who is our most perfect
Pattern, whose Equity admits no spots; and your resolution against Vice will be
the more sincere, by how much the more it becomes Universal: but never let a
demure face, be received as a character of an innocent heart. Let the Drunkard,
and the Swearer in common discourse, as well feel the stroke of your Arm, as
the Rebel and the Schismatic; for your omission will as well be attended with
forswearing (if others information, or your own senses become the accuser) when
you inflict not the Penalties upon both, or either. I cannot conjecture
Fanatics to be the only Criminals, whom the Laws, you are sworn to execute,
reach, no more than those were the only sinners, whose blood Pilate mixed with
their Sacrifice, or those on whom the Tower of Siloe fell: But yet, I think,
they are as great as any almost within the compass of Christianity. For I
cannot but conclude Rebellion and Treason to be as black crimes as Rioting and
Luxury, Spiritual Pride, and a lofty Saintship to be altogether as vain, and
more impious than external Pomp attended with Superfluities, and a small
Cottage swelled into a Lordship. Till you can assure me, that Usurpation and
Violence, Murder and Rapine, Oppression and Robbery, Perjury and False-witness,
Lying and Slander can be admitted into the Chain of Piety, and become the
Advancers of true Religion; that a supercilious morosity, and defect of
Urbanity are good Morals; and contracted, narrow, and base souls, that always
plead the Jewish Corban, whose Avarice is as insatiable as the Sea, and their
Lust as incurable as the barren womb, 'till these I say become the only
vessels of honor, noble, and capacious for the Master's use; and the Second
Table of the Moral Law becomes either lost, or its Obligation cancelled, I
shall never account those persons, so loudly clamoured for by mad men and
women, to be pious, or good: So little Justice have they for their separation,
because they account themselves more righteous than their neighbors. But
because it is not my present business (as a thing which I always abhor) to lay
more burden of sin upon their backs, who are already, pressed as a Cart with
Sheaves; (and an excellent similitude indeed is this, where both the burden and
the sense is equal.) I deem my discourse then only congruous with my present
design, when it tends to persuade you, courageously, and universally, to
execute the Laws against all Offenders; that not only Peace may be kept in the
Streets, but preserved also in peoples Consciences. Though (as I plainly
discern) you cannot but conclude the Fanatics present insolency and rudeness,
and apparent method to a future rebellion, cannot but a little inflame my Zeal;
and, I hope our Adversaries will not dislike that in me, which they so much
applaud in themselves.


Ald. Really I have been many times not only upon your discourses, but being
begged and entreated, by many persons, both of worth and quality (who well
agree with you both in fears and motives, and who have also in the late times,
more than ordinarily, for their Loyalty and Religion, felt the weight of
usurping fingers) inclined to execute the Laws against those persons, that,
regardless of the Law, do not only abstain from a just submission to the
Commands of Authority, but also, in their Conventions and Meetings, exercise a
quite contrary power; and, as those Gentlemen would suggest, prepare their
Auditors, and number their strength, that they may be fit for another
encounter. And then, consulting with mine own thoughts, I considered, that they
pleaded Conscience for their Actions, which being tender, I cannot, methinks,
endure to touch it, and, being a little God in the soul, I am loath to offer
any violence to it.


Vic. I should not at all blame your tenderness, did not their numerous
assemblies daily alarm you, their Spite and Malice continually caution those
amongst whom they live, and the Obligation of your Oath endanger the eternal
ruin of your soul. And you know death hastens toward you, and will be a bold
intruder at a rich Aldermans Gate, as well as a poor Vicars Wicket.


Ald. It Is true indeed, we are all mortal; and I should be extreme loath to
depart this World, with so great a sin, as Perjury, upon my Conscience
unrepented of, which (as you well informed us the last Sunday) includes a new
state of life, and must as well consist, in a future amendment, as in a cordial
sorrow for what is past.


Vic. Say not, Sir, you would be sorry only to be arrested by death with so
great a debt to God as Perjury does contract; but rather resolve upon a sudden
alteration, both of your mind, and practice. For be assured, if you should
chance to die with such a seared Conscience, that, although pricked, will not
bleed, you will part with your beloved Corporation here, only to be possessed
of the Torments of Hell, and Companions of Devils: And I were better deal so
plainly with you (though it may seem strange when compared with that wonted
Complement which my dependent maintenance tempted me to) than to build you a
Funeral Pile, perfumed with rich Odours and Spices, in which, not only your
aged body, but, your very soul too, shall burn.


Ald. I have heard Fanatics sometimes styled fire and brimstone men; but, I
think, your Zeal is more hot than theirs, that is able to kindle such flames.
You strangely startle me with your expressions.


Vic. It Is better, Sir, to start a little in your sleep, which perhaps may
awaken you, than, when your house is on fire, to lie secure, 'till the
devouring flames approach, and consume you. Better have some taste of Hell in
your Conscience here, and to possess burnings in your apprehension, which may
caution you to beware, than to inhabit the Regions of Devils, and to dwell in
the midst of an eternal fire, when time, and you shall be, together, swallowed
in a bottomless Abyss.


Ald. They pretend, with such confidence, to be God's People, that I am afraid
I should be a persecutor of the Church of God, if I should inflict the Law upon
them.


Vic. And are we, Sir, after all our pretensions of repentance for the Covenant
(that Pandora's Box, that filled the Nation with all the evils and miseries of
a cruel and distracting Fate) after all our relentings for former Perjuries;
after all our trials of the ruinous Consequences of their destructive
Principles; after the taste of all their poison, though wrapped up in gilded
Pills; after the view of several Murders, both of Prince, Prelate, and People
of all ranks and conditions; after the view of a bloody War, raised by these
holy men, that spared neither Age nor Sex; I say, upon the view of all, must we
now dispute whether Impiety be Religion, whether Faction be Faith, or Rebellion
and Tumult part of the Commandments? Surely, Sir, you have forgot your self.


Ald. I must confess, the present convulsions in my Soul, by reason of those
fears you have raised in me, may cause also a weakness in my memory: I begin to
remember, that the persons whom we are discoursing of, have been evidenced,
both by their Oaths, and Actions, to be, indeed, of a different Character from
the Church of God; and therefore, in relation to that, I need not fear the
inflictions of the Law to be a persecution of the Church: But they have another
Plea that sometimes startles me, that they act according to their Consciences;
therefore to endeavor to restrain their Worship, will attempt the making them
to sin against Conscience.


Vic. I dare venture a quarter of my Vicaridge, that those persons, who make
this Plea, do scarce understand what Conscience is: And I believe, I can, from
Scripture, as well as reason, prove that the Objectors have no Conscience at
all.


Ald. That indeed being proved, as well as boldly affirmed, would be a great
motive to persuade, and encourage me, in my Place and Office, to attempt, what
(I hope from a pious design) you thus endeavor to argue me to.


Vic. Pray, Sir, will you be pleased to inform me first, what Notion you have
been induced to entertain concerning Conscience.


Ald. I suppose, Conscience then acts, when, reflecting upon mine own Actions,
or Opinions, I either accuse, or excuse my self.


Vic. I do not enquire after the actions of Conscience, but would fain arrive
at a description of it.


Ald. I should think it then to be a judgment of a man upon himself.


Vic. And do you conjecture a man's Conscience, thus described, to be appointed
for the rule and guide of Action?


Ald. I know there may be a false, and erroneous Conscience, as well as such as
is true and good: and no man is obliged either to believe or act error.


Vic. Then Conscience (according to your definition) cannot prove an exact
Rule; and consequently cannot be a sufficient Plea for Action. Indeed,
according to this, the most impious Blasphemer, and uncontrollable Sinner might
make an excuse for all his Vices, by affirming his Conscience led him to it;
nor could we well blame the Turk for his daily Worship to his affected Mahomet,
nor the Pagan for his Veneration of Idols: Nay; the very Jews would have an
incomparable excuse for their bloody butchery of our Lord and Savior; since
St. Peter assures us, they did it through ignorance, nay, the very Rulers too;
and they therefore Crucified him, because they deemed him an Impostor. For,
certainly, according to this false, though common, notion of Conscience, there
is no action, though never so impious, or inhumane, but may receive its
Sanction, and be justified by this Vulgar Law; if such a Conscience, that
consists only in the Judgments, Apprehensions, Phancies, Opinions, nay,
Thoughts of men, may be not only the Director, but Legislator. And if you think
my expressions do not fully reach what is your import and intent, when any one
excuses and justifies his actions because his Conscience informs him of their
Equity and Goodness; It will be, but justice to your self, as well as kindness
to me, to enquire strictly into your own Notion, and inform your Understanding,
what you mean, when you say your Conscience satisfies you in such or such a
thing; and you will find, it is no more than your present Opinion, and thoughts
of what is the immediate subject of your apprehension: And if this were to be
either guide, or excuse, then St. Paul, before his conversion to Christianity,
might have satisfied, and excused himself for all his violence against the
Christians; when he not only imprisoned this Sacred Offspring, but gave his
voice against them when they were condemned, compelling them to blaspheme;
Murder and Cruelty might then have been established by a Law, and it need not
at all been a trouble and affliction to this blessed Apostle, that he was
exceeding mad against the Christians; for he had the Testimony of a Fanatic
Conscience, in that he verily thought with himself, that he ought to do these
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 26.9.


Ald. Well, Sir, it is a matter, I see, of no great difficulty, for you to
argue against my definitions; but if this please you not, I hope you will
exhibit a better.


Vic. I should be loath so to describe Conscience (that sacred thing, which is
to be kept inviolable, and indeed to be the rule of all our Actions) in words
that make it to give countenance to the greatest impieties.


Ald. If there be any defect, or fault in mine, it may well be excused; since
Conscience, too strictly defined, is neither a part of my trade, or advantage.


Vic. A good Conscience, Sir, will be a sufficient advantage to any man, and it
ought to be every man's trade to know it.


Ald. It is your Calling then, Mr. Vicar, to inform us; and if I have not
rightly stated Conscience, do you rectify it, by your own description.


Vic. That, Sir, I shall cheerfully undertake, not only for that it is made an
excuse for action, but the most part of those that resist Authority, and defy
whatever almost is orderly, or sacred, are deemed by you so conscientious, that
you dare not execute the Laws upon them, for fear you should offer violence to
Conscience. But you are satisfied (I hope) that they are persons dangerous to
the State, and that their pretensions are not conformable to their actions, nor
either suitable to the Word of God.


Ald That I had sufficient conviction of, when I read those books you lately
lent me, to wit, The Friendly Debate betwixt the Conformist and Nonconformist,
together with the continuation of it. But I hear, Mr. Vicar, there is a notable
answer to those two Debates you so magnify.


Vic. I must confess your Worship is not at all deceived in your intelligence;
only, upon perusal, I find it neither an answer, nor notable.


Ald. Methinks, Sir, you seem a little too censorious, if not cruel, thus to
stifle an infant in the birth, before it has been fully exposed to the World;
and in two words to refute a Volumn.


Vic. Really, Sir, it were no difficult adventure to storm all those wooden
Forts which that Stoical Author has built in his discourse; though he had an
whole Forest at his dispose, out of which he might select his Timber: Only I
perceive the firmest trees were either too tall for him to lay his Axe to the
root of, or else so well fenced with sharp briars and thorns, that at first
touch they pricked his fingers, and frighted him from a farther access.


Ald. I do not think any persons of their circumstances can fear thorns, and
they that have vanquished Sons of Anak, will not fear the trees of the Forest.


Vic. Yes, Sir, since Hugh Peters's Sermon about Bramble Government, they are
afraid to carry a bush at their backs, whilst they are in their Wilderness
condition, for fear the bigger Trees of the Woods should, instead of bowing in
a Complement to the Bramble, fall down upon their heads, and voluntarily build
a Funeral Pile, where they themselves would prove the Sacrifice.


Ald. I thought they had loved to have been amongst the Briars; a thorn in the
flesh, however, may do them no great hurt.


Vic. Verily, Sir, not a few of them are, by most persons that are intelligent,
ranked now amongst the wild beasts of the Forest, and therefore they may
delight in the Briars; but those Debates have such overgrown prickles, that
they are too sharp for their heads to encounter, or their teeth to bite off:
though we know they have a long time had the Whetstone, and therefore may take
the advantage to sharpen them.


Ald. But pray, Mr. Vicar, what are your conjectures of that answer so
generally cried up amongst them?


Vic. Then indeed (as you said but now) a thorn in the flesh would do them no
harm, if they themselves swell with that Tympany, which the Author of the Reply
wisely attempts to cure in the Debates. Truth is, those Debates seem to be
written because our Adversaries were so puffed, but since the impression of
their answer they appear quite blown up.


Ald. But let me a little entreat your thoughts of that answer, which I doubt
not but I shall meet with.


Vic. Now your Worship has read the Debates, I shall not at all scruple to lend
you the Answer; having taken the Antidote, you need not fear infection;
especially, because we may well expect, that so eminent a Physician, as the
Debates Author is supposed to to be, will expel the raging of that distemper
that in the Reply attempts to return upon his Patients.


Ald. Is the Author of the Debates then fully known?


Vic. Yes, Sir, to those persons that always pretended to the knowledge of
hearts, and perpetually practiced both the discovery and revelation of secrets.


Ald. Pray, Mr. Vicar, what is his name?


Vic. You may, if you please, examine me as a Magistrate; but pray, Sir, let
every one abide in his own Calling, and do not begin to ask me my Catechism,
since the sober Replier (drunk with nothing but his own passion) conjectures
the learned Compiler of the Debates not able to answer to what is your name: But
yet he does before divine (and thinks himself not besides his Calling) that he
is able to describe, though not name, him.


Ald. Pray, what does he suppose him to be?


Vic. Truly, no less than an Irish Saint, although at present an English
Pilgrim; and yet, for all, because of the great affection our sober Respondent
still retains for Leeks and Onions, the Gods of Egypt, (because they formerly
seasoned their broth, with which they banished the mode of that which he,
almost at the end of his discourse, calls Porridge) St. Taffee becomes the
better Saint: And were it not for fear an Irish Footman might be apt to
encounter a Shentleman of Wales concerning the Superiority of their Guardian, I
would adventure more than a few Leeks, and a piece of tosted Cheese, that the
Irish name will prove, at long running, to great a word for such a sober
answerer to pronounce in a breath.


Ald. But why do you thus wave reflections upon the book?


Vic. Not only that I may satisfy the peaceable desire of the sober
Respondent, but because I would not, by a Private Conference, anticipate the
Reply of our learned Opponent, who, being a Latitude man, as his Antagonist
hints, is best able to enclose comprehension. Though I cannot but, under the
Rose, inform you, that the Dialogue has met with some prickles, and the sober
Answer does now and then rage with madness: But whoever was the Author of this
Reply, he seems to be a better Textuary than Interpreter, though he has got the
Assemblies Annotations by heart: and has their sense upon all occasions as
exactly, as if he had at first influenced them: And to me seems a little unjust
in that he is angry with all Glosses that do not come from Geneva or
Westminster, names only some few Authors, and for reasons refers you to the
sale of his Books. But when he has, with much study, and great pains, espied a
figure in the Friendly Debates, how does he demonstrate it in words at length,
that reach through his whole Book; and declaims against such partiality and
collusion, that reckons not their party as numerous as themselves but
encounters a part instead of the whole?


Ald. Pray, what is that figure?


Vic. Why! That which one of their experimental Preachers, formerly nosing a
hard word called Sy -- nege -- docth, but since has learned Synecdoche.


Ald. Pray, Mr. Vicar, what Figure is that?


Vic. Never a one that you learned in Arithmetic; but the Figure by which the
Nation was undone, and the Kings head brought to the block; when a part was put
for the whole in Petitions.


Ald. We never use such figures.


Vic. I know you never do in the Commodities you buy, but sometimes you may, by
a mistake, in selling.


Ald. You seem to have such great skill in buying and selling, that a stranger
will take you for a petty Chapman.


Vic. However, Sir, an English Pedlar may quickly prove as good a man as a
Scotch Merchant; and I see no reason why a broken Vicar may not set up for a
whole sale Shopman, as well as so many broken Shopkeepers commenced, in the
late times, wholesale Vicars.


Ald. But pray, Mr. Vicar, let us retire a little from the Shop to the
Counting House, and tell me what is that total sum that the Answer to the
Debates makes the figure, you were speaking of, amount to?


Vic. Upon perusal, Sir, and casting up his Accounts, you will easily perceive
that the sober Answer charges the Debate not only with what is disingenuous,
but unjust, in laying that sum upon the whole party, which, he says, is but
the debt of a part.


Ald. And I do not see, how the Debate can acquit it self.


Vic. I cannot tell what its Author will reply, but, if he were no wiser than
your Vicar, I should tell him that a few exceptions will not vacat a general
Rule; and truly, if this proves a fault, the Answer will be notoriously guilty,
who in the acquitting of N.C. has justified a part instead of the whole, and
that palpably throughout his whole book; and in many places if he can but
acquit himself (as if he were the first Adam, and Parent of them all, and all
in him were to receive their Sentence) he thinks the whole may presently plead
not guilty.


Ald. Truly, that seems to be a piece of an oversight for him, that undertakes
to reprove another, to become guilty of the same Crime.


Vic. Nay, Sir, had he been but once guilty, he might have been acquitted upon
payment of his fees; but we find him again accusing the Debate for taking
Weapons at the wrong end, and all things by the wrong handles.


Ald. And must not that be accounted a fault?


Vic Troth, Sir, it is pity the Author of those Friendly Debates had not learned
of his Adversaries to handle his Arms; for experience has taught them skill:
and had he been but half so well practiced in two handed Pots, as the sober
Answer would give the World to understand that we Country Vicars are, where he
supposes us to be ignorant Sots, and idle Drones, he would have been better
skilled in the handling both of Owls and Noggins. But that which I would desire
your good Worship to note, is, that this Answerer is guilty of the same fault
(unless what is a fault in another, may become only a failing in him) in taking
the Debate by the wrong end; witness those great pains he has taken, in turning
his Concordance, that he might effectually prove what the Debate does not, and
perhaps the Author will not, deny, about the Holy Spirits assistance in Prayer,
Christian Experiences, Pious Discourses, etc. the abuses whereof are attempted
to be rectified, not the use totally withdrawn, the excrescencies and
absurdities only pruned, but the Trees not dug up by the Roots: which the
Answerer has every where mistaken, (through ignorance (perhaps) cannot be
supposed) as if the Author of the Debates denied the existence or usefulness of
the things; which even we poor Country Sots (how ignorant and dronish the
Answerer's charity, and pretended moderation has published us to the World)
cannot only admit, but daily practice. And when he attempts the vindication of
the four great Letters of his Brethrens Names, he uses the same act of fallacy
as young Sophisters do with a Text of Aristotle, when they would force him to
speak his Adversaries Language, or reconcile him to the Doctrines of that
Philosophy he endeavors to refute; they unite all by a distinction or a
Figure, when that aged Philosopher designed a quite contrary meaning. Thus,
like an Archer, does he first fix his own mark, and then shoot his Darts at it:
and yet, notwithstanding his enlarging it at pleasure, I find he has not
always hit the White; or if he did, it was so weakly, that the Dart made no
impression; from whence I conclude, that though the Arrow may be well bearded,
yet it wants a sharp head.


Ald. But I have heard, Sir, that a beard does not always make a Philosopher.


Vic. No, Sir, if it did, your Worship would have a large share, and
incorporate Towns would prove Universities: Yet, for your comfort, when you
shall read that part of the sober Answer which concerns the high and mighty
Letters, you will find the Debater so closs shaved, that the bigness of his
Adversaries beards may appear, as if so be Adonirams whole Tribe were
concerned; and hair were of more value than brains; and a long beard were, like
an Hedghogs bristles, the best Weapons to defend them: A man would think that
Arguments were to be encountered, and reasons compared in an answer to a Book,
not beards measured; stopping men's mouths with numbers of years: especially
when 666 is not in controversy, nor did any one say that those great Letters
were the name of the Beast.


Ald. You seem, Mr. Vicar, to slight this Answer very much.


Vic. I am afraid, Sir, I honor it more than it really deserves, in mentioning
of it to a Person of your Worth and Grandeur; or reflecting upon it in our
private discourse: For its Author has great reason to fear that no body will
trouble themselves for a public Reply, lest they should only ventilate the
Air, and encounter shadows; or go into their Studies only that they may catch
flies. For alas! the Debates are such strange Forts, that they can neither be
stormed, nor undermined, though we cannot say but that they are good at both;
yet brazen-faces must be the only Canon that can possibly discharge with
success against them, in a denial of plain matter of fact; and the Answerer
himself has no way to decline it, but by the same Synecdoche, which is the
Accusation of his Adversary. The greatest triumph that the Answer most boasts
in; and the principal Trophee that adorns the discourse, is, where the Debater
is supposed to come too near to the sacred Confines of Indemnity; and the
Author would fain have the Act of Oblivion to dash out the memories of Mankind.
It Is very like, though the Tragical History of former Actions would not have
been banished the World (too much spread to be now recalled) yet had not the
later actions of the persons whom N. C. does include, too much evidenced to
Loyal Subjects, that former Methods were still remembered, and endeavored again
to be rendered practicable; their crimes might have been forgotten with the
punishment, and an innocent obedience would have drawn a white Curtain over the
reddest Characters of their Faults: But when we see Tumults and Schism still
propagated to Posterity, why must not the Children bear the punishment of their
Fathers, when they react their Parents sins? And when they are traveling in
the same way in which their Ancestors rode Post, why must it be a violation of
Charity to conjecture they are attempting the same journey? It Is true, indeed,
their pretenses are, like the Title to the Answer to the Two Debates, sober and
peaceable; but their Actions are, like the Book it self, full of biting and
devouring: and you know who betrayed his Master with a Kiss; and who it was
that complained of his Enemy, that the words of his mouth were sweeter than
Butter, but War was in his heart; his words were softer than Oil, yet were they
drawn Swords. I cannot Conjecture what this sober answer was wrote for, unless
it were to justify that Expression which the Conformist, in the Debate, draws
from his Adversaries Conference; that as there is a sanctified wit, so there is
also a sanctified scurrility, and that Scripture Phrases are safest to express
Satyrs and Sarcasmes. When your Worship shall view the Book it self, you need
hardly put on your Spectacles, to see the same drolling and jerking that you
feel in some other discourses; and what was written in smaller Characters in
the two Debates, in the Answer you shall meet withal in the Text. Whoever were
the Author of this Reply, I find that (in their own Phrase) he has the Spirit
of Government upon him; and could not be less (surely) than the Head of a
House, when the Author of the Debates was a poor Scholar, he makes him such an
inconsiderable freshman; and yet supposes B.D. to be his Title: which is more,
I doubt (excepting a little Commencement by grace) than ever the Answerer could
presume fairly to amount to: and it is not the opinion of a few, that a
Batchelour of Divinity, that does his exercise, is a better man than a Clokebag
Doctor; whose Learning, sometimes, that entitles him to his Degree, is sealed
up in his Man's Portmantle. But let the Debater be as poor a freshman as his
Antagonist can either find, or make him; I am sure he has more salt in his
Pottage, than is to be met with in that pitiful punn, in page 265. of his
Adversary; where from W. B's Mess of Pottage he infers, that he has not only
Jus in re, but Jus ad rem; an unlawful quibble, and illegitimate offspring
(even according to the Masters of Wit) because two Languages, strangers to each
other, are coupled together, to accomplish its generation. As for that pride
and passion that he is willing to cast upon the Author of the Debates, his own
Pen was so charged with it, that his Book has shot it back upon himself; where,
as if he had been at Gresham College, and looked through the new Invention
(that so much magnifies that ingenious Society) upon both his own, and his
Parties, worth; he has raised Mole-hills to sufficient Mountains, and stretched
himself to a proportionable length, magnifying their heads to the bigness of
Giants, when their brains will hardly give your poor Vicar so good a meal as
those of a thin wasted Tythe-Pig. You may, perhaps Sir, have heard from a
person that was lately in your company, that it was (not long ago) spoken of
some persons in the World that they magnified only culices, pulices, and
seipsos; he might have applied it to the very Answer that I here privately
reflect upon: For verily I never saw any person, of his Adversaries
Circumstances, handled with more distance and loftiness (though still
declaiming against Pride;) but I see their old Maxim is propagated, of hating
the name, and doing the thing. Thus do we hear, sometimes, a person, heated
with Passion or Drink, swear by the Highest, that Swearing and Drunkenness will
undo the Nation. But the only thing I am troubled at is, to find a man of such
moderation (which, I know not whether in obedience to an Apostle, he is willing
to make known unto all men) in the Head of a whole Party as distant from his
Principles as his seeming readiness for a compliance. Because there are some
ejected Ministers (that have deserted the old Cause and Principle) in, or
about, London, that are both peaceable and learned, that boldly harp upon
gracious Connivences; does it thence follow, that all are to be complied with,
that cannot be sheltered by that Character? It Is like the best of them are
picked out to be a guard to that great City, where the Answer pretends (in all
its canting and whining complaints) to be both their Magazine and Exchequer.
But sure I am, that your Worship knows too well, that there is seldom Learning,
and more rarely Peace and Modesty found among those Cattle we have to deal with
in the Country: The Heads of Factions being, for the most part, proud, though
illiterate; stubborn, and disturbing, though neither possessed of gifts, or
graces; no, not so much as in those orders which the sober Answerer's Judgment
has allowed (though we know not what interest and rendering a Party numerous may
make practicable.) However here, your Worship knows, that men are advanced from
Journey-men only to Shoomakers, or Tailors, to be Masters of Assemblies; take
Degrees without an University, and Commence Ministers, without so much as the
approbation of one Lay Elder, or the least Limb of the next Classis: Nay, the
very Cobblers themselves presume to go beyond their Lasts. Let not that sober
Answerer then ever deceive your Worship with a Synecdoche, and cast a Figure
that he may get us within its Circumference; for then he will easily comprehend
and catch us. But I had almost forgotten one thing, that, being spread over the
whole book, cannot but offend your nostrils; and that is a Box of Ointment,
with a dead Fly in it; which he having, by conjecture, daubed the two Debates
with, presently cries out, the Books stink; but, upon perusal of the whole
Answer, I perceive the Author has had also a lick himself, which made his
breath, throughout his Book, to smell of it. He accuses the Debater for that he
has intermixed a little folly, in commendation of himself, when he was before a
man of great reputation both for wisdom and honor. Though I think this was
sucking poison out of Flowers; yet do I not perceive, by the Flies buzzing
about mine ears, whilst I have the sober Answer before me, that its leaves
shine with the same Ointment: Do I not see both the Author and the Party
varnished there, both with Learning and Piety? Do we not hear how patient they
are in the midst of sufferings; how chaste they are, now they are married, in
opposition unto Batchellors who have no Wives; how contented they are with
never a Living, when their own folly and squeamishness threw them out, etc? I
thought once, by his similitudes, that he had been a Physician; but by his
Ointment I perceive he would be a Chyrurgeon. Sir, had this person (whoever he
be) modestly reproved the misunderstood faults of those Debates, and not been
infected with his own reproof, you and I, that before honored his person, with
such respect as he pays to the Author of the Debates might (out of love to his
Virtues) have covered his failings; but since his own application may be
applied to himself, Turpe est doctori, etc. I cannot be pleased with those
Vices in another, which, I am convinced, I ought to mortify in my self.
Dialogues must have some Complements, though the same person is Amanuensis to
both; because they represent persons of diverse circumstances and humors: But
for a man to boast of himself in a continued Oration (as the Answerer does)
would make even an old man blush, and Herod himself to become lousie and shrug.
The other part of this learned book (costing him, as he says, six weeks in
writing, if he has not mistaken weeks for days) bathes all its leaves in
tears, in which perhaps there may be some salt, (however they were always
their best oratory) enough at least to season our Charity to those that are
moderate and peaceable, so far as Law and Oaths permit: And I would willingly,
out of my poor Vicaridge, (if any such be in a worse condition than my self)
relieve what by reason of either their Opinion or practice may not be altered;
and wish them both Conformity and Livings: And yet the Church (notwithstanding
all their large Stories and elevated thoughts of their own abilities, could
they be otherwise obliged to peace) is able to instruct her own Children,
without the use of the Assemblies Catechism; and yet never read some bodies
Commonwealth to teach them policy for the propagation of Religion: It Is true,
you must expect a whole Peale of Ordnance discharged in complaints of youth,
and ignorance, of Pluralities, and Non-residence, (though qui facit per alium,
facit per se) which yet, in their own time were extant with an Imprimatur, by
their Authority, who, for their own sakes, now decry them: Witness the Picture
of an old man (since dead) with a great bundle of Steeples at his back, who
having discoursed against Pluralities, and his Arguments being retorted upon
himself, had nothing but a distinction betwixt the Profits and Presentation to
save him from his own Sword: But I suppose that those persons, even now adays,
whose merit or interest have rendered Pluralists, if they might but be secured
of the profits, they would not think it repugnant to their concerns, if the
Patrons had the keeping of the Presentations. And as for that youth and
ignorance (so much stomached, for nothing more probably than because they are
not, as in the late times, conjoined together) we are accused of; The Church of
England could not be charged with any thing more unlucky to the Non-conformists
than the youth of their Ministers; when (if recrimination might be pardoned) we
need not look back past the memory of the youngest Priest, to hear the little
Lapwings crying, which when they were seen, had the shells upon their heads,
and a white list round their crowns: And, as if they came only to see the
University, and make their Horses proceed Graduates for their Masters, upon a
sudden, having put St. Mary's dull Notes into Characters, and themselves in
Querpo, became great Propagators of the Gospel; when their Preachment, all this
while, was but only a Chapel Repetition, their Confidence was their greatest
gift, and strong Lungs the grace that approved them. We have not yet forgotten
the Triars, that used to usurp White Hall, who, being seated near the
Banqueting House, and by Presentation of others, being informed of the fall of
good Livings, would be sure to make a feast for themselves; and then others,
perhaps, might partake of their leavings: How did they make Babes in years
presently to commence Babes in Grace? and then, as if their Seal of Office had
been that of the Spirit, they advanced these Punies to Junior Apostles, and
gave them Commission both to plant, and gather Churches: Nor would it be a
violation of that gracious and indulgent Act of Oblivion, to remember those
pretty tricks those Touchstones had, by which they starved the old Conformists.
But I hate to mind your memory of that which your Worship cannot possibly
forget. And as for the ignorance of the younger part of our present Clergy, if
the Replier to the Debates did but stoop his gravity to converse with them, he
would find them not ignorant of his Devices; and I may confidently affirm
without smelling to his Box of ointment, that generally, in the time of the
sober man's peaceable reign, there was not the tithe of that learning that now
is to be met with in young Divines. It should seem, by the grave Answerer's
sober handling him, that the Debater himself is not very old; and yet,
methinks, the wise Respondents falling upon him, is but like the Limb of an
old decayed and wind-shaken Tree dropping down upon a spiney oak, endeavoring
to come up under him; when one would think the greatness of the Limb should
crush and bruise the younger Tree, his own rottenness breaks him to pieces. If
one would have Old age reverenced, the best way is not to despise Youth; for
those that may be young in years, are sometimes elders in Office. If I had been
(in another place) at the elbow of this sober Answerer, when his Pen was
pouring out this Complaint, with so much Gall in his Ink; I would have
remembered him, that Timothy was a Bishop when he was young, and that
smooth-faced St John was the Disciple whom Jesus loved: Young Melancthon,
however, might have jogged his elbow, and obtained leave, without prejudice, I
hope, to himself or Party, to have encountered an old Devil, though he complains
he was too hard for him; and though (Mr. Alderman) I cannot be so unjust to the
World as to list my self in this number, lest I should lick up the sober man's
ointment, and what is worse, another praise; yet this I must tell you of
others in the World; that no Church need be ashamed, when they are numbered
amongst her Officers. To name men would be ridiculous for me, who you know have
little other acquaintance than with names in the Tittle Page of a few borrowed
Books: And besides, to name young Divines would be an affront to W. B. which
very letters the sober Answer has made sacred; though (if I do not mistake my
information) they make up almost his own name. But why do I trouble my self, or
you, with what does not much concern us? Old age and Youth may well agree,
whilst the former does not provoke, and the latter does not become disobedient;
If new-built houses have green Walls, yet old ones are more full of Vermin.
Let old men's discourses be grave and wise, full of matter and experience; yet
young ones will sometimes be accounted good Preachers: both have their great
use in the Church, and if old Trees are best to burn, yet younger are the
fittest for building. There is, Sir, one charge more remaining, which I cannot
but give your Worship an account of; and that is, where the sober Answer (as if
it would plainly evidence it self a more improper Title than the Friendly
Debate) supposes, according to his moderation and charity, that the Debater
himself is almost an Atheist, and his Books the grand destruction of Religion.
If Christianity suffers by such discourses, he may thank himself, and that wild
Party which this sober man does now head, for being the causes and provokers of
them, by their Enthusiastical Practices, and enormous Extravagancies. But
withal, it cannot but be a Paradox to me, that truth is not established by the
refutation of falsehood; or that the purging a disease must always be death to
the Patient. Cannot the Excrescencies, or dead branches, be pruned off, without
digging up the tree by the roots; or the weeds be taken out of a Garden,
without pulling up the flowers too? It Is strange (methinks) that Atheism must
undermine Religion, if that which falsely wears both its name and leaves has but
a root or two loosened, or its leaves shaken off, by a smart wind, that the
naked limbs and body may appear: Never let us fear that glorious Tree, which
brings forth fruit unto holiness here, and in the end Everlasting life, will
the sooner die, but revive, and flourish much the more for the taking away
these Suckers; and when they are grown so big and numerous as to take away the
greatest part of the trees nourishment, the pruning-hook will not then pare
them off, but a sharp Axe must encounter them. But in nothing is the Replier
more unjust and weak, than in loading his Adversary with suppositions of
Atheism: For this is like the women's duells, who, when they are able to fight
no longer, call each other by ugly names; and just like a Countryman, or those
sometimes that are more Worshipful, if they hear an Anabaptist or Quaker talk
but a small piece of sense, they presently declare him to be a Jesuit, as if
these were the only Masters of an Argument: Let not wise men run into the same
snare by terming rational persons Atheists, as if they were the only men of
reason. Some men must be drolled asleep, when Reason and Argument cannot
silence them; and a more airy discourse may be fitter for some to breath in,
than knotty Arguments, and brave harangues; and those, whom Reason will not
convince may sometimes be jock'd into obedience: Tender Children must be rocked
in Cradles, when laboring men will sleep upon the ground. But whither have I
run my self into this Book, and given interruption to our farther discourse? I
will lend you the Book it self ere long, and send for the Answer if the Debater
will trouble himself to reply: By this however I conclude to my self, that this
Book is not an Answer to the Debates, and notable in nothing but the greatness
of its Adversary.


Ald. Well, Sir, I thank you for this general account that you have given of
this Diana, which the whole Party cries up for great: It may be all true, being
rightly understood, that you have said. And since you have so well confirmed me
in that Subject, to the end I may the better be enabled to satisfy others, I
shall expect you will lend me the Answer. In the mean time, I shall be
beholding to you, if you will be so kind as to resume your former discourse,
wherein you promised to rectify my description of Conscience by one more
pertinent of your own.


Vic. That, Sir, I shall most readily do; and question not from a right
description thereof to convince you fully, that those persons, we are now
treating of, have none at all.


Ald. I cannot but long to hear it, Sir.


Vic. Conscience, then, is nothing else, but the agreement of my knowledge with
Gods.


Ald. But, suppose you should meet with one, whose Principles are repugnant to
yours, that will not receive your description without proof? For this being (as
it seems to me) a Point of very great concernment, it requires briefly to be
proved, and explained.


Vic. I thank your Worship for minding me of that, which, I hope, will fully
ease your thoughts of all your scruple of the Fanatics being such
conscienscious men. Will you have your proof from Scripture, or reason?


Ald. Scripture, Sir, by all means; for if, at any time in my discourses with
them, I do, by chance, speak reason, they silence that Argument with clamours
and outcries, that reason is carnal.


Vic. Well then (though I thought our Reason had been the greatest Character
that distinguishes us from beasts, and had been given us to be our Director,
and a better guide than what our Adversaries call Conscience) I shall gratify
you at this time in your desire; that so when you meet with any of them again,
you may be able both to defend your self, and wound them, and yet give them the
choice of their weapons.


Ald. Why, you do not think I trow that we will dispute at sharps?


Vic. No, Sir, not with persons that are so well lined, and are your Customers
too; but my speech was only Metaphorical, and that may be a lawful way of
discourse if it be explained, since a Nonconformist prayed that his desires and
affections might soar aloft, and lest God Almighty should, through defect of
Rhetoric, mistake the Figure, and translate him to heaven, before he had a
mind to leave the World, he presently informed him, that it was a Metaphor,
Lord, taken from a bird.


Ald. I perceive you must ever now and then have your excursions; I am afraid
your long and tedious employment has made your invention quite barren, that it
thus brings forth nothing but weeds.


Vic. No wonder at all, Sir, when I am endeavoring to pluck up Thistles, that
they should shed some seed in carriage, as well as leave their prickles in my
fingers. But if my Fancy has brought forth weeds, it is not because the
ground is worn out, but because you have slept, whilst the Enemy has sown it
with Tares; yet, I dare say, when the harvest comes, in the Judgment of all, I
may be able to measure corn with you, and yet give you many grains of allowance.


Ald. You talked to me concerning figures but now; yet I had rather have words
at length.


Vic. Did I but exactly know your measure, I could easily cut them
proportionably, but, I suppose, your Worship may be afraid to produce it, lest
it should incur the danger of the Statute. Would you have my Expressions
proportioned to the length of a Presbyterian hourglass, or independent
Incomes, or outgoings?


Ald, I mean no other, by that Phrase, than to desire you to express your self
without a Riddle, and tell me what Conscience is, and how you can prove your
definition?


Vic. I have already given you my apprehension of Conscience, that it is, when
a man's knowledge agrees with Gods.


Ald. But how do you prove that from Scripture?


Vic. Because that Word, which in the New Testament is used for Conscience,
denotes the very same expression.


Ald. Pray what is that?


Vic. It is (...), which is derived from (...), which signifies with, or
together, and (...), or (...), scio, cognosco, to know; and cannot be Englished
but by a Periphrasis, or circumlocution (as we commonly say) and is, cum alio
scientia, a knowledge with another: But relating to divine matters, it must
needs represent a knowledge together with God. God being first acquainted with
the Precepts and Laws, which he intended to give forth unto mankind, from hence
exhibites his Rules unto the World, by which they are to regulate their lives;
and, by the same Law, measures the legality, or illegality of our Actions; And
upon the view and consideration of these Prescriptions and Rules, by the help
of our apprehensions and reason, we know together with God, and this Act is
called Conscience.


Ald. Then, it seems, that is only Conscience, when our apprehensions and
opinions of things fully accord with Gods Word.


Vic. Your Notion of it, Sir, is in this fully expressed suitable to my meaning;
and indeed it is no more than a practical understanding, and opinion of things,
as they really are; for it can be no other than the application of our
knowledge, gained from God's revealed will, to the things which we think,
speak, or do.


Ald. But how can this Doctrine of Conscience accord with those various Titles
that Divines usually bestow upon it, of Witness, Judge, and the like?


Vic. That, Sir, proceeds only from the various application of our knowledge.
As first, when we remember and reflect upon what we have, or have not done, so
Conscience is styled a Witness. Secondly, When, in our retirements, we judge
something fit to be done, or not to be done; and hence Conscience is said to
oblige, or bind, to instigate, or provoke. Lastly, When we pass Sentence upon
our Actions, arraigning them at our own internal Bar, and conclude them either
good or evil; here Conscience acts the part of a Judge, whilst it passes a
Sentence of condemnation, or acquittance; and from hence arise all those
troublesome convulsions, that proceed from the Arrainment and Sentence, and
those ravishing joys that spring from the benefit of an absolution.


Ald. I need not enquire now for the inference designed, that those, who plead
the outcries of Conscience, against Public Authority, and the Laws of the
Land, by this making their very vices conscientious; that they have (I say) no
conscience at all; because their disobedience to the higher Powers, in
assembling in Numbers larger than what the Laws allow, does not proceed from
God's Word, at which the Candle of their knowledge ought always to be lighted,
if they intend to plead Conscience for their Actions. And therefore, for the
future, I shall not permit so frivolous an Objection to scare me from my duty,
into the horrid and damning sin of Perjury.


Vic. Really, Sir, I have made it my business to cast away some of my vacant
hours, in Society with these men, on purpose to understand their humors; and I
have not only found, that, when times were to them prosperous, they were as
inclinable to those Vices which are now admired, as most of those which now run
to the utmost extremity (only ours do it in the face of the Sun, and they were
wont to secure themselves by the silence of their company, or secrecy of the
place; for that may be done in a private Conventicle which is not to be
enterprised in the open Market, and there is no iniquity in a Tribe of Israel
though the same Actions are to be condemned in the Canaanites.) But I have
observed most of their Religion to proceed from the defects of their
disposition, and the accomplishments of their minds, to be, for the most part,
the diseases of their bodies: Unless where sometimes interest, or malice,
summons their abilities to uphold a Party. Thus will they account that man's
heart humbled for his sins, whose head is disturbed to lunacy and madness; when
Passion, and Fury boiles over, in scurrilous and railing Phrases, and
Expressions, it is nothing but the godly heat of Zeal, which, fire was brought
from heaven to enkindle; when a Preacher has an unusual dullness, and is fain to
groan, to make a Parenthesis, to fill a wide Chasm in his discourse, this is
called Preaching feelingly; and when want of matter, or barrenness of Phrase
forces them to many pauses in their Prayers, and Lord, Lord, must stop gaps,
and fence enclosures; this must proceed from holy Admiration, and divine
Ecstasy. When they begin their Prayers soft, and whispering, as if they would
keep God Almighty to themselves, with one eye open, and the other shut, and now
and then a wise shrug with the shoulders, or a white and innocent goggle with
the eye; this proceeds from awe, and dread, whilst they are beginning to be
familiar with their Maker: some of them wink fast in their Prayers, as if that
Spirit, they pretend then to be so full of, would steal out at their eyes; or
else those Spunges would not effectually yield tears, unless they should be
well squeezed. Have you not seen one of those dull fellows make wry faces, like
one that has had an hard stool, and drawn his Sparrow mouth to his ears, as if
he expected a fresh prompter?


Ald. You seem to make all their Religion nothing but a cheat.


Vic. Truly, if their Religion consists in such actions, I can assure you,
these are no better. God deliver me from such Juglers in Divinity, that can
disgorge nothing but inkle and fillets, that have more length in them, than
breadth, or thickness. Shall phlegm and melancholy, be any longer accounted
Communion with God; and Dens of Thieves become the only Houses of Prayer? I
could wish them all at the Isle of Pines; where, gendering with the Air, they
might both mind Generation-work, and get fleet Coursers for Itinerants, that
might be very acceptable to those new-spawn'd Zealots.


Ald. But why, Mr. Vicar, do you so strangely conclude that most of the
Fanatics Religion is founded in the temperament of their bodies?


Vic. Because every man may find, by his own experience, that when, in a
melancholy fit, he takes one of their Authors, and reads a little, the Book
presently suits with his temper, and he is pleased then with those Gourds and
Mushrooms, that a bright Sun presently withers.


Ald. But 'twill certainly be a false Inference, to make a general Conclusion
from a man's own particular temper and inclination.


Vic. And yet this is what they always did, when they posted their dreams for
certain Visions, and made their own experiences (as they called them, when they
were but the effects of their present temper, and disposition of body) signs of
trial, and marks of sacred scrutiny and examination.


Ald. But you (that it seems have more than ordinarily enquired into their
ways and methods) espying their folly, should not be caught in the same snare,
nor make your particular experience a sufficient indictment, upon which you may
arraign, and condemn so many, as if their different dispositions were the
greatest cause of their different opinions.


Vic. I do not make an universal conclusion, nor is any Rule so general, but
that it admits of some Exception; yet it is a shrewd Character by which you may
discern those of that Party which believe what they hold, and are serious, as
well as zealous in their persuasion. And to render this conjecture something
probable, view the Multitudes, and as Towns have their greatest proportions and
numbers, where the Air is not so clear and wholesome, so, even amongst those,
you have (besides women, whom Affection and Passion sway more than Argument and
Reason) remarked, that, in such places, the greater number consists of those
that have sedentary Trades, or Handicrafts men, that keep close to their
Houses, and Shops, and have not often either the diversion or benefit of
society and company: Hence came the Weavers, Tailors, Clothiers, Combers,
Shoomakers, and Cobblers, and the like, to advance from the Loom and Stall to
the Pulpit, and become persons of such eminent gifts; because they living
obscure, and retired, where they had converse only with themselves, melancholy
gaining the predominancy in their humors, they gave themselves over, like
drunken men, to discourse only of Policy and Religion; and because they could
not be Rulers on the one hand, they endeavored to be accounted something on
the other, and espouse that which most suited with their melancholy and
retirement.


Ald. But I have seen, some of that party, as merry souls as ever I would
desire to accompany with.


Vic. I shall readily grant that, from mine own observation; but then, if you
observe, they are such as are leading men in their Society, and espouse that
interest only for their own honor and wealth: Or else they are some
Covenanting Parsons, that relinquished their Benefices upon the Act of
Uniformity, because they were ashamed to conform, who had been so violent in
the late times; or perhaps persons of such mean learning, that they knew they
should have no preferment in our Church; or lastly, those that being either by
surprisal, or through hopes of some toleration and allowance, or finally, who
by the familiarity and combination of some leading men of that Party, for
companies sake, deserted their Livings, and so perhaps might unwarily be
Ejected, who now, being vexed for their unadvised losses, envy those that were
more prudent and wise; and out of hate and malice, to the present possessours,
propagate opinions, to the detriment of our Church, and for supporting the
Schism.


Ald. Have you found any, then, that, by the example of others, forsaking their
Livings, do now repent of their rash action?


Vic. Yes; I know those that were, always, in the worst of times, not only
repugnant to those loose devotions, but always seemed inclinable to the
ancient; that yet, by the example of others, and the great interest they had in
them, were pitifully fooled out of their Benefices; that were but little
concerned in the support of that Party, who now, being irrecoverably lost, are
great Zealots against Common Prayer, who, before that black St. Bartholomews
day, did not only afford their presence and devotion to the Liturgy of the
Church, but also read it themselves, before its imposition.


Ald. Well, Sir, you have fully satisfied me in this particular, concerning the
Conscience of those men, against whom my Oath, as a Justice of the Peace,
obliges me to put the Laws in execution; for I am satisfied that their
deportment is not according to the Scripture Rule; and therefore they cannot,
in reason, plead Conscience for their actions; since a man's opinion, or
judgment of things, is not an Argument, convictive enough, to justify his
Principles, or his Actions, and Deportment, that flow from such a corrupted
Fountain. But they pretend to the Spirit of God, and that they have a secret
testimony for the unlawfulness of our present devotions, and service, and the
legality, and justice of their own.


Vic. I am very joyful, that your Worship is apprehensive of the reasonableness
of the former Point, and that your Conscience is satisfied concerning it self,
as also the vanity of their Consciences that pretend most to this Principle.
And indeed, for the most part, a Fanatics Conscience (if a Tradesman) is his
Custom and Gain, if a Teacher, honor and maintenance, and a satisfaction of
his eager humor of Passion, and Malice. And as this Plea of theirs will, to
the reasonable part of mankind, appear empty and insufficient: So, from the
very same grounds upon which their Conscience is refuted, shall I also
manifest, that their pretenses to the Spirit, and that ever blessed and sacred
testimony, is no less a cheat also.


Ald. If you can do that too, certainly you will persuade me to be resolute in
the discharging the duties of mine Office and Trust, against all opposition
whatsoever: Nor shall either present fear, or a melancholy praevision of future
danger, ever be able to divert mine intentions, from a full execution of the
Kings Laws.


Vic. That I may attempt that task then, which I perceive your Worship thinks
almost impossible to be accomplished; I shall show you an absurdity, or two,
that will follow from their supposal of the testimony of the Spirit. But,
before I do that, give me leave to invalidate this pretended testimony of
theirs unto you from what you have before granted.


Ald. Pray do so; for I shall not prescribe your method of conviction.


Vic. You believe, Sir, that neither their Principles, nor Actions, that make
up their cause of Schism and difference from us are to be proved from Scripture.


Ald. No surely: For if I did, I were both impious and irrational, if I were
not wholly of their opinion and practice.


Vic. Then trouble your self no further, for they cannot have the testimony of
the Spirit.


Ald. I do not see the necessity of this consequence, nor how your Argument can
possibly confute them.


Vic. No? It is strange to me, that you, who have showed your self, throughout
this Discourse, so sagacious, and subtle in your judgment, and apprehension,
should not perceive the consequence here.


Ald. Truly, methinks, I am a stranger to it.


Vic. I will endeavor to make this Conclusion well acquainted with your
Worships Premises. Since the Fanatics Principles, and apparent Schism,
according to your own confession, are not to be proved by the Word of God. The
Spirit of God cannot give its testimony to those Principles, because it never
witnesses contrary to the revealed Word, for that were to contradict it self;
since the Scripture was given forth by the inspiration of the Spirit.


Ald. I now very well apprehend this reason, and, indeed, by all Laws and
Methods of arguing, should (as I have heard) desist from prosecuting this
Objection any further: But, because you promised to discover some absurdities
necessarily arising from their Affirmation that they have the testimony of the
Spirit, that I may be able to refute their bold and strange Opinions, I must
urge you further to produce them.


Vic. The first is then, if they have the testimony of the Holy Spirit, for the
Doctrines that they deliver, and the Actions which they practice, then their
Sermons had been Canonical, and their Actions infallible: and thus might not
only the Deity it self be made a Liar, and men be metamorphosed into all these
strange and monstrous shapes by a Law, that has Heavens Seal for its authority,
and inforcement; but Rebellion and Treason would become Canonical too; and the
foundations of the Earth would be out of course, Peace and Charity be
perpetually disturbed, and an Eternal Schism and Separation maintained from
inspired President, and Bible Examples.


Ald. How so?


Vic. Because, Sir, we have no other assurance of the truth of Scriptures,
which are the Canon and Rule of Life, but because the Spirit of God has given
its Testimony, not only by inspiring their first Publishers, but by Miracles
that are without the power of Natures attempts; and, by this Testimony,
out-dated the Law, which was before established, by the same Sanction:
therefore if other Doctrines might have the same Testimony, I see no reason but
they must become Canonical, and of the same Authority with the Scriptures
themselves; since those were but the Doctrines and Writings of men inspired; to
the truth and confirmation of which, the holy Spirit gave its Divine Testimony,
and thus passed them into Canons and Rules.


Ald. I apprehend the strength of this Consequence, and methinks it should be
sufficient to baffle all their bold pretensions: We should then be rarely
governed indeed, if each of them might speak Canons.


Vic. Although your Worship cannot but know that their mouths are of sufficient
bore, and big enough to cast Canons; yet their Metal is not equally tempered
for such work, which was the cause why their Pieces flew about their own ears,
not only striking off the Tips of some, but filling their heads with such an
unusual noise, that they have ever since been troublesome to Mankind, and run
about, like so many Knight Errants, encountering not only flocks of Sheep,
instead of Armies, but sight with Windmils, instead of Giants; when the
Champions are only entia rationis, wrapped about in Logic breeches, gendered
by the wind, that lodges in the Caverns of their Authors brains.


Ald. It seems then, by your discourse, if a man would draw the Picture of one
of their Itinerants, it must be Don Quixot riding upon Rosinante.


Vic. I did not think your Worship had so excellent a fancy for Limning:
there is not only color in your similitude, but proportion too; only you
forgot to have a Regiment of Sancho's attending on him.


Ald. Well, Sir, be the Picture what it will, it cannot (as far as I perceive
by your discourse) be worse than the Pattern: But let not our intermediate
mirth steal away that little time which remains, so far as to give too much
interruption to our more serious discourse: Pray inform me of some other
absurdity that follows our wild men's pretensions to the testimony of the
Spirit.


Vic. If their Testimony of the Spirit were true, then the most just Precepts
of the Gospel would be cancelled: for the latter Law repeals the former, which
is opposite to it; and they establishing their own Doctrine, which we both
acknowledge to be repugnant to the Gospel, and the Injunctions and Commands of
persons then sufficiently inspired; the Doctrine of Christ, and his blessed
Apostles, will lose both its force and obligation, if Heaven should seal the
Doctines of these men by that sacred testimony which they pretend to.


Ald. God deliver me from such impostors; these indeed have a fine way to set
up new Christ's, and new Gospels, or whatever they please to establish.


Vic. It Is very true, Sir; however if some had the hearing of our discourse, it
would sound harsh, and they would look upon us as reprobates and castawaies.


Ald. Surely none but such as you were speaking of, but now, who having lost
their ears, might have their hearing so far impaired, that, their sense being
frighted into the brain, it may be so much inwards, that they understand little
besides what themselves speak: Such ears can only be grated with our discourse,
that are either raw, or else newly skinn'd over.


Vic Alas! Sir, you are not, I perceive, acquainted with the Gentlemen we are
speaking of; though by the Picture, you showed me just now, I am convinced you
are well seen in their faces; Some of their ears are as tender as their
Consciences, being cut into just shape and form.


Ald. I Will warrant these are busy men.


Vic. As busy as a Spider when he is making his Web to catch Flies, they walk
like Footmen: And there are some of them, that, now Nature has beat out all
their teeth, gnash at the Bishops with their gums; that would reduce them to
beggary, to teach them humility, and make them poor, that they may use
Hospitality: As if the whole Nation were grown so bankrupt, that they could not
pay their debts on Earth, unless they forced Heaven to a surrender; and we
could not sufficiently abhor Idols, unless we committed Sacrilege.


Ald. Methinks such persons, whose brains are, like the restless Sea, in a
perpetual motion, not only when driven by a storm, but also when the heavens
are serene, should out of policy be set about some employments, that should be
so laborious, as to keep them in business without any interruption, that so
they might not have sufficient time to shake Foundations, and undermine
Government.


Vic. I wish they were locked up with the Records of the Tower, or put upon
inventing a way to pay off all the Sea-forces of France without the sale of
Cathedral Lands. I verily persuade my self, that these men will be angry at
death when it comes, and go to their very graves murmuring; nay, will mutiny
also in the other world, if misery and torment does not restrain them.


Ald. Indeed we have for a long time exercised lenity and mercy toward them,
and, as far as I perceive, it does but make them the more rude, and insolent,
prone always not only to speak evil of dignities, but to actual Rebellion and
Insurrections; and therefore I verily believe that Satan himself will have no
way to tame them, but by fire and faggot.


Vic. Methinks, if they had but any grains of modesty, if they would (according
to St. Paul's Rule) have their faith to themselves, and not meet together in
such vast numbers, as if they were resolved to affront Authority, and make the
best part of the Nation continually full of dreads and fears; I could be
contented (because we would not have so much to do with them, as at all to
acquaint them how hell will hereafter restrain their Mutinies) that they should
be undisturbed.


Ald. Why? As far as I understand, no body endeavors, or ever did attempt, in
the Protestant Religion, to compel any man's understanding or faith.


Vic. In this, Sir, we are all for that Catholic Charity so much voted for, by
those Consciences that have the largest dimensions; for we know that it is
impossible to impose upon the understandings of men, which must be persuaded
first of the truth of those things which they will be induced to credit, and
believe: But then only do our Canons and Laws begin to be severe, and punish
persons of different persuasions from the established Creed; when their belief
produces such actions as are prohibited, and repugnant to the known Laws of the
Realm. And truly, if that great Wheel of Humane Policy, that turns round the
Affairs of Mankind, should ever prove a rack to that Religion which we now
profess; I should heartily thank God, and those Rulers that my Obligation
subjected me to, if I might but enjoy what our discontented Party have now free
liberty by a Law, not only to practice mine own Religion by my self, and in
Society with mine own Family, but to meet together with Neighbors also to the
number of five: For where two or three are gathered together, according to our
Savior's appointment, and establishment, there he has promised to be in the
midst of them.


Ald. Indeed, upon that very score, and permission, I see no reason why the
Non-conformists should be so mutinous, as still to murmur at their restraints,
and think not only the Laws cruel, but the very Rulers themselves an
insupportable burden.


Vic. That, Sir, proceeds from their peevish Principle, not to be satisfied
with any indulgence; for, if you call to mind their former methods in his late
Majesty's Reign, they were never satisfied with his largest Concessions, 'till
they forced away both his Crown and Kingdom; the continual grant of any
Petition, being but an encouragement to frame another; one Conquest being but
the Prologue to another Tragedy: and when they began to unveil the Temple, and
touch its Roof, they never put a period to their work, as long as one stone was
left upon another.


Ald. Truly, I am afraid, the method would be the same now; for methinks the
present attempts look a little like forty and forty one.


Vic. The more necessity there is of your Worships assistance, to break what
cannot well be dissolved; for as some natures are so ingenuous, that lenity and
entreaty are the only means to reduce them to sobriety and duty; so others are
so morose, and ill natured, that severity can only Hector them to obedience.


Ald. You have proceeded so far already toward my full conviction, that I
verily believe, I shall not much dispute of the method, but act according to
the direction of the Laws, and obligation of mine Oath. But yet that I may be
able as well to argue them, at least, to silence, if not satisfaction, as to
punish their Crimes in such violent and notorious breach of the Laws; I must
further enquire, whether there may not be any more absurdities that are
consequential to that bold pretense of these men to the infallible testimony of
the blessed Spirit of God? which you have already informed me, makes their
strange Notions to become Canonical, and invalidates the great design of the
Gospel.


Vic. This boldness of theirs, that has no Miracle at all to confirm it, seems
to all rational men, that preserve their reason untainted by sense to guide
them in the midst of such variety, and rubbish of Religions, at first audit,
not only to be of such ill consequence, but impious too; that I needed but only
to have repeated the Problem, and the very mention of it would have proved its
own refutation. Yet, at your desire, I shall mention one more amongst a
multitude of absurdities, that naturally flows from this strange Doctrine; and
that is, that we must be continual Scepticks in Religion, and our way to
heaven, will be as uncertain as the wind, or as our own dreams, or conjectures.


Ald. Pray, Sir, let me a little desire the explanation of this.


Vic. Since various complexions are of diverse temperaments, and the manners of
the mind do too strictly attend upon the temperament of the body, it must needs
be, that, according to the variety of faces and dispositions, the operations of
the mind must not only be distinct, but diverse: Thus as in external sense the
object differs according to the diversity of those Organs it makes its
percussions upon; and whatsoever is received, is introduced according to the
capacity of the recipient; so will it be in relation to the mind; this will
either be guided by sense, and so the motions of the understanding will be as
fluctuating and uncertain as the vibrations of a trembling or shaking sense: or
secondly, Education may prove the only ground of belief, and then our Religion
may be as vain as our Education either loose or Fanatical; or else capacities
(admitting an equality of perfection in rational souls) may be exceeding
different in the proportions of their extent, as well as the manner of
apprehension, and reception; the Images of things, in some brains, being lively
and distinct, make more exact perceptions of Objects; in others, being more
obscure, broken, and crumbled into smaller Fragments, and diseases and
indispositions of body making too great a sickness in the minds of men, had
they no other Rule than what they conjecture a motion from the Spirit, either
to confirm or guide their opinions and actions; every fancy or conjecture
that men were possessed of, that made any lasting impression upon the mind,
would presently become a rule and guide to Religion; and thus not only would
there be as many Faiths almost as there are Judgments in the World, but as many
Religions as men: Nay, every man would differ from himself, and change his
faith as often as either the temper of his body should suffer mutation, or, the
figures and shapes in his brains be changed, either by the introduction of new
objects, or mutiny and disorder of the old Images in dreams, or diseases: Add
to all this, that diverse ways do converses, interests, and other accidents,
make strange impressions, and mutations on the minds of men. And as you will
cease to wonder at that variety of fancies, which men, that espouse such
uncertain directors, continually, not only cherish, but vent and propagate; so
you will sufficiently perceive the great delusion of those that thus pretend
the Testimony of the Spirit to raise storms in their own brains, and then say
that this wind blows: Thus making the Spirit of God, to whom we owe our
everlasting bliss, as far as the indictment of Scripture conduces to it, not
only the Author of variety, but contradiction.


Ald. How so?


Vic. Your Worship may not ask me this question, since you need not ride abroad
to a foreign Conventicle for an answer to it; but you have daily examples at
home: For you are not ignorant, I am sure, both by your trade and acquaintance,
of that diversity of Sects we have within the compass of this Town: they all
pretend the Spirit's Testimony, as a seal and confirmation of their opinions,
and practices; and yet they differ as much from one another, as all together do
from us.


Ald. But, methinks, they seem lately to be more united, courteous and kind to
each other; therefore I believe their breaches are made up, and their
differences healed.


Vic. I cannot, Sir, obstruct your belief, any other way than by persuasion,
and argument: But certainly you cannot possibly make a more visible distinction
betwixt us and them, than they make betwixt them and themselves: For they are
different from each other even to a separation, and therefore the diverse Sects
have their diverse Teachers, and pretended Ministers; their Doctrines and Modes
of Worship are diverse, their Churches (as they call them) and Communion
distinct: only in their civil converse they are something more courtly and
complemental to each other, than formerly they were.


Ald. What should be the reason of that?


Vic. Alas, Sir, that may be smelled at a distance, and seen almost by a blind
man: You know, similitude is the foundation of affection and friendship, and
there must be a Fitness and resemblance in the bodies, or some similitude and
likeness in the minds, where a League of Friendship and amity is struck: There
must be a convenience betwixt the persons to satiate each others longings and
desires, and to accomplish the end that is desired. Now these diverse Sects,
that separate from our true, though dejected, Church, have some resemblance and
similitude in diverse of their Principles, and can discourse altogether in the
same mournful, and sad tone, and canting phrases, of some things that they all
agree in; and in their different Tenants, with a wary caution with those, among
them, which are most politic, or at lest with a seeming pity and compassion;
which the advantage of their lamenting speech gives a great countenance to:
They are alike also in their complexions; for an hatchet face, and a dejected
eye, with a white Cap, to make the head diseased, when the body is well, are
things that they endeavor all to imitate; and a sneaking deportment, and
Hermophrodite garb, are more sure signs of these men, than any their Preachers
usually lay down for them to know which Party they belong to: Add this too
(which more closely unites them) that there is a similitude in their seeming
affections, being all condemned by one Law, all slighting the Act of
Uniformity, all subject to the Penalties of those Statutes that concern
Conventicles, and unlawful Assemblies: Nay, lastly, if you reflect upon this,
that they all agree in the dearly beloved sin of Rebellion, watching only an
opportunity of revenge, you will not wonder, that they, who are so different in
some Principles, should yet be kind, and hold a more strict correspondence with
one another: For they well know, that one Party of them must in vain attempt,
either by disputes, or force, to set themselves at liberty, and bring us into
bonds and slavery; and therefore they will unite all their Forces. Besides
(finally) by this feigned union of theirs, they would endeavor to set us a
pattern of Toleration for them; since the Presbyterian can now accord with the
Independent, and Anabaptist; that so our Charity may be as Catholic as their
Rebellion.


Ald. And do you think they unite for such ends as these?


Vic. As sure as we are now discoursing, For, first, hereby they seem a Party
so numerous and momentous, that they have adventured, in some of their Papers
and Pamphlets, to affrighten Authority, and dissuading the Supreme Power from
executing the Laws, by the Club Argument of their power and force; and when
thus they have assaulted us with amazement, and fear, will they attempt to do
that by rebellion, which I hope they will never effect by entreaty, to put
Swords into such enemies hands, and be the Authors of our own execution.


Ald. But, methinks, you are something confident in these matters, I would not
have you charge men with what you cannot well prove.


Vic. I shall not, Sir, be so disingenuous: But when the same Religions, the
same Methods, nay, for a great part the same men too, have formerly, by such
tricks as these, brought the Nation into a noose, ruined both Prince and
Subject, and all with as great a pretense of Sanctity, and holy cheat, as they
can possibly now be guilty of; Shall we permit these very persons to come again
to cut our throats, canting and shedding tears over us, 'till, like the
Crocodile, they have quite devoured us? Let us have a care, Sir, lest we so
long indulge their Idols, 'till they sacrifice, not only our Estates, but, our
very blood to them.


Ald. But all this is nothing but presumption.


Vic. Would you have an actual proof of what is now only in design, and a
future opportunity must give birth to? It will be no absurdity to tell you that
a great probability (abating for the terms) is what men frequently call
demonstration. But what do you think of this observation, which methinks
renders their design of War and Rebellion too apparent? That though they
adhere, and are kind to all the rest of our numerous Sects, yet the poor
Quakers have little interest in their familiarity, or affection


Ald. What should they be rejected for? Methinks they are some of the most
innocent amongst them.


Vic. They are persons, Sir, of very infectious Principles, though their
outward converse seems innocent. But the reason of their rejection is this.
Because they protest against fighting, and so are not fit for the design.


Ald. Do you think the Quakers will not fight?


Vic. Yes, why not, as well as they have done? But because the resolutions of
men, in affairs of this nature, can only be known by their Letters, and
Discourses, the other Parties dare not trust them with the knowledge or
management of so close and bloody a design: Besides, they are assured, when
themselves are in a body, the Quakers will either join with them, or stand
neuter: And so their Plot will not be hindered by them, unless their
familiarity, or Society with them should by accident render them conscious to
the Conspiracy.


Ald. But, methinks, I should not trust these very Quakers with Swords in their
hands, notwithstanding all their fair pretensions.


Vic. No, Sir, if you had been a witness to what I once saw, which, indeed,
though it convinced me that they would fight when provoked to it, yet methought
was a little pleasant to look upon.


Ald. Prithee what was that?


Vic. I happened once where a Quaker and another person had a verbal difference,
and after their manner proceeding to a dispute; the Quakers Antagonist asked
him whether he would be true to his Principles in relation to the enduring
blows from another, without striking again? He answered, Yea; forasmuch as it
is written, Whosoever smites thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also. Upon which the other, not fearing (it seems) the danger of the
experiment, struck him a warm blow upon the right cheek; the Quaker received it
with a great deal of patience, and turned to him the other cheek, when the
other person, doubling his strength, almost felled the sturdy Quaker; who being
provoked by the smart and pain, thought he had sufficiently obeyed the Text,
rushes upon the other, with this expression, Thou shall know that I have
something of the old man yet; and, truly, banged him very handsomely.


Ald. A subtle Quaker; but, it seems, he was not come to perfection, or else
that Sect will fight too.


Vic. No reasonable man will make a question of it; but the reason why I took
notice of the deportment of our principal Dissenters toward these people was,
to evince the great probability of Rebellion, if the principal Conventiclers
are not restrained; which is all the Argument that a future contingent is
capable of.


Ald. Well then, methought I liked that discourse exceedingly upon your last
absurdity from Fanatical Pretensions to the Testimony of the Spirit. Have you
nothing more, that may, without violence to that little time we have left, be
added against that confidence of theirs?


Vic. Yes, Sir; if you please, I will conclude with this; that through this
delusion the temptations and directions of the Devil himself may be entertained
for the whisperings and motions of God's holy Spirit. For I would gladly know,
where impulses are made Rules and Guides, how the owners of such uncertainties
will be able to discern the difference betwixt the motions and suggestions? And
it would not be unpleasant sport, to hear such critical persons exhibit their
inward marks and criteria; He would certainly prove a most exact Enthusiast,
fit to endoctrinate Mankind, that were able to discern different impulses made
upon the same soul, to cause it to understand or believe; since, according to
the apprehension of one that pretends no more skill in these matters than I do,
there can be but one sort of action (at least not diverse enough for the Patient
to distinguish) in the Spirits of a man, the same convulsions and percussions
on the Nerves, by which the soul is enabled to understand or believe; and as to
this, both the action and mode of apprehension is the same, whether it be
truth, or falsehood under the notion of truth, that is presented to the Soul; a
truth of God, or a Diabolical suggestion: If an Object seems true, it is
embraced with the same passion and affection, as if it were a real truth: And
it is impossible to make distinction there where there is no difference: What
internal signs they have who are best skilled in such melancholy Arts, I cannot
well conjecture; but sure I am, that by such uncouth and unreasonable
pretensions, they may as well receive the similitude of an Angel of light, as
the Angel it self.


Ald. But, surely, they would not so far desert their reason and interest
together, as to be led blindfold by such uncertainties, if such dangers and
precipices lay in their way; they must have some tokens, or other, that must
guide them out of this strange Labyrinth.


Vic. I know they are good both at signs and wonders, and yet I cannot well
discern what clue they can have to guide them: For you see all the various
Sects (as numerous as the Grasshoppers of Egypt, and as great a torment as all
their Plagues) all pretend, with an equal confidence, to the same testimony,
and they never yet could (as I have heard) attempt, with success, the
conviction of each other, from any inward marks and tokens, that one was
deluded with a pretense only of what the other truly had: Nay, Sir, inform your
self well, from the wisest of these persons, what they mean when they say that
they have the Testimony of the Spirit; and you shall (unless you have the
better fortune) have no other return than this, that they are assured
themselves of what they are not able to evidence unto others.


Ald. That is sufficient reason for their own belief and action.


Vic. Were there indeed no Paralogism upon their own Consciences, and cheat
put, by their misapprehensions, upon themselves, this were sufficient ground to
themselves for Faith and Action; because, what the Spirit commands we may
safely obey; but they cannot reasonably, from this Topic, persuade another to
the same belief, because they are not able to exhibit this Testimony to
others, or to give signs and external tokens that may be potent to a conviction.


Ald. Methinks now, Mr. Vicar, you yield the thing you have been for some time
arguing against.


Vic. I believe, Sir, you will percieve the contrary, when you remember that
this last supposition was attended with condition, that this Testimony was no
cheat. But I intend to make another use of this to your self.


Ald. Pray let me hear it.


Vic. Suppose then, for a little moment, that they had this Testimony of the
Spirit assured to themselves, but they could not give an external sign, and
demonstration unto others, of what themselves were possessed of: This could not
excuse you, as a Magistrate, from executing the Laws upon them.


Ald. That is strange!


Vic. Sir, it is not more strange than true: For you not knowing their
pretended testimony, none having sufficient means of conviction of it; and the
Doctrines and Actions of the Pretenders being, according to your present
judgment, repugnant not only to the Law of the Land, which you are sworn to
execute, but to that Law of God which is to remain Obligatory unto you, 'till
you have sufficient means of knowledge, that another Law is established by the
same Authority, to repeal what has a present Sanction; you are still engaged to
look upon them as Impostors, and punish them accordingly.


Ald. Then the Jews did not amiss in Crucifying our Savior, nor the Primitive
Persecutors in depriving the Apostles and Martyrs of their lives.


Vic. I did indeed expect this Objection, and foresee the storm; and therefore
am provided of shelter under it: The great Savior of Mankind, had not only
assured evidence of his own Mission, he coming from God, to reconcile fallen
Man to his Maker, and to abolish, what prefigured him, by the delivery and
establishment of the Gospel of Peace: But the Father and Holy Ghost gave
visible Tokens, and audible Voices, to attest this great truth to the
Inquisitive, and then unbelieving World, sealing the truth of our Saviors
great, though to Mankind new, Commission, together with the Doctrines he then
delivered, to be the Director not only to the present Generation, but future
Ages, by Signs and Wonders that arrived at the very height of true Miracles;
which being the Broad Seal of Heaven, were sufficient to establish the truth of
what they were annexed to; and might reasonably create a belief in those who
either saw, or were certainly informed of the truth of them: And therefore the
butchery and murder, nay, the hard usage of this glorious, as well as most
gracious, Messenger, cannot, by all the Art and Reason of Mankind, admit of any
Plea, or Excuse. And then for his Apostles, and those Primitive Martyrs that
sacrificed their lives to give testimony to their Master's Divinity and
Doctrine, and sealed the truth of their Profession and Religion with their own
blood; since the Apostles received our Saviors Commission, so well established
by his own Actions of power and astonishment, which was further confirmed by
God's Almighty Arm accompanying their Prayers and Benedictions, in Signs,
almost, as great as those of their Lord and Master (necessary at the first
plantation of the new Economy, that came to rend the Veil of the Temple, and
abolish those representative Ceremonies that had so solemn, and so long a
Sanction:) And the Martyrs dying in the same Cause, our present Pretenders,
that boldly affirm only what is a cheat to themselves, and cannot any way be
evidenced to others, cannot at all be paralleled with those ancient Martyrs,
and Primitive Apostles; who, though by reason of interest, and the hardness of
men's hearts, they could not convince either the Rulers of the Jews, or the
powers of the Gentiles, yet gave such reason and confirmation of their
Testimony of the Spirit, and inspiration from Heaven, that their Commission was
legible to the whole World, though men's eyes (by reason of their stubbornness,
or inadvertency) were so blind, that they would not see it.


Ald. But the fews still thought these as great Impostors as we can possibly
pretend ours to be, and under that notion only punished them, as you would now
persuade us to deal with ours.


Vic. Could ours indeed prove their testimony for what they speak and do, to
the disturbance both of Church and State, opposite unto Law, as well as the
Apostles did their Inspiration; and confirm their Doctrines by Miracle, we had
sufficient reason to believe them, and should certainly sin, in offering
violence to the Spirit of God, should they be punished for their Belief or
Actions: But because not only their pretensions are vain and frivolous, and
they cannot give a rational evidence to Mankind of their inspiration; and their
Doctrines, which they would endeavor to establish under this pretense, do not
only tend to the undermining Government, and unsettling Foundations, but, in
most of their differences from us, both in Faith, and Discipline, nay, to the
very Phrase and all, has, by the ingenious Author of the forementioned
Dialogues (the Books I sent you the other day) been proved, not only to be
canting and childish, but impious and different from that Doctrine of the
Gospel which is to endure 'till the general Flames and universal Period, and
consequently supercedes all expectations of a future Law, or new discoveries of
what is not contained within the compass of its bounds and limits, they cannot
admit of that Plea.


Ald. But what if now they should at last produce Miracles for the confirmation
of what you so earnestly contend against, what an horrid guilt should we bring
upon our selves, by the punishment of such sacred Apostles?


Vic. Truly, if they should pretend any such thing (as I know not what their
boldness is not confident enough either to expect or affirm) we must endeavor
an acquaintance with Hocus Pocus's, for fear one of their tricks should cheat
us; and make also Philosophical enquiries into the strength and power of
natural causes; and take time to consider the matter well, with all its
attending Circumstances, both of the person, and means of accomplishment,
whether the Power were lasting and permanent, always ready to seal his
pretense, and the like. But, to prevent all trouble by this objection, I will
give you one invincible Argument, why you need never fear the confirmation of
these men's Doctrines by Miracles, and, consequently, if you are satisfied of
their present error, and deviation from the sacred truths of the Gospel, you
may give them the trouble of the Law.


Ald. Pray, Sir, what is that? For I do not love to have any scruples remaining,
that shall gall my Conscience, for punishing these men, according to my Oath.


Vic. In that your Worship does exceeding well: For if you act doubtingly, it
will not only be injurious to your self, but your fear will make you too
remiss; and you will want that courage and resolution, that at all times
becomes a Magistrate, but more especially, when he is to deal with such a Crew
as these. The reason, then, which may satisfy you is this; That the Gospel
having its perpetual Sanction, if Miracles should confirm any Doctrine or
Action opposite to this, the whole Trinity would be impeached of falsehood and
lies, which the most holy God for ever abhors: And therefore St. Paul's
Anathema may very well silence this doubt: Though we, or an Angel from heaven,
preach any other Gospel unto you, than what we have preached, let him be
accursed: Which he repeats again in the very next Verse, to testify the
perpetuity of the Gospel, as well as the vanity and impudence of those that
would have perverted the Gospel of Christ; and not only so, but to prevent all
future expectations, and eternally to stop the mouths of those that should
perchance be given to change.


Ald. This indeed reaches my present case: and I hope, for the future, I shall
not be frightened from the discharge of mine Obligation by any such frivolous
and vain pretenses.


Vic. In that, Sir, you will not only show your self both a Friend to Church
and State, but you will keep a good Conscience, void of just scruple to it
self, and offense to others: Especially, when you shall well consider, that
this boldness of our Adversaries, so inevitably cheats their own souls, as well
as becomes an occasion of delusion to their acquaintance and brethren: For
their pretense to this divine testimony, can be nothing else but an heightning
of their persuasions, and making their belief bold and strong, and,
consequently, their Resolutions and Actions to maintain it confident, and
zealous. And since we find but little difference in these effects, viewed and
considered in persons of a diverse faith and apprehensions, whose Principles are
as opposite to each other, as repugnant to our common belief, as reason and
observation certainly informing those that are more inquisitive and ingenious,
that Persuasion, Resolution, Confidence, and Zeal receive their various
Elevations, and gradual Assurgencies, as well by those Evidences and Arguments
which we conjecture to be certainty of Demonstration, as by any impulse or
motion they can be imagined to have. How can they discover the truth of that
testimony which they pretend to, and discern what the holy Spirit seals, from
what is but fancy and opinion, or perhaps a malicious suggestion from him who
is the greatest Adversary to Mankind, and perpetually envies those hopes of
bliss that yet remain to Adam's Offspring?


Ald. I must needs acknowledge the strength and prevalence of your Arguments
and reason; and I heartily thank you (from that joy and content I hope to have
in the discharge of my too much neglected duty) for your great pains that you
have now taken, to measure both mine own, and our Adversaries errors, by the
Standard of truth and reason: But, yet, though I am convinced that the
Fanatics have no just Plea of their own; yet, methinks, there may be some
circumstances, attending the present season and strait that we seem to be
brought into, that may remit the rigor of my Oaths Obligation, to execute the
Laws against these persons. Will not compulsion, think you, make them
hypocrites?


Vic. I do not conjecture that Swords and Violence were ever intended as a
rational mean to enforce Christianity, or to bring men to a belief of what they
cannot by motive and argument be persuaded to yield the truth of; nor yet can I
conjecture that the smartest Scourges can make these persons greater
hypocrites, than what for the most part they already are; and therefore (as I
hinted before) our present Laws do not compel men's belief, but only take
Cognizance of their Actions; Your Authority is supplicated, and humbly begged,
to be made use of, only to restrain their open affronts to Law and Government,
and to give a check to their bold Assemblies, and numerous Meetings, for fear
lest their discerning their strength, they may at last attempt by force, what
your Oath obliges you to endeavor to prevent and obviate: And by this they
will only pay a Tribute, at the most, by Mulcts and Punishments for what they
are so willing to enjoy; and they need not be forced to a Faith in that which
Reason does not persuade them to believe. Thus the Rod punishing and
restraining the unlimited propagation of Error and Schism, they will, by this,
be put upon enquiry after the Truth, and upon a sufficient view of what they
have not yet made a through inspection into; they may at last embrace, with
cordial affection, what they now prosecute, and offer violence to with the
greatest transports of passion and malignity.


Ald. But their Party seems so very much lately increased, that they will turn
the edge of the Magistrates Sword, and weary Justice with the execution of
them.


Vic. You may therefore cut your work far shorter; and Justice may act with the
less noise, but greater success, if you only prosecute the Heads of them, and
execute the Laws only upon those who lead the innocent sheep astray.


Ald. And are you contented that the rest should still run into disorder?


Vic. You will find the rest, in time, to run themselves into the fold, when
the Bellweathers are gone, which they were wont to follow.


Ald. But methinks this should be the Office of the Bishops, and their
Ecclesiastical Judges.


Vic. First, Sir, all that the Law permits them to act, punishes nothing but
the soul, and conscience; and those persons that we have to deal with, have
their Consciences feared with an hot iron, so that these wounds will not make
them bleed; for the utmost a Bishops Court can do, is but to excommunicate the
Offender.


Ald. And is not that exceeding severe?


Vic. It is, Sir, a most dreadful Sentence, and made such gashes and wounds
formerly, that no Medicine, but an Absolution could heal; far more deep than
the severest stroke from the sharpest Sword, set on by the hand of the most
potent Emperor: But now since Atheism and Impiety has grown to a height, under
the pretense and shelter of Reformation and Religion, heavens thunder, and
lightening too, proves to men but like Squibs and Rockets, make only a great
noise, and a pleasant flash, but scarce singe so much as the Garment.


Ald. Methinks, Mr. Vicar, you make light of that, which was went to be
esteemed a serious matter, and awed the minds and consciences of men, before
Christianity could gain either the favor or assistance of the Civil
Magistrate.


Vic. I only now gave you the Conjectures of those persons we have to deal
with, when Order and Religion are almost banished, by the boldness and
Rebellion of wicked men: but if you would have mine own judgment, I cannot but
tremble at the very thoughts of an Excommunication; which, being attended with
its due circumstances, does not only cut off Communion here, but also from
Fellowship with the blessed Angels and Saints hereafter; and what is thus bound
on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven.


Ald. And why cannot this then have the same effects that it had heretofore, to
restrain men from vice and disobedience?


Vic. Your Worship need not enquire a reason of this, when you shall consider,
that those for the most part, that will be concerned in this Sentence, have
other Notions, not only of the Sentence it self, but also of the Persons that
pronounce it, than the Primitive Christians formerly had; they think the
Sentence is not of such force as we believe it is, and, however, that those
persons that now pronounce it, are not sufficiently authorized to do it.


Ald. Why? They are Commissioned by the King himself, and enabled by the Laws
of the Land.


Vic. The wisest of them will not question, I suppose, but that they have a
Civil Sanction, and that the Ecclesiastical are the Kings Courts; but this is
so far from being Argumentative to produce fear, that it is the only reason why
they scorn it, and the chief motive that I would make use of to crave
assistance from the Civil Sword.


Ald. How can that possibly be? Methinks you relate Riddles to me.


Vic. I shall presently then unriddle the Mystery, because I am not willing to
hold you in suspense; You must know then, that our Non-conformists are much of
the Papists humor in particular; nor can they think, that the Civil Power
should give a Sanction to the Kirks Laws; and therefore, if they can but
satisfy themselves, that the present Church is without Power derived from
Heaven, the Statutes made to confirm our Courts, or to make the Sentences of
these valid, they conclude to be of no greater concernment, than the other Laws
made against themselves, and may be equally violated without sin, or danger. To
tell you the truth, Sir, they look upon our Church as none at all; our Bishops
only as Popish Prelates; our Ministers as nothing but Baals Priests; and all
our maintenance, as nothing but food for the God Bell.


Al. Not so surely.


Vic. Why do they then separate from us? And not only look upon our Prayers as
deficient, but our very Sermons without Authority and Power; nay, our very
Communion and Sacraments as abomination and pollution?


Ald. These men indeed must be looked to; for, I see, if they are permitted
thus to run on without control, they will not only bring us to confusion, but
kill and stay, that they may take possession.


Vic. That was, you know, their former Doctrine; and though they then made (as
one would think) sufficient use; yet, acording to their usual Method, they are
yet upon the Application.


Ald. But if these men reject our Church, and deny our Bishops to be at least
Ministers, how will they make out their own Call, and evidence their own
Ordination lawful, since their Primitive Reformers (the Authors of their
Succession (received Orders from the Bishops hands, by virtue of which they
presumed to impose upon others?


Vic. They have a way to deny Succession to be necessary to a Church; and
besides, they have changed their Principles (as your Dialogue will inform you)
that the Presbyterian might the better associate with the Independent, and
unite their Forces to vanquish ours: But if you would have your doubt at large
resolved, I know you are sufficiently acquainted, and have familiarity with
persons of all Persuasions; and I desire you would put your Objection close to
them, that so they may give you a resolution of what I profess my self unable
to do; nor will I attempt it, since neither my Judgment, nor Obligation leads
me to it.


Ald. I see no reason, indeed, why you should be put upon the defense of them:
But an Excommunication makes men liable to Temporal Punishments, and methinks
they should be afraid of them.


Vic. It Is true indeed (now your Worship has given me a hint of it) I remember
I have been informed, that an Excommunicated person cannot make a will, nor
recover any debt (he not being qualified for a Plaintiff, but Defendant only)
and besides this, he lies open not only to the just zeal of true Christians,
but to the malice and spleen of any one that ows him a grudge.


Ald. How so, Mr. Vicar? It seems the Ecclesiastical Authority is armed with
greater power than I thought of: We must have a care of you our selves, for we
are liable to this Sentence.


Vic. And are not we liable to your Justice? Our gracious Rulers have a little
armed us with a Law, who otherwise (by reason of our usual poverty) should be
open to all misfortunes and dangers: But let us both do well, be loyal and
obedient, and we shall not only avoid the Penalties of the Law, but have praise
and encouragement from the lawgiver. But as to that attendant of an
Excommunication that may justly scare even those that seem to fear it least; it
is (as I was saying) that they are subject to every man's imprisonment; for
after they have stood Excommunicate forty days, any one, that will address
himself, may take out a Writ, De Excommunicato capiendo, and lay them in Prison.


Ald. And would you have greater power than this? It Is a wonder all Goals are
not full of these exorbitant persons.


Vic. It Is not to me strange at all, because there must be Money in the case;
the Writ is so chargeable, that a few of them would swallow up my poor
Vicaridge; and no private person, out of charity to the Church, will contribute
any thing to the punishment of those troublers of Israel. But what advantage
would your Worship get by it, if this method were used?


Ald. Then we should escape their envy and malice, that are Justices of the
Peace, because we should not be the instruments of their punishment.


Vic. In that, Sir, you must pardon me, if I endeavor to inform you of your
mistake in this point of Law: and I hope you will not take an advertisement
amiss, though it is in what your Worship should be acquainted with.


Ald. Prithee say what thou will; he is a mad man that will be angry at thy
language: thou have an Heart for a Prince, although thou have a Purse but for a
Beggar.


Vic. I thank your good Worship, and the rest of your Brethren, for that
liberal maintenance I do enjoy: Contentment (you know) will equal the Vicar to
the Alderman. But, Sir, whereas you were saying, that if the Fanatics were
proceeded against by the Writ De Excommunicato capiendo, you should be free
from contributing to their punishment; you must needs forget your self: For the
very Sentence of Excommunication does deliver the Offender to the Secular
Power, and all the punishments and inconveniences which succeed that doom, as
to the body, are merely Temporal; nay, the very Writ, that we are now
discoursing of, must be directed to Justices of the Peace, and by their Power
is the Offender imprisoned; so that if the Law be at all executed, it must be
by your hands, or else it will not prove effectual, either to restrain those
that are contumacious and refractory, nor terrify those who are more ingenuous
and pliable.


Ald. Well then, if there be a necessity, we must break through the briars and
thorns, we must encounter with the Lion in the way, since our Oaths oblige us;
and I find by you there is no avoiding the Obligation; and, indeed, it admits
not of any other way of effecting the design of restriction to our Adversaries,
and peace unto our selves: Though (if I should make an ingenuous confession) I
would not be troubled with offending my Neighbors, nor can I well endure their
abuses and clamours.


Vic. I am sorry to see so little of the Spirit of a courageous Magistrate,
that should not fear the faces of men, much less such poor contemptible
nothings as those are; and they must not be angry for this expression, because
it is their own. What should your Worship be afraid of? A Religion that is
nothing but Shadow, and Phrases, and Persons that never yet were contented with
all the Largesses of most indulgent Princes; nay, and those too, who, when in
power, were themselves the greatest Imposers, and most strict in their
Punishments against all that did in the least deviate from their established
practices; and notwithstanding all their canting confessions of their former
guilt in this particular, now they themselves are liable to Penalties, will (if
ever they shall by ill chance or violence become our Masters) be more rigid and
severe than ever; and we shall certainly find the smart of what you seem so
unwilling, ever now and then, to execute upon them.


Ald. I cannot think they are for rigor and imposition, that so much decry it;
but if it could appear that they used it in the late times, methinks we had
reason to suspect it for the future.


Vic. I am troubled, methinks, to find you so forgetful of our late miseries,
which perhaps may make you the less sensible of our present dangers: Every one,
that was loyal to his King, and true to his Religion, felt the stroke of their
severity and malice. But, to put this out of all controversy, I will send you
down a little Book newly come to my hands (which is called Samaritanism
revised) that shall fully silence this Objection, and convince you, from the
testimony of their own Authors, both foreign and domestic, that are best
approved by their own Party; that they are so far against Toleration of any but
themselves, that they affirm severities and smart punishments the just debt to
those which they account Heretics and Schismatics. I have not yet read over
the Book, but, by what I have perused, I see the Author is of a Public Spirit,
and wounds the Fanatics with their own Weapons; and because the whole
demonstrates the Piety, Equity, and necessity of putting the Laws in execution
both against Popish and Puritan Recusants, I must commend the whole to your
perusal; and it may, it is like, prevail more than our present Discourse.


Ald. Pray be as good as your word, and send it me then; but I would fain have
the Bishops more active.


Vic. In their places, and according to the extent of their Laws and
Permission, I question not but they are: For I am sure their interest, as well
as every honest man's, is equally concerned. But it is the Temporal Sword must
cut off these Excrescencies, for we see they contemn the Bishops Courts: And
methinks the method is not so natural, for those who must use Rhetoric, and
persuasion, to incline those to a cordial embracement of what severity may
drive them to the profession of, to be the prime Authors, and the immediate
Instruments of conveying to them their Mulcts and Penalties. If the Temporal
Authority would but gall them, we could then have an opportunity to prove
Surgeons to them, and apply our Plasters to their sores; and should have
that advantage of persuasion that we have when we visit sick men, who are then
for the most part in a serious posture, and are willing to embrace those
instructions and exhortations that, in time of health, they scorned and
refused. But now, if the Clergy should be made the only Authors of their
punishments, they would hate the hand that had given them the wound so much,
that they would not endure them to apply any Medicine to effect a cure; and it
would, at best, be looked upon as no other than breaking the head, and giving
them a Plaster.


Ald. I cannot but acknowledge you speak a great deal of reason in this: and I
think it will prevail with me, as much as any thing you have said yet, to be
active in mine Office against these men.


Vic. As much as any thing, Sir, but your Oath you should say; for that
Obligation still remains sacred and solemn: and you renounce your interest in
that Gospel you then kissed, when you entered into those potent bonds, not to be
broken without the penalty of severe repentance, or damnation and torment in
the other World, if you do not discharge your promise.


Ald. You see, Mr. Vicar. I am almost persuaded, but you do perpetually rub old
sores, and gall me with the Obligation of my Oath, you have not yet heard all
that I have to plead in bar of so strict an Obligation.


Vic. I hope you are already convinced that you ought to endeavor, what lies
in your power, to fulfill your promises made to God, especially those that are
sealed and confirmed by the bond and solemnity of a sacred Oath: And that
everlasting chains become due to you, if you voluntarily break those Cords that
you have at present bound your self to God Almighty with.


Ald. I am not so forgetful of your discourse, nor so insensible of mine own
Obligation: But impossibility of performance does as well disoblige me from the
engagement of mine Oath, as illegality has voided the bond of the Covenant. It
is impossible to do any good upon these people by the execution of Laws, and
therefore in vain to attempt it.


Vic. I am sure, Sir, you have already taken Gods name in vain, if you do not
attempt it, and as far as is within the compass of your power to execute it
too: But I cannot but wonder that you should suppose your Oath impossible to be
discharged; I fear you have not yet much attempted it, or else the Essay has
been attended with imprudence, or impatience; you have either failed in the
manner of your administration, or some trouble or inconvenience to your self
has directed your intention, and put a stop to your Justice.


Ald. We did, Sir, (when the King was first restored to the possession of these
Kingdoms, which he had before an undoubted right to) vigorously execute the
Laws against these discontented persons; and we found that our Prisons were
always full to very little, or no, purpose, and there they would preach out at
the very Grates, and disturb the ears of all travelers, and gather
Conventicles at the Prison doors.


Vic. Truly, Sir, 'twas an easy matter to give the losers leave to talk; and
by my consent they should have exercised thus 'till they had been weary both of
prating and restraint: Why did you then discharge them, and not constantly
persevere in making them endure the Penalty of the Laws? To show Children the
Rod only, and never giving them the sense of its lash, does but the more harden
them in their stubbornness: Those persons, when they had felt your Justice, and
seen your Resolution, would, in time, have been weary of their own sufferings;
and others would have been sufficiently deterred, by their examples, from
future molestations of Law and Justice, or provocation of that Sword which they
perceived to be so sharp and keen. You could not, I believe, but observe a
difference betwixt their carriage then, and their deportment now: Those that
now, with confidence enough, desert our Assemblies, were devout, then, at the
reading the Liturgy: But when they see they may, with impunity, provoke
Authority, and contemn Government; they separate then out of humor of being
singular, or by reason of the least disobligation from the Minister, or perhaps
any other in Communion with them; nay, if Authority does but punish any one for
Vice or Debauchery, away they will immediately run to a Conventicle, and desert
their Religion to be, as they suppose, revenged of their Adversary: Nay, after
a little while, we shall scarce have a Whore carted, or an impudent Scold put
into the ducking stool, nay, a Drunkard or Blasphemer set by the heels, but, to
contemn that Authority that sentenced them to their most just punishment, they
will present themselves at the next meeting place, that from malice and revenge
they may break the Law in another place, where, by reason of the neglect, or
cowardice of those that should maintain its force, and resist the breach, it
becomes weak, and easily assaulted, and overcome; since they were beat back by
due chastisement from the former onset and battery. Had you but continued, as
well as you begun at his Sacred Majesty's first arrival, you should not have
had the tithe of what trouble you must now expect; nor they the tenth of what
numbers they have since secured, nor any of us those present fears that hourly
increase and daily invade us.


Ald. But will the Fanatics receive such persons, that out of such wicked
humor, and from principles of revenge, fly from us, only because justice has
reached them?


Vic. If they are women, they will not at all be scrupulous, especially if they
are indifferently handsome; for because Mary Magdalen proved a Saint, therefore
they would have all Saints to be Mary Magdalens: The more Devils have been cast
out, the greater is the glory of the Exorcist. But if they are men, they will
sometimes a little shrive them for fear, at last, their rational soul should
domineer over their sense, and they should return by the way from whence they
came, and discover all their deeds of darkness, and relate the Saints failings
to the wicked. But not to divert our present Discourse, which must now draw
toward a conclusion with the day; suppose what opposition you will in the
execution of the Laws upon these Gamesters in Religion, that play all hazards
upon their Bibles, yet your Oath, as a Justice, still obliges you; and if ever
you will ascend God's holy hill, though you swear to your own hurt, you must
not change.


Ald. True, Sir, if an impossibility did not attend my Oath, and consequently
discharge me.


Vic. Was your Oath impossible to be kept when you first took it?


Ald. No, no; then it had been utterly unlawful, and then I must have repented
for what was impious and unjust, not to be made the matter of an Oath.


Vic. Is it then become impossible since?


Ald. Yes, that it is; because of the increase of their numbers, and the
boldness and courage they have acquired.


Vic. Your Worship and your Brethren are to have thanks given to you for that,
for giving them encouragement by your lenity and forbearance; when the Laws
were sufficiently valid, and you under the greatest obligation to enforce and
execute them. It is a sad thing that men will make so many excuses now, who, to
my knowledge, in the late times were sufficiently active to execute the
Impositions of tyrannical Usurpers; notwithstanding the numbers of those that
wished the King well bore a greater proportion to those Army Myrmidons, than
the Fanatics do to us now. But what are these formidable numbers? It Is true,
they make them appear as dreadful as they can; for every one of them has his
mouth full of fire and brimstone, that they blow forth continually upon us,
and, both in their Writings and Conventicles, make as great a show as possibly
they are able: But you may see by this that their numbers are not so formidable
as they would endeavor to make us believe; for their Teachers were not so very
many that refused Conformity, and yet you have to every little sneaking
Conventicle, no less than five or six waiting Chaplains that are maintained,
for the most part, from what the good women steal from their Husbands; besides,
several of them had Temporal Estates, and are wary enough to keep close to
their own Families, for fear the Law may reach them, when the others poverty
makes them venturous. We were best, after a while, run away from a nest of
Snakes, because they put out their tongues; or be afraid of a flock of Geese,
because they hold out their necks and hiss at us. Would you, that are in
Authority, but a little discountenance these insinuating Companions, and
discharge your Oath upon the Leaders of the Factions, you would find the
Multitude melt and dissolve like Snow against the Sun, and we need no longer be
afraid of Tumults and Insurrections: But, admitting their numbers to be great
and insolent, I cannot imagine how the execution of the Laws becomes
impossible. Are they become so spiritual, that they are invisible too? Or do
not their bold Pragmaticks often enough walk the Streets? Or is not a Sergeant
in Divinity sufficiently known, when he has always the Formality of his Coife
on? Is not the Law still the same that it was; have you not the same Authority
and way to execute it, the same Officers and Power to attend you? Had you ever
yet a prohibition from your Superiors, that might discharge the Obligation of
your Oath? Did not the House of Commons, with their Speaker before them,
petition his Majesty to set forth his Royal Proclamation, to command you to
execute the Laws in force against these Meetings and unlawful Assemblies? And
does not your Oath, that is so sacred and solemn, that, when wilfully neglected
and openly violated, must inevitably bring eternal vengeance upon the
contemners head, yet remain obligatory in the highest? Though no man can be
obliged to an impossibility, yet a Promissory Oath must bind him to the utmost
of his power and ability: And can you say that you have acted to the utmost of
your strength, or according to those seasons and opportunities that are daily
put into your hands? If not, never conjecture your Plea of Impossibility will
be sufficient to excuse your negligence and indifferency.


Ald. Well, Mr. Vicar, you have argued this last point home, not only to my
Capacity, but Conscience; and though I must confess my self sufficiently
galled, yet I shall not wince at my conviction: You have a strange faculty in
persuasion; I never thought to have been brought to this trouble --


Vic. Trouble, Sir! It should be your delight to be strict and diligent in the
performance of your duty; and your greatest trouble must be, that you have been
no less troubled for the breach of your Oath: You cannot say what I persuade
you to is impossible to be done, without a stain and blot upon your Oath, and
consequently your honor as a Justice of the Peace; for you know you are always
new sworn in this Corporation, as well as chosen, once a year; and surely the
putting the Laws in execution is no more impossible at this time, than it was
last Michaelmass; either then your Oath was unlawful it binding you to what was
impossible when you took it, or else it is still most severely obligatory,
notwithstanding all your pretended impossibility. Let courage therefore and a
pious resolution shine like Jewels in the midst of your titles, and let not the
breach and violation of an Oath, make your Bed, sometime or other, prove your
Grave, and your Grave a worser torment: But duly execute his Majesty's most
pious and just Laws, that are as well the Pales of the Church, as the Bulwarks
of the Kingdom.


Ald. But, you know, we are Justices of the Peace, and the design of mine
Office is only for the peace and welfare of this place, and consequently, as a
part of the whole Kingdom. Now when my judgment tells me that the execution of
the Laws will more tend to the ruin and destruction of our peace and quietness
by the provocation and disturbance of these persons, than the forbearance;
certainly I am excused from the Obligation of mine Oath in that respect.


Vic. I am not, Sir, of your opinion in relation to what you now propose; nor
do I conjecture that the executing the Laws against Conventicles and unlawful
Assemblies will at all disturb, but very much settle, the peace and
tranquillity of the Kingdom: For their numbers are not yet so great, but that
they may with facility be suppressed, without any breach upon our present
quiet; would the Justices of Peace lend their assistance, and Command their
Constables and inferior Officers to seize and apprehend the principal Actors,
that they may be brought to the Bar of Justice, to receive their Sentence and
condign punishment. For substract but the number of women and children, that
are incapable of resistance, from the total sum of these bold Usurpers, and
Violaters of the Law; and abate for the want of ability of some, by reason of
their Age, and the defect of courage and resolution in others; and we need not
fear the power of the rest, there will remain so inconsiderable a number to be
encountered with: Finally, add to all this, that they are, for the most part,
persons who are inconsiderable in their interest, being Tradesmen and
Handicrafts; so that, if their Drum should beat, and their Trumpets sound
sedition and tumult, it could be none other than a Prologue to their final
destruction. But if none of these Pleas could possibly with any reason be made,
you are not, in your Office, to be a Judge of what is a mean to promote or
continue the Public Peace; for your Sentence is not proper in this cause,
unless you were a Privy Counselor; but the Laws, you are sworn to, are to be
your Director, and, unless you receive a prohibition from him who has the
Supreme Executive as well as Legislative Power of the Kingdom, your Oath
(whatever may either through fear, self-inteterest, or indulgence to others be
pleaded to the contrary) will oblige you, upon no less danger than the ruin of
your soul, to do what in you lies to discharge it.


Ald. But our livelihood is in this totally concerned: We that are Tradesmen,
should we be severe in the execution of the Laws against these persons, we must
of necessity be undone, for we should lose a great part of our Custom.


Vic. Methinks your Worship is just like a person quite shipwracked, you catch,
with such greediness, at every little Planke and and Oar; and I hope I have
almost vanquished all your Arguments and Doubts, and hewed down the main
Pillars of the House, you do so prop up your building with Poles and
Faggot-sticks: Do you not yet consider that the welfare of your soul is to be
preferred before not only your Estate, but your Life too? What advantage is it
(that I may put to you our Savior's Question) to gain the whole World, and to
lose your own soul? This is so precious a Jewel, that it is not capable of
barter, or exchange: All your torment for the gaining of an Estate here, is
only to make your Posterity rich: and what benefit can you reap from their
temporal welfare and prosperity? Your body will lie rotting in a grave, and
that Vault will be too obscure and dark for you to see through, and take a
prospect of your Families splendor. There cannot possibly be the least
reflection, from their honor and advancement here, upon you, when lodged in
your bed of earth, and crumbled into Dust and Vermin. And then to have your
Soul eternally miserable, and to salute your body in fire and flames at the
great and glorious Morning of the Resurrection, because you have neglected your
Obligations here, both to God, your King, and his holy Church, only to secure
your present Possessions, or to heap up Riches for future Generations; this is
relinquishing the highest Heaven for a poor contemptible spot of Earth.
Methinks, Sir, you should be better skilled in your own Trade, than to exchange
the Pearl of preat price, for small, contemptible, and perishing Commodities;
to barter Diamonds for Bristol stones, and with the Indians, to to sell the
finest Gold for a small piece of painted Glass. If the severest Duties, and
strictest Obligations of most solemn Oaths, may thus be dispensed with, when
Interest stands in competition with them; we then certainly never yet
understood our Religion, nor is the Gospel of our Savior the way to Heaven,
nor will the Gates of that glorious City be ever opened to the Practicers of
Christianity. For if we make a narrow search into those eternal Precepts of the
great Author and Contriver of our Religion, as well as Redeemer and Purchaser
of our lives and ransom, we shall find, next to a belief in our Savior, that
they consist in mortifying our Appetites, Passions, and Desires, in withdrawing
our Affections from too eager a pursuit of this World, in a blessed
contentation with our present Lot, that turns Earth into Heaven and Paradise,
in a due and constant obedience to our Superiors, a strict observation of our
Promises and Vows, and there must not be with us yea and nay. It Is a wonder to
me, that St. Peter should be blamed for denying his Master, if any interest
might dispense with duty; or that the Primitive Martyrs had not been more wary,
than to burn their bodies, when they were no acceptable Sacrifice. Our Savior,
I am sure, was obedient to the death, and has assured those of their
unworthiness of himself, or any of those advantages that he has brought to an
ungrateful World, if they love their Relations better than himself. Believe it,
Sir, God and Mammon, Christ and Belial cannot both be served and obeyed; and if
you will obey the Commands of one, you must not become a slave to the other. I
cannot but admire, that a person of your Port and Gravity would once mention
such an Objection as this, that sets a Temporal Interest against a Spiritual
advantage, as if it were ponderous enough to incline the balance both of Faith
and Reason. Shall a great and solemn duty be neglected, to which you are
obliged by the bond of an Oath, in which either your laziness or contempt
execrates all your own felicity, and abandons your everlasting bliss, only for
the Pelf and glittering Dust of a ruinous and tottering World? This is making a
God of Mammon, prostration before the Golden Image, and adoring a pitiful lump
of clay. But what should I argue thus with a Christian? You are baptized; and
therefore have renounced the World, as well as the Flesh and the Devil: and
therefore I hope this Objection started from you through weakness and
inadvertency only, and was not the effect of Judgment or Premeditation; nor can
you conjecture that Private Interest is of that concern with Almighty God as to
be potent enough to release you from the least duty, much less from the great
and most strict Obligation of an Oath. And yet, that I may endeavor to obviate
all Evasions, even to those that may not have so deep and prevalent a sense of
duty, You know by reason of my Residence and Function in this Town I am
acquainted with almost all sorts of Tradesmen.


Ald. I know you are.


Vic. They tell me then, that indulgence of the Justices to Fanatics does not
at all increase their Custom, or support their Trade; nor will any Obligation
engage those men to buy any where but there where they may have the best
bargain: And that which enclines me to a belief of this, is that prodigious
covetousness and Jewish griping that I have observed in the most of them, as if
it were riveted in their very Religion; for they pretend abstinence to save the
expenses of hospitality and good neighborhood, and so become, in their way,
religious only that they may save charges: Nor can I at all wonder at these
men's avarice, as long as they have so much of pride and humor to maintain: So
that as your interest and livelihood, were it concerned, is not enough to weigh
down your duty and Oath, even that cannot be much damnified by your Justice and
Severity to those persons: For somewhere or other they must buy, and if your
goods be most merchantable, and best cheap, you will not fail of these
Customers: If not, all the art and skill that you have, all the favor and
kindness you can show them, shall never be arguments prevalent enough to draw
them into your noose and snare: For there are no persons, under the Canopy of
Heaven, that are better skilled in the arts and tricks of cheat and cousenage
than themselves; and therefore will easily discern the little wiles that you
lay for them.


Ald. I cannot but return very many thanks to you, Mr. Vicar, for all your
large and pertinent discourses, which I must confess have fully convinced me
not only of the danger of discontented persons, if permitted any longer to meet
thus in great numbers to the disturbance of our peace both in Church and State,
but also of the Obligation of mine Oath, as a Justice of the Peace, to put in
execution the Laws against them: And I pray God enable me to deny mine interest
rather than so great and solemn an Obligation, as an Oath is.


Vic. Trust God Almighty, Sir, with your Estate; he will never bless you the
less for the performance of your duty: For if you be willing and obedient you
shall eat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the Sword, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 1.19,
20. Trust, Sir, in God and do good, and you need not doubt of being
sufficiently fed. Not only the welfare of the Church, which is as glorious as
it is great, depends upon your activity, courage, and diligence; but even the
King's honor, and the Kingdoms prosperity: For if Laws, that have received
their Sanction, are not put in execution, it must be for one of these three
Reasons; either because they are imprudent and unjust in themselves, and this
will subvert the Legislators wisdom: Or, secondly, because he that is to put
them in execution has not power enough to accomplish the design, and then, his
force being contemptible, fear and dread will be withdrawn from the Subject: Or
(lastly) because there is a defect in his will for the accomplishment of what
his Power is ready to assist him in, and the Justice of the cause enforces the
Obligation of the duty: and either of these Reasons being granted, and believed
amongst the multitude will immediately lay a Kingdom waste, and reduce Empires
into heaps of Ruins: For a Prince being thought to want wisdom, brings his
Person in contempt; want of power in time raises his Adversaries, and defect of
will to resist and withstand them, encourages them to proceed to victory and
conquest.


Ald. I have nothing with which I can withstand your conviction. God pardon my
past neglects, and I will be more sedulous for the time to come: But methinks
it should something abate our rigor, to consider that they would tolerate us.


Vic. I see, did not your Oath goad you, the welfare of the Church and peace of
the Kingdom would scarce prevail. Shake off, for once, all your fear, and do
not love the honor more than the duty and burden of of your Office: And then I
will tell you that never any Party yet would plead for Toleration, but whilst
themselves were under restraint; they had another note when the Sun shined,
different from what they have in a shower. To my knowledge Toleration was
accursed in their mouths, who now thank God for a gracious indulgence. The late
times will afford you testimonies enough of their tyranny, when they wore the
Sword of Power and Force, and we shall assuredly find their actions contrary to
their specious pretensions, should Rebellion ever be rampant to a victory. Do
but read over the Books I lent you, and tell me then what hopes you have of an
indulgence from them, unless you once more turn to their Principles and
Opinions. But that I may use a Reason that must of necessity silence this Plea,
shall we suffer our selves to become the conquered Party, only that we may
experience the civility of our Adversary? Will any man, in his right senses,
make over his Lordship and Possessions to another, that he may receive a
Pension from it? We can expect none other than the greatest violence from
persons of their Principles and malice, and therefore let him that stands
take heed lest he fall.


Ald. But if they should chance to have their designs accomplished, and should,
either by strength or treachery gain a victory over us, and so we should lose
the day, they would presently fall to pieces again, and thrust their Swords in
one another bowels.


Vic. This, Sir, will be readily consented to: But as by their former Methods
you collect this, so by their present attempts you may, without the help of
Stars, Prognosticate their barbarous designs of ruin to our Church. And it
cannot but be a strange piece of Policy for a Prince to permit the invasion of
his Territories, and sacrifice both himself and Possessions to the Avarice and
Malice of his cruel Adversaries, that they, wanting an Enemy to encounter, may
sheath their Swords in one another bowels: To be sure they will not disagree
as long as they have a Common Adversary left alive, and it will be strange
pleasure for a dead Enemy that his Adversaries rage against each other. I hope,
Sir, your Arguments are all now spent: for the Vessel I perceive is out, by the
dregs and Lees that run from it. Let me now with all humility, beseech your
double care for the execution of what has been, to our sorrow, too long
neglected; and let a true repentance, for your Omissions, be evidenced both to
God Almighty, and the World, by your future vigor and Activity. The Night has
now blotted out the Day, and calls for a period to our Discourse: The Laws will
prove your best Director, and your Oath and Duty the greatest Motive, Let the
gaping wounds of a bleeding Church beg your Charity to bind up the sores, and
the devastation and misery of former Wars, and almost total subversion of
Christianity amongst us, beseech your endeavor to support that Church, which a
warm Sun would soon revive, and a sovereign Balsam quickly cure: That your duty
to God may be faithfully discharged, and the breach of Oaths may not burden
your Conscience; That you may prove both an obedient and loyal Subject unto him
who gives you your Honor and Authority by your Office, a faithful Assertor of
his Majesty's Power, and Supreme Prerogative, a stout Champion for the Church's
Privileges, a just Fence to Propriety and Enclosures, and a charitable
Repairer of those breaches that Schism and Sedition have too long made upon us.
So shall you be a true Fence to the Fold of Christ, preserving the enclosed
from the mouths of Wolves; and be a means of reducing those wandering sheep
that, through giddiness or wantonness, have strayed, out of their appointed
Pastures, amongst the wild beasts of the Forest. And God Almighty direct all
your undertakings, and crown your Pious and Christian endeavors with success;
that your courageous resolutions and sacred Promises may never terminate or be
envalidated, through the subtilty of the Adversary, or allurements of the
World, 'till your unwearied Performance publicly testifies, that your Promise
was not rash, nor your Oath in vain.


Ald. Now, Sir, that you have answered my scruples, and invalidated my
reasonings, I should be beneath the worth of mankind, if I should not
thankefully receive my conviction: And I hope, whatever liberty I thought my
accustomed Authority might entitle me unto, in giving checks sometimes to the
manner of your Phrase, and smartness of Expression, I shall for the future
abate, and retract; as well knowing, that though the contracted maintenance of
this place may seem to cloud your merits and deserts, yet respect is always due
to a Scholar; much more shall I endeavor to deport my self in such a kind and
courteous familiarity as becomes one whose soul is committed to your care and
charge; and shall so far testify that abundant joy and pleasure I have had in
receiving such ample satisfaction from you, that I shall for the future not
only my self increase my present allowance to you, but shall endeavor to
persuade the rest of my Brethren to a more liberal Contribution: that so you
may bear something of the Port of an Ambassador of heaven, that you may be able
to pray without distraction, and preach with Authority, without restraint
either from our humors or Vices.


Vic. I humbly thank your good Worship that you are pleased to accept any thing
which I am able to attempt toward the satisfaction of your scruple and
doubtfulness; and that you have, not only with patience, but entreaty, heard my
familiar, though for the most part dutiful, discourse thus long. Whatever words
have been by me spoken rash and unadvised, I hope your clemency and mercy will
pardon, and for any seeming levities and jocular Sarcasmes I question not but
your candor and Ingenuity will forgive. Let us both now, in our several
Callings, endeavor the suppression of that rude multitude that wishes evil to
the prosperity of our Sion; I with a meek and gentle persuasion, and you by a
due execution of the Laws; that so peace may be within our Walls, and
plenteousness visible in all our Habitations, that all Vice, of all kinds,
being discountenanced, and punished, both in Friends and Adversaries, mercy and
truth may shine from heaven, whilst righteousness and peace kiss on earth.


Ald. I shall not be wanting in any thing that concerns mine Oath and Office,
for the suppression of those that thus endeavor to suppress us; but if the
nearest Friend I have offends against the Law, and it shall come to my
cognizance, I shall assuredly inflict the Penalties of the Statute for that
Vice, be it what it will, that comes within my Jurisdiction and Power; For
Oaths, I perceive, are Sacred things, that cannot be violated without the sin
of Perjury, which is of no less perilous nature, than odious name. Well; you
see, Sir, Supper is come in, and I must beg you to bless our Table. And God
Almighty grant that all Divisions may cease among us, and Rebellion and Tumult,
since it cannot be entreated, may, at the last, be scared to Silence.


Vic. AMEN.


And now, that your poor Vicar, with his waste
As slender as his Table, may give taste
Of his Poetic fury; all the rage
That he can spit from his small wooden Cage:
Where, like a Bird of Athens, he sits mute,
Which when they meet in Couples do dispute.
His grave Antagonist, with his dear Joyce,
Making Lambicks in her Gate and Voice,
After the toil and sad storms of the day,
Was willing to divert himself with play:
When, I condemned, a melancholy Pen
Epitomis'd an Eagle to a Wren.
But, presently, damnation men appeared,
At view of whom the little Crest was reared;
On first sight of the fire the brain did boil,
And heated to a vapor did recoyl;
But, when the Mercury was fixed, did vent
All its disputes into a merriment;
And on Poetic Bogpipes, ready blown
To sound a doom, the Vicar played his own.
Put Monks and Presbyterians in a Cell,
That both together may thy Fate foretell;
The one from rigid Precepts of his Art,
TO other from Pulses of a trembling heart:
Either, and both, would damn me to the flames,
And disagree in nothing but in names.
Rigid Prognosticators! whose fierce stars
Kindle the flames blown by you Sons of Mars,
And turn vast Kingdoms into fire and smoke,
Whilst your Associates in Rivers croak;
'Till covering all the World, like Egypts Frogs,
They shake themselves, from whence engulphing Bogs
Heated and boiled, by your enraged Ire,
Swell, 'till they burst in brimstone and in fire:
And as the roaring Aetna's angry face
Damns by reflection all the Giants Race;
And as it spits Rivers of Brimstone full,
So foameth the, horn-mad, Geneva Bull.
Take thy full swinge then, do but shake thy head,
Snuff out the Vicars rage, and look him dead,
Severe Fanatic, with thy meager face,
The only Relick of accursed Cham's Race;
Who did a Pulpit full of Malice vent,
Hell and Damnation thy nourishment:
Disgorge thy self ex tempore, and frown
The Author to, what he has, a Market Town.
FINIS.

