A Spittle Sermon PREACHED In St BRIDES Parish Church, on Wednesday in Easter
Week, being the Second Day of April, 1684.

BEFORE The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, THE Court of ALDERMEN, and the
SHERIFFS of the now Protestant, and Loyal, City of London.

By THOMAS PITTIS, D. D. Rector of S. Botolph without Bishopsgate London, and
one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Ecce quam invicem se amant! London, Printed by B. W. for Edward Vize, at the
Sign of the Bishop's Head over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE Right Honorable Sr Henry Tulse, LORD MAYOR, and to the Right
Worshipful the Court of ALDERMEN and SHERIFFS of the City of LONDON.
May it please your Lordship, etc.
IN obedience to your just Authority, which I have always, in my small Sphere,
endeavored to maintain, I have hardened my self against the Censures of the
World, to comply with your desire to Print a mean Discourse on a Noble Theme.
God grant that you may, under the Supreme Being, and a most excellent King,
perfect the Through Reformation according to Law, which you have begun; be as
Charitable, and Kind, as the following Sermon was designed, by the Preacher, to
exhort you unto; and always Loyal to that Most Protestant, and truly Gracious,
Monarch, who gave you your Commission; whilst I remain,

Right Honorable, etc. Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, THO.
PITTIS.

These Books following are written by the same Author, and are to be sold by
Edward Vize, at the Bishop's Head over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
A Discourse of Prayer: Wherein this great Duty is stated, so as to oppose some
Principles and Practices of Papists and Fanatics; as they are contrary to the
Public Forms of the Church of England, established by her Ecclesiastical
Canons, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

A Discourse concerning the Trial of Spirits: Wherein Inquiry is made into Men's
Pretenses to Inspiration for publishing Doctrines in the Name of God, beyond
the Rules of the Sacred Scriptures. In opposition to some Principles and
Practices of Papists and Fanatics; as they contradict the Doctrines of the
Church of England, defined in her Articles of Religion, established by her
Ecclesiastical Canons, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 23. read their abode: p. 20. l. 21. r. Antoninus Pius: p. 24. l.
5. blot out He: p. 27. l. 5. instead of Streams, r. Steames.

Ecclesiastes 11.6. former part. In the morning sow thy seed; and, in the
evening, withhold not thine hand. --


IN the foregoing Verses of this Chapter, we have directions and motives to
disperse our Alms, the blessed fruits of an enlarged Charity: A word so big and
comprehensive, (when it is not restrained as in this Text) that it points out
the whole duty of man. This Virtue, being so sacred and divine a Grace, is the
foundation of all Gods Commands, mentioned both in the Law, and by the
Prophets; so that our Blessed Savior himself informs us, That, as to love the
Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength,
contains the general matter of the first Table of the Law: So, to love our
neighbor as our selves, includes the second, ( Matthew. 22.37, etc.) To the
second of these is my Text confined; and though liberal acts are here wrapped up
in Metaphor; yet the words, I have read, are a plain intimation of as necessary
a duty of dispersing our abundance, or superfluities, of this World amongst
those who stand in need of our relief. For, the expression of Seed signifying
men's Alms, and sowing it, the dispersion of them, cannot appear to be terms
very far fetched; since the Scriptures of the New Testament, in relation to the
Bounty and Liberality of Christians, say, He which sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly; and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, (2 Cor.
9.6.) The Seed of our Charity, amongst other things, springing up unto eternal
life, may easily represent both our duty and reward, and engage us to scatter
and sow our Alms, since so large a Crop shall abundantly satisfy for our
labor and expense. It is not rare in Scripture phrase, but very frequent, to
express its meaning in Allusions or Metaphors, and these, by a continued
succession, are sometimes advanced to an Allegory: And the Context, in these
cases, will easily determine their sense and meaning. Thus we find here, in my
Text, the same duty of dispersing our Charity, which, in the first Verse of the
same Chapter, is advised in the expression of casting bread upon the face of
the waters, phrased, now, by sowing our seed.

And therefore, without any torturing Criticisms, or troubling our selves with
harder language; The Text I have taken to discourse on, includes only a clear
direction to bestow our Charity to those who stand in need of our assistance.
And because men, who are so greedy of this World, that they little take care of
the advantages of the next, are apt to decline the performance of that, which
they cannot but acknowledge to be just and equal, and to raise objections
against the practice of what, in speculation, they are willing to own;
especially in this duty of Charity and Bounty, that cannot be accomplished
without expense: Because some are so addicted to scrape together the dust and
rubbish of this lower World, that their sweat and blood shall be dropped into
it, to make it to consolidate and cement together, that it may not be
scattered, but fixed to the places and seats of abode: Nay, so greedy are some
for the securing their wealth, and so loath to diminish any of their heaps, that
they will even venture to dye to save charges. The wise Preacher therefore, in
the Chapter of my Text, confirms this necessary duty of Charity, by argument;
and at the same time answers objections: And because the rich, though close,
men of the World, are apt to think, that scattering their wealth, is the way to
diminish it, and that giving to the needy, is not the method to increase their
store; he assures them, ver. 1. that if they cast their bread upon the waters,
they shall find it after many days. That is, though they throw it into a
running stream, that is passing by, and never like to return to the same place
again; yet it is not impossible by a large circulation, to enter by the caverns
of the earth, into the same River: However, the fountainhead still springs,
and the great God, of the Sea which is the Parent of the Rivers, can send a
greater proportion from above; and, in this case, unless what may be a greater
advantage intervenes, his will shall not control his power. But men may,
perhaps, be inclined to adventure something upon the bottom of this hope; only
they are afraid to send any large portion of their wealth upon those waters,
that may carry it too far out of their reach: They would disperse a small Sum
to a few; but they are loath to have the trouble of too many Pensioners. This
the Wiseman obviates too, at verse. 2. Give a portion, says he, to seven, and
also to eight; to some, and to more, according to thy proportion and ability;
which one man cannot set for another, unless he is acquainted with his estate
and circumstances: And he adds an Argument, and Motive, to this; For thou
know not (says he) what evil shall be upon the earth. Thou know not what
mischief thou may prevent, by thy Charity, to another: Nor what evils may
betide thy self, when thou may, by the mutability of affairs, stand in need
of help or assistance from others. But (farther) because, in an affair of this
nature, men are so loath to part with that wealth, which they love so well; and
to resign a possession, in hope only of a future reversion; and therefore are
very curious in making their choice of those Objects, on whom they may bestow
their Charity; which must cost them that money which they prize equal to their
lives. The Preacher sends them to take a view of the influence of the Heavens,
and fetches an argument out of the Clouds; that they may not always look upon
the Earth, but sometimes lift up their eyes to Heaven. If the clouds (says he)
be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: And that none may be
disheartened, or rather willingly excuse themselves, from Noble, and Godlike
acts of Bounty, because the Receivers are frequently so unworthy, or
ungrateful; the Wiseman goes on in the third Verse, If the tree fall toward
the south, or toward the north, it is indifferent, so it falls at all; for in
the place where the tree falls, there it shall be. Thy Charity, however, let
the receiver be never so unworthy or unthankful, shall be accepted by him, who
has enjoined it as thy duty, if thou have placed it with a good mind. For he,
that usually stays too long wavering and deliberating about such things as
these, misses often a fitting Object, and frequently does not give at all; but
loses his season and reward too: he slips his seed time, and cannot well expect
an harvest. For (as it follows, ver. 4.) He that observes the wind, will not
sow; and he that regards the clouds, shall not reap. So that, upon the whole,
when we are able, we must be always willing to give; Because (as it is in the
latter part of the Verse, in which my Text is placed) with reference either to
time or persons, we may easily be deceived; For we know not what gift may
prosper; either this, or that; or whether they may not be alike good. Give
often therefore, as Seneca advises, because perdenda sunt multa, ut semel
ponas been; many are to be lost, that you may sometimes, or, at least once,
place your benefits well. However, follow the advice in my Text, In the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand.

And now, these words, from their plain coherence with the former part of this
Chapter, present to us that public duty of Charity to those who stand in need
of our aid and relief. A duty that is inscribed on the minds of men, which
nature it self inclines us to; So that we must renounce the Principles of
Humanity, and bid defiance to the dispositions of our minds (if they are not
filled with dirt and rubbish, or shrunk by an unnatural, nay, devilish
fierceness and cruelty) when we refuse to commiserate persons in affliction, or
cease to be, according to our abilities, charitable to the Poor. The Jews would
formerly have directed us to this duty; The Heathen will upbraid us, if we
renounce it; The Beasts themselves will gladly suffer their own kind to feed
with them; And the damned in Hell have had so much kindness and compassion too,
to wish well to their Brethren, even whilst themselves have been tormented in
the flames: Charity is a duty pleasant in the exercise, glorious in it self,
and brings a large, and a rich portion, to those who love, and therefore
espouse, it: For it entitles men to the blessing of God, which, the Scripture
tells us, makes rich: It Is that which the covetous, and sordid men of this
lower World will commend in others, however they may be loath to practice it
themselves: Nay, the Devils in Hell will laugh at us, when we cease to be kind
to our own species: It Is that, without which, all our larger proprieties must
cease; Humane Government and Society must be dissolved: and if a tolerable care
were not taken of the Needy, the greatest Empires would quickly be laid in dust
and ruins, when the Poor are every where more numerous, and consequently,
stronger, than the rich: It preserves Power and Authority among us, whilst
Order, betwixt superiors and inferiors, is, by a suitable allowance to the
different states and ranks of men, not violated, but preserved entire. The rich
cannot live, without the poor; and in common prudence, they ought to be
maintained, that some may do the drudgery of the World: We may as well think,
that Trade and Commerce can be supported with Foreigners without Ships, to
transport the growth and product of our own soil, and bring to us the
advantages of another: That these flying Arks, riding on the Waves, and mounted
by the wings of the Wind, can sail with safety, and directly, to their Ports,
by the steeridge of a Pilot, without common Seamen, that may, with toil and
labor, hoist, or shift, or take in the Sails. What pitiful Trades should we
quickly have in this renowned City, had we not Porters, and Carmen, to bear the
burdens? How would the destroying Plague invade us, had we not Scavengers to
cleanse the Streets? Nay, Great men, and the most delicate Ladies, would hardly
know how to live; but Pestilence, and Infection would seize their Houses, and
the very Air, in which they breathe, had they not those contented, and in their
condition, happy Inferiors, to endure the heat and burden of the day, whilst
they keep all sweet and clean. So that the Rich can no more live without the
Poor, than they can without the Rich. But, besides all this, the Christian
Religion, which we profess, more especially enjoins Charity to its Disciples;
not only that love, which, if sincere, will, certainly, cover a multitude of
sins; but also their Alms and Bounty, to relieve others: That whilst the Rich
enjoy their State and Plenty, none may be starved for want of Bread. There is
nothing more frequent than Exhortations, and Commands, with reference unto
Charity, so commonly dispersed in the New Testament, as well as the Old; that
to repeat them, would be thought an unreasonable lengthning of my discourse,
and reflect disparagement upon so Religious, and Honorable, an Assembly; as if
I preached to such, who could not, or did not, read the Scriptures.

All therefore that I shall at this time farther attempt, shall be discharged
in a performance of two things:

First, In showing how this Charity, in dispersing our Wealth, may, besides our
ordinary and common Alms, be so managed, that we may accomplish the duty we are
directed to in my Text.

Secondly, In persuading to the full and frequent exercise of it; That in the
morning we may, according to our abilities, sow our seed, and in the evening
may not withhold our hands. And these two things I shall endeavor to
accomplish, as plainly, and as briefly, as I may.

First, Let me exhibit the methods and ways, by which we may expend and lay out
our Wealth, that may easily be spared from our selves and families; so as to
follow the sacred direction in this Text, and several other in Holy Writ. And,
here, I need not speak of the various Objects that are rendered capable of our
Charity and Relief: The Government it self is too often forced to beg, though
it is to keep us all in order; And yet it is dismissed without a
Free-will-offering, when we are obliged to it, by way of gratitude, for that
Peace and Security, under the shadow of which we enjoy our own. None can think
they shall want Objects, either deserving or craving their Charity, though they
had a Million to expend in its service, supposing it to be confined to the
limits of this City; if I may measure the whole, by the bounds of that part, in
which I have my lot and residence; though in the computation, we should make a
sufficient, and vast, abatement. Any way that by our Charity we may contribute
to the advantage, and welfare, of the Goods, Bodies, or Souls of others, that
may want help, and accessions, to either, so as it be done according to
proportion, and opportunity, will, in the general, discharge this duty in my
Text.

But, more particularly, there are three channels, into which our Charity,
dispersing it self, may overflow, to the disburthening the fountain, by the
disposal of our large, or increasing, Mammon. And these are Hospitality,
Liberality, and Munificence.

First, We may sow the seed of our Wealth (that I may sometimes use the
Metaphor in my Text) by being hospitable in our houses, and entertainments: And
this does not only support the dignity of men, to set a luster on the different
Orders in the World, by showing a decent mixture of Authority and Wealth, that
uphold each other. But it invites Inferiors, and those that are entertained,
not only to an awful, and affectionate, regard to the hospitable person; But it
causes men to be acquainted with, and to love, each other by keeping up a
decent, and, as far as it is fitting, a familiar, friendship; that so Order may
be the Parent of Peace; and there may be no Jars or Discords in our various
Societies, nor any Complaints heard in our Streets. This virtue of Hospitality,
the Greeks were wont to express by (...), as if it were an essential ingredient
to the hospitable man to make his entertainments, not to flow from necessity,
but delight: And therefore the pleasure that accrued to him from his kindness
to strangers, might be a great compensation for the charge and expense. But
farther yet, The exercise of this Splendid and Noble Virtue, gains not only
Honor and Reputation in the World, but Friends too. And it is not unfrequently
rewarded in this life, by such correspondencies and accessions to our Wealth,
by a kind reception of grateful guests, that more than double our favors upon
our selves. However, if an affable, courteous and generous temper should not
attract to its Owner, its due and just reward here, through any ill Fate, or
the Ingratitude of others; but be upbraided by disingenuity and unkindness;
yet, to be sure, he shall not always miss his recompense: For his large mind
shall, in a future Region, enter where an Estate cannot; and gain a glorious
and eternal habitation, when his most stately Mansion in this World; nay, the
Palaces of Princes shall prove so ruinous, that they can no longer house their
Inhabitants. For the great God has so twisted our interest with our duty, that
he who commands us to use Hospitality, instamping this sacred Virtue upon our
minds, writing it also in large characters in the Old Testament and the New,
has graciously promised to reward these actions; though their native goodness
is a sufficient argument to recommend their practice. If we receive, therefore,
strangers with compassion and courtesy, or supply the wants of those, whose
necessitous inability, or present misfortunes, cannot make provision for
themselves; The most gracious God, whose nature is to be liberal, will not only
conduct us in our Pilgrimage here, but hereafter allot us eternal Mansions,
full of quiet and pleasant repose, when our days shall be accomplished in this
lower World, and the dissolution of our bodies shall put a period to the
enjoyment of those possessions which we have yet the fruition of. It was
always, amongst mankind, not only a piece of good Nature, but Religion, to
provide for, and protect, to the utmost of their power, him whom their Favor
and Hospitality, admitted as a guest into their houses: Hence was it, that the
old man of Giheah, when he had received the traveling Levite into his house,
at such a time as the whole Town were inhospitable, and the Hectoring Blades of
the Sons of Belial, had a resolution to break the Sacred Bonds, not only of
Hospitality, but Chastity too; and to that end, beset the house, crying out
with a large and common throat, Bring forth the man that came into thine house,
that we may know him: offering not only violence to their neighbor, and to
one, whose Function, being Sacred, might have been his protection, especially
when he was a stranger too; but to the natural propensity, and Laws of mankind:
yet the good old man quickly reprehended such rude violence, though with
Rhetoric that might have softened the most uncultivated Clowns, or any except
such Miscreants as these: Nay, my brethren, (says he, ver. 23.) nay, I pray
you do not so wickedly: And he draws his Argument from the common right and
Laws of hospitality; Seeing this man is come into mine house, do not this
folly. Now this is not the only reason to preserve the rights of hospitality
sacred; But the great God (whom all mankind have cause to fear) was not only
angry at their rudeness and incivility; but utterly dissatisfied with, and
resolved to punish the crimes both of their desire and action: And this appears
in the succeeding punishment: For though the merits of the cause are exhibited
to us ( Judges 19.) yet it is apparent, in the next Chapter, that although the
body of the Israelites lost forty thousand in two Battles; the Benjamites had
their Cities reduced to ashes, and their Beasts and Men smitten with the Sword,
and only six hundred escaped this punishment, like Job's messengers, that the
dislike of such crimes might be continued to posterity. Nor is this example
only upon record to encourage hospitality, and deterr men from acting contrary
to the Laws of it; But there are also more early patterns of this Virtue, and
great advantages that did attend it. Abraham exercising hospitality to
strangers, had the honor to entertain three Angels; and not only so, but at
the same time, he had the assurance of a most gracious Promise, that a Son
should yet spring from the barren Womb, in whom all the Nations of the earth
should be blessed, (Genesis 18.). His Kinsman Lot also, because Generosity then,
as it does often now, ran in a blood, was honored with two Angels for his
guests, in the very next Chapter: And though the wickedness of the Sodomites
seemed to blemish and spoil the Feast, in causing this Entertainment to be
Tragical to themselves; yet hospitable Lot was carried from the devouring
flames, and plucked as a Brand, out of this dreadful fire, that reduced the
whole City into ashes: Now lest any narrow and griping Precisian should banish
the excellent use of hospitality, because the generosity of some may be abused
to the debauchery of others, (as some persons have an excellent Talent to
inveigh against the abuses, nay, the very use of things, which, if allowed,
must sometimes prove chargeable to themselves): Lest such, I say, should too
much straiten the Virtue of hospitality, as a thing too loose for a Gospel
Dispensation, and not agreeable to Spiritual dispositions, that must be fed
with a thinner diet; Those two examples, just now fetched out of the Old
Testament, are placed in the New, to encourage that hospitality which its
Precepts do enjoin: Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, (says the Author
to the Hebrews) for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. Nor is this
a duty commanded only to the Clergy under the New Testament, from whom men are
frequently so unjust, as to expect much, where less is given; But all other
persons as well as these are commanded to be given to hospitality, even all the
household and family of the faithful: And therefore S. Paul exhorts all ( Romans
12.13.) to distribute to the necessities of the Saints, and to be given to
hospitality. And S. Peter also backs him in this, by advising men to use
hospitality one to another, without grudging; And as every man has received
the gift, (his proportion of outward and worldly blessings) so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, (1 Pet.
4.9, 10.). Nay, there are not only Precepts to command, and Motives to
encourage to this duty in the New Testament, but Examples too, could I spare so
much time on this Head, to produce them. What should I tell you of devout
Lydia's entertainment of S. Paul, and those that accompanied him? ( Acts
16.15.) of that splendid Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, at which the Mother
of our Lord, our Savior himself, and his Disciples, were so plentifully, nay,
abundantly treated: ( John 2.) Of that Parabolical Supper, in the Gospel, where
the Poor, and the maimed, the halt, and the blind were entertained; ( Luke 14.)
Nor can I stay now to enlarge upon the hospitality of Publius exercised to S.
Paul and his Ships Crew, on the Island of Melita in the Lybian Sea, when they
had suffered a dangerous Shipwreck in a Storm; nor on the common Barbarians
kindness and entertainment, ( Acts 28.). Let the Old Germans shame our little,
narrow, systematical men, and all inhospitable tempers in the World: Of whom,
Tacitus gives this commendation; That convictibus and hospitiis non alia gens
effusius indulget; No Nation was more free and generous in their
entertainments: Quemcunque mortalium arcere tecto nefas habetur; pro fortuna
quisque apparatis epulis excipit. They were almost prodigal in their
hospitality: 'Twas a crime, a wickedness beyond pardon, to bid any one to
depart out of their houses; and every one entertained suitable to his Fortune:
Strangers were welcome, as well as Friends, to the Tables and Beds of the
hospitable man. Amongst the Lucani, who dwelt in Italy, it was a standing Law,
that if a Stranger came about Sunset to any ones house, to desire shelter, and
the Master would not permit him to be received, he was presently to be fined
and punished, as a cruel and inhospitable man; Mulctetur (says my Author) and
poenas luat inhospitalitatis. How splendid and glorious were such Laws, and a
decent and well guarded deportment, suitable to them, in comparison to some
girdled, and strait wasted, people among our selves; when, with them, a man may
sooner break his Neck, than his Fast; who shake their heads at the name of any
old observation, and yet at home keep an everlasting Lent? But alas! such men,
what ever mortification they pretend, are so far off from the principles of
Religion, that they are not arrived at good manners, pretending Temperance, and
Abstinence, and the frequent abuses of open hospitality, to hide their Avarice,
under the Mantle of Virtue, and a more strict Sobriety: And yet all this while
there are none more frequent guests to other men, than such as are averse to
tolerable entertainments at their own houses: But when they are guilty of a
forced rape upon their common inclinations, and honor causes covetousness to
bleed, they give the entertained a Meal, only that they may run the Spit into
their Bellies; and like one sort of cruel Heathens, sacrifice their guests to
their Diana: Alas! how many Treats are made in the World, upon the sole design
of preying on the entertained, filling their Bellies, that they may empty their
Purses; and laying them to sleep, that they may pick their Pockets, or else rob
them of their principles of Honesty or Religion: Nay, too often, men, under the
guise of hospitality, defraud others of their honor and reputation,
sacrificing the good name of a present guest, to those gods of the World, that
may succeed them in the next entertainment, to whom, greater interest commands
greater oblations, whilst they sport together with blemishing the Fame of an
absent Acquaintance: Though by such treachery, among good men, we spoil our
entertainments, and with the Sacrifice of our Guests, we consume our Honor and
our Honesty too. Yet the fault must not always lie at the door of him who is
given to hospitality, but sometimes the guest may spoil the entertainment, not
only by a tatling humor, and a censorious branding; nay, ripping up the
bowels, and unveiling the faults of such acquaintance, as are common to both;
But he may offer injury to the hospitable man, and discourage him in the
exercise of this generous duty, which cements men together by love and
friendship, and relieves those that are in want and misery: And this is done by
unseasonable approaches, or being overcurious in questions and enquiries, or
garrulous and prating in other places, of what passed at the last
entertainment. Antonius Pius asking one, Where he had those Porphyry Pillars?
he presently replied, with some smartness, In alienis aedibus and mutum, and
surdum, esse decet; Under another roof, it is decent to be both deaf and dumb.
But notwithstanding all this, the accidental abuses of a generous hospitality,
must not discourage the practice of so laudable a Virtue; but we must,
according to our stations and abilities, cheerfully receive, civilly entertain,
and courteously dismiss those, whom a solemn invitation, a common accident, or
an urging necessity, makes our guests; according to that of the Ancient Poet,
(...).

And now I might, justly, take occasion to inveigh against those Great and Rich
men in the World, that have shrivel'd Hearts and swollen Purses, who are so far
from being hospitable to others, that they are narrow and unjust to their
Families and themselves. But as I am not willing to offend the Gentile, so I am
loath to upbraid the very Jew. And therefore I come to my second Head; under
which, we may sow the seed of Charity, in a bounteous liberality to those whom
Providence causes to live upon that provision, which the Almighty Lord of the
whole World, demands as a Quit-rent, from those, to whom he has granted an
Estate, it being his peculiar reserve and portion.

Now because the earthy gifts of this World, cannot immediately reach Heaven,
though we raise never so much dust with them (for our goodness extends not to
God, Psalm. 16.2.) The glorious King of the whole World receives not these
reserved Rents himself; which our Blessed Savior plainly intimates, upon
prevision of his Ascension into Heaven ( John 12.8.) The poor ye have always
with you; but me you have not always. Therefore this Virtue of Liberality,
commanded by him who is liberal to us all, is practiced, by being generous and
free to those necessitous persons among our selves, from whom we may expect no
other returns than gratitude, and ingenuity; Parum tribuere ut accipias, magis
venatio appellanda quam donatio, says St. Jerome; To bestow a small Boon (or a
great one either) that we may receive again, is rather a Sale than a Gift.
Therefore the liberal man flies higher, and will not stoop his Charity to such
mean designs; nor will he let his benevolence to Hire: And as he does not thus
bait his Hook, to catch Fish with Money in their mouths; so neither does he
adventure his bountiful dispersions, that his returns may be popularity and
fame; though this will always be an attendant: Because they are too mean
Consequences of Liberality to be its ultimate scope and end: Hence is that
Satirical Declamation of our Savior against that old Pharisaical Ostentation,
where they blew their Trumpets when they gave their Alms; and deemed their
Gifts ill bestowed if their Charity were not published to the World: It seems
Glory and Renown was the great gain which these narrow soul'd Creatures sought
for, and designed this thin and aerie purchase when they gave an Alms;
Therefore the great Lord of the whole Harvest injoins Christians to be rather
secret in their Disposals, and that they should be so far from boasting of
their Charity, and noising it abroad among other men, that (if 'twere possible)
they should not mind it themselves; nor the left hand know what the right hand
did. ( Matthew. 6.3.) Seneca, also, who is an excellent Moralist, to say no more,
(in his 7th. Book de beneficiis, cap. 22.) persuades the Donor to forget his
gift, lest he should be tempted to boast and publish it: And he farther
reflects on those men Qui beneficium, quod dederunt, omnibus circulis narrant:
That proclaim their Charity on the Stage; and in all Societies brag of their
Liberality. That grave Check which Solomon gives to vainglorious Men, may, in
this, gag our Mouths to silence ( Prove. 27.2.) Let another man praise thee, and
not thine own Lips: For, to publish our own virtue, is to become an Herald to
our selves; and vainly to assume the Ensigns of Honor without authority from
those in whose power is the right to confer them: Nay, at the same time, when
we boast our Liberality, we detract from our reputation and bounty too, and
blazoning our actions the wrong way we shadow and disgrace them. Our Savior,
therefore, when he had exercised that work of Charity and Mercy in curing the
Leper, ( Luke 5.13.) he strictly charges him to tell no Man. The case is the
same in Alms and Bounty; endeavoring to be popular by Ostentation, not only
loses the excellence of the gift, and the reward from Heaven; but the public
fame which is this way sought, we defeat our selves of by the manner of
conveyance. For he who publishes his own Charity, does not only render himself
ridiculous, but oftentimes upbraids the Receiver, turning his kindness into an
ensnaring Cruelty, and makes Enemies instead of Friends: Nay, those gifts are
justly to be suspected as designs and traps, that come from such upbraiding
Adversaries. Hence has it been a trite Observation, by its age and use turned
into a Proverb, (...), The Presents of Enemies, are none at all; which wise
Solomon plainly confirms ( Pro. 27.6.); Faithful are the wounds of a Friend,
but the kisses of an Enemy are deceitful. It is no small accession to the
Bounty of Heaven, that all its gifts are freely bestowed; without an
expectation of other returns than due gratitude from the Receivers; And though
the Supreme Being bestows liberally, he never upbraids those on whom he confers
his Blessings: ( Jam. 1.5.) So is it with the truly liberal man, who has the
Stamp of God upon him; he is so generous in his Disposals, the exercise of his
virtue, that as he contemns those pitiful and mean designs to make his gifts
become nets to draw worldly advantages to himself; So does he as much abhor to
betray men by such Hypocritical methods: He mixes no poison in that Cup with
which he willingly refreshes a thirsty Traveller, nor is his compassion a fair
Prologue to any Tragical execution of his Guest, nor does he express his
kindness to another to gain the fairer opportunity to expose him: And, indeed,
Bounty and Liberality have not their accents of honor given them so much from
the greatness of their gifts, as they are raised from the mind and affection of
the Donor; One Oblation, therefore, readily tendered upon a low Altar from a
willing mind, is better than a constrained Hecatomb: Multo gratius venit quod
facili, quam quod plena, manu, datur: That gift, though in it self mean, which
is easily obtained, is much more acceptable than that which is extorted by much
importunity, though the hand be full which at last conveys it. He that bestows
a Charitable gift as great and large as the Language that describes it, if it
be not without many doubts and shrugs, and such groaning Circumstances as
proclaim inquietude, and unwillingness within him, Ambitioni dedit, non mihi,
says Seneca: He gave not to me, but to his own Ambition; And indeed he that
gives a little with a willing mind, is more to be regarded than he that is
scrued to a larger Bounty, and must have an engine to untie his Purse. For as
(...), the riches of the World are the Materials to set up the Liberal man, so
the charity of the person is not altogether to be measured by the dimensions of
the gift, but by the mind and ability of the Bestower: Dabo egenti, sed ut ipse
non egeam; (says the Moralist) Sic succurram perituro, sed ut ipse non peream:
I will give to the necessitous, so as not to bring Poverty to my self; and I
will so relieve him whose misery forces him to petition for redress, that I may
not throw my self into the pity and compassion of others: Therefore the Liberal
man, whom prudence must guard, is not so prodigal of his Bounty, but that he
will reserve a Subsistence for his Family; nor will he be so narrow and
restrained, but that according to his Proportions he will be the author of good
to others. So that as our income should be the measure of our Disbursments, and
our Charity must not exceed the proportion of our Receipts; yet we ought not to
plead a needless poverty when fit Objects implore our relief. For as a profuse
Prodigality is frequently forced to shed tears at its own Funeral; So a griping
avarice is often an invitation to Birds of Prey that follow the streams of a
loathsome Carcass; It executes its Master by his own austerity, and then buries
it self with him, and all that it has done for him, was only to help him buy
Mourning for himself, that he may be accompanied to his Grave with a larger
Pomp, and more sumptuous Solemnity. But he that observes the due mean betwixt
these two opposite extremes, and weighs his Bounty by his Possessions, is not
only blessed in his life, lamented at his death, and entails smiles and
kindness on his Posterity; But he conveys to them, together with his estate,
the just merit of all his Liberality, and the honor and reputation of his
surviving memory. So that now we may easily perceive the rule according to
which our Charity is to be extended, by exercising Liberality according to
proportion: He that has but a smaller overplus, may be as bountiful as he that
wallows in golden dust, and glitters with Indian sands about him. Seneca that
great, and almost Evangelical, author, in his first Book de beneficiis, chapter the
eighth, gives us a famous instance of this: When many of Socrates's Scholars
brought him Presents in proportion to their Wealth; Aeschines one of his poor
Auditors approached him, and told Socrates that he could find nothing worthy of
him, which he might presume to give; And, by this says he, I know that I am
poor. I present you, therefore, with what is only properly mine, and that is my
self; and how slender soever the gift may appear, I humbly beg that you would
receive it kindly, upon this Consideration; That others, whilst they have so
plentifully rewarded your care and pains, have enough left, nay more than they
bestowed. To whom Socrates presently replied, Have thou not presented me with a
great gift? Unless, perhaps, thou accountest thy self little: I will take all
the care I can to return thee better than I received thee: Which the Moralist
applies to confirm the Argument he is treating of, viz. That the measure of
Liberality is the largeness of the mind rather than the greatness of a gift:
And therefore he concludes with this Inference; Vicit Aeschines, hoc munere,
Alcibiadis parem divitiis animum, and omnium juvenum opulentorum munificentiam.
Aeschines, by this noble Donation of himself, when he had nothing else to give
his Instructor, overcame the greatness of Alcibiades's mind, although it was
proportionable to his Riches, and out-shined the most glorious munificence in
that rich Auditory. But since, an example more authentic to us, because more
sacred, is ready at hand, that may, at once, extend the practice of this virtue
to those of the meaner and more inferior size, and argue our Charity to be
then most acceptable unto God when it bears an equal proportion to our Riches;
I shall present it to you, that it may be apparent that the Gospel does not cut
Morality shorter, but extends it to its just length and measure. When our
Savior saw the rich men casting their voluntary Oblations into the Treasury of
the Temple; he perceived a poor creeping Widow casting in two Mites: Upon which
he said, (to record it to posterity) Of a truth, this poor Widow has cast in
more than they all: For all these have, out of their abundance, cast in unto
the Offerings of God; But she, out of her Penury, has cast in all the living
that she has. (Luke 21.1, 2. etc.) So that to be liberal in sowing our seed of
Charity, is to be frank upon all just occasions offered, in a true distribution
according to the proportion of our Wealth, and the Circumstances attending our
Estates and Families. And now every one best knows his Mind, and his Estate,
and the Freedom or narrowness of our own Charity, together with our deliberate
apprehensions of the necessities or merits of those that would receive; We have
heard Injunctions and Examples from the Law, together with Precepts, and
practice under the Gospel; and I must leave to the Religion and Prudence of all
to measure the proportion and allotments of their gifts, suitable to their
Wealth, together with the Objects and designs of their Liberality,

And proceed to the last general way in which men may sow the seed of their
Charity, morning or evening, at every seasonable and fitting opportunity,
accordingly as Objects present themselves: And this is called Munificence, or
Magnificence, and by the Greeks (...), or (...). This advances Bounty and
Liberality higher in its charge, and scatters with a full and larger hand; Yet
the Reward hereafter will infinitely exceed the greatest weight of our
Expenses, even in this. Now this concerns the great and mighty men of the
World, which a little Wealth cannot accomplish, and therefore it is an height
of Charity, that God and Man can only expect from those to whom the Heavens
have showred down larger allowances, and the Earth and Sea have clubb'd
together to make rich. The hospitable and the liberal person relieve only
sudden necessities, and grant supplies for present wants; But the Munificent
man lays Foundations and erects Buildings for future ages, and charitably
entails an Estate on such as are Heirs to very little, or none themselves: And
by such great actions, splendid and renowned, they erect large Monuments to
themselves, raise Pillars to their Immortal fame, on which are engravened the
great Characters of Charity and Munificence, not only for the present age to
read, but for Posterity to gaze, and comment on: From hence proceeded our
public Buildings, together with their endowments, that are not confined to
single Objects, where the memory of the gift does not die with the first
Receiver, but endures as long as Succession lasts, and is continued to many
future ages, since it is not written in Dust but Marble, the very ruins of
which, if by any iniquity or unfortunate mishap they are demolished, will
remain in the Memories of some men as long as the Annals of time shall last
till they become as old as History: Hence came our Magnificent Buildings, our
Churches, Colleges, Hospitals, and the like things that are the glory of a
Land; which Domestics enjoy, and Foreigners stand amazed at, whilst they make
narrow Inspections into them, and carry reports into their own Countries, that
the Examples may be entered amongst the Records of time. From hence proceed our
public Revenues that enrich those Buildings which are an Ornament to
themselves; so that they become open Attestations to the great, transcendent,
and infinite glory of the Supreme God whom we pretend to worship; are
Seminaries, and public Schools of Literature, or a lasting, and perpetual,
relief to the Poor; They proclaim the Religion, and Charity of Nations, and are
acceptable to all that see, or know, them. These Munificent gifts have been so
common in former days, that they, almost, seem needless in our own. So that
Charity, which then ran in one stream, has been forced, by Laws, to divert into
diverse; and yet Channels are opened for more. So that, although, in some times,
the sense of Men's Consciences may be more affected with these things; and they,
who receive more than ordinary influence from the Heavens, are so spurred
forward to Gratitude and returns, that their inward shame may forcibly provoke
them to public acts of Benevolence and Bounty: Yet the reason, when time draws
men toward the dregs and bottom of the World, why they grow more contracted
and penurious, is not because we have fewer Objects, or less Arguments to
prevail for our Munificence, but because men's Hearts and Consciences are
narrowed, being heated and scorched another way, they are shrunk to this, and,
by a long and continued time of tenderness, they now grow hard and brawny: Or
else because their Iniquities abound so that the Charity of many is waxen cold,
and fashionable Vices become so numerous, that they are also very chargeable to
maintain. For though it cannot but be apparent to the World that, in this great
and renowned City, many famous and public Buildings have, like the Phoenix,
arisen out of ashes, and the Charity of well-disposed persons has been sent
abroad to both Universities, and to other Public Places of the Land: Yet the
increase of Wealth must always be an argument to enlarge our Bounty, since the
Necessitous will continue to be more numerous, than the Rich: And should we
take a view of the large and stately Structure of Solomon's Temple under the
Law, and thereby measure the enlarged hearts of the Professors of that
antiquated Religion by those many great and splendid gifts that were amassed
together to complete the building, and the rich Utensils that were contained in
it; we must presently vilify and explode our selves, in the same Periods in
which we magnify and extol them: There are two Churches that yet lie waste in
this City, which Christian men of ingenuity and Purse, methinks, should have
some regard to; (And this I speak with the more confidence, because I have no
Freehold in either); the one bears the name of Christ, the great Savior and
Redeemer of the World (to which two of your Hospitals are specially related:
The other that of the most famous S. Paul, who, being his extraordinary
Apostle, became the Teacher and Doctor of the Gentiles; the posterity of whom
we cannot deny our selves to be* unless we had rather be accounted Jews. The
building these, which are now the blemish, would mightily advance the ornament,
of this City; and far exceed the glory of all the largest Inscriptions, and
height of a Monument. But alas! I am too mean to direct: However, I wish I had
time enough to epitomize Examples of the great Bounty of the Primitive, and
most refined, Christians, in works of Piety and enlarged Charity; although they
were harassed with Trials and Afflictions, yet they liberally dispersed, what
the rage of their adversaries permitted them to enjoy: The Rich and the Poor
(the hard season then requiring it) threw all into a common bag, laying it at
the Apostles feet; and rather became Objects of their own Charity, than others
should want sustenance and relief: And, afterward, when the Sun shined more
favorably on them, they scattered their Bounty, as he did his Rays; In the
morning they sowed their seed, and in the evening they withheld not their
hands; knowing that in proportion to their seed, so would the increase of their
harvest be. But alas! this would be too large a task for me to accomplish, and
too much for you to hear at once: Nay, a Breviary of their pious and charitable
works, might seem only to enlarge our arraignment, and upbraid our neglects.
Let us a little consider the fresh charity of later Ages, especially that which
I am bound to recommend, and that shall be all that I will trouble you with
upon this last Head: And here you must understand the charitable, and
increasing Fund, by the largeness of the Disbursement, which will appear by
this True Report, etc.

All that I need to note from hence is, what is remarked in the Report it self,
that the disproportion betwixt the Revenue and the Disbursements, is an
argument to engage the direction of men's Charity to these most Christian and
Compassionate Foundations. And now I have nothing else remaining, but to exhort
you (according to your abilities) to be followers of the best and most
charitable examples: And, in this, I must crave leave to beg a raised
attention, (though it has been already sufficiently tired) because time
commands me to crowd my materials into a narrow room; and only to mention those
Heads that might be enlarged to fill a Volume. Charity is so great, and such a
spreading duty, that it makes men to be like God himself, who causes his Sun to
shine, and strains his refreshing showers through the Clouds, both upon the
just and the unjust; who gives liberally, and upbraids not the receiver. It
imitates the great Savior of the World, whose Charity to men, was that which
brought him down from Heaven, and was the motive that caused him to mediate
betwixt God and man, that a whole Species might not be eternally ruined. This
caused him to preach his Doctrine on the earth, to go about doing good, and to
endure his Tragical Tortures and Death. It treads in the steps of the holy
Spirit of God, who diffuses the rays of glorious light, and sheds his
influence on all that are qualified to receive it. Charity is an eternal
Virtue, venerable, not only for its excellence, but its age: For as God was
from all eternity good, so will he remain beyond all periods: And, as this is a
Virtue communicated to men, in which he delights, they shall carry it with
them into the most lofty Regions, when they shall be for ever with the Lord;
when Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision and Prospect, and Hope in an
everlasting Fruition. It Is the only way that we have here, by which, in kind,
we are able to make returns to Almighty God for those outward advantages we
receive from him: For our works of Charity, though done in obedience to his
Commands, cannot immediately reach him; no more than bodily and corruptible
things can directly affect, and increase, the welfare of that which is
immaterial and incorruptible: And therefore our goodness (says the Psalmist)
extends not to him; but to the Saints which are on the earth. And as we have
it in the Book of Job; Can a man be profitable to God, as he that is wise, may
be profitable to himself? No certainly: Therefore Charity, that redounds to the
relief of others, does, in the end, return upon our selves: And therefore it is
a means to increase our Estates, and by this the only Objection against it must
vanish: For, says the Author of my Text, Cast thy bread upon the waters, and
thou shall find it after many days. Hence is it, that men are enjoined, in the
Law of Moses, that they should give to the Poor, without any internal regret,
Because (says the Text) for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto (Deuteronomy. 15.10.). And
this promise, after full experience, is repeated and attested by Solomon in his
Proverbs, The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that waters shall be
watered also himself. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack; but he that
hides his eyes, shall have many a curse. And, since my hand is in, take that
also, (Prove. 19.17.) He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord,
and that which he has given, will he pay again. Hence are Alms compared to
Seed, in my Text, which, being sowed, increase and multiply. And this, however
it may be beyond the view of some covetous men, that never were yet generous
enough, to adventure the experiment: Yet S. Paul, upon the foundation of such
Promises, encourages the Charity of the Corinthians, and prays for their
increase upon the account of their dispersion; Now he that administreth seed to
the sower, both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness (2 Cor. 9.10.). Nay, if we desire
Heaven and the Joys above, when death shall deprive us of our beings here,
Charity and Alms are a method to obtain them; For though this way we should
diminish our treasures on earth, yet we lay them up in Heaven; and they are
only Harbingers, to fore-run our coming: Our Wealth is sent before hand, to
furnish and prepare Mansions for us, and the friends we have made by it whilst
we were upon the earth, have sent up their Petitions, in the hands of our
Mediator, that we may be received into everlasting habitations. And therefore,
says he, who has the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, no less than those of
Death and Hell, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
(your decaying riches) that when ye fail, (i. e.) when ye dye) they may receive
you into everlasting habitations (Luke 16.9.). And what wonder can this be to
us? When he that is the Supreme Lord of this World, and has the sole disposal
of the next, accepts our Charity, as a Sacrifice of his own appointment; that
which refreshes, and exceedingly delights, him ( Heb. 13.16.). It is even as
the Incense of our Prayers; it sends a sweet perfume through the Clouds, till
it ascends before the Throne of God: And, therefore, says S. Paul to
Cornelius, Thy prayer is heard, and thine Alms are had in remembrance in the
sight of God: (Acts 10.31.) The truth of which Doctrine he also confirms to the
Philippians (chap. 4.18.) I have received, says he, the gifts that were sent
from you; a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God; And as his desire,
before, was to receive their Charity, that fruit might abound to their own
account; so it immediately follows, that God should supply all their need
according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. Indeed the exercise of
Charity to those that are in want, is an exemplification of that rule of
Justice, given by our Savior, to do to others what we would they should do to
us, if our circumstances and conditions were exchanged; a rule so applauded by
the reason of mankind, that no person of sense can oppose it: Alexander Severus
so highly valued it, that he caused it to be proclaimed by a common Crier; to
be written on the Walls of his Palace, and public buildings, (as Lampridius
tells us in his Life, cap. 43.). To conclude, then, this long Discourse in a
word; We all profess our selves to be Christians, and we have plainly heard,
that our Religion obliges us to more especial acts of Charity and Bounty; and
this not only by peremptory Commands, but we have Examples enough of it; and
all is attended with Arguments and Motives fully sufficient to persuade to it.
And because ours is, for the most part, a suffering Religion, and it is under
God, the Goodness of our Prince, and the Laws by which he still governs us, and
the Religion and Courage of his subordinate Magistrates, that free us from it
at this time: yet no man that is a true Professor of Christianity, is able
always to secure himself: Nor can any Ensurers in the World, give us security,
that we shall not stand in need from others: Charity, therefore, to
impoverished persons, that are modest, and in distress, will be a probable
security to us for the future. Finally, add to all these numerous, begging
Arguments, That the great God, whom we worship through Jesus Christ, has, by
the publication of the most glorious Gospel, freed mankind from all those
numerous and chargeable Ceremonies, and Sacrifices, pretended to be obligatory,
either by Jews or Gentiles, which consumed the Time and the Wealth of those
which were devoted to any Religion; by this enabling us Christians to be more
expensive in our Charity and Bounty; and this is a return he expects from us
for all our plenty that we do enjoy; and this he commands, and requires of us,
according to proportion; that so we may have our more spiritual Sacrifices
accepted by him through the beloved Jesus Christ, the most good, compassionate,
and charitable man that ever was here upon the earth; who being, also, God
blessed for ever; To him, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, let us render,
as we ought to acknowledge due, all possible Praise, Adoration, and Obedience,
now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

