PLAIN-DEALING. OR, A Second Dialogue between Humphrey and Roger, As they were
returning home from Choosing Knights of the Sheir to Sit in PARLIAMENT.
Roger. WEll overtook Neighbor, I see you are not a man of your word; did not
you promise me when we last met, that you would Vote for our old Members that
sat in the last Parliament, to be Knights of the Shire, to sit in the
Parliament at Oxford?


Humphery. I thought to do so, but by my brown Cow, I have been over-perswaded
to the contrary by my Landlord and his Chaplin Mr. Tantivie, and a pestilent
fine man, I think they said he was a Courtier, that lay at my Landlords house,
and what with Arguments and Wine, they drew aside my heart, and made me Vote
against my Conscience.


Rog. 'T was ill done neighbor Numps, but all their Artifices would not do, we
have carried it by some hundreds, for our old Members, that stood so bravely
for their Country.


Hump. I am glad on it with all my heart, for to tell you truly, though my
Landlord had my voice, the old Members had my heart, and i will never do so
again.


Rog. I hear most of the Counties in England are of the same mind, and all the
Burgess-Towns, Cities, and Corporations; but what arguments could they use to
alter thy mind?


Hump. First I say, They made me continually drunk, and then my Landlord used
me so very civilly, and gave me so many good words, and fine promises, what a
kind Landlord he would be, that I forgot all your Instructions; and methought
he had invincible Arguments to persuade me.


Rog. What were they?


Hump. Nay, I have forgot them, but I thought no Counselor at Law nor any
Bishop, could have contradicted them: I now remember one Argument that took
with me; you know I was ever for the King, and he told me the King did not love
the Old Parliament Men, and therefore I should not Vote for them: But I being
bold, asked him how he knew that?


Rog. What said he then?


Hump. Why he laid me as flat as a Flounder, that is, he fully convinced me,
for, said he, if the King had loved them, he would not so soon have Dissolved
them; I think that was demonstrable.


Rog. It Is no matter though the King did not love them, they loved you and your
Country, and you should so far have loved your self, as not to have betrayed
your own Interest. What said the Courtier?


Hump. Faith he said not much to me, but I suppose he had said enough to my
Landlord.


Rog. And was this all your Landlord said to you? had you nothing to say for
your self? you spoke rationally the last time we were together.


Hump. Nay, I was forward enough to speak I Will assure you; And I told them, I
was sure our old Members would be for the rooting up of Popery, and would stand
stiffly against Arbitrary Government.


Rog. What said they then?


Hump. My Landlord laughed at me, and told me I had been among the Presbyterian
Whiggs, and bid me have a care of being cheated into Rebellion, by those two
words, Popery and Arbitrary Government: Then he showed me a printed paper, I
think he called it, The Mistress of Iniquity, which showed as plain as the Nose
on my face, that in 41, they did as we do just now, and that by that means they
brought one K. to the Block, and so they would now do by our present Sovereign;
God bless him.


Rog. Alas! alas! and that frighted you, did it?


Hump. Frighted me, ay marry did it, and I think 'twould affright any honest
Man; you know I was always a Kings-man, and I would be taught to join with
those, or give my Vote for such, who under the notion of crying against Popery
and Arbitrary Government, would pull down the King and the Bishops, and set up
a Commonwealth again.


Rog. Well Nump, I believe thee to be an honest Man, and there be many in this
Land of thy condition, that are not of any great reach in policies and tricks
of State-Mountibanks, and so may be easily persuaded upon false grounds, to
betray your Country, your liberties, lives, and Religion.


Hump. Nay, that was not all, he then read another princed Paper, with an hard
name, I think it was Hercules Rideing, or something of Jest and Earnest, which
he laughed heartily at, and me thought there were some things called Querks,
which made a gingling and noise in my Ears, that I thought there was some Spell
in it, for it seemed to join with Mrs. Iniquity, to make all the Presbyterians
Traitors, and most of the people of England mad and factious.


Rog. There is as much heed to be given to those Pamphlets, as to the gingling
of Morricebells: They are hired to set the people together by the ears, and are
Papists in Masquerade; things set up to affright the people out of their
senses, with the buy-leave of 41; Wise Men see through them, Honest men are not
affrighted at them, and Fools and Knaves only are led aside by them.


Hump. But don't we do now as formerly, before the last Wars? don't we run just
in the same steps as they did? who caused all the late bloody doings? as those
Pamphlets would make us believe?


Rog. I cannot tell what they mean by Roads and Highways: pray Hodg, we are
now rideing in the High-road to the next Market Town; before the last Assizes,
in this very Road 3 or 4 Highway-men rode in it too, and robbed several persons,
and committed many villainous Murders, and were at last caught and Hanged for
it; now therefore, because we are Rideing in the same Highway, must we Honest
men be accounted Thieves, Robbers, and Murderers, and all other who travel
this Road? that is an hard case.


Hump. You say right Neighbor Hodg, though the Gallows stands in the Highway,
we need not run our Heads against it, nor do any thing to deserve it.


Rog. But to speak plain to your capacity neighbor, if the Court be corrupt,
and that those who should do justice and maintain truth, who should only seek
the good of the King and his Kingdom, (for the ones good is inseparably the
others) and should Act According to Laws; do notwithstanding all things quite
contrary, and by Unjust and Undue, Unlawful, and Sinister ways and means, seek
to oppress and enslave the people, and to set up Arbitrary Government, and the
Religion of Rome, to maintain their own Greatness and Interests; shall not the
People who feel the Burden and groan under the Oppression, and having no other
way of Redress but a Parliament, desire and Petition for one, and cry out
against such Illegal and Unjust Proceedings, but presently they must be termed
by these Fellows; Seditious, Factious, and such as would Dethrone the King, and
pull down the Bishops? Then all men must hereafter be afraid to Speak, to Vote,
or to Petition, against Grievances, lest they should be termed Rebels,
Villains, and Traitors: and to run the same Rode of Forty One.


Humph. Indeed Neighbor it is hard, not to wince when the Beast is hurt; yet I
have basted my Horse for doing it.


Rog. Such Asses would these Fellows have English men to be; still to be
subject to their Tyrannical Cudgels* but God be thanked, the Nation generally
are of another mind, and what ever these Trumpets of 41, sound in the ears of
the vulgar, there is no such complexion in the Affairs now on foot, as in
those of 41, excepting what lies on their part; and in that also I think there
is this disparity, that we have a more evident cause of complaint, our
Grievances being more than ever, and especially by that of the first Magnitude,
the apprehension of a Popish Successor.


Hump. Nay, I had that up too, and then Mr. Tantivy took me in hand as to that,
and made it a clear case, that 'twas no better than downright Treason, to
deprive the D. of the Crown, or to put a Bar in the way of his Succession:
nay, he used the Presbyterians old Text to me, as I heard they made use of it
in 41, to a quite contrary sense, Curse Meroz, and sufficiently ban'd all such
as Enemies to the Church of England, as was against his succession, whatever
religion he is of.


Rog. I wonder that Mr. Tantivy expects to get by it, to be made a Prior or an
Abbot: does he imagine a Popish Successor will not bring in his own Religion?
sure he cannot be such a fool: or is he so very fearful of the dissenting
Protestants, that he will adventure the setting up of the Mass, rather than
shake hands with a Presbyterian? and yet we see many of the Clergy, and those
of the leading Cards, of Mr. Tantivy's opinion: which is beyond my apprehension.


Hump. I do believe Mr. Tantivy will never burn for his religion, that is my
opinion, but I assure you, he fears no more the coming in of popery, than I do
going to Bed.


Rog. Some men are wilfully blind, and such may be the first that would repent
the bringing in such a Successor, as the Men of Norfolk, who set up Queen Mary,
were the first that had the honor to be her Martyrs.


Hump. I am sufficiently convinced, that a Popish K. of Engl. will not be very
acceptable, and that we should be in danger of turning Papists and Idolaters,
or of being burnt for Heretics: I don't much care to have my name in a New
Book of Martyrs, with my picture encompassed with Faggots and Flames, I am
affrighted at the thoughts of it.


Rog. And yet you put it to the venture, in voting for one you know not, one
set up on purpose by interest, to put by our good and trusty old Members.


Hump. I confess I deserve to be half-hang'd; but good Neighbor, what is this
Arbitrary Government so often spoke of? my Landlord asked me what it was, and
in good faith I could not answer him, but Mr. Tantivy said, it was the
Government of a proud, malipert, Arbitrary, Presbyterian Clergyman in every
Parish, and that the people are setting up again.


Rog. So all the Tantivies in England interpret it, but Neighbor, I Will tell
you what I mean by it in a Word, It is a Government of the Prince or Monarch,
by his own will, without circumscription of Laws, and then God-buye to all the
peoples privileges and properties, and our long-kept Liberties, so dear to all
true Englishmen, and then you may be made the princes slaves, to bear the
burdens of his Janissaries, and not dare to complain, not suffered to call any
thing your own, to pay Taxes, Impositions, Gabells, Excise, at your Princes
pleasure, and not by your own consent: The Prophet Samuel very lively describes
such an Arbitrary King, to the Israelites, in the 8th. Cha. of the first Book
of Samuel. He is such a one that will take your Sons to be his Servants, to
attend on his Chariots and his Coaches, and to be his Footmen and Lacquies,
whether you will or no; your daughters to be his Cooks and Drudges. He will
take your Fields, your Corn, your Houses, and all you have at his pleasure; and
to satisfy the rapacious humor of his Courtiers and Concubines: He will seed
his Servants with your bread, and cloth them by your labor and toil, what you
sweat for they shall enjoy. He will rule you with an Army, with Captains of
thousands, of hundred and fifties, and you shall not dare to complain of
Oppression, and this Neighbor, is the true Character of Arbitrary Government.


Hump. O Neighbor, my heart trembles! what a Rogue was I to Vote at Random,
when our all lies at stake: I did not think we had put such a Trust into the
hands of our Parliament Men; I thought, alas! as many do, that we chose only
for Form-sake, and that they were only called to Parliament to give the King
money, and to do what he would have them; and we have paid so many Taxes
already, and given so much money, that I wished in my heart there would be no
more Parliaments in my days.


Rog. You see you were mistaken, it is the greatest trust that can be put into
the hands of men, when we send to the Parliament our Representatives, for we
entrust them with our Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Property, all we have;
for they may preserve them to us, or give them from us, and therefore
Neighbor, we ought to be careful in whom we put this great trust, and not to
be persuaded by our Landlord, or by any flattering Courtier or Horn-winding
Tantivie of them all, to choose those whom we know not, and are not well
assured of, and that we dare not Confide in.


Hump. I hope generally these who are now chosen to Sit at Oxford, are Men of
sound Loyalty to their Prince, and of the Established Religion of the Church of
England, of honest Principles, and lovers of their Country.


Rog. Such as fear not the Calumny of Pamphleting Whislers, and will, if they
may be permitted, heal our Breaches, maintain our Religion, and secure our
Property, and privileges: And God in Heaven bless them, and prosper their good
Endeavors, and so Neighbor Goodnight.


Hump. And let all good people say Amen: Farewell.


FINIS.
London, Printed for T. B. in the Year, 1681.


