The Plain Truth. OR, A Lenitive for the CLERGY.
By one Pantophilus.
IT is manifest that we in this Nation are in a disquiet, and in an
uncomfortable posture. Now as it behooves every man to have a well-grounded
calmness in his own breast; so we ought, by all good means, to promote it in
the Church of God where we live: If I had not a true Desire to further this, I
had never set Pen to Paper this way. But having looked upon most of the Books
and Pamphlets, that have been sent abroad for these several years, especially
since the Press was at liberty, such I mean as concern Religion, I have with
Grief observed a Fatal Ferment in most of them; The Wise God having seemed to
leave us to our selves, foolishly to ruin one another. Each Book and Pamphlet
being pregnant with preternatural heat against the Opposite Party; each Company
and Discourse employed in unkind reflections upon others: yea, matters are come
to that pass, that even among the Clergy, it is rare to see the Gown and Cloak
walk or sit easily together; and which is worst of all, the Pulpit is abused by
some on all sides to cast Oil into this woeful Flame. I have made it my Prayer,
that the God of Love and Peace would calm this Fury; and in my converse have
constantly endeavored it; and finding this Fever still to continue, resolved
to deliver my Thoughts in Writing to the same end, with all serious plainness.

The Parties disagreeing in Religion in this Kingdom may be reduced to four
heads.

1. There is the Established Church, consisting of the Clergy and Laity that
approve of full Conformity in the Rites and Discipline settled by the Laws of
the Land.

2. There are the Papists, who differ from this Church in many great Doctrins,
in many material points of Worship, and with an inveterate enmity. These are
the most formidable Enemies to the Church aforesaid; partly by reason of their
Foreign Alliances and Dependencies, and partly by the encouragement they have
from a Presumptive Heir. And they are the most irreconcilable also, partly by
reason of their avowed Principle, That their Church cannot err, and
consequently are fully concluded against any Reformation in it; and partly by
their constant practice of Equivocations and Dispensations, which renders it
impossible to trust them. And therefore these Essays pretend not to include
them.

3. There are the Non-conformists strictly so called; which are those of the
Clergy and Laity, that agreeing with the Established Church in the substance of
Doctrine and Worship, yet differ in the Rites or Manner of worship and in
Discipline. And under this Head may be ranked those called Presbyterians,
Independents and mere Anabaptists. Now these being so nearly Allied to the
Established Church, might expect far other treatment from them than the
Papists; but that there fell out some years since, a Civil War in the Kingdom,
wherein these two parties proved opposite to one another, and the former were
vanquished by the latter. And this I conceive has heightened the Enmity far
above the matter of their Real Difference, this Party in Religion, though
doubtless they could be glad to have their way, yea each one their own way
settled; yet they could be contented (some rash and furious Persons excepted,
whereof there are some in all parties) to be safely United with the Established
Church, or quietly suffered in their own practice. Neither have they any
Foreign Dependencies, nor any Principles that lead them to Sedition, as
appears by their quietness under great provocations, while the other sort, the
Papists, cannot be quiet, when no body troubles them.

4. There are others amongst us, different from all the former; such are
Atheists, Socinians, Pelagians, Quakers, Ranters, Fifth-Monarchists and other
Heretics; now these though their Principles are pernicious to themselves and
others, and therefore fit it were, some Course were taken to convince them or
restrain them; yet they have no Foreign Helps or Confederacies to create much
danger to our Public Peace. But these are so greatly opposite, either to the
Established Doctrine, or Substantial Worship, that as there is no likelihood of
their Union, so these Papers are not concerned further with them. So that this
Endeavor is intended chiefly for the First and Third sort, which are nearest
akin.

And to bring down the matter to our present Case, it is found out, by Our
King, Parliaments, Judges, etc. That there has been, and yet there is an
Hellish Plot amongst these Papists, to destroy his Majesty, to overthrow the
Protestant Religion with all that profess it in the Kingdom, and to set up
Popery. Immediately upon this Alarm, as the Civil Magistrates were trying the
Criminals, so the Clergy both the Conformists and the Nonconformists directed
their Discourses to expose that Treacherous and Bloody Religion, and to
establish the people in our own. And being both justly bent against the Common
Enemy, there appeared some more mutual kindness toward one another than
before; and some lovers of Peace, that mourned for the loss of that Hopeful
Juncture in 1660, when most Men's Minds were very prone to Unity; and also the
loss of that other in 1665 and 1666 when the Plague and Fire had softened our
Spirits; They did now in 1678 renew their hopes, that this common danger would
greatly tend to the healing of our Divisions, when on a sudden in 1679 without
any known Occasion the Public Clergy begin to abate their keenness against the
Papists, and instead thereof fall to batter the Non-conformists from Press and
Pulpit; and would pretend that there is more danger from Separation, than from
Popery: and some of them, I hope it is the weakest of them, fear not to
profess, they would rather be Papists than Presbyterians; which I am very
certain, no true Protestant will say, except he be blinded with Malice or
Ignorance. And on the other side, many Censorious Non-conformists put the worst
interpretation on this carriage, and suspect their opposites inclinable to
Popery it self; they do not say indeed as the former, that they had rather be
of the Church of Rome, than of the Church of England; but they know well
enough, that neither of them must expect that quarter from the Papists, which
they have found from one another: but yet they exceed the Bounds of Charity in
their harsh Reflections. And thus they stand pelting at one another in an
uncomfortable and ominous manner, while their Common Enemy is ready to swallow
both, and what honest heart can be Spectator of these things without Grief and
Astonishment.

Now if the Discovery of the Cause of a Disease be any step to the cure of it,
I verily believe that want of Christian Love or Charity is the Real Cause of
this fermentation. This has been at the Root of these miscarriages all along,
though something else concur's therewith to produce the present paroxysm. It
cannot be denied, that these have been mutual provocations given; one party
has been moved to see their Freehold and Opportunities of Service therewith,
taken from them (in their Judgments) without cause, and contrary to those
Assurances given them, which they thought might be relied on, and to see their
Brethren possessing them without Remorse or Pity: and then to ^ind themselves
exposed, reproached, prosecuted, imprisoned and undone; and this very much by
the instigation of the Governing and other Clergy. The other party offended
with the preaching of the Non-conformists and many peoples Respects unto them,
and with the sharp Reflections of some among them. But now Christian Love might
have prevented or abated much of this, and so it has, with many wise and
charitable persons of either party.

Certain it is, that while we are in this imperfect state we shall not all see
with the same clearness, and perhaps there are no two persons in the World,
that have the same sentiments in every thing; much less can it be expected in
points now controverted amongst us. Each party professes that they proceed
sincerely according to their best Understanding, the one in conformity, the
other in Nonconformity, must the one be judged now to comply, or the other to
dessent against his conscience? God forbid. Now here comes in the Use of
Christian Love, which when it is once rooted in the Heart, it will incline the
Governors of the Church so to calculate their Laws, Injunctions and
Impositions about things indifferent, as may be easy and not grate upon Men's
Consciences. It is Paternal Love that induces many a Wise Father to abate his
weak or sickly children in many matters, which otherwise he might reasonably
require of them, and to connive at many of their lesser Faults; and such kind
of Love, the Governors of the Church should bear to all that are under them.
And it is not only Charity but Prudence, For these cannot choose but know and
see, that violent courses never beget any kindly compliance, and that all their
severities have exasperated far more than they have reclaimed, and the same
charity should teach the Non-conformists not to envy their honors or profits;
and also to think that the imposers did judge the foresaid Rites etc. to be
most useful for the common good. For Charity hops all things possible,
believes all things credible, and bears all things tolerable; Charity
thinks no evil.

But to come to the inferior Clergy; without doubt the great Zeal we should
burn with, should be of saving men's Souls: and in order thereunto that we open
to them the Necessary Mysteries of the Christian Religion, that we urge them to
Repentance toward God and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that we disgrace
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and that we promote Sobriety, Righteousness and
Godliness with all our power, in a word, all our Sermons should be a kind of
commentary on Our Lords Prayer, the Commandments and the Creed; but alas! how
many of each party, employ their time and parts in debating, confuting,
exposing and condemning their opposites in point of Rites and ceremonies, each
party charging the other with debauching their consciences for the sake of
Reputation or Lucre, which is the most Malicious Accusation that can be
invented in the case. What is it, but want of Christian Love that prompts to
this proceeding; what else should bewitch those men, that agree in the Doctrine
of the Divine Existence against Atheists, in the Doctrine of our Saviors
Person and Natures against Arrians, Socinians and others, in the Doctrine of
Gods Grace against the Pelagians, that agree together in Doctrine and Worship
against the Papists, and in all other Doctrines and Duties that are necessary
to Salvation; and yet, as if we were possessed with a Spirit of Opposition, we
let all these things be silent, and still in our Discourses and in our converse
we begin at the wrong end, and presently enter into debate about Ceremonies and
Government, there can scarce a company of Conformists be met together, that can
find any Subject to enlarge upon, but about the Non-conformists; and much alike
is it with many of the other party; and if men did observe themselves well,
such converse concerning one another is seldom managed without breach of
Charity, wresting the sayings and putting the worse Construction on the
Actions, if not plain bearing false witness against each other. Now Christian
Love teaches quite other things; it inclines the Mind to think the best of
every body, to interpret doubtful words or actions in the very best sense they
can admit, to speak of others most favorably, and in short to love every one
good or bad, as our selves.

The cry for Unity and Uniformity is very great; the meaning whereof is only
this, you must renounce all your Principles and Practices that are repugnant to
ours, that we may be one, and this is pressed from our present danger from our
common enemy; but can any danger excuse a man in doing what his Soul tells him
is a Sin? the least evil of Sin (whether so really, or only so in my judgment,
all is one to me) is not to be done to prevent the greatest penal evil in the
World. Would not Riches and Honor have tempted them? would not Reproach and
Poverty have urged them all this while, to abandon their uncomfortable
opinions, if they could have done it honestly; if they could have played the
Hypocrites, which yet is the Sin they are often charged with, they would surely
have winked and swallowed what is required of them before this day.

But now, if in stead of this Unity, or rather as the proper way to it, we
would pray for the Resurrection of Christian Love, and sincerely endeavor the
practice and expression of it. If we would begin to think, and to speak kindly
of and to one another; if we would vindicate one another as far as we can, and
by our Council and Example teach our Friends and hearers to do the like, we
should insensibly come nearer together, and with calmness and friendship
discourse our selves into some Tolerable Unity. For it is most plain, that our
differences are swelled with the Animosity of either party; there being among
both of them more material points than these wherein they differ from one
another, but Love covers a multitude of Sins.

Let us then in large our Charity; let us reckon there may be and are many
Upright and Holy Christians on either side, and those whom we shall for ever
embrace in the world to come; let us visit one another and freely converse of
those great things wherein we are fully agreed; let us seriously contrive how
to promote real Piety, and how to withstand our implacable Enemies; let us not
bite and devour one another, lest we be devoured one with another.

It is a vain thing to say, it is not fit that the Established Church who are
in Power, Possession and Authority should bow to their Inferiors, who should
rather yield to them; for the things that have occasioned this sad breach, are
in the judgment of the imposers, indifferent whether used or not, before the
imposition of them; and they know that the Church of Christ did, and may
subsist well enough without them; but now in the judgment of the Dissenters,
they are sinful, and they do unfeignedly conclude them such to themselves,
according to their best understanding. And now, which party is fit to relent,
or can abate, judge you; are not Kings in Supreme Power and Authority? yet how
many Princes have stoopt something for the Repose of their People; our Church
claims no infallibility, why may she not therefore open her Bosom to so many
Protestants, as well as formerly she did, in her Liturgy and Ceremonies to win
the Papists. And certainly such condescension would come better from the Church
Rulers and by their mediation, than from the Secular Power, and would be the
likeliest means to heal a Distracted Nation.

And of this they may find the best examples, to wit of the Apostles
themselves, who being Governors in the Church, though they expressed themselves
severely, against such as imposed either their false Doctrines or unnecessary
Rites upon others, yet we shall find them gently treating and condescending to
Honest Christians, that were sound in the main, though unsatisfied in other
points; I hear men still crying out, it is nothing but Obstinacy and Humor --
those that Dissent ought and might satisfy themselves and submit; but might not
the Apostle Paul have replied so on them, that observed days and durst eat only
Herbs, they may if they will be satisfied of their Liberty, and abandon their
conceit, that so much troubles the Church -- But considering, that they did eat
and did observe days to the Lord, he rather advises to a mutual forbearance,
by the exercise of Christian Charity and Love.

But the common objection remains, the Rulers in the Church know not what will
satisfy; or at least, what concessions are likely to gratify any considerable
numbers; and perhaps the Non-conformists have been too shy in making proposals;
for, I think, it is better to err in too much plainness and openness, than in
too much caution and prudence. But alas! These Rulers know well enough, where
the Dissenters are pricked; they know, that if the Orders conferred in the late
times were made valid, when many a good Scholar was educated in a
disadvantagious Opinion of Episcopacy, and knew not where any one Bishop was in
the Nation to apply themselves unto, how many this would bring into the
Established Church. That, if the Declaration about the Covenant were abated;
their declaring their assent and consent forborne; no other Subscription
required, save to the Doctrinal Part of the Nine and Thirty Articles; no Oaths
imposed, but of Allegiance and Supremacy; the Liturgy only recommended, and the
Ceremonies left indifferent; how many would these few concessions be likely to
prevail with. But then if withal, the Inferior Clergy were entrusted with
some measure of Authority, so far as is necessary for the Honor of Gods
Ordinances and Good of the People; if serious and constant Preaching and
Catechizing were more encouraged; if it were evident, that the Reverend Bishops
did sincerely embrace and countenance the most Learned, Holy and Industrious of
the Clergy and Laity in their Diocesses; this would entirely win the Hearts of
all Honest Men, and reduce those who have been exasperated, and violently
driven into some practices that seem inconsistent with their old Principles.
For Man's Nature is so molded, that Love and Kindness have the most powerful
operations upon it; and a courteous expression will make the Sword fall out of a
man's hand, who in heat of opposition would rather dye than yield.

However if this Blessing be too great and good for us, this I abide by, that
during our sad distances in these matters, we are all bound by the Royal Law of
Christ, to love one another sincerely, and in all occasions to express the
same; and I purposely repeat it, to think of each others Persons and Actions
with charity, to speak of them with charity, and to Act accordingly toward one
another in every instance with charity. But you will say, our charity must not
be blind; we must not call evil good, and good evil; I grant this, but
withal I averr, that Charity is not severe, is not censorious, is dim-sighted
in the faults of others, and curious in our own: do but put the best
construction on each others words and actions, and maintain the most favorable
opinion of each others Persons and Designs, and this will create the sweetest
calm in your own Souls, and insensibly tend to our Peace and Union; and without
this, let us be never so Orthodox, never so Zealous, never so high or low;
never so Dignified or so Oppressed, we want one of the greatest Excellencies of
God, one of the greatest Accomplishments of Men, one of the greatest Graces of
Christians, for when once our inveterate disease has spent it self, and that
we are once wearied with our straglings, and come to a consistencie of mind; we
shall see that we can never be safe or happy, till by all possible Abatement on
the one hand, and all possible compliance on the other, we be firmly linked
together in one Soul, and one Body. God of his great Mercy pour down the Spirit
of Humility, Sanctity and Charity into all our Hearts! Amen, Amen.

March 4. 1680/81.
LONDON. Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Three Bibles and Crown at the
Lower end of Cheap Side. 1681.


