A REPLY TO A Paper Entitled: An Answer to the Pretended CASE Printed
concerning the Navigation of the River WYE, in the County of Surrey, by showing
the true state thereof.
THe Design of making the River Wye Navigable, was in Proposition many Years
before the Undertaking thereof. For Thomas Earl of Arundel (Grandfather to the
now Duke of Norfolk) Discourst with the Gentlemen of Sussex and Surry, how to
make a Navigable Cut from Arundel in Sussex, to the Thames by the River Wye,
about 50 Years agone, and took a Survey of that Passage; But the greatness of
the Charge and difficulty of the Work deterred him. About the Year 1625. Doctor
Abbat (Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) being Born at Guilford in Surrey, and
desirous for the Benefit of the Town, to have a River made; caused a Survey to
be taken, but Charge and Difficulty discouraged him also, so that his Grace
bestowed that intended Charity, in Building an Hospital in that Town.

Mr. Pitson having observed in Holland, the Advantage and Art of Navigable
Cuts, and being Discourst by the Inhabitants of Guilford (near whereunto he
dwelt) concerning the Navigation of River Wye, assured them the thing was
Feasible; whereupon they Requested him to undertake it, and Procured an Act of
the then Pretended Parliament for the doing thereof, which he did. And the Work
being too great for Guilford to go through with, they Assigned their Power by
the said Pretended Act, to Pitson, Scotcher, How and Waltham. How and Waltham
Released to Pitson and Scotcher.

Sir Richard Weston was under Sequestration, by Sir Richard Ouslow, and other
the Commissioners as a Delinquent, and Recusant, upon Supposition that he had
been in Arms at Hereford, which Mr. Pitson satisfied the then Powers was not
true, and so helped him off his Sequestration for Pretended Delinquency.

After which Sir Richard Weston proffering for 6000. l. to perform the Work, it
was Agreed he should have half the Profit for his Charges, and they furnish the
other 3000. l. and took a Mortgage of the Manor of Sutton for Security of his
Performance, but he failing sold his Moyty to Pitson and others, for 3100. l.
more. And before the River was made Navigable, Pitson laid out above 10000. l.
and Sir Richard Weston was Reimburst every Farthing he could pretend to have
laid out. And though a Son of Sir Richard Westons, undertook to proceed upon
his Fathers beginnings, yet he also Failed, and Pitson finished the Cut in 1653.
as is clearly proved in the Court of Exchequer. But whereas that Paper says,
that it is in Proof before the Barons, that Pitson in 1654. had Received above
2000. l. more then his Disbursments; it is so far from being True, that nothing
like it has been offered in Proof there, and the Records themselves will best
decide this Controversy.

Pitson and his Partners had Possession of the River till 1^62. when one
Dickenson a Solliciter finding that part of the Lands Cut through was the Kings
Waste, and that some Land-Owners who had been agreed withal, and received part
(but not all) their Moneys, had not conveyed their Lands to Pitson, took
Avantage thereof in 1662. And got a Lease of some Lands from Lessees under the
Queen, and of others from the Land-owners unsatisfied, and stopped the
Navigation; though diverse Orders of the King and Council, and Annimadversions
of the Court of Exchequer, have severally reproved Mr. Dickensons troublesome
and unresonable Carriage in this Affairs: Yet in hopes to weary Pitson and all
others not Trucking with him, he has continued this Disturbance, that he may
securely Fish in troubled Waters, and what ever becomes of the Client, the
Soliciter being the common Trustee will be a gainer. But because the said Paper
pretends Matters on Dickensons part to be so clearly proved before the Barrons,
it is humbly desired that by what has and shall appear in the said Court of
Exchequer, to be true in Proof, every man's Interest may stand or fall.

The matter depended long in the Court of Exchequor because Mr. Dickenson used
all the subterfuge and evasions imaginable to delay the Proceedings, and
shifted the Intrests by so many Conveyances Leases and Assignments Pendent like
to amuse the Cause, that had not that Court been extraordinary industrious as
well as just, Pitson and Sands, etc. the Cause had been unheard to this day,
which has been Dickensons continual endeavor.

The Notes mentioned in that Paper were obtained when Mr. Pitson was not heard,
but laid in Goal by Dickenson and others (...)derates procurement under Actions
of Two hundred fifty six thousand seven hundred pounds.

(...), That what is said, that Two Bills brought in by Sands and Pitson, were
thrown out, is utterly untrue, for never was any Bill of theirs laid aside, but
as the Sessions determined, the Bills fell with the Sessions, and not otherwise.


