THE HISTORY OF THE Persecutions OF THE PROTESTANTS BY THE French King, IN THE
Principality of ORANGE, From the Year 1660. to the Year 1687.

Written by Monsieur Pineton Pastor of the Church of Orange, and Professor of
Divinity, and Chaplain to his Highness the Prince of Orange.

With a particular Account of the Author's Fall through the Violence of the
Persecution.

Licensed,

Jan. 25th 1689. Rob. Midgley.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street; and Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard MDCLXXXIX.

THE HISTORY OF THE Persecutions, etc.
THE Encroachments of the King of France upon the Principality of Orange, were
the Forerunners of the Persecution of the Protestants there: In the year 1660,
that King making himself Master of that Principality, demolished those stately
Fortifications which were raised by Prince Maurice of glorious Memory, as the
Monuments of his strength and power. For five years the State continued thus in
the hands of Strangers; and God knows great were the Churches Troubles in that
Interregnum. The Romanists, who till now, had kept themselves within the bounds
of Moderation, began now to lift up the Standard of Division, and established a
Fraternity, without the consent or permission of their lawful Prince, and
within a little time grew very powerful by the Money which they drew from all
parts, that so they might more easily oppress the Reformed: They employed their
Money for the purchasing of Converts, which was intended by those who furnished
'em with it. These false Zealots used their utmost skill to corrupt the
Childrens Obedience they owed to their Parents; and they set up a House at
Avignon for the Entertainment of 'em: And if they could not be won by favors,
and milder courses, they served themselves with the Authority of the Officers,
to take them by force.

I may give you some taste of the beginning of our Evils, by the following
Account: A Child of nine years old, whose name was Louis Villeneve, was accused
as guilty of some Irreverence in the Chapel that they made in the Castle: The
poor Child was clapped up in a close Prison, where it spent the night in
continual Cries and Lamentations to its Father and Mother, for their help. The
Sunday following, the Child was brought in open veiw, at the usual time when
the Protestants went to the Temple; and being tied neck and heels together, and
whipped by the common Hangman, which he did with tears and reluctance, being
forced to it by the Soldiers of the Garrison, who were about him; and the Drums
beating at the four parts of the Town.

The Edict about the Relapst, was published at the same time in France. The
Governor of the Castle sent four Guards to bring me to the Castle, thinking to
fright me with this Pageantry of War; when I drew near him, he told me, the
King intended this Edict should extend to the Principality: Whereupon I
answered him, The Edict mentioned only the King's Subjects; that he could not
look upon these of the Principality as such, since they lived under the Edicts
of another Prince, and so could acknowledge any other Laws but his. At this
Answer he flew out in a Rage, and fell a(...) of me* and seeing me resolved
steadily to maintain it, he turned from me on a sudden, You shall quickly see
(says he) who it is you speak to. I was not concerned at his Threatenings, but
the more danger they carried, so much the more firm was I to my resolution: In
effect, a few days after the Papists, upon their Fete-Dieu, not contenting
themselves with their allowed Customs, but endeavoring to Innovat^, by hanging
their Tapestry up, and carrying it farther then the bounds that were prescribed
by the Edicts of our Princes: I opposed 'em so, till they were forced to
return, notwithstanding they came backed with the Authority of the Governor and
his Garrison.

We now began to be forced to continual Disputes, to maintain the Privileges
of our Church; 'twas hardly any longer that we could find Justice with the
Magistrates, though they exercised their power in the Prince's Name and
Authority; for either through particular Obligations, or through base Courtship
to the Governor, they were not touched by the Churches Calamities; and instead
of opposing this tide of Oppression which broke in upon us, they suffered us to
be run down by their Compliances, or the Intregues of State.

Before the Citadel was demolisht, the Romanists carried themselves very
quietly all the time of the Advent, the Lent, and Octaves; and the Priests did
not in their Sermons annimate the people against the Reformed, neither did they
provoke us to Disputes: And if it happened at any time that the Priests spoke
too freely against us, the Romanists themselves used to tell 'em, that this was
not the Custom at Orange, and that therefore they should use Moderation. This
Gentleness held till a foreign Power got ground, and then they quickly altered
their Maxims. And whereas before we saw very seldom any Jesuits at Orange,
they were now saught after in great Zeal, to supply the Pulpits; these
Gentlemen at their first coming (according to their politic Conduct) gained
upon the people, by a free Conversation, and by the outward show of promoting
Peace and Agreement with each other. But before the Advent was half over, they
could no longer conceal their natural Temper, and talked of nothing but of
Heresy and Damnation, and challenged all to the Controversy. This task lay
upon me, which for two and twenty years I discharged by God's assistance, with
some advantage to his Truth, and the confusion of Error.

Had they made use of no other Weapons in their Warfare, then Arguments to
maintain the Dispute, it might then have ended with Joy to me; the Contest
would have been determined without loss, to me, or damage to my Church; nay,
rather it might have reapt glory from the occasion. But the Jesuits found that
this would not do their Work, and therefore they betook themselves to other
courses, whereby they might gain those, whom they moved not by their
Controversy. Hence their Hatred against us was every day working, either by
false Witnesses, by Lying or Cheats; and from this their Design, the
Persecution, was modelled, that we have since seen in France, from the year
1660; and they seemed to be learning the Trade of Cruelty against us, that they
might be Masters at it, when they were to exercise it upon others.

It shall be sufficient for me to give you two instances, wherein they gave
great trouble to our Church: Upon the Birth of Mr. le Dauphin there was Joy all
over France, and 'twas a Custom among us of the Principality, likewise to
observe that Day, which we used to do with more Show and Acclamations than the
French themselves; to testify our Affection to the King, at the end of
November 1661, 'twas concluded upon, that Bonfires should be made, and that all
the Prince's Subjects of either Religion, should rejoice for the Birth of the
Dauphin. The Reformed seemed most affected for the Day, and readiest to perform
those accustomed Solemnities; however, the Joy they expressed upon this Feast,
contributed to their Misfortune, for many were accused of speaking ill of the
King; and the next day nothing was heard of but Crimes and Accusations, without
mentioning the persons whom they accused. They were so well instructed by their
Malice, that I was brought in to the Accusation; and 'twas whispered about,
that I went to Mr. Armand, a Merchant, and to other Citizens, to persuade 'em
not to encourage the Rejoycings; or at least, to vent some dis-respectful
Discourses, which they charged 'em with: Upon this they immediately clapped up
Mr. Armand in a Dungeon, and in Chains, and the rest made their escape by
flight. I cannot here but reflect upon the furious Zeal the Romanists are
inspired with, when they fixed an Accusation upon myself, who that morning in
the Pulpit gave all the testimonies of my Zeal for the Prosperity of the King,
for long Life to the Dauphin; however I was not much concerned at the report,
seeing I found no man durst openly accuse me. I was not the only man in this
matter; the Malice of our Persecutors, who were mightily influenced by a Woman
of ill Reputation, Madam Redonnet, gave great fears to others too of being
brought into the same Misfortune. They suborned false Witnesses. Mr. Itier, and
Roussas were condemned to the Galleys; the latter died either through the
slavery of it, or from the anguish of his mind, and Mr. Itier had his liberty,
by the great application of the late Mr. Zuilychem, who was sent Envoy to the
French Court, from the Governors of the Prince, to demand Restitution of the
Principality. This excellent person did so manifestly convince Mr. de Brienne,
Councellor, and Secretary of State, that as to the matters whereof we were
accused, 'twas all a Cheat, and a malicious Design; so that both the accused;
and he that was condemned to the Galleys, were acquitted; which will be a
lasting Reflection upon the ill Designs of our Persecutors against us.

The second instance I shall give, carried with it equal Malice, but was of
much worse consequence, 'twas this: Upon a Sunday when the Carmelites gave the
Blessing, over against the Church-door, the late Mr. de Bedarrides, an eminent
Counselor, had a Chamber whose Windows looked toward the Church, where it
happened a great many were, and the Church was so crowded that many were forced
to stay at the Door, among whom there were several of the Acquaintance of those
who were in the Chamber at a Collation; there being one in the Room who held
out a Glass of Wine to a Friend of his, to invite him to drink, the people
presently cried out, Sacrilege, Impiety; and laid their Accusation against
those in the Room: they charged 'em with counterfeiting the Priest, and doing
Mockery to their Mysteries, and demanded Justice of the Parliament: This did
not satisfy 'em, but they wrote of it to the Court, and had got such credit to
the Report, that the late Mr. de Besons, Intendant of the Province of
Languedock, was commanded to go to Orange, to enquire into the truth of the
matter, and to send an Account of it. Those who were the accused, were frighted
at what happened, and retired from the State, nor durst ever return till by the
Protection of their lawful Prince. Mr. Besons, according to his Commission,
came to the place; went both to the Altar of the Church, and to the Room where
the Accused were, to see if the Altar and the Room looked to each other, so that
persons might see each other from the Chamber to the Altar; but found, when he
saw the places, that neither could see each other, and that therefore that
Charge of Imitating the Priests, or Mocking their Ceremonies, could not be
intended; but was rather the forced Interpretation of their Malice and ill
Will: However, though Mr. Besons was satisfied in the matter, and was a man of
good Reputation, yet he seemed not inclined to do the Reformed any service in
it; but left 'um under an apprehension that some farther trouble would be
brought upon 'um; yet it is probable, he represented to the Court the Innocence
of the Accused, since nothing more followed but the Decree of the Parliament of
Orange, which condemned 'em to Fines and Banishment. One cannot question the
ill Designs of these false Accusers, when I shall tell you, that a year after
this, making a Visit to Mr. Besons, who was going by Orange, the Carmelites
came to him at the same time, but not having confidence to speak of the matter
while I was with him; Mr. Besons coming out with me when I took my leave, stopped
me of a sudden, and addressing himself to the Carmelites, What do you desire
Fathers? (says he) Mr. de Chambrun is innocent. The good Fathers made a long
Speech to him, showing him the great charge they had been at in the Suit, and
yet the Parliament had not re-imburc'd 'em, which gave great disorder to the
Fraternity. Mr. Besons took 'em up, interrupting 'em, Ye have (says he) taken
up a Cause without good grounds; ye have not done well to these poor People: I
have been at the place, and found no reason for the Accusation; if you have not
wherewithal, you must sell your Chalices, and be more cautious for the future.
Upon this the Carmelites were surpised at Mr. Besens's answer, and the more, I
being there while 'twas spoken. Mr. Besons turning to me, (says he) Have I not
treated them well; these Monks are the most troublesome of Mankind.

After this, upon the Principality's being restored to the Prince of Orange, in
the year 1665, we continued in a pretty good state of Quietness till the year
1672, when the War broke out, and the King of France, by his Edict, seized
again the Principality by Reprizal, and gave it to the Count d'Auvergne: During
the time it was in this Count's hands, there were few things which Malice could
invent, but were practiced against us. The Countrymen who labored to demolish
the Castle, thought good, before they went away, to set up two large Crosses of
Wood, which had been made use of to other purposes about the Magazeen, in the
Castle; they placed one of the Crosses upon the Red Bastion, looking toward
the East; and the other they placed upon the Bastion du Rhone, which faced the
West. These gave Offense, and occasioned us much trouble.

A little while after, these two Crosses were pulled down; and they charged
some men of considerable note with this pretended Sacrilege; but by good
providence the design was found out, for 'twas clearly proved upon the Cure,
Father Omagi, a man of very ill Life, and Ignorant, and of more than ordinary
Malice to the Reformed; who had suborned some young men, to accuse these
persons of Quality with it: However, this hindered not, but that this Priest
pusht the matter on farther; he procured Mr. Aimard (an Advocate in the
Parliament) to draw up a Petition to the King, suggesting many Falsehoods, which
were purposely designed to render us obnoxious; and to put a stop to the
collecting of Money for the Preachers, which was for the Maintenance of the
Pastors, and of the Professors and Governors of the College. I had a sight of
the Petition; and a Friend of mine has still a Copy of it, which possibly I may
publish to the World, to give an instance of the Character of those
Ecclesiastics. But, however, the Petition was not answered; they had other
matters in hand, and this lay by till a more favorable opportunity. This
satisfied not the Priest, he presented another Petition to Mr. le Count
d'Auvergne, who enjoyed the Principality by Reprizal, designing that St.
Martin's Church might be restored to the Papists, which my People possessed by
virtue of the Edicts of our Princes. But the Count d'Auvergne was wise and
cautious, and would not innovate, after he had seen our Princes Edicts, which I
sent him by his Intendant.

I did not so little understand how matters were carried, at Orange, but that I
clearly saw this Priest was not the chief Agent: There was Mr. Jean Jacques d
Obeille Abbot, and Count de Montfort, who was now come to fill up the
Bishopric; he so well insinuated himself into the Peoples affections, by
showing himself disposed for peace, that they thought themselves happy in him,
as the circumstances of the times then were; and that there was now a Bishop at
Orange who loved not Strife and Contention. For my own part, I was not won to
the opinion by those appearances; quickly discovering that the Priest was but
the Bishop's Instrument, to bring his Mischief about; and the event gave
reputation to my conjecture: for the Bishop being a person of good Wit, he
foresaw that the Peace was like to be concluded, and therefore he would not
appear against the Reformed, least when his Highness the Prince was restored to
his Rights, he might repent of his acting against the Edicts of the Prince.

In short, the Peace of Nimeguen being concluded, the Principality was restored
to its lawful Sovereign, according to one of the express Articles of the Peace.
There was upon this great Joy at Orange, in hopes that they might now have a
Calm: but the Spirit of Popery, that is ever wrestless, loves not the soft and
still Wind, which God is said to be in; but quickly brought great Difficulties
upon my Church. The day which was solemnized for the conclusion of the Peace,
afforded no great Joy to the Papists: The Bishop was the first that was
observed to be concerned. The Citizens of both Religions went in Crowds to his
Palace, where the Musketeers did him the honor of giving him a Volley of
Shot: he took it ill of 'em, and looked upon it, as if they did it to affront
him. 'Twas there possibly, that 'twas contrived that the two Crosses should be
pulled down, and the Reformed accused of it. The Citizens had continued three
whole days in Arms, viz. Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, and they were so wearied
in their Attendance, that they all fell asleep, which gave an opportunity to
some to contrive mischief against 'em: For there was an Hermit who had
boasted, that this their Joy would have no long continuance: Upon Tuesday or
Wednesday-night, he took two Rogues with him to pull down the two Crosses. It Is
strange what Veneration the Papists have for Crosses; and yet that they should
so profane 'um, when it is to do 'em service against the Reformed. But there is
nothing sacred or holy with them, but which they will abuse to serve their
wicked Designs; Profanation, Sacrilege, etc. are esteemed nothing, if by that
means they may destroy those who pass, with them for Heretics. We need not go
farther for a proof then the Relation before us: The Bishop, who well knew what
had been done, went full of rage to the two Bastions where the Crosses had been
set up, that he might say, that he himself had seen it: and came down in great
passion, promising that he would revenge it. He wrote to the Court of France,
heightning the Crime, as if their whole Religion was in danger. However 'twas
observed, that those Crosses were set up by the Workmen only, without the
Consent of public Authority; and that they had never been Blessed; so that they
might well be looked upon as things indifferent. But this hindered not but that
it past for the highest Act of Sacrilege that had ever been done. There were a
great many Informations brought in; and whereas the Parliament might easily
have made such an Inquiry as to have discovered the persons, they past it over
as if they were afraid to find out the Agents; and contented themselves to put
out a Decree of the Banishment of John Poudrier; though they had no manner of
Evidence against him: But Tevenon, a Papist, who had assisted the Hermit, and
upon whom the Irons were found, which kept up the Arms of the Crosses, and who
also fled upon the Citation, him they let alone without pursuing him farther.

This Decree satisfied not the Bishop, who never left writing to the Court,
till such time as Mr. de Rouillet sent him word, That he had received order
from the Court, to come with his Troops to chastise 'em for their Offense. A
few Weeks after the Intendant's Secretary came with order, to have the Crosses
put up again, and to set up another in the Marketplace; and in case they
refused to obey, that there should come a Regiment of Dragoons, who were in
Provence, to execute the the pleasure of the Court. They would also have had
the Magistrates among the Reformed, to have been present at the Ceremony in
their Hoods and Habits; which I endeavored all I could to prevent; telling
'em, that 'twas better to suffer any Misfortune, then basely to assist at their
Ceremony. But all that I could do, neither my Prayers nor my Tears could
dissuade 'em: their Cowardice carried 'em from their Duty; and their
Fearfulness made 'em tell me, That I should be the Ruin of the Town. Mr. de
Riomall, who was then at Orange in Quality of Envoy for his Highness the
Prince, opposed it as far as possible; but not having power to prevent it, he
went out of the Town, resolving not to be present at the setting up of the
Crosses. They forgot nothing that might make the Ceremony pompous; they sent
for Music from Avignon; all the Diocese came in; and many came in Procession
from far off, to solemnize this Day; the Town was filled with the Religious of
all sorts; and all the Company went up to the place where once the Castle
stood, to see the Bishop Bless the Cross, who was in all his pontifical Robes;
they came down by the way which shooted down to my House, where the Music
stood, playing for some time; and the Bishop, being near the Secretary, (says
he, in Rallery) Mr. Chambrun will have no reason to complain, being so well
treated. From thence they went to the Marketplace, where they set up a new
Cross with the same Ceremonies.

But all this was but as Lightning that did forerun those cruel Thunder Claps
which did break afterward upon this Principality: notwithstanding the Peace of
Nimeguen, the King of France acted against them, as if he had been in actual
War-against them; he dismantled the City of Orange, sent his Dragoons into it
in 1682, who did miserably harass the poor people there. The Intendant of
Provence caused seven or eight men to be seized there, under pretense of being
Relapst: They seized of the Prince's natural Subjects, who had all along
professed the Reformed Religion; they committed them to Prisons that belonged to
the Parliament of Aix; where, after they had endured great Cruelties, and hard
Usage, some of 'em changed to obtain their Liberty; others who continued firm,
were condemned to Fines and Penalties, and immediately to quit the Kingdom upon
pain of Death. This sort of Cruelty began to startle our people; when no man
could look upon himself safe, though in his own House; they expected daily to
find the Officer at their Doors; and were not delivered of their Fears, till
they heard that Mr. Heinsius was to go in the Quality of Envoy Extraordinary
from L. H. P. to the Court of France, who had very much resented the pulling
down of the Walls. But every one knows the success he had; for they maintained,
that they had right to do what they did: And though Mr. Heinsius proved it
clearly to the Marquess de Croissi, that they had infringed upon the Peace of
Nimeguen, by pulling down the Walls; and that the Principality of Orange was
independent upon France: yet he was forced to go back without Reparation for
the Injury they had done.

And though the Roman Catholics ought to regard this pulling down of the Walls,
as a common Evil, which they were as much concerned in, as we of the Reformed,
yet they made this the Subject of their Joy, and began to create us more
trouble then before: The Priest whom we have before given a Character of,
brought in another Fraternity of Religious, which we had never before seen in
Orange. The Prince's Officers who perceived this Innovation would have very ill
Effects, opposed their Establishment here: But the Bishop who had put the
Priest upon it, took his part, and wrote to the Court of France, of the
opposition which the Prince's Advocate, and Proctor General, had made against
the Establishment of this Fraternity. We know not exactly what Answer this had;
but it is very probable, they encouraged 'em to go on; otherwise they had never
dared to have raised such a Tumult as they did in June in the same year, upon
the Sunday after their Fete-Dieu: For upon that day there had like to have
happened a terrible Slaughter in Orange; this was the occasion of the Tumult:
This Religious Order went in Procession about six a Clock in the evening; those
who were the first that went out of the Cathedral-Church, furnished themselves
with Clubs, and other sorts of Weapons, which they kept under their Robes, to
fall upon the Protestants whenever they met any. As they went they looked on all
sides to see if they could find any. But our Consistory had given particular
Order to the People, exhorting them at the Morning-Exercise, to keep at their
own Houses, so as to give no occasion to these tumultuous People to offer any
Violence. Our People behaved themselves very cautiously upon this occasion: but
the Religious, who chiefly designed ill under pretense of Religion, bethought
themselves of flinging Stones into the Protestants Houses, and upon 'em. The
Hermit, whom I have before spoken of, with a little crooked Fellow called
Delaire, were the forward'st to commit this Violence; and though our People were
extremely provoked, yet they suffered all with great patience: So that these
tumultuous People finding no occasion to execute their wicked Design, there
coming some Harvest-men from Dauphine, who were a great way off of 'em, they
quitted their Order in the Procession, and fell upon 'em with the greatest
violence, knocking 'em down with their Clubs; they on the other side cried they
were Catholics, (as indeed they were;) but all this appeased 'em not; they
dragged 'em along the Streets, tore their Clothes, and had it not been for some
of the more moderate of the Papists, they had run them through with their
Swords, which they had under the Robe. This Tumult stopped the march of the
Procession. The Bishop was in the Church, just following the Host; he knew
nothing of the occasion of the Disorder, and they who were next to him, told
him, the Protestants had made an attempt upon the Religious; and that they were
hard by, and advised him to escape, and save himself in his Palace. The Prelate
took heels, and run cross the Church in great haste to get to his House; but as
he was going, some honest Gentlemen met him, and told him the truth of the
matter, and so he came back again. Now, whilst this Ceremony was in the Church,
the Hermit, with some few of the Religious, broke off from the Procession, and
running about the Streets, cried out, that the Bishop was killed, and the Host
was seized: and this Cry those very men made, who were not above thirty Yards
from the Bishop: So that all the Papists of the Town, especially those of the
meaner Rank, run to their Houses, arming themseves with Forks, or Spits, or
Hatchets, and what came next to their hands, resolving to fall upon the
Reformed: And they were so transported with this Alarm, that they would not
hearken to any reason; they were told that 'twas a false Report, and that the
Bishop was not dead; but they would not give credit to it: So that had it not
been for the Courage and Mediation of some of the Gentlemen among the Reformed,
who went to the Rabble to compose 'em, Orange in a little time might have been
seen without Inhabitants; for the Reformed, seeing the Papists betaking
themselves to their Arms for a Massacre, they also armed themselves. I was in
my House alone, whilst all this noise was; and there came in a good Woman to
tell me, with Tears, Ah, Monsieur, (said she) are you here alone; they are
devouring your Flock, and you will be presently sacrificed to the Fury of the
Religious. I then heard a great cry in the Street; I besought the good Woman to
call one of my Servants; she told me, there was none in the way. There then
came in one of my Neighbors, pale and languishing, who told me, that all our
People were running to the place, to relieve our Brethren whom they were
massacring. I desired him that he would endeavor to stop 'em, and to tell 'em
from me, that I would speak with 'em; there came to me some of 'em, whom I
constrained to go after the rest to prevent their going to the Tumult. A little
after they came all of 'em to me, and taking my advice, retired to their
Houses. Mr. de Bergairolles, who is now at the Hague, was very active in
calming some the most violent of their Men: and by this means the Tumult was
appeased, and those of the Seditious Party, were disappointed of their Design.
I draw'd up a Relation of all that past, and sent it to the late Mr. de
Zuilichem, who signified to me in his Answer, that God had miraculously
delivered us; and that he prayed heartily we might never see such another
Sunday. The day after, the Parliament intending to proceed against the Authors
of this Uproar, at the request of the Proctor-General, and the Advocate; the
Bishop did all he could to oppose it with mighty Threatenings; this gave great
apprehensions to the Reformed: We saw that the French Court gave credit to all
that the Bishop wrote, and he had others that stood by him; and that there
needed nothing but the pretense of Religion, to give authority to all they
undertook. The Parliament thought it not proper to push the Information
farther: but his Highness the Prince of Orange being informed of this Attempt,
and that it had like to have cost him the Lives of the best Subjects he had,
gave out a Declaration, by the which he dissolved this Fraternity, and charged
the Magistrates, that they should take care that they appeared not publicly.

I have already spoke of the Priests presenting a Request, to have a stop put
to the Collection which was for the Maintenance of the Pastors, the Professors
and Governors of the College, which was not answered. The time being now more
favorable for the Papists, they presented it a second time, in the Year 1683.
'Twas now answered with a Decree of the Council, by which the Treasurer was
prohibited to raise that Money, upon pain of Disobedience, with an injunction
upon Mr. Grignan, the Lieutenant General of Provence, to help forward the
Execution of the Decree. 'Twas a great blow to the Reformed Churches of the
Principality, who had now no way to get subsistence for the Pastors, or
Professors and Governors of the College. But his Highness the Prince being
acquainted with it, he provided for them according to his usual Charity. The
Misfortunes which befell us came blow after blow, as the Lightning is followed
by Thunder, which at last destroys all; so that we might say, with St. John in
the Revelations, The second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes
quickly. In the Year following we saw another Decree of the Council in July,
and which we were advertized of in August following; and this was the pretense
of it. There was a Youth, called Dumas, a Notary, who during the space of two
years, had been much conversant in reading of the Holy Scripture; he had took
great pleasure in it, and from a desire which he had to be farther instructed
in it, he came on Nights to me to be resolved of difficulties, and to receive
from me fresh Instructions. At last, being persuaded and convinced of the
Truth, he came to the Consistory, desiring to be received in our Church, and
showed great Reason, in giving us an account of the Motives of his change. The
Sunday following he made his Abjuration before the whole Assembly, who were
much edified by his Discourse. This Young Man was of a Family who were
extremely bygotted to the Church of Rome's Superstitions, whose Ancestors were
recorded in our Annals, among those who had committed that horrible Massacre at
Orange, the second of February, in the Year 71 of the last Age. He reckoned in
his Pedigree, some of the Richest, and of the Chiefest Quality of the Roman
Catholic Citizens of Orange. This Conversion of their Kinsman had enraged them
extremely; they went in a crowd to the Bishop, and begged of him with Tears, to
use all means imaginable to draw him off from this pretended Error. The Bishop
could not find a more successful way then to raise us some trouble in the Court
of France, supposing we had received a relapsed Subject of the French Kings.
His Letter was quickly followed by a Decree, which I am now going to speak of;
by which 'twas prohibited for the Ministers of Orange, or for the Elders, to
receive in their Temples any Subject of the King of France's that was a
Relapse; or to endeavor the perverting of the Catholics, to embrace Heresy,
upon the pains mentioned in the Declarations, with an Injunction to the Count
de Grignan, to help forward the Execution of the said Decree. This unheard of
way of proceeding, with regard to the Principality of Orange, afforded me many
Reflections; the title of Heresy, which they had not put in any Declaration or
Decree before, made me imagine they would no longer use any Moderation; and
this regulating the Affairs of Religion in the Principality of Orange,
persuaded me, that we had now nothing to hope for, but that very suddenly we
should be more severely treated than the Natural Subjects.

The Year 1685 was such an Epoche, that future Ages shall look upon to be the
most dreadful that has happened. 'Twas in that Year that the Temples
throughout France were pulled down, and an universal dispersion of the People
into all parts of the Earth. We indeed saw our Calamity hastening apace; but we
never thought the Persecution would be so sharp, or that the Dragoons would
have thrown away common Humanity. Posterity will hardly believe i^ true, and
that which I write concerning my own Flock, will pas^ for Fable, if more
Historians don't second me in the truth of my Relation.

'Twas at Easter in the same Year, that we began to see the Distress of the
Reformed Churches in France; those who in the Neighboring Provinces had been
forbid all public Exercise of their Religion, came crowding to us for the sake
of their Devotion: We that were the Ministers of Orange, endeavored to support
'em under their Calamities, and both in our Sermons, and more private
Discourses, encouraged them to a Stedfastness and Perseverance in the Faith.
From that time they brought Children continually from all parts, to be Baptized
of us. 'Twas a sight which would move compassion, to see Fathers and Mothers
bring their Infants fifteen or twenty Leagues to be Baptized, some expiring in
the Journey. At Whitsontide we had yet greater Multitudes resorted to Orange,
than at Easter, for then they of Languedock also were forbid the Exercise of
their Religion, together with Cevennes, Vivarets, Dauphine, and Provence.

'Twas at this time that we heard of the terrible Persecution at Guienne, and
of the barbarous Usage of those at Montauban: Till then we had heard little of
it, but we had now the News of it so often confirmed, that we could not doubt
of it. Storms drive not the Waves with more Fury, than this violent Persecution
threw Troubles continually toward us, which at last swallowed us up: We now
saw that we were encompast on every side by the Dragoons; they were now in
Dauphine, as well as in Languedock; and the ill News came attested by no less
than ten or twelve thousand Souls who fled for Refuge in the Principality of
Orange. 'Twas indeed a miserable Spectacle to see such numbers of poor People
of all Ages and Conditions, where we might read Calamity in their faces, and
their Discourses taken up with the story of those inhumane Cruelties they had
felt in those Provinces. Women ready to be delivered, put to the fatigues of
Traveling, Widows with their little Children following them; Old Men afflicted
by their fears of the Dragoons more than by the inconveniences of Old Age; we
saw nothing but Objects of Compassion about Orange, which gave us the
afflicting sense of their Miseries, together with a lively Representation of
the persecuted condition which was falling upon us. All this disposed us to
receive them with a Brotherly Affection as became fellow sufferers, and
comforting them by those excellent Discourses which our Ministers suited to
their Condition.

The retreat of these poor People to Orange, drew down upon us the Anger of the
Governors who were at Montelimard: Mr. de la Trousse, St. Ruth, and Tesse cast
out against us violent Thretnings; we heard daily of their Discourses in their
Houses, and in the open Streets, that they would Plunder us, and pillage and
burn us: And in this temper they wrote to the Court, and did aggravate every
thing beyond the truth; and other stories they sent, that were downright
falsehoods; they informed the Court, that there were sixty Ministers who fled
thither, and who preached in the open Streets; that they spoke reproachfully of
the King, and that in the Principality they would form a Rebellion. And though
these Discourses had little appearances of truth in them, yet the Council made
an Advantage of them against us, and made use of them as a pretense for their
evil usage of us; though it is clear that these were not the Reasons of their
Cruelty, which, as it may in part be discovered by what I have already said, so
it is too well known to the World, to need a more particular Proof.

Upon the 11th. of October at Night we were all alarmed; they told us, the
Dragoons were hard by our doors, and on a sudden there was nothing heard but
Outcries about the Town; all the Inhabitants, as well of one as the other
Religion, began to pack up; every body was calling out for Carts and Horses, to
remove their Goods into the Comtat. As much incommoded as I was by my
Indisposition, I desired seven or eight of our Citizens to get on Horseback,
and discover where abouts the Dragoons were: They went with great have, and
came back and told me, that they had not found one Man, so that I thought we
had made a false Alarm. The worst that befell us this Night, was the great
distress of those who took Sanctuary with us; for they were all upon the flight
again, and run about where Providence directed them; some into the Woods, which
were filled with these poor People, and to the Montagne, which is called the
Prince's, a frightful Desert, which in a moment was turned into a well-peopled
place. They all now resolved each Person to go to his own Habitation, or to get
out of the Kingdom. That which occasioned this Alarm, was a Letter which a
Gentleman wrote me from Paris, by which he informed me, that I ought to look
upon it as a thing certain, that it had been resolved of in Council, to send
the Dragoons to Orange, to seize of those who had fled to us for Refuge, and to
deal with us, as with the rest of the Kingdom.

Whilst we were under this Consternation, our Parliament thought they could not
do better, than to put out a Decree, which should Command all Strangers within
three days to go out of the Principality: For as they made this a pretense that
Orange received the King's rebellious Subjects; so by this Decree, we might
take away all occasion of their falling upon us. Before this Decree came out,
we persuaded those few who were left among us to retreat, lest by being found
here, they might draw upon us the same misfortunes which they had felt: That to
be plain with them, they could not hope for any security among us, considering
what was preparing for us; and that therefore they had better contentedly to
retire, than that we should use forcible means to make them, which would be a
sensible grief to us; And that we might not be wanting in any thing that might
serve us, we appointed two Gentlemen to wait upon the Duke de Nouailles, and
two more upon the Governors whom I have before spoken of, who were at
Montelimard, to acquaint them with the Decree of Parliament which had been
published.

The Duke received them with great Civility, telling them, he would write to
Court about it, and that in the mean time he could assure them they need not
fear any thing, since the Parliament had proceeded in that manner. But those
who commanded at Montelimar took another Method. The Marquess de la Trousse
continued his furious Language, and spoke of nothing to our Deputies but
hanging the Ministers, and Interdicting the whole Principality. It Is certain he
knew the Court's mind, and 'twas upon that account that he spoke such imperious
and menacing Language. The Deputies were no sooner returned, but we understood
the Count de Grignan was come Post from Court, with Orders concerning Orange.
He came by the way of Tarascon, to take with him the Intendant of Provence, and
two Companies of Dragoons of the Ord'nance for his Guard. With this Train he
came to Orange October. 23. 1685. But before he made his Entry, he resolved to
show himself a good Neighbor; for having made a halt at Lieu de Bedarrides, he
sent the Captain of his Guards to pray Mr. de Beaufain to assure the
Inhabitants of Orange that he was not coming to do them any Injury. The Captain
found the whole City alarmed, and in a terrible fright, which could not be
quieted by all the Speeches which Mr. de Beaufain took the pains to make from
Street to Street. About Three in the Afternoon the Count arrived there with the
Intendant; they took up their Quarters at the Bishop's Palace, and the Dragoons
were billited in the Public Houses, where they continued without committing
any disorders. After these Gentlemen had conferred a while with the Bishop, the
Count de Grignan sent for the Officers of the Court of the Revenue, of whom the
President, Mr. de Lubieres, is the Chief. He told them, he was sent thither by
the King his Master, to signify that his Majesty desired, that they would
cause those of his Subjects, who had fled into that Principality, to depart
thence; that for the future, we should not receive them into our Churches, nor
multiply any more the exercises of our Religion, as we had done at the last
Sacrament in September, upon which Conditions we need not apprehend the least
danger. To this Mr. de Lubieres answered, That as for Entertaining the
Refugiees, the Parliament had already provided against it by their Decree,
which he then presented to him; that his Majesty's Subjects were already
retired thence, and that if any yet remained, their number was was very
inconsiderable; that they would cause another Decree to be published,
purporting that those who were yet left, should depart the State in three days.
Upon this, the Intendant took occasion to tell the Count, these Gentlemen have
acted very fairly, it is fit we should do so too, and allow eight days time to
the Refugiees to retire in. To the Point concerning the Exercises of our
Religion 'twas answered, that our Church being now reduced to its former
number, there would be no necessity of multiplying the use of them. This
Conference passed very amicably on both sides, with all the signs of a very
good Correspondence. But here I must entreat the Reader to take notice, with
what sincerity we proceeded with them in this Affair. The Count de Grignan and
the Intendant assure us, as from the Court, that if we perform what the King
desired, we need not fear any danger: The Prince's Officers promise to do so,
and perform that Promise; but alas! how have they kept their Word to us? For
there had not passed twenty four hours, but it was violated in a most execrable
manner, and such as must needs strike all my Readers with horror. However I
must needs say for the Count de Grignan, that he acted like a Man of Honor; he
spoke sincerely, as being not privy to the Court-Intrigue, and he sufficiently
expressed his dissatisfaction for being made an Instrument to bring a Promise,
which has been so ill observed.

This Conference of his Highness's Officers with those of his Most Christian
Majesty, caused an extreme Joy in the Reformed Inhabitants of the Principality.
They mutually congratulated their Happiness, as thinking the Assurances given
them would have been made good; and gave Thanks to God, that it had pleased him
(though they were no better than their Brethren) to divert the fury of that
approaching Tempest.

In this pleasing Imagination, that they would let us be quiet, we slept
securely in our Beds; it seemed that our past Inquietudes were as an easy
Cradle to rock us asleep: But it was soon interrupted by the sad News which was
brought me at Three a Clock in the Morning. For it happened that one of my
Neighbors as he was going out of the City, was stopped and turned back by a
Corpse de Guard of Dragoons. He knocked at my Door, which my Servants opened, and
came into my Chamber all pale, and in a panick fear, telling me we were all
undone, that above a Thousand Dragoons had begirt the City, not suffering any
of the Inhabitants to go out; and indeed the Count de Tesse having received
such Orders from Court, had commanded the Queen's Regiment of Dragoons, and Du
Plessis Believre's Regiment of Foot to repair instantly to Paul trois Chateaux,
four Leagues from Orange; these Troops were no sooner come to their Rendezvous,
but they were commanded to march at the beginning of the Night, without knowing
whither they were to go. They came to the Bridge of Aigues an hour after
Midnight, and by the way meeting his Highness's Courrier, who was carrying
Letters to St. Esprit, they stopped him, and took away his Packet. The Commander
of the Party caused a Candle to be lighted, and unsealed the Orders which he
had received from the Count de Tesse, and having read them, took his march to
Orange, and dispatched some Companies to go and invest the Towns of Courtheson
and Jonquieres. He approached the City without being discovered, and posted his
Corpse de Gardes and Sentries very near each other, before any of the City had
notice of it. My Neighbor, whom I before mentioned, was the first that gave
the Alarm; every one started out of their Beds, endeavoring to save themselves
by all passages out of the City, but the Soldiers were placed at so near a
distance, that only some few who had most courage durst venture to get through.
I leave others to imagine the cries and shrieks of the poor Inhabitants; as
remote as I was from the Street, their Lamentations pierced my very Heart; and
those Torrents of Tears which my poor Sheep came to pour out in my Chamber, put
me into the condition of a dying Man. At break of Day the Count de Tesse entered
the City, attended by several Officers, breathing out nothing but Punishments,
Blood, and Slaughter, which augmented the Consternation of those of the
Religion. After having marched about the streets to strike Terror by his
barbarous Expressions, intermixed with horrid Execrations, he alighted at the
Bishop's Palace, the common Rendezvous of all those who came to Orange to
Oppress us. The Companies of Dragoons who were gone to Invest Courtheson and
Jonquieres, had made terrible work there. In the latter they had seized a Rich
Inhabitant, named Garaignon, whom they had pinioned, and made him march before
them in that condition quite to Orange. At Courtheson they took Mr. Aunet,
Pastor of that Church, and made him go in the Head of a Party of Dragoons, who
carried him to the Count de Tesse, by whom he was immediately sent to Prison.
My dear Colleagues, Messieurs Gondrand, Chion, and Petit, had attempted before
day to make their escape, but being forced back by the Guards, who fired at
them, and Mr. Villet, Minister of Provence, who yet was so lucky to get away,
they went to abscond in some of their Friends Houses. At Three in the Afternoon
the Count de Tesse required to speak with the Ministers, and for that purpose
sent some Officers to search for them at their Houses. They brought him word,
that they had found no body but me, who was not able to stir-in my Bed for the
extreme pain of the Gout and my broken Thigh. This Account put him into a
terrible Fury, whilst he was studying where it should be that my Colleagues had
secured themselves. This grand Converter spoke of nothing but demolishing our
Churches, and ruining the City, if the Ministers were not produced. These
Menaces did so terrify our People, that instead of concealing their Pastors,
as those of Alexandria did once in the case of Athanasius, they were the first
to search for them, in order to their bringing them before the Count de Tesse,
hoping thereby to appease the rage of that furious Persecutor, not considering
that they should thereby rather add to the weight of their Persecution.

But for as much as we had mutually promised to sacrifice our selves for our
Flocks, my blessed Colleagues came out of their Retirements, and notwithstanding
the Tears of their Wives and Children, who begged of them not to expose
themselves, as they were going to do, went to wait upon the Count de Tesse, who
received them with threats of sending them to the Gallows, particularly Mr.
Petit, whom he told positively, that he should be hanged the next day. He had
scarce patience to suffer them one moment in his presence, before he sent them
to Prison, without being so civil as to hear them say one word in their own
defense. These faithful Servants of God were no sooner committed, but the Count
sent an Officer with two Dragoons to my House, one of which he posted by my
Bedside, telling him, his Life should answer for my Appearance; and the other
at the Door of my House, to hinder any from coming to me. When I saw my self
under this Confinement, I lifted up my Heart to God in a fervent Prayer,
imploring the assistance of his Grace to support me in this Conflict, to
perfect his strength in my weakness, and that he might be glorified, whether by
my Life or Death. I can aver with a safe Conscience, that though I was in such
deplorable Condition, I did not so much reflect upon my own Sufferings as those
of my dear Colleagues, and my poor Flock. I entreated my Wife, Mrs. Louise de
Chavanon, my Nephews, and others of my Relations, that could be near me, to
give me their Assistance, and not to discourage me by their Tears, telling
them, that in that miserable estate to which my Pains and Afflictions had
reduced me, we ought all of us rather to Arm our selves to fight together that
good Fight, and to defend the precious Pledge of our Faith, which God had put
into our hands; that as to my own particular, my trust in God was so strong,
that I was firmly persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Persecution, nor
Nakedness, nor the Sword could ever separate me from his blessed love. That I
foresaw that I should be treated with the extremest Rigor, as well for
Reasons of State, as upon account of Religion; but whatever happened, I found I
had Courage enough to endure the utmost Cruelties they could inflict upon me.
But alas! I have found by too sad Experience, that the stoutest Heart cannot
bear up if it be not strengthened by the invincible power of Grace, and that
our strongest Resolutions are but vain Illusions, when they have no better
Foundation than mere confidence in our selves.

When they had secured me and my Colleagues, they dismissed the Guard which they
had planted round the City, into which the Dragoons made their entry as into a
place conquered. They Quartered one third part of them upon the Romanists, and
the other two thirds upon those of the Religion. You may more easily conceive
than I can express the outrages committed from that Night forward. All that
Barbarity and Violence could suggest to them, was employed in tormenting my
poor Flock. It Is true, their Fury for seventeen days was not altogether so
great; and Tesse gave out, that his Business there was not to make us change
our Religion; but yet he placed his Guards at all the Avenues of the City, to
hinder any body from going out. -- He was pleased likewise to remove the
Dragoon that was placed in my Chamber, being informed of the sad condition I
was in, and that there was no fear I should make my escape, the misfortune I
lay under being a heavier Chain than all the Irons they could have loaded me
with. -- The Bishop gave me to understand by a Person that was sent to me, that
I was obliged to him for those petty Favors, and I returned him my Thanks for
the same. But for all that, the Door of my House was guarded by Sentinels that
were relieved every hour; and there were but a very few suffered to enter. --
The Guard that was placed in my Chamber incommoded me extremely, hindering me
from discoursing freely with those Persons that stood in need of Comfort. But
when he was removed, I had the Opportunity of conferring with several that came
to me a private way the Dragoons knew not of. -- The day after the Arrival of
these cruel Persecutors, being the 26th. of October, came the first Batallion
of Du Plessis Believre about Two in the Afternoon, and was followed the day
after by the second. The great number of the Soldiers obliged Count de Tesse
to overcharge the Inhabitants with those new Guests; who, though they had
extraordinary Pay, viz. the Dragoons 30, and the Infantry 10 Sous a day, yet
for all that, they forced their Landlords to give them Free Quarter: And Happy
was he that was forced only with dry blows to grant them what they demanded.

No sooner was the first Batallion come, but the Count de Tesse sent the Major
of the Regiment, accompanied with the Bishop's Secretary, to me, to demand the
Keys of our Churches. I answered him, that I was not the Churchwarden. This
Answer put him into a Passion; and he told me, he had Orders to receive the
Keys from my own Hands. I replied again, that I was not the Churchwarden; and
that it was in vain for him to expect that I should deliver him them. Then he
began again to use Threatening Language to oblige me to do what he required. But
finding me, after all, firm to my Resolution, he ordered some of the Soldiers
to go and see for the Churchwarden; and they not finding him, made one of his
Daughters come along with them to me with the Keys in her Hand. The poor Girl
came into my Chamber all in Tears. The Major ordered the Maid to deliver the
Keys to me; but I refused to receive them. He commanded me in the Count de
Tesse's Name to take them, and deliver them to him. I absolutely refused to do
either the one or the other. At last, after a Debate of about a quarter of an
hour, he snatched them out of the Maid's Hand, and went to tell the Count de
Tesse what he had done.

The Count in the mean time tarried at the Gate of the great Church,
impatiently expecting the Keys; and as soon as he got them, he entered the
Church, accompanied by the Bishop, saying, by way of Derision, Farewell, poor
Jerusalem.

The first thing those honest Gentlemen did in that Holy Place, was to tear in
pieces the Bibles, and the Psalm-Books. Then they went up into the Pulpit,
where they uttered a thousand profane Expressions. After that, they tore down
his Highness's Arms, which were placed over the Parliament-Seat. And in fine,
they showed themselves so Inhumane, as to do violence even to the Ashes of the
great Christopher, Count de Dona, that were reposited in that Sacred Structure,
which by his means had been built by Order, and at the Charge of the great
Prince Fredrick-Henry.

The Reader I hope will excuse me for not relating all the indignities they put
in practice to profane our Churches, which fills me with so great a horror,
that my Soul even sinks under it. It will suffice to tell him, that they ran to
the Poors Box to take away the Money, and finding but little there, they
discharged there Fury upon Mrs. Chion, my Collegue's Wife, whom they sent to
Prison. The next day they began to take away the Seats, some of which they
carried to the Cathedral, and the rest to the Chapels of the Convents: Then
they proceeded to the pulling down the little Church, called the Church of St.
Martin. The Cure did what he could to hinder it, alleging it belonged to his
Cure, but he could not be heard; so it was razed down to the ground. But I must
not omit to tell one thing very remarkable, of a Soldier, who being of the
Religion, chose rather to be cudgelled in a most cruel manner, and dragged
along the streets, than to assist at the pulling down of it; telling his
Captain, he would sooner die, than obey him in such an unjust Command.

This Church was no sooner demolished, but these Destroying Angels set about
reducing the other to a heap of Stones. This was a very spacious one, and of an
admirable Structure; the Roof was supported by an Arch carried from West, on
which side stood the Pulpit, to East, having on the right and left a Range of
three Arches of Freestone, with their Cornishes, which supported the
Galleries, to receive the Rainwater falling on the Roof, which was conveyed
away. They spent fourteen days in pulling down this Fabric, and not being able
to loosen the more solid parts of it with Levers, nor any other Instruments,
they were necessitated to blow it up.

At the same time they were at work in demolishing the Church at Courtheson,
and the Dragoons tormented the Inhabitants with a thousand Outrages which they
committed upon those poor people, who being eat out of all, as well as those of
Orange, were not able to provide any longer for the subsistence of the
Soldiers. In the mean time my Colleagues were kept very close Prisoners with
two other Ministers, Messieurs Rainaud, and De Vignoles; the former of which
they had seized in Dauphine, and the latter in the Province of Languedoc. Very
few Persons were permitted to visit them; but we sent each other little Notes,
to encourage us to fight the good Fight, and to defend our Religion, though
with the hazard of our Lives. But though these little Opportunities of mutual
Correspondence gave us some little Joy and Consolation, we had every day some
new subject of Affliction. The poor people that were miserably harrass'd, and
could not bear the great expense which they must lie under, of maintaining the
Dragoons, did most shamefully abate in their Zeal. I sent as many as I possibly
could to confirm them; and gave my self no respite neither night nor day from
performing the Duty of my Ministry, and Praying with all those that came to my
House. But at last, God, who intended to punish us for our heinous sins,
suffered us to see those sad days, being wholly forsaken by our Flocks, except
only some few particular Persons, who, notwithstanding all the Cruelties that
could be exercised upon them, continued firm to the last.

November the 10th. in the Morning it was publicly reported, that an Express
was come to the Count de Tesse, with Orders, that he should execute the Booted
Mission, i.e. that he should Persecute us without Mercy, to make us change our
Religion. I have by a woeful Experience observed, that the Assembles that have
been made at Montaban, Montpellier, Nimes, Usez, and all the other considerable
Cities, to Consult what was to be done upon like Occasions, have been Snares,
which those unhappy Persons who have been drawn away, have laid for the simple,
as likewise for those of better Judgments, to make them also fall with the
Crowd. This made me take all possible care that my Flock might not be drawn
into the same Snare: 'Twas for that Reason, that the day before I had desired
Mr. Grenatier my Kinsman, who was one of those happy Persons, that,
notwithstanding a thousand Dangers he must meet with, and as many Difficulties
he was to run through in making his escape out of the Kingdom, yet still
preserved his Religion. 'Twas, I say, upon an apprehension of this, that I
prayed him to go all about the City, and engage the Inhabitants to decline all
such Assemblies, whatsoever might follow thereupon, assuring them, that
contrivances of ruining them by such means would certainly be made use of; and
that all sorts of fair Promises would be made them, but nothing of those
Promises would be afterward observed. And though he acquitted himself in that
Affair with abundance of Zeal and Diligence, yet the success did not answer our
pains, as we shall show hereafter.

Tesse was at the Count du Suzes House, about three Leagues from Orange when
the Express arrived. He came immediately, and begun an open Persecution, by
removing the Soldiers that were quartered upon the Romanists: And all the
Troops were billetted only upon those of the Religion. And no sooner was this
new assignment of Quarters made, but a thousand doleful Cries were every where
to be heard in the City; the People running up and down the Streets all in
tears. The Wife cried out for help to Rescue her Husband, whom they were either
cruelly cudgelling about, or hanging up by the heels in the Chimney, or tying
to the Bed's-feet, or threatening immediately to cut his Throat. The Husband
implored the like assistance in behalf of his Wife, whom threats and blows, and
a thousand sorts of Cruelties had made to miscarry. The Children cried out,
Help, Help! They are Murdering my Father, they are Ravishing my Mother, and
spitting one of my Brothers. -- But here I must stop my Pen, which is ready to
drop out of my Hand, and the very remembrance of their Barbarities has so
overwhelmed me with grief and tears, that I am not able to proceed in
describing that Tragical Scene. From those Cruelties neither Sex nor Age was
exempt. Nor was there any more regard had to Persons of the greatest Worth, or
of the best Families, than to the meanest Peasants. Nor had they any Respect to
the Prince's Officers, but even Monsieur de Lubieres, Monsieur d'Alencon, and
Monsieur de Drevon were forced to receive Dragoons into their Houses. And it
was well for my Nephew, Mr. Convenent, who was Chancellor of Parliament, that
he got away early that Morning in a Country-man's Habit, that so while it was
in his power, he might make his escape out of the Kingdom: For I do not doubt,
but that barely for his Relation to me, he would have been worse used than all
his Colleagues.

The same day about Four in the Afternoon, the Count de Tesse came along with
the Bishop to my House; he came into my Chamber, where, having lately broke my
Thigh, I was constantly confined to my Bed, having not been able to rise but
only twice to have my Bed made. He saluted me very civilly, and asked me kindly
concerning the state of my Health. And after he had placed himself at the Head
of the Bed, and the Bishop at the Feet, he began to tell me, that he had a
great concern for me, and that he had shown me a particular favor above my
Colleagues, in not throwing me into Prison, as knowing that I was a Gentleman,
and that he had seen none else in the City, but Monsieur de Beaufain and my
self to persuade to comply with the King's Commands. And that the better to
prevail with me, he had brought along with him Monsieur the Bishop, that if I
had any scruples of Conscience, he might give me satisfaction therein. I
returned him my Thanks for his Kindness, and said to this effect, That I had a
Master in Heaven, whom I ought chiefly to obey; and that as for a Sovereign
upon Earth, I owned none other but his Highness the Prince of Orange; that I
was born his Subject, and had the Honor to be one of his Domestics; that as
for Monsieur the Bishop, we were well acquainted, and had been good Friends,
and had never had any Dispute about Religion, and that now, when so many Swords
were drawn to defend the Romish Religion, and to extirpate the Reformed, it
would be to no purpose to enter the Lists with him. He was very importunate
with me to enter into Discourse. If, said he, you will not engage with the
Bishop, pray tell me, for my own satisfaction, why you abhor Images so much,
and what is the Reason you will not come over to our Communion? Sir, replied I,
since you will have me speak my Mind, I will tell you, that in order to the
Reunion you speak of, the Prelates of France are to push the Point which they
contend for somewhat further. The condemning the four Propositions seems to
have somewhat that is good in it, or at least we make this Advantage of it,
that they agree with us in this particular, that the Pope is not the Infallible
Judge of Controversies; which is a Point we all along eagerly contended for
against the Pretenses of the Jesuits, and the Monks. After so hopeful a
beginning, we expect that the Gentlemen of the Glergy should proceed to Reform
the manner of Worship, as now practiced in the Church; for really we cannot
look upon it but as unlawful in it self. They ought therefore to do as Serenus,
Bishop of Marseilles did, who coming into his Church, and seeing it curiously
adorned with exquisite Statues and Pictures, ordered those Objects of Idolatry
to be removed, and made every the smallest Piece to be defaced. And if the Pope
should send his Letters to reproach them for it, as Gregory the Great formerly
did to Serenus; and that they should at least have spared the Paintings, which
might have served as so many Instructors to the Illiterate. They may answer
him, as that great Bishop did to Gregory, that he had no need of such petty
Doctors to make Men gross Idolaters, and that he, the true Pastor of his Flock,
was sufficient to show them how they were to Worship God. Well, answered
Monsieur de Tesse, but do you believe we adore the Images? That is not the
thing we are to consider, replied I; it is enough that you give them a Religious
Worship. Your Bishops should therefore follow the Example of St. Epiphanius,
who going to Jerusalem, upon his entrance into an Oratory, tore a Veil that had
upon it the Picture of a certain Saint. Till then, the Bishop had kept silence,
but then he interposed, saying, That that was the Picture of a Robber. Then I
began to smile, saying, that such an Evasion would have come well enough from a
Jesuit, but I could not but wonder, that such an eminent Prelate as he should
shuffle over this action of St. Epiphanius with a Fiction so very ill
contrived. You, Sir, said I, being so very well versed in Ecclesiastical
History, I am surprised that you should not have taken Notice of the Epistle
which St. Epiphanius wrote to John, Bishop of Jerusalem, which St. Jerome has
Translated out of Greek into Latin, and is his one hundred and first Epistle to
Pammachius, where it is said expressly, that 'twas the Picture of Christ, or
else some Saint, not particularly remembering whether it was the one or the
other. The Count de Tesse would not permit us to dispute any longer upon that
Subject, but asked me, why we would not use Confession? No doubt, Sir, said I,
you understand Latin, hear therefore what St. Augustine says, Quid mihi cum
hominibus ut peccata mea audiant tanquam Morbos meos sanaturi, What have I to
do to confess my sins to Men, as if they were able to heal the Diseases of my
Soul? Then he led me into a Discourse about Purgatory, saying, that it was
highly necessary that our Souls should be purged, and prepared to appear in the
Presence of God. I answered, That that was to be done by our Savior's Blood;
and that in short, Purgatory was nothing else but a mere Fiction, whereof there
was not so much as one word spoken in the Primitive Church. And, Sir, said I, I
will leave you to judge whether St. Augustine believed a Purgatory, when I have
recited a few words of his; Primum locum fides catholicorum credit esse Regnum
Coelorum, secundum Gehennam ubi omnis Apostata aut a fide deficiens cruciatur,
tertium penitus ignoramus, neque in Scripturis esse invenimus. The word
Penitus, added I, is very emphatical, and does so expressly exclude Purgatory,
that if you consider it well, you will not believe any such Place.

When the Count saw me so Resolute to maintain the Truth, he changed his way of
Assaulting me; he told me, the King his Master made it a point of Honor to
make me a Catholic; and therefore I ought to consider with my self, and to
accept those Terms he was going to offer me. You have nothing to do, said he,
but only to draw up in Writing whatsoever you desire, and I have Commission to
grant it you. Here is Monsieur the Bishop, who knows, and is ready to attest
it. I answered him, that I knew very well that so great a Prince, as the King
his Master, would not have any such concern for so inconsiderable a Minister as
I was. That as for the rest, I had no need of any thing; and that all the
Favor I desired of him, was, that he would please to grant me a Pass, as he
had given to the Ministers of France, that I might retire to my Great Master in
Holland. He immediately broke out into high Elogiums upon the Prince, saying,
that he had a particular Veneration for his extraordinary Merits, that he
highly admired him as a great Hero, and that he had upon several Occasions seen
him behave himself both as a brave Soldier, and a great General. If, Sir, said
I, you have such a Veneration for that great Prince, I beseech you have
Compassion upon his Servant, and grant me a Pass, that I may repair to him,
which would be a great Comfort to me in my present afflicted Condition. That,
replied he, is not in my Power; I have told you already, that the King makes it
a Point of Honor to Convert you. It is very well known that you are a
dangerous Person, and too much devoted to the Prince; you will never be
suffered to go to him. How, said I, must my Fidelity to my Great Master be
charged upon me as a Crime, to detain me contrary to all Right? It is to no
purpose to Argue, replied he in a Rage; you must obey the King, otherwise I
shall proceed to execute my Order against you. You dare not do it, said I. How,
Sir, said he, (approaching my Bed with a Countenance flaming with Rage) dare
not do it? Yes, Sir, said I, I say again, You dare not execute your Orders upon
me. And then uncovering my self, I let him see my wretched Body, saying,
Consider, Sir, this Carcass; your Compassion and Generosity will not let you
execute any Cruelty upon it. Adieu, Sir, said he, you are too Rhetorical for
me. I bid you a third time consider of it, and obey the King, or else it will
be worse for you. I told him, that I had considered every thing that I ought to
consider; I see that Pity is a Virtue that is not in fashion now adays. I shall
with satisfaction see my self dragged along the streets of Orange. The Bishop
tarried a little time after in my Chamber; he desired me not to suffer my self
to be Tormented, adding, that he bore a part in my Misfortune; and leaning
himself down upon me, he embraced me with Tears, which I believed came from his
very Heart. From my House these Gentlemen went to the Prisons: The Count had
given Orders that my Colleagues should be kept apart, and that they should be
put into deep Dungeons. He visited them one after another, persuading them to
turn: Yet notwithstanding all the Threats that the Count could use, they
remained firm and undaunted; and by the Piety of their Discourses they sent
away the Count and the Bishop very much ashamed, that they had succeeded no
better in their Undertaking. This Example of Constancy, which both my Colleagues
and I had given those under our Care, should have confirmed them in a
Resolution of suffering any thing, rather than quit the pure Profession of the
Gospel. Several Persons that were in my Closet, heard all that past between the
Count, the Bishop, and my self; and my Discourse with them was related all the
Town over, as were likewise those of my Colleagues. But we had the misfortune to
see that they proved not so effectual as we desired. The sense of what they
already suffered, and the apprehension of what they were further to expect,
prevailed with the people to Assemble. God forgive those that occasioned that
Assembly, and who voted so wickedly therein. It Is true indeed, before any thing
was concluded, a Counselor of Parliament and an Advocate were dispatched to
Count de Tesse, to Remonstrate the Injustice of forcing his Highness's Subjects
to change their Religion; and to pray him to grant Pass-ports to as many as had
a mind to leave their Country. But they got no other Answer than a positive
Denial, and severe Menaces. Which when they had reported to the Assembly, they
resolved upon a change of their Religion upon Terms agreed to by the Bishop,
and comprised in these following Articles.

That they should not be obliged to Pray to Saints.
That they should not be required to kneel-before Images. And
That the Sacrament should be given to them in both kinds.
Together with some more sweeting Concessions, which I do not particularly
remember. Thus these poor unhappy Creatures suffered themselves in the Agony of
their Minds to be trepanned by those fair Promises, not considering that
whether they would or no, they should shortly be brought to kneel before an
Image, and in every particular to Conform themselves to the Romish way of
Worship.

All this while I understood nothing of this Assembly. There were some Devout
Persons with me, who were come to Pray with my Family. I read to them the
Lamentations of Jeremiah; and as we were jointly bewailing the Ruin of our
Church, we were interrupted in that Holy Exercise by some that came to acquaint
me with what had passed. Upon these sad Tidings we redoubled our sighs and our
tears. I made a Prayer for the Assistance and Protection of Heaven in that
Extremity: For I was ready to expire with Grief, as plainly foreseeing that
that Assembly could produce nothing but the Apostasy of my Flock. I sent every
where to get my Elders together; but the business was already concluded, and
all my Arguments to no purpose. No sooner was that unhappy Reunion signed, but
Orders were given to the Dragoons to live peaceably in the Houses of the
pretended Converts: But as for those that remained steadfast, they were
grievously harrass'd by the Soldiers.

And now came my turn to bear the Fury of these merciless Persecutors. The
Count de Tesse had threatened to treat me with Severity, and he was in that
particular as good as his word: For without being touched with any sense of
that sad Condition he saw me in, within two hours he sent to my House 42
Dragoons, and 4 Drummers, who beat Night and Day about my Chamber, to put me
past sleeping, and, if possible, to make me submit. These new Guests crowded
into my Chamber to demand Moneys of me, having one Towel tied about their Heads
instead of a Cap, and another about their Arms, to wipe their hands with. -- To
have given them every thing they asked for, you must have gone to all the
Cooks-shops in the City. For if when they had gorged themselves with the most
delicious Fowl, that did no longer please their Palate, they would call for such
Rarities, as only the Indies can furnish, and all this only for a pretense,
that they might abuse my Servants, and good Neighbors, that were come to wait
upon them, thinking thereby to mollify their extravagant Fury. In a few hours
my House was turned topsy-turvy: All the Provisions I had would not serve for
one Meal, they broke open the doors to search for whatever they found locked,
and made havoc of all they laid hands upon. My Wife endeavored to oppose it
with an undaunted Courage, but her greatest care was how to preserve me, being
afraid every time she came to me, lest the Dragoons should do me some mischief.
She suffered from them all imaginable Insolences, Threatenings, and opprobious
Names, as Whore, Jade, and a thousand other filthy Expressions, which these
wicked wretches belched out every moment. The fear I was in lest they should
grow more abusive, made me conjure her to retire to her Father, Mr. Chavanon's
House. She refused a long time to comply with me, but at length being overcome
by my Tears, she yielded to my Request. No sooner was Night come, but the
Dragoons lighted up Candles all over my House. In my Courtyard, and all my
Chambers you might have seen as at Noonday; and the ordinary employment of
those Ruffians all Night was, to eat, drink, and smoke. This would have been
tolerable if they had not come into my Chamber to intoxicate and choke me with
the Fumes of their Tobacco, and the Drummers would but have ceased their horrid
din, and have let me taken some rest. But these Inhumane Monsters were not
contented to disturb me in that manner, but added to it most hideous yellings:
And if by good chance the Fumes of their Wine laid any of them asleep, the
Officer that commanded them, who, they said, was nearly related to the Marquess
de Louvois, soon waked them with the Discipline of his Cane, that they might
torment me afresh. What could I do in the midst of that Hell upon Earth, but
only lift up my Soul to God to beg his gracious Assistance? That was my only
Employment, which I accompanied with my sighs and tears. These Torments had so
depraved the Constitution of my Body, that I was not able to take any
Nourishment. I received no consolation from any body but my Wife, who came from
time to time from her Father's House to comfort me in my Misery. The Doors were
shut against every body but two Roman Catholics, who being touched with
Compassion at my cruel Usage, hazarded themselves, to come and lend me their
help. Some of my Flock, who had yielded under the Persecution, found means, I
know not how, to slip into my House: They came into my Chamber, and throwing
themselves upon the Ground at my Bedside, conjured me to pray to God for them,
that their Iniquity might not be laid to their charge. It will not, said I,
bursting into Tears, my dear Children, if you recover again by a speedy
Repentance; for there is mercy with God, that he may be feared.

Having got over this ill Night, the Count de Tesse sent an Officer to ask me,
whether I would obey the King. I answered him, that I would obey God. Upon
this, the Officer went hastily out of my Chamber, and Order was given to
Quarter the whole Regiment upon me, and to torment me with greater violence.
All this Day and the Night following the disturbance was intolerable. The Drums
beat in my Chamber, the Dragoons smoked their Tobacco in my Face, and what
through this infernal Smoke, want of Food and Sleep, and the pains I suffered,
my Mind was confounded. And yet in the midst of all these Torments, I sensibly
felt the Grace of God sustaining me. I was once more summoned by the same
Officer to obey the King. I answered, that God was my King, and that I should
soon appear before him to give an Account of my Actions; and that they would do
much better to dispatch me, than to make me languish under so many
Inhumanities. All this did not in the least soften their barbarous hearts, but
made them a great deal worse; so that being thus oppressed with such a load of
Persecutions, on Tuesday, the 13th. of November, I fell into a Trance, in which
I remained four hours complete, with small appearance of Life. The noise of
this soon spread ever all the City; the people run in crowds to my House, and
several Ladies forced their way through the Dragoons, to give me Assistance in
this extremity: And 'twas even reported, that I was dead. My Flock praised God
for my deliverance, and for taking me away in the midst of my Troubles, out of
the hands of my Enemies. The Dragoons came into my Room, and strangely insulted
over me; one brought a another a Pullet, and the rest brought Joints of Mutton,
etc. and mocking, said, We must rub his Teeth with these, and he will come to
himself. The noise of my Death was quickly carried to the Count de Tesse. Upon
which he immediately commanded the Dragoons from my House, fearing without
doubt, the Anger of the Court (who, it seems, is not willing that any should be
killed) for having let me dye in the midst of so many Torments. And to save
himself, he caused to be published by his Emissaries, that I was poisoned.
There was left only four Dragoons to Guard me; and in the Evening I was no
sooner come out of this Trance, but this Count sent the Officer who had the
Command of my House, to tell me, that I must get me ready to be carried the
next day to Pierre-cise. With my weak trembling Voice I told him, that I was
even that moment ready to go wheresoever they would carry me. I omit to speak
of the sorrow of my Wife and all my Kindred, and will only say, I passed over
that Night with strange perplexity of Mind. The Prison did not fright me, but I
mistrusted the strength of my Body; I could not imagine that it would hold out
so long a Journey. They tried to put on my Clothes, but my pains were so great,
I could never endure them. In this great Conflict between the Flesh and the
Spirit, I commended my self into the hands of God, and sang the 11th. Verse of
the 40 Psalm, That I, O Lord, should do thy mind, etc. Whilst I was in this
Combat, my Wife went and threw her self at the Feet of the Count de Tesse, and
with a torrent of Tears, which would have softened the most savage of Mankind,
conjured him to let me be carried to my Country House, and she would pay the
Guards that should be sent to secure me; or if not this, that he would please
to put me in Prison with my Brethren and Colleagues. But this hard and inhumane
Heart, with scorn denied her Request, telling her, that I was called the Pope
of the Huguenots, but that now my Pontifical Reign was expired; and that it was
to have been wished, that long ago I had been banished Orange, from whence I
did nothing but sow my Heresies in all the Provinces of the Kingdom. The Bishop
and several others, who in my Prosperity seemed my Friends, were present, but
not one of them would speak a word in my favor. This shows the Spirit of
Popery, which Idolizes Prosperity, but has not common pity for the Miserable.
The next Morning the Count de Tesse sent me word, that I must be going. He had
beforehand caused to be made a Horse-Litter, it being impossible to carry me
any other way. They took me out of Bed with the looks of a dying Man; my
Friends about me had much ado to get on my Clothes, and I endured a great deal
while they were dressing me, and six Men were forced to carry me into the
Horse-Litter, which was ready for me in the outer Court, some at my Head,
others at the middle of my Body, and the rest at my Feet. In my Chamber, and at
the bottom of the Stairs I saw several of my Friends, who spoke to me only by
their Sighs and their Tears. When they had put me in the Litter, they had much
ado to find a posture in which I might be tolerably easy from my pains. The
Court where I stood was crowded with People, who melted into Tears, and tore
their hair from their Heads. On one side of me I beheld two of my Neighbors,
who for a long time had been at great difference; to whom I thus addressed my
self. My dear Children, why do you weep? Pour forth Tears upon your selves, and
your sins, which have pulled down the wrath of God on you. If you love me, and
are sorry for me, give me the Comfort to see you embrace each other, and let
your Peace and Agreement be the last Fruit of my Ministry among you. I had no
sooner spoke these words, but they fell upon the ground, embracing each other,
and with their Faces in the Dust begged Pardon of one another. On the other
side, I saw some Ladies with their Hair about their Ears, Gentlemen, Citizens,
and Country People, who kissing my Hand, begged my Blessing. I gave it them
with as much Zeal, and as great elevation of Soul as I ever did in my Life. My
Wife, whom the Count had refused the favor to follow me, was now with me, and
hanging about my Neck, melted into Tears. She exhorted me in very pathetical
terms, to Patience and Perseverance. I was in pain how to leave these good
people; but the Dragoons which were commanded to Guard me, made them withdraw,
to make room for the Horse-Litter to march. I was hardly got without the
Courtgate of my House, but I beheld a multitude of people, which filled four
streets and another place adjoining to them. At the same time that these
disconsolate persons saw me, they began to cry out, Misericorde, Misericorde,
Misericorde. There were among them even some Roman Catholics which shed tears
with my people. There was so great a Crowd, that one trod upon another to ask
my Blessing. Some of them cried, Adieu, my dear Friend: Others, Adieu, my dear
Pastor; and all together lifting their hands and eyes up to Heaven, wished me a
thousand good things. This sad sight, and these sorrowful voices even rent my
Heart, and I swoonded away in my Litter, and was forced to take Cordial Waters
to restore me. I was no sooner come to my self, but I conjured those nearest
about me, to let me go in Peace: But they again began to take me by the Hands,
the Feet, and the Arms, as if they would have kept me for ever. The Dragoons
themselves were so sensibly touched with this spectacle, that they were
observed to change color, and were not able to speak a word to these poor
afflicted people. There was a Person of worth in that Country, who having
inquired into all the particulars of this days Action, said to one of my
Friends, who afterward gave me an Account of it, That he did not believe there
were so many Tears shed in Rome, at Liberius his going from thence; nor at
Alexandria, when Athanasius was banished, as was that day shed at Orange. At
last, having been often stopped in the street, I got out of the City by that Gate
which is nearest my House, where again I found more People weeping, than I had
met with in the City. And here again we were forced to stop, to give them my
Blessing, which they begged with great earnestness. And on this manner I passed
by three Gates of the City, all the way accompanied with a continual crowd of
People. I was stopped again in the Suburbs of the Angel, where a Dragoon gave a
box on the Ear to a poor Woman, who was a Roman Catholic, only because she
bewailed my Misfortune. The care I always took to do Service to all Persons of
either Religion, had gained me their Hearts and Affections, so that I did not
much wonder to find a great many honest minds touched with my Sufferings.

I am persuaded some charitable Person had informed the Count de Tesse of the
sad condition I was in; and that it was to be feared I might die before I
arrived at Pierre-Cise. And upon this consideration it was doubtless, that he
countermanded the Orders he had given. An Officer comes to him that commanded
the Party that guarded me, and bids him conduct me to a place called Saint
Esprit, and put me into the hands of the Chevalier De Montanegues, who
commanded there, and to whom the Count de Tesse writ. Immediately upon this new
Order they marched with me: Abundance of my poor Flock still continually
followed me, the sight of them did but renew my sorrow, for which reason I
begged them to let me go in Peace, since I was in the hands of God, to whose
Mercy I recommended them. This Multitude accompanied me near half a League; but
having got clear from them, I began to turn my thoughts upon my self: I lift up
my Heart to God in singing the 143 Psalm, Lord hear my Prayer, etc. I recited
not one Verse without making holy Reflections for strengthening me in this
great Trial. After this, I sang the 69 Psalm, Save me, O God, etc. But I was
interrupted in this holy Employment by the violent pains of my broken Thigh.
The shaking of the Litter, and the slips and false steps of the Mules did so
loosen my Bones, that I fancied I heard them crack; and very often my Nephew,
John Convenent, and two Footmen, which the Count de Tesse permitted me to take
along with me, were forced to give me Cordial Waters to revive my Spirits, and
support my drooping Heart. As I passed by Mornas, a Village of that Countat,
the Inhabitants flocked out to see me, and void of all Pity, reviled me, and
told me, I deserved to be thrown into the Rhosne. A change in ones Condition,
makes a change in Peoples Behavior; heretofore when I used to pass this way, I
met with all Honor and Civility. One of the Guard of the Vice-Legat of
Avignon, to whom I had done some small kindness, being posted here to hinder
any of the People of Orange to pass, as his Comrades were posted in other
places, he advanced toward me, and dispersed this Mutinous Company. He
expressed a great trouble for my Misfortune, and wished it had been in his
power to make me happy. I thanked him for his Civility, and pursued my way to
Saint Esprit, where at the foot of the Bridge I met the Chevalier De
Montanegues, who expected me. He came up to my Litter, and whispering me in the
Ear, expressed a mighty grief at the hard usage I had met with, but assured me,
that I might confidently expect from him whatever he was capable of. My Wife
had the Honor to belong to this honest Gentleman; this, together with some
little Service I had done the Marquess his Brother, prevailed with him not to
put me in the Castle, and he gave this Reason to the Court for not doing it,
that the Stairs were so inconvenient, that it was impossible to carry me up.
They lodged me in the House of Mr. Robin, famous for his great Wit, for the
ingenious Verses he has published, and for the Honor he has merited to be
one of the most considerable Members of the University of Arles. Mrs. Robin his
Lady, in the absence of her Husband, treated me with all the kindness I could
desire, for which I shall pay an eternal acknowledgment. I was so disordered at
my arrival with the toil of five hours being upon the Road between Orange and
Saint Esprit, that I knew not where I was. They had much trouble to take me out
of the Horse-Litter, and I endured incredible pain in their carrying me into
the Chamber which was to be my Prison, and where for the space of Twenty days I
kept my Bed, without being able to rise to have it made.

I spent the first Night in dictating to my Nephew, John Convenent, several
Letters for Holland and Paris, in which I gave an Account of my sad Adventures.
As I passionately desired to get a Passport, so I writ an importunate Letter
to the Baron De Spanheim, Envoy Extraordinary from his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh, in which I begged him to omit nothing to obtain it. I believed it
would contribute to the success of my Design, if I accompanied my Letter with a
short Petition to the King, and which the said Baron might please to present in
my Name. Here Is the Petition in the same terms I conceived it.

To the Most CHRISTIAN KING.
SIR,
NOble James Pineton de Chambrun, born and* bred in the City of Orange,
heretofore Minister in the same City, with the most Humble Duty represents to
your Majesty, That for these Eleven Years he has been deprived of the use of
his Body by the pain of the Gout, by reason of which he is continually confined
either to his Bed, or a Chair, and from whence he cannot stir but by the help
of his Servants. Besides this, he is actually tormented with the Stone; and to
complete his Misery, he has one of his Thighs broken, by a fall he had out of
the Arms of his Servants. It was, Sir, in this sad Condition he was taken from
his House, by Order of the Count de Tesse, and carried by Dragoons to your City
of Saint Esprit, without being able to prevail with the said Count to suffer
his Wife to follow him, and to assist him in his great Necessities. For these
Reasons, he prostrates himself at the feet of your Majesty's Goodness,
Clemency, and Mercy, humbly beseeching your Majesty to give Order, that he may
have a Passport dispatched to him, for himself and Wife to go into Holland,
etc.


Accordingly I received an Answer from Mr. Spanheim, by which he let me know,
that he had sent away with all Expedition my Petition to the Marquess De
Croissy, and that he writ a Letter along with it, of which he sent me the Copy,
as also of the Marquess his Answer. And here truly I cannot forbear saying,
that the most ardent Charity, and most hearty Friendship dictated Mr.
Spanheim's Letter. The Reasons he urged for my gaining what I desired, were
unanswerable, so the Commendation which it pleased him to give of me, was a
certain sign of his dear kindness, but not the right means, to make me obtain a
Passport. On these Occasions, the more ones Virtue is praised, the more it is
oppressed: So that what at another time would have procured me favorable
regards, was now partly the cause of a more severe Persecution. In the Answer
which the Marquess De Croissy sent Mr. Spanheim, he told him, he had presented
my Petition to the King, and that on the Tuesday following he should have a
positive Answer to it. Now mind, I beseech ye, the Intrigues of this World: The
Marquess De Croissy's Answer was dated the 27th. of November, and three days
before that, which was the 24th. of the same Month, the Marquess De Louvois had
given Order to the Marquess De la Trousse to send me to Pierre-Cise. The
Tuesday following Mr. Spanheim failed not to be at Versailles, to receive the
positive Answer which the Marquess De Croissy had promised him, which in
substance was this; That the King had not yet resolved to give me a Passport,
and notwithstanding all Mr. Spanheim's importunity, he could get no other
Answer. Nay, they hid from him the Order which had been given to remove me to
Pierre-Cise. While they were carrying me to the Prison designed, I received
these two dispatches, and that too by the means of my said Nephew, who stole
away from the Boat, and took Post for Orange.

The day after my Arrival at Saint Esprit I was visited by the Chevalier De
Montanegues, who spoke to me in the most obliging manner, offering me both his
Purse and every thing else in his Power. He told me, he would use his endeavor
that I should be under his Custody till I had received a Passport: For, says
he, they will not surely treat you worse than other Ministers of this Kingdom,
abundance of whom I have seen pass along. During my stay here in this City, the
said Chevalier gave leave to all Persons of Quality to visit me. One day I
entered very far into some Controversies of Religion with a Judge of that place,
whose Name was Mr. Bernard. And for the Ladies, who came in great Companies to
see me, I endeavored to instruct them as dexterously as possibly I could.

While I exercised my self in this good Employment, I forgot not my poor Wife,
which I had left in much danger. I writ to her Consolatory Letters, and begged
her to hide her self from the insolences of the Dragoons, and to keep out of
the hands of the Count de Tesse. In a little time I was informed how cruelly
this Count did use her: He caused her Father's House, where she had taken
Sanctuary, to be beset with fourteen Dragoons; they seized her, and because she
would do nothing against her Conscience, he ordered her to be dragged to my
House, and there to be Servant to the whole Regiment of Dragoons, without any
body to help her. She was overwhelmed with sorrow when she heard of a Command
so unjust, and which exposed her Honor and Chastity to all the shameful
practices of the Dragoons. A Religious Person and a Friend of mine, to whose
Family I had done some good Offices, as soon as he knew of the Misery she was
to endure, immediately ran to Mr. Chavenon's House, and there he soon found
means to give some ease to my Wife; for without making her, by any Trick, to
sign or abjure, he sent the Count word, that she had done her Duty, as they
used to speak; upon which the Count withdrew the Dragoons, and my Wife came to
me. The sight of her was a mighty Comfort to me. We encouraged each other to
Perseverance, and as a help to it, every day I used those Exercises of Piety
which it had been my Custom to do at Orange. At the same time I learnt that the
Count de Tesse upon the 25th. of November with his Troops dislodged from
Orange, and drove before them my Colleagues, till they came even to the Prisons
which are in the Bishopric of Valence; and this was an addition of Grief to me
and my Flock.

After I had been Twenty days in my Prison at St. Esprit, Mr. De Vermenton,
Provost of Valence, came with an Exempt and his Attendance to remove me to
Pierre-Cise. And I am here obliged to say, that of his Profession, there is not
so gallant a Man. He executes his Orders punctually, but he does it with so
much kindness and compassion for those he thinks innocent, that whoever is in
his Custody, seem as if they enjoyed their full Liberty. If I had a Vote in the
Chapter, as they say, he should have it to be a Bishop; and there are Bishops
which I would Vote to be Provosts, because their inhumanity makes them fit for
this Place, and the Goodness of Mr. De Vermenton makes him worthy of a
Bishopric. Before he would come to me, he ordered that I should be handsomely
advertised of his Arrival, that so I might not be surpised. After this, he
came where I was, and in the most friendly terms in the World; he signified to
me the regret he had that he must be forced to remove me. He had so much
Compassion for my sad condition, after I had showed him my Body, that Tears
fell from his Eyes, and forced him to say, he would have given a great deal to
have been discharged from this Commission. Nevertheless a Boat was prepared for
my removal. All things being ready, they took me out of my Bed, from whence I
had not stirred since the first day they put me in it. God knows what I suffered
between my Chamber and the Boat, which lay about a quarter of a League off. My
Footmen carried me in a Chair, my Wife and Nephew held up my Legs, and upon
the least turning or jogging, I roared as if I had been upon the Wheel. As I
went, I took my leave of Mr. De Montanegues, and thanked him for all his
kindnesses. It was very difficult to put me in the Boat: Six Men took me out,
as if I had been a dead Corpse, and I was but too sensible to feel a thousand
pains. They laid me upon Quilts, after which, six Men which Town'd the Boat
began to march. We were six days in going to Anconne, which is but six Leagues
from the Bridge of St. Esprit. The North Wind blew so violently, the coldness
of which brought the Gout upon me, which made my whole Body as stiff as a Bar
of Iron. They kept me upon the Water from break of day, till Ten or Eleven a
Clock at Night, which failed not to put me in the most pitiful condition that
ever poor Gouty Man was in. My Tongue to complain, and my Pulses to let me
sigh, were the only things I had at liberty. They put me to bed in my Clothes,
either upon Straw, or Quilts laid upon the Ground. When we came to Anconne Mr.
De Vermenton, fearing I might dye by the way, would not expose me, in pursuing
the Voyage. He staid therefore two days, as well in expectation of good
Weather, as to let me get a little strength. A great many Persons of the City
of Montelimard came to see me; these good People spoke to me only by their
Sighs and their Tears, and lift up their Eyes to Heaven to beg of God, that he
would Revenge the Cruelty which was exercised upon me. I should be too tedious,
if I should relate all the Discourse I had with these good Souls. I told them,
that it was a great Glory for me to suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ, but
that my Body made me afraid; and that I feared lest the excess of my pains
should make me say something contrary to the meaning of my Heart. As to what
concerned them, I told them, they ought to consider with themselves, and to
rise from their fall by a speedy Repentance, if they would expect Mercy from
God. And thus I endeavored to Edify my Neighbors in every place as I passed
along. In the mean while the Tempest still continued, and we had like to have
seen the Cardinal De Bouillon, who came down the Rhosne, to go to his
Banishment in the Isles of Provence, cast away. With leave of the Curate, the
Provost caused to be made on the Sunday a Litter, the better to convey me
forward. He employed Twelve Countrymen, who carried me upon their shoulders,
and all at my Charges and Expenses, which sometimes amounted to four Pistols a
day. The Noise that was abroad about me, had drawn a great many People in the
way as I passed. The good People of Dauphine came in Troops with Tears in their
Eyes to ask my Blessing, testifying by their general regret how much they were
troubled with my Miseries. The Exempt beat them back very severely; yet this
did not hinder them from coming up to me to kiss my hands, and send their good
wishes after me. At Sausse I met with a worthy Gentleman, whose Name was Mr. Du
Ferron, Captain in the Regiment of Sault. He came up to me very ingenuously,
and mightily comforted me by a thousand pretty things, which he entertained me
with on the Subject of Persecution. He talked to me of the Sermon which the
incomparable Mr. Claude had published upon these words You have not yet
resisted unto Blood. He even had that Confidence in me, as to tell me of his
design of leaving the Kingdom, and that he was now on his way in order to it.
God has blessed his good Resolution, and I have had the good Fortune to see him
again at the Hague.

The 10th. of December I arrived at Valence, just as it began to be dark; Mr.
De Vermenton went before to prepare me a Chamber; and his arrival having
declared mine, I found in the Suburbs a great Multitude of People, and in the
first Court of the Inn, a great many Persons of Quality of both Sexes. Some
said, Look, here is that Devil, the Minister of Orange; others cried, This is
the Prince of Orange's Spy; in a word, I heard nothing but Railing and
Invectives, which yet did not trouble me much, calling to mind the words of the
Savior of the World, Mat. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely. That which I was concerned
for, was, how to get out of my Litter; they were above half an hour before they
could effect it, not knowing on which side to take me, being so helpless as I
was of all the parts of my Body. I begged the Provost to have a little Patience
till I recovered my Spirits; and observing so much fine People round about me,
I said, Ladies, I beg your Pardon for my rudeness, I am not able to lift my
Hand to my Cap to salute you: Doubtless you have heard talk of Job, you see
here his Brother, or Cousin-German. At this the Ladies were touched with Pity,
and went away hastily, and I observed several who took out their Handkerchiefs
to wipe away their Tears. At last they carried me from my Litter to a Bed,
where they endeavored to get off my Clothes, that I might take some Rest,
after so many days fatigue, and want of sleep.

The same Night that I arrived at Valence, there was a Person of worth came to
my Bedside. After he had passed some Complements upon me, with a voice pretty
loud, because he would give no suspicion to the Exempt, of whom I have spoke,
whose Name is Nardouin, and who never one moment left my Chamber, nor the sight
of me, and who besides placed Sergeants at the Door as Sentinels Night and Day;
this honest Man, I say, with a low voice told me, that he utterly detested the
Cruelty and Barbarity which had been practiced upon me. After that, he drew
before me so hideous a draught of the state of his Soul since his fall, that I
was filled with fear: To which he added the Torments which he suffered as often
as he was forced to go to Mass, and the horrors of his Mind when he there
beheld the Idolatries they committed. He begged me to give him some comfort; but
alas! I was but in an ill condition to do it. There came some other Persons of
Note, who could not forbear weeping, amongst whom there was a Marquess of
worth, whose Name I shall conceal, who was going to the place of his
Banishment, and whom they would not suffer to speak to me. This Night I passed
mighty unquietly, partly through the terrible pains of the Gout, and partly
through the grief that they would not let me have the freedom to speak to those
about me. The Exempt lay in my Chamber, he was the Spy upon all my words and
actions, so that I had hardly the liberty to complain. The next day the
Provost, who had been conferring with the Bishop of Valence, came into my
Chamber to tell me, that he would leave me that day to take my rest, and that
in the mean time he would prepare a Boat. I told him, that I had much rather go
in a Litter, because I should endure the pains of the Wheel in their carrying
me to the Riverside, which was a quarter of a League from my Lodging. He
seemed to consent to it, but though I had secured one for the next day, yet he
refused to carry me this way. In the mean time, I know not whether it was not
from a motive of Compassion which made Mr. De Vermenton unwilling I should go
any further than Valence; but this I am sure of, that he feared exreamly lest I
should dye in his hands. For this Reason the two Physicians of the University,
and two Chirurgions were sent to visit me. They had no sooner seen my miserable
Body, but they turned away their Eyes, and lift up their shoulders; and when I
told them, that these were not all my Ills, I was besides tormented with the
Stone. They said, they could not give a judgment concerning that, unless they
made a search; but however they had already seen but too much: And upon this
they withdrew. In my Journey my Thigh was unbound, which caused me horrible
pains; and those of the Gout increased furiously upon me: Yet notwithstanding
this sad condition, I was impatient to be quickly carried to Pierre-Cise. I
begged the Provost to satisfy my desire, and he promised me, that the next
Morning we should set forward; but instead of that, I saw coming into my
Chamber that Morning the Bishop of Valence. It was easy to imagine that there
was some contrivance laid, which made me stand upon my Guard. My Arms were so
stiff through the effects of the Gout, that it was impossible for me to lift my
hand to my Cap to salute him. After he was set by my Bed's-head, he began to
tell me, that he was sorry to see me in so much trouble, that this ought to
make me consider with my self, that I might not go to Pierre-Cise, where I
should suffer much; that I had much better reunite my self, by which means I
should be at ease, that the King would allow me large Pensions; That his
intention was not only upon his own Subjects to reunite them to the Church, but
that his Piety incited him to cause all other Protestants to enter into the
Church; and that I should be a very proper Person to contribute to so good a
Design, and that through my means, there might be a good understanding, and
that some satisfaction might be given to Protestants concerning some Points;
and that for his part, he would make no scruple to consent to the taking away
some Images out of Churches, and that even he had already taken away a great
many out of his Churches, where very few are seen; and that the Cup would be
given to the People again. But that it was necessary to have some considerable
Man of our Party, who should promote this business, and that for certain, I was
the Man the most fit. This in substance is what this Prelate said to me at this
first interview. To which I answered, that I thanked him for the Honor he had
done me; that as to the Sufferings he mentioned, I was fully resolved to
undergo them; that if I had believed I could have been saved in the Roman
Church, I should never have let my self have been thus tormented for these two
Months. As for Pensions, through the goodness of God I had no need of them; as
mean a Gentleman as I was, I had where-withall to live. As for the Praises he
bestowed on me, in thinking me fit to Labor toward a Reformation, I was very
sensible of my own weakness; but yet I could willingly spend my Blood to effect
so good a Work: But in the condition Affairs are, there is no likelihood that
things should conclude by Lenity and Friendship, that are begun by force of
Arms; and that therefore I should be extremely obliged to him, if he would
obtain a Passport for me to go where Providence should direct me. Do not
flatter your self about it, Sir, replied he, you are a Prisoner of State, and
you ought not to expect any Passport. It will be thought an Honor if they can
make you a Catholic. It is very well known that you are closely engaged to the
Prince of Orange, and you will never be suffered to go near him. But pray tell
me, says he, Do you think it would not be more for your Advantage to serve the
King, than the Prince of Orange? Is not he a greater Master? I know very well
that it is your engagement to the Interests of that Prince which sticks at your
heart, and that you are afraid to displease him in changing your Religion; but
I do assure you, that we have certain News, that he is getting himself
instructed. Pardon me Sir, replied I, if I tell you, that I do not believe a
word on it. I had the happiness to know him in his most tender years, he was
then perfectly well instructed, and I doubt not but his Understanding has
increased with his Age; and as I am persuaded he has no scruple of Conscience
upon the account of his Religion, so neither does he need any further
Instruction. You are not the first Sir, who has told me this News, there are a
great many others who publish it, but there are reasons for all this, and it is
not hard to discover the design for which all these Reports are spread
throughout Europe. I know that your King is a great King, but I know also that
my Prince is a great Prince, who has always done me much good, and honors me
with his kindness: and I should be very ungrateful if I did but think of
changing my Master. What have I done to deserve to be a Prisoner of State? I
have never medl'd with things of this nature; so that Sir, I must once more beg
you to procure for me a Pass port, or if Mr. Vermenton find that I cannot be
removed, because of my Pains, be pleased to let me be put in one of your
Prisons with my Brethren. After this discourse, he still very pressingly
solicited me to a change, always offering me both Riches and Honors, to all
which I only answered him, (that I might rid my hands of him) That people do
not change their Religion as they do their Shirts, and that I should have time
to think on it in my Prison of Pierre-cise.

It was by his order that they made a show of my tarrying in Valence, till they
received orders from the Marquess de la Trousse who commanded in Dauphine; they
removed me to an ordinary House in the City, where I was continually guarded by
the Exempt, and by Sergeants. My dear Brethren, who as yet were not thrown into
Dungeons, as afterward they were, sent to me a trusty person to tell me that
they offered up their Prayers to God for me, and begged that I would pray for
them: And I did the same in their behalf.

As they continually consulted in Valence to find out some way to make me
yield, so they were of opinion that it would be best to take from me, my Wife
and my Nephew, and deprive me of all my Servants; they accused the two first of
encouraging me in my resolution not to change. The Exempt it seems had heard us
discourse about it; and for the others, they knew that they were absolutely
necessary for me, since they only understood how to manage me in my bed, and to
serve me in all my natural necessities. In effect, I was to be dealt with, as
if I had been a newborn Infant, and I had rotted in my own filth, if I had been
in the hands of other persons, since I could never have endured them to have
done such vile and unpleasant work. But they told my Wife and my Nephew that
they must withdraw, and me they told, that I should have Dragoons or Sergeants
to wait on me. This discourse was to me as a mighty clap of Thunder, and
disordered me so extremely, that I knew not where I was. I was very well aware
that they used me after this manner, on purpose to reduce me to the last
extremity, and to throw me into Pains a thousand times worse than those of
Hell; for if my Servants who were used to my Miseries, could not touch me
without causing me excessive pain, what could I expect from the hands of
Dragoons, and Sergeants, people void of Pity and Mercy? My only refuge was
Prayers and Tears, and I begged God that he would have pity on me, but my Sins
were too great to obtain from his assisting Grace what I begged of him, having a
mind to put on my Cloths to try whether I could endure them when I was to go to
Pierre-cise, as they had given me notice to be ready for that purpose, I
suffered so much Torments that I let slip these cursed Words, Well, I will
reunite my self. The Exempt who was present, immediately run to the Bishop,
without saying a word to me; the Bishop comes the same moment accompanied by
the Provost and some other Persons, and having presented me with a Paper to
sign, and pronouncing some words in Latin, which I protest I never heard, I
refused to do it, as I have constantly refused as often as I have been solicited
to it. He told me, that they had acquainted him that I said, I would reunite
my self; I answered him, that it was true, but it was the violent pains I
endured which forced those words from my Mouth, in the distraction of my Mind,
and that if I should reunite my self, it would be no great Conquest gained,
since the condition he saw me in had deprived me of my Reason. And really, I
knew not what I did, my Reason was so disordered; nay, I had hardly the use of
my Senses. I doubt not but the Bishop caused to be signed in the Paper, that he
had presented before me the Provost and some other Persons, as Witnesses of my
pretended Conversion: But I appeal particularly to the Conscience of Mr. de
Vermenton, whether he ever heard me say in the presence of the said Bishop,
that I would reunite my self. And I make the same appeal to all the other
persons as to this matter, as I take them for honest people, so I hope they will
bear witness to the Truth.

In the mean time let not any believe I say this to excuse my fault. To my
sorrow, I am but too sensible that I have fallen away, and that the fatal words
which I uttered, have separated me from the external Communion of the true
Church, till through the Mercy of God, and the Ministry of his Servants I shall
be readmitted. If I had not thought so, and if I were not yet of the same mind,
I should not have shed so many Tears; on the contrary I should have rejoiced at
my sufferings, and should have thought I might have had a place in the
Catalogue of the most Illustrious Confessors; But alas! I look upon my self as
a cowardly Soldier, who turned my Back in the day of Battle, and as an
unfaithful Servant, who has betrayed the Interests of his Master.

Although my fall was after that manner, and of the nature I have been
representing, yet the Bishop of Valence did not fail to boast of it as a mighty
honor to himself; he continually talked of it to all comers and goers, and he
writ of it to the Court, and triumphed upon it, as the greatest of his Victories.

But my condition was vastly different from his; that which was the subject of
his Glory was the matter of my Shame; and the Honor he claimed in perverting
me, was an Eternal reason for my Sighs and Tears.

Is it possible for me to express my grief to that degree I felt it? Is it
possible for me to describe the state of my Soul in Colors equally black with
the sorrow that overwhelmed me on that sad occasion? Can I tell forth my Groans
to all Europe with as mournful a Voice as I did the moment immediately after my
pronouncing those cursed words?

Whilst I was in this Affliction, the Bishop of Valence received Letters from
Court in answer to those he had writ concerning my pretended change: He pleased
himself mightily in the Congratulations which he received from the Archbishop
of Paris, and Father la Chaise, upon his imaginary Victory. The Marquess de
Louvois writ to him also concerning it; and immediately upon his reception of
these Letters the Roman Catholics published in Valence that there was a
Pension of two thousand Livres settled upon me. This Prelate came to me, and
told me, that it now depended only upon my self, whether I would be very happy;
that they writ him from Gourt, that I might ask whatever I had a mind to, and
it should be granted me. And that the King only wished that I would continue a
little while at Valence. I told him, that I had no occasion of any thing, and
that were I in the greatest necessity, I had rather dye, than it should be
said, I sold my Religion and Conscience for Money; that they did me great wrong
in detaining me at Valence, and that they would be much more just in granting
me a Passport. Nay, to try him, I desired him however to procure me leave to
go to Orange, though in truth I had no great mind to return thither. He told me
that with time this last might be, as soon as I had given any proofs of my
Obedience and Fidelity to the King; but for a Passport, I ought not to expect
that. And he added, that he observed me mightily cast down, and asked me why I
was so. It seems the Exempt and Sergeants had given him constant information,
for they had their haunts about the place where I was, and never failed every
day to give him a faithful account of every thing that passed. How is it
possible, Sir, said I to him, that I should not be cast down after having
received and do still receive such cruel usage? I must needs tell you, that I
am in continual Tears by reason of Torments I suffer both in Body and Mind. You
fancy that you have gained a mighty Victory by those words I spoke, but how
easy is it to triumph over a poor miserable? Upon this first visit, I was not
in circumstances to let him know more of my Mind. But he made me seven other
visits while I stayed at Valence, what our Discourses were upon them all, I
shall here in few words relate.

He was continually telling me, That there was nothing so fatal as Schism, nor
no greater blessing than a Reunion. I told him, 'Twas very true, that Unity
was a most pleasing thing to God, when it could be maintained; but that yet we
must mind what St. Paul says, who teaches, that we must follow Peace with all
men as much as it is possible; from which Doctrine we may observe, that when the
Unity endangers our Salvation, we are indispensably obliged to break it, and
that for as much as the same Apostle teaches us, that we must not so much as
eat with Idolaters, and that there can be no agreement between the Temple of
God and Idols. Upon this he began to discourse to me of the Schism of the
Donatists, but it required not ^n extraordinary Judgment to perceive that he
was but little versed in that History. I told him that certainly the Donatists
were in the wrong to make a Schism about a matter of Discipline; but that our
Reformers separated about Essential matters of Doctrine and Worship, as well as
about the Government of the Church, and for this reason it is impossible to make
them guilty, unless it can be demonstrated that they have err^d in the truth of
their pretensions. He did not pursue this point very far, and he only told me,
that as he had already said, that some things might be Reformed in the Church,
and that he esteemed me a very fit Person to assist in this good work. I do not
very well remember how we began to discourse of the present Persecution, but I
perfectly remember that he said these very words to me; It is believed that the
Bishops are the Authors of the Methods that are now taken for a reunion, but
certainly it is a great mistake; we have indeed upon this occasion, represented
what we thought our Duty, but it is the King's Will, which no body ought to
oppose. While he discoursed to me on this manner, I lift up my Eyes to Heaven,
as astonished to hear a Bishop able to talk so directly against Truth. In his
Discourse he seemed to me, as if he had detested all Violence, and yet he was
no sooner gone from me, but I heard he was on Horseback at the head of the
Dragoons, going to torment all those in his Diocese, who would not either
abjure, or go to Mass. The Prince my Master, I found, troubled his Mind much;
we seldom discoursed together, but he would tell me, these headstrong People
still fancy that the Prince of Orange will come to their Assistance; which made
me say one day to a Friend of mine, that the Name of the Prince my Master, was
as terrible to the Bishop of Valence, as the Drum which was made of the Skin of
Ziska was heretofore to the Emperors.

At another of our Meetings we sell to discourse about the Canon of the Mass;
he gave me so particular account of it, as if he had believed it the
composition of Angels. I told him, that to speak truth, there were very good
things in it; but yet, that it seemed like a Cloak made of so many different
pieces, that those who considered it thoroughly, did not see those fine things
in it which he did. As for Example, Sir, said I, who can endure this passage
in it, where the Priest says, We present to thee this Sacrifice in Honor of the
Holy Virgin, St. Peter, St. Paul, etc. What, offer to God that Blood by which
these Saints were redeemed, in Honor to them! Is not this esteeming less of
the Blood of Jesus Christ than of those Saints? All the Answer I could get from
him was this, That we ought to understand these words in the sense of the
Church.

As to Transubstantiation, I cited to him that incomparable passage of
Theodoret, which is found in his Dialogues; God does not change the nature of
Bread, but adds Grace to Nature. I quoted it to him in Greek. He told me, that
heretofore he understood this Language, but that he had now forgot it. Yes,
Sir, said I to him, I do believe it; you have had other business than to mind
your Grammar. He acquitted himself not much better from what I showed him in
the Decretals. He laid much weight upon these words, This is my Body; telling
me, 'twas impossible to be deceived in believing what Jesus Christ had said.
Upon which I showed him the Explanation which the Decretals themselves give of
this passage, under the Title of the Consecration. Your Decretals, said I to
him, ought not to be suspected by you; and these words of Jesus Christ, This is
my Body, they thus explicate: Coeleste Sacramentum quod vocatur caro Christi
dicitur etiam corpus Christi, non proprie sed improprie, non rei veritate, sed
significante mysterio, ita ut is sit sensus, hoc est corpus meum, id est,
significat.

To this, he also gave me the same Answer, to wit, That it must be understood
in the sense of the Church. But said I, Sir, it is in these Decretals which the
Church explains her meaning, and she says, that we must understand these words,
This is my Body, not that the Body of Jesus Christ is truly in the Sacrament,
but that it is represented and signified by the Sacrament.

The Answers which this Prelate made me, let me clearly see, that he had
studied more Politics than Divinity; that he was more conversant among the
leaves in the Archives of his Diocese, that he might increase his Revenues,
than in the Holy Scriptures, that he might be perfect in all good works, and be
the man of God, according to St. Paul's Precept; and in a word, his Mind was
more set upon the Greatness of this World, and the Intrigues of the Court, than
upon the Humility of a true Bishop, or upon the unfolding of the Mysteries of
Religion.

To persuade me, that it was Lawful to use Force, to make erring Persons come
into the Church, according to that saying, Coge eos intrare, compel them to
come in; which was, it seems, much in use in those days. He sent me the two
Epistles of St. Austin, which some had lately taken the pains to Translate into
French: The first was to Vincent, a Donatist Bishop; the other was to Boniface,
General of the Emperor's Army. I was prepared to Answer these two Epistles, but
I was gone so far with him, that I prevented his asking my Opinion of them. I
had before quoted to him this incomparable passage of one of the Ancients; Nova
haec and inaudita praedicatio quae verberibus fidem suadere conatur. This is a
new and strange way of Preaching, which goes about to persuade men into the
Mysteries of Religion by blows and stripes. However I had got ready for him
some passages of the same Father, and was resolved to tell him, that although
St. Austin was endowed with a great many rare gifts, that yet, he was but a
Man, and for that Reason, suffered himself to be a Court-Bishop. I should be
too tedious if I related the particulars of all I talked of with this Bishop
concerning Religion; I think it sufficient to say, for the Edification of my
Neighbor, and my own satisfaction, that since I let slip those rash words,
there has not gone out of my Mouth any that have in the least been against my
knowledge, or contrary to the Dictates of my own Conscience; on the contrary, I
have endeavored as much as 'twas possible for me to Edify the Church of God,
exhorting all those I met with, either to perseverance, in case they were not
yet fallen, or if they were fallen, to rise again by a speedy Repentance: I
never omitted the accustomed Exercises of Piety; I prayed with all comers and
goers; I sang Psalms with a loud voice; and although they continually told me,
if I took not care, I should ruin my self; I answered them, that I would
glorify my God, and that Death was far more dear to me than Life. One day the
Bishop reproached me, I answered him briskly, that I should all my Life think
my self obliged to thank him, that he could not reasonably speak against my
Devotion, seeing he had told all his Diocese, that our Prayers were good, and
that there was no fault to be found with our Psalms. Two Months and a half I
continued in that City with a dejection of Mind not to be conceived. My
Thoughts were so taken up, that I scarce was sensible of the pains of my Body,
which has almost persuaded me into that Opinion, that pain subsists only in the
Thought. The Bishop's Commissary of War for the Province of Dauphine came to
see me; he was going to Orange to carry 500 Pistols to free those Roman
Catholics which were poor from Quartering Soldiers, by which one may judge at
the Expense the Protestants have been put to. This Commissary offered me Money,
for which I did not vouchsafe to thank him. He exhorted me also to write the
motives of my pretended Conversion, and set before me the Example of the
Minister Vigne. I told him, I was not such a one as he took me for; that he had
forgot the Dragoons and Drummers which he sent me, whose terrible noise had
made me forget my Latin; and thus I briskly sent him away, laughing at him and
his offers.

And since the mention of this Commissary has brought to my Mind the Minister
Vigne, I cannot forbear noting here, that this Apostate being come to Valence
to get himself received a Counselor in the Presidial Court, came to see me,
accompanied by two of the Bishop of Valence his Men. He came into my Chamber
all trembling and pale; I received him very coldly, and after a short discourse
of Civility, which he thought fit to make me, I spoke to him in Latin, because
there were some Persons I had no mind should understand us. I desired him to
tell me, in what condition his Conscience was since his change: He was
extremely surprised at my Question, and seemed at a great loss: But
nevertheless, after a short silence, he answered me with a stammering voice,
that his Conscience was at rest; upon which I told him, that mine was in Hell,
although I had not done what he had done. I have no quiet Night nor Day, for an
ill word which I spoke, and yet you say, that your Conscience is in perfect
Peace. Ah! Sir, you do not consider as you should; you had much better confess
your sin to God, than to withstand Truth unjustly. Says he to me, I am
reunited to the Roman Church, that so I may not be guilty of Schism, which is
so hurtful to our Salvation: I am reunited positively, but I am separated from
her negatively. Said I to him, if you were speaking to some ignorant
Countryman, you might throw some dust in his Eyes by this distinction, but do
you believe me so ignorant, as not to understand your Jargoon? Can you say,
that you are separated negatively from the Roman Church, in rejecting the
Doctrine and Worship which we disapprove? Have not you very lately published a
Letter, directed to your pretended new Converts, in which you maintain what you
tell me now is not the object of your Faith? Have a care, that in lying to Men,
you do not lie to God. In all likelihood he did not expect that I durst talk to
him with so much Courage, but that in Policy I would dissemble with him my
Opinions; so that he withdrew in some confusion, and went directly to the
Bishop's House, where it is very likely he made him a partial recital of our
Discourse; but yet the Bishop never took the least notice to me of it.

As soon as I was a little recovered from the swelling of my Heart, which had
almost deprived me of the use of my Reason, I presumed to write to his
Highness; the Letter was Dated the 12th. of January 1686, and in that I gave
him a short account of all my sad Adventures. This Excellent Master had the
goodness to cause Mr. De Schuylemberg to write to me, that he was very much
concerned at all my Miseries, and that I ought still to hope that God would not
forsake me. This Answer was a mighty assistance to me, and contributed much to
my Comfort; for as God had still designed more Afflictions and Sufferings for
me, so these marks of kindness to one so unworthy, help mightily to support me
in my Combats.

A few days after I had received this Answer, the Bishop of Valence made his
last Visit to me, and it was very troublesome: Until then he had never pressed
me, but then he told me, that I seemed as if I intended to live without the
exercise of any Religion; that I would create to my self troublesome businesses,
for which he was sorry; but however he was to take care of me, that as I had
importuned him, either to procure a Passport for me, or leave to go to Orange,
he had obtained leave for me to go to Romeyer, which is near Die, where there
is good Air to recover my Health. I was very sensible that he was unwilling to
tell me, that this was to be the place of my Banishment; but yet I was
overjoyed that I was suffered to go out of Valence, which I esteemed as Hell.
And I went away as soon as 'twas possible, notwithstanding my pains. But before
I left the place, I failed not by this Letter to take my last Farewell of my
dear Colleagues.

I Bid you Farewell, my dear Brethren, if you can yet think me worthy of so
Honorable a Relation. I am leaving this place, which has been so fatal to me,
and am going to withdraw my self into a Desert, which I must look upon as a
sort of Banishment. My Weakness and Infirmities have separated me from you, and
I am no longer a Faithful and Loyal Servant: I already endure the Punishment of
my Fault even in this Life, for I am in the most Melancholy Circumstances which
it is possible for you to imagine. I envy your Bonds, and I think the dust of
your Feet a thousand times more worthy to be presented to God, than all my
Person. Learn by my sad Example to be more faithful to him whom you serve, than
I have been: This Divine Master knows what Prayers I offer up to him for your
perseverance. I beseech you do not forget me in yours, which will be of great
efficacy in the presence of God. I have a greater value for those dark holes
where you are kept, than for the most stately Palaces in the World. The Prayers
of good Men will open them, that you may enjoy the Fruit due to your
Perseverance, and you know the Blessed Recompense which God has prepared for
his excellent Virtue. Farewell then, my dear Brethren, my Heart with all its
Affections embrace you; and in what part of the World soever Providence shall
dispose of you, I beseech you publish my Sighs and Tears, that if my fault has
scandalized the Church of God, the Tears of my Repentance may serve to Edify
her.


Upon the second of March I arrived in that horrid Desert to which I was
banished. Upon the Road I was in great perplexities of Mind. Diverse Ministers
who had yielded, some through Violence, others most willingly, were at Die, a
Town which I was to pass through. Is it possible, said I to my self, that thou
art sent near such a Nest of Apostates, the remembrance of whose Crime will
continually reproach thee with thy Fault? I made my complaint with such
vehemence, that a Gentleman traveling by the Litter where I lay, asked one of
my Servants whether I was not mad. I will say nothing of the Tears which
abundance of good people shed for me as I went along; I received from them a
thousand kind wishes, for they very well knew the truth of my Heart, and the
regret I had for having let slip those Words. The frightful Desert into which I
was banished, is a little narrow Valley, into which you cannot enter neither,
but through the opening of an inaccessible Rock to the West of the said Valley.
To the East there is a barren Mountain called Glandasse, of so prodigious a
height, that to arrive at the top of it, it will require three hours time. To
the North, and to the South, there are Hills which are joined by heaps to one
another, and which cast such a shadow, and so far, that in Winter one can
hardly see the Sunshine. That which is the only pleasant thing there, is a
little Brook which takes its Source from the said Mountain of Glandasse, and by
its pretty Murmurs might serve to divert the Mind when it is free from dismal
Thoughts, which mine was not. Before these last Revolutions, all the
Inhabitants of the three or four Villages which are in this Vale, were of the
Reformed Religion, except two or three Families, which was a great satisfaction
to me; for while I stayed in this place of Exile these good people came to pray
with me, and to comfort me. The News of my arrival in this melancholy abode
was no sooner spread in the Neighborhood, but there resorted to me people of
all sorts, of each Sex, which stole away to see me, and to mix their Tears with
mine. There came to me some from every Province thereabouts, and they all
assured me, that my Fall was so far from giving a Scandal, that every body had
compassion on me, knowing to what a sad condition they had reduced me, and that
they prayed and hoped the example which I had furnished the Church would be of
great Edification to her. What Edification said I, can any receive from so
great a sinner as I am? I do indeed beseech God with all the powers of my Soul,
that he would please to give me the grace to glorify his Name, but I fear the
fault I committed, will keep him from hearing my Prayers. I am firmly resolved
rather to dye than make any profession of the Romish Religion: But alas! what
am I? and how do I know but the Torments which they may yet make me endure, may
cause me once more to Fall? I told the Count de Tesse that I would be dragged
through the Streets of Orange, and yet I was not as good as my word. What Is past
makes me fear what is to come.

During the five Months that I was in this place of Banishment, the chief
Employment in my Bed of Affliction, was, every day to bath it with my Tears. I
never ceased praying and sighing, and afflicting my Soul; and if sometimes they
forced me out of my Bed, and carried me into a Garden, as often as I saw those
terrible Mountains, I repeated what David said in the 121 Psalm, I will lift up
my eyes unto hills from whence comes my help. My help comes from the Lord
which made heaven and earth.

The Feast of Easter being near, the Bishop of Valence came to Die, which is
about a League from the place of my Banishment, to Confess and Communicate the
pretended new Converts. I had reason to believe he would come and disquiet me,
and accordingly he did not fail; there happened to be with me one Mr. Julian an
Advocate of Die, and a very honest man, and one who has glorified God by his
retiring; I entreated him to hide himself behind my Bed, that he might have the
pleasure of hearing what I said to the Bishop. He granted my request, and
quickly, the Bishop accompanied with a great many Priests, and some Officers of
the Army come in. For half a quarter of an hour our Discourse ran upon things
indifferent; but upon his coming up close to my Bedside all the other people
withdrew, and putting his head very near mine, he asked me, if I would not think
of signing the Writing which he had showed me, and of doing what a good
Christian ought to do. I answered him, that for the Writing I could not sign
it, and to live as a good Christian, I should endeavor all the days of my
Life. He pressed me extremely. But at last I told him for a full answer, that I
would beg him never more to urge me, and conjured him to order the Curate of
the place not to require me to exercise any Act of the Romish Religion, since
that being recovered from the distraction of my Mind, I was in a condition to
speak of my Life.

He appeared not much troubled at this Discourse, he only said, Well, you will
think on it, and so left me with great Civility. The Advocate came out of his
secret place, and falling upon my Neck, embraced me with abundance of
Tenderness and Tears, telling me that my Discourse had extremely edifi'd him,
that he must leave me to go to Die, where the Bishop would not fail to report,
that I had promised him every thing; which accordingly happened: For this
Bishop was no sooner at Die, than in the presence of a great many People, he
said, That he came from me, that I was a very honest man, that he was pleased
with my Conversation, and that I had promised to Confess, and to Communicate.
The Advocate who was there present while the Bishop said this, whispered in the
Ears of some of his Friends; This is not true I am witness of it; and
afterward unfolded the whole Mystery, assuring them that the Bishop said all
this only to seduce them.

The continual troubles of my mind quickly threw me back into the condition I
was in at Valence. I was seized by a violent Fever, which distracted me, yet I
was quickly well, without using the least Medicine; but though my Body was
eased, yet my Mind was so tormented with sad Thoughts, which continually
prepresented themselves to me, that I knew not where I was. It seemed as if God
himself had imprinted my Sin on my Heart, to make me the more sensible of its
horrible foulness, and to the end that I might run to him by Prayers, Sighs and
Tears. I must confess, that I was forsaken of all Comfort, for I was able
oftener than once to say with Job, c. 3. v. 3, 4. Let the day perish wherein I
was born, and the night in which it was said, there is a man-Child conceived:
Let that day be darkness; Let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon it. To this I added, what follows in the same Chapter which
here I care not to write. To call in the Consolations of my God, I often
repeated these words in the 77th Psalm. v. 7. 8. Is his mercy clean gone from
us? and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? Has God forgotten
to be gracious; and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? Alas!
how often did I say, Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness:
according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. Cast me not
away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. O give the
comfort of thy help again; and establish me with thy free spirit, Psalm. 51. v.
1, 11, 12. I endeavored to moderate my grief by considering the difference
which St. Cyprian made of those who were fallen. I knew the Ancients
distinguished between those which were called Sacrificati, that is to say those
who had sacrificed to Idols and Thurificati, those who had presented Incense,
and Libellatici, those who gave Money to the Judge, that they might not go into
the Temple of the Idols, and who afterward had a certain work to deliver
themselves from the Persecution by cunning shift. I very well saw that I was of
this last sort, but yet this did not satisfy me, because I had not the courage
to suffer Persecution for the sake of my Savior, which by the by, I desire,
may be an admonition to those who have escaped it, by any Art whatever, to look
upon themselves as great Sinners. Many may say that they have not signed any
Abjuration, but I desire them to ask their Consciences, whether they have done
no Action, by which they have denied their Religion.

I considered with my self the Fall of many great men, who yet afterward
glorified God by their Repentance. St. Peter was the first who presented
himself to my Imagination: but I found my Infidelity far greater than his. I
forgot not the great Hosius who presided at the Council of Nice; the love of
his Sepulcher, as St. Hillary elegantly calls it, meaning his Body, grown weak
through his great Age, made him sign the detestable Heresy of Arius. But said
I, Hosius because of his Age was in a kind of dotage; but thou was in the
vigor of thy Mind. Liberius came next to my Thoughts, but I perceived it was
only the uneasiness of Banishment that made him fall. And that the fears of
Death made Berengarius as well as Jerome of Prague recant, as also the great
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury: Although there was no comparison betwixt
these great men and me, but inregard of my fault, yet I could not forbear
making a parallel of their conduct with mine; for at last, said I to my self,
all these great Lights regained their former brightness after they had been
sometime obscured: But miserable that thou art, can thou expect that God should
raise thee, seeing thou have so basely forsaken him?

In the exercise of such thoughts as these did I pass the greatest part of the
time of my Banishment; they were interrupted by the Curate of the place, who
came to me about Whitsontide, to exhort me by Order of Monsieur De Valence, to
Communicate. He told me Easter was past, and that it was his Duty to make me
this Exhortation, to the end I might do mine. He was accompanied by two or
three Prebends of Die, but they durst not propose this to me, fearing to engage
with me. The Curate seemed much disturbed while he spoke to me; I thanked him
for the care he took of me, but that my Conscience forced me to tell him that I
was not in a condition to do what he required me; and that I was surpised that
Monsieur De Valence should give him this Commission, seeing I had so fully
informed him of my intentions therein. In good earnest, Mr. Curate, would you
oblige a Man to Communicate that does not believe your Mysteries? Hereupon I
made a long discourse to him to let him know the Sentiments of my Soul. When I
had ended, he arose, and told me, he would never while he lived speak more to
me about this Matter, but that he was indispensably obliged to let his Bishop
know all that I had said to him. This Curate was a Man of his word, for never
since, did he ever speak to me of Religion.

Nevertheless, with an extreme Passion I wished I might glorify God, either by
a Retreat, or by Prison, or by Death, God having put it into my Heart, that I
must suffer every thing, rather than defile my self by any act of Idolatry. It
was upon this consideration that I writ to the Bishop of Valence, to let him
know, that I could no longer live being so horribly tormented with the Stone.
And truly, for several days I endured the pain of such a stoppage of Urine,
that I could find no ease, till I had voided a Stone as big as a Bean. This
Prelate never saw me but in Bed, which I usually kept, as well for the ease of
my Mind, as that of my Body; for when I was up, I was in continual pain. By my
Letter I entreated him to get leave for me to go to Lions to be cut. He
answered me very civilly, that with all his Heart he would use his endeavor
for that as well as for my entire ease. He prophesied without thinking on it;
for the permission which he obtained some time after, was the cause of my
deliverance, by which I was discharged of a Stone, which I had in my Head, a
thousand times more troublesome than any that could afflict a Man in that
strange Distemper. Every day seemed a Year; I waited for this Permission with
great impatience, and not hearing any News of it, I again writ to the Bishop to
the same effect, and after a strange manner aggravated my evil. He got his
desire, and I mine. He delayed the time, that so my pains and anguish might
determine me to what he wished; but my thoughts were quite contrary. Therefore
while he deferred procuring me this satisfaction, I endeavored by way of
Grenoble, to find a favorable occasion to make my escape out of the Kingdom.
God blessed my Contrivance, and heard my ardent Prayers. There was found for me
a Party, which to me seemed able enough to execute my Design. But when I had
made all ready to be Transported by Twelve Peasants over the high Mountains,
even to the side of the Lizere, Advice was brought me, that Grenoble was full
of Dragoons, and so that my Design was ruined. My Affliction was great to have
failed of my aim: But God, who Rules all things by his wise Providence, was
pleased to bar up this way against me, that he might open me one more easy and
commodious. I knew not then, that I was under the Guard of the Chief
Magistrates of the Neighboring Corporations, to whom, it seems, the Bishop of
Valence had given Order to take care that I made not my escape. Infallibly I
had been taken, if I had offered to go away without express leave, which a
thousand times has made me adore the Providence and favorable Protection of my
good God over me.

At the beginning of the Month of July the Bishop of Valence came into his
Diocese of Die, to bring his People to Confession and the Communion. A great
many Troops came before him to use Force and Violence toward those who would
not obey him. He was no sooner come, but he let a Friend of mine know, that he
had obtained the Permission which I desired, to go to Lions. As much as I was
cast down by my continual Tears, yet this good News revived me, and I plainly
perceived my bodily pains to diminish; from whence I inferred that the great God
would by this means enable me to gain my end, which through his Aid I have
done. But in the midst of this little Joy, I was still troubled in my Mind,
foreseeing that I should meet with furious Attacks from this Bishop, either to
force me to Sign, or do some other thing against my Conscience. I strengthened
my self in the Resolution that I had made, by the help of my Prayers, my
Fastings, and extraordinary Humiliation to consent to nothing. These Pious
Exercises made me a little sensible of the Grace of God, and the effects of
this Divine Comforter, which before had withdrawn from my Soul.

But before this Bishop came to me, to Torment me, he went the Circuit of his
Diocese, where he exercised unheard of Violence to make People Confess and
Communicate. The People escaped into the Woods and Mountains; they were pursued
thither, as if they had been Wild Beasts; they were knocked down, bound fast,
and then as quickly as they could were thrown into deep Ditches. In a word,
there was nothing heard but Desolation and Misery. What Honor is this these
Gentlemen do to their Religion, to drag folks to the foot of their Altar, and
make them Sacrifice to their Idols? Heretofore God refused a Victim which went
not cheerfully to the Altar; and can they expect that a Sacrifice made with an
ill will by reasonable Creatures can be pleasing to him? They shall bear this
Iniquity, and the great Judge of the Universe will not fail to impute this
crying sin to them, and to chastise these horible attempts. The best of it is,
that Monsieur De Valence set before the Eyes of these good People my Example to
induce them to Confess, and to Communicate. What, says he, are you wiser than
Monsieur De Chambrun? He has done every thing, and why do you refuse to follow
his Pattern? At the same time I received from diverse places Dispatches to know
how it was. As I was never biased, so I answered, that they should take great
heed not to give credit to such Discourses; that I was resolved to die, rather
than give them this Scandal; and that they need only to inform themselves how I
had behaved my self, not to be caught with such Cheats as these. Good God!
what Religion is this? What Bishops are these, that dare add lies to Violence,
to deceive poor Innocents? And here, to the Glory of my God, I must needs own,
that what I did upon this Occasion was with singular Edification, and produced
abundance of good Effects, because whole Societies or Corporations chose rather
to expose themselves to the Rage and Fury of the Dragoons, than to Confess, and
to Communicate.

The Comptroller of Dauphine about this time came to Die, to assist the Bishop
in this fine Mission. The last preached by the Mouth of the Dragoons, and the
first sued those who would not obey. Every day I heard that they sent away
Troops of Women and Girls to that cruel Robber, who had committed a thousand
outrages against so many poor Innocents who passed through his hands while I
was at Valence. I was told that this Comptroller one day as he was at Dinner
discoursed of me. I am told, says he, that this Minister which is at Romeyer,
will do nothing, though he has promised to Confess, and to Communicate, but we'll
quickly bring him to Reason. He has refused two thousand Livres Pension; he is
very nice, to despise the Favors of a great King. Mr. De Vermenton, who was
there also at Dinner, began to speak, and told him, Sir, you have him not yet;
I have observed him till he came at Valence, and I am persuaded, that the
extremity in which I saw him made him say, that he would reunite himself, but
that the secret meaning of his Heart is quite contrary.

After the Bishop had been the whole Circuit of his Diocese, he failed not to
come and see me: He came alone into my Chamber, and began to tell me, that he
had obtained the Permission which I had so much wished: But before he would
give it me, I must make my self ready to Sign, Confess, and Communicate. I
answered him, that I thanked him for the care he had taken; but I begged him to
let me go in Peace to Lions without further pressing me; that in likelihood I
should there die in the Operation of cutting me, and so should give him no more
trouble. He replied, to me, What, Sir, the King is not to be thus mocked; I
have writ to Court, that you were in good earnest Converted, and what will they
say of me, if I do not make you do your Duty? I have caused all the Ministers
which were at Die to Confess and Communicate, and will you be the singular
Huguenot in France? I answered him, that I live not by Example. I have no
intention to mock or deceive any body; you are too Reasonable, Sir, to force me
to do a thing against my Conscience; I beseech you let me go to Lions. A little
after, he took out of his Pocket a Book, in which the Author had collected
several Passages of the Fathers to prove the real presence of the Body of Jesus
Christ in the Eucharist. There were some of St. Athanasius, St. Cyril, St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine, and diverse others. As fast as he read them, I
immediately gave him an Answer to them, but he did not reply the least word to
my Answers. But he insisted particularly on that passage of St. Austin, in his
explication of 33 Psalm, according to the Vulgar Edition, and the 34 according
to the Hebrew, where this Father did say, That Jesus Christ did bear or carry
himself in his hands when he gave his last Supper to his Disciples. Se ipsum
ferebat in manibus suis. This passage appeared to him unanswerable. What can be
said, says he to me, to so strong an expression of St. Augustine? I began to
smile, and told him, that if I had here my St. Augustine, I would quicly let him
see that what he fancied never entered into the mind of that Father. How, says
he, is your St. Augustine different from that which is cited here? No, Sir, said
I, and you need but turn the leaf to see his Opinion. In the Exposition
following he lets us understand, that his People were offended at these words;
which was the reason he commented upon them in that place I speak of, and told
them, Se ipsum quodammodo ferebat in manibus suis. After a manner, etc. Well,
says he, let this pass. But here are others, to which there is no Reply. He
pursued reading his Book, without ever giving me any Reply to my Answers. He
very well saw by my manner of acting, that he should not be able to gain any
thing upon my Mind; and that all those passages which he alleged to me, were
not capable to convince me; which obliged him to shut his Book, and then he
told me, that as a Friend, he would advise me to obey the King, if not, strange
ill things should be done unto me; after which he embraced me, and bid me
Farewell. The same Evening he sent Soldiers to the Inhabitants of my Desert,
who committed a thousand disorders to force them to do any thing. I concluded
that I should be oppressed by them as well as others; but instead of these
troublesome Guests, the next Morning I saw come into my Chamber a Jesuit, sent
by him to endeavor to corrupt me. There came before him a Canon, named
Reinaud, to whom I said so many things about Religion, that in all appearance
he had given Glory to God in any other time. This Jesuit made himself known to
me, in making me call to mind some Observations which I made in one of my
Sermons preached about Controversy. Do you remember, Sir, said he, the two
Anagrams upon Cornelius Jansenius, and upon Joannes Calvinus? I have retained
them, says he. Did not you find in Cornelius Jansenius, Calvini sensus in ore,
and in Joannes Calvinus, An non es via Lucis? Yes, Sir, said, I, the memory of
them is very fresh. Are you the Man with whom I had then to do? Yes, says he, I
am the very Man, and I come now to offer you my Service. I come to tell you,
that Monsier De Valence is extreme angry with you; he talks of nothing but deep
Ditches, or sending you to Pierre-Cise. I should be very sorry that any ill
should come to you, for I can assure you, that I most perfectly Honor you, and
that all our Fathers have a very particular esteem for you. Believe me, Sir,
and suffer not your self to be tormented; you need only make a little
Confession to me, and I will speedily go to Die and pacify the Mind of
Monsieur De Valence. As to the Confession of my sins, said I to him, I do it
every day to my God; and it is to him only I ought to do it, according to the
Opinion of St. Chrysostom, in one of his Homelies upon the Epistle to Titus,
where he says in Formal Terms, I do not ask thee that thou should confess
thy sins to me, it is to God alone thou ought to confess them. And you know
what St. Augustine says, Quid mihi cum hominibus ut peccata mea audiant tanquam
morbos meos sanaturi.

I will not, says he, dispute with you. I know Sir that you are my Master. The
fear I am in least any ill happen to you, has brought me hither to conjure you
to have pity on your self. I fear nothing, said I to him, I have put my self
into the hands of God. Let him dispose of me according to his Will. This
Jesuit put himself into all shapes, and acted all parts to bring me to what he
wished. He embraced he sighed, he wept; but all those Artifices were in vain,
and he was forced to withdraw without being able to prevail over my Mind; but
yet he was not discouraged for all this. The next Morning he came again, and
entered my Chamber, all frighted, as if the Dragoons had been at his heels ready
to carry me away and load me with Chains. He employed all his Eloquence in a
lively representation what would happen to me; nay, he went to my Wife to
terrify her by his Discourse, and to solicit her to conjure me by her Tears
that I would prevent the mischief that was preparing for me. But he found
himself every where rejected, so that he went away the second time without
being able either by his Flatteries or his Threats to make the least impression
on my Spirit. News was brought me, that Monsieur De Valence was in a great
passion upon the report this Jesuit had made to him, and said, he knew not
what should hinder him from causing me to be thrown into a deep Ditch: that I
troubled him more than all his Diocese: that I might go to the Devil, and that
at Lions I should meet with those that durst talk to me. The next day he caused
another onset to be made me, but seeing me immovable, he gave order to one of
my friends to tell me, that I might go when I would to Lions, where the
Archbishop had received Orders, and should yet receive more, to make me pass my
time uneasily enough. And here one ought to admire Providence in my behalf,
that the Bishop of Valence, who is one of our most bitter Persecutors, should
let me go out of his Diocese in the manner I did; for night and day I said my
Prayers with a loud Voice, and in Company sung Psalms, and exhorted every body
to perseverance, and all this too was not unknown to him; besides that he could
never force me to make the least step against my Conscience; and that I should
have disputed against him, explicated my Opinions to his Curate, to certain
Canons, and to a Jesuit; certainly in all this there must be something of
Divine, and very extraordinary, and hereupon I have often with great diligence
tried to discover the ways of God in this Affair. And after I had well
considered it, I concluded, that God made use of the Vanity of this Bishop to
bring me out of my Misery. He did write to Court that he had converted me. He
durst not contradict himself, least he should pass for a man of little sense;
and besides I verily believe that I hit right of his Thoughts, if I say, that
he argued with himself after this manner. Every body believes that this man is
really converted, and I have taken care to spread this News throughout the
Kingdom; if we throw him into Prison we give the Lie to what we have published;
it is better to let him go to Lions, where infallibly he will dye in the Operation
of his cutting, and so we shall be delivered of him, and after his Death, we
can say of him what we please. In all likelihood these were his thoughts. But
here God cries from Heaven, Your thoughts are not my thoughts, neither are your
ways my ways. The good Prelate could never imagine that I ^^uld be able to do
what I did; he was an Eyewitness of all my Miseries, and he knew that I was
rather a dead Carcass, than a living Man. He had little reason to suspect that
which I had so vehemently desired in my Heart. But it is thus God confounds the
Wisdom of those who think themselves wise.

I had no sooner the liberty to go to Lions, but I left my Desert the first day
of August 1686. carried in a Litter by twelve Peasants. The poor people of
Diois came in Crowds to see me pass along the Road. I will not tell here, with
how many Blessings, and with what Tears I was accompanied. Every where I beheld
pale and dejected Looks, which filled me full of Compassion. I endeavored to
comfort them by my Prayers, and my Benedictions. My people perceived that I was
followed from place to place by the Curates and other Persons* who had received
order from Monsieur De Valence to watch me upon my way. Near the Town of Crest
an honest man gave me information, and told me that assuredly I would be stopped
there. Notwithstanding all I still persu'd my way without the least fear, and I
got safe to Lions the fifth of the same Month, I took up my Lodging in a great
Inn, both to take away all suspicion; and also the better to persuade that I
was there with a design to be cut of the Stone. The next Morning I sent to look
for one called Hermit, a Surgeon for the Stone, to know of him when he
could cut me. He viewed my Body, and after he had examined it well, he told me
it would be very dangerous to perform this Operation in the condition I was in:
but that he would consult of the best-means to do it. Here it was I met with a
very pious Lady, who with me shed abundance of Tears. She was just upon going
for Geneva. I had so great confidence in her, that I told her my Design, and
enjoined her to beg the Pastors of Geneva, to put up their Prayers to God for
me. She took me by the hands, and kissing them, said she hoped that these same
hands who had so often administered to her the Seal of Grace and Pardon might
yet be employed in giving her the same Consolation. This great Inn where I went
to Lodge was not convenient to execute my design; but a private House more
convenient, was procured for me, where I was no sooner fixed, but I sent for the
ablest Physician in Lions, whose name is Mr. Falconnet, and of whom the
Archbishop made use. I gave him an account of all the Symptoms of my imaginary
Evil; he concluded that I had the Stone, but that he must also search me for
the greater certainty. He pitied the condition I was in, and though I was a
Stranger to him, yet he was extremely friendly. He was a man of Learning, and I
took great pleasure in his Conversation. I cannot tell whether it was my
illness, or some observation which I made upon the Greek and Latin Poets,
which pleased him, and obliged him to be much with me. But let it be what it
will, he made use of all his Skill to give me ease, and to please him; I told
him I did find benefit by his Remedies. It happened that as he was one day to
visit the Archbishop, he told him that he had a Patient who was a stranger to
him, but a Gentleman in a very bad condition. Without doubt, says the
Archbishop, this must be a Minister of Orange, of whom I have order from Court
to look after, and calling to his Secretary, bid him bring his little Box of
Papers, where he found the said Order. He communicated it to the Physician on
purpose that he might tell it me, the substance of which was, that the
Archbishop should not let me go from Lions, and that he should take care that I
held no Meeting; when this was signified to me, I answered, that as for holding
Meetings, my condition would not let me run about the City; and for going from
Lions, they need but look upon my Body to be satisfied in that point. But
because I would avoid lying, I resolved not to say, that I would not go thence
without Order.

In the mean time, finding my self so narrowly watched, I concluded that I
should quickly be in Pierre-cise, if I did not take some speedy course. I had
made a bargain with a Waggoner of Franche Count, who promised me for a hundred
Louises he would carry me to Switzerland in his Wagon clothed like a Peasant,
and as if I was his Servant, and that the Wagon had run over me and broke my
Legs. Several of my Friends were against this way for two reasons; the first,
that I should never be able to endure so long a Journey in the Wagon; and the
second that being so strictly observed as I was, I should be no sooner mist in
Lions, but immediately they would dispatch Messengers upon all the great Roads,
and that the great distance between Lions and Switzerland by way of the Franche
Count, would undoubtedly cause my being taken; and so that I ought rather to
think of some way both quicker and shorter. After much thinking, I fancied that
I should certainly gain my point, if I went out Post in a Callech, with the
attendance of some great Lord, my great distemper opposed this design; for
indeed it was very plain, that without an extraordinary assistance from Heaven,
I could never succeed. Nay, there were some that ever laughed at me when I
proposed it. But in short, notwithstanding all their Arguments, I was so well
confirmed in my design, that the very same day I caused a Callech to be bought
for me, and ordered it to come by a private way. I had a mind to try whether I
could endure this sort of traveling, that so I might not hazard my self to no
purpose. I went upon the Key by the River side, and as soon as I perceived
Pierre-cise, where my dear Brethren and Colleagues are kept, I could not
possibly forbear weeping, a whole torrent of Tears fell from me, as well in
compassion of the sad condition of persons so dear to me, as at the remembrance
of my own fault which deprives me of the sweet comfort of enjoying the Company
of such blessed Confessors.

If my Nephew had not earnestly solicited me to quit that place, and give some
intermission to my Tears, I believe I should not have stirred from thence
before night. I had not gone thence thirty paces before an Officer was at my
heels, and commanded me to retire home. This accident surpised me, and let me
see that I was narrowly watched, being I was so closely followed the first time
of my coming abroad. But indeed my Servants had often told me, that they had
observed certain persons hovering about my House which they suspected to be
Sergeants. This made me tell my Wife, that I was now satisfied that I had spies
set upon me; but yet that I would so well time my business, that I would steal
from the sight of my Guards. And that I might the better succeed, I sent for my
Doctor, and told him that my Pains were so excessive that I could no longer
live. He was accompanied by his Son, and the Operator who was to search me.
This was the fifth of September that I endured this cruel Operation. The
Operator could find no Stone, and for his excuse, pretended that my lying cross
the Bed was not a fit posture to perform it, and that he must search me in a
Chair. I begged the Doctor to put off this second search to another time; that I
had suffered so much in the first, that I did not feel my self strong enough to
undergo a second, and the season in the Month of October would be cooler, and
so more favorable to me. This was approved of, and thus I got rid of my
Doctor, and my Operator. But this Operation made me endure two terrible nights,
yet this did not hinder for putting my Affairs in order to go away the Sunday
following, which was the eighth of the same Month. A particular person for whom
I shall all my life pray, lent me two Footmen, with order to do whatsoever I
bid them. He set them out very handsomely, and at my own cost I fitted two
others suitable to them. The two first I thought fit to call Parisien and
Campaign, and those two which belonged to me, I named Flower and River. As for
my self, I was in a Suit covered with Gold, a Hat edged with Gold, a fair
Perriwig, and a point of Venize Cravat, with a Scarlet Ribbon. The Horses that
were necessary for me, I procured and sent them out of the City, and kept only
two for my self and Boy. I fancied that the best time I could take would be
about seven a Clook in the Evening, when every body was taking their pleasure
in walking. My Wife and I prayed together, and after I had embraced her full of
Tears, I caused my self to be put in my Callech which was there ready for me,
conjuring her to go away the same moment from that House to another I had
prepared for her. My grief was extreme to forsake a person so dear to me, and
who had been so great comfort to me in all my Afflictions: but as she could not
ride Post, as I did, I took care that another party should assist her, and in a
few days to follow me.

At the hour resolved on I began my Journey. I passed quite through that great
City in the midst of an incredible throng of People. Calleches and Coaches, and
upon a good round Trot quickly came to the end of the Bridge of Rosne, whither
a friend had followed me at a small distance to observe whether I was known;
but he told me all was well, so we shak'd hands and bid adieu. At the same time
I commanded my Footman to mount his Horse and make the best of his way. It was
just night when I came up to my other Footmen with five Horses, who waited for
me behind the Ruins of a House; they presently harnass'd another Horse and
added him to my Callech, and all being mounted, we pursued our way with a
strange expedition, I was made fast to my Callech with two leather Thongs,
which kept me so close to my Engine, that it was impossible to know that I was
indisposed. Order was given to Parisien, who was a witty fellow, always to ride
before, and to get the Post Horses ready, and never to speak of any but my
Lord, who travailed in great have upon urgent Affairs. This little precaution
succeeded wonderfully. I always found the Horses ready at my coming to the
Stages; I was called nothing but my Lord. This together with my great
Liberality to the Postillions, carried me with such diligence, that at break of
day I arrived at the Bridge of Beauvoisin. All that night I employed in singing
the Praises of God, I began with the 91 Psalm.

Being come to the Bridge of Beauvoisin, I could get but two Posthorses; a
Courrier that I had met upon the Road, who carried the News of the Creation of
Cardinals, had taken the rest. I found Parisien engaged with the Postmaster; I
heard him say as I arrived, My Lord will not be thus content; You must find
Horses at any rate. The good Man immediately came up to me, and calling me, My
Lord, asked my Pardon a thousand times, that he could not presently furnish me
with Horses necessary for me; but in a little time I should have enough very
fit for my Service. I made as if I was very Angry, and it may be I was so in
good earnest, and told him, that the Service of the King ought not thus to be
hindered. He begged me to walk into a Room, where I might be more at my ease. I
briskly answered him, that I must go forward. While he was arguing with me, the
People of the Town, who began to get out of their Beds, flocked about my
Callech, to make their Observations of it, and my Equipage. They paid abundance
of Respect, taking me for a Lord. I stirred my Hat a little to them, and then
sat covered, letting them stand bare-head, the better to persuade them that I
was some great Lord. After I had asked something for Breakfast, though I had no
stomach at all to any, I invited them to drink my Health. I hope I shall be
excused, if here I do not relate all the particulars of what I did and said
upon this Adventure: Let it suffice to say, that I left the Quality of a
Minister, to take that of a great Officer of the Army. And truly, my manner of
Acting did so well persuade all those sort of People of being such, that those
who had the Guard of the Bridge, and the Commissaries of the Custom-House, asked
my Nephew, if I did not Command the Regiment of Guards to the Duke of Savoy. It
may be so, says he to them. Yes, we did think so indeed, replied these
Commissaries to him; we have seen him pass this way heretofore, he has good
Fortune in his looks. While this Dialogue lasted, I was in great disquiet of
Mind, for I had been tarrying there near two hours, and could get no Horses,
notwithstanding my earnest pressing for them. But at last they came, and all
things being ready, the Postillion turned to me, and asked if I would please to
go a good pace; we had need, said I to him, to redeem the Time we have lost. I
passed the Bridge as quick as could be through the midst of a dozen Soldiers,
who were upon the Guard, and who opened for me to the right, and to the left.
The Joy I had to see my self out of a Kingdom, where I had so much suffered,
was inconceivable: I raised up my Heart to offer my most humble thanks to God,
and sang the 125 Psalm. But when I thought my self entirely delivered from the
hands of my Enemies, there fell out an Accident which I no way expected. At the
entry into that inaccessable Rock, which a Duke of Savoy caused to be cut to
^ake a large Passage; where one sees a fine Inscription, Dedicated to the Glory
of that Prince; I found a Guard of seven (...) Postillion gave me Notice, that
they prepared to stop (...)d him push on his Horses, and run over these
Rascals: (...)e of them having presented his Musket to the Horses, made (...)
them rise upon his hind-legs, and was very near tumbling (...)wards upon me. I
called this Soldier to me, and asked him, (...) he stopped me? He answered me,
that he had Order to let no (...) pass without a Passport. How, Rascal, said I
to him, do (...) carry it in my looks? Is it thus thou dare hinder the King's
(...)ss? As soon as I come at Chambery, I Will cause thee to be th^^wn into a
Ditch. Upon this he put off his Hat, and called (...) Lord, and begged my
Pardon. I presently found he did not (...) and his Trade, which made me use
greater Threats to him, (...)m, that if I came out, I would run my Sword
through (...) asked him who was his Officer, and where he was? He (...), his
Name was Favier, and that he was in such a piece (...)nd, which he showed me,
eating of Grapes. He deserves, said I, to be thrown into a Ditch as well as
thou, for leaving his Post. Let him be called, and let him come and speak to
me. They called him; but whether the Threats that I had made frighted him, I
know not, however he was satisfied to call out to his People, To let my Lord
pass* This word revived my Heart, which before began to grow sad. It was no
sooner pronounced, but I commanded my Postillion to make all haste possible. I
passed through Chambery with all speed, only stopped a little to mend my Callech.
And although I must cross the Country, yet I made use of Posthorses to carry
me even to Geneva. The bad Ways, and the Precipices which in this Country one
meets with, made me go more slowly than I desired, lest I should be pursued by
some Courrier. Sometimes it was necessary to make use of the Country Folks to
hold up my Callech in the ill way, for I had very often liked to have been
over-turn'd. But yet notwithstanding all these Toils and Dangers, the great
God, who has visibly sustained me, brought me safe to Geneva about Six a Clock
in the Morning. I was hardly upon the Bridge of Arve, but I found my Heart
began to melt into Tears for my Deliverance. I began to give Thanks to this
Divine Protector, in singing the 8th. Verse of the 26 Psalm.

And here I cannot omit one Remarkable thing; the very last step which the
Horses made after they were within the Inn, one of the shafts of my Callech
broke short in the middle; upon which I made this Reflection, That God, by this
silent Voice, told me, it was he who had sustained and carried me in his Hands,
since there was much more likelihood, that this Accident should have happened
in the midst of Rocks and Precipices. I reflected also, how weary all my People
were, and yet that I was as fresh as when I left Lions, notwithstanding all my
indispositions. For this I rendered my hearty thanks to God, as well as for the
Deliverance he had given me.

Though I had taken great care to be private here, yet the noise of my Arrival
was quickly spread all over Geneva. They came in Crowds to Congratulate my
Escape.

Amongst all the Consolations which I received at Geneva, I ought to reckon
that which I had by Communicating the next Sunday after my Arrival, as the
greatest and most efficacious. But before I did this, I presented my self
before four of the Faithful Servants of God, to whom I opened my whole Heart,
and by my Tears gave them so many marks of my Repentance, that they could not
forbear mixing some of theirs with mine. I was admitted to the Communion of the
Church by these four Excellent Persons. The Dean, whom I esteem as my Father,
made a Prayer so ardent, and so sensible, and directed a Discourse to me so
piercing, that I believe I shall never receive that Pleasure and Comfort which
I did at that time. The Thursday before the Communion I was carried into the
Temple of Magdalen. To tell the ravishing Joy I had at my entering into this
Holy Place is impossible. I was very sensible of it, but I cannot express it.
According to their ordinary course they sung the 86 Psalm. It suited so exactly
to my Condition, that I thought the Pastor had chosen it on purpose to comfort
me. There was not one Verse which I did not apply to my self; and I shed so
many Tears in singing it, that all those who saw me, wept with me, as they have
often acknowledged to me. It was in the Temple of St. Peter that I received the
Communion. I hope I communicated worthily, since I presented to God a broken
and a contrite heart, Psalm. 51. which, according to holy David, is the
Sacrifice which God requires of us.

After I had rendered to God part of these Acknowledgments I owe him, in order
to the making my Peace with him, I thought I was indispensibly obliged to give
notice to the Prince my Master of my Escape. Here follows that Letter which I
took the freedom to write to him.

SIR,
THE Compassion which your Royal Highness was pleased to take of all my
Miseries, and the goodness with which you gave me assurance of it by Mr.
Schulemburg, makes me presume to acquaint you with some good News. I am, Sir,
by the Grace of God, delivered from my Slavery and hard Servitude; for by a
strange Miracle I find my self among my Brethren in the City of Geneva. But
before I relate my escape to your Royal Highness, I most humbly beseech you to
permit me in few words to give you an Account of what past concerning me, since
my unhappy Fall. In the Letter which I took the Liberty to write you in that
time, I acquainted you that I was still detained in the City of Valence, where
they kept me for the space of two Months and a half, though they would persuade
me that I had my full Liberty. During this, the Bishop visited me eight times.
I always let him know that he had made no great Conquest; that my great
Infirmities were the cause of those words which fell from me, and that Day and
Night I wept for the fault I had committed; I prayed him not to press me to any
Profession of the Roman Religion; for being delivered from my Weaknesses, I was
a Man that could speak for my self. We often disputed together; and on these
Occasions I was very sensible of the Divine Assistance to maintain the Truth I
had preached. In one of his Visits he showed me a Letter, in which Monsieur De
Louvoy writ him, that I should be allowed a Pension of two Thousand Livres, if
I would give any assurance of Fidelity to the King. I Answered him
courageously, that I had rather feed upon Grass, than accept of any Pension;
and that I would choose rather to die, than be thought a Man, who like so many
others, had sold his Religion and his Conscience; that as mean a Man as I was,
I had enough to keep me, and so thanked him for the kindness he thought to do
me. It would be too tedious to tell your Royal Highness all that past in our
other Conversation, and common Prudence will not let me commit to Paper many
things which I may tell your Royal Highness, if God gives me leave, as with
Passion I wish it, to come near your Sacred Person. At the end of two Months
and a half, they put me in a frightful Desert, still telling me that I enjoyed
my full Liberty. It was here I lived five full Months, feeding upon my Sighs
and Tears. After I had been there a Month, the same Bishop came to see me, and
feigning my self grievously troubled with the Stone, I begged him to get leave
for me to go to Lions to be cut. He delayed me with fair Promises for four
Months, but at last wearied with my importunity, he writ to Court, and was
answered, that they might let me go to Lions to be cut of the Stone, but
charged him to take care how I behaved my self there. As I was preparing my
self for my Journey, he came once more into his Diocese of Die, to Confess and
Communicate those which were called New Converts. And he came again to my
Desert, to exhort me to do my Duty, as they call it. He br^ught along with him
a Book newly composed to support by the Authority of the Fathers, their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. As fast as he read the passages to me, I
answered them, so that seeing me resolved to do nothing of all that he required
of me, he sent to me some Jesuits and other Ecclesiastics, whose Labors
prevailed as little upon my Mind, as he had done. This vexed him so extremely,
that he threatened me severely, and spoke of nothing but throwing me in a Ditch,
and by way of Favor, into Pierre-cise. But yet notwithstanding all his Anger,
I left my Desert, and went to Lions; whether he caused me to be followed and
watched by his Curates and other Persons. I was no sooner arrived there, but I
sent for, and consulted the ablest Physicians and Operators about the best
means to cut me. I suffered them even with their Instruments to search me; and
the Physicians having acquainted the Archbishop with my pitiful condition, he
sent me word that he had orders to observe my Actions, and that I should take
heed not to hold any Meeting at Lions; this did not hinder me from thinking of
my escape. And the great God heard my Prayers, and put a contrivance into my
head, how to be delivered from my severe captivity, which one day I hope to
relate to your Royal Highness. But, Sir, that a man deprived of the use of his
Limbs, continually watched by Officers, should yet get out of Lions, and arrive
at Geneva, by ways through Rocks, and in the sight of Guards, in two days time,
add to this, that he should be able to endure the fatigue of riding Post in a
Callech, and tire four Servants well fitted, and should never meet with one
Soul that so much as asked Whither goes thou? except at one place where I was
stopped some few minutes, and from whence I cleared my self by personnating a
resolute Man of Honor; and that they should every where take me for some great
Officer; and that I should be able to hide my Illness and Distempers, and never
come out of my Callech; this doubtless will appear like a Fable to all Europe;
but as for my own part, I shall look upon it as the work of the great God, who
has given his Holy Angels charge to bear me up in their Hands. This, Sir, is a
short Abridgment of my History; I expected when I should come into another
Country to be regarded as a Dog for my falling away. But God who has without
doubt had Mercy on me, has ordered things quite otherwise; I can assure your
Royal Highness, that I have been received in this City, as if I were an Angel
from Heaven. Nay, I am very much troubled with People who come in great numbers
to shed Tears of Joy for my Deliverance; insomuch, that the first Syndic has
earnestly pressed me to Lodge in his House, but for several reasons I have
refused it, and acknowledge to him that I was very sensible it was for the sake
of my Great Master he was desirous to do me this honor, and assured him I
would not fail to let him know it. But, Sir, this is not all, for within two
days after my Arrival, the news of it was spread all over Switzerland, and
continually I received from thence Letters of welcome: And that which fills up
the measure of my Joy, is to hear that your Royal Highness is pleased with my
Escape. But as there is nothing which I wish, with greater passion, than to be
near your Person, and that methinks I should then be content to die, if once
God would please to let me behold him whom I most Love, Respect and Honor in
the World; but then on the other side as my unhappy fall makes me dread
appearing before my Great Master, so I shall wait for the Orders which you will
please to send me, before I dare begin my Journey. I hope, Sir, and this hope
is my comfort in the midst of my great Affliction, that you who are so bright
an Image of God upon Earth, as well by your Greatness, as by your Piety, will
show Mercy to your Servant; as I am persuaded God himself has done to me. For
this reason, I throw my self into the Arms of your Royal Highnesses Goodness
and Charity, from whence I hope for all the Favor imaginable, being assured
that you are thoroughly convinced that there is not any of your Subjects, or
Servants, who is with greater Obligation and Veneration,than

SIR, Your Highnesses Most humble and most Obedient Servant and faithful
Subject, J. P. De Chambrun.


Within a few days after my arrival at Geneva, I received abundance of Letters
of Congratulation, which persons of great Merit did me the honor to write me.
I could produce diverse of them, which would not be a little for the Edification
of the World, if I had not some good reasons which hinder me to publish them.
Several fugitive Pastors dispersed in Switzerland did me the honor in person
to come and rejoice with me. All this did but renew my Tears, for I think my
self unworthy of so much goodness as was shown to me. But the Charity of these
good Servants of God extended a great deal farther; for as I signified to them,
that there was nothing I desired more earnestly than to be restored to the Holy
Ministry from whence through my fault I was fallen, so there were some of
remarkable Merit, who maintained, that as I had neither signed, nor exercised
any Act in the Romish Religion, so that they judged that I was not so fallen, but
that I might perform my Ministry, without being reestablished; and that I
might without the least scruple do my function whenever God was pleased to give
me opportunity: nevertheless, I was not satisfied with this, but told them,
that I perceived by this, they designed to comfort me, and conjured them not to
flatter me in my Sin; and that I had need of being more humbled by their
Reproaches for my horrible Cowardice; and that far from extenuating my Crime,
they ought rather to aggravate it. Let the Righteous, said I, Psalm. 141. 5.
Smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent Oil, which shall not break my head. Upon this they all appointed a
general Meeting, where I appeared before them, and where I spoke more by my
Tears, and my Sighs, than by my Words. I made them a short relation of all my
sad misfortunes, and of all that I could remember, that I either did or said
during my Captivity; and begged them to make an exact enquiry into all, as well
for the Edification of the Church of God, as for my own Comfort and
Satisfaction; and in a word, I assured them, that if my weak condition would
allow me to cast my self to the ground, I would there humble my self in Dust,
and of God ask pardon for my Sin, and of the whole Church pardon for the
scandal I have given. After the Formalities usual upon these occasions were
performed, I was reestablished in the honor of the Holy Ministry.

The support and Charity of my Brethren was a very great comfort to me: I
thought my self quite another man after this re-establishment; yet nevertheless
I found my Soul continually to groan under the heavy burden of my Sin; and I
was also now tormented with the fear left my Wife should be taken, she was to
have followed me in a few days, and yet there were several gone, and did not so
much as hear that she was ready to come away from Lions, a little to divert my
Grief, and to pay my Duty to the Count De Dona: I made some little Journies to
Copet, where I was by this Illustrious Lord and his Lady, received with all the
kindness and marks of good Will, that it is possible to imagine; this Lord,
whose Ancestors from Father to Son have always showed great favor to my
Family, omitted nothing that he thought would comfort me in this my extreme
Affliction; for I was no sooner in his Presence, but a stood of Tears hindered
me at the first sight of him, to give him that respect which is owing to his
rare Virtues and Merits. It was at his House I received the answer of the
Letter which I writ to his Royal Highness: Monsieur De Schulemberg sent me
word, that the Prince was extreme joyful at my escape, that I should
immediately come away for Holland; and that orders were given at Geneva to
furnish me with all things that should be necessary. And indeed, this great
Master has showed so much goodness to me, that it is through his generous
Liberality, that I have been able to bear the excessive Charge which I was
forced to be at, in getting my Wife from Lions, and my self to be near his
Person, in pursuance of the command which he sent me.

At my return from this little Journey to Copet, I found at Geneva diverse
Letters from France, in which Persons of great worth rejoiced with me at my
happy escape. They also let me know how glad an infinite of good Souls were at
this News, and what grief my Persecutors had, that I should steal from them in
their very sight. They also acquainted me with the Discourse that was among the
great ones upon this occasion; and yet after this manner some of them reasoned.
Who would ever have thought that so lame and weak a man in his Body, would have
undertaken to run away, or that he had the courage to expose himself so
strangely as he has done? In all likelihood there is some Secret in this
matter; without doubt it is the Prince of Orange, who has caused him to escape,
and with a great expense of Money has corrupted the Guards. The greatest
occasion which I found in these Letters to rejoice at, was the good effect
which my escape has produced; for this has not only awaked some Minds which
before seemed to be asleep, but in imitation of me, the most fearful Persons
have had Courage enough to fly the Kingdom.

But whilst I was busy in answering so many Letters, I received, diverse from
my Wife, which much afflicted me; she gave me notice that those she had agreed
with, proved unfaithful to her; that the Captain of that Quarter, at midnight
entered the House where she was with an intention to seize her; and that she
saved her self from him, in hiding her self in a Pile of Faggots: But that she
was yet in great fear that she should fall into the hands of those he employs
to persecute us; because it was known that she lay hid in Lions. I neglected
nothing to get her out of the Danger to which she was exposed; and at last I
thought I had met with a safe convenience to bring her to Geneva; but she fell
into the hands of dishonest People, where she narrowly escaped Ruin. In the
Night, after they had traveled two hours from Lions, her Guides forsook her and
three Ladies, who were in her Company and Design. These poor Creatures were
nine days going from Lions to Geneva, endured the rigor of the Winter, walked
in Snow, upon the Ice, and over Mountains, waited for by thirty armed Peasants
at certain passages, and closely pursued by an Officer, her Companions seeing
themselves beset with such Dangers, would fain have returned back to Lions; but
she courageously opposed them, declaring to them, that she had much rather
perish than go back; for which resolution, she has had from these Ladies a
thousand Praises and Thanks, after their arrival at Geneva. I had notice from
Lions of the day of her coming away; her tarrying so long made me believe she
was taken, which infinitely afflicted me, thinking that if this misfortune was
befaln her, that they would use her cruelly upon my account. But this great God
who has every way comforted me, has restored her to me, even then when I
concluded she was lost; for the very minute when they were at shutting the
Gates, which was the last day of the year 1686, a Soldier of the Garrison came
in all have, and brought me the news of her Arrival, and the next moment I saw
her at my bedside, where my illness kept me. Our Joy was extreme, and we
immediately gave solemn Thanks to this great God, who to our mutual comfort
has so mightily assisted and blessed us.

After this unhop'd for happiness, I thought of nothing but my Journey for
Holland; I set forward the first of February the year following,
notwithstanding the rigor of the Season, but the abundance of Snow, and the
earnest Solicitations of the Count De Dona and his Countess, staid us at
Copet, where I and my Wife were received with a thousand marks of Kindness by
these Illustrious Persons. From the Windows of this agreeable Seat I could
divert my sight upon the Lake Leman, and upon the inaccessible Rocks of the
Alps, which brought to my remembrance the Poem of Beza, which is found at the
head of some of our Psalms; for every day I heard the poor Fugitives, as they
passed upon the Lake, singing Psalms to their God, which resounded to the
Banks, and echoed into the midst of these horned Rocks. Methought I heard the
Quire of Angels, which is represented to us in the Revelations, singing
Allelujahs, which even pierced Heaven, giving thanks to God for the deliverance
of these poor Fugitives, and begging that his gracious Protection might
accompany them whethersoever it pleased his good Providence to direct them. I
pursued my way by Lausane, where I met with a great number of Illustrious
Fugitives, and with whom I mixed my Tears; and I was received with so great
kindness by the renowned Family of Chabot Chandieu, and by Mr. Du Vernan, so
celebrated for his Zeal, his Piety, and his rare Merit, that I shall eternally
preserve the Memory of it.

In all the Cities of Switzerland and Germany I was most kindly entertained. I
no sooner showed the Passport of the Prince my Master, but they offered me a
thousand Services, and I had so much honor done me, that I was even ashamed;
but there happened to me in this long and tedious Journey a very sad accident,
as I was laid in the Horse-Litter, which was the only way I could endure to
travel; one of the Horses fell, and I fell with so great Violence upon my Face,
that I remained as Dead; all my Body was so bruised with this fall, and the
Nerves of my Legs and my Arms so very much hurt, that the pains which I felt
differed but little from those of the Rack. Nevertheless the impatience that I
was in to be at the Hague, would not let me loose one day, and the eight and
twentieth day of March I arrived there, whether God has visibly by his good
Providence conducted me.

FINIS.

