A RELATION OF THE Great Sufferings AND Strange Adventures Of HENRY PITMAN,
Chyrurgion to the late Duke of Monmouth, containing an Account; 1. Of the
occasion of his being engaged in the Duke's Service. 2. Of his Trial,
Condemnation, and Transportation to Barbados, with the most severe and
Unchristian Acts made against him and his Fellow Sufferers, by the Governor
and General Assembly of that Island. 3. How he made his escape in a small open
Boat with some of his fellow Captives, namely, Jo. Whicker, Peter Bagwell,
William Woodcock, Jo. Cook, Jeremiah Atkins, etc. And how miraculously they
were preserved on the Sea. 4. How they went ashore on a uninhabitable Island,
where they met with some Privateers that burnt their Boat, and left them on
that desolate place to shift for themselves. 5. After what manner they lived
there for about three Months, until the said Henry Pitman was taken aboard a
Privateer, and at length arrived safe in England. 6. How his Companions were
received aboard another Privateer that was afterward taken by the Spainards,
and they all made Slaves; And how aftar six Months Captivity they were
delivered, and returned to England also.

Licensed,

June 13th, 1689.


London, Printed by Andrew Soul; And are to be Sold by John Tailor, at the
Sign of the Ship in Paul's Churchyard, 1689.

A RELATION, etc.
AS a necessary Introduction to the following Relation, it will be convenient
that I give account of the occasion of my being engaged with the rest that went
in to the Duke of Monmouth, and how far I was concerned in that Action.

Being at that time but newly returned from a Voyage to Italy, I went to see my
Relations at Sandford in Sommerset-shire, where I had not been long before the
Duke Landed at Lime, and making forwards, was advanced as far as Ilmister; upon
which I was induced partly out of my own Curiosity, and partly by the
Importunity of some of my Acquaintance, to go and see whether his strength and
number was answerable to what the common Rumor had spread abroad; and to that
purposed rode accompanied with my Brother, and some other Friends to Taunton,
whither the Duke by this time was marching with such Forces as he had got
together.

After some stay there, having fully satisfied my Curiosity by a full view both
of his Person and his Army, I resolved to have returned home, and in order
thereunto I took the direct Road back again with a Friend, who had the same
Intention with my self, but understanding upon the Road that if we went
forward, we should be certainly intercepted by the Lord of Oxford's Troop, then
in our way, we found our selves of necessity obliged to retire back again to
the Duke's Forces, till we could meet with a more safe and convenient
opportunity: but after some time losing my Horse, and no opportunity presenting
it self, I was prevailed with by the importunate desires of my Friends and
Acquaintance then in the Army, to stay and take care of the sick and wounded
men, to which I was the rather induced, in regard I thought my self liable to
the same punishment, should the Duke be defeated, as those who still remained
in the Army; but more especially for that I saw many sick and wounded men
miserably lamenting the want of Chyrurgions to dress their Wounds, so that Pity
and Compassion on my fellow Creatures more especially, being my Brethren in
Christianity, obliged me to stay and perform the Duty of my Calling among them,
and to assist my Brother Chirurgions toward the relief of those that otherwise
must have languisht in misery; though indeed there were many did, notwithstanding
our utmost care and diligence, whose Lives perhaps might have been preserved to
this day, had we had a Garrison, wherein to have given them Rest, and not have
been constrained through the Cruelty and Inhumanity of the King's Soldiers, to
expose their wounded and fractured Limbs to the violent agitation and shoging
of the Carts in our daily Marches. But as I was never in Arms my self, so
neither was I wanting in my care to dress the Wounds of many of the King's
Soldiers, who were Prisoners in the Duke's Army, using the utmost of my care
and skill for both: And thus I continued in full Employment, dressing the
wounded in the Night time, and marching by Day till the fatal rout and
overthrow of the whole Army.

In my flight homewards I was taken Prisoner, and committed to Ilchester Goal
by Col. Hellier, in whose Porch I had my Pockets rifled, and my Coat taken off
my Back by my Guard; and in that manner was hurried away to Prison, where I
remained, with many more under the same Circumstances, until the Assizes at
Wells; though perhaps there could not any thing have been proved against most of
us, to have done us much harm, had they not extorted Confessions from us by
sending certain Persons to the Prisons where we were, who called us forth one
after another, and told us, That the King was very Gracious and Merciful, and
would cause none to be executed but such as had been Officers, or otherwise
Capital Offenders; and therefore if we would render our selves fit Objects of
the King's Grace and Favor, our only way was to give them an Account where we
went into the Duke's Army, and in what Capacity we served him, etc. otherwise
we must expect no mercy or favor from the King, who would certainly punish all
such wilful and obstinate Offenders. By which means they drew us into the
Acknowledgment of our Guilt, and our Examinations and Confessions were written
and sent to the King, before the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies came to try us:
so that he knew beforehand our particular Crimes, and likewise received Orders
from the King (as it is supposed) who, and what Number to execute; but seeing
our former Confessions were sufficient only to find the Bill against us by the
Grand Jury, and not to prove us Guilty (the Petty Jury being obliged to give
their Verdict according to the Evidence in Court) the Lord Chief Justice
fearing lest we should deny what we formerly confessed, and by that means put
them to the trouble of proving it against us, caused about twenty eight Persons
at the Assizes at Dorchester, to be chosen from among the rest, against whom he
knew he could procure Evidence, and brought them first to their Trial, who
pleaded Not Guilty; but Evidence being produced they were immediately
condemned, and a Warrant signed for their Excution the same Afternoon. The
sudden Execution of these men so affrightned the rest, that we all, except
three or four, pleaded Guilty, in hopes to save our Lives, but not without
large Promises of the Kings Grace and Favor; for the Lord Chief Justice told
us, That if we would acknowledge our Crimes by pleading Guilty to our
Indictment, the King who was almost all Mercy, would be as ready to forgive us,
as we were to rebel against him; yea, as ready to pardon us as we would be to
ask it of him: and now was that common saying verified, Confess and be hanged;
for notwithstanding his large Promises of Grace and Favor, we were all
condemned to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and by his order there was 230
executed, besides a great Number hanged immediately aster the^ Fight; the rest
of us was ordered to be Transported to the Caribe Islands, and in order
thereunto my Brother and I, with near 100 more, was given to Jeremiah Nepho,
and by him sold to George Pen a needy Papist, that wanted Money to pay for
our Transportation, and therefore was very importunate with my Relations to
purchase mine and my Brothers freedom, which my Relations at first were
unwilling to do, having no assurance of performing Articles at such a distance,
and therefore thought it best to defer it until we came to Barbados, or
otherwise to agree to pay him as soon as they should receive an account of our
being set free: But this not satisfying him, having present occasion of Money,
he threatened that if they would not pay him now, he would give orders to his
Brother-in-law in Barbados that our freedom should not be sold us after we
came there, but that he should treat us with more rigor and severity then
others; with these Threats on the one hand, and Promises of particular Favor
on the other, he at length prevailed with our Relations, to give him threescore
Pounds, upon condition that we should be free when we came to Barbados, only
owning some Person whom we should think fit to nominate as a titular Master,
and in case that these, with other Conditions, was not performed, the said
George Pen was bound with his Brother John Pen in a Bond of 120 l. to pay
the threescore Pounds back again: And thus we may see the buying and selling of
Freemen into slavery, was beginning again to be renewed among Christians, as
if that Heathenish Custom had been a necessary dependence on arbitrary Power.

And in order to our Transportation, we were removed to Weymouth, and Shipped
aboard a Vessel that belonged to London, which in a few days set Sail for
Barbados, where we arrived in about five Weeks time, but had a very sickly
passage, insomuch that nine of my Companions were buried in the Sea. We had not
been many days in Barbados, before the Governor of the said Island summoned
the General Assembly, who welcomed us with the following Unchristian and
Inhumane Acts.

An Act for the governing and retaining within this Island all such Rebels
convict as by his most sacred Majesty's Order or Permit, have been or shall be
Transported from his Europian Dominion to this Place.
WHereas a most horrid, wicked and execrable Rebellion was lately raised and
prosecuted within his Majesty's Dominions, by James Scot, late Duke of
Monmouth, and Archibald Campbell, late Earl of Argile, and their traiterous
Accomplices, with intent to destroy his Majesty's most sacred Person and royal
Family, to overthrow his Crown and Government, and to render his Dominions the
Theaters of Blood and Misery. In prevention whereof, it has pleased the divine
Providence, which is ever peculiarly watchful to guard the Thrones of Princes,
to accompany his Majesty's Counsel and Arms with such Success and Victory, that
the said Rebels and Traitors were utterly deseated, for which impious Fact many
of them have since deservedly suffered the pains of Death, according to Law,
which the rest were liable unto, being equally guilty of those barbarous
Crimes, and must have undergone, but that his Majesty, in his Princely and
unparralled Grace and Clemency has been pleased to extend his mercy in sparing
the Lives of several Thousands of them, by comuting the Execution of their
Sentance unto atemporary Service in his American Colonies; and forasmuch as his
sacred Majesty has signified it as his royal Pleasure, that the said Rebels,
or so many of them as should be transported to his said American Collonies,
should be there held and obliged to serve the Buyers of them, for, and during
the full space of and term of ten Years at least, and that they be not
permitted in any manner whatsoever to redeem themselves by Money, or otherwise,
until that time be fully expired. Therefore we his Majesty's most dutiful and
loyal Subjests, his Lieutenant Governonr, Council, and general Assembly of this
his Majesty's said Island, taking the Premises into our serious Consideration,
and being zealous to render all due and ready Obedience to his Majesty's
Command, as also to make apparent with how great abhorrence and detestation we
resent the said late wicked, inhumane and damnable Rebellion, and all those
that were Promotors and Actors therein, have thought it becoming our duty to
Bnact, and it is hereby Enacted by the Right Honorable Edward Steed, Esquire Lt.
Governor and Commander in chief of this and other the Caribbe Islands, the
Honorable, the Council, and general Assembly of this Island, and Authority of
the same, That what Person or Persons soever were guilty of the aforesaid
Rebellion, and have been therefore Convict, which either already have been, or
hereafter shall be brought to this Island, either by his Majesty's order or
permit for the purpose aforesaid, shall be held, compelled and obliged to serve
and obey the Owner or Purchaser of him or them in their Plantations within this
Island, in all such Labor or Service as they shall be commanded to perform,
and do by their Owners, Masters or Mistresses, or their Overseers, for the full
time and term of Ten Years, from the day of their Landing, and disposed of
fully to be completed and ended, any Bargain, Law, Usage or Custom in this
Island to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; and to the intent that no
Disobedience may be suffered or done upon his Majesty's said Orders and
Expectations concerning the said Rebels convict, but that they may become fully
liable unto, and bare the aforesaid mark of their monstrous Villainy. It is
farther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master of a Ship,
Importer, Owner, Master or Purchaser of any of the Rebels aforesaid, shall
acquit, release or discharge them, or any of them, or do permit them, or any of
them to redeem themselves by Money, or other Reward, or Recompense, or
Consideration whatsoever, respecting either themselves or the said Rebels
convict, before the term of ten Years Service in this Island, as aforesaid, be
fully completed and ended, or shall conive at, or assist unto their, or any of
their Removes, With-drawings or Escapings from off this Island, the Party or
Parties so offending herein shall therefore forfeit and pay unto his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors the sum of two Hundred Pound Sterling for each, or
every one of the said Rebels, which by him or them shall be either aquitted,
released, discharged or permitted to be redeemed, or conived at, or assisted
unto, a remove, withdrawing or escaping off this Island, before the full end of
the Term aforesaid, over and above the value or recompense for which it was
permitted or done; and farther shall suffer Imprisonment in the Common Goal of
this Island, for the space and term of one whole Year, without Bail or
Mainprize, and be for ever thereafter incapable of hearing any public Office
within this Island.

And it is hereby further enacted and ordaired by the Authority aforesaid, that
if one or more of the aforesaid Servants or Rebels convict, shall attempt,
endeavor or contrive to make his or their escape from off this Island, before
the said term of ten Years be fully complete and ended, such Servant or
Servants for his or their so attempting or endeavoring to make escape, shall
upon proof thereof made to the Governor, receive by his Warrant 39 Lashes on
his bare Body on some public day in the next Market Town to his Masters place
of abode, and on another Market day in the same Town, be set in the Pillory by
the space of one Hour, and be burnt in the Forehead with the Letters F. T.
signifying Fugitive Traitor, so as the Letters may plainly appear in his
Forehead: but for all other Misdimeanours and Miscarriages they shall be
prosecuted and punished according to the Laws of this Island provided for the
governing of other Servants.

And to the end the said convict Rebels may be the better known and
distinguished, it is hereby further enacted and ordained, that within eight days
after the arrivat of any Ship or Vessel to this Island, in which any of the
said convist Rebels are brought, the Master of the said Ship shall deliver to
the Governor, and in to the Secrataries Office of this Island, a true List or
Catalogue of those Names upon Oath, and the Merchant or Merchants to whom they
come consined, or who have the disposal of them, shall also within eight days
after finishing the Sale, give unto the said Office a just account of the
Persons Names to whom they were sold, and disposed of; and in case of failure
herein, the same shall forfeit to the King, his Heirs and Successors the sum of
Two Hundred Pounds Sterlings, and the Merchant or Merchants shall forfeit in
like manner the sum of two Hundred Pounds Sterling.

And for such of the said convict Rebels as have been already Imported before
the making and publishing of this Act, the Master and Merchant of such Vessels
are hereby required forthwith to deliver to the Secratary such List or
Catalogue as aforesaid, upon Penalty of the like forfeiture, which said List or
Catalogue the said Secretary is required to receive and write out fairly, and
cause to be hung up in his Office, that all Persons concernced may have free
recourse thereto.

And in case the first Buyer shall sell, or assign over any such Rebel or
Rebels convict, to any other Inhabitant or Inhabitants of this Island, the
Vender is hereby required to give notice thereof to the Secretary, to the end
the Name or Names of such Servant or Servants may be changed in the Secretarys
Office, from the first to the second, or other Purchaser or Assigns may stand
charged as the first.

And in case of the death of any of the Servants aforesaid, it is hereby
further enacted, That the present Owner shall within fourteen days make, or
cause Oath to be made before the next, or some Justice of the Peace, of the
Name and Death of such a Servant, and that he really was in the Record, and not
another of the same Name, that by means of the Certificate sent to the
Secretary's Office that the Secretary may charge him dead.

And if any Owners or Vendors shall fail in either of the Cases aforesaid, he
or they shall forfeit to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors the sum of
twenty five Pound Sterling, and for the Secratary's pains therein, and also in
case of changing Masters or Mistresses, the Secratary may receive for such
Person, dead or assigned over six Pence, and no more.

And to the end none of the Servants or convict Rebels may remove or escape
from this Island by obtaining Tickets under wrong Names, or other fraudulent or
illegal Methods of this kind, it is hereby further enacted and ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, that all Justices of the Peace that shall hereafter take
Assidavits, to be sent to the Secratary's Office; for Persons that design to go
off this Island shall always express and insert in those Assidavits, that the
Person so going off, and desiring a Ticket, is not one of those Servants and
convict Rebels, without which the Secratary is hereby forbidden to grant or
produce a Ticket; and the Secratary is also required to use the same method in
such Assidavits as shall be taken before himself, under the Penalty of
forfeiting to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors the sum of two hundred
Pound Sterling, for his neglect in either of these cases, and whosoever
obtaining a Ticket lawfully out of the Secratary's Office, being of the Name of
any of those Rebels, or otherwise, and shall permit any of the said Rebels of
that Name, or others, to have such Tickets by which he may be in a probable way
of making his escape off this Island, shall forfeit to the use of our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, the sum of one hundred Pound Sterling,
if he be able to pay the same, and also suffer Imprisonment in the Common Goal
by the space of six Months, without Bail or Mainprize, the said Commitment to
be made, and Execution to be levied by Warrant from the Governnour, upon proof
made before him by two Witnesses, or one Witness, with pregnant Circumstances;
but in case such Persons be incapable to make Payment of such Forfeiture, he is
hereby ordered to lie in Prison during the space of six Months, and be set
once in the Pillory by the space of two Hours at a time, in each of the four
Market Towns of this Island on four several days.

And for the encouragement of all such as shall inform or discover any false,
fraudulant or wicked Practice of this kind, it is hereby enacted, that one
fifth part of all forfeits in the Act mentioned, shall be to the use and
benefit of such Informers.

And to the end the Restraint continuing and holding the said Rebels convict
within this Island, during the term aforesaid, may be the effectually and fully
secured and provided for, and also for preventing the Servants, Slaves and
Debtors of this Island from running of, by which some have perished in the Sea,
It is is hereby further enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that
every Owner or Keeper of any small Vessel, Sloop, Shallop, Wherry, Fishing
Boat, or any other sort of Boat belonging to this Island, shall within twenty
days after publication hereof, give into the Secratary's Office of this Island
in the sum of two hundred Pound Sterling, excepting the small Boats and
Wherries, who are to enter in the sum of ten Pound Sterling, that he will not
convey or carry off from this Island any of the asoresaid Rebels convict, or
any other Person that has not a lawful Ticket, or will permit, suffer, or
consent to the same, but will use his utmost skill, care and diligence in
securing and guarding his small Vessel, Sloop, Shallop or Boat, in such manner
as may must probably prevent the Escapes of such Fugitives; and if any Owner,
or Keeper of such small Vessel, Sloop, Shallop or Boat, shall hereafter make
Sale, Change, or any other Alienation thereof, without first giving notice in
the Secratary's Office, that new security may be there taken, such Vessel,
Shallop or Boat shall be forfeited to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and the vendor to be further obliged to put in Security to answer all Damages
that may happen by reason of such Sale, before security so given; and the like
Method and Forfeitures is hereby required and appointed unto Masters of Ships
in case they shall sell, or dispose of any Beat to any of the Inhabitants of
this Island. And whosoever shall hereafter build or set up in this Island any
small Vessel, Sloop, Shallop or Boat, shall, when he or they builds the same,
enter in to the Security aforesaid, under the Penalty of forfeiting the
materials thereof to his Majstey, his Heirs and Successors.

And be it further ordained and enacted, that the Secratary shall have, and
recive for the Bond and Certificate for Wherrys, fishing Boats, and other small
Boats, only fifteen Pence; and for all other Vessels of a greater bull five
Shillings each, as has been accustomary.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall be Felony
in every Master of every Shallop, Sloop, Wherry or other Boat belonging to this
Island, that runs away with any Shallop, Sloop, Wherry, or other Boat which
they command.

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Woman in
this Island, Owner or Mistress of any such convict Rebels, by any means
whatsoever shall Inter-marry with any of the said convict Rebels, whereby the
said Rebels may become free feom their Servitude, or suffer or consent to the
Marriage of their Daughters, or other near Relations, by which such Servant is
freed, conived at, or eased from his servitude aforesaid, that upon notice
thereof given to the Governor and Coucil of such Marriage or Marriages, such
Rebel or Rebels aforesaid shall notwithstanding be by the Governor and Council
ordered to serve the remainder of his time to some other Person whom the
Governor and Council shall think sit, and the Woman so marrying, as aforesaid,
is to forfieit to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Assigns the sum of
two hundred Pound Sterling, and suffer six Months Imrisonment for such her
inter-marrying with any of the said Rebels convict.

And lastly, it is enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Act be
published by the Minister of the several Parishes in this Island, in their
several Parish Churches once in every six Months from the Date hereof, upon
such Penalty as the Governor and Council for the time being shall think sit to
impose on the Person so neglecting to publish the same.

Given under my Hand the fourth day of January, 1685. Edw. Steed.

BUt to return to my discourse, we were consigned to Charles Thomas and his
Company, with particular Orders and Instructions from George Pen not to sell
me nor my Brother, but permit us to make choice of some Person to own as a
titular Master; however, they were so unkind, they would not allow us that
liberty, but compelled us contrary to our Desires and Inclinations to live with
one Robert Bishop, pretending that they had not absolutely sold us to him, but
could remove us again in case we disliked our place; and that the
ofore-mentioned George Pen might not be obliged to repay the Money we gave
him, they told us we should have the yearly Salary of twenty Pounds, which they
were to receive for our Service: But these pretenses were only to amuse us, for
afterward when we were constrained by the great unkindness of our Master to
address our selves unto them, not only in Person, but also by many importunate
and affectionate Letters, entreating them to use their utmost endeavor and
interest with our Master in order to remove us, but we found it in vain for
they had possitively sold us, and also given it in on their Oaths at the
Secrataries Office.

When our Master perceived that we were uneasy, and unwilling to serve him, he
grew more and more unkind unto us, and would not give us any Clothes, nor me
any benefit of my Practice, whereby to enable me to provide for my self; for I
was obliged to give him an account of what Physic I administered out of his
Plantation, and he received the Money for the same. Our Diet was very mean,
five Pound of salt Irish Beef, or salt Fish a Week for each man, and Indian or
Guiny Corn ground on a Stone, and made into Dumplins instead of Bread; which
course and mean fare brought me to a violent Flux, insomuch that I was focced
to complain to my Master, desiring him to allow me some Flower instead of
Indian Corn to make Dumplins withal, and humbly recommended to his
consideration my Profession and Practice, which I hoped would render me
deserving of better Accommodation than was usually allowed to other Servants;
but he, not moved with Pity, angrily replied, I should not have so good. Whose
unkind answer moved me so, that I had the confidence to tell him, That I would
no longer serve him, nor any other as a Surgeon, unless I were entertained
according to the just Merits of my Profession and Practice, and that I would
choose rather to work in the Field with the Negroes, than to dishonor my
Profession by serving him as a Physician and Surgeon, and to accept of the same
entertainment as common Servants. My angry Master at this was greatly enraged,
and the fiery Zeal of his immoderate Passion was so heightened by some lying
Stories of a fellow Servant, that he could not content himself with the bare
execution of his Cane on my Head, Arms and Back, although he had played so long
thereon like a furious Fencer, until he had split him in pieces, but he also
confined me close Prisoner in the Stocks, which stood in a open place, exposed
to the scorching heat of the Sun, where I remained about twelve Hours, until my
Mistress, moved either with Pity or Shame, gave oder for my release.

It would be too tedious to give a particular Account of the many other Abuses
and Unkindnesses we received at his Hands, and therefore it shall suffice to
say that in this condition we lived with him about fifteen Months, until by
his debauched and extravagant course of Life he had run himself so extremely in
Debt, and perticularly to those Merchants that sold us to him, that he could
not well pay for us; for which reason we were removed from him, but the
Merchants were forced to remit the Money due for our Service, before he would
return us. And now being returned again, we remained in the Merchants Hands as
Goods unsold; and because I would not consent to be disposed of at their
pleasure, they threatened to Horse-whip me, and put me to servile Employment.

But we had not been long here before my Brother dyed, and I being wearied with
long and fruitless Expectation of my Pardon, and no less perplexed and tired
with the great Abuses I had received at their Hands, resolved to attempt the
making my escape from off the Island; to which purpose after several
contrivances and ways that came into my Head, and those well weighed with all
the consequent Circumstances that possibly I could foresee, I concluded at
length to proceed after this manner:

Being introduced by a Friend into the acquaintance of one John Nuthall, a
Carver, whose condition was somewhat mean, and therefore one that wanted Money
to carry him off the Island, I imparted my design unto him, and employed him to
buy a Boat of a Guiney Man that lay in the Road, promising him for his Reward
not only his Passage free, and Money for his present Expenses, but to give him
the Boat also when we arrived at our Port.

By the way, it is to be understood, that the means which enabled me to defray
these extraordinary Charges, was a private Consignation of Goods from my
Relations to a particular Friend in the Island, who took care to dispose of
them for me. John Nuthall therefore readily consented to what I proposed, and
after I had enjoined him to secrecy, I delivered him twelve Pounds to buy the
Boat, which accordingly he did, and gave in Security for the same at the
Secratary's Office, conformable to the Custom and Laws of the Island;
nevertheless, all that would not prevent the Jealousy of the Magistrates that
sprung from the consideration of his Poverty, and the little service they knew
the Boat would do him, whereupon they sent for John Nuthall, and strickly
commanded him to discover who it was that had employed him to buy the Boat, and
threatened to put him to his Oath; nevertheless they could get nothing out of
him, for the man had so much Courage, that he confidently denied that any
Person had employed him, but that he bought the Boat merely for his own use.

Yet was not all this sufficient, they still threatened to sease the Boat,
unless he gave in better security; Upon which he came to me, to advise what was
best to be done, I ordered him forwith to sink the Boat; which as it very much
abated the suspicion of the Magistrates, so it secured the Boat from seizure:
While these things were in agitation, one of John Nuthall's Creditors, to whom
he owed seven Pounds for Tools, threatened to Arrest him, unless he paid him
down the Money, which was no small surprise to a Man that had no Money to make
his Payment; however, having a days respite to procure satisfaction, he came
and told me, That unlses I would supply him with Money to pay his Debt,
necessity would constrain him to discover my design; So that well knowing the
danger I was in, I was forced to supply him. And here I must not omit to relate
that by this time I had discovered my design to two of my Acquaintance under
the same Circumstances, Thomas Austin and John Whicker, who readily agreed to
be my Companions, and gave me what Money they could well spare to help carry on
the design, but my self was the chief contriver and manager of the whole,
having more time and liberty than they; for I usually met John Nuthall every
Night at some convenient place, remote from the Town by the Sea side, where
after we had consulted together, he took his Instructions how to proceed.

In this interval of time, the Boat being sunk, and by that means the suspicion
of the Magistrates quite over. John Nuthall's debt paid, and he again secured
to Secrecy, we began to think of providing Necessaries for our intended
Voyage, which as they occured to my thoughts, I set them down, that so nothing
might be forgotten, which take as follows, A hundred weight of Bread, a
convenient quantity of Cheese, a Cask of Water, some few Bottles of Canary,
Madera Wine, and Beer: These for the support of Nature; and then for Use, a
Compass, Quadrant, Chart, half Hourglass, half Minute-Glass, Log and Line,
large Tarpaulin, a Hatchet, Hammer, Saw and Nails, some spare Boards, a
Lanthorn and Candles: All which were privately conveyed to a Friends House not
far from the Waterside, to be in a readiness against the time. Which after I
had bethought my self, who besides to make choice of for my Companions, was the
next thing to be considered of, but that a luckey chance after a short
expectation, presented us with one; for within few days the Governor of Mevis
putting in at the Barbados, the Governor, for his more noble entertainment,
caused the Malitia of the Town to be in Arms, which was attended with
Revelling, Drinking and Feasting to excess; the consequence of which I easily
conjectured would be drowsy Security and Carelessness: This time I therefore
thought most proper for our intended enterprise, and gave notice thereof to my
intended Companions, most of whom I kept ignorant of my design until now,
fearing it should by any means be discovered, and ordered them not to carry
home their Arms, but to bring them after it was Night to a certain Storehouse
by the Wharf, where I designed to put to Sea: the Storehouse being then under
the care of John Wicker, one of my Confederates, and therefore a most happy
convenience to conceal both them and their Arms till it was time to set Sail.

In the mean time John Nuthall employed two lusty Blacks to empty the Water out
of our Skiff, and set her a float, and then brought her to the Wharf before the
Storehouse, whither by this time we had conveyed our Necessaries, keeping
the Blacks within the Storehouse, that they might have no opportunity to
discover our design. About eleven a Clock at Night, thinking it time to embark
in our small Vessel, we assigned one of our Company to stand Centry at the head
of the Wharf, to give us notice if the Watch should happen to come that way;
and Then with all speed we put our Provisions and Necessaries aboard; which we
had no sooner done, but we had an Alarm that the Watch was approaching to the
head of the Wharf: a misfortune which so surprised us, that we all of an
instant betook our selves to our Heels, and for my own part soon recovered a
Friends House, giving all for lost, supposing my Companions were fallen into
the Enemy; hands. But whilst I was condoling my Misfortune to my Friend, and
giving him a lamentable account of our attempt and discovery, and also
consulting whither to retire in the Country to lie dormant if possible, till
some better opportunity offered it self, I heard a Person at the Window
enquiring for me. At first I was in a dreadful fear, lest it was one of the
Watch in quick persuit after me, but knowing him by his Voice to be one of my
Companions, I gladly received the account he gave me, which was, that the Watch
came only to call up one of their Number that was to watch with them that
Night, and then went away without taking the least notice of the Boat. However,
I was so disheartened by this unlucky Accident, that I was altogether unwilling
to make a second attempt, till at length overruled by the Importunity of my
Friend, more especially when he told me that they all waited for me, and could
not go without me (for neither of them had any skill in Navigation) and
considering the baseness of disappointing so many Persons whom I had engaged in
so much danger, I resolved once more to hazard a burnt Forehead and fore Back,
and going with him to the Water side, I found my Companions by the Boat waiting
for me, and not a little glad to see me come again; then we put the Negroes
into the Storehouse, charging them not to stir forth, or make any noise till
the Morning; and to encourage them to be faithful to us; I gave them three half
pieces of Eight for their good Service.

This done, and thus delivered from our Fears, we embarked in our small Vessel,
being in number eight, namely, John Whicker, Peter Bagwell, William Woodcock,
John Cook, Jeremiah Atkins, and my self, which were Sufferers on the account
of the Duke of Monmouth; the other two was John Nuthall who bought the Boat for
me, and Thomas Waker. Thomas Austin, of whom I formerly spoke, was so possessed
with fear of being cast away, that he would not go with us: About Midnight we
put off to Sea, designing for Quirasao, a Dutch Island, that lies about 200
Leagues thence, for we durst not go to any English Island, for fear we should
be taken and sent back again. We rowed softly forward within a Pistols shot of
the fort; for there lay at that time a Man of War in the Road, which made us
not a little afraid of being discovered by those watchful Enemies, but
Providence so ordered it, that we passed both without discovery. However, by
that time we were got clear of the Fort and Shiping, our Boat being so extreme
leaky, had taken in so much Water, that we were almost ready to sink, not
daring to heave it out before for fear of making a noise to alarm our Enemies:
But having the convenience of a Tub and large wooden Bowl, we fell to work,
and in a little time we pretty well emptied our Boat, and then we set our Mast
and hoisted our Sail, and steered our Course South-West as near as I could
judge, (intending to make the great Granada) for our Candles being bruised into
one mass of Tallow, and our Tinder and Matches wet, we could not strike a light
to steer by our Compass, neither indeed had we any Candles lighted for the
same Reason, during our whole Voyage, so that in the Night we were forced to
steer by the Stars, and when it was cloudy, by the Wind.

That which troubled us most, was the leakiness of our little Vessel, for
although we endeavored all we could to stop her gaping Seams, with our Linen,
and all the Rags we had, which we tallowed with our bruised Candles, yet she
was so thin, so feeble, so heavy laden, and wrought so exceedingly, by reason
of the great motion of the Sea, that we could not possibly make her tight, but
was forced to keep one Person almost continually Night and Day, to throw out
the water, during our whole Voyage; the same Night most of my Companions were
so Sea sick, that notwithstanding we were all ready to sink, I could hardly
persuade them to throw out the Water, and my place being at the Helm to guide
and govern the Boat, I could not safely go thence; however at length, through
great Importunity and earnest Persuasions, I prevailed with them to take a
little pains to preserve us from drowning. My Companions now began to wish
themselves at Barbados again, and would willingly have returned, but I told
them, there was no possibility of it, being so far to leward of the Island. One
of them through Carelessness in heaving out the Water, threw over our wooden
Bowl, and we running away with a large Wind, could not go back to take it up,
so that we had nothing left to throw out the Water but our Tub, which obliged
them to be more careful of it, for our Lives were concerned therein.

May the 10th, in the Morning we were got almost out of sight of the Island, at
least far enough from being descried from thence: And perceiving no sort of
Vessel in persuit of us, we began to be cheered up with the thoughts of our
Liberty, and the hopes of our safe arrival at our desired Port: But then alas!
the Night no sooner approacht, but we were assailed with a brisk Gale of Wind,
under which misfortune another worse befell us, that we split our Rudder, so
that we were forced to lower our Sail, and with an Oar to keep our Boat before
the Sea, whilst one of my Company (a Joyner) mended our Helm, by nailing to it
two pieces of Boards, that done, we went cheerily on again.

May the 11th, we had indifferent good Weather, and my Companions pretty well
recovered of their Sea sickness, and now we had time to put things in a better
posture in our Boat, and to raise her, which we did by nalling on Tarpolings
from her sides to our Oars, that were lasht fast about nine Inches above, which
did us good service in keeping out the Sea: We likewise made a Tilt, with a
Hamock over the hinder part of our Boat, to defend us from the scorching heat
of the Sun.

May the 12th, this Morning notwithstanding we steered South-West to weather
the Great Granada the Current had set us so much to the Northward, that we made
the Granadilloes to bear West of us, which obliged us to steer more Southerly
to weather the Great Granada.

May the 13th, the last Night we weathered the Great Granada, and steered down
the South side of the same, and then shaped our Course for the Testegoes, for I
could not take any true Observation by my Quadrant, because of the uneven
motion of the Sea, and the nearness of the Sun to the Zenith, and therefore was
constrained to steer a Course from Island to Island, though the farther way
about.

May the 14th, We had fair Weather, and a fresh Gale of Wind, and about Noon,
as I remember, we made the Testegoes, bearing South, South-West, and before
Night made the North-East end of the Magaretaes. But by this time being so
extremely spent for want of sleep, having been obliged for the most part Night
and Day to steer the Boat, I was desirous to take a little Rest, but first I
directed one of my Companions how to steer down by the said Island, and then
composed my self to Sleep, in which interval of time my Companions eagerly
longing for fresh Water, regard ours stunk so extremely as it did, stood in for
the Land, and loar'd the Sail, designing to go ashore, at which time I happily
awoke, and apprehending the great danger of falling into the Hands of the
Indians, who had already kindled a Fire on the Shore not far from us, I caused
the Sail again to be hoistup, and hasted away with all Expedition, and being
favored with a brisk Gale of Wind got soon out of fear or danger of those
savage Canibals.

May the 15th, we had fair Weather, and very pleasant Sailing down the North
side of this Island: But when we had got about the middle of the Island my
Companions were no less importunate than before to go ashore for fresh Water;
to which I at length consented, partly because I saw that part of the Island
free from Inhabitants, and partly enticed by the fair appearance of a sandy
Bay, and the Water seemed so smooth, that I thought we could not injure our
Boat by running her ashore, in regard we had neither Anchor nor Grapling to
ride her off. But contrary to our expectations, and to our great surprisal, we
found the Ground near the Shore exrream foul, and the Sea heaved us so fast in,
that we could not possibly avoid being split on the Rocks, had not I leapt into
the Sea to fend her off, which whilst I labored to do with my Feet against the
Rock, till I was almost spent, my Companions with their two Oars rowed her off,
at which our Hearts were filled with Joy, and our Mouths with Praises to the
Lord, who had so wonderfully preserved us from being cast away on this Island,
where probably we must either have been starved our selves, or have become Food
for those inhumane Man-eaters. From the West end of this Island we directed our
Course for Saltatudos, but that Afternoon the Wind increased, and a white Ring
encircled the Moon, which I thought presaged ill Weather, and to our great
sorrow proved too true, for about nine at Night a dreadful Storm arose, which
made us despair of ever seeing the Morning-Sun; and now the Sea began to foam,
and to turn its smooth Surface into Mountains and Vales, our Boat was tossed
and tumbled from one side to the other, and so violently driven and hurried
away by the fury of the Wind and Sea, that I was afraid we should be driven by
the Island in the Night time, and therefore we brought our Boat too, with her
Head against the Sea; but the Wind and Sea still increasing we was forced to
bear up before it, with only Sail sufficient to give her steeridge way. And now
in vain we began to wish our selves at the Barbados again, or which was worse
on that Island on which we were so lately like to have been wrackt, believing
that a Misery then, which now we should have thought a happiness; and that
which confirmed us the more in the certainty of our approaching Ruin, was an
unexpected Voice, which to our thinking, seemed to hallow to us at a great
distance. But the Omnipotent, who is never unmindful of the Cries of his People
in Distress, heard our Prayers; so that when all our Hopes were given over, and
we had resigned our selves into his Hands, expecting every moment when the wide
gaping Sea would devour and swallow us up, God of his infinite Mercy and
unspeakable Goodness, commanded the violence of the Winds to cease, and allayed
the fury of the raging Waves, eternal Praises to his Name for evermore.

May the 16th, this Morning at break of Day saw the Island of Saltatudos just
before us, and when it was sufficiently light that we could discern how the
Land lay, we steered down the North side, intending to go ashore at some
convenient place to refresh our selves after that dreadful Storm, and to take
on board some fresh Water, and if possible to stop the leaks of our Boat, in
order to proceed in our Voyage for Quirasoe, and accordingly when we came to
leward of a small Island hard by the other, we stood in directly for the shore,
thinking it a convenient place to Land, which we had no sooner done, but we saw
a Canow coming thence directing her Course toward us; at which sight being a
little surprised, my Companions provided their Arms, and charged their Muskets
and Blunderbuss with pieces of Glass-Bottles (for we coming from Barbados in
so great a hurry and fear, through forgetfulness they left their Bag of Bullets
on the Wharf.) When they were come somewhat nearer, that we could perceive them
to paddle like Indians, we bore up and were running from them; which as soon as
they perceived they waved their Hats, and hailed us, by which we knew they were
not Indians, as we supposed, and therefore permitted them to come nearer, and
perceiving them to be white men, we enquired what they were, they told us, They
were English men in distress, etc. and waited for an opportunity to go off the
Island. The account we gave them of our selves was very short, That we came
from one of the Windward Islands, by which they supposed we had fled for Debt,
and should have continued in that belief, had not Thomas Waker, one of my
Companions, privately informed them, that there was only he and John Nuthall
that were Debtors, the rest of us being Rebels; for he thought thereby to
ingratiate himself and Friend into their favor. But these Privateers (for so
they were as we afterward understood) hated them the more for their Treachery,
and loved us the better, confessing that they were Rebels too, adding, That if
the Duke of Monmouth, had bad One Thousand of them, they would soon have put to
flight the King's Army. But to proceed, when we came to the shore the
Privateers assisted us to hall up our Boat, that she might not be injured by
the Sea, having no convenience to ride her off; which done, they showed us the
Well of fresh Water, which was hard by their Huts, where we refreshed our
selves a little, and with our Sail we made a shade to keep the Sun from us, and
when we had so done, we lay down under it to refresh our selves with Rest and
Sleep, having had but little of either all our Voyage, being so extremely
thronged together in our little Boat. These Privateers at first were very kind
to us, and gave us some of their Provision, and related to us the Story of
their Adventures, which to the best of my memory was thus that they formerly
belonged to one Captain Yanche, Commander of a Privateer of 48 Guns that
designed to plunder a Spanish Town by the Gulf of Florida, called St Augusteen,
and in order thereunto sent thirty of them out into the Gulf of Flo^ida, to
take Canows from the Indians for the more convenient and speedy Landing their
men, but they going ashore on the Main to turn Turtle, was set upon by the
Indians, and two of them killed on the place; however at length they put the
Indians to flight, and some time afterward took two or three Canows, and one
Indian Prisoner, who conducted them to his own and his Fathers Plantations (on
condition they would afterward set him free) where they stored themselves with
Provisions, and other Necessaries; but it cost them dear, for their
Quartermaster and one more of the Company was po^soned, by their unwary eating
of Casader Roots, the rest of them went with those Canows and Indian which they
had taken, to the place appointed, expecting to meet their Man of War, but
could not find him, and therefore being necessitated to shift for themselves as
well as they could, they came to this Island, hoping to meet here with some
Vessel loading of Salt, in which they might get passage for some English Port,
but was disappointed here also, for the Ships were all gone before they came.

After we had sufficiently refresht our selves with Rest and Sleep, and
returned to the Lord the Praises due unto his Name for this wonderful and
miraculous deliverance, we thought it time to consider how to stop the Leaks of
our Boat, and to raise a Deck over her with Rinds of Trees, etc. that we might
proceed in our intended Voyage for Quirasoe, our Intentions were no sooner
perceived by the Privateers, but they endeavored to persuade us from it,
alleging the insufficient of our Boat, and the Dangers we were so lately
exposed unto, advising us rather to go with them in their Pereagoes a
Privateering, than to hazard our lives by a second attempt; with the like
Argument they would have easily prevailed with my Companions to consent to go
with them, had I not persuaded them to the contrary. But when the Privateers
saw it was in vain to persuade, they thought to compel us by burni^g our Boat,
supposing th^n that we would choose rather to go with them, then to slay upon
the Island till S^^ping came for Salt, which would be eight or nine Months,
and in the mean time to be in danger of being taken by the Spamards for
Privateers, or otherwise to be starved with Hunger; for we had no more then
four or five pound of Bread for each man left. But this contrivance answered
not their Expectations; for notwithstanding they burnt our Boat, and took our
Sails; and other Utensils from us, I continued my resolution, and chose rather
to trust divine Providence on that desolate and uninhabitable Island, than to
partake or be any ways concerned with them in their Piracy, having confidence
in my self, that God who had so wonderfully and miraculously preserved us on
the Sea, and brought us to this Island, would in like manner deliver us hence,
if we continued faithful to him. And in order to our better Accommodation and
Preservation on this Island, I gave the Privateers 30 pieces of Eight for the
Indian they took on the Main (but was not so true to their Promise as to set
him at liberty (which I expected would be serviceable unto us in cat hing Fish,
etc.)

About the 25th of May, twenty two of the Privateers having first raised the
sides of their Pereagoes with Boards (fastened with the Nails they saved in the
burning our Boat) and fitted them for the Sea, they set sail, leaving four of
their Company behind that refused to go with them, as also a Spanish Boat that
was of no service to them, neither could be of any use to us, unless we had
Sails to sail her, and a Rudder to guide her, both of which we wanted.

In this condition they left us, deprived of all ways and means of getting off
until the season aforesaid, unless God by a particular Providence should direct
some Vessel or other to touch here.

But before I proceed to give account of our manner of Life in this place, I
think it necessary to give a short description of the Island it self, which is
situated in the Latitude of 11 Degrees, and 11 Minutes North Latitude, its
extent is about twelve Miles in length, and two or three in breadth, and is
about one hundred and twenty Leagues from Barbados, called by the Spainards
Tortuga, from the great plenty of Turtle that resorts thither, but our English
gives it the Name of Saltitudos, because there is such great quantity of Salt
yearly brought from thence; the Spaniard claims the Propriety of this Island,
lying so near the Main where they inhabit, and therefore will sometimes take
our English Vessels as they are loading of Salt, of which they took two the
Season before we came there. The East and West end of this Island is for the
most part Sand, the middle consists of hard and carggy Rocks, that are very
poreous, resembling honey Combs, and therefore we called them Honeycomb Rocks:
There is plenty of small Bushes growing out of the Sand, and Shrubs from
between the Rocks, but no Timber Trees on the whole Island.

One the South side near the East end, is the Salenaes, or salt Ponds, from
whence the Salt is brought; which is thus made, the Sea or salt Water
penetrates through the beachy Banks of the Sea, and over-flows a large Plain of
two or three Miles circumference, near a Foot deep, where by the scorching heat
of the Sun the thin Aqueous part is exhaled, and the Saline part is Coagulated
into pure white Christaline Salt; and because there is a continual supply of
Salt Water from the Sea, the Sun continues exhaling and coagulating, until the
whole Salenaes is deeply covered over with Salt, so that all they have to do is
only to rake it together, and carry it aboard. There is great plenty of Birds
and Fowl, as Pellicans Flammans, Parakets, Mocking Birds, and a innumerable
company of Sea-Fowl, and some Vegi^able Productions, of which I shall have
occasion to treat hereafter.

But to return from this Digression, the Privateers had no sooner left us, but
we found our selves of necessity obliged to seek out for Provision, and being
led by the Example of those four Privateers that staid behind, we w^lked along
the Seashore to watch for Tortoise or Turtle, which when they came up out of
the Sea to lay their Eggs in the Sand, we turned them on their Backs, and they
being incapable of turning themselves again, we let them remain so till the day
following, or until we had convenience of killing them; for if they were
sufficiently defended from the heat of the Sun by a shade, which we usually
built over them, they would live several days out of the Water: And thus we
walked to and fro in the Night time to turn Turtle, and in the Day time we were
employed in killing them, whose Flesh was the chiefest of our Diet, being
roasted by the Fire on wooden Spits; and sometimes when we designed a Feastival
we left some part of the Flesh on the Calepatch and Calapee, that is, the Back
and Breast Shells, which we roasted, by setting them upright in two forked
Sticks thrust into the Sand, before a large Fire: what we did not eat we cut
into long and slender pieces, and after we had salted it very well, we dried it
carefully in the Sun on ranges of Sticks set up for that purpose; for we had no
other way of preserving it, having nothing to wet salt it in, but we found it
so difficult to divide their shells, that we broke our knives, and were forced
to make new ones out of the swords my Companions brought with them, which we
did after this manner; first, we broke them into suitable lengths, and softened
them in the Fire, and then rubed them on a Stone to a fit shape and thinness,
and after we had hardened them again, we fixed them in Hafts, and made them more
serviceable then our former. And here for the better Information of some
Persons I think fit to describe these Sea Beasts (if I may so call them) which
are somewhat of an Oval form, strongly defended on the Back and Breast with a
thick Shell, and have four Fins covered with thick Scales, that serve them
instead of Legs when they come ashore; they feed on Woose or Sea Grass that
grows out of the Rocks, which I judge is the true reason they do not eat Fishy;
they breathe, and therefore are obliged to come frequently up to the surface of
the Water, on which they sometime float so sound a sleep, that they give
Seamen opportunity with a Boat to take them up; their Flesh is very
delightsome and pleasant to the taste, much resembling Veal, but their Fat is
more yellow; the she or Female Turtle comes up on the Shore to lay their Eggs
in the Sand three times in the Year, in the Months of April, May and June,
where they are brought to Maturity by the sweet Influence of the Sun; and when
the young ones are hatched they musters out of their Cells, and marches into the
Sea, but not without danger of being devoured by the Sea-Fowl, that wait to
destroy them; e^ch of these Tortoises lay about 140 Eggs at one time in about
an hours space; which are full as large as Hens Eggs, but with this difference
that these are round, and covered only with a thick strong Membrane or Skin,
nor will their whites harden by heat, as the whites of Hens Eggs; their Yolks
we bent in Calabashes, with some Salt, and fried them with the fat of the
Tortoise, like to Pancakes, in a piece of a earthen Jar found by the Seaside,
which we did eat instead of Bread.

I never saw any Creature so long a dying as these, for after we had cut their
Throats, divided their Bodies, and cut their Flesh into small and minute parts,
every part and portion would continue twitching and moving it self a long time:
They have a threefold Heart, said to be the Heart of a Fowl, of a Beast, and
of a Fish, which will stir and pant several Hours after is it taken out of
their Bodies.

Our continual feeding on these Tortoises, brought us to a violent looseness,
which I speedily stopped with an Opiatick Tincture; which I provided on another
occasion; for before we came from Barbados, I thought of a way to deliver our
selves out of our Enemies Hands, (in case we should be taken) without shedding
of Blood; and it was thus, I dissolved a sufficient quantity of Opium in a
Bottle of rich Cordial Water, which we carried with us in the Boat, intending
to give it to those Persons that should take us, which I supposed they would
readily drink, and by that means would be overtaken with so profound a Sleep,
that we should have opportunity sufficient to make our escape from their.

We were obliged to go many Miles from the Well of fresh Water, to turn Turtle,
and to fetch Salt from the Salenaes, which necessitated us to carry our. Water
with us in a Cask over those uneven Rocks, which soon wore out our Shoes, and
compelled us to make our soft and tender Feet, unwillingly to salute those hard
and craggy Rocks, which was very irksome to us at first, but time and necessity
made it more familiar and easy, that at length the Bottoms of our Feet was
hardened into such a callous substance, that there was scarce any Rocks so hard
but we could boldly trample them under our Feet.

When the season of the Tortoises coming ashore was expired, and we had gotten
a considerable quantity of their Flesh salted and dried for our Winter store,
we set about building of Houses to defend us from the stormy Weather, which we
were shortly to expect, which we did so artificially, and covered them so well
with course Grass that grew by the Sea side, that neither the violence of
Winds, nor fierceness of Storms could easily injure or offend us. Our household
Goods consisted chiefly in two or three earthen Jarrs left us by the
Privateers, some few Calebashes and Shells of Fish that we found by the Sea
side: in our Houses we formed little kind of Cabbins to repose our selves in,
with as much ease as possibly we could.

In these little Huts or Houses we spent most of our time, sometimes Reading or
Writing, and at other times I went abroad with my Indian a Fishing, at which he
was so dextrous, that with his Bow and Arrow he would shoot a small Fish at a
great distance; sometimes we caught some Craw-Fish, which we broiled over the
Coals, and for change of Diet we sometime eat a sort of Shellfish that live
on the Rocks, and are like Snales, but much langer, called Wilks.

And, as there is no Mountain so barren, on which their may not be found some
Medicinal Plant, so neither was this Island so unfruitful, but it aforded us
two Vegetable Productions of great service unto us, the one we called Turks
Heads, being of an Oral form, beset on every side with sharp Prickles like a
Hedge Hog, out of which there grow in the apper part a longish red and pleasant
Fruit, about the bigness of a small Nut; in taste resembling a Strawberry; the
other was much more servicable to us, called Curatoe, of an oval body or stump
like the former, but out of this grew long thick Leaves, whose edges were
prickly, and its juice so exceeding sharp and pungent, that it was not easily
suffered on the bare Skin, with which we washed our Linen as with Soap, for it
would scour excellent well; through the Leaves is dispersed long and thready
Fibers, with which when we had separated and dried it in the Sun, we made very
good Thread, and mended our Clothes therewith in Needles which we made of
Bones; with the Leaves I made a most excellent Ballom for Wounds, by boiling
them in the Fat of the Tortoises, which I brought to a sit consistency by
adding Bees Wax thereunto. Thus much of its external use, its internal follows:
After we had cut off the Leaves about three or four Inches distant from the
Body, we dug a great Hole or Pit in the Sand, and heated it exceeding hot,
and put the said Body therein, covering it up in the hot Sand, where we
permitted it to remain five or six days, in which time the juice that was
before so extraordinary sharp and corrosive, by this digestion became so
strangely changed, that it was extremely sweet and pleasant, like the Syrup of
baked Pears.

And after we had pressed it forth, and fermented it with a proportionable
quantity of Water, it became a most pleasant and spirituous Liquor to drink;
the innermost part of the Body or stump we cut into slices, and eat it like
Bread. At this Island there is an innumerable Company of Sea-Fowl, that lay
their Eggs in the Sand, over spreading at some places near twenty Yards, as
near together as the Birds can well sit to lay them; and when the young Ones
are hatched, they run about in great Companies like Chickens a considerable
time before they are able to fly, which often afforded us pleasant diversion to
pursue and take them, which when we had skined, salted and dried in the Sun, we
could preserve a long time, but they did eat extreme Fishy, much like
Red-Herrings.

We endeavored to make a Pot to boil our Turtle in, by tempering the finest
Sand with the Yolks of Turtles Eggs and Goats Hair, for we could find no Clay
nor Earth in the whole Island, but could not possibly make them endure drying,
so that we were forced to eat our Turtle roasted by the Fire on wooden Spits.

There is a pleasant fragrant Herb grows out of the Sand among the rooks which
we called wild Sage, whose Leaves we smoaked instead of Tobacco, and for want
of a Pipe I smoaked it in a Crab's Claw, of which there was plenty, but they
were so poor we did not eat them.

There is also an Insect, called a Soldier, having a Shell like a Snail; but
some say this Shell is not proper to themselves, for having weak and tender
Bodies, they get possession of these Shells to defend themselves against the
injury of the Air, and attempts of other Creatures; as they grow bigger they
shift their Shells, and get into larger, being commonly those of Peridwinkles;
they have instead of a Foot a instrument like a Crabs Claw, wherewith they
close the entrance of their Shells, and thereby scoures their whole Bodies;
when they are set near the Fire they presently forsake their quarters, and if
it be presented to them again, they go backwards; they commonly keep in great
Companies about the Rocks near the Well of fresh Water, and when they intend to
change their Lodgings, there sometimes happens a serious engagement, managed
with that clasping Instrument, till the strongest by Conquest gets Possession,
which he carries about with him on his Back during his Pleasure.

Another little Insect is worthy to be mentioned, called Lizards, and were so
familiar and friendly, that they would come boldly among us, and do us no harm;
they have four begs, their Bodies are adorned with diverse delightsome Colors;
they feed on Flies, and for that reason was serviceable unto us in killing
them, which they performed with great nimbleness and cunning, for they lay down
where they suppose the Fly would come, putting their Heads into as many
different postures as the Fly shifts places, and when they find their advantage
they start so directly on their Prey with open Mouth, that they seldom miss it;
they are so very tame that when we were eating, they would come on our Meat and
Hands to catch Flys.

After we had spent about three Months in this desolate and disconsolate
Island, we saw a Ship attended with a small Sloop, steering toward the Shore,
at which we were at once possessed with Hopes and Fear, with Hopes that it was
some English Vessel, in which we might probably get a passage thence, and with
fear lest it should be a Spaniard, who doubtless would make us Prisoners if
they could take us, supposing that we were Privateers.

The four Privateers that remained with us all this time drew near the Sea
side, where the Ship was at an Anchor; and after they had discovered them to be
Privateers, made signs to them to send their Boat ashore, which accordingly
they did; and after they had carried them on Board the Captain of the Man of
War sent up the Sloop to that part of the Island where I and my Companions
were, and when they came ashore unto us, enquired which was the Doctor; my
Companions informed them it was I, one of them, therefore addressed himself
perticularly to me, Desiring me in the Name, and on the behalf of their
Captain, to go with them on Board the Man of War, where I should be kindly
entertained, and have liberty to come ashore when I please. I readily embraced
his kind Invitation, but could not procure liberty for any of my Companions to
go with me. When we came to the Man of War, I was very honorably handed up the
side, the Trumpets in the mean time sounding, and very kindly received and
well-com'd aboard by the Captain and Doctor, who invited me aft into the great
Cabin, where I was not only feasted with Wine and choice Provision, but had
given me by the Doctor a pair of Silk Stockings, a pair of Shoes, and a great
deal of Linen Cloth to make me Shirts, etc. And after a long discourse
concerning the Affairs of England, more perticularly of the progress and defeat
of the late Duke of Monmouth, which they seemed to deplore; I addressed my self
to the Captain in the behalf of my self and Companions, humbling entreating him
to permit us to go with them either to that Port to which they were bound, or
otherwise to put us on board some English Ship that they should accidently meet
withal: For I understood by their Discourse that they had taken a rich Prize,
and was bound directly for a Port to spend their Money (as they usually do) so
that I apprehended no danger in going with them. But the Captain not being able
to take us aboard without the consent of the Company, having but two Votes, and
as many shares in the Ship and Cargo; the Company were called together, and
after some Debates they voted that they would take me with them, but none of my
Companions. However, they were so kind that they sent them a Cask of Wine, and
some Bread and Cheese, a Gammon of Bacon, and some Linen Cloth, Thread and
Needles to make them Shirts, etc. and the next day permitted them to come on
board, and entertained them very courtiously.

In about two days time we sit Sail, leaving my Companions on the Island, not
a little grieved at my departure, and stood away to the Nothward, with a design
to go to Illa Terra; from which at present I shall digress to give an account
what became of those Privateers that left us, who were the occasion of my being
delivered from this place. The next day after they went from us they arrived at
the main Continent, where they halled up their Periagoes, and stayed there
about a Fortnight, waiting to seize some Spanish Vessel that might come that
way, which they designed if possible speedily to board before the Spaniards
could get themselves in a posture of defense; but not meeting here with any
Prize, went to Windward, where they took a Canow laden with Pork, and meeting
with some English Vessel at one of the Windward Issands, they parted Companies,
some went for Carolina, and the others went in a small Sloop to Blanco, where
they met with a Man of War, a Piivatcer, that had taken a Fortugees, a great
Ship, called the Grand Gustaphus, laden with Wine and Linen Cloth, etc. When
they had shared her Cargo, they parted Companies, the French with their shares
went for Petty Gnavers in the Grand Gustaphus, and the English being informed
by those other Privatiers of our being on Saltatidos, came thither with their
Man of War, and took me off, as is before expressed.

In about five or six days after we left Saltatudos, we made Porto Rito, and
our Vessel being so extreme leaky, some of the Company were for putting into
Mena, but the rest not consenting, we steered betwixt Porto Rico and
Hispaniola, and so to the Eastward of the Abroletaes or Hankerchers, where
there were diverse Vessels on the Wrack diving for Plate; but we stopped not here,
but continued our Course to the Northward, until we came into the Latitude of
Illa Terra, and then steered away West for the Island, and as we were running
down we saw a Ketch, to which we gave Chase, and in a few Hours came up with
her, who told us, that they came from New York, and was bound for Providence;
as soon as the Privateers understood that Providence was inhabitated again,
they altered their Resolutions, and designed to go with them to that place, and
accordingly kept them company; the Night following we met with bad Weather, and
was like to run ashore on Illa Terra, through the carelessness of our Pilot, had
not a Person from the Quarter Deck, that was more watchful then the rest,
espied the Land just before us; but this was not all, for after we had tacked
about, and was lying by with the Heads of both Vessels off ashore, the men on
board the Ketch were so drunk with the Wine the Privateers had given them, that
they suffered their Ketch to drive aboard us, and with the violence of the blow
she gave us broke down our Cat-head, and had we not by a particular Providence
got free from her, we had both unavoidably sunk down in the Sea, for our Vessel
was so extremely leaky before, that at the same time she had three Foot of
Water in her Ho^d; and our Pumps being both out of order, we were forced to
convey it out with Tubs. The next day we steered into Providence, and came to
Anchor, under the command of a small Stochadoe Fort, built by the new
Inhabitants, who had not been here above 8 Months, but had so well improved
their time, that they had built a Town by the Sea side, and elected a Governor
from among themselves, who with the consent of twelve more of the chief men of
the Island made, and enacted diverse Laws for the good of their little
Commonwealth, being as yet under the protection of no Prince.

The Privateers found here a kind Reception by the Inhabitants, and after they
had gotten their Goods ashore, they ran their Ship a Ground, and burnt her,
giving their Guns to the Inhabitants to fortify the Island, designing to
divide themselves into small Members, and to go thence to some other place
where they might sell their Goods, and betake themselves to honest course of
Life. The Governor of this Island was a very sober man, an Independent, and
usually preached to the Inhabitants every first day of the Week, at which time
he caused a Gun to be fired for a signal, to give notice to the People when he
was going to begin. Whilst I remained here, the Privateers had two false
Alarms, supposing the Spaniards were come again to dispossess them of the
Island; for this being formerly a Harbor for Privateers, and a Nest of Robers,
the Spaniards on a time, when most of the men were on the old Wrack, pillaged
and burnt their Town, and carried away, as it was reported, thirty thousand
Pound in Plate and Money, and took some of the Inhabitants Prisoners, the
others fled to Illa Terra, where they remained till this Island was resetteld
by those new Inhabitants that came from Jamaica, and other parts. The Island it
self is very fruitful, and if the report of the Inhabitants be true, the
quickest in production of any I ever heard or read of; there is plenty of wild
Hogs in the Woods, which the Inhabitants often kill, and good store of wild
Grapes, with which they make good Wine, and diverse sorts of Fruits, as Oranges,
Lemons, Limes, Guavers, etc. Also medicinal Herbs, as Tea Radix, Contra Yerva,
Jesuits Bark, etc. Of eatable Roots, there is Partatoes, Yams and Edders, etc.

The Ketch with whom we came in company to this Island, sold part of their
Bread and Flower to the Privateers for Linen Cloth, and some they sold to the
Inhabitants: And in about a Fortnights time they set Sail for Carolina, and I
with them; but as we were falling down amongst the Bohemia Islands, toward the
Gulf of Florida, we were like to be cast away on the Rocks and Shoals that lay
in our way, but through mercy we got clear. When we came on the Coast of
Carolina, we met with blowing Weather, and by the mistake of our Captain fell
in to the Southward, where we came to an Anchor, but the Wind was so high, that
in weighing of him our Cable broke: The next day we came to an Anchor again
just before the Bar of Carolina, for our Captain was afraid to go in with his
Vessel, for fear they would seize him, because he had been dealing with the
Privateers, and for that reason he only sent in his Boat to get some fresh
Provision, and to put on Shore a Passenger that came with us; and because I
found no Vessel here bound directly for England, I resolved to go with them for
New York: And here also we had the Misfortune to lose our other Anchor,
insomuch that when we came to Sandy-Hook, we were forced to ride our Vessel by
two of her Guns, which we had slung for that purpose, until our Boat had got us
a small Anchor from on board some other Vessel. The next day we went up to New
York, where, as I was walking one Morning on the Bridge, I accidently met with
a Person I knew, that came lately from Barbados; at first I was surprised, but
having Confidence that he would not discover me, I went to him, and desired his
company to some House, where we might privately discourse together: He was glad
to see me safe there, and accordingly to my desire he went with me to a House
hard by, where I gave him an account of my Adventures, and what had happened to
me since I left Barbados; and he in requital gave me an Account of the
different Resentments People had of our departure, and how that after we were
gone our Masters had hired a Sloop to send after us; but thinking it in vain,
they did not pursue us; however, they sent our Names, and the description of
our Persons to the leward Islands, that so if any of us came thither, we might
be taken Prisoners and sent up again: At one time it was reported, that we had
gotten aboard a Dutch Vessel, and was bound for Holland: at another time that
we were taken Prisoners at St Christophers, and to be sent back in Chains,
which made our Masters rejoice, and insultingly to boast of the severe
Punishments they would inflict upon us; and was resolved, as they said, that I
should be hanged for an Example to others, because I was the chief contriver
and manager of our escape: But these Hopes and Insulstings of theirs were soon
over, for when at length they could hear no true account of us, they concluded
that we perished in the Sea. I had not been long at New York before I got
passage in a Vessel bound for Amsterdam, and in order thereunto took out a
Ticket from the Secrataries Office by another Name; and in about five Weeks
time we arrived at Cows, on the Isle of Weight, where this Vessel stopped to
clear; and as soon as I had got my Chest, etc. ashore, I embarked for
Southampton, where I left my Chest at a Friends House, and returned in a
disguise to my Relations, who before this time (unknown to me) had procured my
Pardon, and joyfully received me as one risen from the Dead; for having
received no account from me since I left Barbados, they did almost despair of
ever seeing me any more.

NOw unto the Eternal and True God, the sacred Fountain of all Mercies, that
have been with me in all Dangers and times of Trial, who miraculously preserved
me on the deep Waters, and according to the multitude of his Mercies delivered
me, when appointed to dye, unto him do I with sincere Gratitude dedicate the
remainder of my days, Humbly imploring that the Angel of his presence may
always attend me, and the Remembrance of his repeated Favors more and more
engaged my Heart to serve him, that in Testimony of my abundant Thankfulness, I
may return to him a perpetual Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, hencesorth
and forever.

From my Lodging at the Sign of the Ship, in St Paul' s Churchyard; London,
June the 10th, 1689. Henry Pitman.

An Account of the Adventures of my Companions since I left them on Saltatudos,
communicated to me by John Whicker since his arrival in England.
Dear Doctor,
in answer to your Request I have given you the following Account;

ABout a Fortnight after you left us on Saltatudos, two of our Companions, John
Nuthall and Thomas Waker having made Sails of the Cloth the Privateers left us,
and fitted, the Spanish Boat for the Sea, went from us, designing for Quirasoe;
but the Boat being so large and unruly, and they so unskilful in Navigation,
that I fear they either perished in the Sea, or was driven ashore on the Main
amongst the cruel Spaniards; for we never heard of them since.

The next day after they departed from us, arrived here a small Privateer Boat
of about four Tuns, in which were eight English men and a Negro, that formerly
belonged to the Ship in which you embarked, but that they left her, and went
ashore upon a Island, called Fernando, which lies to the Southward upon the
Coast of Brazil. Their reason for leaving their Ship was this; Having been out
of Carolina about an Year and Half, and had made nothing of a Voyage
considerable, resolved for the South Seas coming to the Streights of Magdaleen,
met with very bad Weather, which forced them to put back again, and resolved to
turn Pirates; but these eight men being averse to the rest of their Companions
design, went ashore upon the Island aforesaid, carrying with them what they had
on board, intending to go from thence in a small Boat, which was given them by
the Ship's Crew, with some Rigging, and other necessaries, which they designing
to build upon, and raise her higher in case of bad Weather, having in their
Company two Carpenters and a Joyner; taking their leaves of each other, the
Ship put to Sea, next Morning saw a Sail at a considerable distance, but making
the best of their way, soon came up with her, and finding her to be a
Portugeizs, they laid her aboard, and took her with very little resistance,
although she was a bigger Ship, and had more men then the Privateers; having
made her their prize, brought her away to the same Island, on which were their
Companions, and turned the Prisoners ashore among them, giving them a Boat and
Oars: But this caused no small trouble among the English, who were then
Inhabiters with them; but being well armed, they kept them at a distance from
their appartment all that day; but the next Night the Spaniards ran away,
carrying with them their own Boat, and the English men's too; then were they in
a bad condition, not having a Ship nor boat with which they could convey
themselves from that desolate Island then were they constrained to cut and fall
a sort of Trees, called Mangroves, and in the best manner they could, sawed out
Boards, Planks, and other Timbers sit for their use, and began to build a new
Boat from the Keel, and in six Weeks, or thereabouts, finished her, being in
burden as they judged four Tuns; no one being idle, but employing themselves,
some about their new Vessel, while others (by turn) traveled the Island to
shoot Provision, which was a sort of Birds, called Books, something resembling
our English Sea-Gulls, or Pyes, (but bigger.) This Island affords a fort of
very large and pleasant Figgs, which they also fed on sometimes.) There are a
great many wild Dogs, very large and fat, which eat very little or nothing but
Figs. Likewise in the day time there comes ashore Sea-Lyons, which will sit by
the Waterside, and make a hideous roaring; they are hairy about their Head and
Neck, much like our Land Lions; their Paws very lage, with a Skin like the Foot
of a Swan, which serves them to swim withal; they are very fearful and
timorous, not suffering a man to come nigh them, but presently makes to the
Sea; they live under Water as well as above. Having lancht and rigged their
Boat, they put on board their Provision, which was only a small Cask of Pease
that was given them by the Ship, which they kept by them for their Sea store.
Having Water and all things aboard, took their departure from Ferdinando,
aforesaid, committing themselves to the protection of Almighty God, and the
mercies of the Seas, directing their Course for Tabago: But missing it, the
Pilot ordered to bear up the Helm for Saltatudos, at which place they arrived,
but almost famished (for they had neither Pease nor Water for the space of five
or six days before. Having lain some days at the East end of the Island
unknown to us, and being in great want of Provision, resolved to travel the
Island to see if they could find out any Food, by chance they found some salt
Turtle, which we had laid upon a Tree, and covered it over with a Callapatch,
to secure it from the Weather.

Three of these men being very ill principled and loose kind of Fellows,
waiting their opportunity when three of their Companions were abroad, went
aboard and fetched their Arms, then came ashore to their Hut, where the other
two were, and presented a Pistol to each of their Breasts, and swore if they
would not carry every thing aboard they were dead men. The two men being
surprised, and not able to make any resistance, the three having all the Arms
in their Custody, were forced to comply, and carry all aboard. Which done, they
charged them that if they did not acquaint them when the other came home, they
would make them Examples. They promised very fair, having done this, they went
aboard, waiting for their coming home. In the Evening the other three men came
to their Hut, not mistrusting what had happened, but finding the Hut risted,
and every thing gone, enquired the meaning of it, which having understood,
bethought what to do; to tarry they were afraid; to go they could not tell
where; for they had traveled all Day, and could not find a drop of fresh
Water, neither was there any at the Hut, for the other had carried all aboard,
being very faint one was resolved to hail the Boat, and beg a little; the other
kept close to hear how he would fare, who having hailed them, they made answer
he should have some: So coming ashore laid hold on him, and tied his Hands
behind him, and left him in Custody with one of them while they went to look
for the rest: The reason why they endeavored to take them, was because they
had hid their Moneys in the Sand, and did not keep it in their Chests; but in
the mean time while they were looking for the other, the Prisoner by means of a
Knife he had in his Pocket, cut loose the Line with which his Hands were tied,
and made his escape: Being thus exiled from his Companions bethought himself of
ranging the Island to look for men; for the Turtle which they found came afresh
into his Memory: all this time he had no Victuals, nor a drop of Watter, but
was constrained to drink his own, being so excessive hot, at length having
traveled about the Island till almost ready to faint, he came near our Huts,
and seeing us dressing of Turtle with nothing on, only a pair of Drawers, the
man made a stand, thinking we had been Iudians, for we were tan'd with the Sun
as yellow almost as them; at length advanced, and enquired if we were English
men: We told him we were; then he begged for a little Water, which we gave him,
and some of our Turtle* And after some Conference, he told us his condition,
and desired us to help him to regain what was so ungratefully taken from him
and his fellow sufferers, by their own Countrymen and Boats Crew, which we
readily agreed to; and when we had sixth our Arms, we traveled all Night till
we came where the Boat lay, which was about six or seven Miles from that place.
When we came near the place, we hid our selves in the Bushes by the Sea side,
waiting their coming ashore next Morning, which they usually did as we were
informed. Morning being come, two of them came ashore, and the Negro slave
bearing a Vessel to fetch Water, and they with their Arms, leaving one aboard
with about twelve pieces by him ready laden; when they were come on shore, we
appeared with our Arms ready cockt, enclosed them, and took them Prisoners;
then we brought them to the Waterside, and showed the other aboard what we had
done, commanded him not to Fire, but to jump over board, and swim ashore to us,
which he immediately did: So taking them all Prisoners, we put them ashore,
leaving them some of our Provision; the rest we put aboard in order to
prosecute our Voyage for New England. So victualling and watering our small
Frigot in the best manner we could we left them upon the Island, and the 24th
of August took our Departure from Saltatudos, and in about six days time made
the Island of Porto Rico, but our Pilot not being very well acquainted with
that Country, supposed it to be the high Land of St Domingo upon Hispaniola,
and therefore ordered to bear up the Helm, and stand away to the Westward
before the Wind: the next day we could see no Land, which caused no small
trouble amongst us, being dubious where we were. Toward the Evening we made
the East end of Hispaniola: then our Pilot saw his error, that we had lost our
passage between the two Islands, Hispaniola and Portarico, beforementioned, we
were sailing down the South side of Hispaniola about nine days; having
sometimes very little Wind, at other times Turnadoes, that we could not carry
Sail. Our Water being all spent, we were forced some to drink their own Water,
others to drink salt Water taken up by the side. Running along close aboard
shore, we espied three men running with all the haste that possibly they could,
till they came to a Canow which lay at the Mouth of a Creek, which immediately
they rowed up into the Country among the Woods, we imagining they were afraid
of us, supposing us to be Spaniards, then we came to an Anchor, and my self
with one more, (a Carpenter) swim'd ashore, but with a great deal of
dissiculty, for the Rocks lying so far off the shore, had like to have dashed
out our Brains: Coming ashore we swom up the Creek, but the Tide being so
strong against us, we were forced to return back again; neither finding the
men, nor hopes of getting fresh Water, therefore we swom aboard again. Weighing
our Anchor, we steered within the Isle of Ash, which lies almost to the West
end of Hispaniola, our Pilot looking over his Waggoner, found that within this
Island was a fresh Water Creek, into which we designed to run, but through
mistake run about two Leagues up into a wrong Creek, where we could find no
fresh Water, that with drinking salt Water our Mouths were almost grown
together, and hardly able to speak; but God Almighty was pleased to send us a
very great shower of Rain, which lasted so long, that by means of a Sheet held
up by the four Corners, with a weight in it, we caught about two Gallons of
Water. So loaring our Sails we haled up the Creek into the Woods, and went
ashore, and concluded to dig a Well; when we had dug about four or six Foot
deep, we found fresh Water to our great Comfort and Satisfaction; lying ashore
all Night to take up the Water as it sprung, we were almost stung to death with
a sort of Flys, called Musquetoes and Merrywings, which draw'd Blisters and
Bladders in our Skin; that we looked as if we had had the Small Pox, which was
very tedious for our Bodies to endure. By next Morning we had got about forty
Gallons of Water aboard, with which we put to Sea again; but we had not been at
Sea above three Hours, before we saw a Sail within the West end of the Isle of
Ash, beforementioned; we bore up our Helm, and stood away for her; In a short
time we saw her come to an Anchor: supposing her to be a Jamaica Sloop, for she
had our Kings Jack and Ancient out: We hailed them, whose answer was (from
Jamaica) so coming to Anchor by their side, they laid us aboard with two
Canows, full of Spaniards, all armed as Pirates, and carried us aboard their
Sloop; stripped us naked, and put us down in their Hold, having nothing to lay
our naked Bodies upon only their Ballast Stones, or a top of their Water Cask;
the Provision they allowed us was course and short, about hal^ a Pint of Indian
Corn a day for a man for nine days together.

The place where they carried us, is called St Jago, a Spanish Town upon Cuba,
we remaind in this condition above six Months; when they went to Sea, we were
carried as their Slaves, (to pump Ship) wash their Clothes, and beat Corn in
great wooden Morters, and Negroes with naked Swords, always standing by as
Overseers, that our Hands have been bladdered and so sore, that we could hardly
hold any thing: When at home, our business was to row the Canow up two Leagues
in the Country (full of Jars to fetch Water) which we were forced to carry upon
our naked Backs a great way to fill them; sometimes into the Woods to cut Wood,
barefooted and bare-leged, neither Shirts to our Backs, nor Hat to our Heads,
but only a Rag sufficient to cover our Nakedness. Our Provision, as I told you
before, was Indian Corn boiled in Water, but a larger share than at first.

About the latter end of October we were divided, my self with three more were
put on board a small Barque, the rest of my Companions remained aboard the
Sloop, both Vessels being bound down to leward of Cape Cruse, having
information of a Dutch Trader that lay there before a small, Town, called Byan;
in which Voyage we were taken all very sick in the Ague, as well Spaniards as
English, which reduced us to a deplorable condition, having nothing to yield us
any comfort. In this distemper dyed one of our Companions^ Jeremiah Atkins of
Taunton during his Sickness, they were very cruel to him, not suffering us to
carry him down into the Hold, but made him lie Day and Night upon the Deck; all
we could do for him, was to cover him with the bark of a Cabbage-Tree, to keep
the Sun from him by Day, and the Dew by Night: In this languishing condition he
lay about a Week, and then dyed; when dead, they threw him over board, letting
him float a Stern, without using any means to sink him, as is usual. Returning
back again for St. Jago, without their expected Prize, off of Cape Cruse, my
self and one more of our Companions was taken again from on Board the Barque,
and put aboard the Sloop, and two other of our English were put aboard the
Barque, who took their departure from us at Cape Cruse aforesaid, bound for
Carthagena, a Spanish Town upon the main Continent. In five days we arrived at
our Port of St Jago, where we lay about a Month, and having kreen'd our Sloop,
put to Sea again; bound for the North side of Hispaniola to take Frenchmen.
Turning up to Windward of Cuba, we met with a Jamaica Sloop bound for the
Wrack, the Spaniard commanded him to hoist out his Canow, and come aboard;
which he refusing, went his way, having weathered Cape Myeeze, which is the
Eastward point of Cuba; we stood along shore bound for a small Town, called
Barracco, where in two days we arrived: we lay there till the latter end of
October, at which place our Sloop drove ashore, and struck off about fourteen
Foot of her false Keel; but after a great deal of trouble got her off again; at
this place they got two Hogs, and a quantity of Plantins, a sort of Food that
grows upon Trees; they are made use of instead of Bread among the Inhabitants
in the West Indies. We then proceeded in our Voyage for Hispaniola, and fell in
with a place, called the Mould, off which place we saw two Sail, an English
Vessel that came from Jamaica, bound for New York, and a French Sloop bound for
Pettygwavers, a French Town to leward on the North side of the said Hispaniola;
having a fresh Gale we came up with the English man, brought him by the Lee,
commanded the Captain aboard, with four of his men, and put twelve Spaniards
aboard his Ship. Then chasing the Frenchman, came up with him about an hour
after Night: the Frenchman stood it out and fought us, making a stout
Resistance, although they had not above seven or eight men, and in the
Spaniards* were thirty five Men, eight Guns, six Patterreroes, and every man
his small Arms: The French making such a bold Resistance kept them off, till
such time as they had an opportunity, to run their Sloop a Ground in the Mould,
in the dark, by which means they saved their lives, otherwise they had been all
dead men, as the Spaniards swore if they took them: In the next Morning we run
into the Mould, and brought out their Sloop, and put about ten Men aboard,
bringing both Prizes away for St. Jago. From the English Captain they took 900
l. in Money, and plundered him of all he had, save the suite of Clothes that he
wore, and waited the Governors motion to make a Prize of the Ship, which would
have been done, had not the Spanish Governor received advice of the Duke of
Albermales arrival at Jamaica; upon which news the Governor paid the English
Captain 600 l. of his Money back again, and sent him away to Jamaica, and all
the English Prisoners, that would go with him were free by his consent. By this
time arrived the Barque, in which was the other three of our Companions, who
were very glad to hear of our and their Redemption, we embarked once again
Freemen together, by God's Grace bound for Jamaica, where we safely arrived
about the latter end of March: So seperating our selves we endeavored in the
best manner we could to get passage for England our native Country, desiring
God Almighty to deliver us, and all our dear Countrymen Protestants, from the
barbarous Cruelty of the Spaniards and Papists.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
The Quintessence or Powers of Scurvey-Grass, both Plain and Purging.
BEing endued with the lively Color, Taste and Smell of the Herb, containing
its essential Virtues and Qualities, and is much to be preferred before the
Spirit commonly sold, in all cases wherein that is recommended, as in the
Scurvey, Dropsy, Jaundice, Hipocondriack Melancholy, etc. Price 1 s. a Bottle.

Magisterium Anodinum.
SO called, from its great and admirable Faculty, in easing all manner of Pains
in any part of the Body, which it does, not only by taking away that painful
Sensation, but by correcting or removing the material cause that excites it: A
Medicine so well corrected, and friendly to Nature, that it far exceeds both in
ease and virtue the common Preparations of Mathew's Pill, or any of that Nature
yet exposed to the World. Price 1 s. a Box.

Spiritus Catholicus.
THis Spirit is of most subtle and volatile Parts, and is a specific in most
Diseases of the Head, as Appoplexies, Lethargies, and all manner of sleepy
Diseases, Falling Sickness, Convulsions, Megrim, Vertigo or Giddiness of the
Head, Cattarhs, etc. The smell of it powerfully revives those that are in Fits
or Fainty, and for the most part gives ease in Pains of the Head, in a few
Minutes time. It Cures the Plurisie, Quinsie, without Blood-letting, and all
manner of Instamations, either external or internal. It is a famous Medicine in
all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, messentery Womb, etc. and the Diseases
of those parts; The Cholick, Stone, Gout, Scurvey, Hypocondriack Melancholy,
King's Evil, Rickets, Fevers and Agues, etc. Price 1 s. a Bottle.

Pillulae Catharticae.
A Most excellent Purging Pill, in all Cases where Purging is necessary, as in
the Scurvey, Dropsy, Gout, Venerial Disease, Appoplexies, Epilepsies, old and
invelerate Headaches, Cholick and Iliack Passion, Jaundice, Green Sickness,
etc. Price 1 s. a Box.

These Medicines are all Prepared and Sold (with Printed Directions, giving a
more full Account of their Virtues, etc.) by Henry Pitman, at the Sign of the
Ship in St. Paul's-Church-Yard.


