AN IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE State of New England: OR, THE Late GOVERNMENT
there, Vindicated.

In Answer to the DECLARATION Which the FACTION set forth, when they Overturned
That GOVERNMENT.

With a Relation Of the Horrible Usage they treated the Governor with, and his
Council; and all that had His Majesty's Commission.

In a LETTER to the CLERGY there.

By John Palmer.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Poole, at the Ship over against the Royal Exchange,
in Cornhill, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THERE was so much Industry used in New England, by those who had taken upon
themselves the Government, that nothing should come abroad which might
undeceive the People, already wrought to such a pitch of Credulity, easily to
believe the most monstrous Lies and Follies, that the ensuing Letter could not
be Printed without excessive Charge and Trouble; the Press being forbid to any
that were injured, to justify themselves, though open to all that would
caluminate, and abuse them; so that for several Months it appeared in
Manuscript, by stealth, branded with the hard Name of a Treasonable and
Seditious Libel; and would have been little better than Death, for any one, in
whose Hands it should have been found; but remained unanswered, although Care
was taken that it came to the Hands of some of the Persons to whom it was
directed.

I was then obliged to conceal my Name, because I was in their Hands, and
liable to whatever their Malice could prompt them to impose upon me; but being
now at Liberty, and having revised it, I have thought fit, for the
Justification of Sir Edmond Andros, and the rest of my Fellow Sufferers, to
make it public here, that the World may see how barbarously we have been used,
and most unmercifully dealt withal, by those Professing People; who for the
better effecting the Subversion of Kingly Government, and establishing their
Old Commonwealth, contrary to the Laws both of God and Man, and their Faith
given; detained us Ten Months in Prison, without any Mittimus, or just Cause,
alleged for their so doing; and afterward caused us to be put on Board, a
deep laden Ship, where we endured all the Miseries of a Troublesome Winter
Voyage; but (by God's Blessing) escaped both the danger of the Seas, and our
Enemies, and appeared at the Council Board, where the worst of our Enemies
(even the very Men that had so unjustly imprisoned and detained us) had nothing
to say or object against us.

Their Declaration (published as the Cause of their Insurrection) is herein
particalarly answered, and matter of Fact truly alleged, not in Scandalous,
Base, and Abusive Reflections, as some of their Pamphlets are stuffed withal,
but with that Sincerity and Moderation which becomes a Christian; and although
there are many things in it so frivolous, that to Men of Business, it may seem
impertinent to answer; yet I hope to be excused, because the meanest things
made so deep an Impression on the Vulgar and Ignorant People, that it was
absolutely necessary they should be undeceived.

I hope it will satisfy every unprejudiced Person, and sufficiently convince
the World that our Imprisonment was not for any Crime commmitted, but that (we
being employed from the Crown) by our Removal, the more easy Subversion of
Monarchy, and Destruction of the Church of England, might be effected; both
which they ever mortally hated, and had long before plotted to ruin, making
use of this juncture of Affairs, and Their Majesty's Names to cloak their
Design, whilst their Service was never intended, as is evident by their
withdrawing the Force from the Eastward, by which their Majesty's Fort and
Garrison of Pemyquid, and the whole County of Cornwall, the greatest part of
the Province of Mam, and part of the Province of New Hampshire were lost; the
Inhabitants being driven from their Houses, and above 300 of them taken
Captives, and Murdered, by the Indians; embezling their Majesty's Stores, Arms
and Ammunition; seizing and dismaniling their Fright, destroying their Revenue,
setting up a Republic Government, making Laws, erecting Courts of Judicature,
condemning and executing their Fellow Subjects, denying them Appeals to their
Majesty's, and burthening them with intolerable Taxes, without any manner of
Lawful Authority, for so doing, to the great Violation of the Laws, and
destructive of the Liberty of the Subject.

The State of NEW ENGLAND, Impartially considered, etc.
Reverend Sirs,
TWO Months have already past away, since, with Astonishment, I have beheld the
most deplorable Condition of this Country; into what a Chaos of Confusion and
Distraction have this People run themselves; and in what a labyrinth of Miserys
and Perplexitys are they involved! It Is high time now to make some serious
Reflections on the State of Affairs.

In the first place therefore, 'twill be necessary to consider,

1. For what Reasons, and to what End, did they take up Arms? 2. Whether those
Reasons be Substantial, and such as carry with them weight enough to justify
the Act; and whether the proposed End can be obtained by such Methods? 3. If
not, What will be the Event, and whether any way be left open for a Peaceable
and Friendly Settlement?
Although it is not a doubt but a prevailing Party among you, to gratify their
Malice, Ambition, or Revenge, have been the Plotters and Contrivers of these
unhappy Troubles; and the better to carry it on, have made use of the deluded
Countrymen, as the Monkey did the Cats Foot, to pluck the Chestnut out of the
Fire: Yet I shall not meddle in that matter; I will only instance such things
as Conversation and Report have brought to my Knowledge, or as I shall find
obvious in the Declaration; the sum of which is:

1. That above ten Years since, there was an horrid Popish Plot in the Kingdom
of England, in which the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion was designed;
and there was great reason to apprehend the Reformed Churches of New England
were to be overwhelmed in the same Pit of Ruin and Destruction.

2. That the better to effect it, their Charter (the only Hedge which kept them
from the wild Beasts of the Field) was both injuriously and illegally
Condemned, before it was possible for them to appear at Westminster in the
Legal Defense of it; and without a fair leave to answer for themselves.

3. That by an illegal Commission they were put under a President and Council,
which was soon superceded by another, more Arbitrary and Absolute, to Sir
Edmond Andros, giving him Power, by the advice of his Council, to make Laws,
and levy Taxes, as he pleased; to muster and employ all Persons resident in the
Territory, as occasion should require, and them to Transfer to any English
Plantation; and that there were courses taken to damp and spoil their Trade,
while neither the Honor nor the Treasure of the King was advanced.

4. That several Redcoats were brought over, to support what should be imposed
upon them, and more threatened.

5. That Preferments were principally laden on Strangers and Haters of the
People.

6. That they were Squeezed and Oppressed by a crew of abject Persons from New
York, who took, and extorted, extraordinary and intolerable Fees.

7. That it was impossible to know the Laws that were made, and yet dangerous
to break them.

8. That by some in open Council, and by the same in private Converse, it was
affirmed, That the People in New England were all Slaves; and the only
difference between them and Slaves, was their not being Bought and Sold; and
that it was a Maxim delivered in open Court, by one of the Council, That they
must not think the Privilege of Englishmen would follow them to the end of the
World.

9. That they were denied the Privileges of Magna Charta; and that Persons who
did but peaceably object against raising Taxes, without an Assembly, were for
it severely Fined.

10. That Juries have been picked and packed, and that some People have been
Fined without a Verdict, yea, without a Jury.

11. That some People have been kept long in Prison, without any Information
against them, or being charged with any Misdemeanor, or Habeas Corpus allowed.

12. That Jurymen were Fined and Imprisoned for refusing to lay their Hands
upon the Book, as they came to be Sworn, contrary to the Common Law of New
England.

13. That there was a discovery made of Flaws in the Titles of their Lands; and
that the Governor denied that there was any such thing as a Town among them,
and that more than a few were by Terrors drawn to take Patents at excessive
rates.

14. That Writs. of Intrusion were issued out.

15. That the Governor caused their Lands to be measured out for his
Creatures, and that the right owners for pulling up the Stakes, have been
grievously molested; and several Persons had their Commons begged.

16. That the forcing of the People at the Eastward to take Patents, gave a
rise to the late unhappy Invasion by the Indians.

17. That blank Patents were got ready to be sold at great Prices.

18. That the Governor, and five or six of the Council, did what they would;
and that all such as were Lovers of their Country, were seldom admitted.

19. That all manner of craft and rage was used to hinder Mr. Mather's Voyage
to England, and to ruin his Person.

20. That although the King promised Mr. Mather a Magna Charta for redress of
Grievances; and that the Governor should be Wrote unto, to forbear these
measures that he was upon, yet they were still injured in these very things
which were complained of.

21. That the Ministers and Churches have been discountenanced.

22. That they were imbryar'd in an Indian-War; and that the Officers and
Soldiers in the Army were under Popish Commanders.

23. That the rest of the English Plantations being alarmed with just fears of
the French, who have treated the English with more than Turkish Cruelty, could
not but stir them up to take care for their own Preservation, lest they should
be delivered to the French, before Orders could come from His Hihgness the
Prince of Orange, and the Parliament of England.

24. That they have for their Example, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of
England; and above all, they esteem it their Duty to God, so to have done.

Thus far have I traced the Declaration, and do not know that any one thing
material is omitted; I shall now mention some other Matters which have occurred.

'Twas credibly Reported,

That Boston, and all the Inhabitants were to be destroyed; and to that end the
Mohacques were to be brought down.

That there were several Fireworks prepared in the Fort, and Vaults dug under
Ground to blow up the Town.

That the Soldiers at the Eastward were all poisoned with Rum.

That there were thirty Sail of French Frigates upon the Coast: With several
other trifling things, which I cannot recollect.

These are the principal Reasons alleged for their taking up Arms; now the end
can be no other than the redress of those Evils' complained of.

The next thing then to be considered of is, Whether all, or any of the Reasons
aforesaid, are sufficient to justify their Proceedings; and whether the
proposed end can be attained by such Measures?

1. That there was a Popish Plot is without doubt; and if England at that time
had fallen under the Yoke of Roman Tyranny, it is as certainly true New England
must have undergone the same Fate; but that this should be used or introduced
as a Reason or Argument for vacating their Charter, is beyond my Conception;
for if they had once prevailed, How weak a rampart would the Charter have been
against so cruel and powerful an Enemy? Would the Papists have made
Westminster Hall the Arbiter? Certainly no, their Will would have been their
Law, and the Hedge would have been broke down, with a great deal of ease. Is it
reasonable to imagine, that after they had with Force and Violence attained
their wished-for End in Old England, they would make use of Politics in New?
And as preposterous and unreasonable to Fancy, that for that end the Charter
was called in Question; especially when you consider, that four decades of
Years have already past, since the Crown of England first thought it not fit
for them to hold any longer; and several Years after, the Popish Plot was
discovered, before the Scire Facias issued out.

2. That the Charter was injuriously and illegally Condemned, without giving
them timely notice of it, or allowing them to answer for themselves, might bear
some weight with it, if true; but it will appear quite otherwise, and that they
had opportunity enough to have made Defense on behalf of their Charter, if they
had thought fit: For several Years before the proceedings to the Condemnation
thereof, our late Sovereign King Churles the Second, by His Letters signified
to them the many Complaints that were made to him of their Encroachments, and
ill Administration of the Government; and to command that they should send over
Agents, sufficiently Authorized, to answer the same; which at length they so
far complied with, as to send them: But when they were called to hear, and
answer the said complaints, always excused and avoided the principal part
thereof, pretending they were not sufficiently empowered to that purpose; and
afterward other Agents were sent, fully empowered to answer, but not to submit
or conclude any thing: And when His Majesty was pleased to cause a Writ of Quo
Warranto to be sued forth against the Charter, and sent over with his Gracious
Declaration, and proposals of such Regulations to be made therein, as might be
agreeable with His Majesty's Service, and the good and welfare of his Subjects
here, and required an entire submission thereto, the General Court would not
submit to, or comply therewith; only a Letter was sent to the Right Honorable
Sir Lionell Jenkins, then Secretary of State, Dated the 10th. of December,
1683. Subscribed by the Governor, and eight of the Assistants only, wherein,
after the acknowledgment of their having had a Copy of the Quo Warranto, and
his Majesty's Declaration, they say, That the major part of the Magistrates
have for several Weeks declared their Opinion, and voted to lay themselves at
His Majesty's Feet, by an humble submission and resignation of themselves to
his Majesty's pleasure; not being willing to contend with his Majesty in a
course of Law, but by the next opportunity to dispatch their Agents fully
empowered to make their Submission according to his Majesty's said Declaration,
but by no means can at present obtain the consent of the Depuries, whereby to
make it an Act of the Corporation; and therefore have agreed with them to a
power of Attorneyship, to save a Default, in hopes that further time will
prevail to dispatch their Agents accordingly, and shall earnestly endeavor to
give the People a better understanding, before the next Ship Sail from hence.

His Majesty by this, finding that all the easy means he had used, could not
bring them to any answer for the Crimes and Misdemeanors laid to their charge,
nor produce any thing else but baffles and delays, gave Order to his
Attorney General, to sue out a Writ of Scire Facias from the High Court of
Chancery, against the Governor and Company; which was accordingly done,
directed to the Sheriffs of London, etc. and made returnable in Easter-Term, in
the 36th. Year of His Majesty's Reign; wherein they were required to make known
to the said Governor and Company at London, That they appear in His Majesty's
High Court of Chancery at Westminster, on the Day of the return thereof, to
show cause wherefore the said Charter, for the Reasons in the said Writ of
Scire Facias mentioned and contained, should not be made void, null, and
cancelled; and the Liberties and Privileges thereby granted to the said
Governor and Company, be Seized into the King's Hands; upon which Writ the
said Governor and Company not appearing, another Writ of Scire Facias, of the
same Tenor issued forth, returnable in Trinity-Term, then next following, when
the said Governor and Company appeared by their constituted Attorney and
Council; but refused to Plead to the said Writ, only moved for time to send to
New England, which not being agreeable with the Rules and Practice of the Court
in such Cases, could not be allowed; but in Favor to them a Rule was made,
That unless they Pleaded by the first day of the then next Michaelmas-Term,
Judgment should be entered by Default: And in that Term, for default of
Pleading, Judgment was entered on His Majesty's behalf, and the said Charter
adjudged to be void, null, and cancelled, and that the Liberties and Privileges
of the said Governor and Company be Seized into the King's Hands; which was
accordingly done, by the Exemplification of the said Judgment in the Reign of
K. James the Second, and by His Majesty's Commission to a President and Council
to take the Government of this Country. All which Proceedings are most just
and legal, according to the Rules and Practice of the Law of England, and
agreeable with many Precedents of the like Nature, both ancient and modern.

Besides, all Companies, Corporations, or Bodies Politic, made or granted by
Letters Patents, or Charter, from His Majesty, for any part or places beyond
the Seas, are by themselves or Agents to be always ready to answer His Majesty
in any of his Courts at Westminster, when he shall think fit to order any Suit
or Writ to be Sued or Prosecuted against them, and are supposed to be resident
in or about London or Westminster for that purpose, as the East India, Royal
African, Bermoodos, and Hudsons-bay Companys are, who have their Trade,
Factories, Collonys, and Plantations, abroad in Asia, Africa, and America: And
in the like state or condition were the Company or Corporation of
Massathusets-Bay in New England to be, according to the Capacities given them
by their Incorporation, of Suing and being Sued, Pleading and being Impleaded,
as appears by the Dogget-Book of the Council, when the Charter was first
Granted; wherein if they have neglected their Duty, as well as exceeded their
Powers and Privileges granted, and would not put themselves into a condition to
be heard, when they ought and might, it is not His Majesty, nor the proceedings
of His Courts that are to be blamed, but themselves.

3. That there was a Commission sent to the President, and the successive one,
to Sir Edmond Andros, are both true; but that they were Illegal, is a Position
too confidently asserted by the Penman, who seems to be more a Clergyman than
a Lawyer; but because the well clearing up of this point will be of great
service to the subsequent Discourse, 'twill not be amiss that it be thoroughly
considered. I shall therefore lay down this as a certain Maxim, both consonant
to Reason and the Laws of the Land, That those Kingdoms, Principalities, and
Collonies, which are of the Dominion of the Crown of England, and not of Empire
of the King of England, are subject to such Laws, Ordinances, and Forms of
Government, as the Crown shall think fit to establish. New England, and all the
Plantations are subject to the Dominion of the Crown of England, and not to the
Empire of the King of England: Therefore the Crown of England may Rule and
Govern them in such manner, as it shall think most fit. For the proof of which
I shall instance Wales, which was once a Kingdom, or Territory, governed by its
own Laws; but when it became of the Dominion of the Crown of England, either by
Submission or Conquest, it became subject also to such Laws as King Edward the
First (to whom they submitted) thought fit to impose, as may plainly appear in
the Preamble of the Statute of Rutland. Leges and consuetudines partium illarum
hactenus usitatas, coram Nobis and preceribus Regni nostri fecimus recitari,
quibus diligenter auditis, and before intellectis quasdam illarum de consilio
Procerum predictorum delevimus quasdam permissimus, and quasdam correximus, and
etiam quasdam alias adjiciendas and faciendas decrevinis, and eas de caetero in
terris nostris in partibus illis perpetua firmitate teneri and observari
volumus, in forma subscripta. We have caused the Laws and Customs of those
parts hitherto used, to be recited before Us, and the Peers of Our Realm, which
being diligently heard, and more fully understood, some of them, by the Advice
of Our Peers aforesaid, We have obliterated, some We have allowed, and some We
have corrected; And have also Deereed, That some others shall be made; and We
will, that for the future, they be holden and observed in Our Lands in those
parts, with perpetual Firmness in manner hereinafter expressed. Then follow the
Ordinances, appointing Writs original and judicial, in many things varying from
those of England, and a particular manner of proceeding.

And again, in the close of the same Statute, Et ideo vobis Mandamus quod
praemissa de caetero in omnibus observetis, ita tantum quod quotiescunque
quandocunque and ubicunque Nobis placuerit, possimus praedicta Statuta and
earum parts singulas declarare, interpretari, addere sive diminuere pro
Nostrae libito voluntatis, pront securitati Nostrae and Terrae Nostrae
viderimus expediri. And therefore We Command you. That from henceforward you
observe the Premises in all things, so only, that as often, whenever, and
wheresoever We please, We may Declare, Interpret, Add to, and Diminish from the
said Statutes, and every part of them, according to Our Will and Pleasure, so
as We shall see it expedient for the safety of Us, and Our Land aforesaid.

In the next place I shall instance Ireland: That it is a Conquered Kingdom is
not doubted, [ Cook. Rep. Fol. 18.] but admitted in Calvin's case, and by an
Act of the 11th. 12th. and 13th. of King James, acknowledged in express Words,
viz. Whereas in former times the Conquest of this Realm, by His Majesty's most
Royal Progenitors, Kings of England, etc.

That by virtue of the Conquest, it became of the Dominion of the Crown of
England, and subject to such Laws as the Conqueror thought fit to impose, until
afterward by the Charters and Commands of H. 2. K. John, and H. 3. They were
Entitled to the Laws and Franchises of England, as by the said Charters,
reference being thereunto had, may more fully appear, I shall only instance two.

The First is out of the close Rolls of H. 3. wherein the King, after Thanks
given to G. de Mariscis Justice of Ireland, signifies, That himself, and all
other his Lieges of Ireland, should enjoy the Liberties which he had granted to
his Lieges of England; and that he will grant and confirm the same unto them: [
Claus. 1. H. 3. Dorso 14.] which afterward in the 12th. Year of His Reign he
did, as follows; Rex dilecto and fidelio suo Richardo de Burgo Justiciar' suo
Hibern. Salutem; Mandarimus vobis firmiter praecipientes, quatenus certo die
and loco faciatis venire coram vobis, Archi-Episcopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Priores, Comites and Barons Milites and Libere Tenentes, and Balivos
singulorum Comitatuum, and coram eis publici legi faciatis Chartum Domini
Johannis Regis Patris Nostri, cui sigillum suum appensum est, quam fieri fecit,
and jurari a Magnatibus Hiberniae de legibus and consuetudinibus Angliae
observandis in Hiberniae. Et praecipiatis eis ex part nostra, quod leges illas
and consuetudines in Charta praedicta contentas de caetero firmiter teneant and
observent. The King to his Faithful and Beloved Richard de Burg Justice of
Ireland Greeting. We have Commanded you, firmly enjoining you, That on a
certain day and place, you make to come before you the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights and Freeholders, and the Bailiffs of
every County; and before them you cause to be publicly read the Charter of the
Lord King John, our Father, to which his Seal is affixed, and which he caused
to be made and Sworn to by the Nobility of Ireland, concerning the Laws and
Customs of England to be observed in Ireland: And commanded them on our behalf,
That for the future they firmly keep and observe those Laws and Customs
contained in the Charter aforesaid.

By all which it is evident, That after the Conquest, and before the recited
Charters, the Inhabitants there, although composed of many Freeborn English
Subjects, who settled themselves amongst them, were neither governed by their
own Laws, nor the Laws of England, but according to the good pleasure of the
Conqueror: And if you will take the Opinion of Sir Edward Coke, in his
Annotations on the Great Charter, he tells you plainly, That at the making
thereof, it did not extend to Ireland, or any of the King's Foreign Dominions;
but after the making of Poyning's Law, which was in the 11th. Year of H. 7,
(long after the Great Charter) it did extend to Ireland.

I have only one Instance more, and that is, The usage of Foreign Nations in
their Plantations and Settlements abroad.

The Governments of the United Provinces, and Denmark, are well known in
Europe; and yet in all their Plantations, their Governments are despotical and
absolute, all the power is in the hands of a Governor and Council, and every
thing is ordered and appointed by them, as is sufficiently manifest to those
that are acquainted with Batavia, Surrinam, Curasao, New York, (when formerly
in their hands) and the Island of St. Thomas.

By which it is evident, That those Kingdoms and Principalities which are of
the Dominion of the Crown of England, are subject to such Laws, Ordinances, and
Methods of Government, as the Crown shall think fit to Establish.

The next thing then to be proved is, That New England, and all the English
Colonies, are subject to the Dominion of the Crown of England, as Wales and
Ireland are, and not to the Empire of the King of England, as Scotland is.

It Is a fundamental point, consented unto by all Christian Nations, that the
first Discovery of a Country inhabited by Infidels, gives a Right and Dominion
of that Country to the Prince, in whose Service and Employment the Discoverers
was sent: Thus the Spaniard claims the West Indies; the Portugals Brasile: and
thus the English these Northern parts of America. For, Sebastian Cabot,
employed by King Henry 7. was the first Discoverer of these Parts, and in his
Name took Possession, which his Royal Successors have held and continued ever
since; therefore they are of the Dominion of the Crown of England; and as such
they are accounted by that excellent Lawyer Sir John Vaughan in his reports
[Vauh. Rep. Craw versus Ramsey.] which being granted, the Conclusion must
necessarily be good, and it will follow; That Englishmen permitted to be
Transported into the Plantations (for thither without the Kings License we
cannot come) can pretend to no other Liberties, Privileges, or Immunities
there, than anciently the Subjects of England, who removed themselves into
Ireland could have done: For it is from the Grace and Favor of the Crown alone
that all these Flow, and are dispensed at the pleasure of him that sits upon
the Throne; which is plain in the great Charter it self; where, after the
Liberties therein granted by the King, it concluded thus -- Tenendas and
habendas de Nobis and haeredibus Nostris in perpetuum. To have and to hold of
Us, and Our Heirs for ever; which by the Learned Sir Edward Coke is thus
explained: These words (says he) are not inserted to make a Legal Tenure of
the King, but to intimate that all Liberties were at first derived from the
Crown [ Instit. page 2. fol. 4.] Barbados, Jamaica, the Leeward Islands, and
Virginia have their Assemblies: but it is not sui juris, it is from the grace
and favor of the Crown, signified by Letters Patents under the Broad Seal. But
the Laws made by these Assemblies with the consent of the Governor, are no
longer in force than till the King is pleased to signify his Disapprobation of
them, which power he has always reser^^^ ^o himself, and can, whenever he
thinks fit, Repeal and Ann^^^ all such as have not been before confirmed by
him, or some of his Predecessors.

New England had a Charter, but no one will be so stupid to imagine that the
King was bound to grant it them, neither can you, without impeaching the
prudent Conduct and Discretion of your Forefathers, so much as think, they
would put themselves to so vast an Expense and unnecessary Trouble to obtain
that, which as English Men, they thought themselves to have a sufficient Right
to before: They owe it only to the Grace and Favor of their Sovereign; and if
they had made better use of it, to promote the Ends for which it was granted,
the weight of those Afflictions under which the People of this Country now
groans, would not have lain so heavy upon them, at least they would have less
deserved them.

Besides, the Parliament of England have never by any Act of theirs favored
the Plantations, or declared or enlarged their Privileges; but have all along
demonstrated, that they were much differenced from England, and not to have
those Privileges and Liberties which England enjoyed, being in all Acts
relating to the Plantations, restrained and burdened beyond any in England, as
appears by the several Acts made for the increasing of Navigation, and for
regulating and securing the Plantation Trade.

I think I have both by good Authority, Practice and Precedent made it plain,
That the Plantations are of the Dominion of the Crown of England, and without
any regard to Magna Charta, may be ruled and governed by such ways and methods
as the Person who wears that Crown, for the good and advancement of those
Settlements, shall think most proper and convenient: therefore neither the
Commission to the Prosident, nor that to Sir Edmond Andros, can be said to be
Illegal.

Since then such an one might lawfully be granted, you have great reason to
commend the Moderation of the Gentleman who was entrusted with it, and to
return Thanks to Almighty God, for placing over you a Person endued with that
Prudence and Integrity, that he was so far from exceeding his Commission, that
he never put in execution the powers therein granted him. Have there been any
Taxes laid upon the People, but such as were settled fifty years since, and
made perpetual by Laws of their own making? Any part whereof might be retained,
and in force, after the condemnation of their Charter, that the King thought
fit Who has been transferred out of this Territory? Or were ever fewer Rates
paid than under him?

And whereas it is also alleged in the Declaration, That there were courses
taken to damp and spoil their Trade, while neither the Honor nor Treasure of
the King were advanced: Give me leave to tell you, the same is altogether
false, and mistaken, for the very considerable increase of Their Majesty's
Revenue arising by Customs (not at all altered under Sir Edmond's government)
does sufficiently demonstrate that the regular and lawful Trade of this
Territory was exceedingly improved under him: It Is true, the Acts for
Regulating the Plantation-Trade, and Navigation (little regarded under the
Massathusets Government, to the great prejudice of the Revenues of the Crown,
and detriment of its European Subjects) were carefully enforced, and their
constant and profitable correspondence with Foreigners and Pirates diligently
obstructed, (which was very disagreeable to many Persons who had even grown old
in that way of Trade, and was I believe one chief cause of the Revolution,
which seems evident by their falling again upon the same measures since that
change.) By this is meant Courses taken to damp and spoil their Trade, for
which I hope the Government will not lie under any imputations in the Judgment
of considering Men.

I shall say little concerning the King's Treasure; for it is clear to all that
know this Country, that under the late Government, there was never so few Taxes
paid, nor until the Indian Rebellion, a fuller Treasury since the settlement of
these parts; and it is plain, That the alteration of the Massethusets
Government, and annexation of the rest of those petty Colonys did highly
conduce to the King's Honor, and the good and welfare of his Subjects; for all
that Country which was every day subject to the Incursions of the French, was
no sooner taken into the King's hands, and united, but they became formidable:
And all endeavors to make them demolish the Fort of Oneagra, (which they had
Built and Garrisoned some hundreds of Miles within the English Dominions, in
the Year 1687) proved unsuccessful, until the Union of the said Colonys, under
the Commission so much complained of: And I do heartily wish, that the
Divisions now among you, do not encourage them to take the advantage of this
opportunity, and by an utter destruction of all this Continent, experimentally
make good my Assertion.

And it is as plain that the King's Subjects, which for many years had groaned
under the severlty of a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Constitution, deprived of the
Laws and Liberties of Englishmen, forced in their Consciences, suffered death
for Religion, and denied Appeals to the King, were eased of those intolerable
Burdens, and allowed the free Exercise of their Religion, and the benefit of
the Laws of England, which were duly and truly administered unto them, by which
the Honor of the King is advanced to the highest pitch.

4. 'Twill be but time lost to say any thing of the Red-coats; for no body can
be so void of Sense and Reason to think that so many Thousand Men, which at
this day inhabit this Colony, could be imposed upon by 100 Red-coats; and if
any body has been so vain as to threaten them with more, I look upon it an
effect of passion or folly; For Experience, which certainly is the most
convincing Argument in the World, tells you there is no such thing.

5. What is meant by Preserments, and who are called Strangers and Haters of
the People, I must confess I cannot easily comprehend, unless to inhabit
fourteen or fifteen Years within the Territory will make a Man such. Is there
any one Gentleman of the Council, that has either been displaced, or put into
that Station by the Authority there? Which of your Judges are Strangers? Were
not Three of them brought up amongst you; and of your own Communion? And was
not the other in the same Employment in some part of this Territory, at the
time of the Annexation? From whom had the Secretary and Collector his
Commission? Certainly from no body here. Did the alteration of the Government
change your Treasurer? Is it not the same Sir Edmond found here? Is he not a
Man of Estate, good Credit and Reputation, and one of your own Countrymen? Were
not all Officers in the Government, as well Magisterial as Ministerial, natural
born Englishmen, and Subjects to the Crown of England? How then are Strangers
and Haters of the People preferred, when there is not one that can reasonably
and justly be so termed, in any place of Trust or Office throughout the
Dominion.

6. Who are meant by abject Persons from New York wants an Explanation, for
none of the Gentlemen that came from thence, (now in any Authority) but are
well known to have lived there for a long time, in Esteem and Reputation,
enough to merit a better Epethite of all good and honest Men; and I believe it
will one day appear, that their Faithful discharge of their Duties, their
constancy and steadiness to the Church and Laws of England, and unshaken
Loyalty and Fidelity to the Crown, was their greatest Crime.

I am not well acquainted what Fees were taken, but this I know, that a
Committee of the Council were appointed to make a settlement of Fees for all
Officers throughout the Government, which was effected, approved of, and sent
to England; and if any one have exceeded those Limits, they deserve to be
called to account, but it ought to be in a due course of Law. For the personal
miscarriages of a Ministerial Officer, are no sufficient Warrant for an
Insurrection; neither ought the whole Government to be Subverted, because Tom
or Harry are ill Men. The Authority can but provide good and wholesome Laws for
the punishment of Evil doers, and cause those Laws to be put in execution
against Offenders: But if any one does me a personal wrong, for which I have a
Remedy by Law, and I will not take it, I ought not to quarrel with the
Government, for it is my own Fault, and I might have redress if I would.
Personal Crimes must be censured Personally; and a Government ought no more to
be scandalized and aspersed, because an Extortioner is in it, than because
there is a Felon or a Traitor.

7. I need not tell you that the Statute Laws of England are Printed at large,
and that many Abridgments of them are so likewise, and easy enough to be
procured; neither can it be but very well known, that all the Acts of the
Governor and Council were solemnly published with Sound of Trumpet, as soon as
made, and Authentic Copies afterward transmitted to the Clerks of each
respective County throughout the Territory; Why then it should be said, that it
was impossible to know the Laws? I see no reason, unless by it is meant the
Common Law; and if so, you may as well quarrel because every common Person does
not understand Euclid or Aristotle; for the knowledge of the Law, cannot be
attained without great Industry, Study, and Experience; and every Capacity is
not fitted for such an Undertaking, Ex quovis Ligno non fit Mercurius. If this
was a Grievance, What a miserable condition are they in now, that instead of
not knowing the Law, there is no Law for them to know?

8. What rash, or indiscreet, Expressions may fall from any single Person of
the Council, either in his private or politic Capacity, I will not undertake
to justify; all Men are not endued with qualifications alike; every one in
that Station ought to give his Opinion, as he himself understands the Matter;
and if any one have unadvisedly uttered Words so disagreeable, I know no Body
injured by it, neither can the Government be justly censured for it.

9. That the Privileges of Magna Charta, and other Liberties of Englishmen
were denied them, is a thing which can never be made appear; however, admitting
it, I have sufficiciently discussed that Point in the Third Article. By the
Persons said to be severely Fined, for peaceably objecting against raising of
Taxes without an Assembly, I conjecture are meant the Ipswich-men, who were so
far from a peaceable objecting, that they assembled themselves in a riotous
manner, and by an Instrument conceived in Writing, did Associate and oblige
themselves to stand by each other in opposition to the Government, and by their
Example, influenced their Neighbors to do the like. And this by the Law is
esteemed an Offense of that Nature, that it is next door to Rebellion; for
which they were Indicted, Tried, and Convicted, either by Verdict or their own
Confession.

10. I cannot justify that Sheriffs, who does either pick or pack a Jury; it is
both repugnant tothe Law and his Oath; and he deserves no favor, that can be
Guilty of such a Crime; but let him first be known, and the thing proved; for I
do not remember any one that has been Convicted, nor so much as accused for
such an Offense.

Judgments upon Demurers and Defaults, are so practicable and warrantable, by
the Law, that nothing can excuse the enumerating them amongst the Grievances in
the Declaration, but the Pen-man's want of Knowledge in that Profession. It Is a
Maxim, Volenti non fit injuria; and when both Plantiff and Defendant do, by a
joint consent, submit to the determination of the Court, or by their own
negligence make default; Who has the wrong? Where is the Injury? This has
been a practico so frequently used in your former Government (though under
another Name) that no body can be ignorant of it.

11. That any one has been Imprisoned, without being charged with Crime or
Misdemeanour, is an Allegation which I dare be bold to say can never be proved;
I have heard indeed an Habeas Corpus demanded upon the Statute of the 31. C. 2.
was denied in Major Appleton's Case, (who was one of the Ipswich-men
beforementioned;) but let any considering Man peruse the Act, and I believe he
will be easily convinced, that it is particularly limited to the Kingdom of
England; besides, he was committed only because he would not find Sureties for
the good Behavior, and the question was not whether he should be Bailed; for
upon finding the said Sureties, he must have been discharged of course; so that
it was not the want of an Habeas Corpus detained him in Prison, but his own
wilful and obstinate Humor; if they do but consider well how many Gentlemen
lie now in stinking Goals, and close Prisons, without either Mittimus or Crime
laid to their charge, and without the allowance of an Habeas Corpus, although
demanded; I am sure they cannot but blush, when they read that part of the
Declaration.

12. That Jurymen were fined and imprisoned for refusing to lay their hands to
the Book, I presume is a mistake; probably they may have been fined for their
contempt, and sent to Prison for not paying that Fine, which by the Law may be
Justified; for evrey Court may fine any man for a contempt in open Court, and
they themselves are Judges of the Contempt.

Whether it be a forcing of Conscience or not, I shall leave to Casuists; but I
am very well satisfied, it is not comprehended within the late Indulgence: Yet
admit it were, the Judges are sworn to do their Duties in their Offices,
according to the Laws of the Land: Prescription is a good and sufficient Law,
the form of laying the Hand upon the Book has been the only modus of Swearing
time out of mind; therefore the laying the Hand on the Book in Swearing, is a
good Law, and the Judges cannot dispense with it, Salvo Sacramento; if they
did, a Judgment in such a case would be erroneous and reversible, and it is
dangerous to admit of Innovations.

The Common Law of New England is brought in, to Warrant the lifting up the
Hand; but I take that to be rara Avis in Terris; for I challenge the whole
Territory to produce one Precedent of such a resolved case; but perhaps by it,
Prescription is intended; if it be, that will as illy serve the turn as
the other; for the Colony has not been long enough settled, to claim any
advantage by that Right; neither if it had, would it be admitted without
apparent violation of their Charter, being absolutely repugnant to the Laws of
England.

13. Fully to discuss the question concerning the Titles of their Lands, would
be a Subject too Copious for the present Design, therefore I shall only glance
at it as I pass by, being resolved, when time shall serve, to declare my
Opinion more amply on that Subject; in the mean time, let every considering Man
Examine well the Charter, which is the very basis of all their Rights, (unless
they will set up a Power above the Kimgs,) and then let him tell me, in whom
the Fee simple of that Tract of Land, betwixt Charles's River and Merry-mack
remains: if in the Grantees or their Heirs, How do they derive their Titles
form them? If in the Governor and Company of the Massathusets Bay, they must
inquire whether pursuant to the Directions and Powers to them granted, it is by
good and sufficient Conveyances in the Law, derived unto them. If they find it
so, they must not be disturbed with Fears and Jealousies, for nothing can hurt
them, if not, they are infinitely obliged to those Persons who have made them
sensible of their Weaknesses, in a time, when by His Majesty's Letter Patents,
the Governor was empowered to supply all such Defects, and not upon Terms,
either excessive or unreasonable, but upon such as were both easy and moderate,
which will plainly appear to any Man who will but give himself the trouble to
peruse the Table of Fees, settled and allowed by the Council; yet still every
Man was at his own Liberty, to take a Patent of Confirmation, or to let it
alone, as is apparent enough by the many Petitions now lying in the Secretary's
Office, which, although his Excellency was always ready (so far as in him lay) to
Grant, yet the more necessitous Affairs of the Govermment, which both he, and
all about him, ever preferred to their private advantage, took up so much of
his time, that not above twenty ever passed the Seal; and I am very well
assured, that not one Example can be produced, that the least compulsion was
ever used in this case, to any Man living, within this Dominion.

If the Governor did say, there was no such thing amongst you as a Town, what
can be inferred from thence? It Is not to be presumed, but his Discourse tended
only to a Body Corporate and Public: For you generally call that a Town in
America, where a number of People have Seated themselves together, yet it is
very well known, it is so in Name only, not in Fact: I take that Body of People
to be a Town, properly so called, who by some Act of Law, have been
Incorporated, and in that sense there is no such thing as a Town in the
Massathusets, neither was there a Power to make such before his Excellency's
Arrival, for One Corporation cannot make another. [The Case of Suttons
Hospital. Co. Rep.]

14. That Writs of Intrusion were issued out, is doubtless true, and the
Government would have justly merited a severe censure, if all ways should have
been free and open, for the Subject to attain his right, and none left for the
King. They would think themselves highly injured to be refused a Capias or any
other common Writ; and I Am sure the other is as peremptory an one in the Kings
Case; and had the Penman been never so little acquainted with the Natura
brevium, or the Register, he would have been ashamed to have stuffed up the
Declaration with such Matter, which can be of no other service, than to amuse
and deceive ignorant People. Have there been more than seven Writs of this kind
issued out, during Sir Edmonds Administration? Or more than two Prosecuted? And
were any of them against either Poor or Ignorant Persons, that had neither
Purses nor Brains to defend themselves. Has it not been against such, as both
for their Estates and Capacities, are sufficiently known to be eminent? And the
business of Deer-Island was brought on for no other intent, then that right
might be done to the King here, and that the Party, if agrieved, might in a
regular way have brought it to the Council Board in England for their
Determination: And I think, if this matter were rightly understood, it would be
of excellent service to the Country, for such a Judgment would sufficiently
instruct them what they have to trust to.

15. That their Commons might be begged, is not very strange; but that the
Governor must be Criminal because such a thing is asked of him, is a barbarous
inference: To whom have they been granted? Or for which of his Creatures have
they been measured out? I should be glad to see that Man who would barefaced
instance one partioular grant of any Man's Right or Possession passed by Sir
Edmond, during his Government. It Is true, that at the request of Lieutenant
Coll. Lidget, (a Gentleman who has long lived among you in Reputation, equal
to the best, whose Fortunes were not so narrow, that he needed a dependence
upon any one, and by a plentiful Estate, which he possessed in Charlestown,
had a right to a proportionable share or dividend in all the vacant and
unapropriated Lands belonging to the said Town,) the Governor and Council did
grant him a piece of the said vacant Lands, (which the Penman corruptly calls
Commons) contiguous to a very considerable Farm, which he was there owner of,
which I presume they might very lawfully do; for it can never be made appear,
That the People of Charlestown, either in Law or Equity, had a Right or Title
to the said Land, without a Grant from the Governor and Company of the
Massathuset's Bay, exempted under the Seal of the Corporation, pursuant to the
Rules and Directions of their Charter, they can have no Legal Claim; and I am
fure, such can never be produced, and I think they have as slender a pretense
to an equitable one, when the Land has always lain wast and undivided, to the
profit and advantage of the Claimer, without any manner of charge or expense.

Besides, it cannot be consistent with the Interest of new Plantations, that
two or three Hund. Thousand Acres of Land should be taken up by a small number
of People, who are not capable of improving one tenth part of it, and the rest
lie vacant under the notion of Commons, when Persons of Ability, equally
concerned, would improve it, but cannot, because they are less numerous than
the poorer sort of the Town, whose advantage it is that the Lands should so
lie, and who manage their Affairs by majority of Voices. And if the Tract of
Land which Charlestowne pretends to, were proportionally divided, Coll.
Lidgett's share (they themselves being Judges) would have exceeded the Grant.

It Is likewise true, that Clark's Island was granted to Mr. Clark of Plymouth,
which might very well be, for it was never included within the Plymouth Patent,
and so resolved by the Council in that case, and therefore grantable at the
King's Pleasure. And this is all that I know of which can be objected.

It may be true, that some Persons who have contemptuously and riotously
obstructed the Surveyor-General, in the doing of his Office, and plucked up,
and removed the Stakes and Landmarks set up by him, upon vacant and
unappropriated Lands, have been upon Legal Trial and Conviction moderately
Fined for their Offense, but see no reason that should be accounted a Crime in
any, or that such Actions should escape unpunished.

16. I am likewise in the dark, to find out how the forcing of the People at
the Eastward to take Patents (although I know of no such thing done) gave a
rise to the late unhappy Invasion by the Indians, unless by that means the
Indians were deprived of those quit-rents and acknowledgments, which by a base
and dishonorable agreement, made by Commissioners appointed from Boston, the
People of those parts, some time since, were obliged to pay them, as their
Lords and Masters.

17. I am totally ignorant what is meant by Blank Patents, for it is the first
time I ever heard of such a thing, neither indeed can it be; for he that takes
a Patent for his Land, does it in such a form as best pleases himself, or as
he shall be advised to by his Council; And how any Man living can so far know
my mind to prepare such an Instrument for me, I leave the World to judge.

18. That any of the Council were ever denied admittance to that Board, is a
thing so apparently false, that I Am sure not a Man amongst them but must
justify the Governor in that point; who was always so far from such a Method,
that although there was a certain day appointed for their meeting every Week,
well known to them all; yet it was a frequent thing for him to send on purpose
to Salem, and other Neighboring Parts, for the Gentlemen that lived there; and
I have seen the Messengers Account, wherein he charge a considerable Sum of
Money for Horse-hire on those Errands. It Is very well known, his Excellency has
waited many Hours for several of the Gentlemen that live in Town, and would
never Sit until they came; and as he has never done, nor ordered the least
matter relating to the Government, without their advice and consent; so he
never did it without a sufficient number to make a Quorum, which was Seven.

19. There was never any other Course taken, to hinder Mr. Mather's Voyage to
England, than what the Law allows; neither can the Government, without a great
deal of Injustice, be charged with any thing relating to that Matter, for none
in place knew his Errand.

There was a particular difference between Mr. Randolph and him; and I never
heard of any other Course, taken by Mr. Randolph, than the ordinary Writ in
such Cases usual; which was so far from retarding his Voyage, that an
Attorney's entering a common Appearance, in that Case, would have been
sufficient to have discharged him, if the Writ had been served.

20. Suppose the King promised Mr. Mather, a certain Magna Charta, for Redress
of (imaginary) Grievances; and that his Excellency should be wrote unto to
forbear the Measures he was upon; yet no such thing being done, he was obliged
to the Observance of His Majesty's Commands, before signified to him in his
Letters Patents; which was a sufficient Warrant to him, until he should receive
some thing subsequent to contradict it.

21. That your Churches and Ministers have been discouraged, is so general an
Head, and the rest of the Declaration so particular, that it gives me cause to
suspect the truth of it; and I shall hardly alter my Opinion, until any one of
you be instanced, who kept himself within his Province, and only meddled with
that which belonged to him.

It Is the Church of England that has most reason to complain, only you cry
Whore first: For at Sir Edmond's Arrival, they were the only People destitute
of a Place to Worship in, until, by Advice and Consent of the Council, the New
Meeting House, in Boston, was borrowed, and made use of by them, but at
inconvenient Hours; in the Morning after Eleven, and sometimes as their Service
was prolonged at Twelve; and after Four in the Afternoon, which with patience
was endured, though the Enmity of that People, to the Church of England, was
such, that they grudged them that small Accommodation, and showed their
uneasiness therein; which was soon removed, by the Governor's encouraging a
Church to be built, and completed in Boston, at the Charge of those of that
Communion, where the Public Worship, and Service of God has been attended,
until the late Insurrection, when the Minister was forced to leave the
Country, and Church, for his own safety; And has not the Minister been before
this publicly affronted, and hindered from doing of his Duty? What scandalous
Pamphlets have been Printed to villifie the Liturgy? And are not all of that
Communion daily called Papist Dogs, and Rogues, to their Faces? How often has
the plucking down the Church been threatened? One while, it was to be converted
to a School, and anon, 'twas to be given to the French Protestants. And whosoever
will but take the Pains to survey the Glass Windows, will easily discover the
Marks of a Malice not common; I believe it is the first National Church, that
ever lay under such great Disadvantages, in a Place, where those that dissent
from her, ought to expect all things from her Grace and Favor.

22. Should I undertake to recount all the particulars of the late Indian
Rebellion, this would swell to a bulk bigger than ever I designed it; I shall
only tell you, you must look at home; for the reasons of those troubles, which
is well known, began when his Excellency was above Five Hundred Miles off at
New York, and that the Folly and Rashness of the People, drew it on their own
Heads. The Governors Conduct in that Affair has been so prudent and discreet,
that I have no reason to doubt but your Council of Safety, etc. Into whose
hands, all the Papers relating to that business did fall, are very well
satisfied with it: Was not the whole Country so secured, that not the least
Damage, or Spoil was done to the Plantations and Fishery, during the Forces
being abroad? And were not the Indian Enemies by the said Forces, hard Marches,
and Pursuits, sometimes above One Hundred Miles into the Desert, beyond any
Christian Settlement, reduced to the extremest Wants and Necessities? And all
things brought to that pass, that if our unhappy Domestic Troubles had not
intervened, the War before this time would have been advantageously Finished,
without any Rates or Taxes, on the Country; for by his Excellencies good
Husbandry, the standing Revenue would have defrayed the Charge: It Is true, you
have lost some of your Friends and Relations in that Expedition; but could the
Governor keep them a Live? Are not Diseases in Armies as Fatal to Men as the
Sword? When Death comes, it is not to be avoided; and you see that all your Art
and Care has not been sufficient to Preserve your dearest Friends at Home,
from the greater Morcality which has run through this Crountry; Did any of
them Dye neglected? Which of them wanted any thing to be had in those Parts?
Did his Excellency lie upon Beds of Down, and fare Deliciously every Day? No,
the same Meat, the same Drink, the same Lodging in their Quarters, and Marches
very common to all; only he was generally the least taken care for: To what a
degree of Madness and Impiety are we then grown, so Falsely and Maliciously, to
Re-criminate a Person, who for your Defense and Security, has so generously
exposed himself to the Hardships of that Cold and Uncomfortable Clymate, and
the Fatigues of War, against a Barbarous and Savage People? And certainly if
God Almighty has not given over this People to believe Lies, their Eyes must
be by this time open, and they cannot but know, how much they have been put
upon, Shamm'd and Abused. Who are Popish Commanders in the Army? Will any Man
Barefaced Aver so great an untruth? It must be Confessed, there was one and no
more, under that Circumstance, who had the Command of a Company of the King's
standing Forces, and was not Commissioned for the Army; besides, if he had,
has he not Lived long amongst us? Did any one ever question his Ability,
Courage, Fidelity and Conduct, and ought not that Liberty of Conscience, which
has been so hotly Preached up, even to the Encouragement of immoral Acts
amongst you, be equally beneficial to him with other Men? Especially when the
Gentlemen in the Country, were so far from offering their Service in the
Expedition, that some of the most Eminent amongst them, have absolutely refused
the Service; and they have been told, the Governors proposal to the Council,
about his going to the Eastward, met with no Opposition, lest some of the
Military Men there, should have been bound in Honor to have taken that
Employment upon themselves.

23. That some of the English Plantations in the West Indies, which were
Contiguous to the French, should be Alarmed, is no wonder, for they were ever
Jealous of their Neighborhood, and always stood upon their Guard; but that
you should be afraid of being delivered up to the French, when there is neither
War betwixt the two Crowns, nor any Frenchmen that we can yet here of, to
receive you, is one of the most unaccountable things in the World. From what
parts must they come? From Canada you know they can not; they want both Men and
Ships, and have reason enough to look to themselves; France have their Hands
full at home; and it is well known they cannot spare any from the West Indies;
they made their outmost Effort against Estalia; and by the best Intelligence I
can get, in that Service or War, there was not one Frigate; Must they then drop
out of the Clouds, or do you expect a Fleet from Utopia? Certainly, this must
needs convince any considering Man, that these poor People have been extremely
abused, and they must be Stupid and Senseless, who think that Sir Edmond
Andros, and Ten or Twelve Men more; (for that is all the Number said to be
concerned in this wonderful Plot;) Could they be guilty of so horrid a
Wickedness and Impiety? Were able to deliver so many Thousand Men, well
appointed, into the Hands of a few Frenchmen, who from God knows whence, were
to come, The Lord knows when.

24. That it was either their Duty to God, or that they had the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commons of England, for their Presedent, I cannot by any means
allow; and I am amazed to see Christians call that a Duty, which God has so
remarkably showed his Displeasure against, in all Countries, and Ages; Is not
Rebellion, as the Sin of Witchcraft? Numb. 11.12.16. Who was it that sent the
Leprosy amongst the Children of Israel, for their murmering? Psalm. 78. Or, how
came the sudden Fire, with which they were burnt up? How many Thousands
perished by the Pestilence? Or, were they a few that were stung to Death by the
Fiery Serpents? Do we not read, that the Earth opened, and swallowed up some of
their Captains, with their Wives and Children quick? which horrible Destruction
fell upon the Children of Israel, for their murmering against Moses, whom God
had appointed their head, and chief Majestrate; What shall I say of Absalom?
What of a Achitophel? Or what of Sheba? Holy Writ is so full of Examples, of
the like Nature, that no Body can esteem that a Duty, which is so often
testified against: And as it is far from being their Duty to God, so there is
no Parellel between the Proceedings of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
England, and theirs here; for the Design of Establishing Popery and Arbitrary
Government, in this Colony, is altogether Ridiculous and Incredible; for, who
was to have effected it? Could those few of the Church of England, that with
the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, so lately opposed it in Europe; and
that in all Ages have been the only Bulwork against it? Or were the
Presbyterians, Independants, or Anabaptists, to have brought this about? It
must have been one of those, for I dare be bold to say, there are not Two Roman
Catholics betwixt this and New York.

I have sufficiently demonstrated, in the third Article, the little Right we
have to any other Government in the Plantations; and that we cannot justly call
that Arbitrary, which by the Law we are obliged to submit to: So that betwixt
their Condition and ours, there can be no Parity.

As their Reasons and yours were different, so are the Measures which have been
taken; for his late Highness the Prince of Orange, having well-weighed and
considered the tottering Condition of the Protestant Religion all over Europe,
thought it was high time for him to take up Arms, as well for his own
Preservation, as that of his Neighbors and Allies. We do not find, that
notwithstanding the Danger that hung over their heads, the People of England
took up Arms to right themselves; but instead thereof, they became humble
Suppliants to his Highness for his Favor and Protection, which he was pleased
to grant them: Neither do we find, that the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
assumed any Authority, for which they had no color of Law: As they are Peers,
they are invested with the highest Authority, and are the grand Conservators of
the Peace of the Nation; they never left their Duty and Allegiance to his late
MAJESTY, until he first left the Kingdom; and all Things were transacted in his
Name, and by his Authority, until the very minute the Prince was proclaimed;
who came not by force to Conquer and Subject the Nation to a foreign Power, nor
to Subvert and Destroy the lawful Government, but to Maintain and Support the
same, in a peaceable manner, by a Free Parliament: The Prince, nor Peers, never
abrogated nor altered any of the lawful Powers of the Nation, but strengthened
and confirmed all that were capable of beating Office, by which there was
always a due Administration of Justice. The Sword was never said to Rule and
Sway; and by consequence that Confusion and Disorder avoided, which their
Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings have precipitated us into.

As to the fanciful Stories of Macquas, Subterranean Vaults, Fireworks, French
Frigates, poisoning the Soldiers to the Eastward, etc. they are so apparently
false, and strangely ridiculous, that by this time, no Man in his Wits can
believe them; and I need no Argument to confute the Credit of those monstrous
Follies, since Time and Experience have sufficiently demonstrated them to be
mere Lies and Inventions.

And now I hope all sober thinking Men are convinced, That the before-alledged
Reasons, are in themselves either absolutely false, or of little moment; and
consequently no sufficient ground for taking up Arms; all that remains on this
head therefore, will be to show,

First, That if all the Reasons had been tiue, yet it could not justify their
Proceedings.

Secondly, If their Condition had been as bad, and their Grievances really as
great, as they were made believe, those Measures could never mend the one, nor
redress the other.

The most excellent Grotius has so learnedly wrote upon the first of those,
that I shall presume to use no other Argument than his own upon that head,
which you may read in 4. Cap. Lib. 1. De jure Belli and Pacis.

Thirdly, These Measures could never better their Condition, nor redress their
Grievances, unless they are so vain to imagine themselves capable of waging War
with the Crown of England, and all its Allies. Is the King so inconsiderable a
Prince, that he should be forced? Or can they think that the noise of their
Thousands and Ten Thousands, will frighten him into a Compliance? Without doubt
if they do, they will too too late find themselves mistaken? and a woeful
Experience will quickly teach them, that the sole want of their Majesty's
Protection, will, in a very short time, reduce them to the most miserable and
deplorable Condition in the World.

But, perhaps, they may fancy, that this Action of theirs, has extremely
obliged their Majesty's, and that all things now are become justly due to the
Merits of their Services: 'Twill do very well if it be so understood; but I
cannot see the least probability of such a Construction, for they have
sufficiently manifested in their Declaration; that Self-Interest, fondness of
their former popular Government, and aversion to the Government established
from England, was the first and principal Motive to their Undertakings; and
their Progress does plainly demonstrate, that they have only made use of their
Majesty's Names, the better to effect their own Designs, whilst every thing
that has any relation to them lies neglected and unregarded, without any
Recognition of their Authority over those Dominions, or the least
acknowledgment of their submission to such Orders as should come from them,
saving what particularly related to some few ill Men, (as they call them,) whom
they they have imprisoned and detained, without any Law or Reason: So that they
have rashly and imprudently adventured their ALL upon a Chance, (not an equal
one,) Whether it will be well or ill taken: If well, they can expect nothing
more, than what they would have had by fitting still and quiet, unless it be a
vast charge, trouble, and expense: which they have inevitably brought upon
themselves: If ill, What will be the event?

In the first place, This Country, which has so much valued it self, for the
true Profession and pure Exercise of the Protestant Religion, will be termed a
Land full of Hypocrisy, Rebellion, Irriligion, and what not? and they
themselves a degenerate wicked People.

Secondly, In all their Pamphlets and Discourses, they have so magnified their
Action, and boasted of the vast Numbers they can bring into the Field, that it
must be of great import to the Crown of England to curb them, and in time to
reduce them to their former Obedience; and no body will imagine it consistant
with the Interest of the Crown any more to trust Government, in the hands of a
People so ready and so able, upon all Occasions, to Revolt and set up for
themselves; and the stronger they are, the more need there will be to keep them
under.

Thirdly, And lastly, They will really endure and undergo all those Miseries
and Calamities which they fancied to themselves under the late Government, and
become the Scorn and Byword of all their Neighbors.

What then remains, but that they should endeavor to settle themselves in such
a posture, as may at least mitigate, if not wholly prevent the beforementioned
Inconveniences? If their Charter be restored, it can neither justify their
past Actions, nor maintain their former Laws or Constitution of Government; but
render them liable to be questioned and Quo Warranto'd for their Malefesance,
whenever the Supreme Authority shall think it meet. There is nothing
therefore that can be safe or ca^^e for them, and of greater Service and
Benefit, than that they put themselves in a submissive and humble posture, sit
and ready to receive their Majesty's Commands; and not value themselves too
much upon their own Merits, lest they become unworthy of their Majesty's Grace
and Favor; without which, (think what you will,) they can never be safe and
secure from the Severity of the Laws, which they have indisputably violated, in
Matters of the highest Nature and Consequence imaginable.

I hope every good Man will seriously consider the foregoing Discourse, and
suffer himself to be guided by the Dictates of Reason, and not of Humor and
Prejudice; and then I am well assured, it will be evident enough that they have
mistaken their Measures, and that a due sense thereof, and a timely recess,
will more advantage them, than an obstinate and wilful perseverance; and that
nothing but such a Remedy can restore their almost-perishing and undone
Country, to a lasting Peace and happy Settlement; for which, shall ever be the
hearty Prayers of

Your humble Servant, J. Palmer.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Was principal induced to direct the precedent Discourse to you, Gentlemen,
for two Reasons: First, Because I am well assured, you have had a great share
in the late Revolution; and, secondly, Because I would be rightly understood,
which I am sure I can never fail of, by Persons of your Learning and Worth; and
I hope you will be so kind to me, and so just to your Country, to let me know,
in the most public manner you can, wherein I have mistaken the Matter, either
in point of Fact or Judgment: But if I have been so fortunate to convince you,
that wrong Measures have been taken, and that the People had no Reason for what
they have done, nor no Bottom for what they are yet doing, let me tell you,
it is your Duty not only to admonish them, but to reduce them to such a temper
as becomes pious Men and good Christians, for which you will have the Praise,
and God the Glory.

From the Castle the Twentieth Day of June, 1689.
FINIS.

