(...)

portrait

(...)

portrait

Planispherium Catholicum

Quod vulgo dicitur The Mathematical Jewel.

Per Joh. Palmer. M.A.

LONDINI Sumptibus Josephi Moxon.

engraved title page

The Catholic PLANISPHAER.

Which Mr Blagrave calls The Mathematical Jewel; Briefly and plainly
discribed, in Five Books.

The first showing The making of the Instrument.

The rest showing the manifold Use of it.

1. For representing several Projections of the Sphere. 2. For resolving all
Spherical Triangles. 3. For resolving all Problemes of the Sphere;
Astronomical, Astrological, and Geographical. 4. For making all sorts of Dials,
both without Doors and Within; upon any Walls, Cielings, or Floores, be they
never so Irregular, where-so-ever the Direct or Reflected Beams of the Sun may
come.
All which are to be done by this Instrument, with wondrous Ease and Delight.

A Treatise very useful for Mariners, and for all Ingenious Men, who love the
Arts Mathematical.

By JOHN PALMER. M. A.

Hereunto is added a brief Description of the CROS-STAF. And a Catalogue of
Eclipses, Observed by the same I. P.

The Heavens declare the Glory of God; and the Firmament shows his
Handi-work. Psalm. 19. London, Printed by Joseph Moxon, and sold at his Shop on
Cornhill, at the Sign of Atlas. 1658.

To my Honored Friend, JOHN TWYSDEN Doctor of Physic.
Sir,
MAny Learned Men have complained that Mr. Blagrave's Mathematical Jewel, (as
he calls it) both the Instrument and the Book are rarely to be found. That the
Book also by reason of the Interpolation of Gemma Frisius his precepts is
longer then needed, and by reason of the Authors frequent interruptions by
vexatious Suits in Law is somewhat confused; whereof himself complains in his
Preface to the Reader, and in the Conclusion of the Fourth Book, and elsewhere,
wishing an amendment. At your request especially I undertook the reformation of
that Treatise, which now at length I have simshed. Gemma Frisius was the first
that brought this Instrument to some good perfection, calling it Astrolabium
Catholicum, but he did that by a Cursor and Brachialum which Mr Blagrave
happily devised to perform by a Reet and Label with more ease and delight. I
have no design to deprave the labors, or to obscure the Names or Fame of
those ingenious Men, by whom this Instrument was contrived, and advanced to so
great perfection; but as Mr Blagrave said when he took upon him to reform Gemma
Frisius his Treatise; so I say of my last Edition of the Instrument after both,
Facile est Inventis addore. Surely if men deceased have any knowledge or regard
to what is done after them in this World, and could have communication with
those that remain here, I suppose Mr Blagrave's Ghost would give me, thanks for
doing that which he heartily wished to be done but for want of leisure left
unfinished: and I should like wise thank him by whose means I became acquainted
with this excellent Instrument: which, next to the Sphere or Globe it self, is
the best Instrument, in my judgment, that ever was devised for Astronomy: and
for the easier making and portableness, is to be preferred before the Sphere it
self.

My aim has been throughout this Treatise to Write Plainly, Methodically, and
with as much brevity as might consist with perspicuity, remembering that of the
Poet, Brevis esse laboro, Obscurus fio. How far I have attained my Intention,
the Reader will judge. If this work shall be found useful to the World, the
thanks is due to you, who first engaged me in it, and for the furtherance
thereof took the pains to delineate the Instrument for me with your own hands,
in Brass Plates of fifteen inches Diameter; which I esteem very highly, both
for the exactness of the work, and for the work-man's sake, to whom for more
then twenty Years past I am also many other ways obliged. I confess I have
been somewhat slow in performing my promise to you, because this Treatise has
taken up only my spare hours, which by reason of infirm health, and more
necessary emploiments, are not many.

Sir, I am Your Servant. John Palmer.
Ecton Apr. 1. 1658.
The first book of the Catholic Planisphear.
Wherein The whole Fabric or making thereof is plainly Described.
CHAP. I. Of the parts of the Planisphear. And of the Matter, his matter and
Lineaments.
THis Planisphere is made up of five parts

1 The lying plate, called Matter. 2 The moving plate; called the Rete, Reet, or
Net. 3 The Ring or Limb. 4 The Label. 5 The Sights.
The Matter is a round plate of metal or past-board flat smooth, and stiff: the
larger the better. And if you will have the circles actually drawn for every
degree, it had need be ten Inches at least in Diameter. If it be made of metal
(as Silver Brass or Tin and Tin-glass in equal quantity melted together) it
must be well pollished: but it may very well be made on a fair pastboard,
pasted on a Messie board: for thereon the Lineaments may be distinguished with
inkes of several colors, which cannot be if it be made in metal.

The Lineaments of the Matter (though they be fitted to represent other circles
of the Sphere also, as shall be showed, yet) most aptly represent the Meridians
and Parallels: and therefore so we call them here, while we speak of the
Fabrique. Among the Parallels the two Tropiques and the two Poler circles are
to be inserted. And lastly to these you shall add the Ecliptique: and so you
have all the Lineaments of the Matter.

For the Declination whereof,

1 Upon the center of the Matter plate, describe the fundamental circle, (about
an inch within the edge, if your plate be 12 inches Diameter) that so a
convenient space may be left for the Limb. This circle shall be the great
Meridian passing through the Poles of the world, and also through the Zenith
and Nadir of your Country; and is the bound by which all the Lineaments of the
Matter are enclosed. Draw two Diameters crossing one another in the center at
right angles, and dividing this Meridian into his quarters, let one of these
Diameters be A B the Axtree-line, the other C D the Equator or his Diameter:
divide also every quarter of this Meridian into 90 equal parts or degrees.

This Meridian only of all the circles of the Matter, falls out to be a full
circle in this projection, because the bisection of the Sphere is supposed here
to be made in the plain thereof, and because the eye is supposed to be the Pole
thereof, and so equidistant from every part thereof. The rest of the Meridians
and Parallels their Semicircles are in this Planisphere fore-shortned according
to Optique reason, (as shall be further explained Ch 2) because they all either
are great circles passing through the eyepoint, and cutting the Meridian at
Right angles, as the Axtree-line or East Meridian, the Equator, and the
Ecliptique, which are therefore projected upon their Diameters and become
straight lines; or else lie Oblique to the eye, as do all the rest of the
Meridians and Parallels, which are all of them projected into arches less then
a semicircle; and yet every one of them is to be accounted a semicircle fore
shortened, and to be divided as a somicircle into 180 degrees.

2 To describe the rest of the Meridians, you shall lay a Ruler from the Pole A
to the several degrees of the semicircle C B D (or from the Pole B to the
several degrees of the semicircle C A D, for all comes to one) and mark where
the Ruler intersects the Equinoctial line C D for every degree; so shall you
have the Equinoctial divided into 180 degrees. ( viz. 90 degr. on one side the
center, and 90 degr. on the other) through which divisions or degrees the
several Meridians shall pass, and all of them must meet in both the Poles.
Therefore having three points given for every Meridian ( viz. the two Poles A
and B, and a middle point in the Equator C D, bring these three points into a
circle, and you shall have the true arch of every Meridian drawn on the
Planisphear; as they appear in this Projection: which how to do shall be
further showed Chap. 3.

3 To describe the Parallels, you shall first divide the Axtree-line A B into
180 degrees. (as you divide the Equator C D) by laying your Ruler from C or D to
the several degrees of the opposite Semicircle, and marking where the Ruler
intersects the Axtree-line A B; or with your Compasses transfer the division of
the Diameter C D to the Diameter A B; so shall you have three points given for
every Parallel, whereby his arch may be drawn: as for example, the tenth
Parallel North shall be drawn from the tenth degr. of the Quadrant D A, counted
from D, by the tenth division of the Semidiameter E A, counted from E, to the
tenth degr. of the Quadrant C A, counted from C: and so of the rest. The
Tropiques and Poler circles are described as the Parallels. Yet of them see
Chap. 6.

4 To describe the Ecliptic, number his greatest Declination (23 degr. 30 mi.)
in the Meridian from C, toward A to F. and again from D toward B to G; then
join the points F and G with a straight line which shall pass through the
center of the Matter and be the Ecliptic. For dividing whereof you shall only
transfer the division of the Axtree-line or Equator upon this Ecliptic line
(for all Diameters have like divisions) and you shall distinguish every tenth
and 30 degr. by longer strokes, and shall set at G; and at the center; at F:
and the rest in their order.

CHAP. II. Of the reason of this Declination.
FOr the better understanding of the reason of this Declination, either take or
suppose to your self an hollow Sphere or Globe, of equal diameter with your
great Meridian before drawn. Cut this Sphere by the Meridian into two dishes or
Hemisphears, the one representing the Eastern, the other the Western Hemisphear
of the Heaven: So in each of these Hemisphears the Meridian is an whole Circle,
being the Base of the Hemisphear, or brim of the dish: but the rest of the
Meridians, the Parallels, Equinoctial, and Ecliptic, are all bisected by the
great Meridian, and so you can have but half their circles in the Eastern
Hemisphear, and the other half is in the Western.

Next suppose also the plain A C B D, to be a thin plate of some transparent
matter, as clear horn glass, or crystal; and this plate fitted to stick in the
dish mouth (that is, in the Meridian of the Hemisphear) and upon the center E a
straight wyre to be erected perpendicular to the plain A C B D, and the length
of the said wyre to be equal to the semidiameter E A. Now place your eye at the
top of this wyre and look up the Lineaments of the Hemisphear through the glass
plate, and observe where the visual lines drawn from the several points of the
Hemisphear to the eye cut the glass and what kind of lines and arches they do
paint upon the glass, and you shall see there that the semicircles of the
Equator, the East Meridian, and the Ecliptic, will be depainted on the glass
in straight lines; because they be great Circles, and pass through the eye
point of this projection) and the lines passing between your eye and the
several degrees of any of them shall divide their Diameters upon the glass into
such parts as they are divided by the precept of the former Chapter. For the
top of the wyre (here supposed to be the West point of the Horizon) is the true
eye point from which the Diameters A B and C D are divided, and from which the
whole projection of the Eastern Hemisphear is made at one view upon the glass
But because this concave Hemisphear with his wire or Axis erect, cannot easily
be pictured on a flat, therefore to supply the want of a solid Sche m you may
consider that the Axtree line A B is not only the Diameter of the East
Meridian, but a common Diameter to all the Meridians: and therefore if you take
your ey point at C or D, and by your eye beam or a ruler laid from one of those
points to all the degrees of the opposite semicircle do divide the Axtree line,
it shall be all one as if you had divided him from the top of the wire by the
degrees of the East Meridian which passes through the bottom of the concave
Hemisphear. For all great Circles of the Sphere and their Diameters likewise
being equal, look how any one of their Diameters is divided, in like manner
they shall all be divided, if the eye be alike situate to them.

CHAP. III. How to find the centers of the Meridians five several ways.
THe centers of the Meridians and their semidiameters are thus found,

1. You have by the first Chap. three points given by which they must be drawn
(viz.) the two Poles, and a third point in the Equator) and how to bring these
into a circle or arch, is showed by Euclid. 4, 5. But I think this way
incomodious for this purpose. 2 A better way is to get the centers by proffers,
thus,
Let it be required to draw the twentieth Meridian whose points given are A 2
B. Having first extended infinitely the line C D, set one foot of your
Compasses at adventure, in the line C D, whereabout you guess the center should
be, and extending the other foot to A or B, carry it about at the same extent
toward 2, and if it touch the point 2, you have taken the true center, and may
draw the arch as is required, if your Compass overreach, you must narrow it,
and come nearer; if it reach short, widen your Compass, and seek your center
further, till by trial you light upon it: if one foot of your Compass stand in
the line C D, and the other cut the middle point, and one of the extreme points
A or B, it ought to cut the other also; if your plain be flat, and the line C D
straight and square to the line A B: but if any of these have failed, you shall
never bring the three points into an arch while the foot of your compass
^andeth in the line C D. Therefore in such case set one foot in A, and draw
with the other foot a short arch crossing the line C D; then set the standing
foot in B, and with the running foot cross the short arch last drawn: where
these arches cross will be the center, by which you may draw an arch cutting A
and B, and if it cut 2 also, you have your desire. But if this arch over reach
2, widen your Compass: if it come short of 2 (the middle point) narrow your
Compass, and try again in like manner till you can compass all the three points
in the same arch.

3. A third way. I suppose you may know that every Meridian cuts the Equator
twice, viz. in two opposite points distant 180 degr. one from another: as, for
example, the Meridian which cutteth the Equator in 60 degr. of Right Ascension,
cuts it again in the opposite degr, viz. 240. Now if you can find these two
points in the Equator line C D, the center will be in the just middle betwixt
them. One of these points is already given within the fundamental Circle; the
other without, is thus found. Prolong your Equator infinitely beyond your plate
both ways, and divide the extension thereof by like reason as you divided his
Diameter, viz. as by a Ruler laid from A to the several degrees. of the Quadrant B
C, you divided the Semidiameter E C into 90 degr. so keeping still one end of
your Ruler fixed at A, and carrying about the other end thereof to the several
degrees of the Quadrant C A, you may divide the excurrence of the line E C into
90 degr. more: and so E C and his exccurrence or continuation will be half the
Equator divided into his degr. and E D with his excurrence on the other side
will be the other half divided by like reason. And thus the whole Equator is
projected in one straight line, and divided into degr. also. Then having a
point given within your fundamental circle through which the sixtieth Meridian
must pass ( viz the 60 degrees. of the Semidimeter E C or E D) number thence over
the center to 180 degrees. and there is the point where the other semicircle must
cross, and the middle between those points is the center. But because the two
points taken in the quadrant A C are very near together, especially toward A,
and the Ruler also will cross the prolongation of the line E C very obliquely,
you may therefore do better to divide this line into his degr. by a Scale of
Tangents, for if upon the Equinoctial line D E C you prick down from E both
ways the Tangents of the half degr. in order from 0, to 90, those pricks shall
be the whole degr. of the Equinoctial line in this Projection, to be numbered
from E both ways to 180 degrees. where the Tangent becomes infinite. Thus taking A
E for Radius, E D is the Tangent of 45 degrees. by the structures: yet the arch or
Diameter E D is a Quadrant or 90 degrees. of the Equinoctial in this Projection,
because the Tangents of the half degrees. of the Quadrant E A I, measure out the
whole degr. of the line E D, as was abovesaid.

4 If you consider well what has been said, you will find (or you may take it
here upon trust,) that for the 90 Meridians to be drawn between C and E, half
the centers will be found in the opposite Semidiameter E D, and the other half
without D in the said Semidiameter prolonged. And that every second division of
the line E D from E toward D and forwards, shall be the centers of the
Meridians which cut the Semidiameter C E. As for example, to draw every fifth
Meridian from C to E, you take every tenth degrees. from E toward D for the centers.

And further if you would not be at more trouble then needs, to divide the
extension of the Diameter beyond the fundamental circle, you shall but do thus.
Begin with the crookedest Meridians first, whose centers are within the
fundamental Circle, and first pitching one foot of your Compass in the point 1,
(near E) extend the other foot beyond the center to 2; there is the center from
which you shall draw the first Meridian A 1 B: and also turning about your
Compass you shall make a mark in the extension beyond D at 1, where the other
Semicircle of this Meridian would cross the Equator. So for the next Meridian,
in the line C E marked with 2, your center is beyond E at 4, and after you have
drawn his arch A 2 B, mark with your compass his other crossing at 2 beyond D,
and so with one labor you shall both draw the 45 crookeder Meridians, and also
make the out lying division of the line E D prolonged: of which division every
second or even number will be a center to some of the straighter Meridians.
This is a very good and easy way: and this way Mr Blagrave always used.

5 Or lastly You may frame a decimal Scale of 1000 or 10000 parts, equal to the
Semidiameter of the Matter; by which Scale with the help of the Cannon of
Triangles, you may presently find the length of any S ne Tangent or Secant you
shall desire. Now look what inclination any Meridian has to your fundamental
Circle (that is, what angle they make between them) the Secant of that
inclination is the Semidiameter of that Meridian; and the Tangent of the same
inclination is the distance of his center from E the center of the Matter. For
example, the Meridian A 2 B his inclination is 20 degrees (for the angle C A 2 and
likewise the arch C 2 which measures it is 20 degr. the S cant of 20 degr is
10641. by the Cannon of Triangles (which every Mathematician ought to have at
hand) Take with your Compasses from your decimal Scale 10641. and setting one
foot in A, with the other foot cross the Semidiameter E D; in that crossing is
the center: or take with your Compasses 3639. the Tangent of 20 degr. and set
it from E toward D, and it shall give you the same center at 4. For A E being
Radius, E 4 is the Tangent, and A 4 the Secant of 20 degrees. by the structure.

And if you like to work this way, it will help you much to have a short Cannon
of Tangents and Secants of whole degr. of the Quadrant gathered into one page:
which Cannon for your ease is here annexed.

A Table of Tangents and Secants to every degree of the Quadrant.
Degr Tan. Secan 1 00174 010001 2 00349 010006 3 00524 010013 4 00699 010024 5
00374 010038 6 01051 010055 7 01227 010075 8 01405 010098 9 01583 010124 10
01763 010154 11 01943 010187 12 02125 01022^ 13 02308 010263 14 02493 010306 15
02679 010352 16 02867 010402 17 03057 010456 18 03249 010514 19 03443 010576 20
03639 010641 21 03838 010711 22 04040 010785 23 04244 010863 23.30 04348 010904
24 04452 010946 25 04663 011033 26 04877 011126 27 05095 011223 28 05317 011325
29 05543 011433 30 05773 011547 31 06008 011666 32 06248 011791 33 06494 011923
34 06745 012062 35 07002 012207 36 07265 012360 37 07535 012521 38 07812 012690
39 08097 012867 40 08390 013054 41 08692 013250 42 09004 013456 43 09325 013673
44 09656 013901 45 10000 014142 46 10355 014395 47 10723 014662 48 11106 014944
49 11503 015242 50 11917 015557 51 12348 015890 52 12799 016242 53 13270 016616
54 13763 017013 55 14281 017434 56 14825 017882 57 15398 018360 58 16003 018870
59 16642 019416 60 17320 02000 61 18040 020626 62 18807 021300 63 19626 022026
64 20503 022811 65 21445 023662 66 22460 024585 66.30 22998 025078 67 23558
025693 68 24750 026694 69 26050 027904 70 27474 029238 71 29042 030715 72 30776
032360 73 32708 034203 74 34874 036279 75 37320 038637 76 40107 041335 77 43314
044454 78 47046 048097 79 51445 052408 80 56712 057587 81 63137 063924 82 71153
071852 83 8144^ 082055 84 9514^ 095667 85 11430 114737 86 14300 143355 87 19081
191073 88 28636 286537 89 57289 572986 90

CHAP. IIII. To find the Centers of the Parallels, six several ways.
THe first way, but the worst for our purpose, (as was said before for the
Meridians) is by the fifth Proposition of the fourth book of Euclid; to find
the Center of the Circle circumscribing the Triangle made by the three points
given.

2 A better way is by profers. Take this upon trust: that as you found the
Centers of all the Meridians in the Equator, so shall you find the Centers of
all the Parallels in the Axtree line prolonged, and by making like profers as
you were taught for the Centers of the Meridians, (Chap. 3.) you may quickly
find the Centers of the Parallels.

3 A third way. You must consider that the Axtree line represents the East
Meridian as well as the Axis of the world which is a common Diameter to all the
Meridians. Also that every Parallel cuts the East Meridian (as it does the
rest) in two points Equidistant from the Equinoctial and two Equidistant also
from the Poles. Therefore having one point already given in the Axtree line
within the fundamental Circle where the Parallel shall cut, number the distance
from this point to the next Pole, and number also the same distance again
beyond the Pole in the Axtree-line prolonged, (being divided also as you were
taught to divide the Equator line Chap. 3. and at the end of this number shall
the Parallel out the Axtree line again. And the middle between these two
sections is the Center. For example, the 50th Parallel is 40 degr. distant from
the Pole. Count therefore in the Axtree line prolonged 40 degr. beyond the
Pole, and there is the utter end of this Parallels Diameter; which if you part
in two, the middle at G is the Center.

4 If from the point given, where the Parallel cuts the great Meridian, you
raise a Tangent line, this Tangent shall cut the Axtree line in the Center of
the Parallel. Example, The said 50th Parallel cuts the great Meridian at H,
there I raise the Targent H G perpendicular to the Radius E H. And this Tangent
as you see cuts the Axtree line in G the Center of the Parallel.

5 Hence arises a fifth way. For it appears by this figure that the Tangent of
the Parallels distance from the Pole is equal to his Semidiameter: and that the
Secant of his distance from the Pole is equal to the distance of his Center,
from the Center of the great Meridian. For here E H is Radius, H B an arch of
40 degr. H G the Tangent thereof, and Semidiameter of the Parallel, E G the
Secant thereof, and the distance of the Center of the Parallel from the Center
of the Meridian. And all this is evident by the structure in the Scheam.
Wherefore making E H Radius, take from your Scale or Sector, with your
Compasses the Secant of the Parallels distance from the Pole, and set it from E
in the Axtree line, and it shall end in the Center of the Parallel. Or take the
Tangent of the Parallels distance from the Pole, and set it from the point of
his Section with the Meridian toward the extension of the Axtree line, and
where the end of it just touches the Axtree line, there is the Center.

6 For want of a Sector, or other fit Scales of Tangents and Secants you may do
thus: Set one foot of your Compass in the Center E, and extend the other upon
the Diameter of the Equator or Axtree line, to twice so many degr. as your
Parallel is distant from the Pole. That distance is the very Tangent you seek.
For example, for the 40th Parallel from the Pole, I number from E toward D 80
degr. to 8. now E 8 is the Tangent of 40 degr. (though it contain just twice so
many degr. of the Circle foreshortned in this projection: as has been showed
Chap. 3. Sect. 3.) and so if you will have the Secant of 40 degr. take with
your Compasses the length from 8 (where the Tangent ends) to A. and that is the
Secant to be used as was taught in the last Section.

Thus have you ways enough for finding the Centers of the Meridians and
Parallels. And you may have occasion in the making of the Instrument to use
most of them one time or other. However, the knowledge of them is both
pleasant, and useful for the right understanding of this and other Projections
of the Sphere, as also for the examination of your work, when you shall chance
to doubt of it.

CHAP. V, How to draw the straighter Meridians and Parallels, whose
Semidiameters are very long.
IT may trouble you very much to draw those Meridians and Parallels which lie
near to the Diameters; because they be arches of great Circles and require
Compasses larger then you can well get, or manage when you have gotten them.
Till you come to the 80th Meridian from the Limb, a Beamcompass of a yard long
will reach, if your Matter be not above a foot Diameter, and a longer Beam you
cannot well manage, for it will be apt to tremble with it is own weight, and
draw double lines, though it be made very thick and massy. But the 89th
Meridian will require a Beam-compass of almost ten yards long: For his
Semidiameter will contain the Semidiameter of the great Meridian 57 times.
Therefore to draw the 10 last Meridians and the 10 last Parallels, you may help
your self one of these ways.

1. Guido Vbaldus has devised an Instrument for this purpose, consisting of
three rulers in form of an obtuse Triangle. The description and use thereof you
may see in Blagr. l. 4. c 2, 3. and in Vbaldus his book De Theorica Astrolabij.
But though it be an Ingenious device, yet I have found by experience, that it
is a ticklish Instrument, and hardly managed, for which reason I have hanged it
by. 2 The Bow now commonly used, is an Instrument not so artificial, but more
tractable and steady then the former. It is made of too steel rulers, the
shorter of them must be of good substance, as three quarters of an inch in
height, and as much in breadth, that it may be stiff, and lie flat; the length
must be somewhat more then the Diameter of your Instrument: The other may be an
inch longer, of the same height but much narrower, that it may be bent out
with screws into an arch of any Circle required; which ruler so bent, being
laid to the three points given, you may by it draw the arch required, as easily
as you draw a straight line by a straight ruler, The stiff ruler carries the
screws, and it must have rivets, by which the bending ruler may be stayed at
both ends, while it is bent by the screws. See the figure.
CHAP. VI. How to draw the Tropiques, and Polar Circles, and to finish the
Matter.
BEsides the 180 Parallels aboy ementioned, you have four more to draw before
the Matter is finished. viz. the two Tropiques, and the two Polar Circles; of
which the Northern is called the Arctique, and the other the Antarctique
Circle. How to draw these you are sufficiently instructed Chap. 4. if you know
but their Declination, for they be Parallels. The Tropique of Cancer declineth
from the Equator toward the North Pole 23 degr. 30 min. and the Tropique of
Capricorn declines as much toward the South Pole. The Arctique Circle declines
Northward 66 degr. 30 min. and the Antarctique as much Southward. And these
being drawn after the manner of the other Parallels, you have drawn all the
lineaments of the Matter, And the better to adorn and distinguish them you shall
with your Graver hatch every fifteenth Meridian: for they are hour lines. The
South arch of the great Meridian A C B is the hour of Noon: and his North arch
A D B, the hour of Midnight. These need not be hatched, being the Semicircles
of the great Meridian, or fundamental Circle, which contains all but the Axtree
line A E B, which is the hour line of the sixes, and the rest of the hour lines
counted from him both ways, would be hatched on both fides, to show like a
ragged staff, for distinction sake. Also every fifth Meridian (not being a
fifteenth) you shall make a pricked line, not punching it with a round point,
lest you make your plate warp, but making many short strokes cross the line
with your Graver, which will be more conspicuous. Every tenth Parallel also
would be a ragged line, and the intermediate fifths pricked lines: likewise the
Tropiques and Polar Circles would be pricked lines. Also if your plate be
large, you may set figures to the hour lines, and to every tenth Meridian at
the Equator: but if your plate be small the divisions of the Label applied upon
the Equator may supply the lack of them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Reet, or Nets
HAving showed you what belongs to the Fabrique of the first part of this
Instrument called the Matter: A few words more will instruct you how to make the
Reet, whose lineaments are for the most part the same.

The Reet is a round plate of metal, or pastboard, like unto the Matter, but of
less Diameter: it must be well planished and polished; and the thinner the
better, if it hold working it would not be thicker then a shilling, being of a
foot Diameter. It is called the Reet or Rete, that is the Net, because it must
be pierced through, and made like unto a Net or Lettess; that the lincaments of
the Matter may be perceived through it. If we had a transparent metal, much
labor might here be saved. A clear Lanthorn horn may serve for a small
Instrument, but for large Instruments, it is best to have it either of fine
pastboard, or, if you will go to the cost, of metal cancelled; as shall be
taught.

1 For the delineation of the Reet, first draw your fundamenttall Circle equal
to the fundamental Circle of the Matter leaving a border or Limb without, of
such breadth as may receive the graduations of the Circle and figures set to
them, which breadth may be three tenths of an inch, where the Reet is a foot in
Diameter: draw likewise two Diameters A B, and C D, crossing one another in the
Center E at right Angles, and dividing the Circle into his four Quadrants,
which you shall subdivide again into 90 degr. apeece, as you did in the Matter.

2 You shall inscribe two arches, which shall represent the Semicircles of the
Ecliptique, which shall meet at the points C and D of the Equator, and the
middle points of these arches shall be found in the Diameter A B, thus. The
Diameter A B being divided as before you were taught to divide the Diameters of
the Matter, number from A toward the center E 23 degr. 30 min. and there make
the point F, for: and likewise number from B toward E 23 degr. 30 min. and
there set the point K. for. then join the points C F D in one arch, and the
points C K D in another arch (as is taught Chap. 3) and your Ecliptique is
drawn. But now you must make him a narrow Limb inward toward the Center, to
receive the scale of his degr. and the characters of the Signs. And to divide
him you shall do thus. Number in the Axtree line (A B, from F inwards 90 degr.
there is the Pole of the arch C F D, to this Pole fasten one end of your ruler
(having an ey-lid-hole in the edge for that purpose) and carrying about the
other end over the several degr. of the Semicircle C A D, you shall cut the
arch C F D into his correspondent degrees. As if you lay the ruler from C to 10
degr. in the Limb toward A, it shall cut the Ecliptique in 10, and so of the
rest. Likewise for the other Semicircle C K D, find his Pole 90 degr. from K
toward F and A: and from that Pole by like reason, you shall divide the
Semicircle C K D by the divisions of the Semicircle C B D. This is the best way.

Or you way divide the Ecliptique by a Table of Right Ascensions, thus. Lay
your ruler from the Center E to 27 degrees. 54 min. in the Limb, which is the Right
Ascension of 0. to be counted from D toward B, and the ruler shall at the same
time cut the Ecliptique in 0, to which that Right Ascension belongs, and so for
any other degrees. or you may defer the dividing of the Ecliptique, till you have
finished and cut out the Reet: and then if you set the line C D of the Reet, in
A B the Axtree line of the Matter, the Ecliptique will lie among the Meridians
of the Matter, and shall be so divided by the Parallels of the Matter, as the
Meridians are divided by them. But my advice is that you divide your Ecliptique
the first way, and you may use this for proof of your work at last.

3 The rest of the lineaments of the Reet are the Azimuths, to be drawn as the
Meridians of the Matter, and the Almicanters, to be drawn as the Parallels.
Only you shall need to draw but half the Almicanters, and the Azimuths but
half way, leaving one half of your Reet viz. E C B D blank and void of them.

In drawing these Azimuths and Almicanters you shall be careful to skip over
the border of the Ecliptique, leaving it fair, that the graduations thereof
with their figures set to every tenth degr. and the characters of the Signs
may be more distinctly seen. Also you shall do well, if you make a border to
the Axtree line on the Northside, that is toward D, and let this border be of
the same breadth from A to B, the breadth not exceeding one fifth of an inch in
a Reet of a foot Diameter; upon which border you may make a scale of degrees,
setting figuresin it to every tenth Almicanter. This will be a great strength
and Ornament to your Reet.

Below the Horizon C D likewise, you shall make a Limb or border for the
Horizon, to receive his graduations: this may be a quarter or three tenths of
an inch broad, where the Reet is a foot in Diameter: and upon this border you
shall set figures at every tenth Azimuths, and shall number them both ways,
from the Center and from the Meridian.

4 You shall inscribe so many of the fixed Stars as your Reet may well receive.
Which to do you must know their Right Ascensions (or Culminations) and also
their Declinations, for which purpose I have given you a Table of 110 of the
more notable fixed Stars, (which may best be inserted in your Reet,) with their
Right Ascensions and Declinations calculated to the year of our Lord 1671.
which may serve for 40 years before and after without any considerable error.

To inscribe them you shall first number the Right Ascension of the Star from
0, that is from D upon the Limb of the Reet toward B, and at the end of that
number fix your Label, (which by this time should be made and pinned on the
Center,) then from the Limb count inwards upon the Label the Stars Declination,
and at the end of that number make a prick in your Reet close to the edge of
the Label, there is the Stars place. Then with your Graver you shall make there
the shape of a Star, with 4, 5, or 6 points, according as the magnitude of the
Star deserves: and let one point be longer then the rest; and let it point
outward from the Center, if the Stars Declination be North, but inward toward
the Center, if his Declination be South: and let the end of his long point
(called Apex) be in the very true place of the Star. But if your Label be yet
unmade, then take the measure of the Stars Declination with your Compasses upon
any of the four Semidiameters of the Reet, (measuring it from the Limb
inwards,) then lay a ruler from the Center to the Right Ascension of the Star
and where the ruler cuts the Limb of the Reet; there set one foot of your
Compasses, (opened as before) and with the other make a prick toward the
Center, close to the edge of your ruler, and there is the Stars place in your
Reet.

5 Lastly, you shall cut out all the spaces of this Reet, which may be spared;
remembering always that you leave uncut the borders of the Ecliptique, Horizon,
and Axtree line, and be very careful that you cut not into the Center of your
Reet, but leave breadth sufficient about the Center to hold the Center-pin,
which must join Matter Reet and Label together. This remembered, you shall cut
out two third parts of the spaces of the Almicanters, beginning from the
Horizon C D, and cutting out the breadth of two degrees, after which you shall
leave the breadth of one degree; and then cut our again the breadth of two
degrees, and so forward. But for the greater strength and ornament of your
Reet, and for ease in numbering the Azimuths, you shall at every 15th Azimuth
leave a string of the breadth of one degree, whole from the Horizon to the Pole
A, or at every thirtieth Azimuth leave such a string going quite through, and
at every other fifteenth the string may be cut off when it comes within ten
degr. of the Pole, because there the spaces of the Azimuths be very narrow and
close together.

And where among those Almicanters and Azimuths you have any Star, you must
contrive to leave him standing, and to set by him his name or some figure by
which you may know him again. But you are to content your self with four Stars
on this side the Horizon, because you will want convenient room. On the other
side you may have more, and room also to writ their names upon strings or
branches left for that purpose; which you may contrive into some voluntary
lettess-work, wherein you shall not much regard uniformity of the Quadrants,
but to make the Reet as open as you can, provided you leave it of sufficient
strength.

The cutting of this Network requires much labor and care. be sure you use no
Punches nor Ch^sils, nor adventure to stamp your figures, lest you spoil all.
But get your Gravers Drils and Files, of several bignesses and fashions, and
being to cut out any of the lettesses, lay your plate upon a flat board, or
contrive to pintch it between two flat boards, as in a Vice, that it crumple
not. The lower board were best have a small Auger hole, through which your Files
may play: the upper board must come close to your work behind, but must not
cover it. Then first make way for your Drill with a Graver: next with your
Drill (set Perpendicular to the plate) bore two or three holes close together,
then get in a small File, and file them all into one mortess or narrow window,
to make way for bigger Files, and when you come near the line be sure your File
be not slope but Perpendicular to the plate in working. And to guide your Files
Perpendicular in Paste this on fol. 17. so as it may by open while the first 7.
Chapters are reading

diagram working you may make a long handle to your File, like an arrow shaft,
and longer if you will: fasten a board with an hole befitting the handle of
your File just over your work; put the shaft or handle of your File through
that hole so far that it slip not out in working: and this hole shall so govern
your File, that if you set it Perpendicular at first it must needs file
Perpendicularly. This device I learnt from an excellent Artificer, M. Matthew
Hill, of Bedford; who by this and such other ingenious devices did cut out two
of these Reets so exactly and truly, as I think the like has not been done in
metal before.

To cut out the Reet in pastbord is much easier, if you be provided of sharp
knives and chesills, fitted for your purpose.

A Table of the Right Ascensions and Declinations of 110 of the more notable
fixed Stars; calculated from Tycho his Tables: rectified for the year of our
Lord 1671.

As. mi. D. mi. Andromeda her Head, 357. 54. 27. 18. N. 2. (Mirach) Girdle. 12.
49. 33. 55. N. 2. Foot (Alamath) 25. 57, 40. 44. N. 2. Perseus his side,
Algenib. 44. 16. 48. 36. N. 2. Meadusaes head, Algol. 41. 46. 39. 39. N. 3.
Henerichus right shoulder. 85. 53. 44. 56. N. 2. Left shoulder, Alhabot. 73.
07. 45. 37. N. 1. Left elbow. 69. 29. 43. 15. N. 4. The Kids. 69. 57. 40. 33.
N. 4. The Kids. 70. 51. 40. 42. N. 4. The great Wain. The Wheels. 160. 18. 58.
08. N, 2. The great Wain. The Wheels. 160. 48. 63. 32. N, 2. The great Wain.
The Wheels. 173. 59. 55. 33. N, 2. The great Wain. The Wheels. 179. 48. 58. 51.
N, 2. The Horses. 189. 53. 57. 47. N. 2. The Horses. 197. 37. 56. 41. N. 2. The
Horses. 203. 37. 51. 00. N. 2. The little rain, the Pole Star. 07. 53. 87. 34.
N. 2. Last Wheel. 231. 14. 73. 15. N, 3. Dragons tongue. 254. 36. 54. 55. N. 4.
Head first, 260. 46. 52. 34. N. 3. Head last, Ras Aben. 267. 15. 51. 36. N. 3.
Tail 167. 15. 71. 05. N. 3. Boots Arcturus. 210. 13. 20. 58. N. 1. Engonasi's
Head, 254. 12. 14. 50. N. 3 Ophiucus Head. 259. 55. 12. 52. N. 3. Lyra, 276.
27. 38. 30. N. 1. In Ariadnes brow, (Mumir) 230. 12. 27. 51. N. 2. The Swans
bill, 289. 23. 27. 18. N. 3. The Eagles Heart, 293. 41. 08. 03. N 2. Tail, 282.
36. 13. 25. N 3. The Dolphins tail, 304. 24. 10. 14. N 3. Pegasus his mouth,
(Eniph) 322. 03. 8. 24. N 3. Head, 328. 24. 4 38. N. 4. Neck, 336. 21. 9. 08.
N. 3. Right shoulder (Sheat,) 341. 59. 26. 18. N. 2. First in the wing,
(Marcab) 342. 07. 13. 28. N. 2, Last in the wing, 359. 08. 13. 22. N. 2. The
Rams head, 27. 12. 21. 54. N. 3. Horn, 23. 54. 17. 40. N 4. Horn, 24. 08. 19.
12. N. 4. The Bulls North eye, 62. 23. 18. 26. N. 3. South eye, (Aldebaran) 64.
17. 15. 48. N 1. Brightest of the Pleiades, 52. 00. 23. 03. N 3. Gemini, Head
of Apollo, 108. 24 32. 33. N. 2. Head of Hercules, 111. 19. 28. 46. N. 2. The
first foot, 88. 48. 22. 33. N 4. The first foot, 90. 48 22. 38. N. 3. The third
foot, 94. 41 16 38. N. 2. Cancer, Praecepe, 125. 22. 20. 48. N ne Leo, the
Lions neck, 150. 26. 21. 29. N. 2. Heart, (Regulus, 147. 43. 13. 33. N 1. Back,
164. 08. 22. 20. N 2. Tail, 173. 04. 16. 25. N. 1. Virgo, Spica, Azimech, 196.
56. 9. 31. S. 1. Libra, South balance, 218. 13. 14. 37. S. 2. North balance,
224. 52. 8. 07. S. Scorpio, in his forehead the lowest, 234. 50. 25. 06. S. 3.
Midst, 235. 15. 21. 38. S. 3. Highest, 236. 36. 18. 51. S. 3. Heart, (Antares,)
242. 23. 25. 37. S. 1. Sagittaries head, the midst, 281. 18. 22. 07. S. 4
Capricoms horn, the highest, 299. 58. 13. 29. S. 3. Tail, 320. 29. 18. 02. S.
3. Tail, 322. 15. 17. 32. S. 3. Aquarius right shoulder, 327. 16. 1. 52. S. 3.
left shoulder, 318. 07. 6. 56. S 3. Right leg, (Scheat,) 339. 22. 17. 31. S. 3.
End of the flood (Fomahant,) 339. 46. 31. 17. S. 1. The Whale, Mandibula, 41.
21. 2. 48. N 2. Mouth, the midst, 36. 36. 1. 50. N 3. Check, 35. 44. 1. 07. S.
3. Belly, (Baten Kaitos) 23. 52. 11. 54. S. 3. Tail, Northern, 0. 43. 10. 37.
S. 3. Tail, Southern 6. 45. 19. 48. S. 2. Orion. Right shoulder, Bedalgieure
84. 23. 07. 18. N 1. Left shoulder Bellatrix, 76. 54. 06. 01. N 2. Girdle the
first, 78. 52. 0. 35. S. 2. Second, 79. 55. 1. 26. S. 2. Third, 81. 04. 2. 09.
S. 2. Left foot, (Rigel) 74. 44. 8. 37. S. 1. Right foot, 83. 03. 9. 49. S. 3.
Thegreat Dogs mouth, Alhaber, Sirius, 97. 42. 16. 14 S. 1. Foremost foot, 92.
08. 17. 49. S. 2. The little dogs neck, 107. 22. 8. 54. N 3. Thigh, Procyon,
110. 34. 6. 03. N 2. Hydra, the heart, (Alphard) 137. 54. 7. 15. S. 2. Corvus,
in his beak, the first of the, 177. 50. 22. 54 S. 4. Second of the, 179. 49.
15. 39. S. 3. Third of the, 183. 16. 14. 39. S. 3. Fourth, 184. 20. 21. 33. S.
3.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Ring, or Limb of the Matter.
THe third part of this Instrument is the Ring or Limb, which is nothing else
but the skirt of a Circular plate equal with the Matter, whose middle is cut out
by a lesser concentrique Circle. It is bounded with two Parallel Circles, the
outmost must touch the edge of the Matter round the inner Circle or edge of this
Ring: it must be a little less then the Limb of the Reet, that it may take hold
of the Reet to keep it flat and safe from harms. This Ring had need be thicker
then the Reet, but not so thick as the Matter; and for breadth, about 1/10 part
of the Diameter. It must be pinned or screwed on to the Matter with 6 or 8
pinnes or screws, that so you may take your plates asunder when need is to
cleanse them from any stain or dust that may get between. Let the pins that
carry the naile-screws be riverted in the Ring, and chair heads so filed down
and polished, that they be not seen to check the Label: and holes being made in
the Matter for the pins to pass through, you shall have small screws of what
fashion you like best, to turn upon them on the backside; these screws would be
made all of a length, and may serve as feet to bare up the Instrument about a
third part of an inch from the ground, that it be not scratched and be readier
to take up.

And that the Reet may turn more pleasantly under the Ring, and lie as near as
may be in the same plain with the Ring, you shall abate half the thickness of
the upper edge of the Reet, about a barly-corn's breadth round about, so far as
he shall run under the Ring and likewise aba e half the thickness of the inner
edge of the Ring on the lower side where he clasps down the Reet, (which a good
Turner knows now to do;) or you may make a shift to do it with a beam-compass,
if you make your running point like a narrow chesill.

Your Ring thus fitted to the Matter, you shall set one foot of your Compasses
in the Center of the Matter, and with the other draw near the inner edge of the
Limb a Circle about 8/100 of an inch distant from the edge. Also opening your
Compasses about of an inch more you shall draw another Parallel Circle: and
laying your Ruler or Label from the Center to the several degrees of the
fundamental Circle of the Matter, you shall draw short lines for every degree
from the inner edge of the Ring to the first Circle, and every tenth degree you
shall prolong to the second Circle, and let every fifth be drawn half way.
Between these two Circles also you shall set figures to every tenth degree;
numbering from the Equinoctial line C D to the Poles on both sides both ways.
Also without the second Circle you shall set great figures for the several
Hours, setting XII at C, and thence proceeding in order to the right hand
toward B, at 15 degrees set I, at 30 degr. set II, at 45 degr, set III, and so
on, till you come to D, where you must set XII. Thence you shall proceed in the
other Semicircle D A C, setting I, II, III, and so on in order, till you be
come round. And remember that you write on the Ring, at A Oriens, at C
Meridies: at B Occidens, and at D Septentrio.

CHAP. IX. Of the Ephemeris or Calender, on the Ring.
IF there be space enough left upon the Ring without the Circles of the degrees
and Hours, you may fill it up with the Ephemeris of the Sun in this manner:

The former Scale on the inner edge of the Ring shall serve you to this purpose
for an Ecliptique; and you may set to him the Characters of the Signs, if you
will, at every thirtieth degree; beginning at Oriens and there setting, and at
Meridies, and the rest in like order.

Then draw another Scale without this, upon the Ring, consisting of two spaces.
In the inner space shall be the Days of the Year: in the outer space: which
must be a little larger) shall be the Names of the months in their order.

And to divide this Scale rightly, you shall do thus. Go to some Eshemeris for
the Leap Year that next comes, viz. 1660, (or rather for some Leap Year about
20 Years hence, that your Scale may serve without any Prosthapheresis, for 40
Years to come without sensible error, and beginning your year with March, look
where the Sun was on the 29 of February at Noon; which you shall find to be 20
degr. 47 min, for the Year 1660. Therefore laying the Label or a Ruler from the
center to 20 degr. 47 min. in the inner Scale, strike a long stroke through
your outward Scale, and from thence begin your Year, writing from thence toward
the right hand March 1660. Then lay the Label to 21 degr. 47 min, (which is the
Suns place on the first day of March at noon the same year) and where it cuts
the outer Scale, mark the first day of March, and so the rest in order. And to
the first day of every month, you shall set his proper Letter which belongs to
him in the Calender; as to the first of March you shall set D, and to the first
of April G, etc. and when you have done December, you must take the Suns place
for January and February out of the next years Ephemeris, viz. 1661, and note
that the space for the last day of the year ( Febr. 28) will fall out to be
less by a fourth part then the rest, by reason that the Sun wants almost 6
hours to finish his Circle, which he finishes in days 365, 5 hours 48 minutes.
And for this cause these Scales will serve you to find the Suns place at noon,
for any day in a like year, that is every fourth year, accounted hence, either
backwards or forwards; which year shall evermore be accounted to begin from
Febr. 29. and may be accounted the first year after Leap year, because the
Intercalation was February 25 next before. Then for the year next following,
viz, 1661. (beginning March 1 and being second from the Bissextile or Leap
year) these Scales shall give you the place of the Sun at six hours after noon,
and the third year from Bissextile 1662 (beginning as before March 1) these
Scales shall give you the Suns place 12 hours after noon, or the midnight
following. And the fourth year 1663 being Bissextile, these Scales show the
place of the Sun at 18 hours after noon, the next year 1664, being the first
after Bissextile, and beginning (as aforesaid) March 1, is the very same year
for which your Scale is made and gone, for that year: your Scale shows the Suns
place at noon again.

But because the Julian years are bigger then the true Solar years by almost 12
mi. of time (that is, near a quarter of an hour) in which time the Sun moves 27
sec. 13 thirds 37 fourths, therefore when you have found the Suns place by the
former Scale, any year after 1660, look how many years are passed since 1660
and so many times you must add 27 sec. 13 thirds 37 fourths, (that is almost
half a minute) to the Suns place found: and for years past ^ou must subtract as
much, that you may find the Suns place exactly. This Prosthapheresis in 2 or 3
years is scarce considerable in an Instrument, but in 10 years there will be 4
minutes 32. seconds, and in 20 years 9. minutes 5. seconds, to be added after
1660. and as much to be subtracted in like number of years preceding the year
1660. to which this Scale is supposed to be framed.

This Ephemeris or Calender M. Blagrave would have on the backside, where he
would also have a Ruler with Sights, to take the Altitude of the Sun or Stars.
But this will be found incommodious in many respects, both in the framing, and
in the using; and therefore I advise that nothing be set on the backside but
the Tables of the Prime, Epact, and Cycle of the Sun, thereby to find the age
of the Moon, her Conjunctions and Oppositions, and the moveable Feasts for
ever, Of which see Chap. 11.

CHAP. X. Of the Label and Sights.
THe Label is a Ruler slit in the midest, and the half of it cut away to the
Head, where it is pinned to turn upon the Center, and reaching to the outside
of the Limb. The Fiducial edge thereof, which points upon the Center, must be
graduated, like to the semidiameters of the Matter and Reet, into 90 degrees, to
be numbered either inward or outward. The fashion of it may be understood by the
figure without more words.

To this Label you may fit Sights, either fixed or moveable, as you like best,
for observing Altitudes and Azimuths: but for taking. Azimuths you had need
have one tall Sight, at least half as long as the Label: and then it had need
be moveable, to take off at pleasure.

For taking the Altitude of the Sun, I have made a pair of moveable Sights, to
slip up and down upon the edge of the Planisphear; having on the backside
springing plates of brass to pintch them close, and make them stick where you
set them. These are commonly to be set at C and D the ends of the Equinoctial
line. At A in the Limb and in the Circle next unto the inner edge which
boundeth the strokes of the several degrees, you shall drill a small hole,
through which you may put a thread to hang a plummet on. The Sun then shining
through the Sights placed at C and D, the plumb-line shall show his Altitude in
the semicircle B C A, you beginning to number from B, and observing where the
plumb-line crosses the Circle in which the hole for hanging the plumb-line was
made. And here you must remember that because the plumb-line falls not from
the Center of the Planisphear, but from a point in the circumference about A,
therefore the space of two degrees must be taken but one degree, so that if the
Plumb-line fall 20 degr. below B toward C, the Suns Altitude is 10, degrees as
you may see demonstrated, Euclid. 3.20. and Pitisc. Trigonem. 1.53. And thus
you may observe the Suns Altitude near the Horizon, as exactly as by a
Quadrant, whose semediameter were equal to the diameter of your Planisphear.
But if the Altitude exceed 30 or 40. degrees then will the Plumb-line cut the
limb too slope and have too much play to your trouble: For remedy whereof you
shall remove the Sight at D toward A some degrees: as for example 60 degrees,
by which means you shall abate the Suns Altitude 30 degrees, which 30 degrees
must be added to the Altitude observed: as for example, the Sights are placed
one at C, the other 60 degrees above D toward A, and the Plumb-line cuts 10
degrees from B toward C, I say, then is the Sun 5 degrees high and 30 degrees
more, in all 35 degrees: in like manner you may place the Sight at any other
number of degrees from D toward A, as you shall find most convenient for the
present Altitude; remembering always that how many degrees soever you remove the
Sight, half so many are to be added to the Altitude found. But if your Reet
happen to run so far under the Limb, that you cannot make a center-hole for the
Plumbet through the Limb and Matter, without hindering the Reets motion, then may
you have a small plate of sheet brass, in fashion of an Arm or Tongue, in the
point whereof you shall have a Center-hole drilled, and this plate shall be so
joined with a sluice or screw about the Limb near A, that the Center-hole made
in this plate may lie close to the point where the Center should have been
boared in the Limb in the line A B: and thus you may put it on, and take it
off, at pleasure, that it hinder not the motion of the Reet or Label. Of the
fashion of the Sights see more Book 4.2.

CHAP. XI. Of the perpetual Calender, on the backside.
ON the backside of your Planisphear you may set the Calender following, which
consists of three Tables gathered round. The longest would be set outtermost.
The first is the Table of the Cycle of the Sun, that is of the Sundays Letter.
This is here placed in the middle. It is a Cycle of 28. years, in which time
the Dominical Letter runs all his changes, (caused by the one odd day above 52
weeks) in every Common year, and two odd days which run over the even weeks in
the Leap years. To find the beginning of this Cycle, add to the year of our
Lord 9. (because the first year of our Lord, as we commonly acount, was the 10
of this Cycle) and divide the sum by 28. the remainder is the year of the Cycle
running; and if nothing remain, then it is the 28. or last year. So you shall
find that the Cycle now running shall end with the Julian year 1671 as in the
Table; and shall begin again with the year of our Lord 1672. Thus may you renew
the Table when it is expired; or make this very Table serve you for ever.

Example.

Enter this Table with the year of our Lord 1656. now running; and you shaall
find over against this year in the next space inwards 13. showing you that it
is the 13 year of the Suns Cycle; (so shall the 28 year forward viz. 1684 be
again the 13th year of the Cycle next coming.)

In the next space within, you have the Dominical Letters F and E, (because it
is Leap year) F shall be the Dominical Letter till you come past the
Intercalary day, which is the day following the 24th of February: and for the
rest of this year the Dominical Letter shall be E; (for the Letters always
change backwards) also you shall note here that the day inserted in every 4th
year is not February 29, but February 25. for February 24. (being 6 Call.
Martij) is repeated again in the Leap year: and they write again February 25.6
Call. Martij: and the 25th of February in the Leap year is marked with the same
letter F, wherewith the 24th of February happens always to be marked. Hence the
Leap year is called Annus Bissextilis: and note that by the Eclesiasticall Law
S. Matthias day, which is February 24th in common years, in the Bissextile
years is to be observed on February 25. Nevertheless in our Secular Law not the
24th and 25th of February. but the 28th and 29th in the Leap year are ordained
to be one day in the account of Law: as by Statutum de Anno Bissextili, made in
21 year Henry 3. may appear.

The second Table is of the Cycle of the Moon, consisting of the Prime or
Golden Number, and the Epact. This Table contains 19 years, which is the Annus
Metonicus: in which space of time Meton an Astronomer about 430 years before
Christ, observed the Moon to finish all her variations. So that every 19 year
the mean conjunctions or changes should happen upon the same days of the
month, that they did happen upon 19 years before; only an hour and half
sooner. Yet beeause every 19 years contain not the same number of Leap years,
but sometime there come five Leap years in 19 years, and sometimes but four,
therefore there may happen in this Period of Meton an error of an whole day,
besides the hour and half above mentioned. For remedy whereof Calippus, about
the 330 year before Christ, devised to quadruple this period of Meton, making
Period^s Calippica of 76 years, which contains just 19 quaternions of years; so
containing always the same number of Leap years and days. This period is
therefore more perfect then Metons: for after this period of 76 years, the Moon
runs over the same course for her conjunctions and oppositions; changing in
the same year of the period always, upon the same day of the month, save only
that she changes sooner by six hours in the latter period then in the former.

But the Church still retains the period of Meton, called the Prime, or
Golden number; because it used to be set in Golden letters in the Calendar, in
a certain artificial order throughout every month, to guide you to the day of
the Moons Priming or Changing: so may you find it in red letters, thus, Set to
the Calendar printed in large folio with the Book of common Prayer, in the time
of the late Queen Elizabeth. To find the year of the Prime, add to the year of
our Lord 1, and divide the sum by 19. the remainder is the year of the Prime,
or if nothing remain it is the 19th or last year. Thus you may find the present
year 1656, to be the fourth year of the Prime, and so you find it in the Table.
The Cycle or Period now running, ends with 1671. and begins again with the year
following.

The Epact or Concurrent is set against the Prime in the next space inwards:
and finisheth his Cycle in the same time. It was devised to find more readily
the day of the change, and age of the Moon. The way to find it is this.
Multiply the Golden number serving for your year by 11, and divide the product
by 30; the residue is the Epact for your year. Or having the Epact known for
any year, you may make it from year to year, by adding 11 to the Epact of the
year foregoing, and casting away 30 when the sum exceeds 30. The reason whereof
is, that the Moon changes 12 times in 354. days, that is 11 days before the
Sun has gone his round: for which cause the changes must needs happen every
year 11 days sooner. Observe here that the Prime changes every year the first
day of January; the Epact not till the first of March. The Dominical letter
changes upon the first of January going one letter backward yearly; and in
every Leap year it changes again on the Lords day next after February 24. The
reason whereof is this: The Calender is marked throughout with the letters of
the week A B C D E F G, and the same day of the year is always marked with the
same letter, now if the year contained even weeks then would the Dominical
letter be always one and the same: but because a common year contains 52 weeks
and one day, therefore the last day of the year must be marked with A, as the
first was; the first day of the year following again is marked with A: now put
case the last of December marked A, be Sunday in the year 1654. the day
following viz January 1, is Monday, and yet marked A; and the first Sunday in
1655 must needs fall on January 7 marked with G: and so G became Dominical
letter for 1655. as A was for 1654. and as those 2 days marked with the same
letter A, coming together at every years end cause a change of the Dominical
letter, so in the Leap year the Intercalary day February the 25, being marked
with F, always as the 24th is, the coming together of those two days marked
with one letter, causes a second change of the Dominical letter for that year
by like reason.

The third Table is a Table to find Easter for ever. This is placed outmost
because it is the longest. It was very falsely ordered in M. Blagraves book: and
so it is in Grostons Tables, from whence I suppose he transcribed it. I have
set it right and straight, and taken what care I could that the Printer or
Graver do not put the ranks into the same disorder in which I found them, both
in Blagrave, and in Grostons Tables, printed 8 years before him.

diagram

CHAP. XII. Some cautions to be Observed in the making of the Instrument.
THough I have taught the making of the Matter first as being the base and
principal part of the Instrument; yet I shall advise you first to draw and cut
out the Reet, and fit the Label to it, leaving it sufficient length to reach to
the outside of the Matter. And then having your Ring ready fitted to screw on
to the Matter you shall drill the centers of the Matter, Reet, and Label, with
the same drill; and fasten them together with a Center-pin well fitted to the
bore: this Center-pin must not be too big: let it be square at the head to
stick in the backside of the Matter, that it turn not; and let the other end
have a male screw, upon which you shall turn a female screw, to draw the plates
together; so that they be neither too loose nor stick too hard. Then take a
great needle, or such a round point of hardened steel, and bearing it up into
some corner of the Reet close to the inside of his Limb, turn about both Reet
and Needle upon the Matter, so that the Needle may trace out the great Meridian
of the Matter, and so the principal Circles of the Matter and Reet shall be sure
to be Concentrique, and to argree in all postures of the Reet: whereas if you
draw the Meridian of the Matter before you have bored the Center, and fitted on
the Reet, you shall hardly happen to bore so true, but you shall find the
Circles to be a little Eccentrique and interfering one with another. And to
avoid the like Eccentricity in the Circles of the Ring, it were best to have a
sorry Beam Compass made only for this purpose, and fitted to your Center pin
to draw them by: yet if those be drawn from the Center of the Matter unbored,
there will be no perceiveable error, if you devide them from the Limb of the
Reet by the Label when all is pinned together. These things done, quarter the
Meridian of the Matter with two cross Diameters, and divide them as is above
directed; remembering to apply your Reet to the Matter often, to see how the
divisions of the Diameter agree, and how the Meridians and Parallels which you
are drawing on the Matter agree with the Azimuths and Almicanters of the Reet.
And thus by comparing your plates often, and examining the lineaments of the
one by the other, as you draw them, you shall avoid many slips and mistakes,
and proceed in your work with more confidence and contentment.

The second Book. Of the several Projections of the SPHERE; which are
represented by this PLANISPHEAR.
The Preface.
THe Sphere may be Projected fitly upon the Plain of any great Circle: but the
Projection will be of little use for resolving Questions in Astronomy, unless
it be made upon one of these four, the Meridian, the Equator, the Azimuth of
the Nonagesimus gradus, or the Horizon. This Planisphear is fitted therefore to
represent all those four Projections, and especially the two former.

CHAP. I. Of the Planisphear in the Meridional Projection, representing the
Eastern or Western Hemisphears: And of his three Modes or postures.
WHat M. Blagrave Book 2. Chap, 15.16. calls the first and second distinction
of the Jewel, I call the first and second Meridional and Equinoctial Projection
of the Planisphear, for which change of terms I hope the Judicious Reader will
not blame me. The Meridional Projection is the Eastern or Western Hemisphear
projected upon the plain of the Meridian of your place, which is the great and
chief Meridian in every Country, passing through the Zenith and Nadir of the
place, as well as through the Poles of the World. The eye in this Projection is
supposed to be placed in the East or West point of the Horizon. The lineaments
which belong to this Projection are the innermost Scale of the Ring, and all
the lineaments of the Matter and Reet, except only the Zodiac of the Reet, and
the Stars. Here the outmost Circle both of the Matter and Reet represents the
great Meridian of your place, and the Scale upon the inside of the Ring divided
into 360 degrees serves to divide the said Meridian: for the Label laid upon
any degree of the Scale of the Ring cutteth the same degree in the Meridian
Circle; because it is concentrick thereto.

This Meridian also stands for Colurus Solstitiorum, (so they call that
Meridian which passes through the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn) for
though all the Meridians in 24. hours space do successively come into the
Meridian of your place (which is the Noon Circle passing over your head North
and South) and the Sphere may be divided into Eastern and Western Hemisphear by
any of these Meridians, when they become Vertical, yet the Sphere is then in
the best posture to be divided for our purpose into East and West, when Cancer
is Southing, Capricorn at midnight, and 0 rising full East, and 0 setting full
West.

In this Meridian at A, or Oriens is the North Pole, and the South Pole at B,
or Occidens: for the words Oriens and Occidens are there placed to serve the
Equinoctial Projection. The Concurrent Circles meeting in the Poles A and B are
Meridians. Those Meridians are 180 in number, and divide the Equator C D into
360. degrees, because, every one of them cutteth it twice, that is once in each
Hemisphear. By these are numbered the Right Ascensions of the Stars and Planets,
and the hours and minutes of Day and Night: for every 15 of these Meridians
numbered from the Limb is an hour Circle, as has been showed (Book 1.6.) they
are numbered from D to C, that is, from Septentrio to Meridies 1.2.3. etc. for
the Morning hours and back again from C to D, in like manner for the Afternoon:
the Axeltree line A B falling out to be the six a clock line both ways. By
those Meridians also are numbered the Longitudes of Towns and Countries in
Geography.

The Circles or Semicircles crossing these Meridians are the Parallels of
Declination: they are lesser Circles whose property it is to divide the Sphere
into unequal parts. In the midst of them lies the Equator C D, being here a
straight line, and cutting the Axtree-line A B at Right Angles in the Center E:
the Parallels are greatest near the Equator, and from thence they lessen toward
the Poles, they are 180 in number i. e. 90 on each side the Equator, save that
the two extreme Parallels are reduced to two points in the Poles. By these
Parallels are numbered the Declinations of the Stars in Astronomy, and the
Latitudes of Towns and Countries in Geography.

And this name and use have the Circles of the Matter always in the Meridional
Projection. The Ecliptic always stands for it self, when it is used, which
is only in the first Mode of this Projection. But the Circles of the Reet have
diverse names and uses, in the diverse Modes of this Projection, which here
follow.

1 The first mode of the Meridional Projection.
The point A of the Reet in which the Concurrent Arches meet, is called the
Vertex of the Reet. Set the Vertex of the Reet to the Latitude of your place,
so shall the Vertex be Zenith, and the Concurrent Arches there meeting shall be
Azimuths, called also Vertical Circles, and Circles of Position, passing from
Zenith to Nadir, and dividing the Horizon into 360 degr. as the Meridians on
the Matter pass from Pole to Pole; and divide the Equinoctial. The Semicircles
crossing these Azimuths shall be Almicanters or Circles of Altitude. The
Diameter crossing the Axeltree of the Reet at Right Angles shall be the Horizon
or Finiter, whose Graduations are set to him in a border below the Center, and
from him are the Almicanters reckoned upward to the Zenith. The Azimuths may be
reckoned from the North or South Semicircles of the Meridian, or from the
Axtree line of the Reet, which is the East or West Azimuth, commonly called the
Prime Vertical. When I bid you set the Vertex of the Reet to the Latitude of
your place, you must first know what your Latitude is. It is the nearest
distance of your place from the Terrestrial Equinoctial, numbered in degrees and
minutes of a great Circle. The Latitude of London is 31 degr. 32 min. North.
The Latitude of Ecton or Northampton, is 52 degr. 15 minutes, or very near, And
how to get the Latitude of those or any other place shall be showed Book 4.11.
The Latitude had, number the degrees thereof upon the Ring from C or Meridies
(where the Equator cutteth the Meridian) toward A or Oriens, which in this
Projection is the North Pole, because we in England have North Latitude. At the
end of this number see for London 51. degrees 32. minutes, from the Equator
Northward, set the Vertex of the Reet, so this Vertex represents the Zenith,
or point in the Heaven which is just over your head, in which point all the
Azimuths meet, and through which also passes the Meridian of your place, which
here is represented by the outmost Circle of the Matter, or the innermost Circle
of the Ring. Now is the upper Semicircle of your Meridian divided into four
notable parts. From the Zenith Southward to the Equator is the Latitude 51.
degrees 32 minutes, from thence to the Horizon is the complement of the
Latitude 38. degrees 28. minutes, making up a Quadrant: again from the Zenith
Northerly to the Pole, is the complement of Latitude 38. degr. 28. minutes, as
before: and from thence to the North of the Horizon is the Elevation of the
Pole above your Horizon: which is always equal to the Latitude of your place:
for where in a right Sphere the Polesly in the Horizon, and have on Elevation,
there the Equator passes through the Zenith, and if you go from such a Country
Northward till the Pole be Elevated one degree, the Equator shall there decline
from your Zenith one degree Southward, because the Equator keeps always the
distance of 90 degrees from the Poles. And this distance of the Zenith of your
place from the Equator is called by Geographers Latitude, and is always equal
to the Elevation of your Pole. So that it is all one whether you set the Vertex
51. degrees 32. min. above the Equator, or set the North point of the Horizon
51. degrees 32. minutes below the North Pole.

Now the Vertex of the Reet set to the Latitude, and consequently the Pole
mounted to his due Elevation, your Planisphear is in a right mode and posture
speedily to resolve all questions concerning the Diurnall motion; as the Suns
longitude, Declination, Right Ascension, the Ascensionall differences, with the
Semidiurnall Arch or length of the day, the Suns Altitude, Azimuth, and
Amplitude; the hour and minute of the day, the beginnings endings and duration
of twilight, and such like; and that with so great facility, that having only
the Longitude of the Sun (with the Ephemeris on the Ring shall give you for
asking) and therewith either the Altitude Azimuth or Hour, one of them: you
may see all the rest at the first view without changing the posture of your
Instrument; as shall appear in the fourth book.

2 The second Mode of the Meridional Projection.
Set the Zenith, or Vertex of the Reet to the North Pole of the Ecliptic, (or
which is all one) set the Horizon line of the Reet in the Ecliptic line of the
Matter, so the Azimuth shall in this posture become Circles of Longitude, and
the Almicanters Circles of Latitude: And in this Mode your Planisphear is
fitted to resolve all Questions of the Longitude, Latitude, Right Ascension,
and Declination, of the Stars.

3 The third Mode of the Meridional Projection.
Number the Altitude of Culmen Caeli, (that is the Southing point of the
Ecliptic) in the Ring, from the North Pole toward Meridies, if the Ascendant
be a North Sign, or toward Septentrio, if the Ascendant be a South Sign. To
the end of this numeration palce the Finiter. Reckon also upon the Finiter from
the Center toward Septentrie the Amplitude of the Ascendant; the Meridian
cutting there gives you the arch of the Ecliptic from the Ascendant to the
Midheaven: and his match taken so many degrees on the other side the Center
gives the other arch of the Ecliptic from the Midheaven to the Descendant. The
rest of the Meridians and the Parallels are in this Mode of no use. The
Almicanters and Azimuth of the Reet here show you the Altitude and Azimuth of
every degree of the Ecliptic at one view.

CHAP. II: Of the Equinoctial Projection: showing the Northern or Southern
Hemisphears.
THe Equinoctial Projection represents the Northern or Southern Hemisphear
projected upon the plain of the Equator. Here the Limb or outmost Circles of
the Matter and Reet are Equator. The eye-point is the North or South Pole, which
you will, by turns. Which Poles are here expressed on the Center of the
Equator, because the Sphere is pictured on a plain or flat. The Axtree line of
the Matter A B is Colurus Equinoctiorum, the Diameter C D crossing him is
Colurus Solstitiorum. But contrary on the Reet the Axletree is Colurus
Solstitiorum and the Finiter Colurus Equinoctiorum. The Colurus Solstitiorum on
the Matter is also the Meridian of your place, and therefore is marked with
Septentrio, and Meridies; and the ends of the Axtree with Oriens, and Occidens.
The rest of the Meridians being all straight lines meeting in the Poles or
Center, are casily supplied by the Label: and so may the Parallels also, being
Concentrick with the Equator. For if you lay the Label on the 15. degree in the
Limb from Meridies toward Occidens, the fiduciall edge of the Label there
designeth the 15 Meridian, or the One a clock line: the North Quadrant of the
said Meridian proceeding from the Center (now the North Pole) outward to the
Limb or Equinoctial, and the South Quadrant returning in the same line from the
Equinoctial to the Center: (now the South Pole:) and if you remove the Label
180 degrees from One a clock of the day there it shall design One a clock at
night, made by the other Semicircle of the same Meridian, which joyneth with
his match in the Center without any angle, that is, into the same straight
line: and so of the rest.

And for the Parallels, if you set the point of your Compass or a needles point
in the 23. degree of the Label, and turn about the Label with the point, it
shall describe a Circle which will serve for both the Tropicks: and so may you
make any other of the parallels. I do not advise you to draw the Meridians and
Parallels in this form, least you cumber your Instrument, but I show you how
you may represent any of them in a moment, when ocasion requires.

The Meridians of the Matter, (that were so called in the Meridional Projection)
are here turned into the several Horizons of the World. And the Parallels here
serve only to graduate those Horizons. Out of these Horizons choose your own
Horizon, and distinguish him if you will that you may readily find him when you
shall look for him.

Your Horizon is thus inquired. Because the Elevation of the Pole at
Northampton is 52. degrees 15. minutes, therefore from the Center (now North
Pole) number in the Meridian line Northward 52. degrees 15. minutes, and there
cutteth the the North Semicircle of our Horizon, or there you may Imagine him
between the 52 and 53 Horizons, and the Southern Semicircle thereof lies 52
degrees 15 minutes on the other side the Center toward Meridies. This may
seem strange that the North and South points of the Horizon, which in the
Sphere are unequally distant from the North Pole, viz. the one but 51. degrees
15. minutes, and the other 127. degrees 45. minutes, (the supplement thereof)
should be equally distant in this Projection. But the reason is because the
Center is both North and South Pole here at pleasure, and the Northern and
Southern Hemisphears are both here represented by turns. Carry this in your
head, and then lay the Eabel upon the South part of the Meridian, and number
thereon from the Center (now North Pole) outward to the Equator at the Limb 90.
degrees, thence number backward toward the Center (now the South Pole) the
Elevation of the Equator (which is always complement of the Elevation of the
Pole, and is here 37. degrees 45 minutes) there is the Southern point of the
Horizon, and is distant from the Center (now South Pole) only 52 degrees 15
minutes, but from the Center being North Pole 127. degrees 45. minutes, and
from the Northern point of the Horizon before found just 180. degrees, as it is
in the Sphere. Having found the North arch of your Horizon 52. degr. 15. min.
behind the Center; count as many degrees and minutes forward in the Meridian
before the Center toward Meridies, and the arch crossing there shall be his
match to make up the whole Circle; and so may you find your whole Horizon upon
the Matter whatsoever your Latitude be.

Here you must remember, that Stars which have Northern Declination rise and
set upon the Northern arch of the Horizon; and those which have Southern
declination upon the Southern arch. Remember also, that many Stars between the
Tropicks which have Northern Latitude, have nevertheless Southern Declination,
and contrary many which have Southern Latitude have Northern Declination.

The lineaments of the Reet serving you in this Projection, are only the
Ecliptic, and the fixed Stars, the Almicanters and Azimuths here are of no
use. The Meridians and Parallels are supplied by the Label, for the Reet as
well as for the Matter.

And whereas the Ecliptic here seems to be irregular, seeing the Solstitial
points of Cancer and Caprcorn are not distant 180 degrees, as they should be,
you must imagine that the Southern arch of the Ecliptic is Projected by the
eye placed in the North Pole, and for the Northern arch the eyes place in the
South Pole: and the Center serves for both the Poles alike, as has been
showed: number therefore as you were taught for the Horizon in this Projection.
For the reason of the draught of the Horizon and of the Ecliptic in this
Projection is the same.

CHAP. III. Of the Nonagesimal Projection, showing the Eastern and Western
parts of the Sphere, being divided by the Azimuth of the Nonagesimus gradus.
NUmber in the Limb from the Equinoctial line toward the Pole the Altitude of
the Nonagesimus gradus, (which is the highest degree of the Ecliptic) and
thereto set the Finitor, turning the Almicanters either to the North or to the
South, as your work proposed shall require.

Now is the Finiter Ecliptic, his point at the Limb-is Nonagesimus gradus. The
Center of the Planisphear is Ascendant and Descendant, the East and west points
of the Horizon are here distant from the Center as much as the Amplitude of the
Ascendant comes to, to be counted from the Center upon the Eqinoctial line of
the Matter, which here stands for Horizon: the Meridians and Parallels of the
Matter are here Azimuths and Almicanters, but the Azimuths must be numbered from
the East point of the Horizon. The Azimuths and Almicantars of the Reet, are
here Circles of Longitude and Parallels of Latitude. Here are no Meridians nor
Parallels of declination in this Projection, only the great Meridian of your
place is to be found here, because he is an Azimuth as well as a Meridian, for
he passes through the Zenith as well as through the Poles of the World, and
this Meridian is always distant form the Limb (or Azimuth of the Nonagesimus
gradus) as much as the Ascendant is distant from the East point of the Horizon:
for the Amplitude of the Ascendant and the Azimuth of the Nonagesimus gradus
are always equal, and as the Meridian cutteth the Horizon 90. degrees. Westward,
from the East point, so does the Azimuth of the Nonagesimus gradus always cut
the Horizon 90. degrees Westward from the Ascendant.

This Projection is of excellent use, for getting the Altitude and Azimuth of
any or all the degrees of the Ecliptic at once, also for getting the Longitude
and Latitude of Planets, Comets, or Stars unknown, by their Altitude and
Azimuth Observed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Horizontal Projection, representing the upper and lower
Hemisphears.
HEre the Limb must be reputed Horizon, and the Center of the Planisphear the
Zenith of your place. Then may you by one of the Azimuths of the Reet represent
the Ecliptic in any of his postures, (whatsoever degree be Ascending) and by
the Label you may presently find the Altitude and Azimuth of every degree
thereof. Likewise may you here represent the plain of any Declining-inclining
Dial, by some one of the Azimuths: and the Meridian of the Plain by one of the
Meridians: by the help whereof you may resolve diverse Problemes in Dialling, as
shall appear in due place.

The end of the Second Book.
The Third Book. Of the Resolution of all Spherical Triangles, by the
PLANISPHEAR.
CHAP, I, Of the kinds and parts of Spherical Triangles.
IT is to be known, that 1, Spheri. Triang. are

Rectangular Obliquangular.
2 A Rectangular Triangle is that which has one or more Right Angles.

3 A Triangle that has three right Angles has always his three sides
Quadrants.

4 A Triangle that has two right angles has the sides opposite to those
angles Quadrants, and the third side is the measure of the third angle. So that
of those Triangles which have more Right angles, seldom arises any question.
But the Right angled Triangle with one Right and two Acute angles, is that
which comes most commonly to be resolved.

5 A Right angle is that which contains 90 degrees, or opens to one quarter
of the circumference of any Circle described from the angular point.

6 All Spherical Triangles not Rectangled are called Obliqueangled. And if they
have one angle greater then a Right angle, they be called Obtuse-angled,
otherwise they be Acute-angled.

7 In rectangled Triangles the sides including the Right angle be called Legs,
the side subtending it is called Subtense or Hypotenusa.

8 Either Leg of a rectangled Triangle may be made Basis, (if you will imagine
him to lie level) and then the other leg shall be called Cathetus or
Perpendicular.

9 In Oblique angled Triangles, the sides comprehending the angle given or
sought, are called Legs, and the third side the Base.

10. In every Spherical Triangle there be (beside the Area or space contained)
six containing parts viz. three sides, and three angles: of those six there
must be three always known or given to find out the rest.

CHAP. II. Of the 16 Cases of Rectangled Triangles. And how they may be reduced
to five Problemes.
IN the Rectangular Spherical Triangle there be five parts only come into the
Question; the three sides, and two acute angles: because the third (being
right) is always known. Of these five parts any two being given the rest may
be found.

There be 16 Cases or Problemes about Spherical Triangles. six for finding the
Legs: four for the Hypotenusa: and six for the Angles. See Gellibrand.
Trigonom. Britan. But we may here reduce them all to 5 Problemes, because our
Planisphear resolves always two of them at once. For by two parts given you
shall presently get two of the three that are unknown: and if you do but turn
the Triangle, you may presently have the third also: as shall appear in this
book.

The Rectangular Triangle in question shall be marked throughout this book with
A B C in this manner: so that the Base shall be marked and called B A, the
Cathetus, or Perpendicular Leg C A, and the Hypotenusa. B C.

diagram

The right angle A. the angle at the Base B. the angle at the Cathetus C. And
note that in the 4 first Problemes B A shall be always set upon the
Equinoctial line of the Matter, C A in a Meridian, B C on the Label, and B
always at the Center; as you shall find in the four next Chapters.

CHAP. III. PROBL. I. The Legs given, to find the rest.
SEt B at the Center, B A, on the Equinoctial line of the Matter, C A, on that
Meridian which crosses at A; then lay the Label to C, and your Triangle is
made. Example. Let B A be 57. degr. 48. diagrammin. C A 20 degr. 12. min. I
number in the Equinoctial line from the Center toward Meridies the length of B
A to 57. degrees 48. minutes, and there I imagine stands A. Now because this
Base ends between the 57 and 58 Meridians, but nearer to the 58, I must
imagine a Meridian passing between them in his due distance which shall cut off
your Base in his due length of 57 degrees, and in that imagined Meridian I
number upwards from the Equator, by help of the Parallels, the length of the
Cathetus C A 20. degr. 12. minutes; at the top of this Cathetus is the place of
C, whereto I set the Label, and the Triangle is made upon the Planisphear, in
such form as the figure here shows.

Now may you number B C the Hypotenusa upon the Label, and find it 60. degrees,
the angle B has his measure on the Limb between the Equator, and the Label 23
degrees.

Lastly to find the angle C do but turn the Triangle, setting C A on the
Equinoctial, and B A on a Meridian, (according to the 1.8.) and laying the
Label to B you shall find B C 60, degrees as before, and the measure of the
angle C between the Equator and the Label may be reckoned on the Limb 77. degr.
43. min.

Note here that in this and all other like cases, in stead of the Label you may
better use one of the Semidiameters of the Reet; for they have the same
graduation, and lie closer to the Matter.

CHAP. IIII. PROBL. II. A Leg and the Hypotenusa given to find the rest.
SEt the Hypotenusa B C on the Label from the Center: the given Leg (to be
marked C A) in one of the Meridians. Example. In the former Triangle, where the
Hypotenusa was 60. degrees, the Cathetus 20. degrees 12. minutes. I number on
the Label from the Center 60 degrees, and there make a prick for C; then I turn
this prick to the Parallel of 20. degrees 12. minutes, and the Triangle is
made. For the Meridian cutting this prick is Cathetus, and has betwixt this
prick and the Equator 20. degrees 12. minutes, as the Parallels show. Where
this Cathetus cuts the Equator stands the right angle A, and between A and the
Center lies B A, 57. degrees 48. minutes: the measure of B is on the limb
between Meridies and the Label 23 degrees 30. minutes.

And for the angle C turn the Triangle. Set C now at the Center, calling it B,
and you may find this angle as you did his fellow.

CHAP. V. PROBL. III. The Hypotenusa and an Angle given, to find the rest.
SEt the Hypotenusa on the Label, the Angle given at the Center. Example. In
the former Triangle the Hypotenusa was 60. degrees, and the greater angle
77.43. I number in the Limb from Meridies toward Oriens 77. degrees 43.
minutes, and there I set the Label, then I look the 60. degree of the Label
numbered from the Center, at that 60 degree is C where the Hypotenusa and
Cathetus meet. Here therefore the Meridian that cuts the Label in 60 degrees
makes the Cathetus: I follow him down to the Equator and find his length 57
degrees 48 minutes, and from the point where he cuts the Equator I go straight
to the Center, and find 20 degrees 12 minutes the length of B A.

Lastly for the angle C turn the Triangle, setting C at the Center, and calling
it B; and you shall find C as chap. 3. For whereas your Hypotenusa is 60, and
your Cathetus 20 degrees 12 minutes, lay the 60 degree of the Label upon the 20
Parallel, and the Label shall cut in the Limb 23 degrees 30 minutes, the
measure of the angle C.

CHAP. VI. PROBL. IIII. A Leg and an Angle given to find the rest.
IF the Leg be conterminate or adjoining to the angle given, then make the
given Leg Base, setting it upon the Equator; and move the Label from the
Equator toward the Pole, so many degr, as the given angle B comes to. Then mark
what Meridian cuts the end of the Base, that Meridian makes the Cathetus:
follow him till he crosses the Label, in that crossing is the angle C of your
Triangle, from whence you reckon the length of the Cathetus to the Equinoctial,
and the length of the Hypotenusa next way from C to the Center.

And now having all the sides, to get the angle C you shall turn the Triangle,
and get him as in the 3 Chapter.

But if the Leg be opposite to the Angle given, make the given Leg Cathetus,
that the angle given may be at the Center.

Example. In the former Triangle I have given the less angle 23 degrees, and
the Leg opposite thereto 20. degr. 12. min. I open therefore the Label from the
Equator to 23 degrees. 30. min. on the Lamb, and mark where he cutteth the 20
Parallel, for there is the angle C of the Triangle; thence you shall have a
Meridian for the Cathetus going to the Equator, whose length is 20 degrees 12,
minutes: thence in the Equator to the Center is the Base 57 degrees 47 minutes;
and thence in the Label to C again, is the Hypotenusa 60 degrees.

And now having all the sides, to get the angle C, you shall turn the Triangle,
and get him as in the 3 Chapter.

CHAP. VII. PROBL. V. The Angles given to find the Sides.
THis should have been the third Problem, considering what is given. But
because the way of resolving this case differs from all the former, therefore
I have reserved it to the last place.

In plain Triangles this case is insoluble, But in Spherical Triangles it may
be resolved on the Planisphear, two ways.

1. The first way has M. Elagrave 5, 24. He sets B C on the Limb between the
Pole of the Matter and the Vertex of the Reet, B A and C A one on a Meridian,
and the other on an Azimuth crossing one another at a Right angle within the
Limb. Which to do you must work thus. Example. In the former Triangle, the
Angles are given A 90, B 23, degr. 30. min. C 77, degr. 43. min. Now first I
will guess that the Hypotenusa is 40 degrees, and setting the Zenith 40 degrees
from the Pole, that arch of the Limb between Pole and Zenith I take for my
Hypotenusa, yet unknown. At the Pole shall be B, and at the Zenith C. Then
because B is 23 I take the twentie-third Meridian from my Hypotenusa which is
on the Limb, and between that and the 24th I imagine a Meridian which shall make
B A of my Triangle. Also because the Angle at C is 77, degrees. 43. min. I take an
imaginary Azimuth near the 78th, numbered from my Hypotenusa which is on the
Limb, and that Azimuth shall make C A of my Triangle. Now have I the Angles B
and C, and three arches of which all the sides of my Triangle shall be made:
but whether B A and C A cross at Right Angles I know not, and therefore I know
not yet certainly the length of any side. Now to make the Angle at A a Right
Angle, mark where your Azimuth (which you have taken for C A) cuts the Finiter,
and from that point number in the Finiter toward the Center to 90 degrees, and
there is the Pole of your Azimuth; ( viz. 12 degrees 17 minutes from the Limb)
make a prick with ink at that Pole, and then look whether your Meridian 23
(which you took for B A) cut this Pole, which yet he does not as you will find.
Therefore turn the Reet till the said Meridian do cut this Pole of the said
Azimuth, and then you may be sure that Meridian and Azimuth, (wherever they
cross,) do make Right Angles. (By Pitisc Trigonom. 1, 57) Therefore now have
you all the Angles set on the Planisphear, and thereby all the sides found,
viz. B C in the Limb 60, degr. B A in the Meridian 57 degrees 48 minutes C A in
the Azimuth 20 degrees 12 minutes, as they ought to be.

2. The second way M. Oughtred uses: It is this. For the rectangled Triangle
whose three Angles be given, you shall frame another oblique Triangle, whose
sides shall be equal to the Angles of the first Triangle. And so the Angles of
the second Triangle to be found on the Planisphear shall be equal to the sides
of the first Triangle, which are inquired. The Triangle which serves for an
Example throughout this Book has his Angles A 90 degrees C 77 degrees 43
minutes, B 23 degrees 30 minutes. Here to find the sides, for the Angle A, I
take half the Axis of the Matter from the Center to the Pole, and that shall be
a side of 90 degrees. For the lesser Angle B, I reckon upon the Label from the
Center a side of 23 degrees 30 minutes, and at the end thereof make a prick, on
the Label. I turn this prick upon the Parallel from the Pole 77 degrees 43
minutes, and the Meridian there Crossing shall be the third side of this
Triangle. Follow this Meridian to the Equator, and from his cutting there to
the Center is the measure of the lesser Angle of this second Triangle, which is
equal to the lesser Leg of the first Triangle. 20 degr. 12 minutes: likewise
the arch of the Limb from the Pole to the Label, is the measure of the middle
Angle of the second Triangle, which is equal to the middle side, that is, to
the greater Leg of the first Triangle 57 degrees 48 minutes. And now having
found the Legs of the first Rectangled Triangle you may by the first Problem
find the Hypotenusa to be 60 degrees. The Rectangled Triangle used in the first
way, and the oblique Quadrantal Triangle used in this second way, shall appear
in such forms on the Planisphear as these figures following do express.

The first Way.
diagram The second Way.
diagram

CHAP. VIII. How to represent and resolve the Cases of the four first Problemes
of Spherical Triangles, diverse other ways.
ONe way has been shown for representing any Rectangled Spherical Triangle
upon the Planisphear, by the Label, Equator-line, and a Meridian, and thereupon
to find out the sides and Angles of any such Triangle.

Now for Variety sake, and for the exercise of Learners in the knowledge of the
Sphere, and because the same Angle sometimes may be more distinctly represented
in one part of the Planisphear then in another, I have thought good to set down
six other ways, by which the four first Cases of Spherical Rectangled
Triangles may be pictured on the Planisphear, and resolved.

There be three places in the Planisphear where the Angle B may be placed,
whether he be given, or sought.

1. At the Center, and there his quantity is measured by the Label or any
Semidiameter of the Reet, moving upon the Ring. thus was B placed in the former
Chapters, and shall be once more in the first Variety. 2. At either of the
Poles of the Matter, where by the Meridians that issue thence you may number the
quantity of any Angle from 0, to 180. 3. At the Zenith or Vertex of the Reet,
where the quantity of the Angle may be numbered by the Azimuths in like manner.
CHAP. IX. The first Variety.
HEre the angle B shall be at the Center as before; B A on the Finiter, C A in
an Azimuth, B C in the Axis of the Matter. So shall you have your Triangle
pictured in the same form and quantity that he had in the former chapters
though other lines be here used. And to resolve the four first Cases of
Rectangled Spherical Triangles with these Circles, you shall,

1. In the first Case where B A and C A are given, Number B A from the Center
upon the Finiter; where it ends, you shall meet an Azimuth upon, which you
shall number C A toward the Zenith; in the top of C A make a prick with ink for
C, and then turn that prick to touch the Axis of the Matter. Thus have you all
the sides in view, and the measure of the ngle B you shall find upon the Limb,
between the Pole and the Finiter. And for C you must turn the Triangle as
before has been taught. 2. In the second Case. B C and C A given, Number B C
in the Axis from the Center, and at his end for C make a prick; Then for C A
count to what Almicantar he will rise from the Finiter, and turn the Reet till
that Almicantar cut the prick C in the Axis; and the Azimuth there crossing the
Axis and Almicantar in C shall make C A. And between that Azimuth and the
Center shall be B A on the Finiter. B shall be measured as before. C shall be
found as before. 3. In the third Case B C and B given. Set the Finiter as much
from the Pole as the angle B comes to. Then number B C in the Axis from the
Center B to C. Thence turn down in the next Azimuth to the Finiter and you make
C A. Thence turn to the Center, and you close the Triangle with B A. C shall be
found as before. 4. In the fourth Case, if B and B A be given. Set the Finiter
to the angle B, as in the third case in this chap. and from the Center upon the
Finiter number B A. from A go up an Azimuth to the Axis, where C shall stand.
From thence go to the Center, and you have compassed your Triangle, and all is
shown by the view, but the angle C, which may be found as before. But if B and
C A be given, set the Finiter to the angle, as in the third Case of this chap.
then count in what Almicantar C A will end, and follow this Almicantar to the
Axis, where they meet is the point C. And the Azimuth that cutteth there shall
cut the Finiter in the place of A.
CHAP. X. The second and third Varieties.
SEt B at one of the Poles of the Matter where the Meridians meet; B A on the
Limb either; way B C in a Meridian C A on the Label. One Example of the third
Case shall suffice. B and B C are given. B is 77 degrees 43 minutes; Number
therefore the Meridians from the Limb till you come past 77 and almost to 78,
and there imagine a Meridian to be drawn for the Hypotenusa of your Triangle;
That Meridian makes an angle of 77 degrees 43 minutes with the Limb, as the
Hypotenusa of your Triangle does with the Base. And because the Hypotenusa B C
is 60. therefore the 60th Parallel reckoned from the Pole shall determine his
length, and cut him off in the point C. Prick the point C (that is, the
crossing of the 77 43 Meridian with the 60th Parallel from the Pole) and to
that prick lay the Label: so that part of the Label which lies between the
prick and the Limb shall be C A, and the arch of the Limb between the Pole and
the Label shall be B A of the Triangle. So shall all be known but C, which also
may be found if you turn the Triangle as before.

Or thirdly, using only the Reet and Label, Set B at the Zenith; B A on the
Limb of the Reet; A C in the Label; B C in an Azimuth, and you shall make the
same Triangle on the Reet, that you made last on the Matter.

CHAP. XI. The fourth Variety.
SEt B at the Zenith of the Reet. B A upon the Limb from the Zenith to one of
the Poles of the Matter, C A in the Axtree-line of the Matter, B C in an Azimuth.

CHAP. XII. The fifth Variety.
SEt B at one of the Poles of the Matter, B A upon the Limb between the Pole and
Zenith, C A in the Axis of the Reet, B C in a Meridian.

Note here, that if you set the Triangle upon the Planisphear either of those
two last ways, you shall find him to be set both ways, and that you have your
Triangle twice found, or two Trangles each of them representing the Triangle in
Question; one is toward the right hand and the other toward the left: And they
are both comprehended between the Axletrees of the Matter and Reet; and the arch
of the Limb which lie: between the two Axletrees is Base to them both.

CHAP. XIII. The sixth Variety.
SEt the Zenith line of the Reet in the Equinoctial line of the Matter. Then set
B at the Zenth B A upon the Eqiunoctial line inwards from the Limb, C A in a
Meridian, B C in an Azimuth.

Thus have you various ways for describing and resolving any rectangular
Spherical Triangle upon your Planisphear. If in trying one way you find the
points of your Triangle too much shadowed with the Reet, or that the sides
cross one another too obliquely, that you can hardly find the point of the
angle, then may you try another way, and you shall likely find that fault
amended.

These three last Chapters you shall easily understand, if you understand the
former Chapters of this Book. And therefore I thought it needless to use any
further examplification.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Solution of Oblique angled Spherical Triangles: And
generally of all Spherical Triangles.
THese six Chapters following might well have been placed before the second
Chapter. For howsoever they best serve Oblique angled Triangles, yet are the
Rules general, and may serve very well for the solution of all Spherical
Triangles whatsoever. But I like this order well enough, and I think the Reader
will have no cause to dislike it.

There be twelve Cases of Oblique-angled Spherical Triangles. But for the
Planisphear they are here reduced to six. And they be all (unless I may except
the last) as easily resolved upon the Planisphear as the five Cases of
Rectangled Triangles.

Here note that for Oblique-angled Triangles, in all the Cases following, one
side shall evermore be set upon the Limb between one of the Poles of the Matter
and the Zenith, of the Reet, and the other two sides shall be made, one by a
Meridian, and the other by an Azimuth; at the meeting whereof is the Angle C,
which only may remain unknown after any Question resolved, and may be
presently found by turning the Triangle, as before it happened in the Rectangled
Triangles.

PROB. 1. Three Sides given, to find the Angles.

SEt one Side, (which you will) upon the Limb between the Pole and Zenith,
count the second side from the Pole by the Parallels, and count the third side
from the Zenith by the Almicanters: and know that where the last Parallel cuts
the last Almicanter, there is the point of the third Angle C: the Meridian that
passes from this point to the Pole is the side A C: the Azimuth that passes
from the same point to the Zenith is the side B C: and the third side A B is on
the Limb between the Pole and Zenith. Now may you count the Angles at the Pole
and Zenith and B: and for the third Angle C, turn the Triangle laying one of
the other sides in the Limb between the Pole and Zenith, and you shall find
that Angle also, as you did his fellows. Note that whereas I called the sides
of Rectangled Triangles B A. C A, and B C, that is Basis, Cathetus, and
Hypotenusa, I choose here in Oblique-angled Triangles, to transpose the letters
of the two first sides for diftinction sake, calling them A B, and and A C, and
the third side indifferently either B C or C B.

Example. Let 40 degrees 70 degrees and 46 degrees be Sides of a Triangle,
whose Angles are sought. Now because I would first get the Angles joining to
the side 40 degrees. I mark that side A B, and set A B upon the Limb, A at he
Pole, and B at the Zenith; which I remove 40 degrees from the Pole, according
to the length of the side A B. Then because A C is 70 degrees. I hold one finger
(or a pin) upon the 70 Parallel from the Pole, and because B C is 46 I hold
another finger on the 46 Almicanter counted from the Zenith, and look where
this Almicantar crosses the said 70 Parallel, there is C of my Triangle: The
Meridian that comes from the Pole to C is the long side of my Triangle A C; I
count then from the side A B on the Limb how many Meridians lie between A B and
A C, and I find that A C is just the 45 Meridian, therefore I say the Angle A
at the Pole is 45 degrees. The Azimuth that comes from the Zenth to C is here
the middle side of my Triangle, being in length 46 I count from the side A B of
my Triangle on the Limb how many Azimuths there are to this and I find that
this is the 114 Azimuth almost, therefore the Angle B at the Zenith is almost
114 degrees (exactly 113.30. minutes.)

Now to find the Angle C, I turn the Triangle, and set B C, 46 degrees on the
Limb (changing the letters into A B) And where the 40 Parallel crosses the 70
Almicanter, there I meet with the 39 Azimuth, which shows me that the third
Angle formerly called C, and now since the Triangle turned marked B is 39
degrees (exactly 38 degrees 51 minutes.)

diagram

CHAP. XV. PROB. 2. Two Sides and an Angle comprehended given, to find the rest.
SEt the Angle given at the Pole and set one of the given sides in the Limb
between the Pole and Zenith, the other given side you shall reckon on that
Meridian which is distant from the Limb as much as the given Angle comes to,
at the end thereof there shall meet you an Azimuth which shall make the third
side of your Triangle.

Example. In the former Triangle having A B 40. A C 70 and the Angle
comprehended at A 45 degrees, I set A B on the Limb from Pole to Zenith, then
because the Angle A is 45 degrees I take the 45 Meridian reckoned from A B, and
thereof I take 70 degrees (counting from A the Pole) for my side A C: at C in
the 70 degree of this Meridian there crosses an Azimuth which makes my third
side; this Azimuth is the 113 being numbered from A B therefore the Angle at B
is 113, and I find between B and C in this Azimuth 46 for the length of the
side B C: only C is now unknown, which you may also find by turning the
Triangle.

CHAP. XVI. PROB. 3. Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to
find the rest.
SEt the given Angle diagramat the Zenith B, the side subtending it in a
Meridian A C, the other given side on the Limb A B.

Example. I have given A B 37 degrees 45 min. A C 105 degrees 41 minutes: and B
167 degrees 09 minutes: I set the Zenith B 37 degrees 45 minutes from the Pole
A, then because B is 167 degrees 9 minutes, I count the Azimuths from the side
A B to 107 degrees, and farther 9 minutes, and I know that the Azimuth there
imagined to pass (set between 167, and 168) shall make the side of my Triangle
B C; but yet the length of B C I know not; and I want still a Meridian for the
side A C opposite to the angle given. Now because A C his length is given (105
degrees 41 minutes, though the Angle A be yet unknown) I take the Parallel 105
degrees 41 minutes, numbered from the Pole A, and where this Parallel crosses
the 167 Azimuth, there I am sure must be the Angle C: and the Meridian passing
from C to the Pole is the side A C 105 degrees 41 minutes: this Meridian lies
between the 12 and 13 number from A B, and shows the Angle A to be 12 degrees
26 minutes: the side B C, I may count 68 degrees by help of the Almicantars.
Now have I three sides and two Angles, which are more then enough to find the
Angle C, when the Triangle is turned.

Note that you may place the known Angle at the Pole as well as at the Zenith,
and it may be needful so to do when the Angle C of your Triangle would
otherwise fall under the Limb of the Zodiaque.

Note also that the Angle C may sometime fall under the Finiter, where the
Azimuths fail. As if you had set the Angle 167 degrees at the Pole, the
opposite side 105 degrees 41 minutes had been set in an Azimuth, and C had been
beyond the Finiter: your remedy in this case is to set Nadir in the place of
Zenith, so shall C fall among the Azimuths just as you would have him. Example.
Set 37 degrees 45 minutes between the Pole and Nadir (a b) count the Angle
given at the Nadir b 167 degrees 9 minutes and his supplement 12 degrees 51
minutes, for A C count a C the supplement thereof, and you shall find b C 111,
whose supplement is B C 68.

Note thirdly, that if the angle given in this chapter be a cute, then if you
place the known Angle at the Zenith, the Parallel may cross the Azimuth twice;
or if you place the known Angle at the Pole, the Almicanter taken to find out
the opposite side, may cross the Meridian twice; and so it may be doubtful in
which intersection the Angle C shall be found: That you may discover, if you
examine which agrees best with the other parts of the Triangle being turned; or
if you reduce this Triangle to two Right-angled Triangles, by letting fall a
Perpendicular. Of which see the last Chapter.

CHAP. XVII PROB. 4. Two Angles and the Side comprehended between them being
given, to find the rest.
SEt the side given between the Pole and Zenith on the Limb then count one
Angle among the Meridians, the other among the Azimuths, and where the Meridian
and Azimuth bounding the said Angles meet, there is the point of the Angle C,
and all is known but the Angle C, which you may find also, if you turn the
Triangle.

Example. In the 14th Chap. The Angle A was 45 B 113 the side A B comprehended
40. Having set the Zenith 40 from the Pole, I seek the 45th Meridian from A B,
and the 113 Azimuth from A B, and where they cross is C. Now may I number A C
by the Parallels 70 and B C by the Almicantars 46. C may now be found by any of
the 3 former Problemes, if you turn the Triangle, and set C at the Pole, or at
the Zenith.

CHAP. XVIII PROB. 5. Two Angles and a Side opposite to one of them given, to
find the rest.
SEt the Angles given, as A, and B, at the Pole and Zenith; the known side, as
B C in an Azimuth; Count among the Meridians the Angle opposite to the known
side, and having found the Meridian that boundeth him, lay a finger or a bodkin
point thereon; then count the other Angle among the Azimuths, and when you come
to the Azimuth that boundeth him, because that Azimuth makes the known side of
your Triangle, you shall number his length from the Zenith, and at the end
thereof make a prick, then turn about the Reet till this prick in the Azimuth
touch the Meridian before found; and then is your Triangle formed on the
Planisphear, and all is known: but the Angle C to be found as in the former
Chapters.

Example. Let be given A 45 degrees B 113 B C 46. I count from A B to the 45th
Meridian, upon which I lay my finger, that he get not away for he must make my
side A C, then I look the 113 Azimuth (from A B) to stand for the given side:
and because his length given is 46 therefore in this 113 Azimuth at 46 below the
Zenith I make a prick: then I turn the Reet till this prick touch the 45th
Meridian, there at that touch must C stand; thence to the Pole is the side A C
70, and on the Limb I have the side A B 40. C is to be had by turning the
Triangle, as in every of the former Problemes.

CHAP. XIX PROB. 6. Three Angles given to find the Sides.
THis Case comes very seldom in use. Yet that our Method of Trigonometry by
the Planisphear may be complete, and that no Problem that is soluble may be
left here unresolved, I shall show the solution of this Problem also. Mr
Blagrave, it seems, never attempted this, contenting himself that he had found
the way to resolve this Problem in Rectingled Triangles, which also he had
once given over as impossible. Blagr. Book 5, 24.

For resolving this Problem it is to be known that if you go to the Poles of
the 3 great Circles whereof your Triangle is made, these Poles shall be the
angular points of a second Triangle; and the two lesser sides of this second
Triangle shall be equal to the two lesser Angles of your first Triangle; the
greatest side of the second Triangle shall be the supplement of the greatest
Angle of the first Triangle (that is, shall have as many degrees and minutes as
the greatest Angle of the first Triangle wanted of 180 degr.) see Pi^^scus
Trigonometry Lib. 1. Prop. 61.

This second Triangle therefore (all whose sides are known from the Angles of
the first) you shall resolve by the first Problem of Oblique angled Spherical
Triangles. Chap. 14. And having by that Problem found the Angles of this
second Triangle, know that the 2 lesser Angles of the second Triangle shall be
severally and respectively equal to the two lesser sides of the first Triangle.
(and the least Angle to the least side, the middle Angle to the middle side)
and the greatest Angle of this second Triangle being subtracted out of 180
degr. shall leave you the greatest side of your first Triangle.

Example. If the Angles be given 113 degr. 45 degr. and 38 degr. 51 minutes,
and the sides be enquired. Draw by aim a rude Scheam of this first
diagramTriangle, writing in the Angle A 45 degr. in B 113 in C 38 degr. 51
minutes, supposing these sides yet unknown: then draw under this by aim also a
Scheam of the second Triangle, diagramsetting his Base Parallel with the Base
of the first and making the Base of the second shorter then the Base of the
first. Set also B at the Vertical Angle, and A C at the Base; as in the first
Triangle. Then say,

Because A in the first Triangle is 45 degr. therefore in the second Triangle B
C (subtendeth A) shall be 45 degr. And because C in the first Triangle is 38
degr. 51 min. therefore in the second Triangle the side A B (which subtendeth
C) shall be 38 degr. 51 min. And because B the greatest Angle in the first
Triangle, is 113 therefore in the second Triangle the side A C (which
subtendeth B) shall be the supplement thereof, viz. 66. Write now upon the
sides of this second Triangle the quantities of the sides, so is your second
Triangle ready to be resolved by the first Problem of Oblique-angled Triangles
whereby you shall find the Angles of the second Triangle, as I have expressed
them in the Scheam. A 46, 26 min. C 40, B 110 degrees.

Now lastly I say these Angles of the second Triangle thus found, give me the
sides of the first Triangle, which I seek, in this manner.

In the second Triangle. In the first Triangle. A is 46.26. Therefore B C is
46.26. C is 40.00. Therefore A B 40.00. B is 110.00 Therefore A C 70.00.

Supplement of 110 degrees. And thus by all the Angles given, we have found out
all the sides, which was required.

Now would you see where this second Triangle dwells in the Planisphear, by
whose help we have found out the sides of the first? That I will now show you;
because many may be as glad to know it as I was when I first found it. Having
then the Angles of your first Triangle given, and his sides also now found;
place him as in the 14 Chap. A B, 40 in the Limb. A C 70 in the 45th Meridian.
B C 46 degr. 26 min. in the 113 Azimuth. Then diagramyou shall say, Because the
Center of the Planisphear is the Pole of the arch A B, therefore at the Center
shall stand the Angle C, which A B subtendeth: Next follow the 113 Azimuth
(which makes B C of your Triangle) to the Finiter, and from the point where he
touches the Finiter you shall number in the Finiter to the Center 23, and
number on 66 more beyond the Center to make up 90, and there is the Pole of the
arch B C. Therefore there shall stand the Angle A, which B C subtendeth. Then
follow the 45th Meridian to the Equator, and thence count in the Equator 45
degr. to the Center; and 45 degr. more beyond, which make 90: there is the Pole
of the arch or side A C. Therefore there shall stand the Angle B which A C
subtendeth. Here you see your second Triangle made by the Poles of the first
adjoining to the Center of the Planisphear under the Finiter: only the side A
B is wanting: To get that, prick A and B with ink on the Matter, if your
Planisphear be metal; and when they be dry (if you can have patience to tarry
so long.) turn about the Reet till some one Azimuth or other do cut both these
pricks, which here the 48th or 49th from the Limb will make a shift to do (if
your Zodiaque do not obscure one of the pricks) and in this Azimuth you may
number between the pricks 38, 51, for the length of the side A B. Thus I have
showed you how all the sides and the Angle (C) of the second Triangle (made
between the Poles of the first Triangle) may be found in his proper place where
he dwells in the Sphere, below the Finiter; and how to find both these and all
the rest, by hoising up this Triangle to the Pole and Zenith, has also been
showed in this Chapter.

CHAP. XX. How to reduce an Oblique angled Triangle to two Rectangled
Triangles, by letting fall a Perpendicular.
BEcause the third Problem of Oblique angled Triangles cannot be resolved by
the Canon of Sines and Tangents without letting fall a Perpendicular, and
because in that case the crossing at the Angle C is often so Oblique that you
cannot define the Angular point certainly, and because in the Method for
resolving the third Problem one of the sides of the Triangle happens some
times to make two intersections with the Parallels or Almicanters, and there
may be doubt which of these intersections is to be taken for the Angle C.
Although I there showed another way to resolve that doubt, yet I will show you
also how to resolve it, and to remedy the inconveniences aforesaid, by letting
fall a Perpendicular. And it shall suffice to show you this in one example,
which if you mark and be acquainted with the four first Problemes of Rectangled
Spherical Triangles you shall be able to do it in any other needful case
whatsoever. Take therefore the Triangle of Chap 16. where we had given A B
37.45 minutes A C 105, 41. minutes. B 167. 9 min. you must observe that the
Perpendicular ought to fall from the end of a known side, and to subtand some
known Angle, which here cannot be, because both the Angles at the Base A C are
unknown.

Continue therefore the sides A C and B C to Semicircles, and you shall have a
second Triangle N P C, in which, N P is equal to A B, N C is supplement of B C.
P C suplement of A C: N supplement of B. C is common to both Triangles.

Here then in the diagramsecond Triangle N P C, let the Perpendicular fall from
P upon the Base N C, so have you two Rectangled Triangles, P R N, and P R C.

In the Triangle P R N you have (beside the Right Angle R) the Angle N 12. 51
minutes, (supplement of B) and the Hypotenusa N P 37. 45 minutes; and so may
find all the rest of this Triangle, by the third Problem of Rectangular
Spharical Triangles, viz. P R 7. 49 min. N P R 79, 49 min. and R N 37 degrees,
which had,

In the Triangle P R C, by the second Problem of Rectangular Spharical
Triangles you may find R C 70 degrees (which added to R N makes N C 111, whose
supplement is C B 68) C 8 degr., C P R 88 degr. which added to N P R makes the
whole Angle C P N 167, 47. which being subducted out of 180 degr. leaves the
supplement thereof C A B 12.13 min. as I find it by my Planisphear; and by
exact calculation it may be 12 26 minutes.

Thus have you a perfect Method of resolving all Spherical Triangles by the
Planisphear.

The end of the Third Book.
The fourth Book. Showing the Solution of the SPHERICAL PROBLEMES, Both
Astronomical, Astrological, and Geographical, by the PLANISPHEAR.
CHAP. I. The Preface.
THe best method (in my judgment) for setting down the Problemes of the Sphere
is, to set them in such order, that the former may be Praecognita to the
latter, and the latter presuppose the knowledge of the former. This most
Authors have used. But this method here aimed at, perhaps is not always kept
exactly. Because where one Triangle serves to resolve diverse Problemes, I was
willing to make an end with him sometime before I meddled with another, for
avoiding the multiplicity of Chapters, and repetition of the same Schemes.

THere be in the Sphearfive famous Triangles, by the knowledge where of most
Astronomical Problemes are resolved, insomuch that if you be but well versed in
the general Problemes of Trygonometry set down in the former Book, and have
acquaintance with these five Triangles in the Sphere, you will be able to
resolve most of the following Problemes without any further help.

Of those five Triangles three are Rectangled, which shall be here denominated
from their Hypotenusa's.

1. The Ecliptical Triangle, whose Hypotenusa is an arch of the Ecliptic, his
Legs are arches of the Equator, and a Meridian: he serves especially for
Questions of the Suns Longitude, Right Ascension, and Declination, with some
others, See this Chapter 6 etc.

2. The Horizontal Triangle, whose sides, are arches of the Horizon, Equator,
and a Meridian. He serves especially for Questions of the Suns Amplitude,
Ascensional difference, and Declination, and of the Latitude of your place. See
this Chapter 14.

3. The Azimuthal or Parrallactical Triangle, whose sides are arches of an
Azimuth, the Ecliptic, and a Circle of Longitude: he serves especially to
find the Moons Parallaxes in Altitude, Longitude, and Latitude. See this Chap.
64.

4. The other two are Oblique angled. One I use to call the Complemental
Triangle, because all his sides be complements, viz. the Complement of
Latitude, of Declination, and of Altitude. He serves. chiefly to find the
Altitude, Azimuth, and Hour. See this Chap. 24.

5. The last, I use to call the Polar Triangle, because one side of him is
evermore the distance of the Poles of the World, and of the Ecliptic (23
degrees) his other sides are a Meridian, and a Circle of Longitude. He serves
chiefly to find the Longitude and Latitude, the Right Ascension and Declination
of the Stars. See this Chap. 34.

CHAP. II. How to find the Altitude of the Sun or Stars, by Observation, with
the Planisphear. Also what fashion is best for Sighst.
THe Planisphear may here supply the office of a Quadrant (which is the fittest
and most common Instrument for taking Altitudes) For the Planisphear is divided
into 4 Quadrants, and if you hang a plumb-line at the Center, it may serve any
of them. Set your Sights to one of the Semidiameters of the Matter, and turn him
so to the Sun that the Sun may shine through the Sights; then shall the
plumb-line (if it hang Parrallel to the Planisphear, neither bearing upon it,
nor hanging off from it) show in the lowest Quadrant of the Limb the degrees of
Altitude. But because the Quadrants may be small, I have showed you a way how to
make them serve your turn as well as if they were of double Semidiameter, Book
1.10. whither I refer you.

My Sights for the Sun and Moon I have devised to make thus.

Let them be about an inch square for a Planisphear of a foot Diameter: And in
the middle of that sight next you (which must be a thin plate) let a very small
hole be drilled quite through: in the middle of the Sight next the Sun, bore an
hole as big as a Pease, or bigger, whose Center must answer the small hole in
the other Sight, then cross the Center of the hole in the Sight next the Sun
with an hair, or fine third, so that the third may run level or Parrallel with
the Horizon, when you use the Sights. When you turn the Sights toward the Sun,
and the shadow of the third fall, upon the small hole of the lower Sight, you
shall set or hold a white paper about a span behind the lower Sight, upon which
paper you shall perceive a small Image of the Suns body, and likewise of the
third cutting through the midst of him very distinctly. And here you shall
observe that the image of the third moves upon the image of the Sun in the
paper, contrary to the motion of the shadow of the third upon the lower Sight;
for when the shadow of the third touches the bottom of the Sighthole, the
image of the third shall touch the top of the Suns image on the paper, and
contrarily. But when the shadow of the third cutteth the middle of the
Sight-hole, then shall the image of the third always cut the middle of the
image of the Sun upon the paper exactly and clearly. Also you shall observe
that though the Diameter of the Sun be always more then 30 min. yet the
Diameter of the image cannot be observed here to be much above 20 min. as you
may measure by the min. of the Quadrant which the plumb-line passes over,
while the image of the third passes over the image of the Sun: whither the
Diameter of the Suns image on the paper be diminished by reason of the
thickness of the plate through which the beams pass, or because the image on
the paper is small, the beginning and end of the Obscuration by the image of the
third, cannot be precisely observed, for the present, I leave to Optical men to
enquire: Also what is the reason why the image of the third moves contrary to
the motion of his shadow, is a question of some difficulty: My resolution is,
because that image is a species which passes through the Sight-hole with the
species of the Suns body: For when the shadow of the third falls upon the
lower part of the Sight-hole, then certainly the upper part of the Suns body is
above the obscuration of the third, and the lower edge is Eclipsed at the
Sight-hole. Now the ways of the Suns body thus Eclipsed on the lower side,
passing through the Sight-hole, must needs be there decussated, so that the
ways or beams coming from the lower part of the Sun shall make the higher
part of the image on the paper, and contrarily; as appears when an Eclipse of
the Sun is observed by a Telescope, or by a small hole, letting the beams into
a dark room: For the reason here and there is the same. I have used those
Sights for the Sun and Moon almost these 20 years past, and (for ought I could
ever read or hear) they are of my own invention, and I have not met with any
device more commodious to me for this purpose.

For the Moon, you must set your eye to the lowest Sight-hole, and let the
third cut the middle of her body. For the Stars, if your eye cannot discern
them by the third, you must behold them by the edges of the Sights both above
and below. Or if you would observe the Stars Altitude by some larger
Instrument, I advise that the Sight next your eye be a broad plate 4 or 5
inches square, in the middle whereof you shall cut a window whose length may be
near 2 inches, and his breadth or height about an inch or more, so that your
eye may be well shadowed, and yet have free scope through the window to find
the Star. Let the upper Sight be a Cylinder or ruler set Parrallel to the lower
Sight, and his breadth be equal to the window almost, but narrower by a few
minutes as 2 min. or 4 min. when you looking through this window can see the
Star appear alike on both sides, the upper Sight, then is your Instrument right
set, and the plumb-line shall show you his Altitude as before. Note that for
all curious observation of the Sun or Stars, your Instrument must be supported
with a Tripos, or like device, that it may be steady, and that the apparent
Altitudes of the Sun and Moon must be corrected according to the Table of
Parrallax and Refraction. The sixed Stars have Refraction, but no Parrallax
sensible. The quantity of the Parrallax is to be added, and the quantity of the
Refraction to be subtracted always from the apparent Altitude found, so shall
you have the true Altitude.

Here follows an Abridgement of Lansbergius Tables of Refraction and
Parrallax of the Sun, as much as this Instrument may need, for the rest go to
Lansbergius or Tycho Brahe's Tables at large, where you shall find the Moons
Parrallax in the Horizon, to be sometimes 51 minutes, sometimes 1 degrees. 7 min.
at 70 degrees of Altitude, between 18 degrees. 24 min. Here Refraction is as the
Sun.

Alt. Parall. mi. sec. Refr. mi. see 0 2 18 34 00 5 2 18 14 00 10 2 16 8 15 15
2 13 6 00 20 2 10 4 33 25 2 05 3 12 30 2 00 1 51 35 1 53 0 54 40 1 46 45 1 38
50 1 29 55 1 19 60 1 09 65 58 70 47

CHAP. III. To find a Meridian line.
STrike a straight line upon a Table or any Horizontal plain: and lay your
Planisphear so that one of the Diameters of the Matter may lie in that line.
Then take the Suns Altitude: the Altitude would be taken at least 2 hours (the
more the better) before noon: and note, that if you take it between 29 and 30
degrees you shall be troubled neither with Parrallax nor Refraction, because
the Suns Refract^^n and Parrallax be equal at the Altitude 29 degrees 26
minutes. The Altitude taken, you shall immediately lay your Planisphear in the
posture aforesaid; and turning the Label to the Sun, make a prick in the Limb
where the Label cutteth: And when the Sun comes to the same Altitude
afternoon, your Planisphear laid as before, turn your Label to the Sun, and
where he cuts make a second prick in the Limb. Then divide equally the Arch of
the Limb comprehended between the pricks: and to the middle thereof lay the
Label, and it shall point full North and South. Look then through your Sights;
and if you see any Steeple, Pinacles. Chimney, Tree, or such mark, at a good
distance in the line of Vision, you may note him for a South-mark, or for want
thereof set up a smaller mark nearer hand. But note also that this may best be
done when the Sun is in or near the Summer Tropic, for near the Equator he
changes his Declination so fast, that it may cause you an error of a few
minutes, unless you make allowance for it.

Note, that all lines Parallel to your Meridians are Meridians.

2. Another way.

Having taken the Altitude of the Sun, or a Star, at a good distance from the
Meridian; presently lay your Planisphear flat, and turn the Label to the Sun,
or Star, as before. Then by the Altitude taken, get the Azimuth; (by chap. 24
or 27 of this book.) Then remove your Labet (Eastward; if the Sun or Star were
Westward from the Meridian; or Westward if the Sun or Star be in the East
Hemisphear;) so many degrees as the Azimuth comes to, and your Label shall be
in the Meridian.

3. A third way.

When the great Wain is seen under Cynosura, (the Pole Star) observe with your
eye the distance of the Thill-horse, called Alioth, from the next wheel of the
Wain and setting that distance (by aim) in 5 parts, observe by a plumbline
when Alioth draws near to be in the same Perpendicular with the Pole Star. For
when he wants but one of those 5 parts to come into the Perpendicular, then
is the Pole Star in the Meridian over the Pole in our age: at other times of
the night the Pole Star may be 4 degrees wide, and in one hour near the
Meridian he changes his Azimuth above one degree.

4. A fourth way.

Because the distance of the Pole Star from the Pole is now 2 degrees 30
minutes, and the Pole is in the circle or line which passes from the Pole Star
near Alioth, as before; you may by guess cut off from that line 2 degrees 30
min. and in that Section you have the Pole at any time. This way may be used
abroad in the fields, where you cannot stand upon exactness; and herein you
shall miss very little, if you accustom your self to observe the distances of
the Stars about the Pole.

CHAP. IIII. To Observe the Azimuth of the Sun or Stars.
LAy your Planisphear upon an Horizontal plain or Level, and his Meridian on
the Meridian line of your Place, found by the last Chapter. Then turn your
Label that the Sun may cast the shadow of one Sight upon the other, or directly
toward it, or till the shadow of a plumb line cut both the Sights alike, then
does the Label show the Azimuth in the Limb. For the Stars, you must so direct
the Sights by your eye, that their edges may touch the Visuall line that comes
from the Star to your eye: and if your long Sight prove too short, turn him
toward your eye, and inlightning the shorter Sight by a candle held behind you,
mark where the edge of the long Sight cuts both the edge of the short Sight,
and the Star; for there is your Label in the Azimuth of the Star, which you may
count on the Limb.

Note that if you seek the Azimuth to get the hour, you shall find it most
easily when the Sun or Stars are near the Horizon: and then you shall not be
troubled with their Refraction. But there is most use of observing Azimuths
near the Meridian, because there the Azimuth changes apace, the Altitude very
slowly: Yet if you may choose, choose to take Altitudes rather then Azimuths
(so you come not within 2 or 3 hours of the Meridian) because the Sights serve
all Altitudes with like facility, and you may sooner have a true plumb line any
where, then a true Horizontall plain, and a true Meridian line.

CAAP. V. To find the Suns Longitude.
THe Longitude of the Sun is the arch of his distance from 0 in the Ecliptic:
or it is the angle made at the Pole of the Ecliptic comprehended between the
circle of Longitude passing through 0, and another Circle of Longitude passing
through the center of the Sun: for the said arch of the Ecliptic is always the
proper measure of this Angle. And because the Suns center never has Latitude,
therefore for the Sun you shall enquire the arch; but contrarily, for the Stars
which have Latitude, you shall require the Angle: and they be both (as was
said) of one measure.

The Suns Longitude (Arch or Angle) is presently found by the Ephemeris upon
the Limb of your Planisphear, for if you lay the Label upon the day of the
Month, it shall cut the degree of the Sign also in which the Sun is, and that
is his Longitude: in doing whereof, you shall observe the cautions given Lib.
1.8. to which I refer you.

Note here, that the Longitude of a place in Geographie is the Angle at the
Pole of the World, comprehended between the first Meridian (passing by the
hither side of S. Michals Island, which is the nearest of the Azores) and the
Meridian of the Place: and this Angle has his measure in the Equator.

CHAP. VI. The Suns Longitude, Declination, Right Ascension, any one of them
given, to find the rest in the first Projection.
WHat the Suns Longitude is, has been showed chap. 5. His Declination is his
di^^ance from the nearest point of the Equator; and therefore is always
measured in an Arch of that Meridian which happens to pass through the center
of the Sun, and always cuts the Equator at right Angles, as do all the
Meridians.

The Right Ascension of the Sun is the angle at the Pole of the World
comprehended between that Side of the Colurus Equinoctiorum which cuts the
intersection of the Ecliptic with the Equator in 0, and the arch of another
Meridian which passes through the center of the Sun. And note, that this angle
may increase above 180 degrees, even to 360 degrees, though every angle,
properly so called be less then 180 degrees, and never more then 90 degrees
comes into the Triangle: for if you number backwards or forwards from either of
the Equinoctial points, you shall have like arches of Right Ascension
answering to like arhces of Longitude and Declination; so that having found the
Right Ascension in any one Quadrant, or the complement thereof, you shall find
the whole Right Ascension from 0 by adding one, two, or three whole Quadrants
to the Right Ascension found, or to the complement thereof, as by the view of
your Planisphear you shall presently know how to do better then by more words.
Otherwise thus. The Right Ascension of the Sun is an arch of the Equator
comprehended between the Vernal Equinox and that point of the Equator which
rises with the Sun in a right Horizon. A right Horizon is where the Equator
passes through the Zenith, and makes right angles with the Horizon, and
consequently, where the Poles have no Elevation: For from that posture of the
Sphere in which the Equator rises upright, is the term of Right Ascension
borrowed: I would, if I might, call it rather Equation; because it is numbered
on the Equator, and serves for the Equation of natural days, and may as easily
be found in any Sphere as in a right Sphere, since the Horizon of a right
Sphere limits the Right Ascension only because that Horizon falls in with a
Meridian, and the Meridians do limit it in all parts and postures of the
Equator, without any respect to the Horizon at all. But the old term has so
long inured, that I believe it will not be changed without better Authority.

These definitions premised, you shall know that these three arches, viz. of
Longitude in the Ecliptic, of Right Ascension in the Equator, and of
Declination in a Meridian, do make up a notable Rectangled-Triangle in the
Sphere, The Ecliptical Triangle.
like unto that which was made the common Example, in all the five Problemes of
Rectangled-Triangles. Book 3, 3. etc.

For there B C is the diagramLongitude (in 0) 60, degr. C A the Declination 20
degr. 12 min. B A the Right Ascension 57 degr. 48 min. A is known a right
angle, B is known, the angle of the Suns greatest Declination, which for our
age is 23 degr. 30 min. Now if but one of the Sides be given, you may find the
other two by the Problemes of Rectangled Spherical Triangles.

But to see your Triangle, and resolve him in his proper lines, Go to the Matter
of your Planisphear, and take him there in the first Projection. There number
60 the Suns Longitude in the Ecliptic line of the Matter from the Center
outward. Where 60 ends, there is C of your Triangle, and the Meridian that
meets you there is C A the arch of Declination; follow him to the Equator, and
you shall find by his graduation he is 20 degr. 12 min. Long. thence turn in
the Equator to the Center, and you make B A the Right Ascension 57 degr. 48
min. so have you the true picture of your Triangle in his proper place. Observe
your Triangle now, and you may see A is a right angle, for at such angle all
the Meridians cut the Equator. B is 23, for such an angle the Ecliptic daily
makes with the Equator, as the arch in the Limb comprehended between them
shows. Now take for given any of the three Sides, and you have the rest. Take
the Longitude for given (and be it 60 degr. as before, or 70 degr. or what you
will) and you may find the Declination, and Right Ascension as before. Let the
Right Ascension be given; then setting a needles point in the end thereof A,
you may thence in a Meridian trace out the Declination C A to the Ecliptic,
and the Longitude B C thence to the Center, every Side being divided into his
whole parts or degrees. If the Declination be given, say, Because the 20th
Parrallel almost must cut off C A (the arch of Declination) in C, therefore I
follow the Parallel 20 to the place where he cutteth the Ecliptic and there
comes the Meridian that serves my turn; and I may go down by him to the
Equator, (as you would go down a ladder counting the rounds or degrees as you
go) and so on, round my Triangle, and I need no more. For observe it when you
will in the use of this Planisphear, if you can find the way to go round your
Triangle, you have all the Sides measured to your hand, and evermore one Angle
also, most commonly two, and the angle C only left unknown.

But admit the Sun be in 0, then is his Longitude 120, degrees, and he is come
back from the Solstice in your Planisphear as many degr. as he wanted of it
before. Here the Triangle is equal to the former, and resolved in like manner.
The Declination is the same as before: But the arches of Longitude and Right
Ascension in the Triangle are supplements of the true Longitude and Right
Ascension; showing what the Sun wants of the Longitude and Right Ascension 180,
in 0. wherefore subtract the Base of the Triangle 57 degr. 48 min. from a
Semicircle, or 180 degr. and you shall leave 122 degr. 12 min. the Right
Ascension of 0. or number in the Equator from the Center the way in which the
Right Ascension has increased, that is first to the Limb (which here is
Colurus Solstitiorum) 90 degr. then back again to A the Right angle of your
Triangle, and you have 32 degr. 12 min. to be added thereto. The Sum is 122
degr. 12 min. the Right Ascension, as before: If you observe this Example, you
will easily perceive, that when the Sun is past 0. the Triangle will be on the
other side the Center, and between and you must add to the Right Ascension and
Longitude found within the Triangle 180 degr. and in the last Quadrant between
and (where the Right Ascension again increases inwards) you must add 270 degr.
to the complement of Right Ascension found in the Triangle, and take the sum,
or else subduct the Right Ascension found in the Triangle from 360 degr. and
take the residue for the Right Ascension.

CHAP. VII. To do the same in the second Projection, more easily.
IN the second Projection where the Center is the Pole of the World, and the
Limb Equator, you shall find the Ecliptic, fairly drawn upon the Reet and
distinguished into his quarters and degrees. Remember now from the former chap.
that the Ecliptic. Equator, and a Meridian, must make your Triangle; and know
that the Label supplieth the place of the Meridians.

If the Longitude or Right Ascension be given, lay the Label on the degree
given (in the Ecliptic for Longitude, or in the Limb of the Reet for Right
Ascension) and your Triangle is made, and you may presently see your desire.

If the Declination be given, consider in what quarter of the Ecliptic the Sun
is, then number the Declination given upon the Label inwards, and where the
numbering ends make a prick on your Label, then move the Label into the quarter
where the Sun is, and lay the prick on the Ecliptic there, and your Triangle
is made, wherein you may see the Longitude and Right Ascension desired. This
needs no Example.

CHAP. VIII. To find the Angle at the Sun, made between the Ecliptic and
Meridian.
THis is the angle C of the former Triangle, and is the only part which cannot
be found in the former posture of the Triangle, neither in chap. 6 nor 7, but
is easily had by conversion of the Triangle, as you may remember out of the
third Book.

Take the Triangle of chap. 6, and make the Cathetus Base, for this turn: and
by the 1 or 2 Problemes of Rectangled Triangles, you may find this angle to be
77 degr. 43 min.

CHAP. IX. To find the said angle of the Ecliptic, with the Meridian, by the
Longitude, Declination, or Right Ascension, diverse other ways.
IN the Meridional Projection do thus.

If you have the Longitude given, count the distance of the Sun in that
Longitude from the next Equinoctial point, and count so many degrees in the
Arctick Circle from the Limb inwards: to the end of this numbering, lay the
Label, and between the Label and Equator you have upon the Limb the lesser
angle made between the Ecliptic and Meridian; the greater angle is the
supplement thereof. Also between the Arctick Circle and the Limb you may find
the Declination on the Label, which is more then was required.

If you have the Declination given, count it on the Label inwards, and make a
prick where the number ends, then turn this prick upon the Arctick Circle, and
the Label shows the lesser angle in the Limb, as before.

Example. I would know what angle the Meridian that cutteth the Sun in 9 degr.
makes with the Ecliptic. I number therefore in the Arctick Circle from the
Limb inwards 39 degrees. and to the 39th degr. I say the Label, and it shows in
the Limb the angle sought 71 degr. 20 min. and in the Label the Declination of
9 degr. viz. 14. 32 minutes: this is a good way. But that the Label at this
39th degr. cutteth the Pole of the Ecliptic (as Mr. Blagrave says Book 3,
40.) is not true: either Mr. Blagrave or the Printer here mistakes. For the
Pole of the Ecliptic lies 14. 24 minutes nearer the Axletree, as you shall
find in the next rule.

2. Another way. Mark what is the Right Ascension of the point proposed, being
counted from the next Equinoctial point (as of 9 degr. the Right Ascension is
36.36 min.) count so many degrees in the Arctick circle from the Axeltree: at
the end of this number is the Pole of the Ecliptic. Lay the Label to him, and
you shall make a Quadrantal Triangle, whose Sides shall be equal to the Angles
of the former Triangle, which was made of the Longitude, Declination, and Right
Ascension, of the point proposed: for the Right Angle you have a Radius or
Quadrant of the Axis: for the Angle of the greatest Declination between the
Equator and Ecliptic 23, you have the arch of a Meridian between the Pole of
the Equator and the Pole of the Ecliptic: for the angle sought, you have the
arch of the Label, between the Pole of the Ecliptic and the Center 71.20
minutes; as before: the least angle of this Quadrantal Triangle is at the
Center, and you shall find his measure in the Limb 14.32 minutes: that is the
measure of the least Side of the former Triangle, viz. the Declination of the
point proposed.

Here you see, If the Declination had been given, you should have set it in the
Limb, between the Pole and the Label, and so had you made the same Quadrantal
Triangle, and might have found on the Label between the Arctick Circle and the
Center the measure of the angle sought: and likewise in the Arctick Circle
between the Label and the Axtree-line the Right Aseension, though it be more
then was required. The reason hereof you may learn from Book 3.7.

CHAP. X. To find the point of the Ecliptic in which the Longitude and Right
Ascension have greatest difference.
Move the Label. on the Polar circle till you find the degrees of the Label
between the Polar circle and the Limb to be equal to the degr. of the Limb
between the Label and the Pole, so have you a Rectangled aeqaicrurall Triangle
made by the Limb, Label, and the Meridian 46; like to that in the second
Variety, Book 3.10.

Here the angle B at the Pole between the 46 Meridian and the Limb, is equal to
the Longitude of the point sought 46, and either Leg is equal to the
Declination thereof 16: Therefore I conclude, that when the Sun is 46 in
Longitude. (that is in 16) then his Longitude has furthest out run the Right
Ascension. Subtract now the Right Ascension of 16, which is 43 out of the
Longitude 46 there remains 2 degrees: which being converted into Time, is 10 min.
the greatest inequality of Ascension in a Right Sphere.

CHAP. II. To find the Latitude of your Place, or the Elevation of the Pole
above your Horizon, by the Meridional Altitude, and Declination of the Sun.
Meridional Projection.
GEographers call the distance of a place from the nearest point of the Equator
upon Earth, the Latitude of that Place, as the Latitude of London is 51 degrees. 32
min. from the Equator Northward: the Latitude of St Thomas Island upon the
coast of Africa is 0 degrees. 0 min. because the middle of that Island lies under
the Equator. And because the Latitude of your Place, and the Elevation of the
Pole above your Horizon, are always equal, therefore the Elevation of the Pole
is often called Latitude of the Place, or Latitude simply: and so for brevity
sake we shall often call it. But when we speak of the Latitude of the Moon or
Stars, you must understand Astronomers thereby mean their distance from the
nearest point of the Ecliptic.

To find the Latitude of your Place, get the Suns Declination, by the 6 or 7th.
and his Meridian Altitude by the second of this Book: Then find the parallel of
the Suns Declination, North or South as the Declination is, and where it
touches the Limb (here Meridian) there is the point where you observed the Sun
at Noon; set the South end of the Finiter so many degr. below this point as the
Meridian Altitude had, then is your Finiter set to your Latitude, and you shall
find the measure of it between the Equator and the Zenith, (which is properly
the Latitude) and the same measure shall you find between the North point of
the Finiter and the North Pole, where it is more properly called the Elevation
of the Pole.

Example. June 20 1651. I observed the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, here at
Ecton, four miles Eastward from Northampton, 60 degr. 59 min. the Longitude of
the Sun was then 8 degr. 19 min., his Declination 23 degr 14 min. Northward.
Therefore having found in the Limb the point where the Parallel 23 degr. 14
min. touches above the Equator, I put the South end of the Finiter 60 degr. 59
min. below that point, toward the South Pole, which done, I see the North Pole
Elevated above the Finiter 52 degr. 15 min. and the Zenith of my Horizon
likewise to be removed from the Equator Northward 52 degr. 15 min. which is the
Latitude of Ecton.

Note that you may best observe the Latitude when the Sun is near the Summer
Tropic; for then you shall not be troubled with Refraction; and then the
Declination varyeth slowly; which varyeth almost one minute every hour near the
Equinoctial.

CHAP. XII. To do the same by the Meridian Altitudes of the Stars about the
Poles.
MAny of the Stars near the Northern Pole may be seen with us twice in the
Meridian in one Winters Night: that is, one while above the Pole, and 12 hours
after again below the Pole. As for Example, the Polestar, called Alrucabe,
about December 18 will be in the Meridian above the Pole at 6 of the clock at
Night, and at 6 next morning he will be in the Meridian below the Pole.

Observe both the Meridian Altitudes, and add them together, half that sum is
the Elevation of the Pole. Example. I observed at Ecton the greatest Altitude
of the Pole Star to be 54 degrees. 45 min. and his least Altitude 49 degr. 45 min.
the sum is 104 degrees. 30 min. the half 52 degr. 15 min. the Latitude of Ecton:
and here I have gotten also the Pole-stars distance from the Pole, and
consequently his Declination which is the complement thereof, for the Latitude
being subducted from the greater Altitude leaves the Stars distance from the
Pole 2 degr. 30 min. and consequently shows his Declination to be 87 degr. 30
min. which is 39 min. more then Gemma Frisius observed it, Anno Dom. 1547. for
in our age the Pole Star approaches about 1 min. nearer the Pole in every 3
years.

Note that these Stars which are distant from the Pole less then the Latitude,
and more then the complement thereof, have their less Meridian Altitude in the
North part of the Meridian, and their greater Meridian Altitude in the Southern
part of the Meridian beyond the Zenith. Wherefore for them you shall take the
complement of their greater Altitude, and add it to the North Quadrant of the
Meridian, and if to that sum you add the lesser Altitude, the half thereof
shall be your Latitude. But the nearer any Star is to the Pole, the fitter for
this purpose, and therefore none better then Alrucabe, who is the nearest of
all.

CHAP. XIII. To find the Declination of the Sun or Stars, by their Meridian
Altitude, and the Elevation of the Pole.
This is done by the first, made of the Meridional Projection, where having set
your Finiter to the Elevation of the Pole, or your Zenith to the Latitude, (for
as has been showed Chap. 11. all comes to one, and in doing either, you do
both) and having observed the Meridian Altitude of the Sun or Star, number the
Altitude observed upon the Limb of the Reet on the South or North side of the
Pole, according as the Star was observed to be, and there shall meet you on the
Matter his Parallel of Declination.

Example. I observed the Suns Meridian Altitude at Ecton, 20 degrees. I look
therefore where the 20th Almicanter touches the Limb, (the Finiter first set
to the Latitude) and there meets at the Limb the 17 Parallel below the Equator:
wherefore I say, the Sun declineth 17 degr. 45 min. Southward. Again, I
observed the Star Alhaiot in the North part of the Meridian 6 degr. 42 min.
high, I go to that Almicanter in the North quarter of the Reet under the Pole,
and there meets at the Limb the Parallel 45 min. of North Declination.

CHAP. XIV. To find the Oblique Asoension and Descension, and the Ascensional
difference of the Sun or any Star: by his Declination, and the Latitude of the
Place, Two several ways, in the Horizontal Triangle.
THe Oblique Ascension is the arch of the Equator which rises with the Sun or
any Star in an Oblique Sphere, that is, a Sphere wherein the Equator makes an
Oblique Angle with the Horizon. This arch begins always from the Vernal
Equinox, but we seek the latter term or end thereof. To find this by
Calculation, we use to find first the Ascensional difference, that is the
difference of the Right and Oblique Ascension, or the arch of the Equator
comprehended between the latter terms of the arches of the Right Ascension and
Oblique Ascension of the Star, this difference for North Stars, we subtract
from the Right Ascension, and the remainder is the Oblique Ascension; but for
South Stars we add it to the Right Ascension to make the Oblique Ascension: and
for Oblique Descension or Setting, contrarily, we add the Ascensional
difference for North Stars, and subtract it for South: you shall see all plain
in the Meridional Projection of the Planisphear, and the first Mode thereof,
where the Finiter is set to the Latitude.

Example. I would know the Oblique Ascension of the Sun in 0 and the
Ascensional difference, The Declination of the Sun in 0 is 23 degr. 30 min. our
Latitude 52 degr. 15 min. I go to the North Parallel 23 degr., which is the
Tropic of Cancer, on the Matter, and following him to the Finiter, there I turn
in the Meridian which cutteth there, and go down to the Equator under the
Horizon, and make a prick here; I say, is the Right Ascension of the Sun in
Cancer 0, for the same Meridian cutteth both these, and therefore both these
points would rise at once in a Right Sphere, where the Meridians by turns
successively, become Horizon: but counting how many degrees are between this
prick and the rising point of the Equator, I find 34 degr. 10 min. this is the
arch of Ascensional difference, which being subtracted out of the Right
Ascension of 0 (which by Chap. 6 is 90 degr.) there remains the Oblique
Ascension 55 degr. 50 min. And the meaning is, that whereas the Sun being in 0
in a Right Sphere, rises with the 90th degree of the Equator, in our Latitude,
he rises with the 55 degr. 50 min. of the Equator: the difference of these
Ascensions is 34 degr. 10 min. add this difference to the Right Ascension of 0,
and it makes 124 degr. 10 min. the Oblique Descension, for the 124th degree of
the Equator sets with 0, and the point of the Suns Right Ascension shall in
North Signs Set before him as much as it Rises after him, and in South Signs
shall Set after him, as much as it Rises before him. This you may see plainly
by the view of this Projection; if you imagine it one while to be the Eastern
Hemisphear, and another while the Western Hemisphear, at your pleasure.

The Horizontal Triangle.
diagram

Take in the Scheme of the Horizontal Triangle annexed, so many Circles of your
Planisphear as you shall use for this purpose, and moreover see here how the
Ecliptic should lie in your Planisphear when 0 is rising, which the
Planisphear in this posture cannot express.

Is the arch of the Suns Longitude 90 degr. A Is the arch of the Suns Right
Ascension 90 degr. B Is the arch of the Oblique Ascension 55 degr. 50 min. B A
Is the Ascensional difference 34 degr. 10 min. A B C, I call the Horizontal
Triangle.

The same way serves for the Stars, for the Stars Parallel of Declination
followed to the Finiter, shall bring you to C of the Triangle, as the Suns did,
and then you know what to do.

A second way and more easy and pleasant, is by the Equinoctial Projection.
Place the Sun or Star upon the East part of your Horizon, (in the North-east
quarter, if the Declination be North; but in the South-east quarter, if the
Declination be South; as you had direction, Book 2, 2.) and the degrees of the
Limb by which 0 is gone past Oriens, or the six a clock line of the Matter, are
the degrees of Oblique Ascension, subduct this out of the Right Ascension, if
the Star be North, or out of this subduct the Right Ascension, if the Star be
South, and the remainder is the Ascensional difference. But this subduction is
made to your hand in the Planisphear.

diagram

Take the former Example. The Latitude here is 52 degr. 15 min. the Suns
Declination in 0, is 23 degr. 30 min. as before. Now See in this second figure
of the Horizontal Triangle A B C, how the Circles lie in the Planisphear, set 0
on the Northeast part of the Horizon at C, and you have before your eyes.

the Suns Longitude. 90 degr. A the Suns Right Ascension. 90 degr. B the Suns
Oblique Ascension. 55 degr. 50 min. B A the Ascensional difference. 34 degr. 10
min.

CHAP. XV. The Ascensional difference, Declination, and Amplitude, of the Sun
or a Star, and the Latitude of the Place, any two of them given, to find the
rest.
T the Amplitude or Ortive Latitude is the arch of the Horizon between the
rising-point of a Star and the full East point. This is the Hypotenusa of the
Horizontal Triangle, expressed in both the Schemes of the former Chapt. Now I
told you Book 3.2. that if any two parts of a Rectangled Triangle be given with
the Right angle, the rest may be easily found; observe then your Triangle A B C
in the first Scheme of the former Chapter, and likewise in the Meridional
Projection of your Planisphere, you shall see the very same. For the Finitor
being set to the Latitude, C shall be where the Tropic of Cancer cuts the
Finiter: the arch of the Meridian between C and the Equator is C A and the
Declination: thence in the Equator to the center is A B the Base, and the
Ascensional Difference B C in the Horizon is the Amplitude; B is the complement
of Latitude; A is 90 degr. C is unknown, and we need it not, else, if you have
read the third Book, I hope you can find him.

Here are six Cases.
1. Admit now that the Declination and Amplitude be given, put the term of the
Amplitude (I mean the point where it ends, counting from the Center) upon the
Parallel of the Declination, and your Triangle is formed, and thereby the
Ascensional difference and the complement of Latitude are discovered. 2. Or if
the Declination and Ascensional difference be given, number the Ascensional
difference from the Center downwards in the Equator: Then go up in a Meridian
as many degrees as the Declination comes to, and to the point where you end
(which is C) set the Finiter, so he is placed to your Latitude, and the
Amplitude also is shown. 3. Or if the Declination and Latitude be given, the
Finiter being set to the Latitude, follow the Parallel of Declination to the
Finiter there is C, thence go down by a Meridian to A in the Equator, thence in
the Equator to Bat the Center, thence turn by the Finiter to C, and you have
compassed your Triangle, and therefore have all known but C. 4. If the Latitude
and Ascensional difference be given, the Finiter being set to the Latitude,
count from the Center in the Equator to the end of the Ascensional difference,
there is A: Go up thence in a Meridian to the Finiter; there is C: Go thence in
the Finiter to the Center: there is B. 5. If the Latitude and Amplitude be
given, the Finiter being set to the Latitude, count from the Center (B) in the
Finiter to the end of the Amplitude (where shall be C) go down thence in a
Meridian to the Equator, (where is A) thence in the Equator return to the
Center B. 6. If the Amplitude and Ascensional difference be given, prick the
end of the Amplitude numbered in the Finiter from the Center, and prick the end
of the Ascensional difference, numbered in the Equator from the Center: then
turn about the Reet till some one of the Meridians cut both these pricks, and
that shall make up the Triangle.
Note, that for South Stars, or the Sun in South Signs, this Triangle lies on
the South Side the center, and above the Finiter; but for North Signs it lies
North of the center, and below the Finiter.

CHAP. XVI. To do the same in the Equinoctial Projection.
HEre serves the second figure of the Horizontal Triangle in Chap. 14. where B
A is the Ascensional difference; C A the Declination, B C the Amplitude, B
complement of the Latitude.

If the Latitude and Declination be given, number the Declination on the Label
inwards, and at the end make a prick, turn this prick to the Horizon of the
Matter, and so shall the outward arch of the Label, be C A, the shorter arch of
that Horizon B C, and an arch of the Limb B A of your Triangle.

If the Latitude and Amplitude be given, do as in this Example. I observed
Sirius to rise 27 from the East Southward my Latitude is 52 degr.. I go to the
52 Meridian on the Matter, reckoned from the Center on the South Side, because
the Star is Southern, as his rising shows. This 52 Meridian being my Horizon
(as Book 2.2.) I number in him the Amplitude of Sirius, from Oriens toward
Meridies 27, and thereto I lay the Label; and I see my Horizon cuts the Label
in 16, that is C A the South Decimation of Sirius: and between the Label and
Oriens in the Limb, I have B A 22, his Ascensional difference. If you can do
these two, you may resolve the four other Cases of this Chapter with like
facility. View but the Scheam in the Book, and in your Planisphear, and that
alone will instruct you.

CHAP. XVII. To find the Semi-diurnal and Semi-nocturnal Arches of the Sun or
Stars: the time of their Rising and Setting: and the length of their Day and
Night: by Declination, and the Latitude of the Place.
SEt the Finiter to the Latitude, (as-in the first Mode of the Meridional
Projection.) Then seek the Parallel of the Declination of the Sun or Star,
North, or South, as it happens to be. That Parallel shall be divided by the
Finiter into two arches: the arch above the Finiter is the Semi-diurnal arch,
in which you may count the time of Rising and Setting, and the Length of the
Day: that below is the Semi-nocturnal arch, in which you may reckon the length
of the Night; or if your Question be of a Star, the time he spends under the
Horizon.

Example. In the first Scheme of the 14th Chapter, D E is the Tropic of
Cancer, that is the 23 Parallel of North Declination: C E is the Semi-diurnal
arch: C D the Semi-nocturnal. And you shall find in the Meridional Projection
of your Planisphear those arches are divided by the Meridians; and the arch C E
contains 124 degr. 10 min. which turned into hours and minutes, (accounting
every degree 4 minutes of Time, and every 15 degrees an hour,) is 8 hours 16
min. 40 sec. half the length of our longest Day, and the arch C D contains
55. degrees. 50 min. that is, three hours 43 min. 20 sec. half the length of our
shortest Night: therefore at three hours 43 min. after midnight the Sun Rises
in the Tropic, and sets so much before midnight, that is, at eight hours 16
min. 40 sec. and so may you find your desire in any other Parallel.

Example. 2. I observe that Fomahant his Meridian Altitude is but 6.30 min.
therefore by Chap. 13 he declineth Southward 31. I would know how long he
shines with us; and I presently see in the Meridional Projection of my
Planisphear, that his Parallel has but 38 degr. above the Horizon; that is, he
will set two hours 32 min. after he is South; and the whole time he shines in
our Horizon, is five hours four minutes.

Example. 3. Lyra her Declination is 38.30 min. North; and I see his Parallel
comes within 45 min. of the Horizon, in the North part of the Meridian, but
never touches it: therefore I conclude that Lyra never sets with us at all.

CHAP. XVIII. To find the same, in the Equinoctial Projection.
TUrn about the Reet till the Suns place in the Ecliptic, or the point of the
Star, touch your proper Horizon: and that on the North side, if the Declination
be North, or on the South side, if it be South. Lay the Label to the Sun or
Star in the Horizon, and between the Label and Meridies upon the Limb you shall
have the Semi-diurnal arch, both in degrees, and in hours and minutes. And you
shall observe that those Stars whose Declination is greater then the complement
of your Latitude (as Lyra's was in the last Chap.) will never touch the Horizon
at all. For Stars of such Declination, if they be North, never set; and if they
be South, never rise at our Town.

But what shall I do if the Star be not in my Reet? Then will I number his
Right Ascension on the Limb of the Reet, and having thereto laid the Label, I
will number his Declination upon the Label from the Limb inwards, and where it
ends make a prick by the edge of the Label, in the Reet, for him: for there is
the place of the Sta: but if the Stars place happen to be in a window of the
Reet, where the Reet is perforated, then I will make the prick upon the Labels
edge at the Stars Declination, and turn that prick to the Horizon. I may pintch
the Label close with the Reet, and turn both together, which willbe the
handsomer way, but if I move the Labels prick alone to the Horizon, it is
sufficient for this Problem, which needs no more words.

CHAP. XIX. To find the beginning and end of Twilight, by the Suns Declination,
and the Latitude of the Place.
SEt the Planisphear in the first Mode of the Meridional Projection; then turn
the Planisphear that the Zenich may be downwards, and the Almicanters mostly
below the Horizon. Then go to the 18th Almicanter below the Horizon: and
wheresoever the Parallel of the Suns Declination does cut that Almicanter,
there is the beginning and end of Twilight: and because every Parallel is
divided by the Meridians into 12 hours, or 180 degr. (every 15 degr. being one
hour) therefore you may easily count how far the point where Twilight begins,
is distant from Midnight, or from Noon, or from Sunrise, or Sunset in the
Horizon.

Example. In our Latitude 52 degr. 15 min. my Planisphear set as aforesaid, I
find that where the 18th Almicanter cutteth the Equator under the Horizon,
there cutteth also in the same intersection the 30th Meridian, or second Hour
Circle from the Axis and Center; by which I gather, that when the Sun is in the
Equator, the twilight begins two hours before 6 or Sunrising, and ends
likewise at 8 of the clock at Night, the Sun then setting, (as you may see) at
6. Likewise where the Winter Tropic cuts the 18th Almicanter, there cuts also
the first Meridian from the Axis Southward; showing that in the depth of
Winter Twilight begins 4 minutes after 6 in the morning, and lasts till 5
hours 56 minutes afternoon. Likewise I see that about the beginning of where
the Sun declineth North-wards about 20 degrees, the Twilight lasts till
midnight, and that from that time till the Sun comes to (that is, from May 11
to July 11, or thereabouts,) we have no dark night at all, unless the Sky be
Cloudy, for in all that time the Sun is never found above 18 degrees under the
Horizon.

CHAP. XX. To find the time of the Cosmical Rising and Setting of the Stars, by
their Declination and Right Ascension, and the Latitude of the Place.
AStar is said to rise Cosmically when he rises at the same instant with the
Sun.

To find it, use the Equinoctial Projection: Turn the Star (being found in your
Reet) to the East part of your Horizon, and look what degree of the Ecliptic
cutteth the same East part of your Horizon; for when the Sun comes to that
degree, the Star and Sun shall rise both together. If the Star be not in your
Reet, put him in with ink, as you put in the rest, Book 1.7. if his place light
upon a window, or hole of the Reet, prick him on the edge of the Label, and
hold Reet and Label close together, while you turn him to the Horizon.

Example. Sirius I have among 40 other principal Stars in my Reet, and would
advise you not to be without him, for he is a little Sun in a Winters Night, to
tell you how the time passes; he is called by the Latins both Canis, and
Canicula; for they had no name for the little Dog, but called him by the Greek
name Procyon, as Pliny witnesses Lib. 18 Chap. 28: yet I have seen a late
Writer, who takes upon him to teach the College of Physicians both Physic and
Astrology, before he has well learned either of them: who in his
Obtrectations upon the Pharmacopaea Land. in the Chapter of Vinum Scilliticum
Galeni, betrays his ignorance herein, as elsewhere in 100 other things, which I
could show; for in that very Chapter page 147 of his fourth Impression, in 24
short lines he commits 5 absurd errors. 1. He makes it doubtful whether Canis
be to be taken for Sirius, or Procyon. 2. He goes about to teach Galen where
Squills grow; and that there is no hilly ground near the Sea. 3. He supposes
that the Acronycal rising of the Dog (which happens in the depth of Winter) is
a fitter time to gather Squils, then the Heliacal rising, which happens near
unto the Cosmical, in the heat of Summer. 4. He either supposes that Squils
grow in the Parallel of London, or that by the rising of the Dog at London men
should gather Squils in Greece or Spain. 5. He tells the College that both the
Dogs are between the Equator and the South Pole, which indeed is news, if it
were true. Let the ingenuous Reader pardon this digression, and I proceed.

This Sirius I brought to our Horizon, (the 52) and found that there rises
with him in the Ecliptic 18. in like manner, with Procyon rises 6: therefore
Sirius rises Cosmically with us August 1: and Procyon 12 days sooner. But in
Greece and Spain, in the Latitude 38 degr. Sirius rises with 4, that is a
fortnight sooner.

A Star is said to Set Cosmically, when the Sun rises at his setting. Place
the Star therefore on the West part of your Horizon: then look what degree of
the Ecliptique rises in the East part; for when the Sun comes to that degree,
the Star shall set Cosmically.

Example. I brought Sirius to the South-west part of our Horizon, where he
uses to set. And in the South-east part I saw 23 degrees in the Ecliptique
rising: therefore when the Sun is in 23. (which is about November, 5. then
shall Sirius set Cosmically. But at Athens in Lat. 37,

His Cosmicall Rising is in 4. July 17 His Cosmicall Setting is in 9. Nov. 20
The Pleiades in our Lat Cosmically Rise. in 12 Apr. 22. The Pleiades in our Lat
Cosmically Set in 29 Nov. 11. At Athens Cosmically. Rise in 19 April 30. At
Athens Cosmically. Set in 27 Novem. 9. Arcturus in our Lat. Cosmically. Ri. in
0 Sep. 13. Arcturus in our Lat. Cosmically. Set. in 4 June 15. At Athens
Cosmically. Rise in 10 Sept. 23. At Athens Cosmically. Set in 6. May 17.
CHAP. XXI. To find the time when any Star rises or sets Acronycally, by
his Declination, and Right Ascension, and the Latitude of the Place.
WHen a Star Rises just at Sunsetting, he is said to rise Acronically. To
find the time, turn the Star to the East part of the Horizon in the Equinoctial
Projection, and mark what degree of the Ecliptique descends in the West: for
when the Sun comes to that degree, the Star shall rise Acronically.

Example. When Sirius touches the South East Quarter of our Horizon, I see 18.
setting. Therefore when the Sun is in 18. Sirius rises Acronically.

A Star sets Acronically, when he sets with the Sun. To find the time,
place the Star setting, in the West-part of the Horizon, and see what degree of
the Ecliptique sets with him: for when the Sun is in that degree, the Star
shall set Acronically. Thus in our Latitude.

Sirius Acronically. Rises in 18. Jan. 27. Sirius Acronically. Seteth in 23.
May 3. At Athens Sirius Acronically. Ri. in 4. Janu. 13. At Athens Sirius
Acronically. Set. in 9. May 20. Pleiades Acronically. Rises in 13. Octo. 26.
Pleiades Acronically. Seteth in 29 May 10. At Athens Pleiades Acroni. Rises in
19 Nov. 1. At Athens Pleiades Acroni. Seteth in 27 May 8. Arcturus Acronically.
Rises in 0. March 10. Arcturus Acronically. Seteth in 4 Dec. 15. At Athens
Arcturus Acroni. Rises in 10. Mar. 20. At Athens Arcturus Acroni. Seteth in 6.
Nove. 18.
CHAP. XXII. To find when a Star rises or sets Heliacally.
AStar rises Heliacally when he geteth out of the beams of the Sun, and
begins to be seen in the East a little before Sun rise. And a Star is said
to set Heliacally when he gets into the beams of the Sun, and begins to
be least in the evening by reason of the Suns opproach to him. Those Stars
which you see nearest the East Horizon in the Morning Twilight are Heliacall
Risers; and those which you see nearest the Westpart of the Horizon, in the
evening Twilight are Heliacall Setters. For this no exact rule can be given,
for all men have not like quickness of sight, nor all Stars like brightness,
nor all Climates, Countries and Days of the Year the same clearness of Air.
And the Moon often times augmenteth the Twilight, when she is within a few days
of the Change, and keeps the Stars longer Combust. Commonly about twenty
days before their Acronicall setting they come within the Sun beams, and so
set Heliacally, and they appear again, (that is, rise Heliacally) about twenty
days after their Cosmicall rising. But if they be great Stars, the Air clear,
your sight good, the angle made between the Ecliptique and the Horizon great,
they may appear sooner: and later in the contrary Cases. According to this rule
the Pleiades set Heliacally, now at Athens in 7. and rise Heliacally in 9. so
they should be Combust there 32 days: but because they be Stars of less
Magnitude, we may perhaps allow them 40 days as Hesiod did in his time, in the
beginning of his Second book of Weeks and Days. (...).

CHAP. XXIII. To find the Age when any Astrologer lived, and what time of the
Solar year the Seasons happened in his Country, by knowing his Latitude, and the
Rising of any Star in his time.
THe old Grecians, and after them the Latins, before Julius Caesar especially,
designed the Seasons of the Year by the rising and setting of some notable
Stars. Hesiod begins his second book of Weeks and Days: with this Georgical
Canon.

(...)
(...).
That is, when the Pleiades rise, begin to Mow, and to Plow when they set; And
in the same Book Verse. 182. he says (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)


(...). That is, 60 days after the Winter Tropique Arcturus rises
Acronically, and then appears the Swallow, the Spring being then new begun.

These and the like rules were the Husband-mans Almanac. by which they
measured the Solar Year, and the return of the Seasons. For in their Civil
Year, consisting of Lunar Months, by reason of an intercalary Month which was
added every third Year, and somewhat ofter, the Seasons could happen upon the
same day of the month yearly, but sometimes 2 or 3 weeks sooner or later, as
our moveable Feasts do. The rising and setting of the fixed Stars keep the same
distance Yearly, from the Equinoctial and Solstitiall points, for a man's age
near enough; but longer those rules cannot last without some perceivable error:
for in 100. years the Stars go forward in Longitude. according to Tycho. 1
degree 25 minutes, by reason whereof the risings and settings of the Stars
happen later in the Year, about a day and half every 100 years in the same
Latitude.

Now if you would note in what Age a Star had such a rising or setting, in such
a Latitude, as for Example. In what age Arcturus rose 60 days after mid-winter
in the Latitude of Asera in Boeotia near Athens, whose Latitude is 37, and
consequently how long since Hesiod lived, in whose days Arcturus had such
rising, you shall reason thus: 60. days after the Winter Tropic the Sun is in
1 degree by the Ephemeris for in those 60 days near his Perigium he goes
about 61 degrees. I am therefore to seek when Arcturus did rise at Athens with
the opposite degree of the Ecliptique, 1 degree (the Sun is in 1 degree, then
setting over against it.) I seek the Longitude and Latitude of Arcturus, and
find in Tycho'es Tables that Anno Domi. 1600. Arcturus had Longitude 18. 39
minutes, Latitude B. 31.02. minutes: then I will suppose that Hesiod lived 830.
years before Christ (for there some Chronologers place him, but without any
good proof that I find) that is, 2430 years before Anno Domi. 1600. in which
space of time Arcturus must have increased his Longitude by Tycho' Hypothesis
34 degrees 25 minutes, which being subducted out of the Longitude which
Arcturus had Anno Domi. 1600. leaves his Longitude for the year before Christ
830. 14. degree 14. minutes, his Latitude was then and ever 31.02 minutes. Now
from this Longitude and Latitude, I get his Right Ascension, and Declination,
by Chap. 34. of this Book, where I find Ascension 180. degrees, Declination
North 34. degrees 15 minutes: those had, I place Arcturus in my Reet according
to that Right Ascension and Declination (as was taught Book 1 7. and Book
4.18.) and by Chapter 21. I find 4 rising with him; and at the same time 4.
setting in the same Herizon of Athens. But I ought to find 1 degree setting in
Hesieds time. Therefore I will suppose again that Hesiod lived 1130 years
before Christ: and proceeding as upon the former supposition, I find that then
29. degrees did set at his Acronical rising: but I ought to find 1 degree
rising. And seeing it is hereby found, that in 300 years his Acronicall setting
varies 5. degrees, or days; I take the proportional part of that time, and lay
that in the year 1010. before Christ, Arcturus did set Acronically 60. days
after the Winter Trepique: and then lived Hosiod, or soon after. For being an
Astrologer himself (as Pliny tells us Lib. 18.25. saying, Hu^us quaque nomine
extat Astrologia,) it is likely he would not use an antiquated rule. Arcturus
therefore rose Acronically at Athens in Hesiods time, in 1 degree, that is,
about Febr. 9. of our Julian year, as it now goes: then the Swallow used to
come to Athens: but in our Age he rises Acronically at Athens in 10 that is
Mar. 20. and at Ecton or Northampton, 0. that is, Mar. 10.

By this you may see that the old Astrological Rules concerning the rising and
setting of the Stars, left us by Hesiod, Cato, Aratus, Varro, Palladius,
Virgil, Ovid Pliny, Columella, Ptolomy: and other Ancient Authors cannot serve
for our Age, nor for every Latitude; and the best use we can make of them, is
to find the Age, when they lived.

Pliny, Lib. 18.26. says, that in Caesurs Calender octavo Calend. Martij was
Hirundinis adventus and jostero die Arcturi exor us Vespertimus. Which agrees
not to Caesar's time.

Also Lib. 2.47. he says, Ardentissimo aestatis tempore exoritur Caniculae
fidus Sole primem partem Leonis ingrediente, qui dies est 15. ante Caelend.
Augusti (that is, July 18.) Rome is in Latitude 42, degrees, Pliny lived about
70. years after Christ; then was Canicula (that is Sarius) in 17. degrees
Latitude, 39, Right Ascension, 79 Declination, South, 16, and did rise at Rome
Cosmically, decimo quinto Calend. Augusti, or July 18. as thus far he reports
truly: but the Sun was not then in 1 degrees. as Pliny says but in 23 degrees: for
the Sun entered in his time not decimo quinto Calend, Augusti, but octavo
Calend. Augusti. The Sun in those days entering the several Signs mostly on
the 5 day of the several months, as in our Age about the 11th day as
Astronomers well know. Pliny seems to have taken his Astrology upon trust.
And I cannot devise what should lead him to suppose, that howsoever the
Equinoxes and Solstices in his time happened octavo Calend. (as he denies not)
yet the Sun entered into a new Sign about the Ides of every Month, and that
the Equinoctial and Soistitial points were in Octavis partibus signorum, as if
the Sun came not to the Equinoctial till he came to the 8th degree of Aries.
See Pliny Book 18. Chapter 25, 26, 27, 28. He seems to distruct the Julian
Calender, and to adhear more to the account used by Varro de Rerustica Lib.
1.27. but either he understood neither of them well, or I do not well
understand him.

Now Sirius rises in our Horizon with 18, about August 1, in the Declination
of the heat, who in Plinyes time rose ardentissimo astatis tempore. And our
Dog-dayes if we follow the Dogs rising will be every age colder and colder, and
at length fall in Winter. It were better to reduce them to the Suns entrance
into Leo, or to Cancer, 23, rather as they were in Plinyes time: and to count
the ardentissimum tempus a fortnight before and a fortnight after: for Sirius
was not by the Ancients supposed the cause of the sultry heat of Summer but a
concomitant sign of that Season, whereof the Suns continuance in the
North-Signes was the cause.

Would you know also when they began to Plow and to Mow in Greece in Hesiods
Time? He says, when the Pleiades rise, begin to Mow, and to Plow when they
set. The Pleiades (I mean the brightest of them) 1010 years before Christ, were
in 17.25. minutes, Latitude 4 degrees North. Declination therefore by Chapter
34) 11 degrees, Right Ascension 14 degrees; therefore they rose Cosmically at
Athens or Ascra, ( Hesiods birth Place) in 10, that is, as our Julian year now
goes, about March 20. The Heliacall rising is about 20. days after the
Cosmicall (Chapter 22.) that is about April 9. Therefore either March 20. at
the Cosmical rising, or April 9. at the Heliacall rising, they began to Mow,
and I think he means the Cosmicall; the Acronicall rising was there in his Age
in 10. about Sep. 23. which is too late beyond reason. Now that they should
begin Mowing in Greece within 10 days after the Equinoctial is not strange,
seeing the first fruits of ripe Corn were offered at Jerusalem yearly at
Easter; which fell ordinarily 15. days after the Equinoctial, or thereabout.
Duet. 16. And in Egypt - cum falce arva visunt Paulo ante Calendas Apriles,
mossis autem peragitur Maio, says Pliny 18.18. viz. Harvest began in Egypt a
little before April, and April then began 8, days after the Equinoctial only.

The Cosmicall setting of the Plaiades at Athens, in Hesiods time 1010. years
before Christ was in 18. degrees October. 1. then began they to Plow and Sow: the
Egyptians began Novembri mense incipiente Pliny 18.18. But if Hesiod were now
alive at Ascra he would find the Plaiades rise Cosmically, with 19 Alpril 30.
and set Cosmically in 27 Nov. 9. so much are his Georgique rules now
antiquated, and serve for little else but to show how many Ages ago he lived;
and how the Seasons happened in his Age.

CHAP. XXIV. The Latitude of your Place, the Declination, Altitude, Azimuth,
and Hour of the Sun or Stars, any three of these being given, so find the other
two.
SEt your Planisphear in the first Mode of the Meridional Projection, The
Complemental Triangle.
and you shall find all these five in one Oblique-angled Triangle; which I use
to call the Complemental Triangle; because it consists of three Sides, which
are all Complements. (Others may call it as they please.)

A B in the Limb between the Pole and Zenith, Complement of Latitude.

A C in a Meridian, Complement of the Declination, or the Supplement of that
Complement.

B C in an Azimuth, Complement of the Altitude.

A at the Pole is the Angle of Horary distance from the Meridian, whose full
measure is in the Equinoctial line; but because every Parallel is divided by
the Meridians into 180. degrees as the Equator is, and every 5th. and 15th.
Meridian plainly distinguished from the rest in the Fabrique of this
Instrument, therefore you may easily count the angle of the Hour in any
Parallel.

B at the Zenith, is the angle of the Azimuth, accounted from the North part of
the Meridian: his full measure is in the Finiterline of the Reet; but you may
number it in any Almicanter because every 5th. and 15th. Azimuths are
distinguished on the Reet, as the Meridians are on the Matter.

C the place of the Sun or Star, in the meeting of the Meridian and Azimuth, is
the third angle, which commonly is neither known nor enquired; but it may be
found when you please, by turning the Triangle, as has been often showed.

Now if you be versed in the 8 last Chapters of the third Book, you may easily
find any of the requisites of this Chapter without any more direction.
Nevertheless for the Learners sake, I shall exemplify this general Problem,
in the 4 next Chapters, and also further in the 31, 32, and 33. Chapters
hereafter following. See the Scheam Chap. 26.

CHAP. XXV. To find the Altitude and Azimuth of the Sun or Stars, at any time
proposed; the Latitude and Declination being known.
YOur Planisphear set in the first Mode of the Meridional Projection, as in the
former Chapter, go to the Parallel of the Declination of the Sun or Star, and
follow him through all the Meridians from the Finiter to the Limb; (which is
the Meridian of your Place;) and thence back again to the Finiter, and you
shall find at the first sight what Almicanter and Azimuth cross the Parallel in
any point proposed: and so have you the Altitude and Azimuth thereof.

Example. June 10. the Sun was in the Tropique of Cancer, and so makes his
diurnal revolution in the 23 Parallel of Declination; I follow this Parallel,
the Tropique, from the Horizon upwards, and having gone 4 degrees, I meet the
ragged arch or hour line of 4. (which is the 120th. Meridian from the South)
there crosses the second Almicantar, and the three and fiftieth Azimuth from
the North; whereby I learn that at 4. in the Morning, June 10, the Sun is 2
degrees high; and in Azimuth from the North 53. Thence going on 15 degrees, I
come to the hour circle of 5. where cutteth the 10th. Almicantar almost, and
Azimuth 64 degrees, and better: going 15 degrees further I come to the
Axtree-line, which is the hour circle of 6. and there I find the Suns Altitude
18 degrees, and his Azimuth from the North 75 degrees, etc. And look what
Altitudes and Azimuths I find at 4, 5, 6. etc, in the Morning, the same I find
at the afternoon hours, that have like distance from Noon: because the Eastern
and Western Hemisphears are alike, and the same lines serve them both.

Thus you may do in any other Parallel, and for any Star, as well as the Sun;
having his Declination given. And so you may make Tables of the Suns Altitude
and Azimuth, at every hour, and quarter of an hour, if you please, for every
day throughout the year: and that as fast as you can write them, without
changing the posture of the Planisphear at all.

CHAP. XXVI. The Latitude, Altitude, and Azimuth given, to find the
Declination, and the Hour.
EXample. Having observed the Suns Altitude 13. degrees, and his Azimuth from
the South Westward 28 in our Latitude 52. my Planisphear set in the same manner
as Chapter 25. I sought out the 13th. Almicantar at the Limb of my Reet, and
followed him inwards till I came between Azimuth 28, and 29, there I met the
30th. Meridian, and the 20 Parallel of Declination, by which I gathered that it
was 2 of the clock after noon, and that the Sun declined Southward 20 degrees.

Note here, that the hour of a Star thus found, is not the hour of the Night,
unless the Star happen to be opposite to the Sun; but it is the time the Star
lacks to come to the South, or the time of his course from the South.

diagram

CHAP. XXVII. The Latitude, Declination, and Altitude, given, to find the Hour,
and Azimuth.
HEre the three sides of the Complemental Triangle are given, and the angles A
and B sought.

Example, March the 10 in the Morning the Sun being in the Equinoctial, I
observed his Altitude 32 degrees: the Finiter being set to my Latitude 52. as
before, I went to the 32. Almicantar in the Reet, and where I found him
crossing the Equinoctial line of the Matter, there I conclude was the place of
the Sun at the time of my observation; and the angle C of my Triangle: there
the 30 Meridian passing, showed me that the angle A at the Pole was 30, or,
that it wanted half a degree, that is 2 minutes of time, of ten of the clock:
and there also the Azimuth 36 from the South (or from the North 143) showed me
that the angle B at the Zenith is 143, the Azimuth from the North, and his
supplement 36, the Azimuth from the South.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Declination, Altitude, and Azimuth of the Sun given, to find
the Hour, and Latitude.
IN the Meridional Projection, look in the Reet where the Almicantar for the
Altitude given, and the Azimuth given do cross; and turn the point of the Reet
where they cross to the Parallel of the Suns Declination upon the Matter: the
Meridian that cutteth there shows the hour, and between the Finiter and the
Pole, or between the Equator and the Zenith, you have the Latitude in the Limb.

CHAP. XXIX. To find the Hour of the Night, by the Northing, or Southing,
Rising or Setting of any Star.
USe for this the Equinoctial Projection. And if the Star be in your Reet, turn
him to the North or South of the Meridian line, or to the East or West part of
the Horizon in your Planisphear, as you see him in the Heaven. Then turn the
Label to the Suns place in the Ecliptic of the Reet, and it shall show the
hour in the Limb: but if the Star be not in the Reet, you shall supply him by
the shift used Chap. 18.

Example. March 10th. I saw Sirius setting in the South-West; and having turned
him to the same place in my Planisphear, I laid the Label to 0. which was the
Suns place for that day; and it cut in the Limb 11. hours 3 minutes past noon.

Again, December 1. Seeing Lucida Pleiadum in the Meridian, I turned the Star
till he touched the Meridian line of the Matter; then laying the Label to 19.
the place of the Sun, I found it was 10. hours 17. minutes at Night,

The same Night I saw Ras Aben, or the brightest in the Dragons head under the
Pole, in the North part of the Meridian; wherefore I placed him on the Meridian
line between the Center and Septentrio: and the Label laid to 19. showed me it
was 12. 36. minutes; that is more then half an hour past Midnight.

CHAP. XXX. The time of Day or Night given, to find in what Coast any Star is:
and how much he is distant from the Horizon, or Meridian.
LAy the Suns place to the hour given, in the Equinoctial Projection, then may
you presently see all the Stars of the Reet in what Coast they are, whether
under the Horizon or above, and how many hours they lack, or are past either
the Horizon or Meridian.

Example. Sitting within doors at seven of the clock on Christmas day at Night,
I desired to know what Stars were rising, and what near the Meridian, wherefore
laying 14. to 7. of the clock afternoon, I saw in the Reet the Rams horn, a
little past South. The Plaiades wanted 1. hour 28. minutes of South, as the
Label showed me in the Limb; was rising, but Cor. not yet up. I would know now
what he wanted of rising, therefore I turned forward the Reet till Cor came to
the Horizon, and observed how many degrees of the Reet passed under the Label
(or by any point of the Limb) while the Reet turned: and I found that 0 (and so
any other point) moved on in the Limb 10 degrees in the while that Cor was
coming to the Horizon. Whereupon I understood that he would rise 40 minutes
after.

CHAP. XXXI. The Time, and Latitude given, to find the Altitude, and Azimuth of
any Star: and thereby to get the knowledge of the Stars.
FInd the hour of the Star, by the former Chapter. And by the Label observe his
Declination: then set your Planisphear in the Meridional Projection, and in the
Parallel of the Stars Declination, number his hour-distance from the South;
where the number ends, set a needles point; there is the place of the Star; and
the Almicantar and Azimuth that cut him there, show your desire.

Example. I would know the cloudy Star Praesepe, in the breast of Cancer (which
indeed is a glimmering light, made up of five small and bright Stars as by the
Telescope appearech) This Praesepe I found by the last Chapter to want 6. hours
21. min. of South; his Declination, found by the Label, is 21. degrees North.
Therefore setting the Finiter to our Latitude 52, I follow the 21. Parallel of
North Declination, from the Meridian till I come 5 degrees 15 minutes past the
Axletree (because I found him 6 hours 21 minutes before the Meridian) there the
17th. Azimuth, from the East Northward, cutteth the Parallel of Praesepe; and
there cutteth him also the 13th. Almicantar. Now to find him out, I lay my
Planisphear Horizontally, setting the Meridian of my Planisphear in the
Meridian of the Place (by Chap. 3, and 4.) and I turn my Label and Sights to
the Azimuth of Praesepe 17 degrees from the East Northward, and before my
Sights I hang up a Plumb-line upon a Pole, to keep the Azimuth; then keeping my
station, I set my Planisphear upon his edge, or hang him upon a staf with a
socket, in the Azimuth of the Star; so that the Plumbet show Altitude 13
degrees (by Chap. 1.) then do the Sights point just upon Praesepe, and would
teach me the Star, if I did not know him before.

CHAP. XXXII. The Latitude of the Place, the Declination of a Star, with his
Altitude, or Azimuth given, to find both the Hour of the Star, and the Hour of
the Night.
BY this Chapter you may find the time of Night, at any time, by any Star, if
he be visible above the Horizon. Use the first Mode of the Meridional
Projection: and having Observed the Altitude or Azimuth of the Star, look where
that Altitude or Azimuth cutteth the Parallel of the Stars Declination, there
cutteth also a Meridian which shows the hour of the Star, that is, the
distance of a Star from the Meridian in hours and minutes. And by this hour of
the Star, to get the hour of the Night, you shall place the Star at the hour
found, in the Equinoctial Projection: which done, the Label laid to the place
of the Sun shall show the hour of the Night in the Limb.

Example. December 25. I observed Procyon to be full East, his Declination
North, is 6 degrees 3 minutes. In the Meridional Projection I looked where the
Axis of the Reet (which is the East Azimuth) cut the sixth of the North
Parallels, and I found the intersection 1 degree Southward from the Axtree of
the Matter (or hour-line of six) there also cutteth the 5 Almicantar, which
shows more then I sought, that Procyon was 5 degrees 30 minutes above the
Horizon. Now having the hour of the Star, 6 hours, 4 minutes, before the
Meridian, I take the Equinoctial Projection, and having laid the Label one
degree from Oriens Southward in the Limb, I turn Procyon to the Label, which
shows his Hour 6 hours 4 minutes, and leaving him there, I turn away the
Label to 14 the Suns place, and it shows me in the Limb the time of night 6
hours 26 min. past noon. And the same I might have found, if instead of his
Azimuth, I had observed his Altitude 5 degree, the crossing of that Almicantar
which the 6th Parallel would have given me the same hour of the Star, and
further, his Azimuth, undesired.

CHAP. XXXIII. Your Latitude known, and the Altitude, and Azimuth, of any Star,
Planet, or Comet, observed, and the time of Night: how to find his Right
Ascension, and Declination.
THis Case differs little from the Case of Chapter 26. where, from the same
things given, the Declination and hour was required. For the hour and Right
Ascension are in a sort the same thing, only the account of the Right Ascension
begins always at 0. and is made in degrees and minutes of a degree. The
account of the Hour begins at the Meridian, and is made in hours and minutes
of an hour. Fifteen whole degrees make an hour, and consequently 15 minutes of
a Degree make one minute of Time, for in every minute of Time, there passes
the Meridian a quarter of a degree of the Equinoctial. The time of Night is
here further required to be given; which may be had by Chap 29. or 32.

The rule. When you observe the Altitude and Azimuth of the Star, observe also
the time of Night, by Chapter 29. or 32. and to save you labor herein, you
shall do best to observe your Altitude and Azimuth, when some known Star is
seen just in the Meridian. Then with your Latitude, and the Altitude, and
Azimuth of the Star, get by Chapter 26. the Declination, and hour of the Star:
Then in the Equinoctial Projection, lay the degree of the Sun to the hour of
the Night: thence turn the Label to the hour of the Star, and you have his
Right Ascension in the Limb of the Reet, between 0 and the Label.

Example. Put case I would find the Declination and Right Ascension of Lucida
Pleiadum. The Sun being in Sagittarius 20. December 2. I observed that when
Australis caudae Caeti is full South, Lucida Pleiadum was near South-east viz.
in the Azimuth 67. from the Meridian, and the Altitude of the said Star 45. 0.
hence, by Chapter 26. I find his Declination 23 degrees North, and the
hour-distance from the Meridian 45 degr. that is 3 hours before noon. Then in
the Equinoctial Projection (according to Chapter 29.) I set Australis caud.
Cati in the Meridian line of the Matter. and turning the Label to 9. of the
clock (which is the hour of the Star) I find in the Limb of the Reet (numbering
from 0, to the Label) 52 degrees, the Right Ascension of Lucida Pleiadum: and
where the 23 degrees of the Label now touches the Reet, there may I prick the
Star in my Reet, if I have him not before; the time of night is easily seen, by
turning the Label to the Suns place, it shows 7. hours 12 minutes at night:
but I need not so much as look on that, though by placing Australis caud. Caeti
in the South, I have the time implicitly. The Proposition therefore, might
have been thus made; Your Latitude known, and the Altitude and Azimuth of an
unknown Star observed, just at the time when any known Star is in the Meridian;
to find both the Right Ascension, and Declination of the Star unknown.

Note also, that if you observe the unknown Star in the Meridian Azimuth, you
have presently his Declination, by Chapter 13. and the Right Ascension of
Culmen Caeli, is the Stars Right Ascension.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The Declination, and Right Ascension of any Star given, to find
his Longitude, and Latitude.
LOok the Stars place in the Matter, (which is the intersection of the Meridian
of his Right Ascension with the Parallel of his Declination) and make a prick
there. Then your Planisphear being set in the second Mode of the Meridional
Projection, you shall presently find the Longitude and Latitude in the Reet:
for the Azimuth cutting the said prick, shows his Longitude, and the
Almicantar his Latitude.

Example. November 14. 1639. I observed a Star of the third Magnitude in the
Heart of Cetus, which I know to be no common Star, because I had never noted it
before, neither could I find it in the Tables of Ptolemy, Tycho, or any other:
the Right Ascension thereof was 30. 13 minutes, the Declination 4. 50. minutes
South, as I observed by 2 way which hereafter shall be showed Chapter 44. I
made therefore a prick with ink in the Matter of my Brass Planisphear, where the
30th. Meridian (numbered from the Center toward my right hand) and the 5th.
Parallel of South Declination do cross; regarding also the odd minutes. Then as
soon as my ink was dry, I set the Finitor in the Ecliptique line of the Matter
with the Zenith South-wards; because the Latitude of the Star was South, and I
saw the 26. Azimuth from the Axtree line cutting the prick, and likewise the
16th. Almicantar cutting about 10 minutes below the prick toward the Finiter.
Therefore because in this Mode the Azimuths be Circles of Longitude, and the
Almicantars Parallels of Latitude, (by Book 2.1.) I conclude the Longitude of
Cor Caeti. was 26. and his Latitude 16. 10 minutes South.

When first I observed this strange Star in the said year 1639. and could find
no mention of it in the Tables of Ptolemy, Copernicus, Stadius, Tycho, or
Maginus, I did thereof advertise my very good friends Dr. John Twysden, then in
Kent, and Mr Samuel Foster, Professor of Astronomy in Gresham College, then at
London; who thereupon made the same observation of the Star that I had done,
for the place of it; and we all agreed that it increased in light, and was
above the third Magnitude in December 1639. and that it had no perceivable
Parallax. And as I was thinking to publish some brief advertisment thereof, in
the Latin tongue, that Astronomers beyond the Seas as well as here, might
attend the observation thereof, Mr Foster wrote me word that he had found the
Star pictured in Bayerus his Images, which were printed Anno Domi. 1616. And in
1640. there came to me through Dr Twysdens hands a Treatise of that Star, then
newly Printed, by one Phacylides, Professor of Logique at Franequers, whose
observations agreed with ours. But he thought this Star to have been made of
the great Eclipse of the Moon which happened December 10. 1638. in the foremost
foot of. wherein we were not of his mind, you may read this conceit in his
Book page 197. This Star does often appear, and again disappear; it is sometime
of the 3d. Magnitude, sometime of the 4th. I have seen it often in the Eastern
Hemisphear, seldom in the Western. It is lost sometimes diverse weeks
together: this year I could never see it, till February 2. 1656/7. Such as have
leisure for the Study of these Arts, may do well to observe it, and to search
the reason of its changes: for which purpose I thought it fit to give this
notice.

CHAP. XXXV. The Longitude, and Latitude, of any Star given, to find his Right
Ascension, and Declination; and to place the Stars in the Matter.
THis Problem is the converse of the precedent. The Stars are registered by
their Longitudes and Latitudes, because their Longitudes increase equally, and
their Latitudes remain the same. And so the Tables are easily rectified to any
Age, by Addition or Subtraction of a few degrees or minutes of Longitude only:
but the Right Ascension and Declination of the Stars happen to increase and
decrease very unequally, and must therefore be calculated from Age to Age, from
the Longitude and Latitude whose Tables are more certain.

Set the Planisphear in the second Mode of the Meridional Projection, as in the
former Chapter, and bearing in mind that the Azimuths here are Circles of
Longitude and the Almicantars Parallels of Latitude, look where the Longitude
and Latitude of the Star meet, and there make a prick in the Reet; and look
what Meridian and Parallel of the Matter cut, under that prick they show the
Right Ascension, and Declination of the Star.

Example. Eniph. Alpharats, that is, Os Pegasi, had by Tycho'es Tables An. Dom.
1600. Longitude 26. 22 minutes, Latitude 22.07. North. The Finiter set to the
Ecliptique line of the Matter, and the Zenith toward the North Pole (because the
Stars Declination is North) I count the Longitude of the Star upon the Finiter,
(here Ecliptique) thus. At the Center say I, is 0. thence proceeding rightward
to the Limb, I say, here is 0. whose Right Ascension is 90. thence returning to
the Center, I say, here is 0. upon the Axis of the Reet and Right Ascension
180. upon the Axis of the Matter; thence I proceed in the Finiter to the other
side of the Limb, and say here is 0. bounded by the Limb of the Reet and Right
Ascension 270. bounded by the Limb of the Matter, which Limbs here fall into one
Circle; and are Colurus Solstitiorum: these numbers I keep, and returning back
in the Finiter toward the Center, when I am gone 30 degrees, I say, here
begins. and going on 26. 22. minutes further, I say, thus far is the Star gone
in Longitude. Now here cuts the Finiter (by this account) the Azimuth 35. from
the Limb; in this Azimuth I number the Stars Latitude, by the Almicantars
22.07. and at the end of that number in the said Azimuth I prick the Stars
place. And here I see the 8th. Parallel of North Declination upon the Matter
cutteth him, and the Meridian 51. from the Limb showing the excess of his Right
Ascension above 270. which I kept before. Therefore I conclude the Right
Ascension of Eniph. Alpharats, Anno Dom. 1600, was 321. 20 minutes; and his
Declination 8. degrees. North.

Another Example. In the Year 1670. Aldebaran will have one degree of Longitude
more then he had in Anno Domi. 1600. therefore he will be in 5, 12 minutes
Latitude 5. 31 minutes South. Now because the Latitude is South, I turn the
Zenith toward the South Pole (the Finiter being placed on the Ecliptique line
as before) and beginning at the Center, I number on the Finiter (here
Ecliptique) the Longitude of Aldebaran 65. 12 minutes; and a little beyond the
65th. Azimuth I climb up by the Almicantars, toward the Zenith 5. 31 minutes
to the place Past this on fol. 102 so as it may ly open while that Chapter is
Reading.

diagram of Aldebaran. There the 64. Meridian of the Matter cutteth under him;
she wing his Right Ascension: and likewise the 16th. Parallel almost of North
Declination; showing that Aldebaran declines North almost 16 degrees, though he
have South Latitude 5. 31 minutes.

Another way to place the Stars in the Matter by their Declination and
Horary-distance from the Meridian. See hereafter Chapter 52.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Latitude, and Declination of a Star given, to find his
Longitude, and Right Ascension.
SEt your Planisphear in the second Mode of the Meridional Projection, turning
the Zenith Northward or Southward as the Stars Latitude happens to be North or
South. Then look where the Parallel of the Stars Latitude in the Reet cutteth
the Parallel of the Stars Declination on the Matter, the Azimuth cutting that
intersection shows the Longitude of the Star; and the Meridian there cutting
shows his Right ^scension.

Example. The Declination of Spica, Anno Dom. 1670. will be 9. South, the
Latitude was always 1. 59 minutes South. Now where the second Almicantar
cutteth the 9. Parallel of South Declination, there passes the 19th. Azimuth
from the Axis toward my left hand showing Spica's Longitude 19, and the 17th.
Meridian from the Axis, to which I add a Semicircle (because 0. is at the
Center) and I make 197 degrees the Right Ascension of Spica for 1670.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Longitude, and Latitude of two Stars given, to find their
Distance.
MAke one of the Poles of the Matter to be Pole of the Ecliptique, for this
turn, and set the Star which has most Latitude at his distance in the Limb,
and turn the Zenith to him; count thence by the Meridians the difference of
Longitude, till you come to the other side of your Triangle; and in that side
number either the Latitude from the Equator, or his complement from the Pole;
at the end of this number is the other Star: and the Azimuth passing from him
to the Zenith, shows the distance. This is done by the second Problem of
Obliquangled Triangles. Book 3.15.

Example. In Tycho'es Tables for 1600.

Aldebarans Longitude is 4.12. Latitude 5. 31. min. A.

Sirius Longitude 8. 35. Latitude 39. 30. A.

Difference of Longitude 34. 23.

I number therefore 39. 30 minutes, the Latitude of Sirius from the Equator in
the Limb, or the Complement thereof from the Pole, (all is one,) there I set
the Zenith to stand for Sirius; then because Aldebaran is distant from Sirius
in Longitude 34. 23. minutes, I take the 34, Meridian from the Zenith, and
where the 5 Parallel cutteth him, there say I, is Aldebaran (and C of my
Triangle) and the Azimuth passing thence to the Zenith measures the distance
of the Stars 46 degrees almost.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Declination, and Right Ascension of any two Stars given, to
find their distance.
DO here with the Right Ascension and Declination as you should do with the
Longitude and Latitude, by the former Chapter, for the case is like, and
requires the same manner of working.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Declination of a Star or Planet, and his distance from a
known Star given, to find his Right Ascension.
BEcause this Case is the converse of the precedent, and soluble by the first
Problem of Obliquangled Triangles, Book 3. 14. an Example, or two shall
suffice.

Anno Domi. 1639. I observed the Declination of Cor Caeti (the strange Star
mentioned Chapter 34.) to be 4. 50 minutes South; and his distance from Lucida
Mandibulae Caeti Past this on fol. 105 so as it may ly open while that Chapter
is Reading.

diagram to be 13.04 minutes and Lucida Mandibulae was Eastward from him. The
Right Ascension of Lucida Mandibulae then was 40. 56 minutes, his Declination
North 2. 40 minutes; therefore I have a Triangle whose Sides are all known.

A B the distance of Mandibulae from the Pole 87. 20 minutes, I set between the
Pole and Nadir in the Limb, because B C will reach beyond the Finitor.

For A C the distance of the Stars. I seek the 13th. Parallel from the Pole. And

For B C I seek the 94. 50 minutes Almicantar, counted from the Nadir (that is
the 5th. almost above the Finitor) and where the said Parallel and Almicantar
cross, there is Cor Caeti, and C of my Triangle: through it there cutteth the
Azimuth 10, showing the Difference of the Right Ascension of the Stars; which
difference I subtract out of the Right Ascension of Mandibula, because he was
further East; and there remains the Right Ascension of Cor Caeti 30. 16
minutes, or rather 13 minutes. And I have here also numbered by the Meridians,
the angle A at Mandibula 120 degr. though un-required.

Another Example. January 7. 1656/7, I observed by my Brass Quadrant of 12
inches in Radius, the Meridian Altitude of Jupiter 56. 20 minutes, out of which
subtracting the height of the Equator here at Ecton 37. 45 minutes; I found his
Declination 18. 35 minutes North; his distance then from Lucida Pleiadum, I
observed by my Cross-staff 5. 12 minutes, and from Aldebaran 10.07 minutes.

The Complement of Decli. of Lucida Pleiadum is 67.00 mi.

The Complement of his Declination was observed 71. 25.

And these two Complements with the distance of and Lucida Pleiadum 5. 12
minutes, make a Triangle, soluble by the first Problem of Obliquangled
Triangles; whereby you may find the angle of the difference of Right Ascension
of Lucida Pleiadum and is 2. 56 minutes; which added to the Right Ascension of
Lucida Pleiadum (because was Eastward) makes 54. 44 minutes the Right
Ascension of Jupiter.

CHAP. XL. The Latitude of a Star or Planet, and his distance from a known Star
given, to find his Longitude.
DO here with the Longitude and Latitude as you were taught to do with the
Right Ascension and Declination, in the former Chapter.

CHAP. XLI. To find the distance of two Stars by their Altitudes, and their
difference of Azimuth observed at the same time.
THe Complements of the Altitudes are the distances of the Stars from the
Zenith: Set one of the Stars at the Pole, and set the Zenith as much from him
in the Limb as the Complement of his Altitude comes to, then considering what
difference of Azimuth the Stars had, take the Azimuth of like distance from the
Limb (beginning from that side of the Limb where the Pole aforesaid is) and in
that Azimuth reckon from the Finitor the Altitude of the other Star (or the
Complement of his Altitude from the Zenith, all is one) at the end thereof is
C, and the other Star; and the Meridian that passes from him to the Pole,
shows the distance of the Stars. This case is so like that of Chapter 37. that
he who knows one may know the other also.

CHAP. XLII. To find the Angles of Station which any two Stars make with the
Pole, by their Right Ascension and Declination: or with the Pole of the
Ecliptique, by their Longitude and Latitude: or with the Zenith, by their
Altitude and Azimuth.
THis Case agrees with the second Problem of Oblique-angled Triangles.

Example. In the Triangle of Chapter 39. made between the Pole of the World,
Mandibula Caeti, and Cor Caeti, I would know the angle at Mandibula, which is
the angle of his Station. Place the Triangle upon your Planisphear as in
Chapter 39. where the angle unsought, there discovered it self to be 125.
degrees.

CHAP. XLIII. To find whether three Stars be in one great Circle, by having
their Longitude and Latitude, or their Right Ascension and Declination, or
their Azimuth and Altitude known.
EXample. I would know whether the three Stars of Orions Girdle be in the same
great Circle. Here I prick them down, and draw their Circles of Longitude to
meet at the Pole of the Ecliptique; so have you two Triangles joined in one,
and the three Stars in the Base of it.

Now first, I must find by the former Chapter what angle of station the first
Star has in the little Triangle P A B, and then what angle of station he has
in the whole Triangle P A C, and if these two angles be equal, then be the
Stars all in one great Circle, otherwise not.

diagram

This Problem may be of use to find how the tail of a Comet points upon the
Sun, or upon any other Planet or Star, below the Horizon. But if the three
points enquired of, be all in view; I know no better way then to stretch a
third straight at a reasonable distance from your eye, applying it to the
Stars; for if the same straight line cut them all, they be all in one great
Circle, otherwise not.

CHAP. XLIV. If a Comet or Star unknown be seen in a straight line with two
other known Stars, and his distance from one of the known Stars be observed;
how to find the true place of the Comet or Star unknown.
EXample. Anno Domi. 1639. I observed that Mandibula Caeti, Gene Caeti,
diagramand the strange Star Cor Caeti (spoken of Chapter 34.) made a straight
line; and by a Radius, such as I then had at hand, I observed that Cor Caeti
was distant from Mandibula 13. 04 minutes. Now if I would find the Longitude
and Latitude of Cor Ceti, I should use the Longitude and Latitude of the other
Stars; but because I intend to find first his Right Ascension and Declination,
I make use of their Right Ascension and Declination. The manner of working is
alike. The Scheme of the last Chapter may serve here if you turn it up-side
down; Then P is the North Pole, A Mandibula, B Gena, C Cor Ceti. P A is the
Complement of Declination of Mandibula 87. 20 minutes, P B the distance of Gena
from the North Pole 91. 16 minutes, (for he declines Southward 1. 16 minutes) A
P B the difference of their Right Ascension 5. 35 minutes.

Therefore I set the Nadir of my Reet as far from the Pole as P is from A, and
so between them on the Limb is the side P A. Then for the side P B it reaches
from Nadir beyond the Finitor 1. 16 minutes, therefore in the 1. Almicantar I
number from the Limb 5. 35 minutes, the difference of Right Ascensions for the
Angle A P B, and where the 1. Almicantar and the 5. Azimuth do meet, there is B
for Gena: thence I go in a Meridian to the Pole at A, and as I go I number the
distance of B and A, that is, Gena and Mandibula, 7 degrees almost; and I
observe that this Meridian is the 125. Meridian from the Limb; so much is A,
the angle of station at Mandibula.

Now I say, in this Meridian also is Cor Ceti, because he is in a right line
with the other two Stars which are cut by this Meridian: and he is 13. 4
minutes from Mandibula, by observation; therefore I run from the Pole A so many
degrees in this Meridian, and so come to C, the place of Cor Ceti, and there
cutteth the 4. 50 minutes Almicantar, showing the Declination of it, and the
Azimuth 10. 43 minutes; showing his difference of Ascension from Mandibula;
which difference I subduct from the Right Ascension of Mandibula (because
Mandibula is further East,) and there remains 30. 13 minutes, the Right
Ascension of Cor Ceti: which being found, you may find his Longitude 26
degrees, Latitude 16. 10 minutes, by the 34th. Chapter: Observe how your
Triangle lies in the Planisphear, where Nadir is used for the North Pole, the
North Pole is the place of Mandibula, and the 125. Meridian represents the
great Circle cutting the three Stars.

CHAP. XLV. The distance of a Planet from two known Stars being Observed, to
find his Longitude and Latitude.
IT is true that Mr. Blagrave says, Book 5. 25. that in Questions of this sort
it is harder to conceive how they should be resolved, then to resolve them. And
therefore he advises to draw a rude Scheme of your work, agreeable to the
Meridional Projection of your Planisphear, after this manner.

December the 28. 1656. I observed somewhat grossly by my Cross-staff that was
between the Hyades and the Pleiades, distant from Aldebaran 9. 49 minutes, and
from Lucida Pleiadum 5.26. and to the Southward of the Stars. I draw therefore
a rude Scheam representing somewhat near the posture of these three Stars. E C
is Ecliptique, and P his South Pole, P C the Circle of Longitude of the
Westerly Star Lucida Pleiadum 25. 12 minutes, and because he has North
Latitude 4 degrees, I place him at F; Aldebaran, whose Longitude is 5. Latitude
South 5. 31 minutes, I place somewhat like at O, and Jupiter I place below the
line drawn between them, and nearer to the Pleiades then to Aldebaran, as I
observed his situation in the Heaven.

diagram

That I seek now here, is P, the complement of Jupiters Latitude; and F P, his
difference of Longitude from Lucida Pleiadum.

First, in the great Triangle F P O, I have the angle P, the difference of
Longitude between Lucida Pleiadum and Aldebaran 9 degrees 48 minutes, and the
including sides P O 84.29. ( Aldebaran distance from the South Pole) and P F
94. (distance of the Pleiades from the South Pole) and hence by the second
Problemes of Obliquangled Triangles Book 3.15. I get at once, the Base O F,
distance of Lucida Pleiadum and Aldebar an 13. 45 minutes, and the angle of
station at F, viz. P F O 45. 28 minutes.

2. Then in the Triangle F O, whose three sides are now known, I get the angle
O F (by the first Problem of Oblique Triangles, Book 3.14.) 35. 14 minutes)
which being Subducted from the angle O F P, leaves the angle P F 10. 14
minutes.

3. In the Triangle P F, having now the angle F, and the sides including it, I
get the third side P, the Complement of Latitude 88. 39 minutes (by Oblique
Problemes 2. Book 3.15.)

And lastly the three sides in the Triangle P F being now known my Planisphear
unmoved will show me F P 58 minutes (by the Problem 1 Oblique Triangles,)
which 58 minutes being added to the Longitude of Lucida Pleiadum makes up the
Longitude of 26. 10 minutes, and his Latitude was even now found 1. 21 minutes
South.

CHAP. XLVI. To find the Culmen Caeli, and the Altitude thereof, at any time
proposed.
CUlmen Caeli is the degree of the Ecliptique which is cut by the Meridian of
your Place.

Use the Equinoctial Projection, where having laid the place of the Sun to the
Hour proposed, look what degree of the Ecliptique is cut by the Meridian line,
and you may number his Altitude from your proper Horizon.

Example. March 29. 1652. I laid the Suns place 19. 11 minutes to 32 minutes
past 10. of the Clock before noon, and in the Meridian I saw 25 Culminating.
And for his Altitude I looked where my Horizon cuts the South part of the
Meridian (at 52 from the Center) and from that cutting I count in the Meridian
to the Ecliptique 36 degrees, the Altitude of Culmen Caeli.

But note, That if had been a North Sign, I must have counted first to the
Limb 37. 45 minutes, and thence back again to Culmen 1. in 39.

CHAP. XLVII. To find the Ascendent or Horoscope, and the other three Principal
Houses, for any time proposed.
A Strologers divide the Heaven into twelve Houses, of which, four are
principal. The First House, which begins at the Ascendent or Rising point of
the Ecliptique. The Fourth, which begins at Imum Caeli, or Midnight. The
Seventh, which begins at the Descendent point of the Ecliptique. And the
Tenth, which begins at Medium Caeli, or Culmen.

These be the four Cardinal points, and the Ascendent and Descendent, and
likewise the Medium and Imum Caeli, are always opposite one to the other, so
that one being known, the other is known also.

To find these points, use the Equinoctial Projection, and there lay the Suns
place to the hour proposed: then the degree of the Ecliptique rising in your
Horizon is Ascendent, and you shall see the same degree of the opposite Sign
Descending in the West part of the Horizon; and look what degree touches the
South part of the Meridian, that is, Medium Caeli, and the same degree of the
opposite Sign shall be in Imo Caeli, that is, in the North and Subterranean
part of the Meridian.

Example. March 29. 1652. I observed the great Eclipse of the Sun, the middle
whereof happened at Ecton, at 10 hours 32 minutes 04 seconds before noon in
apparent time, at what time the Sun was darkened digits 11. 22, in 19. 11
minutes. I would know for this time the Figure of the Heavens.

Therefore laying the Label to 10.32 minutes before noon, and bringing 19. 11
minutes to the Label, I see in our Horizon 24. 7 minutes rising, and 24.7
minutes setting. In the Meridian above the Horizon I see 25. 19 minutes: and in
Imo Caeli, toward Septentrio, 25. 19 minutes.

CHAP. XLVIII. To find the beginnings of the other eight Houses.
THere be six great Circles, by which the twelve Houses are distinguished. They
be called Circles of Position: and so they call the rest of the Circles which
serve to subdivide the Houses. They be all Horizons to some Country or other in
the World, and therefore are most fitly represented by the Horizons of the
Matter. The First House begins always at the Ascendent: and the rest follow
in order according to the Sequel of the Signs. But Astrologers are not well
agreed about their situation. For 1. Some will have the domifying Circles drawn
from the Poles of the Ecliptique through every 30th. degree thereof, as
Ptolemie. 2. Some draw them from the Poles of the World, through every 30th.
degree of the Equator; as Alcabitius. 3. Some draw them from the intersections
of the Meridian and Horizon, through every 30th. degree of the Equator; as
Regiomontanus. 4. Some draw them from the same intersections, by every 30th.
degree of the Prime Vertical or East Azimuth; as Campanus. Yet every Astrologer
will pretend he can tell you your Fortune, though they go about it so diverse
ways, that they may be all false, and but one of them can be true: and no Man
has showed any better reason for his way then another, but his own opinion.

If you will follow the first or second way, the matter is plain. For in the
first way every 30th Circle of Longitude reckoned from the Ascendent downwards,
and so round, is a Domifying Circle: and likewise every 30th. Meridian from the
Ascendent is a Domifying Circle in the Second way. And if you know but what
Longitude a Star has, you presently find in what House he is, after the first
way. And if you know the Right Ascension of a Star, and of the Ascendent, you
presently find in what House he is, after the second way.

But if you will use the third way (now commonly used) you shall set the Zonith
line of the Reet to the Latitude, and so the Azimuths are your Circles of
Position; then look what Azimuth cutteth every 30th degree of the Equinoctial,
that is a Domifying Circle; and you shall reckon here from the Limb, which
shall stand for the beginning of the 10th. House, and so in our Horizon 52. the
forty third Azimuth cutteth the 30th. degree of the Equator, serving the 11th.
and third House: and the Azimuth 70 cutteth the 60th. degree of the Equator,
serving the 12th and second Houses: and because I know that on the other side
the Center the Intersections will be like, I look no further.

But now I must get the Depressions of these Circles under the Pole in this
manner. I number in the forty third Azimuth the Latitude of my Place from the
Zenith; to the end of which number I lay the Label, and I see the Azimuth
cutting on the Label 32 for the depression of that Circle. And in like manner,
laying the Label upon the 52 degrees of the Azimuth 70 I find on the Label his
depression 48 degrees; by the third Problem of Rectangl. Trangles, and the
third Variety Book 3.5.1^.

These Horizons therefore I choose out in the Matter, viz. 32, and 48. for these
with the Meridian and Horizon of my Place, shall serve to get the Houses for
ever, in my Latitude: for the 32 Horizon shall be the beginning of the 11th.
and third Houses; and the 48th, the beginning of the 12th and Second, Thus have
I the Circles of Position of the 11, 12, 2, and 3. Houses: and the 10th. and
first, are had by the former Chapter: and these six being had, I have all; for
opposite Hemisphears are always alike, and one description serves both.

CHAP. XLIX. To know what degree of the Ecliptique is in the beginning of every
House.
DO as in this Example. By Chap. 47. I had the degree Culminating in the middle
of the great Eclipse there mentioned, 25. First I lay 25 to the Axtree line at
6 in the morning, where it lies as in a Right Horizon; thence I move it 30
degr. South ward in the Limb, viz. to 8. of the clock, and in the Horizon of
the 11th. house (32) I see 7 degrees setting, the said degrees of Culmination:
30 degrees further, viz. to 10. a clock, I see in the Horizon of the 12th.
House (48.) 24. And setting the said degree of Culmination to the Noon-line, I
see in our Horizon (52 which begins the first House) 24 ascending. And setting
the said degree 2 hours further on, I see in the Horizon of the second House
(48) 13. And setting the said degree to 4 a clock, I see in the Horizon of the
third House (the 32) 1.

Thus have I the degrees of the Ecliptique in the beginning of 6 Houses, and
the 6 Houses opposxe begin with the same degrees of the opposite Signs.

CHAP. L. Another way to find what degree of the Ecliptique is in the beginning
of every House, and thereby to set a Figure more easily then by the former
Chapter.
IT was found by Chapter 48. that the Azimuths 43. and 70 are evermore
Domifying Circles in our Latitude (52.) and how you may find them for any other
Latitude was there showed. There I reckoned them from the Limb; but here I
shall reckon them from the Axis; and say, the Azimuth 47. The figure of the
Heavens.

March 29. 1652. H. 10. 32. a.m.

diagramserveth the 11th. House; the 19 serves the 12th. the Axis for the
first, and seventh; the 19 below the Axis for the second; the 47th. for the
third; the Meridian for the 10th. and 4th. You may therefore mark the ends of
these Azimuths in the Finitor, setting 12 to the 19 above the Axis, (here made
Horizon for this turn) and 11. at the 47th. at the Axis, 1. then at the 19
below the Axis, write 2. at the 47th. write 3. and at the Limb 4.

Your Houses being thus distinguished on the Reet, get the degree of
Culmination, and the Altitude thereof, by Chapter 46. then set the Zenith under
the North Pole, so much as the Altitude of the Culmination comes to: and if the
Ascendent be a North Sign, let the Pole be toward your left Hand; and contrary
if it be a South Sign: so shall the Axis of the Reet be Horizon, and the Pole
Culmen Caeli.

Next get the Ascendent by the 47th. and his Amplitude by the 16th: this
Amplitude you shall number in the Axletree of the Reet from the Center always
to your left Hand, or toward Septentrio; and mark what Meridian there cuts the
Axletree of the Reet, in that degree of Amplitude; that Meridian shall be your
Ecliptique for this time: follow him up to the Pole, and you trace out the arch
of the Ecliptique from the Ascendent to mid-heaven: and if you go down in his
match to the like degree of Amplitude on the other side of the Center, there is
the Western arch of the Ecliptique from the mid-heaven to the Descendent; and
here you may see every degree of the Ecliptique above the Horizon, and in what
House it is, without any more coursing after them.

Example. 25 was Culminating; his Altitude 36 degrees; the Ascendent had 24.
whose Amplitude is 36. Setting the Zenith therefore 36 degrees to the right
Hand under the Pole, I number in the Axtree-line of the Reet, from the Center
to my left Hand the Amplitude of the Ascendent 36. there comes the 23.
Meridian from the Center, who must serve for the Ecliptique. Now because it is
troublesome to number the degrees of the Signs backward, I will begin at the
Descendent 36 from the Center on the other side: and say, Here is 24 degrees
descending, (because 24. was ascending,) hence I count on toward the Culmen,
till I come to the Azimuth 19, (which is the Domifyer of the 12th. and 8th.
Houses,) and here I say, begins the 8th. House in 13. for there are but 19
degrees from the Descendent hither: hence I count to the 47th. Azimuth (the
Domifyer of the 9th. and 11th. Houses) and there I count 1 degree, for the
beginning of the 9th. House: hence I number on to the Pole, and there I happen
on 25, the Culmen and beginning of the 10th. House. Thence I number on the
other side of the Matters Axtree, in the twenty third Meridian, toward the
Ascendent, and I find the 47th. Azimuth cuts 7 degrees for the beginning of the
11th. House; but the 19 Azimuth which should show me the 12th. House, is cut
off by the Finitor, and I am left to seek him else where: And to find him I
need but turn about my whole Planisphear (the Reet unmoved) and make the other
Pole Culmen for this turn, and then I find among the Azimuths that piece of my
Ecliptique which I wanted in the former posture; and I may reckon on him
between the Ascendent and the Azimuth 19, 29. and thereby see that 24 is in the
beginning of the 12th. House: so have I 6. of my Houses, and may by them find
the other 6, (as was showed Chapter 48.) and set them down as in the Figure.

CHAP. LI. A third way to set a Figure with less labor.
LEt the Meridians and Azimuths here change their offices in which they served
in the former Chapter: that is, let the 19 and 47th. Meridian on both sides the
Axis of the Matter be Domifyers; and let the 23 Azimuth be Ecliptique: and to
that purpose, set the Zenith above the Pole, according to the Altitude of
Culmen 36 degrees, and make the Axis of the Matter Horizon. Then beginning as
you did before at the Descendent, go up in the Ecliptique till you come to the
Meridian 19, and follow the Almicantar that there cutteth to the Limb, and
there make a mark for the 8th House; then mark where the same Ecliptique cuts
the next Domifyer (the 47th. Meridian) and follow the Alm^icantar from that
point to the Limb; prick there the 9th. House: the Zenith is the 10th. thence
go toward the Ascendent, and do in like manner; making pricks for the 11th. and
12th. Houses: also in the Limb of the Reet at the end of that Almicantar which
cutteth the beginning of the Houses in the Ecliptique. Then in the Zodiaque of
the Ring, look the degree of Culmination, and set the Zenith of the Reet to it;
and the Label laid to these pricks, shall show you presently in the Zodiaque
the degrees for the beginning of every House.

CHAP. LII. How to place any Star or Planet in his proper House.
IN the Equinoctial Projection, get the Stars Hour distance from the Meridian,
thus. Lay the Suns place to the hour proposed: then turn the Label to the Star
(or to his Right Ascension if he be not in the Reet) and it shall show in the
Limb how many hours and minutes the Star is past or short of the Meridian: get
also the Stars Declination North or South, by the Reet, or by the 35. or some
other Chapter; and where the Parallel of the Stars Declination crosses the
hour of the Star in the Matter, there is his place for this turn: therefore
having made a prick with ink for him there, set the Zenith line to your
Latitude, and having your Domifying Azimuths marked upon the Reet (as Chapter
49. 30.) you shall presently see in what House the Star is.

Example. 1652. March 29, 10. hours 32 minutes before noon, I would know in
what House the Pleiades are. The hour of Lucida Pleiadum for that time is 8. 14
minutes after midnight: the Declination is 23 degrees North. I number therefore
in the 23. Parallel of North Declination from the Atree of the Matter to the
Meridian 33, there is the place of Lucida Pleiadum, where I prick him down; and
setting the Zenith line to the Latitude, I find the 39 Azimuth or Circle of
Position cuts him: by which I see he is 8 degrees from the beginning of the
11th. House, for that begins at Azimuth 47, as appears Chapters 49, 50.

CHAP. LIII. To find the division of the Houses, according to Campanus.
CAmpanus begins the Houses at every 30th. degree of the East Azimuth,
accounting from the Ascendent in the Sequel of the Signs, as was said Chapter
48. Therefore if you will use his way, set the Zenith line to the Latitude, and
the Finitor shall become the East Azimuth; and every 30th, Azimuth from the
Limb, or Axtree line, is a Domifying Circle: you shall therefore in stead of
Azimuths 19. and 47. (which are Domifyers after Regiomontanus for our Latitude,
as was showed Chapters 49, 50.) take Azimuths 30. and 60. on both sides the
Axtree line, which are distinguished to your hand; and with these Domifyers you
shall work in all respects as you did with the other in the three former
Chapters.

CHAP. LIIII. How to Direct a Figure.
TO Direct is to turn on the Sphere, till some Star in the second House come
into the first, or contrarily: and so observe how many degrees the Equinoctial
is moved forward or backward in the same time.

Place the Star or Planet on the Reet, or on the Label, (as Chapter 18. is
taught, then in the Equinoctial Projection (as Chapter 47.) set the Ascendent
at your Horizon, and note the degree Culminating: then turn on the Reet forward
or backward till the Star come to the Horizon: then lay the Label on the degree
which Culminated before; and mark how many degrees of the Limb he is distant
from noon, so many degrees of the Equator have passed the Meridian and Horizon:
which Astrologers take to signify so many years before the effect promised by
the said Star shall happen.

diagram diagram diagram diagram diagram

Appendix, Concerning Judiciarie Astrologers.
SOme learned Artists may perhaps think that these 8. last Chapters pertaining
to Astrology might be spared; and I think so too: but that I foresee they may
be of use to such as would examine the errors and fallacies of Astrologians.
Astrology of old was no more then Astronomy, an Ingenuous Science, leading a
Man to the knowledge of that which may be known, and ought to be Studied, the
greatuess and wisdom of God manifested in his works. But Astrology, as the
word is now commonly used, is (...) Act. 19.19. and (...) 1. Tim. 6.20.
Teaching Men to search into that which neither can be known, nor ought to be
Pryed into; Contingencies to come, which belong to God only to know, and
reveal. Esa. 41.23. Tell us things to come, (says he) that we may know that ye
are Gods. And Favorinus an Heathen Philosopher could say, Tollitur quod maxim
inter Deos atque homines differt, si homines quaque res omnes futuras
pranoscerent. This kind of Astrology God derides by his Prophets, and forbids
to his People, Esa. 47.12, 13. He says to Babylon, where this Art then
flourished. Stand now with thine Enchantments, and with the Multitude of thy
Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy Youth; if so be thou shall be
able to profit; if so be thou may prevail. Thou art wearied in the Multitude
of thy Counsels: Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly
prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon
thee. Jerem. 10.2. Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and
be not dismayed at the signs of Heaven: for the Heathen are dismayed at them.
For the customs of the people are vain.) And it was one of the presages of
their Captivity, when they began to be replenished with those Eastern Arts, and
to be South-sayers, like the Philistims. Esaias 3.

I have seen what glosses have been put upon some of these Texts: and how the
judgments of Mr Perkins, and Mr Gataker, are slighted by some late pretenders
to Astrolegy; whereat I wonder not: having seen the works both of the one side,
and of the other.

Judiciary Astrology has two parts, The Meteorological, and the Genethliacal.
And against both there are these just exceptions, 1. Whereas about the time of
Nabonassar, or soon after, the Heaven was divided upon the Poles of the
Ecliptique into 12. Spaces, called Dodecatemoria and Signs: and the
Astrologers of the next Ages ascribed to these spaces certain virtues or Powers
over the several parts of Man's Body, and over the several Countries and Nations
of the World: especially by reason of the qualities they supposed to be in the
fixed Stars; which then occupied those spaces: their Rules are still observed,
notwithstanding that those Stars are removed into the succeding spaces. For
those Stars which in Nabonassars time were in the Dodecatemorion of, are all
removed into the Dodecatemoria of, and; and those of and are come in their
rooms: for the fixed Stars are found to pass through a whole Sign, that is, a
12th. part of the Compass of the Heaven, in 2118. Years; and it is now above
1900. Years since Ptolemie wrote, and above 2400. since Nabonassar began his
Reign. 2. That Astrologers scarce look beyond the Zodiaque for their Aspects,
whereas the fixed Stars on the North and South may have, for ought they know,
as operative configurations with the Planets, as the Planets one with another.
3. That their own Rules are so manifold, and the Planets and fixed Stars and
their Aspects also are so many, and so diverse in qualities and degrees, that it
is impossible to judge what effect the mixture of those influences shall
produce: especially considering that from the beginning of the World to this
time, the Heavenly bodies never had twice the same posture: and therefore there
wants experiment to build the Art upon.

For the Meteorological part, I was much helped by the Studies of my Father,
who for 10. Years did most curiously observe all changes of Wind and Weather,
while (...) was waking; and noted them daily over against the days in Maginus
his Ephemerides. His conclusion was, that he could find no certainty in the
rules of Astrology commonly received, nor frame any other upon his experience.
Yet had I a mind to try a little further, and about the Year 1631 and forward
for some years, I made daily Observations of all Winds and Weather at home, and
got also the best information I could by Letters from Friends abroad, by
relation of Travelers, Journals of Seamen, Curranto'es (as they were then
called) Mercurius Gallabelgicus, etc. And I found so great diversity of Weather
in the same Climate, and sometime in places scarce three degrees distant in
Longitude or Latitude, that I dispaired of Prognesticating Weather, till I
could learn which way the Wind would list to blow. This among my Observations
is memorable, that the Weather Capt. James had in his Voyage, Wiatering and
return from the Mid-land Sea of America, was very diverse from ours, and often
times contrary; and all the agreement I could find, was, that one day when it
Thundered in America very sore, we had Thunder 18. hours after: yet he was many
months in Charlton Island, which is in our Latitude; where his Ship was so
Frozen, and the Sea so full of Ice, that he could not sail till May. And I know
a learned Gentleman that used for a recreation at Christmas time to put a Dozen
new Almanacks into the hands of so many of his servants, and set them to read
in order the several judgments of the Prognosticaters about the Weather;
wherein he found as good sport as William Duke of Mantua did in reading the
judgments of several Astrologers, upon a Figure erected upon the Nativity of
his young Mule.

For the Genethliacal part, since Planets signify diversely according to the
Houses in which they are, it were very needful for Men of this craft, first to
demonstrate how the Houses ought to be divided, before they undertake to give
any judgment: but herein they are not agreed: those Stars which after Ptolemy
are in one House, and signify thus; after Regiomontanus are in another House
for the same time and place, and so signify otherwise. Of the four ways above
mentioned Chapter 48. I cannot say which is best: but that of Regiomontanus
which is now most followed, and called by some the Rational way, seems to me
the most Irrational of all, because of the very unequal division of the Houses:
for let a man Erect a Figure for Wardhuys in Norway, after that way, and he
shall find the 4 Houses next the Meridian, viz. 3, 4, 9, 11. hugely great, each
of them containing above a seventh part of the Sphere; and the 4 Houses next
the Horizon each of them not to contain a twenty fourth part; he shall also
observe that all the Stars within 48 degrees of either Pole (which take up a
full third part of the Sphere) are perpetually confined to two Houses for that
Parallel; though in warmer Climates some of them have a little more liberty;
but Ptolomie and Alcabitius gives every Star the Liberty of all the Houses, and
Campanus Imprisons but a few.

I could never see any good reason why the influences of the Stars should make
more impression upon the Child in the moment of his Nativity, then they did at
any time before in the Womb. If mines in the Earth are not hidden from the
influences of the Stars, neither is the Child in the Mothers belly. If the
Stars have such operation on Men in their Nativity, it is rational to think
they have more force in their first conception, when the matter is fluid and
more apt to receive impression, then when the Child is shaped, and the temper
more confirmed: and this Johannes Angeli an old Astrologer considering, framed
a Table to discover to a minute the time of conception, by the time of the
Birth given, where he extends the time of gestation to 40. Weeks, and (as I
remember,) 6 days over; but he does not tell us whether he made that Table by
experience, or divination; nor how many experiments he had used for the trial
of it.

Favorinus once demanded of these Genethliacal men, who pretend to know men's
Fortunes by the Positions of the Stars in their Nativity. How it comes to pass
that thousands of people, of both Sexes, of all Ages, born in sundry places,
and under sundry configurations of the Stars, have happened to perish in the same
hour and moment, and by the same misfortune, as by Shipwreck, Storms of War,
Earthquakes, fall of Buildings, and such like accidents? And whether this fate
could have been foreseen in all the Figures Erected for their-several
Nativities? Which demand I think never yet received any good answer.

This also I have long observed that no Man (so far as my knowledge and
intelligence reaches) are so Fortunate in setting Figures for discovering
things lost, or Prognosticating of Life and Death, as some who scarce know
Charles Wain, nor any Planet in the Sky beside the Sun and Moon: and some of
these have given out that I allowed of their practices, before ever they
consulted me, and so gave me occasion to make this digression. He that would
see more of this argument may read what my Lord Howard, sometime Earl of
Northampton, and Mr Perkins have written thereupon. Pliny Book. 30. Chapter 2.
has recorded Nero's experiment and judgment of this Art. Species magiae
plures sunt; namque and ex Aqua, and ex Spheris, and ex Aere, and Stellis, and
Lucernis, ac Pelvibus, securibusque, and multis alijs modis divina promittit:
preterea umbrarum, inferorumque colloquia: quae omnia aetate nostra princeps
Nero vana falsaque comperit: quippe non Cithorae tragicique cantus libido illi
major fuit, fortuna rerum humanarum summa gestiente in profundis animi vitijs:
Primumque imperare Dijs concupivit, nec quiequam generosius voluit. Nemo unquam
ulli artium validius favit: Ad haec, non opes ei defuere, non vires, non
discendi ingenium; aliaque non patiente mundo, Immensum and indubitatum
exemplum est falsae artis, quam dereliquit. Nero, as if he had said, What shall
the Man do that comes after the King? And a little after, Proinde it a
persuesum sit, intestabilem, irritam, inanem esse, habentem tamen quasdam
veritatis umbras, sed in his veneficas arts pollere, non Magicas. The
judgment also of Favorinus, a learned Philosopher, is worthy to be here
rehearsed, as it is reported by A. Gellius Noct. Attic. 14.1. With whose words
I will end this digression.

Cavendum ne qua nobisisti Sycophantae ad fidem faciendam irreperent, quod
viderentur interdum vera effutire aut spargere. Non enim comprensa (inquit)
neque definita, neque percepta dicunt, sed lubrica atque ambagiosa
conjectatione nitentes, inter falsa atque vera pedetentim quasi per tenebras
ingredientes eunt: and aut multa tentando incidunt repent imprudentes in
veritatem; aut ipsorum, qui eos consulunt, multa credulitate ducente perveniunt
callide ad ea quae verae sunt: and iccirco videntur in praeteritis rebus quam
in futuris veritatem facilius imitari. Ista tamen omnia quae aut ^em^re aut
astute vera dicunt, prae caeteris quae mentiuntur, pars ea non est millessima.
And a little after, Idem Favorinus deterrere volens ac depellere adolescentes a
Genethliacis istis, and quibusdam alijs id genus, qui prodigiosis artibus
futura omnia dicturos se pollicentur, nullo pacto adeundos esse consulendosque
bujusmodi argumentis concludebat. Aut adversa (inquit) eventura dicunt, aut
prospera: si dicunt prospera, and fallunt; miser fies frustra expectando: si
adversa dicunt, and mentiuntur: miser fies frustra timendo sin vera respondem,
eaque sunt non prospera; jam inde ex animo miser fies antequam e fato fias: si
felicia promittunt, eaque eventura sunt, tum plane duo erunt incommoda: and
expectatio te spesuspensum fatigabit: and futurum gaudij fructum spes tibijam
defloraverit; nullo igitur pacto utendum est istiusmodi hominibus res futuras
presagientibus.

CHAP. LV. To find the Angles of the Ascendent, or the Angle of the Ecliptique
with the Horizon, and the Altitude of the Nonagesimus gradus, at any time.
IN the Equinoctial Projection set the Suns place to the time proposed, and get
the Altitude of Culmen Caeli, by Chapter 46. Then, if the Eastern arch of the
Ecliptique be shorter then the Western, you shall count the degrees between the
Ascendent and Mid-heaven; otherwise count from the Defcendent to Mid-heaven.
Number these degrees on the Label from the Center, and where they end make a
prick; which prick if you put upon the Parallel of the Altitude of Culmen
Caeli, you shall have in the Limb, between the Finitor and the Label, the
measure of the lesser angle, which taken out of 180 degrees leaves the greater
angle. This is done by Problem 2. Rectang. And note that the lesser angle, and
the Altitude of the Nonagesimus gradus be always equal.

Example. March 29. 1652. 10. hours 32. minutes a. m. 25 was in Culmine: the
Meridian Altitude thereof is 36. Between Culmen and the Descendent I find 61.
therefore I prick the degree 61 from the Center in the Label; and when I have
turned that prick to the 36. Almicantar, the Label shows in the Limb of the
Reet 42 degrees for the lesser angle of the Ecliptique with the Horizon
(exactly 41. 58 minutes) which also is the Altitude of the Nonagesimus gradus:
the greater angle is 138 degrees 2 minutes.

Another way. In the Equinoctial Projection: lay the Label on the Nonagesimus
gradus; and observe his Declination on the Label, and his Horary distance from
the Meridian. Then in the Meridional Projection and his first mode, observe
where that Declination and Horary distance meet on the Matter, and the
Almicantar touching the same point shows the Altitude of Nonagesimus gradus,
which is equal to the angle sought.

Example. In the former Case, where 25 was in our Meridian, 24. was Nonagesimus
gradus; the Label laid to it showed me his Declination 9 almost, North: and his
Horary distance from the Meridian in the Limb 26. 20 minutes. then the Fimtor
being set to the Latitude, I seek the Intersection of the 9 Parallel of North
Declination with the 26 Meridian from the Limb: and there touches the 42
Almicantar; showing the Altitude of Nonagesimus gradus, and the quantity of the
lesser angle sought, as before. And there comes unasked also, the 36 Azimuth
being the Azmuth of the Nonagesimus gradus, which is always equal to the
Amplitude of the Ascendent. Other ways, See Chapter 56. and 57.

CHAP. LVI. The Ascendent and his Amplitude, and the Altitude of Culmen Caeli
given; so to represent the Ecliptique, that you may presently find not only
the Altitude of the Nonagesimus gradus, but the Altitude and Azimuth of every
degree of the Ecliptique at one view.
SEt your Planisphear in the third Mode of the Meridional Projection: that is,
If the Ascendent be a North Sign, move the Finitor from Meridies toward the
North Pole, till the North Pole be elevated above the Finitor according to the
elevation of Culmen Caeli; but if the Ascendent be a South Sign, move the
other end of the Finitor from Septentrio toward the North Pole, till the Pole
have the Elevation of Culmen Caeli. Then number the Amplitude of the Ascendent
upon the Finitor from the Center to your left hand, (toward Septentrio) and
take the Meridian that crosses there for the Eastern arch of the Ecliptique,
and his match so much distant from the Axtree toward Meridies shall be the
Western arch; so do the Azimuths and Almicantars of the Reet show at once the
Altitude and Azimuth of every degree of the Ecliptique.

Example, March 29. 1652. 10. hours 32 min. a. m. I found 25 Culminating. and
his Meridian Altitude (by Chapter 46) 36 degrees, the Ascendent 24. (by Chapter
47.) and his Amplitude 36 (by Chapter 15, and 16.) the Sun being then Eclipsed
in 19. 11 minutes. I would know his Altitude and Azimuth, and likewise the
Altitude and Azimuth of the Nonagesimus gradus. To this purpose, I take the
North Pole for Culmen, and set the Finitor 36. below him toward Meridies; and
from the Center toward my left hand, I number on the Finitor the Amplitude of
the Ascendent 36, there cuts the twenty third Meridian from the Axis: (which
here serves for the Eastern arch of the Ecliptique:) the degree in this
Ecliptique here cut by the Finitor is the Ascendent 24. thence I number in this
Ecliptique Southward 90 degrees by help of the Parallels, and so I come to 24
degrees, being the Nonagesimus gradus. Here the 42 Almicantar touches the
Nonagesimus gradus, showing the Altitude thereof, and here also cutteth the
Azimuth of the Nonagesimus gradus 36 equal to the Amplitude of the Ascendent,
as it is always and ought to be; so as that you might have found the
Nonagesimus gradus by this Azimuth with less numbering. Now for the Sun, he is
in 19. 11 minutes, that is, nearer the Meridian then the Nonagesimus gradus by
almost 5. degrees: I count therefore 4. 49 minutes (for so it is) past the
Nonagesimus gradus; there is the Sun, and the Almicantar cutting there shows
his Altitude 41, and his Azimuth is shown by the 29 Azimuth some what near. Or
if you would reckon after the order of the Signs, which is easier, begin at
the Descendent, where is 24. thence 61 makes 25 at the Pole, for Culmen Caeli:
thence in the Eastern arch to the Suns place I make 85 degrees 11 minutes; and
4.49 minutes further is 24. the Nonagesimus gradus.

CHAP. LVII. To do the same another way, by the Horizontal Projection, very
plainly.
TAke the Zenith for the Ascendent, and set him in his place in the Limb (which
here is Horizon) so much from Oriens as his Amplitude comes to; and that toward
Septentrio, if it be a Northern Sign, or if it be a Southern Sign toward
Meridies. Then number upon the Meridian line from the Limb inwards the Altitude
of Culmen Caeli, and the Azimuth that cutteth there shall be your Ecliptique in
this Case: If the Azimuths reach not the Meridian, turn about the Reet, and set
Nadir for Ascendent. Lay the Label to any degree of this Ecliptique, and the
degrees of the Label from that degree to the Limb shall be the Altitude
thereof: and between the Label and Meridies in the Limb the Azimuth thereof.

Example. Because in the Case of the former Chapter I foresee that the Sun will
be past the Nonagesimus gradus, and so in the West Quadrant of the Ecliptique
(though he be in the East Quadrant of the Horizon) therefore I set Nadir at the
Amplitude of the Ascendent viz. 36 from Oriens Northward, then in the Meridian
line I number from the Limb inwards 36. for the Altitude of Culmen, where I
make a prick, and say, Here is 25 Culminating, and through that prick passes
the 42. Azimuth from the Limb, which is now my Ecliptique; and by that I see
that the angle of the Ecliptique which the Horizon (called the angle of the
Ascendent, and always equal to the Altitude of Nonagesimus gradus, as was
said) is 42 degrees: and if I follow this Azimuth to the Finitor, there is
Nonagesimus gradus, and the Altitude thereof 42 degrees counted from the Limb
(here Horizon) the Azimuth thereof lies in the Limb between the Finitor and the
Meridian 36 as before, equal to the Amplitude of the Ascendent, I number also
from 25 in the Meridian 23. 41 minutes to the left hand still, and there I have
19. 11 minutes, the Suns place, which cuts on the Label 41. for the Altitude of
the Sun there, and the Label at the same time cutteth in the Limb about 29.
from South Eastward for the Azimuth of the Sun: and after the same manner you
have before you the Altitude and Azimuth of every other degree of the
Ecliptique for the time proposed.

CHAP. LVIII. To do the same by the Nonagesimal Projection, if the Altitude of
Nonagesimus gradus be first given instead of the Altitude of Culmen Caeli.
SEt your Planisphear in the Nonagesimal Projection (by Book 2.3.) that is,
make the Limb now to represent the Circle of Longitude or Azimuth (for it is
both) which cutteth the Nonagesimus gradus, and make the Equinoctial line here
to be Horizon: and from the Equinectial line number in the Limb the Altitude of
Nonagesimus gradus, and thereto set the Finitor, so shall the Finitor be
Ecliptique, the Nonagesimus gradus at the Limb, the Ascendent and Descendent at
the Center: and because the Equinoctial line is Horizon in this Projection,
therefore the Meridians become Azimuths, and the Parallels Almicantars, showing
the Altitude and Azimuth of every degree of the Ecliptique, if you reckon as
you ought in this manner. Reckon in the Equinoctial line (here Horizon) from
the Center the Amplitude of the Ascendent, to the right Hand, if it be a North
Sign, and contrarily if it be a South Sign. Where this Amplitude ends is the
East point, from whence you shall reckon all your Azimuths. Count thence to the
Limb and back again (if need be) in the said Equinoctial line, till you have
made 90 degrees, there is your Meridian, as far distant from the Limb, as the
East point was from the Ascendent. Follow this Meridian to the Finitor, and
there he shows you Culmen Caeli, and the Parallel there cutting shows the
Altitude thereof. Now may you find every degree of the Ecliptique above the
Horizon, if you know but what Ascends, or Descends, or Culminates; and of every
such degree the Parallels show you the Altitude, and the Meridians show his
Azimuth, if you begin your numbering from the East or South Azimuth.

Example. When 24 degrees was Ascending (as in the Example before used) as by
consequence 24. in Nonagisimo gradu, was in 4. 45 minutes, and had but 3. or 4.
minutes South Latitude: I would know his Altitude, and Azimuth, setting go the
Finitor above the Equinoctial line 42 degrees (which is the Altitude of
Nonagesimus gradus) I say, because the Nonagesimus gradus at the end of the
Finitor in the Limb, is 24. therefore I must count back 10. 45 minutes toward
the Ascendent for Mars, and there the Parallel 41 degrees with 10 minutes
cutteth the Finitor, for the Altitude of, and the 14th. Meridian Eastward from
the Limb gives me his Azimuth, which if I begin to reckon from the East point,
falls out to be almost the 40th. Azimuth from the East. Mars his Latitude
here is not regarded.

CHAP. LIX. The Nonagesimus gradus, and his Altitude and Azimuth given, as in
the former Chapter. How in the same Projection to get the Altitude and Azimuth
of any Planet or Star, by his Longitude and Latitude.
YOur Palnisphear set as in the former Chapter: you shall number the Longitude
of the Star upon the Finitor, (here Ecliptique) beginning at the Descendent or
Nonagesimus gardus; and in the Azimuth serving his Longitude, count his
Latitude by the Almicantars, at the end of which account is the Stars place for
this time. The Parallel cutting there shows his Altitude, and the Meridian
cutting there shows his Azimuth, if you count from the East point as you were
taught in the former Chapter.

Example. Lucida Pleiadum was in Longitude 25. 10 minutes, Latitude 4 degrees
00 minutes North. Therefore from the Nonagesimus gradus 24. I number in the
Finitor toward the Ascendent 31. 10 minutes, and there is the Longitude of
Lucida Pleiaedum; in the Azimuth that cuts here I go up Northward 4 degrees,
and there I make a prick for Lucida Pleiadum. Now the Parallel 38 shows me his
Altitude, and the 48th. Meridian from the Center, shows me that Lucida
Pleiadum is gone 48 in Azimuth from the Ascendent, but from the East point
only 12 degrees 10 minutes.

CHAP. LX. The Altitude and Azimuth of any Star taken, and either the
Ascendent, Nonagesimus gradus, or Culmen Caeli known: How by the same
Nonagesimal Projection to find the Stars Longitude and Latitude.
IF you know either the Ascendent, Nonagesimus gradus, or Culmen Caeli, you
have enough to put your Planisphear in the Nonagesimal Projection, by the
former Chapters. And your Planisphear so set, you shall seek out the Meridian,
which stands for the Azimuth in which you observe the Star; and therein
number from the Equinoctial line the Altitude observed: the Azimuth and
Almicantar cutting there show the Longitude and Latitude of the Star inquired.
If the Azimuths reach not the place of the Star, turn the Reet half round, and
let the Zenith and Nadir points change places; and your turn is served.

Example. Febr. 13, 1657/8. I observed (somewhat near) that was gone Westward
from the Meridian in Azimuth 14 degrees, and that his Altitude was 61 degrees;
Sirius was then in the Meridian, by which I have the Ascendent, Culmen, and
Nonagesimus gradus, any or all of them given. For when in the Equinoctial
Projection I bring Sirius to the Meridian line, it is all one as if I had set
the Suns place to the hour of the Night (by Chapter 46.) and I see there
Culminates with Sirius 7. 10 minutes, whose Meridian Altitude (by the 46.) is
61. 5 minutes; and I see 5 ascending in my Horizon, and 5 descending; therefore
5 is Nonagesimus gradus, which is 90 degrees distant both from the Ascendent
and Descendent: his Altitude (by Chapter 55.) 61. 10 minutes almost. Therefore
I set the Finitor 61. 10 minutes above Meridies, (as Chapter 58.) and in the
Finitor at the Limb I count 5 Nonagesimus gradus; thence I go inwards in the
Finitor 1. 40 minutes where I come to 7. 10. the degree of Culmination; this
degree is cut by the 4th. Meridian from the Limb, whereby I learn that this 4th
Meridian will be the Meridian of my place, and that the Amplitude of the
Nonagesimus gradus, and likewise of the Ascendent, is 4 degrees. Now to place
in the Matter, I count his Azimuth first, beginning from the Meridian of my
Place now found. First I reckon up from the Culmen Caeli to Nonagesimus gradus
in the Limb 4 degrees, (for so much the Nonagesimus gradus is West of the
Meridian) and thence back again, I tell to the 10th. Meridian from the Limb,
which makes the 14th. Azimuth from Medium Caeli, in which Azimuth I observed
Jupiter in that Meridian; used here for the 14th. Azimuth) I reckon the
Altitude of Jupiter from he Equinoctial line 61 degrees, and at that Altitude I
make therein a prick for the place of: And imediately I see this prick stands
a quarter of a degree above the Finitor, showing the Latitude of 15 minutes
North, and it is cut by almost the 5th. Azimuth from the Limb, which shows me
that the Longitude of is 4. 50 minutes less then the Longitude of Nonagesimus
gradus; and therefore that is in 0. 40 minutes.

CHAP. LXI. The Latitude and Azimuth of a Star, and either the Ascendent,
Nonagesimus gradus, or the Culmination given, to find his Longitude.
YOur Planisphear being set in the Nonagesimal Projection, (as in the former
Chapter) seek the Meridian that serves for the Azimuth of the Star, and mark
where it cutteth the Almicantar serving for the Parallel of the Stars Latitude.
The Azimuth cutting there shows the Longitude, which you shall reckon from the
Ascendent, or Descendent, or Nonagesimus gradus; whose Longitudes are known, as
was showed in the former Chapter.

Example. Suppose his Azimuth observed 14 degrees from South Westward (as
Chapter 60.) and suppose his Latitude known 15 minutes North: (Though I know
the Tables make Jupiters Latitude here diverse minutes less, that matters not to
our purpose here) I say where the 10th Meridian (which by the former Chapter is
the 14. Azimuth in this posture of my Planisphear) cutteth the Almicantar 0
serving for Jupiters Latitude, there cutteth an Azimuth which gives me Jupiters
Longitude, as in the former Chapter.

CHAP. LXII. To find the Parallactical Angle; that is, what Angle the Azimuth
makes with any point of the Ecliptique, by the Altitude of that point, and of
the Nonagesimus gradus.
NUmber on the Label from the Center the Complement of the Altitude of the
point proposed, (which may be known by Chapter 56.) and at the end of it make a
prick, and having (by Chapter 55. or otherwise) the Altitude of Nonagesimus
gradus, turn the prick you made on the Label to touch the Almicantar, which is
Complement of that Altitude: then in the Limb of the Reet between the Finitor
and the Label is the quantity of the angle.

Example. In Chapter 56. the Altitude of the Sun in the middle of the Eclipse
which happened March 29. 1652. 10. hours 32 minutes a. m. was 41. 47 minutes, and
the Altitude of Nonagesimus gradus 41. 58 minutes; wherefore I make a prick on
the edge of the Label at 41 counted from the Limb, (or I count the Complement
hereof from the Center, and make the prick) and having turned that prick to the
forty second Almicantar from the Zenith, I find the Label showing 87 degrees
in the Limb of the Reet, the quantity of the angle.

But because the Label here cutteth the Almicantar so slope that you can hardly
observe the just point of Intersection, I will show you another way.

The Complement of the Altitude of Culmen Caeli, the distance of the point
proposed from Culmen, and the Complement of Altitude of the said point, make a
Triangle; whose 3 sides are all known, or may be known by the Chapters
foregoing: Therefore by the first Problem of Obliquangled Triangles you may
find the angle.

Example. I set the Complement of the Suns Altitude Z diagram for A B in the
Limb, and marking where the 54th Parallel, counted from the Pole meets with the
Almicantar 23. 41 minutes, (counted from the Zenith,) there I find the Azimuth
93. 19 minutes, showing the greater angle at the Sun, whose Supplement 86. 41
minutes is the lesser angle sought; and this lesser angle below the Ecliptique
is always Westward in the West Quadrant, and contrary in the East. In the
first way you resolve the Rectangled Triangle Z. 90., by the Problem 2.
Rectang. and third Variety: in the second way you resolve the Oblique Triangle
Z C by Problem 1. of Obliqueangled Triangles.

CHAP. LXIII. To find the Parallax of Altitude of the Sun, or Moon.
THe true Altitude of the Sun, or Moon, ought to be observed in the Center of
the Earth, whereto the Tables are conformed: but because we dwell upon the
Superficies of the Earth almost 4000 English miles from the Center, therefore
the Planets seem lower to us then indeed they be. Suppose a Man observed the
apparent Altitude of the Moon at C on the Superficies of the Earth to be E G 10
degrees; he that could observe it in the Center at B might find the diagramtrue
Altitude F G almost 11 degrees. Now the small angle at D (being equal to the
difference of these Altitudes, and subtended on this side by the Semidiameter
of the Earth B C, and on the further side by the arch of the difference of
these Altitudes in the Primum mobile,) is called the angle of the Parallax of
Altitude. This Parallax is greatest in the Horizon, and decreaseth as the
Planet rises higher, till in the Zenith it vanish into nothing: because there
the line drawn from the Center falls into the line drawn from the Superficies
of the Earth to the Planet, and makes therewith no angle at all.

To get the Parallax for any Altitude proposed, you must first get the
Horizontall Parallax out of some Astronomical Tables: for it varyes according
to the Planets distance from the Earth; which is not always the same; yet the
Suns Horizontal Parallax you may always reckon to be about 3 minutes, and the
Moons Horizontal Parallax to be at the least 50 minutes, and at the most 68
minutes. This had, I number the Horizontal Parallax in the Limb from the
Equinoctial line, and thereto lay the Label; and number the Altitude of the
Planet on the Label from the Limb, and the Parallel that cuts that Altitude
shows the Parallax desired. And note here, that for every minute of the
Horizontal Parallax you may reckon 5, 10, or 20, times so many, so that your
Label rise not beyond 10 degrees in the Limb; so shall you attain the minutes
more exactly.

Example. March 29. 1652. the Altitude of the Sun in the middle of the Eclipse
was 41. 47 minutes, and his Horizontal Parallax according to Lantsbergius, 2
minutes 18 seconds, for which I number 2 degrees 18 minutes from the
Equinoctial line, and thereto set the Label; and so I find the 43 degrees of
the Label to cut the Parallel 1 degree 30 minutes, which I am to account 1
minute 30 seconds, the Suns Parallax for this Altitude. Likewise the Moons
Horizontal Parallax according to Lantsbergius, was then 62 minutes, her
Altitude the same with the Suns, or very near; I set the Label therefore to
make an angle of 6 degrees 12 minutes with the Equinoctial, and so I find the
Parallel 4 cutting the 41 degree of the Label; which shows the Parallax of the
in that Altitude 46, accounting every degree 10 minutes, as here I had
appointed them to signify.

CHAP. LXIV. The Parallactique Angle, and the Parallax of Altitude given, to
find the Parallax of Longitude and Latitude.
IF the Azimuth or Circle of Altitude make no angle with the Ecliptique, but be
co-incident with it (as where the Ecliptique cuts the Zenith) then does the
Parallax of Altitude vary the Longitude only; and so much as the Parallax of
Altitude is, so much is the apparent Longitude of the Planet greater then the
true Longitude in the Eastern Quadrant of the Ecliptique, and so much lesser in
the Western.

If the Azimuth make a Right angle with the Ecliptique (which it may do only in
Nonagesimo gradu) then does the Parallax of Altitude vary the Latitude only;
and so much as the Parallax of Altitude is, so much must be added to the
apparent North Latitude, or subducted from the apparent South Latitude, to make
the true Latitude of the Planet North or South. If the Azimuth cut the
Ecliptique with Oblique angles (as most commonly it happens to do) then does
the Parallax of Altitude vary both the Longitude and Latitude. And the nearer
the Planet is to the Nonagesimus gradus, the greater is the Parallax of
Latitude, and the Parallax of Longitude less: and contrarily the further the
Planet is from Nonagesimus gradus, the greater is the Parallax of Longitude,
and the Parallax of Latitude the less.

The Parallax of Altitude is always the Hypotenusa, and the Parallax of
Longitude and Latitude are the legs of a small Rectangled Spherical Triangle,
The Parallactical Triangle.
which may be called the Parallactical Triangle, and the leg which has the
Parallax of Longitude is a segment of the Ecliptique, or of a Parallel near it,
and the leg which has the Parallax of Latitude, is a segment of a Circle of
Longitude passing through the apparent place of the Planet, and through the
Poles of the Ecliptique, and cutting the Ecliptique, or his said Parallel at
Right angles, as in the Figure.

C is the apparent place of the Planet. B is his true place, in which he must
be seen from the Center. A B C is the Parallactique angle. B C is the Parallax
of Altitude. B A the Parallax of Longitude. C A the Parallax of Latitude.
diagram

Wherefore by the third Problem of Rectangled Triangles, Book 3. 5. you may
presently get both the legs.

Example. The Parallactical angle B, was found Chapter 62. to be 86. 41
minutes, and the Parallax of the Moons Altitude, (Chapter 63.) to be 46 minutes
for the same time. Here therefore having laid the Label to 86. 41 minutes from
the Equinoctial, I number in the Label from the Center 46 degrees and an half
(in stead of 46 minutes and an half the Parallax of Altitude) and I find that
the 46 Parallel cutteth the said 46, degree of the Label; by which I know that
the Leg C A for the Parallax of Latitude is 46 very near, (for the here being
near the Nonagesimus gradus all her Parallax almost goes into Longitude,) but B
A of my Triangle is covered by the head of my Label. Nevertheless I may see his
measure in any of the Parallels to be 3 minutes for the Parallax of Longitude,
for it is the 3 Meridian from the Axis, which cutteth 46 of the Label: and if I
had not this shift, I might have my choice of other shifts, showed Book 3. the
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13th. Chapters.

The Suns Parallax of Altitude Chapter 63 for the same time was found 1 minute.
therefore laying the Label to the Parallactique angle (as before) I number on
the Label for the side B C (the Suns Parallax of Altitude, being 1 minute) 9
degrees, so every degree here signifies 10 seconds; and I find there cutting
almost the 9th Parallel, showing me that C A the Parallax of the Suns Latitude
is 1 minute almost (that is almost as much as his Parallax of Altitude) and
there cutteth also the Meridian 0, showing me that the side B A, Parallax of
Longitude, is almost 7 seconds.

The Sun therefore (though he never have Latitude) by reason of his Parallax,
appeared in the middle of this Eclipse to have South Latitude 1 minute, the
Moons true Latitude was then by Lantsbergius his Tables 45 minutes, 24 seconds
North; so that by this account the Sun and Moons Centers were distant in
Latitude 46 minutes, 54 seconds: but when out of this distance you have
subtracted 46 for the Moons Parallax of Latitude, there remains 34 seconds for
the apparent distance of the Centers of the Sun and Moon. But by Observation, I
found them distant 1 minute 48 seconds: for the digits Eclipsed at Ecton, were
11. 22 minutes; and so perhaps might I have found by my Planisphear, or some
what near, had it been large enough, and had I regarded every minute and second
precisely in setting down this Example, which were more then needed for my
purpose in this place.

CHAP. LXV. To find the Moons Latitude, by her distance from either of the
Nodi, called Caput, and Caudi Draconis.
AS the Ecliptique crosses the Equator with an angle of 23. 30 minutes for our
Age, so the Orbite or Circle in which the Moon moves crosses the Ecliptique:
but the angle of Inclination is not always nor long the same: for in the
Conjunctions of the Sun and Moon the angle is ever 5 00 minutes, and increases
to the time of the Quadrature, when it is found 5 degrees 16 minutes; thence it
decreaseth to the Opposition, where it is again but 5 degrees, as in the
Conjunction; thence it increases again to 5 degrees 16 minutes in the latter,
and again thence decreaseth to 5 degrees in the.

Get by the Astronomical Tables the quantity of the angle made between the
Ecliptique and the Orbite of the Moon, (which in all Conjunctions and
Oppositions, and therefore in all Eclipses is 5 degrees, as was now said) and
get also by the like Tables the Moons distance from the nearest of the Nodes:
then may you find the Moons Latitude, by the Problem 3. Rectangled Triangles,
Book 3. 5. just as you use to find the Suns Declination, by his Longitude and
greatest Declination.

Example. The in the former Case was distant from Caput Draconis by
Lantsbergius Tables 8 degrees 43 minutes. I lay the Label from the Equinoctial
line to 5 degrees in the Limb, and counting in the Label from the Center 8. 43.
I see there the Parallel of 0 (that is, 45 minutes, or 46 minutes) crossing for
the Moons Latitude.

CHAP. LXVI. To find the Dominical Letter, the Prime, Epact, Easter day, and
the rest of the moveable Feasts for ever, by the Calender, discribed Book 1. 11.
AN Example, shall serve here instead of a Rule. For the Year 1657. I would
know all these: wherefore I seek the Year 1657. in the Table of the Suns Cycle,
and over against it, I find 14. for the Year of the Cycle of the Sun, and D for
the Dominical Letter. And note here, that every Leap-year has 2 Dominical
Letters (as 1660. has A G) and the first ( viz. A) serves that Year till
February 25, and the second (G) for the rest of the Year. And note that these
letters go always backwards when you count forwards (as B A, then G F, etc.
not F G, and then A B) as you may see by the Table.

Then in the Table of the Cycle of the Moon, I have for the Year 1657. the
Prime 5. the Epact 25. Those had, I go to the Table for Easter, and seek there
in the first rank the Prime 5. and under it in the middle rank stands E; that
is not my Dominical Letter; therefore I seek not backward, but always forward
in the middle rank, till I come to my Dominical Letter D. and under it I find
in the third rank March 29. upon which Easter day falls this Year 1657. The
rest of the moveable Feasts may be had by their distances from Easter, which
are always the same. Only for Advent Sunday, remember that the next Sunday
after November 26 is Advent Sunday. Read Book 1. 11. and that will sufficiently
instruct you with this Example.

CHAP. LXVII. To find the age of the Moon, by the Epact.
REmember first that the Epact begins with March, which must be here accounted
the first Month: Then if you add to the Epact the number of the Month
current, and the number of the day of the Month current, the sum or the excess
above 30, is the Moons age.

Example. January 20. 1656. According to the account of the Church of England,
(who begin the Year with March 25. which was the Equinoctial day about Christ
time) the Epact is 14. January is the 11th Month, and the 20th day is
proposed; now add 14, 11, and 20. together, they make 45. out of which I take
30. and there remains 15. the Moons age.

This Rule is of good use, not only to find the age of the Moon, and so her
changes to a day, but also for examining of Chronology, where the time is most
certainly reckoned by Eclipses. But you must note, that if you apply this Rule
to the Years past before Anno Dom, 1600. then for every 312. Years that the
Year proposed precedes Anno Dom. 1600. you must subtract one day out of the age
of the Moon, found by this Rule.

Example. ^icius lib. 1. Reports, That in the beginning of Tiberius Caesar's
reign there was an Eclipse of the Moon, and Temporarius says, that whereas
Augustus died Aug. 29. (I think he should say 19.) this Eclipse happened Sep. 27.
I would know whether it were possible for an Eclipse to happen that day,
supposing the beginning of Tiberius to be in August, Anno Dom. 14. and Anno
Periodi Julianae 4727. The Prime for that Year is 15, and the Epact 15. by Book
1. 11. add now to the Epact, for September 7. and for the day of the Month 27.
and the sum is 49. out of which subducting 30. I leave the Moons age 19. but
because Anno Dom. 14. precedes Anno Dom. 1600. 5. times 312. Years, therefore
out of 19 I subduct 5. and there remains 14. the age of the Moon, corrected
for September 27. Anno Dom. 14. Therefore it was about the full Moon: and it is
possible the Moon might be Eclipsed then, as Temporarius says. But it could
not be Eclipsed September 27. Anno Dom. 13. for then the Epact being 4. the age
of the Moon by the same Rule was 3. neither could it happen Sep. 27. Anno Dom.
15. for then by the same Rule the age of the Moon, was 25. at what age the Moon
was far from her opposition to the Sun: and therefore could not be Eclipsed.

CHAP. LXVIII. To find in what Parallel and Climate a Place is, by the Latitude
given.
PArallels in Geography are lesser Circles Parallel to the Equator, and passing
through the Zenith of a Place, and succeeding one another at such distance that
at every Parallel the length of the day is varyed a quarter of an hour.

A Climate is such a Parallel as alters the length of the day half an hour.
The Parallels and Climates begin from the Equator, under which the day is
always equal to the Night, and each 12 hours long: hence they count the
Parallels and Climates Northward, and Southward: but because the Earth was not
so far known to Ptolomy and the Ancient Geographers, as it has been to those
of later Times, therefore there is great difference between the Ancient and
later Geographers about the number and quantity of the spaces contained by
them: as among others Kerkerman Syst. Geography, lib. 1. has showed.

Yet may they easily be found to every Man's mind, by the Planisphear in the
Meridional Projection, thus. Find by 4. 17. what is the Semi-diurnal arch of
the Sun in, out of which, take 6 hours, and look how many quarters of an hour
the double of the residue contains, so many Geographical Parallels is the
place removed from the Equator, and half so many Climates.

Example. I find the Semi-diurnal arch in our Latitude to be 8 hours 16
minutes, in the Tropique of Cancer; out of which taking 6. and doubling the
residue, I have 4. 33. which is more then 9 half hours, or more then 18.
quarters: so much our longest day exceeds 12 hours; therefore we should be past
the 18th Parallel, and 9th Climate, viz. in the beginning of the 10th Climate,
and 19th Parallel.

CHAP. LXIX. The Longitude and Latitude of two Places given, to find their
Distance.
WHat Longitude and Latitude in Geography are, and how they differ from
Longitude and Latitude in Astronomy, has been showed, Book 4, 5.11.

If the places differ only in Latitude, and have one Longitude, bearing full
North or South one from another; then take their difference of Latitude, by
subducting the less out of the greater, if the places have both North Latitude,
or both South Latitude: or take the sum of their Latitude, if one be North, and
the other South. Then for every degree of this difference or aggregate number,
you may reckon 69 English. miles of the Statute, which ordains 1760. Yards to
be a Mile: but of English Miles measured by common estimation, there go not
above 60. to a degree; so that every such Mile that you Travel North or South
shall alter your Latitude about one minute. If they differ in Longitude only,
and have no Latitude, but be both under the Equator, you shall reckon in like
manner for every degree they differ in Longitude 69 Miles of distance.

In all other Cases you have a Triangle soluble by the second Problem of
Obliquangled Triangles: of which Triangle the Complements of Latitude make the
two comprehending sides, and the difference of the Longitudes of the places is
the angle comprehended between them, and the third side is the arch of the
distance of the places; which when you have found in degrees and minutes of a
great Circle, you may turn into Miles as before: mark how the distance of two
Stars is found by their Longitude and Latitude given, Chapter 37. in the same
manner may you find the distance of two Cities or Towns.

Example. I would know the distance of London from Jerusalem, The Complement of
the Latitude of London is 38. 28 minutes: the Complement of the Latitude of
Jerusalem is 58. 05 minutes: the difference of their Longitudes 46. 0 minutes.
I set the Zenith to the Latitude of London in the Limb, that is 38. 28 minutes
from the Pole, so the Limb is the Circle of Longitude in which London stands,
then I seek the 46 Meridian from that side of the Limb where Zenith is set for
London, for that 46 Meridian is the Circle of Jerusalems Longitude: (because
the difference of Longitude is 46.) Now because Jerusalems Latitude is 31. 55.
and the Complement thereof, or distance from the Pole 58. 5 minutes, I walk on
in the 46 Meridian till I come where the 58th Parallel from the Pole crosses
him, and there is the place of Jerusalem: the Azimuth that goes hence to the
Zenith is the nearest way from Jerusalem to London: what Azimuth this is I
regard not, for I enquire not the angle at London, but I observe by the
Parallels how many degrees there be in him between the places of Jerusalem and
the Zenith, and I find 38 degrees 20 minutes: which being resolved into Miles
is 2300. Miles of common estimation, but Miles of the Statute 2664. the
distance of London from Jerusalem.

CHAP. LXX. The Latitude and distance of two Places given, to find the
difference of Longitude.
THe Triangle will stand as in the former Chapter: there by two sides and the
angle comprehended you sought the third side, by Problem 2. Obliquangled
Triangles: here by three sides given, you seek an angle by Problem 1
Obliquangled Triangles.

Make the Pole, Pole: and set the Zenith to the Latitude of one of the places,
as you did London. (Chapter 69.) 38. 28 minutes from the Pole, then number the
Complement of the Latitude of the other place from the Pole, by the Parallels,
and the distance of the two places from the Zenith by the Almicantars; and
where the last Parallel and last Almicantar meet is C of your Triangle: (see
Book 3. 14.) Now count how many Meridians there be between C and the Limb, so
many degrees is the angle at the Pole sought, for the difference of Longitude.

Example. Having the distance of London from the Pole 38. 28 minutes, and of
Jerusalem from the Pole 58. 5 minutes, and the distance of London from
Jerusalem 2300. common English Miles, (of which 60. make a degree) I set the
Zenith for London 38. 28 minutes from the Pole in the Limb, then because
Jerusalem is distant from the Pole 58. 5 minutes, I go to the 58th Parallel
from the Pole, and lay one finger or the point of a bodkin on him; and because
London is distant from Jerusalem 38 degrees 20 minutes, I count from the Zenith
to the Almicantar 38. 20 minutes; now where this Almicantar crosses the
Parallel last found, there is C of the Triangle, and the place of Jerusalem:
and you may see that you must cross 46. Meridians before you can go thence to
the Zenith in the Limb; which shows that the angle at the Pole for the
difference of Longitude is 46.

CHAP. LXXI. To find what degree of the Ecliptique Culminates in another
Country, at any time proposed, if the difference of Longitude be known.
IN the Equinoctial Projection, Bring the Suns place to the hour proposed, by
help of the Label: and in the Noon-line you see presently what degree
Culminates in your Country. (as Chapter 46, is showed.) Now to know this for
another Town, set the Label so many degrees from the Noon-line as the
difference of Longitude requires, and that Eastward, if the place proposed be
East, or Westward if it bear West; and so the Label shall cut the degree of
Culmination, for the place proposed.

Example. If it be demanded what degree is Culminating at Jerusalem March 10.
at 10. a clock before noon, I will set the Suns place 0. to the hour; and I see
upon the Noon line, which is our Meridian, there Culminates 28 almost. Now for
the Meridian of Jerusalem I must lay the Label 46 degrees Eastward, that is
from Meridies toward Oriens, and look what Star or degree of the Ecliptique is
then cut by the Label, that is then Culminating in the Meridian at Jerusalem;
(as here I find 17.) for in this Projection the Label (lay him where you will)
is a Meridian.

CHAP. LXXII. To find what a Clock it is in another Country, by knowing the
hour at Home, and the difference of Longitude.
THis is done easily enough without an Instrument: for if you turn the
difference of Longitude into hours and minutes, and add the same to your hours
for any place which lies Eastward, or subtract the same for any place which
lies Westward, you shall make the hour of the place.

Example. The difference of Longitude between London and Jerusalem is 46. or
being converted into time 3 hours 4 minutes: therefore adding this to the time
at London, I say, when it is noon at London, it is 4 minutes past 3 a clock
after noon at Jerusalem: and when it is 2 a clock at London, it is 5. and 4
minutes at Jerusalem.

If you will do it by the Planisphear, you shall do it in the Equinoctial
Projection, thus. Whereas the Limb of your Rect is graduated into 360 degrees,
if you distinguish the hours also at every 15th degree, beginning at the Zenith
(which shall be 12) and numbering thence in the Limb of your Reet to your right
hand or Westward, 1, 2, 3, etc. then shall you need to do no more but set the
Zenith to the difference of Longitude, East or West from your Meridian, as the
strange place happens to be situate: for then the Label laid to the hour of
your Country in the Limb of the Matter, shall show the hour of the other Country
in the Limb of the Reet. And so the Zenith being laid to 60 degrees Westward,
which is the Meridian of the Isle of Barbados the Label laid to Meridies shall
cut in the Limb of the Reet 8 of the clock before noon: which shows me that
when it is noon with us, it is at Barbados but eight in the morning.

The end of the Fourth Book.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Longitude and Latitude of one Place known, and the Rumb and
distance of a second Place, to find both the Longitude and Latitude of the
second Place.
SEt the Zenith to the Latitude of the first Place, then seek the Azimuth which
serves for the Rumb of the second Place, and in that Azimuth count his
distance from the Zenith: where this distance ends there is the second Place,
whole Latitude is shown you by the Parallel which cutteth him, and the Meridian
cutting there also, shows his Longitude.

diagram

Example. Let Z be London, and because Jerusalem bears from London almost S b
E or 77 from South Eastward, therefore I choose the Azimuth 77 Z K. therein I
number Jerusalems distance from London Z I 2300. miles or minutes, that is 38.
20. minutes. Now in the Triangle Z P I, I may find P I the complement of
Jerusalems Latitude 58. 05. minutes, and Z P I the difference of Longitude 46,
which must be added to the Longitude of London to make the Longitude of
Jerusalem.

CHAP. LXXIV. The Latitudes and Distance of two Places given, to find the Rumb,
and the difference of Longitude.
COunt in the Meridian from P (the Pole) the complement of the Latitude of the
first place, and thereto set Z the Zenith. Count also from P the complement of
the Latitude of the second place, and lay your finger on the Parallel at which
your number ends. Count also from Z the distance of the places in Degrees and
Minutes, and note the Almicantar at which this number ends: where this
Almicantar crosses the aforesaid Parallel there is C of your Triangle; (but
here marked I,) Look what Azimuth cutteth here, it shows the Rumb: and the
Meridian that cutteth here, (if you count his distance from the Limb) shows the
difference of the Longitude of the places. This is so plain from Chapter 69,
70, and 73, that it needs no example. The same Scheam serves these 4,
Chapters,

The end of the Fourth Book.
The Fifth Book.
Showing the way to resolve all GNOMONICAL PROBLEMES; And to make all sorts of
SUN DYALS, very easily by the PLANISPHEAR.
CHAP. I. The Preface.
Of the kinds of Dyals.
ALthough Gnomoniques pertain to Astronomy, yet I think it not amiss, for the
ease of the Reader in finding them, to place the Gnomonical Problemes in a
distinct Book by themselves.

Suns Dyals may be reduced to two sorts.

Some show the hour by the Altitude of the Sun, as Quadrants, Rings, Cylinders,
etc. for the making whereof you must know the Suns Altitudes for every day, or
at least every 10th day of the year, and for every hour of those days: which
Altitudes you may find immediately upon this Planisphear, as in a Table made to
your hand, for any Latitude, by Book 3.25. and so make them of any shape
according to your mind.

The other sort show the hour by the shadow of a Gnomon, or Style, Parallel to
the Axis of the World: and of those I treat chiefly in this Book. Those be all
Projections of the Sphere upon a plain which lies Parallel to some Horizon or
other in the World. And if upon such a plain the Meridians only be projected,
they shall suffice to show the hour, without projecting the other Circles, as
the Ecliptique, the Equator with his Parallels of Declination, the Horizon with
his Almicantars and Azimuths, which are sometimes drawn upon Dyals, more for
ornament, then for-necessity.

CHAP. II. Theorems premised.
FOr the better understanding of the reason of Dyals, these Theorems would be
known.

1. That every plain whereupon any Dyal is drawn, is part of the plain of great
Circle of the Heaven: which Circle is an Horizon to some Country or other: that
the Center of the Dyal represents the Center of the Earth and World, and the
Gnomon which casts the shade represents the Axis, and ought to point
directly to the two Poles. And if upon the Center of the Dyal you fasten a
Label with Sights of equal Altitude, and keeping your eye in the line of the
Sights turn this Label round, you shall thereby describe in the Heavens that
great Circle wherein your Dyal-plain lies, and see where it cuts our Horizon,
and how much it is Elevated above it on one side, and depressed on the other.
2. That those Dyal-plains Geometrically are not in the very plains of great
Circles; for then they should have their Centers in the Center of the Earth,
from which they are removed almost 4000. Miles: and in truth they lie in the
plains of Circles Parallel to the said Horizons, but so near them, that
Optically they seem to be the plains of those Horizons: because the
Semidiameter of the Earth bears so small proportion to the Suns distance, that
the whole Earth may be taken for one point or Center, without any perceivable
error. 3. That (as all great Circles of the Sphere, so) every Dyal-plain has
his Axis, which is a straight line passing through the Center of the plain, and
making right angles with it: and at the ends of the Axis be the two Poles of
the plain, whereof that above our Horizon is called the Pole Zenith, and the
other the Pole Nadir of the Dyal. 4. That every Dyal-plain has two faces or
sides: and look what respect or situation the North Pole of the World has to
the one side, the same has the South Pole to the other, and these two sides
will always receive 24 hours; so that what one side wants, the other side
shall have; and the one is described in all things as the other. 5. That (as
Horizons, so) Dyal-plains are with respect to the Equator divided into 1.
Parallel or Equinoctial, 2. Right, 3. Oblique. 6. A Parallel or Polar
Dyal-plain makes no angles with the Equator: but lies in the plain of it, or
Parallel to it. Such Dials are Scioterica Orthognomonica, that is, have the
Gnomon erected on the plain at Right angles, as the Axis of the World is upon
the plain of the Equator: because the Axis and Poles of the Dyal be here all
one with the Axis and Poles of the World: and the hour lines here meet all at
the Center, making equal angles, and dividing the Dyal Circle into 24. equal
parts as the Meridians do the Equator, in whose plain the Dyal lies. 7. A right
Horizon or Dyal-plain cutteth the Equator at right angles, and so cutteth
through both the Poles of the World. Therefore such Dyals are
Paralielognomonical: that is have the Gnomon Parallel to the plain, and so the
hour lines and the hour lines all Parallel one to another: because their plains
though infinitely extended will never cut the Axis of the World. Yet have those
Dyals a Center, (though not for the meeting of the hour lines) viz. through
which the Axis of the Dyal Circle passes, cutting the plain at right angles,
and cutting also (near enough for the projecting of a Dyal) the Center of the
World. 8. An Oblique Horizon or Dyal-plain cutteth the Equator at Oblique
angles: such Dyals are Scalenognomonical: that is, have for their Gnomon the
side of a Triangle whose angles vary according to the more or less Obliquity of
the said Horizon: and the Gnomon shall always make an angle with the plain of
so many degrees as the Axis of the World makes with the plain; or as either of
the Poles of the World is Elevated above the plain. 9. Every Oblique Horizon is
divided by the Meridians or Hour Circles of the Sphere into 24. unequal parts:
which parts, are always lesser as they are scarer to the Meridian of that
Horizon or plain, and greater as they are further off: and on both sides the
Meridian of the plain the hour Circles which are equally distant in Time, are
also equally distant in Space: whence it is that the divisions of one Quadrant
of your Dyal plain being known, the division of the whole Circle is likewise
known. 10. The Hour Lines in an Oblique Dyal are the Sections of the plains of
the Hour-circles of the Sphere with the Dial plain. And because the plains of
great Circles do always cut one another diagram in halfs by Diameters, which
are straight lines passing through the common Center, therefore lines drawn
from the Center of the Dyal to the Intersections of the Hour-circles with the
great Circle of the plain, shall be those very Sections, and the very
Hour Lines of the Dyal. 11. Every Dyal-plain (being an Horizon to some place in
the Earth, as was said Theorem 1.) has his proper Meridian; which is the
Meridian cutting through the ^oles of the plain, and making Right angles with
the plain. If the Poles of the Dyal-plain lie in the Meridian of our place;
then is the Meridian of the plain all one with the Meridian of the place; and
the Gnomon or Style shall stand erected upon the Noon-line, or line of 12 a
clock, as in all direct Dyals: but if the plain decline, then shall the
substylar or line wherein the Gnomon stands, which is the Meridian of the
plain, vary from the Noon-line, which is the Meridian of the place: and this
variation shall be East if the Declination of the plain be West, and
contrarily: because the visual lines by which the Sphere is projected on
Dyal-plains, do all like the beams of a Burning-glass intersect or cross one
another in a certain point of the Gnomon (to be assigned at pleasure, and
called Nodus) and so do all place and depaint themselves on the Dyal-plain
beyond the Nodus the contrary way. 12. Dyals are most aptly denominated from
that part of the Sphere where their Poles lie: though some Authors have chosen
to denominate them from the Circles in which their plains lie: as the
Dyal-plain which lies in the Equinoctial or Parallel to it, is called by many
an Equinoctial plain: but I concur with those who would rather call it a
Polar-plain; because the Poles thereof are in the Poles of the World.
CHAP. III. How to draw an Horizontal or Vertical line, upon any plain.
BEcause in the Delineation of most Dyals the Horizontal or the Vertical line
of the plain must first be drawn, before you can place the hour lines; I will
show you first how to draw either of them. Know this first that they cross one
another at Right angles in the Center of the Dyal: and therefore if you can
draw either of them, you may draw the other also. Also in upright plains as are
Walls a Quadrant or a Square with a Plumbet applied to the Wall, will show you
how to draw both of them very easily. Or if you hang a Plumb-line quiet before
the Wall when the Sun shines, the shadow of it shall be a Vertical line at any
time.

But if the plain incline or recline, you shall set to it a Square with a
Plumbet, and thereby first draw the Horizontal line; for when the Plumbet
(which must play in an hole) hangs Parallel to one side of the Square, a line
drawn by the other shall be Horizontal: that drawn, you shall lay your Square
flat on the plain, and draw the Vertical from any point of the Horizontal at
Right angles by your Square

Another way is this. Hang your Planisphear by the handle with his Plumbline,
so that the Plumbline fall upon one of the Diameters; then setting your Label
and Sights to the other Diameter, look through the Sights, and mark where the
visuall line cuts the plain near to one side, and there make a prick, then
direct your Sights to the other side of the plain, and make another prick,
(your Label and Plumbline being still at Right angles as before) by these two
pricks draw a line, and it shall be an Horizontal line. And note, that all
lines Parallel to an Horizontal line be Horizontal: and all lines Parallel to a
Vertical line be also Vertical.

CHAP. IV. How to make the Polar Dyal, and how to place it.
THe plain of the Polar Dyal lies in the Equinoctial: where the 12 chief
Meridians or Hour-circles divide both the Equinoctial and this plain into 24
equal parts. The Gnomon stands upon the Center at Right angles with the plain.
You may learn to make him only by the 6. Theorem of the second Chapter.

Take your Planisphear in the Equinoctial Projection, and there is your Dyal
ready made on the Limb, and the Hours already marked. Erect now a wire or thread
Perpendicular upon the Center, or hold a Square to the Center, so that his top
be equally distant from all the parts of the Circle: and there is your Gnomon
placed.

To place this Dyal do thus. Having (by Book 4.3.) found a Meridian line, if
you cross it with another line, that shall be an East or West line. Have also
in a readiness a square board upon which you may fasten your Planisphear or
Dyal-plate with pins, screws, or wax, so that the Noon-line may be Parallel to
two sides of the board, and the East-line to the other two: then set the North
side of the board in the East line, even now found, and raise the South side by
a Quadrant to the height of the Equinoctial; and so may you place your Dyal in
any Window if it be made upon a loose round plate; but if the plate be square,
you need not the board to place it.

Note that both faces of this Dyal must be divided, and the Gnomon must appear
on both sides, like the stick in a Purre (or whirligig) which Children use:
otherwise you must turn him upside down, as often as the Sun passes the
Equinoctial.

CHAP. V. How to make the South Equinoctial Dyal, or Parallelognomonical Dyal
direct.
THe Equinoctial Dyal we call that which has his Poles in the Equinoctial
Circle: of which there be three kinds.

1. The direct or South Equinoctial Dyal, which faceth the Meridian directly,
not looking from him to one side more then to the other, having his Poles in
the Intersections of the Equinoctial and Meridian. 2. The East or West
Equinoctial Dyal, which may also be called the Equinoctial Horizontal Dyal: for
an Horizontal Dyal declining just 90 degrees from the South or North, becomes
an Equinoctial Dyal, as well as Horizontal: because there his Poles light upon
the Intersection of the Horizon with the Equinoctial. And though this Dyal be
of kin to both, yet his Gnomon shows that he should be sorted rather with the
Equinoctial Dyals then with the Horizontal: for he is Parallelognomonical:
these two sorts be regular, having their Poles in the four notablest points of
the Equator: the third is somewhat Irregular, but may be brought to Rule. 3.
The Equinoctial Dyal declining, whose Poles happen anywhere else in the Equator
between the Horizon and Meridian.
Now to make the first of these, the South Equinoctial Dyal, draw first an
Horizontal-line upon the plain, and cross it with a Vertical-line, by Chapter
3. The Intersection of these is the Center of your Dyal, and would be chosen
about the middle of the plain. Now your Planisphear being fastened to a square
board, as in the former Chapter, you shall set the North side of the said board
in the Horizontal-line of the plain, so that the Axis or East line of your
Planisphear may be Parallel thereto, and the Noon-line (or Equator line of the
Matter) may point directly to the Center, making Right angles with the plain, or
at least with the Horizontal line thereof: (for it is not material whether the
board be upright, slope, or lie flat upon the Dial plain) then placing your
Sights first in the Noon line, they shall point to the Center for the point of
12. thence remove your Label to 1. of the diagram clock in the Limb, and they
shall point out in the Horizontal line of the plain, the point of Intersection
for one a clock, where you shall make a prick: In like manner remove your Label
to 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. in order, making pricks in like manner* When you remove
your Label to the Axtree line for 6 you shall find that the line of the Sights
makes no Intersection with the plain, but runs Parallel to it; because the
Sun is then in the Horizon of this Dyal, where he projects the shadows of all
upright things infinite. And as you found the points for the hours afternoon,
so may you by like reason find the points for the 5. morning hours, and their
quarters also, if you please: which had, if by these points found you draw
lines Parallel to the Vertical line of the plain (which is here the Meridian of
the plain, and of the place) they shall be the true hour lines. And the Gnomons
edge must stand over the Meridian, and Parallel to it, at the same distance
that the Axtree line of your Planisphear was situate in projecting the hour
points. If you cannot fix your Planisphear on a board, as abovesaid, or if your
plain require a Gnomon of a greater or lesser height, you may upon any board
presently draw so much of your Planisphear as serves for this purpose. Or to
say more briefly, Do but make the height of your Gnomon Radius, and the
Tangents of 15, 30, 45, 60, 75. shall give the distances of the hour points in
the Horizontal line, on both sides, from the Center of the Dyal, as may appear
in the Figure.

CHAP. VI. How to make the East Equinoctial Dyal, or the West.
THis plain is a Right Horizon of those People who dwell under the Equator,
distant from us 90 degrees of Longitude; as the South Equinoctial-plain of the
last Chapter was the Horizon of those who dwell under the Equator, in the same
Longitude with us. Therefore these Dyals are in all points alike: only the
Substylar-line which in the South Equinoctial Dyal is 12. in this East
Equinoctial Dyal is but 6. in the Morning for our Country, because of the
difference of Longitude.

To protract this on the wall or plain, first draw a Perpendicular or Vertical
line by Chapter 3. as A B. Pitch one foot of your Compasses in any convenient
point thereof (as C) and with the other foot draw a blind arch from some lower
point of the Perpendicular Southward (as D E.) In this arch number the
Elevation of the South Pole above this Perpendicular (that is, the Complement
of your Latitude, being with us 37.45 minutes) and from that degree to the
Center of the said arch draw the line E C, which is the very Axis of the World,
pointing to both the diagramPoles; Cross this Axis at Right angles with the
line C F, and that shall be a Diameter of the Equator and the Contingent-line,
as they call it. Now choose a fit point in this Contingent for the Substyle or
6. a clock point, as at G, and thereto by the square board mentioned in the
former Chapter, set Oriens, or Occident, of your Planisphear; and so the Label
set to the several hours in the Limb of the Planisphear shall show the
hour-points in the Contingent line: only for 12. the line of the Sights will
not intersect the plain at all, and therefore here is no Noon-line, as there
was no 6. a clock-line in the South Equinoctial Dyal but so soon as the Sun
leaving the plain makes the shadow of the Gnomon infinite, then it is Noon.

Lastly, draw a line Parallel to the Contingent line at such distance as the
plain will afford, as the line E I, and to this you shall protract your hour
lines, drawing them from every point of the Contingent to this; so that they
make Right angles with the Contingent and with this Parallel, even as the
rounds of a Ladder do with the sides, but that the distance of the rounds of a
Ladder are equal, and these distances be unequal. The Gnomon must be set like a
Bridge Perpendicularly over the 6. a clock hour-line, the edge that casts
shadow being Parallel to it, and of such height as the line K G of your
Planisphear, or so that if the Gnomon fall, his edge may lie in the line of 3.
or of 9. of the clock. This also may be made speedily by help of the Tangents,
as the South Equinoctial Dyal.

For the West Equinoctial Dyal, it is made like the East in all points; only
it shows but the after Noon hours, as the East shows but those of the fore
noon. When you have drawn on paper the East Dyal, and set it by guess in its
Situation, go on the West side of it, and you may see through the paper the
picture of the West Dyal, and so will the back side of the West Dyal show you
the true picture of the East.

CHAP. VII. How to make the Declining Equinoctial Dyal.
ANy Declining plain may be so Reclined that he shall become a Right Horizon or
Equinoctial plain, and at what Reclination this shall happen you may easily
find by Chapter 19.

When you are sure that your plain is a Right Horizon, having his Poles in the
Equinoctial, you shall by the same 19th Chapter get the Oblique Ascension of
the Noon-line, and the difference of Longitude; which had, the Dyal shall be
made in this mannar. See the second of the five Scheams of Declining-Recliners,
Chapter 20. Draw upon your plain (by Chapter 3.) an Horizontal line D d
(answering to D d in the said Scheam) therein take a point at pleasure, as the
point Z, (answering to Z in the said Scheam) and thereupon draw above the
Horizontal line Westward, if the Declination be West (as the said Scheam shall
direct you) the Quadrant of the plain D P T; (answering D Pro T of the said
Scheam) herein number from D the arch D P, which is the Oblique Ascension of
the Noon line, and draw Z P for the Axis and common Section of all the
Meridians. It appears now Latitude 52. 10 minutes

Declination 50. 00. West

Reclination 26.32.

D. L. 43.16.

Ascension of Noon-liee 61.59

diagram that no Dyal can be drawn upon the very plain of a Meridian, for there
all the hour lines will be represented by one line, which is the Axis of the
World; therefore you must draw such Dyals on a Parallel plain, as you did the
two former after this manner.

Set the line M E N for the Axis of the World or Gnomon, and prop him up over
the line P Z with two props of equal height, and Perpendicular to the plain,
and make the point E (which stands Perpendicularly over Z) the Center of the
World; then from this Axis or Gnomon mounted in the Air, shall the hour lines
be projected distinctly, and all of them shall be Parallel to the Axis and one
to another, as it happens in all sorts of Equinoctial Dyals. The line Z P shall
remain now only the Meridian of the plain or Substylar. And to find the
hour lines you shall do thus.

Draw through Z an Equinoctial or Contingent line E Z, making Right angles with
the Axis M E N or Z P, then setting Z O equal to Z E, draw upon the Center O
(with an extension of the Compasses,) the arch of the Equinoctial b Z d, or the
Parallel arch passing by D. Then number in this arch from the Substyle
(Westward if your plain decline West, or Eastward if it decline East) the
difference of Longitude, and where it ends there is the point of Noon in this
arch: from that point begin to divide the said arch by fifteens of degrees, or
24th parts of the whole Circle. And remember, that when you come to 90 degrees
from the Substyle, you need divide no further, for the Sun is no longer upon
this plain. Also you may leave out those hours at which the Sun is always
under our Horizon, as the hours from 8. at Night, to 4 in the Morning: then lay
a Ruler from the Center O to every one of these divisions of the Circle, and
where the Ruler cuts the Contingent, there make points for the hours
respectively, and through these points you may draw the hour lines Parallel to
the Substyle, of what length you please; and mark them from the Noon line
Eastward 1, 2, 3. etc. because the Suns Diurnal course is Westward, and the
course of the shadow is contrary.

He that will may make use of his Planisphear for dividing the hours, as was
taught Chapter 4, and 5. or use a Quadrant, or a Scale of Chords, or the Tables
of Tangents with a Sector, or a Scale of equal parts. But it needs not.

Note that this Dyal may compare with the hardest: however Mr Blagrave and
other Dyalists have omitted it, as seeming easy: and here Wittekindus, (to whom
all later Dyalists are much beholden) and after him Fale were mistaken, using
the Declination of the plain, where they should have used the difference of
Longitude in the making of this Dyal.

CHAP. VIII. Of the kinds of Oblique Dyals.
WHat an Oblique Dyal is, and why it is so called, has been showed Chapter 2.
They be

Regular. Irregular.
The Regular lie in some notable Circle of the Sphere; as, 1. The Vertical
Dyal, whose plain lies in the Horizon: for which cause many call it the
Horizontal Dyal. 2. The South and North Horizontal Dyal, whose plain lies in
the East Azimuth: and it is commonly called the South or North Erect Direct
Dyal. As for the East and West Dyals, they belong to another place, as was said
Chapter 5.

The Irregular are such as lie Oblique to the Horizon, as Reclining or
Inclining Dyals; or lie Oblique to the Meridian, as Decliners: or else Oblique
to both, as Recliners or Incliners Declining; which are esteemed the hardest of
all, because of their double Irregularity, though by the Planisphear they are
made almost as easily as the rest.

The Declination of a plain is the Azimuthal distance of his Poles from the
Meridian of the Place, East or West.

The Reclination is the distance of his Poles from the Zenith and Nadir of your
Place. Inclination is the nearest distance of the Poles of the plain from your
Horizon. And whatsoever the Reclination of the upper face of a plain is, the
Inclination of the lower face is the Complement thereof.

CHAP. IX. How to make the Vertical Dyal.
IN the Meridional Projection the Finitor being set to the Latitude of your
Place, you shall see the Limb which is your Meridian, and the Axtree-line which
is the sixth hour-circle, dividing the Finitor into 4 Quadrants; and the rest of
the Meridians dividing every Quadrant alike. Mark now at what degree numbered
from the Limb, every hour-circle (that is, every 15th Meridian being a ragged
or blacker line) cutteth the Finitor; at the same distance shall the same
hour-circle cut the Limb of your Dyal in the plain.

Example. To diagrammake a Vertical Dyal for our Latitude 52 degrees 15
minutes. I set the Finitor to this Latitude, and because I see the Meridian and
Axtree divide the Finitor into 4 equal Quadrants, therefore I open my Compass
to the Semidiameter of my Planisphear, or of any other Circle which I have at
hand already divided, and with that measure I draw a Circle, and cross it
square with two Diameters dividing it into four equal parts: of which Diameters
I appoint one to be the Noon-line, and at the North end thereof I write 12. the
other Diameter then is the East line, and at both ends thereof I write 6. Then
I count in my Planisphear how many degrees from the Meridian or Noon line every
other Circle cutteth, and I find that the first cutteth 11.58 minutes,
wherefore I take with my Compasses from off the Limb of my Planisphear, or
other Circle used for this purpose, the space of 11.58 minutes, and set it in
the Circle of my Dyal from 12. both ways, for the hours of 1. and 11. and
because I find the second hour Circle cutting the Finitor at 24. 32 minutes,
therefore I take in like manner the Chord of so many degrees from the Limb of
my Planisphear, and set it also in the Circle of my Dyal both ways from 12.
for the hours of 2. and 10. And when you have done the like for the 3, 4, and
5. hours, you shll draw lines from those points to the Center, and set to those
lines from the North Eastward 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and Westward 11, 10, 9, 8, 7. And
because the Sun in Summer is above our Horizon more then 2 hours before and
after 6. (for I see the 7th and 8th hour Circles intersecting the Tropique
above the Finitor) and because hour lines equally distant from the Meridian or
Axtree cut like degrees of the Horizon (as my Planisphear here shows me) and so
shall make equa langles at the Center; therefore laying my Ruler to 7 in the
Morning I prolong that line beyond the Center to the other side of the Circle
for 7 at Night: likewise by the prolongation of 8 in the Morning, I make 8 at
Night, and by the prolongation of 4 and 5 of the after Noon, I make 4 and 5 of
the Morning hours.

Lastly, for the Gnomon, set your Compasses to the Chord of the arch of the
Poles Elevation in the Limb: that is, measure in the Limb from the Pole to the
Finitor, and setting that distance in the Circle of your Dyal from 12. either
way, make a point, through which if you draw a deleble line from the Center,
you have between this line and the line of 12. the angle of your Gnomon, by
which when you have shaped him, you must set him upright over the 12 a clock
line, with the point of the said angle at the Center, and all is done.

CHAP. X. How to make the South and North Horizontal Dyal.
THis is usually called the Erect Direct Dyal, and belongs to an upright Wall
looking full North or South: and the plain of it lies in the East Azimuth,
which on the Planisphear in the Meridional Projection is represented by the
Axis of the Reet.

The Finitor set to the Latitude, as in the former Chapter, mark where the hour
Circles cut the Axis of the Reet, which is the proper Horizon of this Dyal; you
shall find the first cutteth 9. 20 minutes from the Meridian, the second 19. 30
minutes, the third 31. 30 minutes, the fourth 46. 45 minutes, the fifth 66. 24
minutes; the sixth 90. And you shall see the North Pole depressed under this
plain, as much as is the Complement of our Latitude, and the South Pole as much
Elevated above it.

1. Wherefore for the South Dyal, draw an Horizontal line about the top of your
Dyal plain, which shall be the hour of Sixes, from the midst whereof let fall a
Perpendicular, which shall be both the Vertical and the Meridian, both of the
Place, and of the Plain, wherein the Gnomon must stand Elevated 37. 45. minutes
or the Complement of your Latitude toward the South Pole.

From the Center (which is the point from whence the Perpendicular falls,) draw
a Semicircle beneath the Horizontal line, of equal Semi-diameter with that of
your Planisphear or of any other Circle which you have divided; and in this
Semicircle set off on both sides from the Perpendicular or Meridian line the
distances of the hours before found, making pricks in the Semicircle, and
thereto drawing lines from the Center, and setting figures, after the same
manner as you did in the diagramformer Chapter; and your Dyal is done. This
Dyal shows the Hours from 6 in the Morning to 6 at Night; the other Hours
before and after 6 belong to the North face of this Dyal.

Another way. Because the Almicantars may often obscure the Intersections of the
Hour Circles with the Axis, you may avoid that inconvemence, if you reduce this
Dyal to a Vertical Dyal.

For the South Horizontal Dyal being the very Vertical Dyal of those People
that live 90 degrees Southward from us, that is, in South Latitude 37. 45
minutes, if you set the Finitor to the Latitude 37. 45 minutes, you shall see
the sections of the Hour Circles with the Finitor more ^pparently, and thereby
make your Dyal.

2. For the North face, Imagine you had for you. Gnomon a wyre thrust aslope
through the Center of the plain from the South side Northward and you will
presently conceive that in the North Dyal the Horizontal or 6 a clock line will
be lowest, and that the Gnomon will turn upwards toward the North Pole as much
as he turned downwards on the other side: and that all the hours save 4, 5, and
6. in the Morning, and 6, 7, and 8. at Night may be left out in our Latitude;
because the Sun shines no longer upon it: and those hour-distances you may
find, and set off from the 12 a clock line, or from the 6 a clock line, as you
did the hours of like distance in the South face.

Another general and pleasant way to delineate the opposite face of any Dyal,
see hereafter in the end of the 12th Chapter.

CHAP. XI. How to Observe the Declination of any Declining Plain.
ALL Perpendicular plains, as Walls, lie in the plains of one of the Azimuths:
which plains always cut both Zenith and Nadir, and the Center of the Earth. As
in the figure. Z is Zenith and Nadir: E S W N Horizon, E W is the Base or
ground-line, or any diagramHorizontal line drawn upon a Wall or plain looking
full South or North; his Poles are at S and N in the Meridian, wherefore he
declineth not, but lies in the East Azimuth E W.

A B is a Wall or plain declining East by the arch S p, to which E B or W A are
equal, for so much as the Wall bends from the East Azimuth, so much does his
Pole at p decline or bend from the Meridian.

1. Now to find how much any plain declineth, and so in what Azimuth he lies,
one good way is this: when the Sun begins to inlighten the Wall, or when he
leaves it, then is the Sun in the same Azimuth with the Wall; take at that
instant his Altitude, and thereby get his Azimuth (according to Book 4.27.) and
that is the Azimuth of the Wall.

2. Another way, First draw upon the Wall an Horizontal line, by Chapter 3.
then your Planisphear being fastened to a Square board (as in Chapter 4.) set
one side of the board to that Horizontal line or Parallel to it and fix there
your board and Planisphear level, by the help of a Square set under him like a
bracket, the place your Label and Sights in one of the Diameters of your
Planisphear, and mark when the Sun comes into the line of the Label, casting
the shadow of one Sight upon the other, if the Label be then in the Diameter
which is Parallel to the Wall, then is the Sun at that time in the Azimuth of
the Wall: if the Label be in the other Diameter which is Perpendicular to the
Wall, then the Sun coming to it is in the Azimuth of the Pole of the plain.

Now having the hour, or the Altitude of the Sun get his Azimuth (by 4.27,) the
same is the Azimuth of the Wall or plain, if the Label were Parallel to the
Wall; or the same is the Azimuth of the Pole of the plain (that is the very
Declination) if the Label stood Perpendicular to the Wall.

3. Another way, If you have not time to watch till the Sun come into the
Azimuth of the Wall or the Vertical of it, which cutteth the Pole thereof, then
get the Suns Azimuth by the said Book 4.27, when you can, and at the same time
Observe by your Label the Suns Horizontal distance from the Pole of the plain,
and by comparing these together you may easily gather the Declination of the
Wall: as in Example.

I observed the Sun to be gone West from the Pole of the plain 70 degrees, and
by the Altitude of the Sun then taken, I found his Azimuth 60 degrees: here I
reason thus, The Sun is gone from the Pole and Vertical of the Wall 70 degrees,
and from the Meridian but 60 degrees, therefore the Meridian lies between the
Pole of the plain and the Sun and because p is 70. and S 60. therefore S p the
Declination of the plain, is 10 degrees the difference of 70. and 60, and the
Declination is East, for the Sun is nearer to the Meridian then to the Vertical
of the plain: and thus if you draw a rude Scheam of your Case, you may soon
reason out the Declination, better then do it blindfold by the rules commonly
given.

And by these two last ways you may take the Declination, not only of upright
plains, but of Recliners also, for which the first way will not serve,

CHAP. XII. How to make a Declining Horizontal Dyal.
HEre three things are required. For besides the distances of the several hours
from 12, and the Elevation of the Gnomon, which are requisite to the making of
all Direct and Regular Dyals, we must here know also the Declination of the
Gnomon, which some call the distance of the Substyle from the Meridian, or the
distance of the Meridian of the plain from diagramthe Meridian of the Place.
For in all Dyals the Noonline in the Meridian of your Place, projected on the
Dyal, and in all Horizontal or Mural Dyals, not Reclining or Inclining, the
Noon-line is a Perpendicular cutting the Center of the Dyal, how much soever
they Decline.

But Declining Dyals which look awry from our Meridian, have a Meridian of
their own, which is called the Meridian of the plain, and the Substyle (because
the Style or Gnomor stands upon it) and is indeed the Meridian of that Place,
where this Declining Dyal would be a Vertical Dyal, and where the Substyle
would be the Noon line: and to this Substyle the hours of the plain are always
so conformed, that the nearer they be to the Substyle the narrower are the hour
spaces, and contrarily: because the Meridians do so cut every oblique Horizon,
that is, thickest near the Meridian of the place: and this Declining Dyal
(being a stranger with us) follows the fashion of his own Country, and so
has his narrowest hour spaces near his own Meridian, rather then ours Now as
that is the Meridian of our place which cutteth our Horizon at Right angles,
passing through his Poles Zenith and Nadir, so the Meridian of any plain is
that which cutteth the plain at Right angles, and passes through his Poles.

You may find all these requisites in the Meridional Projection, not only for
one, but for all Declinations, lying as in a Table before you, with admirable
ease and delight; for there is no Declining Wall or Horizontal plain, but we
have an Azimuth in the Reet which shall picture him: and look how the Meridians
divide these Azimuths, so do they divide the Horizons or Circles of the
Declining plains. The Pole of any Azimuth is found in the Finitor 90 degrees
distant from him; the Meridian that cuts the Pole of the Azimuth, cuts also the
Azimuth, and the plain thereby represented at Right angles, and is the Meridian
of the plain or Substylar, (Chapter 2. Theorem 11.) and the degrees of that
Meridian between the plain and the next Pole of the World are the Elevation of
the Pole above the plain: and so the Elevation of the Gnomon or Style, and the
arch of the plain comprehended between this Meridian of the plain and the Limb,
is the Declination of the Gnomon, or distance of the Substyle from the
Meridian, or distance of the Meridian of the plain from the Meridian of the
Place. What would you more?

Example. If a Wall Decline East 30 degrees. I say, because the face of the
Wall looks 30 degrees from the South Eastward, therefore the plain, which
lies 90 degrees from his Pole, is in the 30th Azimuth from the East Northward:
therefore I go to the 30th Azimuth from the East line of Axis, counted cither
way, and take that Azimuth and his Match (which is equally distant from the
Axis) for the very picture of my Declining plain.

Then seeking the Substyle or Meridian of the plain. I say the Pole of the
plain is in the Finitor at the 30th Azimuth from Meridies in the Limb, (because
the plain it self is the 30th Azimuth beyond the Axis) the Meridian that cuts
this Pole is the 36 (exactly 36. 8 minutes, the number whereof shows me the
difference of Longitude between our Country and the Country of this Dyal. This
36 Meridian, being the Meridian of the plain, I follow toward the Pole, and
find him cutting both the arches of my plain on both sides the Axis: but I
regard the cuttng only in that arch which is nearest to the Pole, because there
the angle looks more like a Right angle, and there is the nearest distance of
the Pole from the plain, and there I see the hour spaces least: from that
Intersection therefore, I reckon in the same Meridian to the Pole 32 degrees
and perhaps a minute more, (you may find it by Calculation,) this is the
Elevation of the Pole above the plain, and of the Gnomon likewise: also from
the same Intersection I reckon in the plain to the Limb or Meridian 21. degrees
10. minutes, the distance of the Meridian of the plain from the Meridian of the
Place: the same is the Declination of the Gnomon, or of his Substyle.

Then for the hours, I begin at the Zenith of the Reet, where is our Meridian,
and numbering first toward the Substyle, I seek at what number of degrees from
the Zenith the hour Circles cut my plain, and I find as follows, degrees. min.
11. -- 9. 35 10. -- 17. 54 9. -- 25. 54 8. -- 34. 22 7. -- 44. 17 6. -- 57. 10
5. -- 75. 4

Then in the other arch of the plain I have the afternoon hours, thus.

degrees. min. 1 -- 12. 10 2 -- 28. 59 3 -- 52. 26 4 -- 80. 17

And further I cannot go, because I see the next hour is above 90 from the
Substyle; therefore my Dyal receives him not on this side, but on the North
side there is use of him.

Now to draw the Dyal, I consider that because the plain declines East
therefore the Gnomon shall decline West: for the Dyal being such a projection
of the Sphere wherein all the Vi^ual lines cross in the Nodus of the Gnomon,
and thence disperse themselves again toward the plain, therefore that which is
East in the Sphere will be expressed West on the plain, and contrarily, (as was
showed Chapter 2. Theorem 11.) Also I consider that howsoever the plain be
turned East or West, the Gnomon's place is fixed, because it is a part of the
Axis of the World, or a line Parallel to it. Now therefore if I turn a South
Dyal, and make him Decline East, and hold the Gnomon unmovable; the West side
of the Dyal will approach nearer to the Gnomon, as reason and sense will tell
me: likewise the hours which are found on the same side of the Meridian or
Noon-line with the Substile must be set the same way with it from the Noon-line
in the Dyal. Therefore having drawn an Horizontal line E W on the Wall, from
the Center taken at A, I let fall the Perpendicular A B for the Noon-line, then
upon the Center A. I draw a blind Semicircle with the Semi-diameter of my
Planisphear, or of some Quadrant, as E B W and therein I prick down the
Substyle and the hours, after the manner used the 10th Chapter.

And if you would draw the North Dyal of this plain, do but prolong those
diagramhour lines, and the Substyle upwards beyond the Center, and you have the
North Dyal, above the Horizontal line E W, as the South Dyal below it; and
note, that because in our Latitude the Sun sets soon after 8 in Summer,
therefore the 3 hours next before and after midnight may be left out in this
Dyal, and in all others which must serve in our Latitude.

This is the most ready way to delineate the opposite face of any Dyal. See
another way to make this Declining Horizontal Dyal, Chapter 21.

CHAP. XIII. How to Observe the Reclination or Inclination or any Plain.
WHat Reclination and Inclination are, has been showed Chapter 8.

All Reclining and Inclining plains have their Bases or Horizontal Diameters
lying in the Horiz ontal Diameter of some Azimuth: but the top or Nonagesimus
gradus of the plain from the Horizon leans back from the Zenith of your
Place, in the Vertical of the plain (which is the Azimuth cutting the plain at
Right angles) so much as the Reclination happens to be; and the Pole of the
plain, on that side the plain inclines to, is sunk as much below the Horizon as
the Nonagesimus gradus of the plain is sunk below the Zenith, and the opposite
Pole is mounted as much.

Let E S W N be diagramHorizon, Z the Zenith. E W the Horizontal Diameter of
the plain and of the East Azimuth E A W a plain not Declining but Reclining
Southward from the Zenith by the arch Z A 50 degrees and his opposite face
Inclining to the Horizon according to the arch A S 40 degrees, the Pole of the
Reclining face is at P in the Meridian (which here is also Vertical of the
plain) and is Elevated 50 degrees in the arch N P equal to the arch of
Reclination Z A: and the Pole of the Inclining face is depressed as much on the
other side under the Horizon.

To find the quantity of the Reclination you shall draw a Vertical li^e on the
plain, by Chapter 3. and thereto apply a long Ruler which may over-shoot the
plain either above or below: to that Ruler apply any Semidiameter of your
Planisphear, or of any Quadrant; and the degrees between that Semidiameter and
the Plumb line shall be the degrees of Reclination.

Or stick up in the Vertical line two pins of equal height, and Perpendicular,
and placing your self either above or below the plain, as you find most easy,
direct the Sights of your Planisphear or Quadrant to the heads of the two pins
being in a right line with your ey; and the Plumbet shall show the Reclination
on one side the Quadrant, and the Inclination (which is always Complement
thereof) on the other.

CHAP. XIV. How to make a South and North Reclining Dyal.
THe Base or Horizontal line of such a Dyal lies in the East Azimuth, and his
Pole in the Meridian; as you may see in the plain of the former Chapter. In the
Meridional Projection having set the Finitor to the Latitude, count from the
Zenith the degrees of Reclination Northward or Southward as you observed it to
be, and remove the Zenith so many degrees the same way, then shall you see
presently which Pole is Elevated above the Zenith line, (for that is the
picture of your plain) and how much: to which Elevation you shall make your
Dyal by the tenth Chapter, remembering to turn the Gnomon upwards or downwards
as the North or South Pole is Elevated above the face of your plain.

Example. The plain of the former Chapter was a North plain Reclining Southward
50 degrees, that is, almost to the Equinoctial: when the Finitor is at our
Latitude the Zenith is distant from the North Pole the Complement thereof
37.45. toward the South. Now I must put the Zenith yet 50 degrees more
Southward, because my plain Reclines so much that way, and I see that then the
North Pole is Elevated 87. 45. minutes, and I see upon the Zenith line or Axis
of the Reet how the hour Circles cut my plain almost in equal spaces: if this
plain had Reclined but 2. 15 minutes further, he had fallen into the plain of
the Equinoctial, and so the Dyal would have been a Polar Dyal, and all the
hours would have had equal space, and the Gnomon would have stood
Perpendicular, which are the properties of a Polar Dyal, as has been showed
Chapter 4.

For the opposite face of this Dyal, the general rule given Chapter 12. may
suffice.

CHAP. XV. How to make an East or West Reclining Dyal.
AS it has been showed Chapter 14, that the base or Horizontal line of a South
Recliner lies always in the East Azimuth, so the base of an East Recliner
lies always in the Meridian of the Place. And as all Declining plains lie in
some Azimuth, and cross one another in the Zenith and Nadir, by Chapter 12. so
these Reclining plains lie in some Circle of Position, and cross one another in
the North and South points of the Horizon: which being considered, those East
Recliners shall be made as easily as the Decliners Chapter 12.

For these East Recliners be in very deed South Decliners to those that live 90
degrees from us Northward or Southward; and have one of the Poles Elevated as
much as the Complement of our Latitude: for the Perpendicular or Plumb-line of
those People is Parallel to the Horizontal Diameter of our Meridian.

In the Meridional Projection, set the Zenith line to the Latitude, and then
are the Azimuths Circles of Position, and are also those very East or West
Reclining plains, and the Zenith line is the base or Horizontal line to them
all, and to the Meridian likewise; Take any of these Azimuths, and see how the
Meridians of the Matter divide him, so shall the Dyal-plain represented by it be
divided also. The working is very like that of Chapter 12. Compare the one with
the other where you doubt.

Example. I have an East plain Reclining 45 degrees, to which I would make a
Dyal. I set the Zenith line to the Latitude 52. 15 minutes and going to the
arch of the 45 Azimuth on one side the Zenith line, and his match so many
degrees distant on the other side, I take that Circle for my plain, his Center
is the Center of the Planisphear: the Meridian or Noon line of the Place in
these Dyals is evermore the Axis or Zenith line of the Reet, for he is drawn to
the Intersection of the Meridian of the Place (here the Limb) with the plain.
The Zenith line here lies Horizontal, therefore the Noon line in these East
Recliners must be evermore the Horizontal line of the Dyal, as in all Decliners
(Chapter 12.) the Noon line is evermore the Vertical or Perpendicular line.

The arch of my plain which is nearest to the North Pole has his Pole in the
Finitor 45 degrees from the Center Southward, and there this Pole is cut by the
Meridian 31. from the Axis, this is the Meridian of my plain, and he is distant
from the Meridian of the Place 58. (which is the difference of Longitude) this
Meridian I follow to the arch of the plain which is nearest to the North Pole,
and so going on in him to the Pole I number in him between the plain and the
Pole 34 degrees, which is the Elevation of the Pole, and therefore also of the
Gnomon above this plain: and between this Meridian of the plain and the
Meridian of the Place at Zenith I reckon in the plain 42 for the Declination of
the Gnomon.

Wherefore having drawn an Horizontal line N S for the Noon line, I appoint the
Center at S the South end, because diagram the North Pole is Elevated, and
drawing a blind arch, I set therein from the Horizontal line upwards 42. and
there draw the Substyle S V.

Then I seek my hour distances, and I find the first hour-circle from the
Meridian toward the Substyle cuts in the plain 14, therefore taking 14 in the
blind arch from the Noon line toward the Substyle, I set 11. for so it is, and
not 1. as you may persently perceive, if you hold but a Book or a Trencher
after the Situation of your plain, somewhat near by guess, and consider which
way the shadow must move, reason will tell you it moves downward in this Dyal
from 11. to 12. etc. then I see the second hour-circle cuts the plain at 25 for
10. the next at 34. for 9. the next at 43. for 8. which happneth a little above
the Substyle, as he ought, for the difference of Longitude is almost 60. viz
58. as before, next 51. for 7. next 61 for 6. next 73 for 5. next 88 for 4. and
further I need not go in our Country.

Then in the other arch of the plain I find 19 for 1.45 for 2. 71 for 3. and
these I put in their places, as in the Figure. The Gnomon must stand square
upon the Substyle, at an angle of 34 degrees.

Note that the Reclination must always be reckoned from the Limb inwards upon
the Finitor, because where the Finitor touches the Limb there is our Zenith for
this turn. Inclination is reckoned from the Zenith line, which here is both the
Diameter of the Horizon, and Horizon itself.

For the Opposite or Inclining face of this Dyal-plain, use the general way I
showed you, Chapter 12. that is, strike the Substyle and all the hour lines
through the Center: and set the same figures to every hour line beyond the
Center which he had on this side, and set the Gnomon upon the Substyle downward
to behold the South Pole, and it is done. And so by the Inclining Dyal, if you
had him first drawn, you might presently make the Recliner.

CHAP. XVI. How to find the Arches and Angles that are requisite for the making
of the Reclining Declining Dyal.
BEfore you can Intelligently make a Reclining-Declining Dyal, which is the
most Irregular of all, having two Anomalies, viz. Declination and Reclination,
you must be acquainted with 3 Triangles in the Sphere, wherein certain arches
and angles lie which are neefull to be known.

I advise you therefore first to draw (though it be but by aim) an Horizontal
Projection of the Sphere, such as here I have drawn for a South Dyal Declining
West 50 degrees, and Reclining 60 degrees in the Latitude 52. 10. minutes,
which shall be our Example.

The Circle E S W N is our Horizon N S our Meridian.

diagram

D T d the plain, Z T the Reclination thereof.

D d the Base or Horizontal line of the plain.

V u the Vertical of the plain cutting it right in T, and cutting the Pole
thereof at H: for u is the Pole of a plain erected upon D d; but the Pole of
the Reclined plain D T d is H.

S u or N V the Declination of the plain.

M P H m the Meridian of the plain, cutting the North Pole at P, the plain in
Right angles at R, and the Pole thereof at H.

Now see your three Triangles all adjoining in this Scheam, viz. D N O and O R
P Rectangled at N and R, and P Z H. Obtuse-angled at Z.

It is true that the last Triangle alone may do your work, or the two first may
do it without the last: but you shall do well to be acquainted with them all.

In the first Triangle D N O you have given D N 40 degrees the Complement of
the plains Declination, N the Right angle of our Meridian with our Horizon, D
the Complement of Reclination, whereby you may find D O the Oblique Ascension
of our Meridian; that is, how many degrees of the plain the noonline shall lie
above the Horizontal line: also you may find N O the Perpendicular Altitude of
the noon-line, or the Inclination of the noon-line of the Dyal to the Horizon;
(where you shall note that when this Altitude of the noon-line N O is equal to
N P the Elevation of the Pole, then is the second Triangle P R O quite lost in
the point P, and the plain then becomes a Declining Equinoctial plain) also
you may find the angle O called the Position-Reclination for a reason hereafter
to be showed; Wittekindus calls it, Complementum repetendum, because he means
to have a Bout with it again, to find other arches by it.

In the second Triangle O R P you have given O, as before, for this angle was
in the former Triangle, or his equal, (for Anguli precrucem oppositi sunt
aequales) R the Right angle of the plain with his Meridian: O P the position
Latitude, that is, the Latitude of that Place wherein the Reclining plain O R T
d Q, shall be a Circle of Position: this is given if you subtract N O the
Perpendicular Altitude of the noon-line, out of N P your Latitude, (this O P is
Wittekindus his Differentia Retenta.) And hence may be found O R the
Declination of the Gnomon, or distance of the Meridian of the plain from the
Meridian of the Place: R P the Elevation of the Pole above the plain in the
Plains own Meridian: P the angle between the Meridian of the plain and the
Meridian of the Place: this angle is called the difference of Longitude,
because it shows how far the places are distant from us in Longitude, wherein
this Dyal shall be a Direct Dyal, without Declination, having his Gnomon in the
noon-line of the Place, and and shows also how many degrees of the Equinoctial,
or how many hours and minutes there are between our Meridian and the Meridian
of the plain, as the arch O R shows how many degrees of the plain come between
the said Meridians. Let this be well observed by Learners.

In the Third Triangle P Z H, you have given P Z the Complement of your
Latitude, Z H the Complement of the plains Reclination, and Z the Supplement of
the plains Declination.

Hence may be found H P whose Complement is P R the Elevation of the Pole above
the plain, P the difference of Longitude, H whose measure is R T the arch of
the plain between the Meridian of the plain or Substyle and the Vertical line
of the plain, the Complement whereof is R D the Substyle's distance from the
Horizontal line of the plain.

Every arch and angle therefore in these Triangles is given, or may presently
be found by the Problemes of Spherical Triangles, Book 3.

But I shall show you a short and pleasant way to find them, by setting the
whole Scheam at once on your Planisphear, where you shall have them almost all
at one view.

For this purpose I use my Planisphear in the Horizontal Projection. But note,
that I make use only of the Reet and Label, and one of the Meridians of the
Matter.

Thus I set D d on the Axis of the Reet, D T d on the 60th Azimuth from the
Center, V u on the Finitor, Z N on the Label, fixing it in the Limb of the Reet
40 degrees from the Zenith, according to the arch D N. Then in the Label I make
a prick with ink at P for the North Pole 52. 15. minutes within the Limb, and
another prick in the Finitor at H for the Pole of the plain 30 degrees from the
Center; which done, and keeping my Label fixed to my Reet, I turn the Reet till
I see some one Meridian cutting both the pricks P and H, (as the 15 Meridian
from the Axis shall do in this Example) and that Meridian shall serve for the
Meridian of the plain for this time.

And by this time I see my three Triangles on my Planisphear, their sides
divided into degrees, as a Carpenters Rule into Inches. and I find for the
Latitude 52. 10. minutes, that D O the Oblique Ascension of the Meridian is
44.06.

N O the Altitude of the Meridian 20. 22 minutes.

O P the Position Latitude 31. 48. minutes.

O R the Declination of the Gnomon (13. 21. minutes) from the Meridian.

R P the Elevation of the Gnomon 29. 08. minutes, and P H Complement thereof.

H the distance of the Meridian of the plain and Vertical thereof, you may see
by the arch of the plain which measures the angle H, 32. 32. minutes.

Now have you nothing to ask of the third Book, but the angles O and P, and
there you have diverse ways to find that.

O the Position-Reclination is 67. 29. minutes.

P the difference of Longitude 26, 00. minutes.

CHAP. XVII. How to find the Horary distances of a Reclining Declining Dyal.
TAke the easiest way first. You have seen Chapter 15. how easily East and West
Reclining Dyals are to be made by the Planisphear, because they fall out to be
Circles of Position, and are plainly pictured by the Azimuths.

Now I will show you how all Reclining Dyals may be reduced to East or West
Recliners, for some Latitude or other, and so the hour distances found by the
Method of the 15th Chapter.

The Circles of Position, as has been showed, do all cross one another in the
North and South points of the Meridian. Now therefore by the point O where the
plain cuts our Meridian, draw a new Horizon O B Q C, and then shall you see
your plain in that Horizon to be a very Circle of Position. But now we are
gotten into a new Latitude, O P called (before in Chapter 16) the Position
Latitude, and we have here a new Reclination, for whereas this plains
Reclination in our Latitude is Z D T 60 degrees, his Position Reclination is O,
viz. Z O T, or P O R 67. 29. minutes.

In the making of this Dyal therefore, you shall forget your own Latitude, and
the plains Reclination in your Horizon, and with this new Latitude and
Reclination make the Dyal after the manner of the East Recliner Chapter 15. not
regarding the Declination at all: For the Base of this plain is now fallen into
the Horizontal line of the Meridian, and his Declination being just a Quadrant,
he becomes a Regular Plain, and neither his Declination nor his Reclination
shall now much trouble you.

How to place your Noon-line from the Horizontal or Vertical line of the plain,
you have found already, and at what distances every Hour shall stand from the
Noon-line in the plain you shall thus find.

diagram

Set the Zenith line of the Reet to your new Latitude P O 31. 48 minutes, and
find for your plain the Azimuth 67 from the Axis, because P O R is 67. 29
minutes, as before: seek his Pole in the Finitor, which will be the 90th degree
from the said Azimuth or plain, and you shall find that Pole cut by the 26.
Meridian: this therefore is the Meridian of my plain, and shall make the
Sub-style on the Dyal: his distance from the Meridian of the Place in the
Equinoctial is 26. and so much is the angle O P R the difference of Longitude,
as before: then follow this Meridian of your plain to that arch of the plain
which is next the Pole of the World, and you shall number from the plain to the
Pole in the said Meridian 29. 08 minutes for the Elevation of the Gnomon P R,
as before: and from this Meridian to the Meridian of the Place at the Zenith
you shall number in the plain 13. 21 minutes for O R, the Declination of the
Gnomon, as before.

Now the crossing of the plain with the Meridian of the Place is the Noon-point
in the plain, and that in this case is always in the Zenith, and I see the
rest of the Meridians cutting the plain for the Morning Hours, thus.

Hor. degrees. min. 8 -- 68 28 9 -- 41 23 10 -- 22 28 11 -- 9 35 12 -- 0 00

And for the Evening Hours in the other arch, thus.

Hor. degrees. min. 1 -- 7 56 Sub. 13 21 2 -- 15 18 3 -- 22 52 4 -- 31 32 5 -- 42
36 6 -- 58 18 7 -- 81 35

And because 7 in the Morning will be shown by this Dyal in the Summer; to find
the distance thereof from the Noon-line in the plain, I set Nadir in the place
where Zenith was before, and so I see the 7th hour-circle cutting the plain at
98. 25. minutes. But this is more then I need to do: for having once found 12.
Hour-spaces in any Dyal, I can make any of the rest by striking the Hour-line
of the same denomination through the Center. As for Example. If I prolong the
7th of the afternoon Hour Lines beyond the Center, I there make the line of 7a
clock in the Morning.

CHAP. XVIII. How to draw the Reclining Declining Dyal.
FIrst draw an Horizontal line, as A B and upon the Center A describe a blind
Circle equal to the Limb of your lanisphear, or of some other Circle which is
divided to your hand, that by help thereof you may presently divide this blind
Circle into any parts required Then set in this blind Circle the arch D O the
Oblique Ascension of the Noon-line 44. 06 minutes from B upwards at C and from
C yet upwards (as the Scheam shows you) set the arch O R 13. 21. for the
Declination of the Gnomon: and draw the lines A C for the Noon-line, and A D
for the Sub-style.

Then set off the distances of the several Hours from the Noon-line The North
Face.

The South Face.

diagram on both sides, viz. the Morning Hours below the Noon-line Westward,
and the Evening Hours above it Eastward: as you may be taught by Chapter 2.
Theorem 11. and by your own reason.

And lastly set the Gnomon Perpendicular upon the Sub-style A D, making his
angle at A equal to the arch P R, found above to be 29. 08. minutes, and your
Dyal is done.

CHAP. XIX. How to know at what Reclination any Declination Plain shall become
a Declining Equinoctial Dyal-Plain, to be delineated after Chapter 7. And how
to find the Oblique Ascension of his Meridian or Substyle, and the difference
of Longitude, which are requisite for his Delineation.
THere is no Declining plain but at some certain Reclination cutteth through
the Poles of the World and so becomes a Right Horizon. Therefore to find
whither a Declining Reclining plain do happen to be a Declining Equinoctial
plain, you shall observe what the Elevation of the Noon-line N O is; for if
that be equal to N P the Latitude, then does the plain cut the Poles, otherwise
not: And at what Reclination any Decliner shall cut the Poles, and so have the
Altitude of his Noon line equal to the Latitude, you shall thus find.

Use the Reet and Label in the Horizontal Projection as you did Chapter 16.
that is, set the Horizontal line of the plain D d on the Axis of the Reet, then
number from the Zenith in the Limb of the Reet the Complement of the
Declination, and thereto lay the Label, and having made a prick with ink in the
Label for the Pole (52 from the Limb) mark which of the Azimuths cutteth that
Pole for he shows you at what Reclination that Decliner shall cut the Pole
and fall into the plain of one of the Maridians. And now you shall have but one
Triangle to resolve, viz D N P* (for the whole Triangle P R O of Chapter 16. is
swallowed up in the point of the Pole P) and and D N P has all his sides
known, and the angle D at first Sight; and for P you may find him if you turn
the Triangle as Book 3. has been showed.

Example. I would make an Equinoctial Dyal in the West Declination 50. degrees,
Lay the Label therefore 50. degrees from the Finitor, or 40. from the Zenith,
and so the Axis of the Reet represents the plain Declining 50. degrees and the
Label represents the North part of the Meridian, and now I see the Azimuth 26
from the Axis cutting the Label in the place of the Pole; therefore I say, that
Azimuth represents the Equinoctial plain which belongs to this Declination.

And now I see the Triangle D N P on my Planisphear, N P on the Label is the
Latitude, and also the Altitude of the Noon line 52. 10. minutes, D N
Complement of the Declination 40. D P the Oblique Ascension of the Noon line
61. 59. minutes, N is a Right angle, D is Complement of the Reclination 63. 28.
minutes, (whose measure in the Scheam is T V) P the Complement of the
difference of Longitude, for the difference of Longitude it self in the Scheam
is H P Z, and the Complement thereof Z P T to which D N P is equal, by the
Structure for it is Angulus pre decussim oppositus: and by any of the four
first Problemes of Rectangled Triangles you may find it to be 46. 44. minutes,
whose Complement is 43. 16. minutes, the difference of Longitude. The Oblique
Ascension of the Noon line, and the difference of Longitude thus found, you
shall have enough to make the Dyal by Chapter 7.

CHAP. XX. An Admonition concerning the five several Cases of Declining
Recliners.
BEcause by the diversity of Declination and Reclination, the figure and
situation of the three Triangles mentioned Chapter 16. is so charged that you
cannot always find them on the sudden, unless you have a firm comprehension of
the Sphere in your head and in the Case of the last Chapter the middle Triangle
is quite lost, having all his sides and angles contracted into the very point
of the Pole; therefore I have thought good to set down the 5 several Cases of
these Dyals in so many several Scheams, and in every Scheam to mark the
Triangles with the same Letters, that what Case soever shall happen to be
proposed; you may have a Scheam ready to direct you.

And to know which Scheam shall serve to express the situation of your plain,
take these Rules

1. If the plain Recline North below the Pole, so that the arch N O the
Perpendicular Altitude of the Noon line be less then N P the Elevation of the
North Pole, then the first Scheam serves your Case. 2. If the plain Recline to
the Pole making N P and N O equal, you shall use the Second cheam. 3. If the
plain Recline not so far as the Pole, but make N O greater then N P, you shall
use the Third Scheam. 4. If the plain Recline Southward, then instead of the
Triangle D N O you shall use the opposite Triangle d S O where if S O be
greater then the Elevation of the Equator or equal to it, you shall use the 4th
Scheam. And if it be less, you shall use the Fifth.
And note that in the Fifth Case you may best do you work by the Triangle P H Z
alone, (the Triangle P R O being here too big) setting off your Sub-style from
the Vertical by the measure of the angle H, or of the arch T R, the Noon line
from the Substyle.

CHAP. XXI. How to make the Declining Horizontal Dyal, another way then was
showed Chapter 12.
THough you have in the former Chapters a perfect Method for the making of all
sorts of Dyals which give the Hour by the shadow of the Axis of the World, or a
Gnomon set Parallel to it: yet I think it both pleasant and profitable for the
Reader to see some other ways whereby the same things may be performed.

For the Declining Horizontal Dyal you shall first find the Elevation and
Declination of the Gnomon after this manner. Take your Planisphear in the
Horizontal Projection, and for the help of your fancy* lay it flat upon a
Table, setting the Meridian, that is, the Equator line of the Matter in the
Meridian of your Place by aim. Then set the Fini^or for your plain; and his
Pole (which is the Zenith of the Reet) shall be Eastward or Westward from the
Meridian of the Matter so much as you observed the Declination: then seek the
place of the Pole in the Meridian, viz. the North Pole 37. 45. minutes
Northward from the Center, if the Wall look North, or the South Pole so much
Southward, if the Wall look South: and it where not amiss if the Poles
diagramwere there marked with an Asterisk, or some such note, 38. or 40.
degrees from the Center, somewhat near your Latitude, so these Asterisks (if
they be not exactly the Poles for your Latitude) shall direct you to find the
Poles presently, being very near them: as if the Asterisk be at 50. I know 2
more inwards is my Pole for Latitude 52. Next look what Azimuth cutteth this
Pole, for he shall represent the Meridian of the plain; follow him to the
Finitor, and you may number as you go the Elevation of the Pole above the
plain; and the degrees of the Finitor between this Azimuth and the Center are
the degrees of the Declination of the Gnomon or distance of the Sub-style from
the Meridian.

2. Having found these two, You shall set your Planisphear in the first Mode of
the Meridional Projection: that is, Set the Finitor to the Elevation of the
Pole above the plain, so shall you have all your Hour distances distinguished
upon the Finitor by the Meridians. But here you must carry this in your head,
that here the Limb is not the Meridian of your Place, but of the plain; and
then to find the Meridian of your Place, number from the Limb in the Finitor
the Declination of the Gnomon, and the Meridian cutting there is the Meridian
of your place, and stands for Noon: therefore every 15th Meridian numbered from
hence (and not from the Limb in this Case) is an Hour line for your Dyal: and
look at what distance from the Limb they cut the Finitor, at the same distance
from the Sub-style shall the Hourlines be set in your Dyal plain.

Example. I have a South plain Erect Declining 30. degrees Eastward, (as in
Chapter 12.)

And for this, First I set the Zenith 30 degrees from Meridies, toward Oriens,
and so does the Finitor represent my plain, and I see the Azimuth 21.10.
minutes cutting the South Pole of the Horizontal Projection about 38 degrees
from the Center; from the Pole to the Finitor I number in this Azimuth 32.01.
minutes, the Elevation of the Pole above the plain; and from the Intersection
of this Azimuth with the Finitor to the Center where the Meridian of the Place
meets, I number in the Finitor 21.10. minutes, so much is the Declination of
the Gnomon or of his Substyle from the Noon line.

Secondly, setting the Finitor to the Plain's Latitude 32.01. minutes, I number
from the South point of the Finitor inwards 21.10. minutes, and there cuts the
Meridian 36.08. minutes from the Limb, showing me the difference of Longitude,
or Equincctial distance of the Meridian of the Place from the Meridian of the
plain; for this 36 Meridian is the Meridian of my Place, and therefore I mark
him well, he is the Vertical of my Dyal, and also the Noon line. And here I
consider that the Sub-style will be Westward from him upon the plain, because
it Declines Eastward (by Chapter 2. Theorem 11.) Therefore beginning at Noon,
where the 36 Meridian cutteth the Finitor I go 15. toward the Limb, and light
upon the 21th Meridian from the Substyle for 11 a clock, and he cutteth the
Finitor at 11.35. minutes from the Limb: so the 10th Hour is the sixth Meridian
on this side the Limb, and cutteth the Finitor 3.16. minutes: the 9th Hour is
the ninth Meridian beyond the Limb, as you come back again, and cutteth the
Finitor at 4.44. minutes from the Limb or Sub-style on the other side (that is,
Westward of the Sub-style in the Dyal.) In like manner you may gather the
distances of the other Hour lines from the Sub-style into a Table, and thereby
plot them down as in the Figure.

CHAP. XXII. To make the Reclining Declining Dyal, another way.
HAving found the arches and angles requisite by Chapter 16. and platted down
your Horizontal and Vertical lines, and placed the Noon line above o^ below the
Horizontal line, according as the arch of his Oblique Ascension or Descension
requires, and having placed also the Sub-style in his due situation as is
above taught, you may easily find the distances of the several Hours from the
Sub-style, as you found them in the former Chapter for the Declining Horizontal
Dyal.

For when you have set the Finitor to the Latitude of your plain, as there you
did, the Limb is Sub-stylar, and if you number thence in the Finitor the
Declination of the Gnomon, there shall meet you the Meridian of the Place. Here
you shall begin, and take every 15th Meridian forwards and backwards for an
Hour line, and observing how many degrees are in the Finitor between the Limb
and every one of these Hour lines, so many degrees shall you place that Hour
line from the Sub-style in the plain. If you understand the former Chapter this
will need no Example.

CHAP. XXIII. To draw the proper Hours of any Declining Dyal.
EVery Declining plain, whether it Recline or not, has two great Meridians
much spoken of. 1. The Meridian of the plain, which is the proper Meridian of
that Country to whose Horizon the plain heth Parallel. 2. The Meridian of the
Place, which is the Meridian of your Country, in which you set up this
Declining plain to show the Hours; and so either of these Meridians Dyals may
be conformed. How to draw the Hours of our Country on such a plain is the
harder work, because the plain is Irregular to our Horiz on: yet I suppose I
have made the way very easy in the former Chapters. But to draw the Hours of
the Country to which the plain belongs, is most easy. For if you take the
Sub-stylar for the Noon-line, and the Elevation of the Pole above the plain for
the Latitude, you may make this Dyal in all points like the Vertical Dyal,
after the precept of the 9th Chapter.

CHAP. XXIV. To know in what Country any Declining Dyal shall serve for a
Vertical Dyal.
IF the Dyal Decline East, add the difference of Longitude (found as above
Chapter 21.) to the Longitude of your Place, and the sum or the excess above
360 is the number of the Longitude sought. If the Dyal Decline West subtract
the said difference of Longitude out of the Longitude of your Place, and the
difference is the Longitude inquired: but when the Longitude of your Place
happens to be less then the difference of Longitude you must add to it 360.
before you subtract the difference of Longitude. The Elevation of the Pole
above the plain is the Latitude of the Place inquired.

Example. The Declining plain of Chapter 12. will be a Vertical plain in the
Longitude 61. degrees, and North Latitude 32. degrees, that is, in the
Mediterranean Sea between Alexandria and the Isle of Creet. And the Declining
Reclining plain of Chapter 16, 17, 18. is Parallel to the Horizon of those that
sail in Longitude 359. degrees, and North Latitude 29. degrees that is as
Terrestrial Globes and Mapps show me, between the Azores and Hesperides.

CHAP. XXV. To set a Plain Parallel to the Horizon of any Country proposed.
IF you can get the Declination and Reclination of such a plain, you have
enough to place him in his true Situation. And those may be found by the
difference of Longitude and the Latitude of the strange Country, (which are in
this Problem supposed to be given) even as in Chapter 16. you found both those
by the Declination and Reclination given.

Example. I would set a plain Parallel to the Horizon of Jerusalem, to show me
what time the Sun Rises and Sets there any day of the Year, and what Hour
passes at Jerusalem at any time of our day. First I seek by Geographical
Tables or Mapps the Longitude and Latitude of Jerusalem, and I find that
Jerusalem is removed Eastward from London in Longitude 47 degrees, and that the
Latitude there is 32 degrees. or thereabouts. Therefore in the Rectangled
Triangle P R O of Chapter 16. I have the angle P 47 degrees difference of
Longitude, also the side P R the Latitude of Jerusalem 32 degrees, and hence by
the 4th Problem of Rectangled Triangles Book 3.6. I get P O 42.30 minutes, and
by consequence O N 9.45. minutes (because P N is our Latitude) and I get also
the angle O 51.40 minutes. And these had, I get by the same Problem in the
adjoining Triangle O N D, both D N 12.05. degrees, the Complement of the
Declination inquired, and the angle D 39.23. Complement of the Reclination
inquired. Wherefore I conclude that a plain which shall represent here the
Horizonof Jerusalem must Decline Eastward 77.55. minutes, and Recline Northward
50.37. minutes. Draw upon this plain the proper Hours of Jerusalem, by Chapter
23. and know that when the Sun leaves this plain ceasing to inlighten the
upper part of it, then he sets at Jerusalem, and look how many Hours and
minutes the Sun sets after noon in any Country, so many Hours and minutes he
rose before noon.

CHAP. XXVI. How other Circles of the Sphere besides the Meridians may be
Projected upon Dyals.
THe Projection of some other Circles of the Sphere beside the Meridians though
it be not necessary for finding the Hours yet may be both an ornament to Dyals,
and useful also for finding the Meridian, and placing the Dyal in his due
Situation, if it be made upon a moveable Body, as shall be showed Chapter 33.

The Circles fittest to be projected in all Dyals for those purposes are the
Equator with the Tropiques and other his Parallels; which may be accounted
Parallels of Declination, as they pass through equal degrees, as every 5th or
10th of Declination: or Parallels of the Signs, as they pass through such
degrees of Declination as the Sun Declineth, when he enters into any Sign, or
any notable degree thereof; or Parallels of the length of the day, as they pass
through such degrees of Declination wherein the Sun increases or decreaseth
the length of the day by Hours or half-Hours.

Also the Horizon with his Azimuths and Almicantars are an ornament to
Horizontal and Vertical Dyals; and are likewise use full for projecting the
Equator and his Parallels in all Dyals. My purpose is to be brief in this
Treatise of the Tumiture here following because I hasten to an end. I shall
therefore think it sufficient if I show you one way to furnish any Dyal with
the Circles of the Sphere. Leaving you to devise others which I could have
shown.

CHAP. XXVII. How to describe on any Dyal the proper Azimuths and Almicantars
of the Plain.
FRom any point of the Gnomon (taken at pleasure) let fall a Perpendicular upon
the Sub-style; that Perpendicular shall be part of the Axis of the plain, and
shall be reputed Radius to the Horizon of your plain. The top of this Radius in
the Gnomon is called Nodus, because you must there set a Knot Bead, or Button
to give shade, or else cut there a notch in the Gnomon, or cut off the Gnomon
in the Place of Nodus, that the end may give the shadow for those lineaments.
Let not your Nodus stand too high above the plain, for then the shadow will
fall beside your plain for too great a part of the plains day nor let it stand
too low, for then the lineaments will run too close together. A mean must be
chosen.

At the foot of this Radius take your Center, and describe a Circle on the
plain and divide it into equal degrees; and from the Center draw lines through
those degrees infinitely, that is, so far as your Dyal-plain will bear; these
lines shall be the Azimuths of the Horizon of the plain, and shall be numbered
from his Meridian or Sub style.

Divide any of these Azimuth lines into degrees, by Tangents agreeable to the
said Radius, and having made a prick at every degree, through every of these
pricks, you shall draw Parallel diagram Circles which shall be Almicantars or
Parallels of Altitude, to be numbered inwards, so that at the Center be 90. for
the Zenith, and from the Center outward you shall number 80, 70, 60. etc. till
you come within 10. or 5 degrees of the Horizon; for the plain is too narrow to
receive his own Horizon, or the Parallels near, if the Nodus have any Competent
Altitude.

And to divide the said Azimuth lines you use the Tables of Tangents with a
Scale of equal parts, or else plot the Tangents thus on paper, set A B equal to
the Radius of your Horizon, and with that Radius draw the Quadrant A B C, or A
b c, and divide the Quadrant, numbering the degrees from C to B, and having
drawn the Tangent B D, or B d, Parallel to A C, draw lines from the Center
through the several degrees to the said Tangent-line, so shall this
Tangent-line be divided for your purpose: and from it you may transfer the
divisions to your plain.

Now if your plain lie in the Horizon of your place, (as the Vertical plain
does) these Azimuths and Almicantars may be of some use to show you the
Altitude and Azimuth of the Sun for any time. See them in the Scheam Chapter 30.

But if your plain lie not in the Horizon of your place, then you shall draw
the said Almicantars or Azimuths, or so many of them as you shall need, in
deleble lines, because here they serve only the Horizon of the plain: yet shall
they help you to describe the Equator and his Parallels, with the Horizon of
your Place in any Dyal: and when they have done this, unless your Dyal be
Vertical, they may be gone.

CHAP. XXVIII. How by help of the proper Azimuths and Almicantars of the Plain
to describe the Equator and his Parallels, on the Polar or Orthognomonical Dyal.
IT shall suffice here to show how the Parallels of the Signs may be
described, because the Parallels of Declination and of the length of the day
are described by like reason. And know that in the Polar plain because the
Gnomon is Perpendicular to the plain, the same Gnomon shall serve both Hours
and Azimuths; for the Hour Lines be Azimuths in this plain. Note also that the
Sun is never Elevated above this plain more then he Declineth from the Equator,
which at the most is 23 degrees, and that if the height of Nodus be above a
sixth part of the Semidiameter of the plain, the ten first Almicantars will
fall beside the plain. A sixth part therefore must serve, and that will give
you all the Altitudes above to degrees, and the Parallels of the Signs whose
Declination is more then 10.

Describe therefore the Almicantars here, as you were taught Chapter 27. for in
the Hour lines you have already every 15th Azimuth, and may draw more if you
please.

Then know that the Almicantars here are the very Parallels of Declination,
because the Equator is the Horizon of this plain, diagramand if you draw the
Almicantar 11.30 minutes, that shall be the Parallel of or because so much is
the Suns Declination and also his Altitude above this plain, when he enters
those Signs the Almicantar for 20.13. minutes is the Parallel for and in like
manner, and the Almicantar 23.30. minutes the Parallel for. And by like reason
you may draw the Parallels of the South Signs on the South face.

CHAP. XXIX. How to inscribe the Equator and his Parallels, in the Equinoctial
or Parallelognomonical Dyal.
IF this plain Decline not, the Hour lines of your Country will serve you for
they be also the Hour lines of the plain, and the Noon-line is Sub style if it
do Decline, you shall draw in deleble lines the proper Dyal of the plain (by
Chapter 23. which Declineth not.

And having here the Azimuths or Almicantars of the plain, drawn by Chapter 27.
you shall observe upon your Planisphear at what Altitude or at what Azimuth the
Parallels cut the several Hour lines, and where the like Altitude or Azimuth
cuts the same Hour lines upon the plain, you shall make marks, and through
those marks draw the Parallels which shall be all Conical sections, except the
Equator, which because he is a great Circle, shall be a straight line on those
plains; and in all other plains, except the Polar, where he is a Circle.

Now to find the Altitude and Azimuth which the Sun in such a Parallel has at
such or such an Hour. Take the Matter in the Meridional Projection; only for
this time let the Limb be not the Meridian of your place, but the 6 Meridian or
Hour-circle, and likewise Horizon of your plain, and let the Axtree line be the
Meridian thereof, cutting it at Right angles. Now look where the first
Hour-circle from the Limb (which is 7 a Clock) intersecteth the Tropique of, to
that intersection you shall lay the Label (or rather one of the Semidiameters
of the Reet, which touches nearer) and look how many degrees of the Limb lie
between diagram the Label and the Equator line so much is the Azimuth of that
Hour from the East or West in the Tropique of Cancer: and the degree of the
Label cut at the same time by the Tropique and the Hour line is the Altitude
sought Do so for the second Hour circle, (which here is 8.) and so for the rest
in order 9, 10, 11, 12. and you shall find that in the Tropique of Cancer in
the Morning the Sun has Azimuth from the East Northward, and Altitude as
follows, Azi. min. Alti. min. 7. 24. 20. 13. 44. 8. 26. 45. 27. 18. 9. 31.
30. 40. 25. 10. 40. 40. 52. 35. 11. 58. 30. 62. 20. 12. 90. 00. 66. 30.

In the Equator the Azimuth is always the same, full East or West, and so upon
your plain he must needs be a straight line. The Altitudes in the Equator are
15, 30, 45, 60, 75, 90.

The Hours alike distant from the Meridian on both sides are alike, and so are
the Parallels alike distant from the Equator alike also.

When you have therefore gathered a Table out of your Planisphear for the
Morning Hours of the North Parallels, and of the Equator, (as I have done here
in have for the Equator, and Tropique of Cancer) you may by that Table prick
down the Parallels upon one quarter of your Dyal, and by that also draw the
rest; for as you may see upon your Planisphear, all the 4. quarters are alike.

Note that the Azimuths cut the Hour lines too Obliquely: it is best therefore
to trust to the Almicantars, and so shall you have easier and surer work,
though you meddle not with the Azimuths at all.

CHAP. XXX. How to inscribe the Equator and his Parallels, in an Oblique or
Scalenognomonical Dyal.
IF the plain neither Decline nor Recline, and so be a Vertical plain, the Hour
lines of your Place will serve you for they be also the Hour lines of the
plain, and the Noon line is the Sub-style. If it either Decline or Recline, or
both Decline and Recline, you shall draw in deleble lines the proper Dyal of
the plain by Chapter 23. and so this Dyal shall be reduced to a Vertical Dyal,
and be as casily furnished with the Parallels as the Vertical: and when you
have by the deleble Hour lines of the plain inscribed the Parallels, you may
wipe out those Hour lines of the plain, and let the Hour lines of the place and
the Parallels stand.

Having therefore drawn the Azimuths or Almicantars of your plain by Chapter
27, take your Planisphear in the Meridional Projection, setting the Finitor to
the Latitude of your plain; Then find your Equator and Parallels on the Matter,
and where the several Hour lines intersect them above the Finitor, mark what
Azimuth or rather what Almicantar passes through these intersections; for in
the same Azimuth and Almicantar shall the Parallels cut the Hour lines of the
plain upon the plain.

Example. In the Vertical Dyal for our Latitude 52.15. minutes, I set the
Finitor to this Latitude, and going first to the Tropique of Cancer, I begin at
the Limb, that is, at Noon, there I see the Azimuth full South the Altitude
61.15. minutes, at 1. a clock: Azimuth 27. Altitude 59. at 2. Azimuth 49.
Altitude 53 at 3. Azimuth 67. Altitude 45. etc. Therefore where I find the Noon
line of my plain cut by the Almicantar 61, I make a prick, and in the Hour
lines of 11 and of 1. where the Azimuth 27 and the Almicantar 59 meet, I make
pricks, and where the Azimuth 49 and the Almicantar 53 do meet upon the Hour
lines of 10.2. I make pricks, and so for the rest.

Lastly I draw with an even hand a crooked line without angles through those
pricks, and that shall be the Parallel or Tropique of Cancer: and in like
manner I put in all the other Parallels, and the Equator in the midst of them,
though for the Equator you may draw him more speedily by striking a line
through the Center of the Almicantars making Right angles with the Substyle.
And that may be a general Rule for the Equator in all Dyals which have a
Substyle, and in the Polar Dyal where there is no Substyle, the Equator shall
be a Circle, as before is shown.

Note here that if your Dyal be great, and you have not points enough to govern
you in the draught of the Conical sections you may draw half-hour-lines, and
find points in them also, after the same manner.

diagram

CHAP. XXXI. To do the same by the Hour Lines of the Place, although the Plain
Decline or Recline.
IF you like not to draw the proper Dyal of the plain where it Declines or
Reclines, because being useless in your Country it must be wiped out again, it
shall suffice you to find the Hour lines of your Country upon the plain by
Chapter 21, and 22 and in the posture your Planisphear has in those Chapters
to observe what Almicantars or Azimuths do cross those Hour lines at the
several Hours in any Parallel, and thereby make pricks upon the Hour lines of
your Place, as in the former Chapter you did upon the Hour lines of your plain;
and by these pricks you may draw your Parallels as before.

Note that if you work this way, you shall find the Suns greatest Altitude to
be in the Meridian of the plain or Substyle, and not in the Noon-line of your
Place; whereat you must not wonder: so if the Substyle be about 9 in the
Morning there you shall find the Sun at highest, and that his Altitude
decreaseth from thence till he leaves the plain.

CHAP. XXXII. How to inscribe the Horizon of the Place, with his Azimuths and
Almicantars, in the Horizontal Dyal.
THe Nodus may be chosen in any part of the Gnomon, but with the eaution given
Chapter 27. and a Perpendicular falling from the Nodus on the Sub-style shall
touch the Center of the Azimuths and Almicantars of the plain, as has been
showed Chapter 27.

Here you have no use of those Azimuths and Almicantars: but through the Center
of them you shall draw an Horizontal line by Chapter 3. and that shall be
Horizon.

Now if your plain Decline not from the Meridian, and so this Center fall upon
the Noon line, you shall divide your Horizon both ways from the Center, as you
were taught to divide the Azimuthal lines by Tangents, Chapter 27. and shall
number those divisions from the Center on both sides 5, 10, 15, 20. etc. and
from the several points so made for 5, 10, 15, etc. In the Horizontal line let
fall Perpendiculars or Vertical lines on the plain, and they shall be Azimuths
of your Place.

But if your plain Decline you shall divide the Horizontal line thus. Draw a
short Vertical line through the said Center downwards, by Chapter 3. which
shall be the Verticle of your plain.

In that Verticle set D E equal to the Radius of the Horizon, (that is, D N the
height of Nodus) and upon the Center E describe the arch G H or g h as wide as
you please and the plain will bear; draw also through D the Horizontal line D
F; then from the Center E strike the line E F f cutting the intersection of the
Horizon with the Meridian of the Place at F and where the line E F cuts, either
of the said arches. you shall begin to divide either of them into fives or tens
of degrees numbering 5, 10, 15, etc. both ways and laying a Ruler from E to
those degrees in the arch you shall mark out thereby the same degrees in the
Horizontal line, and from these marks let fall Perpendiculars upon diagramthe
plain, which shall be the Azimuths desired.

For the Almicantars they will not be so handsome lines, but if you will have
them, do thus. If the plain Decline not, set the Finitor to the Latitude of
your Place, as Chapter 10. and if it Decline, set the Finitor to the Latitude
of your plain as Chapter 21. Then keeping your ey above the Horizon, and within
the Tropiques, mark what Hour lines the 10th Almicantar (for Example) cutteth,
and what Azimuth there with him cutteth the same Hour lines also, and in the
interfections of the same Azimuths and Hour lines upon your plain you shall
make marks, through which the tenth Almicantar shall be drawn: and so of the
rest.

Note here That your Azimuths and Almicantars must not be drawn beyond the
Tropiques, nor beyond the Horizon: neither must the Hour lines, if the Nodus be
the end of the Gnomon.

The Scheam shows you how the Azimuths may be drawn on the Dyal of Chapter 12.
and 21. Declining East 30 degrees.

CHAP. XXXIII. How by the help of this Furniture to place any moveable
Dyal-Plain in his true Situation, and consequently to find the Meridian-line of
the Place, without any other Instrument then the Dyal it self.
SEt the Dyal upon a level Table or Board, and turn it till the shadow of the
Nodus touch the Suns Parallel, Azimuth, or Almicantar, any or all of them: but
the Parallel shall best guide you, because that is most easily known by memory
without Observation. And when the shadow of the Nodus touches the Suns
Parallel it shows there the Hour also; and moreover it shows the Suns Altitude
and Azimuth for the same Time if the Azimuths and Almicantars also be drawn
upon your Dyal.

But you shall note here, that the shadow of the Nodus may touch the Parallel
at like distance from the Sub-style on both sides. Therefore if you be in doubt
which is the true place of touching (as you may well doubt when the shadow cuts
the Parallel near the Sub-style) you shall Observe a while whether the sh dow
of the Radius be lengthning or shortning: If it shorten, the Sun is not come to
the Sub-style, and so the earlyer Hour showed is the true Hour; If it lengthen,
the Sun is past the Sub-style, and the later Hour is the true Hour. And when
the Dyal shows the true Hour, the Gnomon and the plains Parallel thereto do
point North and South. And here you may see, that the further the Sun is from
the Sub-style, the more easily is the Dyal placed.

Thus may you make a very commodious Polar Dyal, to stand in a chamber Window,
and to remove from Window to Window as the Sun goes, which shall find the
Meridian line it self any where, in the 4. Summer and 4. Winter Months; and if
you will make him a Limb, like the Limb of a Box-lid of a Cheese-fat, to
receive the Parallels near the Equinoctial, which else fall beyond the plain,
he shall serve for all the Year.

CHAP. XXXIV. How to make a Vertical Dyal upon the Ceeling of a Floor within
Doors, where the Direct Beams of the Sun never come.
THe greatest part and as much as you shall use of the Vertical Dyal described
Chapter 9. may by Reflection be turned upside down, and placed upon a Ceeling,
but the Center will be in the Air without Doors.

A piece of a Looking-glass as broad as a Groat or Sixpence set level, or a
Gally-pot of fair Water, which will set it self level, being placed upon the
sole of the Window shall supply the use of the Nodus in the Gnomon, and the
beams of the Sun being Reflected by this Glass or Water shall show the Hours
upon the Ceeling.

The Planisphear shall help you to make this Dyal two ways. If the Window
Decline not much from the South, you may make it most easily the First way. But
if it Decline much, and so the lines fall much upon the partition Walls, or if
you would adorn this Dyal with the Parallels or other Circles, you shall use
the Second way.

The First way is this Draw a Meridian line upon the Floor. by Book 4.3. so
that it may point upon the Perpendicular, which you shall imagine to fall from
the Nodus upon the plain of the Floor prolonged. And this may be most easily
done, if you hang a Plumb-line in the Window dnecuy over the Nodus of place of
the Glais, for the shadow which that Plumb-line gives upon the Floor at Noon,
is the Meridian line sought; and by a Ruler or a line stretched upon it you may
prolong it as far as you shall need.

Then let a Plumb line fall from the Ceeling upon this Meridian line of the
Floor, and behind it Northward or Southward, place your Ey, so that the
Plumb-line may hide the Meridian line of the Floor from your Ey: then keeping
your head steady, cast you: Ey up to the Ceeling, and direct One to make two
points at a good distance, in the line upon the Ceeling which the Plumb-line
now covers from your Ey, and by these points you shall draw a straight
Meridian on the Ceeling.

diagram

Then having fastened one end of a Line at Nodus, let Another stretch this line
up to the Meridian on the Ceeling, and let him move his hand nearer or further
in the Meridian till you find by a Quadrant that this line points up
Northward as many degrees as the Elevation of the Equator is in your Country,
and then you shall cause him to make a point where the line touches the
Meridian of the Cieling, and through that point you shall draw the Equinoctial
line of your Dyal, cutting the said Meridian at Right angles. The length of the
thread from the Nodus to the point in the Meridian where the Equinoctial cuts
him, is Radius of the Equinoctial: to that Radius you shall find the Tangents
of 15, 30, 45, 60, 75. as you found the Co-tangents Chapter 27. (knowing that
the Co-tangents of 80, and 70. be the Tangents of 10, and 20, and so of the
rest) and beginning in the Meridian make pricks in the Equinoctial line, at the
end of the Tangent of 15. Eastward for 1. and Westward for 11. and at the end
of the Tangent of 30. prick Eastward 2. and Westward 10. etc.

Then by Chapter 9. seek what angles the Hour lines of a Vertical Dyal make at
the Center, which in our Latitude are 1.11.58. minutes, 2.24.32. minutes,
3.38.20. minutes, 4.53.52. minutes, 5.71.17. minutes, and with the Complements
of these angles shall these Hour lines cross the Equinoctial: so the Hour line
of 1. shall Incline to the Meridian on the South side the Equinoctial line, and
shall make his lesser angle with the Equinoctial 78.02. minutes, and the rest
as in the Figure.

The Second way is this. Fit a plain smooth Board about a foot Square to lie
level from the fool of the Window inwards, and near the outer edge thereof make
a Center in the board in the very place of Nodus, or a little under it,
remembering that the Nodus or Center of the Glass must be set so much higher
then this board, as the Center of your Quadrant is placed higher in the
Projecting of the Dyal.

Upon that Center taken in the board describe as much of a Circle as you may
with the Semidiameter of your Quadrant; which Circle shall be Horizon: Draw
here from the Center to the Horizon inwards a Meridian line, by Book 4.3. and
where it cuts the Horizon begin to graduate the Horizon into degrees of
Azimuths both ways, which you may speedily do, by transferring the graduations
of your Quadrant, or so much as you shall need, to this Horizon.

Next you must devise to make your Quadrant stand firm and upright upon one of
his straight sides, (which I will call his foot for this time) and that you may
thus do; Take a short piece of a Ruler or sinal Transom, and saw in one side of
it a notch Perperdicularly, in which notch you may stick fast or wedge the heel
or the toe of your Quadrant, in such sort that his foot may come close to the
board, and the other straight side or leg may stand Perpendicular upon it.

Those things prepared, put your Planisphear in the Meridional Projection, with
the Finitor at your Latitude, and first observe there the Altitudes of the Sun
in the Meridian, which in Latitude 52.15. minutes, you shall find in the
Tropique of 61.15. minutes, in the Equator 37.45. minutes, and in the Tropique
of 14.15. minutes. Now having stuck a short needle in the Center of the
Horizon, close to which you must always keep the Center of your Quadrant, set
the foot of your Quadrant in the Meridian line of the Board, and from the
Center of your Quadrant extend a thread by 14.15. minutes of Altitude straight
on to the Cieling (the thread only touching the plain of the Quadrant and making
no angle with it, but held Parallel) and where the thread thus extended touches
the Cieling make a point, then the Quadrant unmoved, extend the thread by 61.15.
minutes of Altitude, and make another point as before, and between these two
points draw a straight line, and that shall be your Meridian, and shall be long
enough for your use: then extend the thread by 37.45. minutes of Altitude, and
where it touches this Meridian cross the Meridian at Right angles with an
infinite line, which shall be the Equator. Then seek upon your Planisphear for
one a clock, and you shall find in the Tropique of the Suns Azimuth 14. and his
Altitude 13.06. In the Tropique of his Azimuth 27 and his Altitude 59.04.
minutes: therefore setting the foot of the Quadrant in the Azimuth 14. from the
Meridian Eastward, I extend the thread by 13.06. of Altitude, and make a prick
in the Cieling: and again setting the foot of the Quadrant in Azimuth 27. and
extending the thread by 59.04 minutes of Altitude, I make another prick in the
Cieling, and the straight line which I shall draw between these two pricks
shall be all the Hourlines of One, and so of the rest. And if you be minded to
have the other Parallels drawn, you may find points for them as you have done
for the Tropiques, and by those points draw them. And note that two points made
in the Cieling for the same Hour line in any two Parailels, or in the Equator
and any Parallel, shall suffice to direct the line, though it is best to take
your points in the Tropiques, at the largest distance, as I have here done, if
there be room enough on the Cieling.

But because it often happens that part of your Dyal falls beside the Cieling,
and the plain of the Cieling and of the Walls is often interrupted, and made
Irregular by Beams, Wal-plates, Corrishes, Wainscot, Chimney-peeces, and such
like bodies, I will show you one absolute device to carry on your Hour lines
over all.

Extend the thread for any Hour line to the Tropique of Cancer ^n the Cieling,
as you where taught before, and fix it there, and extend another thread in like
manner to the Tropique of Copricorn, where ever it shall happen, (as perhaps
beyond the middle beam, or quite beyond the Cieling upon the Wall) and fix that
thread also. Then place your Ey so behind these threads that one of them may
cover the other, and at the same instant where the upper line (to your Sight or
Imagination) cuts the Cieling, Beams, Wall, or any Regular or Irregular body,
above the end of the lower line, there shall the Hour line pass from Tropique
to Tropique: direct any By-stander to make marks as many as you shall need; and
by these marks draw the Hour line according to your desire.

If the arch of the Horizon between the Tropiques be within view of your
Window, you shall draw the same on the Wall to bound the Parallels, the
Horizons Altitude you know is nothing, and therefore he will be a level line;
and the Suns Azimuth when he rises (commonly called Amplitude, and Ortive
Latitude) is in Cancer 40.40. minutes East Northward, and in Capricorn as much
Southward; and these will be reflected to the contrary coasts on the Dyal.

The end of the Fifth Book.
A brief Description Of a CROSS-STAFF.
THe Cross-staff consists of two Rules joined (by a socket, or else pinned)
in the form of a Roman T, and three Sights, or more.

The longer Ruler is called Radius, Index, and the Yard, as A B, of which I
call A the near end, B the further end. The breadth would be of an inch, the
depth an inch and half, the length 70, or 80. inches: and every of those inches
would be divided by Parallels and Diagonal lines into 100. equal parts.

The shorter Ruler E F is called the Transom; it would be half an inch or three
quarters, both in breadth and depth, and in length about 2. foot: for the
Sights there, if I may advise you, would never be set above 20, inches asunder.

This Transom would be divided into whole inches only, beginning in the midst
at B in the visual line B. and numbered to 10 both ways.

The Sights C and D must have sockets at the bottom, through which the Transom
must pass, so that the Sights may be set to any division of the Transom. The
Vanes or tops of those Sights must have only two edges on their sides, visible
to your ey, namely those edges which touch the Transom; and the two other edges
must be pared away.

The middle Sight at B would have half his head cut away, and a shoulder left,
as in the Figure, and a tenon at the bottom fitted to a mortess made in the
middle of the Transom, that you may stick him in and take him out when you
please, for to this mortess you shall do well to fit two other moveable Sights
very narrow, for observing the Diameter of the Moon, or the distance of Stars
which are very near: one may be about half an inch broad, and the other about a
quarter.

The Index must have one broad Sight, G, made with a socket to ride upon the
Index; it would be three inches and an half high above the Radius: the breadth
at least three inches, and the mortess through which the Radius slippeth would
be made near the right side of This Cross-staff is exactly made by Mr. Anthony
Thomson, in Hosier lane; London.

depiction of a cross-staff the Sight, that full half of the Sights breadth (or
more) may be on the left side the Radius. At the upper corner of this Sight
leftward, as at, you shall with a Gouge hollow a pit for your ey, on the
backside: in the midst of which pit you shall bore an hole quite through, big
enough to receive a Goosquill: also you shall round the corner of the Sight
that it may fit the inner corner of your ey, that the left side of the Sight
may lie close to your Nose in observing. The Fiducial edge of the middle Sight
of the Transom must so answer this Ey-hole, that it keep the same distance from
the side of the Radius leftward; and the distance would be about an inch and
quarter, that your right Ey may easily come at the hole while the Index
slippeth upon your right shoulder, and so your true Radius shall be the pricked
line B, running beside the Index, but Parallel to it, and this line must cut
the middle of the Transom, and the middle of his middlemost Sights.

When you would use this Staff, you shall first set the Sights of the Transom
to like inches, as at 10, and 10. if the angle be great, or at 5, and 5. as in
the Figure they are placed: always set them at whole inches, and at like
numbers on both sides from the middle of the Transom: and choose to place those
Sights so that your Ey-sight may be far distant from them in observing, for so
you may the more distinctly observe the minutes and seconds of the angle
inquired. Then resting the further end of the Index upon a Wall or some device
fitted for that purpose, put the near end over your right shoulder: and setting
your Ey to the Ey-hole, slip the Index backward or forward till you see the
objects by the sides of the Sights of the Transom; and mark what number the
backside of the Ey-sight cutteth upon the Index, for that shall give you the
angle sought in this manner.

Example. The Sights of the Transom being set at 5, and 5, that is, 10. inches
asunder, I observed two Steeples by their edges, and the Ey-sight then cut upon
the Index, 6625. that is, inches 66 from the Transom. I say therefore, As C B
500. to B G 6625. so C B Radius or 100000. to B G the Co-tangent of half the
angle. Here I have no more to do then to divide 662500000. by 500. or 6625000.
by 5. which is an easy work, and the Quotient 1325000. is the Co-tangent of 4.
degrees 18. minutes 57. seconds 43. thirds, for half the angle.

Note here, that if the Sights had stood at 10, and 10. then had the number
6625. been the very Co-tangent of half the angle: and remembering that your
Radius on the Transom has but 1000, actual parts, go to the Canon, and cutting
off so many places as may leave the Radius there but 1000. you shall find your
number 6625, to be the Co-tangent of 8. 35 minutes.

Note also, that you may observe the angle between the middle Sight and one of
the other: and then you find the Co-tangent of the whole angle to that Radius
to which your Sight is set on the Transom, as to the Radius 200. 300. or any
other even hundred to 1000.

Note further, that you must evermore observe near the tops of your Sights,
that the visual lines may run above the Transom as much as the Ey is placed
above the plain of it.

He that will, may have room to set several Scales of degrees and minutes to
several Radiusses; as one to the Radius 300. another to 500. another to 700. by
which the very degrees and minutes may be presently had, without recourse to
the Tables. To me the Scale of equal parts is in stead of all.

The Commodities of this disposition of the Staff, are these.

1. It is better managed when it rests upon the shoulder, and the Ey-sight
being made to move while the Transom and his Sights stand Fixed, shall save you
much labor of coursing up and down from one end of the Staff to the ^^^er in
observing.

2. The Ey-sight being made to show the angle by the length of the Co-tangents,
shall always give you large differences: insomuch, that if your Staff be but
6. foot long you may observe to Seconds, and Thirds in lesser angles, and till
you come beyond 20. degrees, your Sight shall seldom move less then the tenth
part of an inch for one minute. And beyond 30. or 40. degrees this Instrument
would not be used, because the Ey cannot see both the Sights of the Transom at
once, without rolling from one to another, whereby the Center of Vision is
changed.

3. Your Ey is better fixed and shadowed by this Ey-sight, then when the end of
the Index is placed by guess upon the Cheek-bone.

The inconvenience here is no more then what is found in all Cross-staffes of
what form soever. And that is, they are subject to some error by reason of the
Eccentricity of the Ey. For the visual Beams meet within the Ey at a depth
uncertain, and they are also refracted in the Superficies of the apple of the
Ey: the apple of the Ey also is not of the same convexity, nor of the same
breadth in all Men: and it is contracted in a bright Air, and dilated in a
darker Air; as you shall soon find if you go about to observe the Diameter of
the Moon by this Instrument, without correction of the Eccentricity; for you
shall always find the apparent Diameter too great, and much greater in the
Night, then in the Day. Thus, November 18. 1653. I observed the Moons Diameter
32. minutes 06. seconds in the Day Time, and that Night I observed it 58.
minutes, by reason of the dilatation of the apple of my Ey in the Night.

This error may be rectified two ways. The First is by examining the
observations made with your Cross-staff, by some other Instrument which is not
subject to like error. As for Example, I have devised to fasten an arch of a
Circle containing 20. or 30. degrees to the end of a Ruler of 6. or 7. foot,
and fit to it a Label with Sights, then having observed by my Cross-staff the
length of Orions Girdle, I will set my other Instrument to it, turning the arch
toward me that I may manage the Label better, and noting the difference of the
observations, I will find how to correct my Staff in that posture an another
time: and so by many observations I may frame a Table to correct the
Eccentricity throughout: but my Table perhaps will not serve to correct the
eccentricity every Man's Ey, neither will a Table made for the Night serve me in
the Day.

The other way is most exact and certain for all Men. Make another Transom in
all points like the first, but shorter by half, and let the divisions thereof
be into half-inches: this Transom must ride upon the Index with a socket,
between the long Transom and your Ey. Now when you observe, set the Sights of
the short Transom to the like number of half inches as the Sights of the long
Transom stand at whole inches, and when you have placed your Ey-sight so that
you see the Stars upon the edges of the Sights of the long Transom, draw your
short Transom till you see the Stars by his Sights in like manner at once; then
look what number is cut by the short Transom, the double thereof is the
Co-tangent of the angle: and look what the number cut by the Ey-sight wants of
that double, so much is the Eccentricity of your Ey in that place. This way is
showed by that Excellent Mathematician Mr Edward Wright in Chapter 15. of his
Treatise of Errors in Navigation.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Eclipses, Observed since the Year of our Lord 1637.
FIrst, At Coventree, whose Longitude is more West then London 1. degree 29.
minutes of space. Latitude 52. 28. minutes. My especial friends Dr John
Twysden, and Mr Samuel Foster, late Professor of Astronomy in Gresham Colleige,
and my self all together, observed the total and great Eclipse of the Moon,
which happened in the Year 1638. on Tuesday December 11. before Noon. The total
obscuration began 1. hour 07. minutes: The time of emergence observed by the
Altitude of Benenaes was 2. hours 41. minutes; so the total Obscuration
continued 1. hour 34. minutes: during the greatest part of which time the Moon
was quite lost, though the Sky was clear. When the Moon began to recover light
she was in the foremost foot of Apollo, between the two Stars of the third
Magnitude: a line drawn between those Stars did cut off the lower part of the
Moons body to of her Diameter, and setting the distance of the Stars in 12.
parts, the Moon had gone 7 of those parts toward the Easterly Star: which is in
Calce Apollinis. Hence I compute the apparent Longitude of the Moon at the time
of emergence 29. 36. minutes 19 seconds, and her apparent Latitude 0. 44.
minutes South.

2. At Easton Macodit, whose Longitude is West from London 0. 43. minutes of
space, that is, almost 3 minutes of Time the Latitude 52. 13. minutes, Anno
Dom. 1641. upon Friday October 8. I observed the end of the total Eclipse of
the Moon, when Lyra had Altitude 48. 48. minutes, that is, at 8 hours 38.
minutes 08. seconds after Noon.

3. At Ecton whose Longitude is West from London 45. minutes of space, or 3.
minutes of Time Latitude 52. 15. minutes Anno Dom. 1645, upon Monday Angust 11.
I observed the Eclipse of the Sun ending when the Center of the Sun was in
Azimuch 0. 55. minutes past the South, that is, 0. hours 2. minutes after Noon.
This Eclipse Hevelius observed to end at Danizick at 1. hour 53, minutes, as he
writes in his Selenographia.

4. At Ecton aforesaid, Anno Dom. 1649. upon Wednesday May 16. before Noon: I
observed in the company of Mr Samuel Sillesby, late Fellow of Queens Colleige
in Cambridge, the total Eclipse of the Moon. The beginning when the right Knee
of Ophiucus was in Azimuth 7. 42. minutes past South: that is, 1. hour 08.
minutes a.m. The total obscuration began when the Azimuth of the said Star was
20, degrees Westward, that is, at 1. hour 55. minutes 44. seconds. By the
Medicaean Tables it should happen to be totally obscured at Uraniburg 2. hours
46. minutes 23. seconds, and at Ecton 1. 53. minutes 23. seconds. By
Lantsbergius Tables, at Ecton 1. hour 40. minutes 48. seconds.

5. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1649. October 25. current, Afternoon, I observed by a
Telescope the Eclipse of the Sun. The Digits Eclipsed and the Time were as
follows, Dig. H. min sec. Dig. Hour. 0. 0. 41.56. 4. 1.47.28. 1. 49.48. 3.
2.03.28. 2. 59.44. 2. 15.32. 3. -- 1. 09.44. 1. 22.40. 4. 26.12. 0. 31.04 4. --
33.32.

6. At Easton Macodit Anno Domi. 1651/2. on Monday March 15. in the Morning, I
observed with Dr Twysden, that the Moon was Eclipsed about one Digit when
Alkair was in Azimuth 79. 40. minutes from the South Eastward. More we could
not see for Clouds.

7. At Ecton Anno Dom. 1652. on Monday March 29. before Noon, I observed the
great Eclipse of the Sun by a Telescope and a minute-watch Rectified by the
Azimuth of the Sun, taken both before and after, in the company of half a score
Gentlemen and Ministers my Neighbors, as follows.

Di. mi. Ti. mi. sec. Digits. Time 0.03. -- 9.21.12. 11.00. -- 10.35 1.00. --
9.27. 10.00. -- 10.42 2.00. -- 9.31.08. 9.00. -- 10.48 3.00. -- 9.37. 8.00. --
10.55. 4.00. -- 9.44. 7.00. -- 11.01. 5.00. -- 9.50. 6.00. -- 11.06 6.00. --
9.55. 5.00. -- 11.11 7.00. -- 10.00. 4.00. -- 11.19. 8.00. -- 10.06 3.00. --
11.24 9.00. -- 10.11.28. 2.00. -- 11.31. 10.00. -- 10.18. 1.00. -- 11.35 11.00.
-- 10.25. 0.00. -- 11.42 11.22 -- 10.32.04.

And though this Eclipse was so great, yet we could read in the time of the
greatest darkness within Doors, notwithstanding that the Window was covered
with a Blanket.

8. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1652. on Tuesday September 7. current, the Moon rose
Eclipsed about 10. Digits, and while 8. Digits were yet darkened all the dark
part of the Moon was visible of a Dusk and Tawny color: this Eclipse ended
when the double Star in Cornu wanted in Azimuth 6. 30. minutes of the South;
that is, at 7. hours 51. minutes 52. seconds: but the Moon was not free of the
Penumbra till 7. minutes after.

9. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1654. on Wednesday August 2. current, before Noon, I
observed the great Eclipse of the Sun by a Telescope and a Minute-watch,
sufficiently Rectified by the Azimuth of the Sun, in the company of many
learned Men my Neighbors and friends, as follows.

Di. T. mi. Di. Time. 0. -- 7.47. 10 -- 1. -- 7.52 10. -- 9.00. 2. -- 7.58 9.
9.09. 3. -- 8.04. 8. -- 9.18. 4. -- 8.09. 7. -- 5. -- 8.15. 6. 9.31. 6. -- 8.20
5. 9.38. 7. -- 8.28. 4. 9.45 8. -- 8.34. 3. 9.51 9. -- 8.40 2. -- 10. -- 8.49.
1. -- 10.03 10 -- 0. -- 10.09.

10. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1654. on Thursday August 17. I observed the Eclipse of
the Moon by a Telescope and a Minute-watch, Rectified by the Azimuth of the
first Star in the Horn of, as follows, Time After Noon. mi. 9. 47 I saw the
Penumbra invading the Moon, with my bare Ey, 9. 54. I saw the Penumbra invading
through my Telescope. 10. 15 Shadow 3 minutes deep. 10. 25. Shadow 4. minutes
deep Yet I could discern all the Limb. 10. 45. Shadow more then 4. minutes
deep. Yet the Moons Limb all seen. 11. 05. Yet the darkness is more on the East
side: shadow is 5. minutes deep, and the Limb is lost in the shadow. 11. 11.
All the Limb seen again, and the shadow seems but 3. minutes deep, and just
under the Moon so that the East and West side of the are darkened alike. 11. 22.
The shadow little above 1. minute deep in my Glass. 11. 25. The shadow half a
minute deep by my Glass. 11. 27. The shadow gone in my Glass: But the Penumbra
still covers almost of the Moons Diameter. 11. 30. The shadow is here gone in
the judgment of my naked Ey, but the Penumbra is seen still. 11. 35. The Moon
as clear as at 9.47. but yet the lower quarter of the Moon is much dusker then
the rest of her body.

11. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1655/6. upon Tuesday January 1. afternoon, I observed
the Eclipse of the Moon, by a Minute-watch Rectified by the Southing of the
Stars. Clouds often hindered, but thus I observed.

Ho. mi. 6.43 The Moon grows dusk on the East side. 6.49 More dusk, yet all
the Limb is seen. 6.51 Here I judge the Moon to touch the Vmbra. 6.53 The Limb
begins to be lost in the shadow so far as I can discern both with the Telescope
and without it. 7.00 darkened 2. Digits by estimation. 7.07 Almost 4. Digits.
7.34 Almost 7. Digits: here the Clouds thicken. 8.29 darkened about 10. Digits,
yet almost all the Moon is perceivable through the shadow. 8.36 About 10.
Digits, yet almost all the Limb perceivable. 9.11 About 8 Digits. 9.23 About 5
Digits. 9.28 About 4. Digits. 9.39 About 3. Digits. 9.51 Here I judge the end.
The Limb of the is all restored, yet the West side of the Moon looks duskish
for 3. or 4. minutes longer.

12. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1657. on Monday June 15. the Moon rose Eclipsed: I
observed the end thereof by the Azimuth of Antares, to be 16. minutes after 10.

13. At Ecton, Anno Dom. 1057. on Thursday December 10. I observed the Eclipse
of the Moon ending, when she was apparently 34 degrees high, and me thought I
discerned the Penumbra till her Altitude 35. it was a thick flying mist, no
Star but Jupiter could be seen with us all the time of this Eclipse: about one
third (at the most) of the Moons Diameter was darkened on the North side. From
the first Ecliptical opposition mentioned in this Catalogue to this last is the
space of a Metonique Year.

These Observations are faithfully reported, as I made them. I could have
strained some of them to a better Harmony; if I would have forged any thing, or
used my own judgment upon them: but I rather leave them to the judgment of
the learned Readers; especially such as have accustomed themselves to Celestial
Observations.

FINIS.
The Rudiments of Astronomy, Put into plain Rhythmes.
The Constellations of the Fixed Stars.
THe Army of the Starry Sky
Declares the Glory of God most high;
Seen and perceived of all Nations
In eight and forty Constellations.
First near unto the Northern Pole
The Dragon and two Bears do Role.
Whose hinder parts and Tails contain
The lesser and the greater Wain.
The Hair, the Bear-ward, and the Crown,
And then comes Hercules kneeling down.
And next below a place does take
Great Serpentarius with his Snake.
Under the Harp of Orpheus
The Eagle and Antinous.
The Silver Swan her Wings does spread
Above the Dart, and Dolphins head.
Then Pegasus comes on amain;
Andromeda follows in her Chain.
The Triangle below her stands;
And at her feet in Perseus hands
The Gorgons Head. Above are seen
Her Parents Cepheus, with his Queen
Cassiope. Not far below
Heniochus his Goat does show
On his left shoulder: in his hand
He does the stormy Kids command.
Here in the Zodiaque begins
The Ram, the Bull, the Loving Twins;
The Crab, the Lion. and Virgin Tender,
The Balance, Scorpion, and Bow bender;
Goat, Waterman, then Fishes twain
Shall bring you round to the Ram again.
Fifteen Images appear
In the Southern Hemisphear.
The Monstrous Whale before the rest,
Eridanus scarce wers his breast:
Over the Hare Orion bright
Sparkles in a Winters night.
Then comes the great Dog, at whose tail.
The famous Argo spreads her sail.
Above the little Dog does flame,
For whom the Latins had no name.
Long Hydra on her tail allow
Carries the Pitcher and the Crow.
The Centaure holds the Wolf by the heel.
The Altar, and Ixions Wheel
Are never seen of us: but here
The Southern Fish brings up the rear,
The Planets.
UNder those fixed Stars above
Seven Planets in their Orbs do move.
The highest is Saturn. Thirty Year
He spends in Compassing his Sphere,
Twelve Jupiter, and Mars in twain
Sets forward and comes round again.
Then in one Year the Sun displaies
Three hundred sixty and five days,
And near a quarter; which in four
Encompassings makes one day more.
Between the Sun and us there fly
Fair Venus, and swift Mercury.
These always near the Sun we find;
Not far before, nor far behind.
The Moon's the lowest, who in seven
And twenty days goes round the Heaven.
And above two days more do run
Before she overtakes the Sun.
So twenty nine and an half in all
Do make a Month Synodical.
These Planets make their course to the East,
Though they be faster hurled West.
And six degrees the rest may stray
Beside the Suns Ecliptique way,
The Circles of the Sphere.
SIx greater Circles mark you shall
Which equally divide this Ball.
Just in the midst between the Poles
From East to West the Equator rolls.
The Ecliptique cuts him; and does slide
Scarce twenty four degrees aside.
Horizon even with the ground
From Stars below our sight does bound.
Meridian upright does rise,
Parting the East and Western Skies.
Two Colures through the Poles do run
Quarrring the Circle of the Sun.
One where the Spring and Fall begin,
The other where longest days come in.
Four lesser Circles (mark them well)
Are to the Equator Parallel.
Two Tropiques bound the Suns high way
Showing the Long'st and Shortest day,
The Arctique Circle curs the Bears,
The Antarctique opposite appears.
Meridians half twenty four
For Hours, and for Degrees ninescore,
Through both the Poles oath World do pass,
And the Equinoctial down right cross.
And ninescore Parallels has that line
By which Stars North and South decline,
The Ecliptique has his Longitudes,
And Parallels of Latitudes
For Stars: but in Geography
The Towns beside the Equator lie.
Over our Head, and under Feet,
The ninescore Azimuths do meet.
And here as many Parallels
Of Altitude Horizon tells.
Longitudes, and Meridians all,
And Azimuths, great Circles call.
But all their Parallels in Heaven,
Being lesser, cut the Globe uneven.
Degrees three hundred and threescore
Has every Circle and no more.
When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained,
What is Man that thou art mindful of him? Or the
Son of Man that thou visitest him.
Ps. 8.
Errata.
Some Faults have been committed between the Writer and the Printer; the chief
whereof the Reader is desired to amend as follows.

page and line. Faults Amendments. 2, 3, 4. etc. to page 30. in the Title The
first Book of the Fabrique of the Planisphere. The first Book. Of the Fabrique
of the Planisphear. 31 and 32. in the Title The second Book of the Projections
of the Sphere. The second Book. Of the Projections of the Sphere. 1. 13. mossie
massy. 2. 7. Declination Delineation 3. ant. Declination Delineation 4. 16.
look up look upon 4. 36. eye beam eye-beame 5. 13. Euclid. 4, 5. Euclid 4.5.
22. required of your Compass over reach required. If your Compass reach short
5. 23. if it reach short if it overreach 6. 39. structures structure 8. secant
67. 25693. 25593. The 5. last Tangents want a place. You must add a Cipher to
each of them. 9. 16. two so 12. 18. all but all. But 13. 07. working it
working. It 16. 19. four fewer 17. 18. Alamath Alamach 21. Henerichus
Heniochus. 17. antop. little rain little Waine 18. 8. brow Crown 18. 30.
Praecepe Praesepe 19. 16. Bedalgieure Bedalgieuze 23. Alhaber Alhabor. 20. 6.
round the inner circle or edge of this Ring it must round. The inner circle or
edge of this Ring must 20. 14. nail screwes male screwes 17. small screwes
female screwes 19. bare bear 22. 30. is made and gone, for that year: your
scale is made. And so for that year your scale. 24. 9. but one degree but for
one degree 25. 7. put out the marks of Parenthesis() 26. 8 year Henr. 3. year
of Henr 3. 23. Periodus Periodus 28. always, upon always upon 35. thus, set
thus set 28. 1. and 5. Grostons Grastons 30. 3 second Meridional second, or the
Meridional 33 6. set for London namely for London 33. ^1. on Elevation no
Elevation 34. ^^ (...) the which the 9. Azimuth Azimuthes 37. 6. the eyes place
the eye is placed 41. 3. Center B A, Center, B A 48. 4. either; way; either
way; 22. A C C A 50. 16. Zenith, of Zenith of 32. Zenith and B Zenith A and B
53. 12. 12 and 13 number 12th and 13th numbered 56. 8. these sides the sides 20.
sub^endeth A which sub^endeth A 62. 17. fall falls 63. 7, 9. ways rays ult.
of deleatur 64. 10. min. at 70 min. and at 70 11. between 8 degr. 34. min.
between 18 and 24 min. 12. Here Refraction is as the Sun Her Refraction is as
the Sun's 65, 1. your Meridians your Meridian 66. 30. require enquire 67. 3.
Michals Michaels 68. 39. Long long 73. 6 CHAP. II CHAP, XI 74. 20. Alrucabe
Alrucaba 75. 8. Alrucabe Alrucaba 75. 12. first made first mode 76. 29. prick
here prick; here 8^. 16, 17. by Declin. by their Declin, 82. 12. her Declin.
his Declin. antep. sta Star 86. 16, 17, 18, 19. Pleiades Rises sets
Pleiades Rise set 86. 30. to be least to be lost 87. (...) (...) 88. 4. could
happen could not happen ^. 14. note know 17. Asera Asera 91. ^1. Duet. Deuteronomy.
99. 21. 23 degrees 23d degree 102. 6, and 30. Eniph. Alph. Eniph Alph. 23. 35
56 105. 8. Stars, I Stars, I ^ Caeti Ceti 19. 120 degrees. 125 degr. 110. pen. by
Oblique Problemes by Probl 2 Obliqu. 111. 25. in 39 in all 39 114. 17. grees
setting, grees. Setting. 11. Houses: also Houses also 31. 49, 30 50, 51. 118.
6, 7. 49, 50 50, 51. 24. and so and to 119. 1 Astrologers Astrology 17.
futurus futurus 122. 29. no man no men 123. 3. princeps. Nero princeps Nero 4.
citherae citharae 10. dereliquit. Nero dereliquit Nero 12. persuesum persuasum
27. se nore temere 128. 26. as by and by 29. setting go setting therefore 130.
34. Jupiter in that Meridian; Jupiter. In that Meridian 139. 6. Christ time
Christ's time 17. Ticius Tacitus 141. 6. 4, 5. 11. 4. 5, 11. 145. 13. Suns Dyals
Sun Dials 147. 5. or Equinoctial deleatur 19. so the hour lines to the
hour lines 154. in the scheam the letter I is wanting at the lower end of the
hour-line of 11. 157. 17. with an extension with any extension 174. 32.
precrucem per crucem 176. 11. by the arch by R T the arch 180. 9. Declination
plain declining plain 181. 20. pre per 184. 27. the Vertical of my Dial, and
also deleatur 185. 28. and so and to 188. 9. Tumiture furniture 190. 7. you use
you may use 192. in the scheme, the pricked line last save one should be put
out. 193. ant. a Vertical plain a Vertical or a South Horizontal plain 194. 27.
of 10. 2 of 10 and 2 199. 11. Box-lid of a Box-lid or of a.

Also many words are mis-written, As Cannon for Canon. Lettess for Lattess.
Finiter for Finitor. Semediameter for Semidiameter, Trygonometry for Trig.
Ophiucus for Ophiuchus. Plaiades for Pleiades. Acronically for Acronychally,
Ascendant and Descendant for Ascendent and Descendent. Equinoctiorum for
Aequinoctiorum, examplification for exemplification, Dyal for Dial. Ceeling for
Ceeling etc, which the Reader is desired to amend or overlook: as also the
mis-placing or omitting of points of distinction, as Comma's Colons and
Periods, which I could not prevent, being so remote from the Press. Many of
these mistakes are here corrected in the Table of Errata: especially the most
material.

The Contents of the First Book.
Chap. 1. OF the parts of the Planisphear: And of the Matter, his matter and
Lineaments. fol. 1 Chap. 2. Of the reason of this Declination. fol. 3 Chap. 3.
How to find the centers of the Meridians five several ways. fol. 5 Chap. 4. To
find the Centers of the Parallels, six several ways. fol. 9 Chap. 5. How to
draw the straighter Meridians and Parallels, whose Semidiameters are very long.
fol. 11 Chap. 6. How to draw the Tropiques, and Polar Circles, and to finish
the Matter. fol. 12 Chap. 7. Of the Reet, or Net. fol. 13 Chap. 8. Of the Ring,
or Limb of the Matter. fol. 20 Chap. 9. Of the Epherneris or Calender, on the
Ring. fol. 21 Chap. 10. Of the Label and Sights. fol. 23 Chap. 11. Of the
perpetual Calender, on the backside. fol. 25 Chap. 12. Some cautions to be
observed in the making of the Instrument. fol. 29
The Contents Of the Second Book.
Chap. 1. OF the Planisphear in the Meridional Projection, representing the
Eastern or Western Hemisphears: And of his three Modes or postures. fol 30
Chap. 2. Of the Equinoctial Projection: showing the Northern or Southern
Hemisphears. fol 34 Chap. 3. Of the Nonagesimal Projection showing the Eastern
and Western parts of the Sphere, being divided by the Azimuth of the
Nonangesimus gradus. fol 37 Chap. 4. Of the Horizontal Projection, representing
the upper and lower Hemisphears. fol 38
The Contents Of the Third Book.
Chap. 1. OF the kinds and parts of Spherical Triangles, fol. 39 Chap. 2. Of
the 16 Cases of Rectangled Triangles. And how they may be reduced to five
Problemes. fol. 40 Chap. 3. The Legs given, to find the rest. fol. 41 Chap. 4.
A Leg and the Hypotenusa given, to find the rest. fol. 42 Chap. 5. The
Hypotenusa and an Angle giver, to find the rest. fol. 42 Chap. 6. A Leg and an
Angle given to find the rest. fol. 43 Chap. 7. The Angles given, to find the
Sides. fol. 43 Chap. 8. How to represent and resolve the Cases of the four
first Problemes of Spherical Triangles, diverse other ways. fol. 46 Chap. 9.
The first Variety. fol. 46 Chap. 10. The second and the third Varieties. fol.
48 Chap. 11. The fourth Variety. fol. 48 Chap. 12. The fifth Variety. fol. 49
Chap. 13. The sixth Variety. fol. 49 Chap. 14. Of the Solution of Oblique
angled Spherical Triangles: And generally of all Spherical Triangles. fol. 50
Chap. 15. Two Sides and an Angle comprehended given, to find the rest. fol. 52
Chap. 16. Two Sides and an Angle opposite to one of them given, to find the
rest. fol. 52 Chap. 17. Two Angles and the Side comprehended between them being
given, to find the rest. fol. 54 Chap. 18. Two Angles and a Side opposite to
one of them given, to find the rest. fol. 54 Chap. 19. Three Angles given, to
find the Sides. fol. 55 Chap. 20. How to reduce an Ch^^que angled Triangle to
two Rectangled Triangles, by letting fall a Perpendiculer. fol. 58
The Contents Of the Fourth Book.
Chap. 1. THe Preface. fol. 60 Chap. 2. How to find the Altitude of the Sun or
Stars, by Observation, with the Plamisphear. Also what fashion is best for
Sights. fol. 61 Chap. 3. To find a Meridian line. fol. 64 Chap. 4. To Observe
the Azimuth of the Sun or Stars. fol. 65 Chap. 5. To find the Suns Longitude.
fol. 66 Chap. 6. The Suns Longitude, Declination, Right Ascension, any one of
them given, to find the rest, in the first Projection. fol. 67 Chap. 7. To do
the same in the Second Projection, more easily. fol. 70 Chap. 8. To find the
Angle at the Sun, made between the Ecliptic and Meridian. fol. 70 Chap. 9. To
find the said angle of the Ecliptic, with the Meridian, by the Longitude,
Declination, or Right Ascension, diverse other ways. fol. 71 Chap. 10. To find
the point of the Ecliptic in which the Longitude and Right Ascension have
greatest difference. fol. 72 Chap. 11. To find the Latitude of your Place, or
the Elevation of the Pole above your Horizon, by the Meridional Altitude, and
Declination of the Sun. Meridional Projection. fol. 73 Chap. 12. To do the
same by the Meridian Altitudes of the Stars about the Poles. fol. 74 Chap. 13.
To find the Declination of the Sun or Stars, by their Meridian Altitude, and
the Elevation of the Pole. fol. 75 Chap. 14. To find the Oblique Ascension and
Descension, and the Ascensional difference of the Sun or any Star, by his
Declination, and the Latitude of the Place: Two several ways, in the
Horizontal Triangle. fol. 76 Chap. 15. The Ascensional difference, Declination,
and Amplitude of the Sun or a Star, and the Latitude of the (...), any two of
them given to find he rest. fol. 79 Chap. 16. To do the (...) in the
Equinoctial Projection. fol. 80 Chap. 17 To sinal the Semi-diurnal and
Semi-noctu^^al Arch of the Sun or Stars: the time of them Rising and (...) and
the length of their Day and Night: by the Declination, and the latitude of the
Place. fol. 81 Chap. 18. To find the same, in the Equinoctial projection. fol.
82 Chap. 19. To find the beginning and end of Twilight, by the Suns
Declination, and the Latitude of the Place. fol. 83 Chap. 20. To find the time
of the Cosmical Rising and Setting of the Stars, by their Declination and Right
Ascension, and the Latitude of the Place. fol. 84 Chap. 21. To find the time
when any Star rises or sets Acronycally, by his Declination, and Right
Ascension, and the Latitude of the Place. fol. 85 Chap. 22. To find when a Star
rises or sets Heliacally. fol. 86 Chap. 23. To find the Age when any
Astrologer lived, and what time of the Solar year the Seasons happened in his
Country, by knowing his Latitude, and the Rising of any Star in his time. fol.
87 Chap. 24 The Latitude of your Place, the Declination, Altitude, Azimuth and
Hour of the Sun or Stars, any three of these being given, to find the other
two. fol. 91 Chap. 25. To find the Altitude and Azimuth of the Sun or Stars at
any time proposed; the Latitude and Declination being known. fol. 92 Chap. 26.
The Latitude, Altitude, and Azimuth given, to find the Declination, and the
Hour. fol. 93 Chap. 27. The Latitude, Declination, and Altitude, given, to find
the Hour, and Azimuth. fol. 94 Chap. 28. The Declination, Altitude, and Azimuth
of the Sun given, to find the Hour, and Latitude. fol. 95 Chap. 29. To find the
Hour of the Night, by the Northing, or Southing, Rising or Setting of any Star.
fol. 95 Chap. 30. The time of Day or Night given, to find in what Coast any
Star is: and how much he is distant from the Horizon, or Meridian. fol. 96
Chap. 31. The Time, and Latitude given, to find the Altitude, and Azimuth of
any Star: and thereby to get the knowledge of the Stars. fol. 96 Chap. 32. The
Latitude of the Place, the Declination of a Star, with his Altitude, or Azimuth
given, to find both the Hour of the Star, and the Hour of the Night. fol. 97
Chap. 33. Your Latitude known, and the Altitude, and Azimuth of any Star,
Planet, or Comet, observea, and the time of Night, how to find his Right
Ascension, and Declination. fol. 98 Chap. 34. The Declination, and Right
Ascension of any Star given, to find his Longitude, and Latitude. fol. 100
Chap. 35. The Longitude, and Latitude, of any Star given, to find his Right
Ascension, and Declination; and to place the Stars in the Matter. fol. 101 Chap.
36. The Latitude, and Declination of a Star given, to find his Longitude, and
Right Ascension. fol. 103 Chap. 37. The Longitude, and Latitude of two Stars
given, to find their Distance. fol. 103 Chap. 38. The Declination, and Right
Ascension of any two Stars given, to find their distance. fol. 104 Chap. 39.
The Declination of a Star or Planet, and his distance from a known Star given,
to find his Right Ascension. fol. 104 Chap. 40. The Latitude of a Star or
Planet, and his distance from a known Star given, to find his Longitude. fol.
106 Chap. 41. To find the distance of two Stars by their Altitudes, and their
difference of Azimuth observed at the same time. fol. 106 Chap. 42. To find the
Angles of Station which any two Stars make with the Pole, by their Right
Ascension and Declination: or with the Pole of the Ecliptique, by their
Longitude and Latitude: or with the Zenith, by their Altitude and Azimuth. fol.
106 Chap. 43. To find whether three Stars be in one great Circle, by having
their Longitude and Latitude, or their Right Ascension and Declination, or
their Azimuth and Altitude known. fol. 107 Chap. 44. If a Comet or Star unknown
be seen in a straight line with two other known Stars, and his distance from
one of the known Stars be observed; how to find the true place of the Comet or
Star unknown. fol. 108 Chap. 45. The distance of a Planet from two known Stars
being Observed, to find his Longitude and Latitude. fol. 109 Chap. 46. To find
the Culmen Caeli, and the Altitude thereof, at any time proposed. fol. 111
Chap. 47. To find the Ascendent or Horoscope, and the other three Principal
Houses, for any time proposed. fol. 111 Chap. 48. To find the beginnings of the
other eight Houses. fol. 112 Chap. 49. To know what degree of the Ecliptique is
in the beginning of every House. fol. 114 Chap. 50. Another way to find what
degree of the Ecliptique is in the beginning of every House, and thereby to set
a Figure more easily then by the former Chapter. fol. 114 Chap. 51. A third way
to set a Figure with less labor. fol. 116 Chap. 52. How to place any Star or
Planet in his proper House. fol. 117 Chap. 53. To find the division of the
Houses, according to Campanus. fol. 118 Chap. 54. How to Direct a Figure. fol.
118 Appendix, Concerning Judiciarie Astrologers. fol. 119 Chap. 55. To find the
Angles of the Ascendent, or the Angle of the Ecliptique with the Horizon, and
the Altitude of the Nonagesimus gradus, at any time. fol. 124 Chap. 56. The
Ascendent and his Amplitude, and the Altitude of Culmen Caeli given; so to
represent the Ecliptique, that you may presently find not only the Altitude of
the Nonagesimus gradus, but the Altitude and Azimuth of every degree of the
Ecliptique, at one view. fol. 125 Chap. 57. To do the same another way, by the
Horizontal Projection, very plainly. fol. 126 Chap. 58. To do the same by the
Nonagesimal Projection, if the Altitude of Nonagesimus gradus be first given,
in stead of the Altitude of Culmen Caeli. fol. 127 Chap. 59. The Nonagesimus
gradus, and his Altitude and Azimuth given, as in the former Chapter; How in
the same Projection to get the Altitude and Azimuth of any Planet or Star, by
his Longitude and Latitude. fol. 129 Chap. 60. The Altitude and Azimuth of any
Star taken, and either the Alcendent, Nonagesimus gradus, or Culmen Caeli
known: How by the same Nonagesimal Projection to find the Stars Longitude and
Latitude. fol. 129 Chap. 61. The Latitude and Azimuth of a Star, and either the
Ascendent, Nonagesimus gradus, or the Culmination given, to find his Longitude.
fol. 131 Chap. 62. To find the Parallactical Angle; that is, what Angle the
Azimuth makes with any point of the Ecliptique, by the Altitude of that point,
and of the Nonagesimus gradus. fol. 131 Chap. 63. To find the Parallax of
Altitude of the Sun, or Moon. fol. 133 Chap. 64. The Parallactique Angle, and
the Parallax of Altitude given, to find the Parallax of Longitude and Latitude.
fol. 135 Chap. 65. To find the Moons Latitude, by her distance from either of
the Nodi, called Caput, and Caudi Draconis. fol. 137 Chap. 66. To find the
Dominical Letter, the Prime, Epact, Easter day, and the rest of the moveable
Feasts for ever, by the Calender, discribed Book 1.11. fol. 138 Chap. 67. To
find the age of the Moon, by the Epact. fol. 138 Chap. 68. To find in what
Parallel and Climate a Place is, by the Latitude given. fol. 140 Chap. 69. The
Longitude and Latitude of two Places given, to find their Distance. fol. 141
Chap. 70. The Latitude and Distance of two Places given, to find the difference
of Longitude. fol. 142 Chap. 71. To find what degree of the Ecliptique
Culminates in another Country, at any time proposed, if the difference of
Longitude be known. fol. 143 Chap. 72. To find what a Clock it is in another
Country, by knowing the Hour at Home, and the difference of Longitude. fol. 144
Chap. 73. The Longitude and Latitude of one Place known, and the Rumb and
distance of a second Place, to find both the Longitude and Latitude of the
second Place. fol. 144 Chap. 74. The Latitudes and distance of two Places
given, to find the Rumb, and the difference of Longitude. fol. 144
The Contents Of the Fifth Book.
Chap. 1. THe Preface. Of the kinds of Dyals. fol. 145 Chap. 2. Theorems
premised. fol. 146 Chap. 3. How to draw an Horizontal or Vertical line, upon
any plain. fol. 149 Chap. 4. How to make the Polar Dyal, and how to place it.
fol. 150 Chap. 5. How to make the South Equinoctial Dyal, or
Parallelognomonical Dyal direct. fol. 151 Chap. 6. How to make the East
Equinoctial Dyal, or the West. fol. 153 Chap. 7. How to make the Declining
Equinoctial Dyal. fol. 155 Chap. 8. Of the kinds of Oblique Dyals. fol. 158
Chap. 9. How to make the Vertical Dyal. fol. 158 Chap. 10. How to make the
South and North Horizontal Dyal. fol. 160 Chap. 11. How to Observe the
Declination of any Declining Plain. fol. 162 Chap. 12. How to make a Horizontal
Declining Dyal. fol. 164 Chap. 13. How to Observe the Reclination or
Inclination of any Plain. fol. 168 Chap. 14. How to make a South and North
Reclining Dyal. fol. 169 Chap. 15. How to make an East or West Reclining Dyal.
fol. 170 Chap. 16. How to find the Arches and Angles that are requisite for the
making of the Reclining Declining Dyal. fol. 173 Chap. 17. How to find the
Horary distances of a Reclining Declining Dyal. fol. 176 Chap. 18. How to draw
the Reclining Declining Dyal. fol. 179 Chap. 19. How to know at what
Reclination any Declining Plain shall become a Declining Equinoctial Dyal
Plain, to be delineated after Chapter 7. And how to find the Oblique Ascension
of his Meridian or Sub-style, and the difference of Longitude, which are
requisite for his Delineation. fol. 180 Chap. 20. An Admonition concerning the
five several Cases of Declining Recliners. fol. 181 Chap. 21. How to make the
Declining Horizontal Dyal, another way then was showed Chapter 12. fol. 182
Chap. 22. To make the Reclining Declining Dyal, another way. fol. 185 Chap. 23.
To draw the proper Hours of any Declining Dyal. fol. 185 Chap. 24. To know in
what Country any Declining Dyal shall serve for a Vertical Dyal. fol. 186 Chap.
25. To set a Plain Parallel to the Horizon of any Country proposed. fol. 186
Chap. 26. How other Circles of the Sphere besides the Meridians may be
Projected upon Dyals. fol. 187 Chap. 27. How to describe on any Dyal the proper
Azimuths and Almicantars of the Plain. fol. 188 Chap. 28. How by help of the
proper Azimuths and Almicantars of the Plain, to describe the Equator and his
Parallels, on the Polar or Orthognomonical Dyal. fol. 190 Chap. 29. How to
inscribe the Equator and his Parallels, in the Equinoctial or
Parallelognomonical Dyal. fol. 191 Chap. 30. How to inscribe the Equator and
his Parallels, in an Oblique or Scalenognomonical Dyal. fol. 193 Chap. 31. To
do the same by the Hour Lines of the Place, although the Plain Decline or
Recline. fol. 196 Chap. 32. How to inscribe the Horizon of the Place, with his
Azimuths and Almicantars, in the Horizontal Dyal. fol. 196 Chap. 33. How by the
help of this Furniture to place any moveable Dyal-plain in his true Situation,
and consequently to find the Meridian-line of the Place, without any other
Instrument then the Dyal it self. fol. 198 Chap. 34. How to make a Vertical
Dyal upon the Ceeling of a Floor within Doors, where the Direct Beams of the
Sun never come. fol. 199 A brief Description of a Cross-Staff. fol. 204 A
Catalogue of Eclipses, Observed since the Year of our Lord 1637. fol. 209 The
Rudiments of Astronomy, Put into plain Rhythmes. fol. 214
A Catalogue of Books and Instruments, Made and sold by Joseph Moxon, at his
shop on Corn-hil, at the Sign of Atlas.
THe Catholic Planisphere, called Blagrave's Mathematical Jewel; made very
exactly on Past-boards; about 17. inches Diameter. Globes Celestial and
Terrestrial, of all sizes; A Book in Press for the use of them. By Joseph
Moxon. Spears, according to the Ptolemean Tychonean Copernican
Systeme

With Books for the use of them.

The Spiral Line. Gunters Quadrant and Nocturnal; Printed and pasted, etc.
Stirrups Universal Quadrat. Printed and Pasted, etc, Sea-Plats, Printed on
Paper, or Parchment, and Pasted on Boards. Wrights Corrections of Errors, in
the Art of Navigation. The third Edition, with Additions. Vignola, or the
Complete Architect, useful for all Carpenters, Masons, Painters, Carvers, or
any Gentlemen or others that delight in rare Building. A new Invention to raise
Water higher then the Spring. With certain Engines to produce either Motion or
Sound by the Water: very useful, profitable and delightful for such as are
addicted to rare curiosities: by Isaac de Cause. A Help to Calculation By J.
Newton. A Mathematical Manuel, showing the use of Napiers bones, by J. Dansie.
A Tutor to Astrology, with an Ephemeris for the Year 1658. intended to be
Annually continued, by W. E. Also all manner of Mathematical Books, or
Instruments, and Maps whatsoever, are sold by the foresaid Joseph Moxon.

