THE Moderate Parliament Considered in this time of Danger: BEING AN ANSWER TO
A LETTER sent a Person of Quality About Electing a Member to sit in the ensuing
Parliament.
Dear Friend,
THat Kindness that has been always between us, makes me thus bold with you,
as to request your Vote for a Worthy Gentleman, Mr. --, who stands to be
Burgess here. I had so great a confidence of your Kindness to me, that I did
almost assure him of your Vote; and I am confident if you knew the Gentleman as
well as I do, I should not need to have asked this Favor. But if you please to
engage for him upon my Credit, you will not, I believe, repent your
Undertaking: for he is a moderate man, and of sound Principles in Religion,
according to the Purest Reformed way, a stout Opposer of the Court, and a good
Countryman, and one that will stand up for the Interest of the People and the
Good of the Country; and such men will make us happy: and such I hope you will
always stand for. Our Election is next Thursday* come seven-night, at which
time I hope I shall see you. In the mean time, I rest

Aug. 22. 1679. Yours to my Power, H. D.

My Old Friend!
I Received yours, and have considered of your Motion for my Vote. I confess I
have one to give, and am resolved to bestow it on an honest Gentleman, if I
can. Your Friend may be so, for any thing I know; but the Character you give of
him in your Letter is not so taking with me, as peradventure you think it is,
as to fetch me ten Miles to Vote for him. You tell me he is a Moderate man:
what you mean by that piece of your Character I do not know; whether you mean
it as to the King, or the established Government in Church, it matters not; he
cannot be a fit man for this Election, when the most zealous men for King and
Church are the fittest now to secure us from those Plots that are on all sides
against Monarchy and Episcopacy, and to defend us from a
Commonwealth-Government in the State, and Presbytery or worse in the Church;
both which are so plainly drove at and intended: and I fear your Moderate men
will rather pull down, than keep up and preserve the present Establishments
amongst us. I my self have felt and seen too much mischief by a Change in
Government, ever to give my Aid and Assistance a Second time to its Alteration
or Downfall. I formerly have been inclined to believe Moderation would be the
best way to preserve the Government in Church and State, and beget the King and
Church many Friends, and confirm and secure them for ever. But sad experience
has found the contrary; and nothing has ruined All, and made the Enemies of
our Government so high, so saucy and insolent, as Lenity. Had they bin kept at
first to their Duty and Allegiance, and felt the Effects of Disobedience, they
would not have grown to such a Formidable Height of Presumption as now they
are, and been so ungovernable.

As for your Burgesses Principles in Religion, which you warrant are so sound,
they do not appear so to me. I have some reason to suspect them, you word them
so cunningly, in an unusual Phrase, According to the purest Reformed way. He
may be what he please, even an Anabaptist or a Quaker, for any thing I see in
that Character. Purity of Reformation is the language of them all, and each
Faction pretends to be the purest; and where to rank him, I cannot tell.

And for his Principles in Politics, I have too much ground to question them
too, from what you say of him, That he is a stout Opposer of the Court; the
King, I doubt, you mean, if not Monarchy. And in that you tell me he is a good
Countryman, I must for ever be jealous of him, and of that sort of men, and
believe for two Reasons them to be Men of Dangerous and Mischievous Principles,
to both Church and State. I consess I have formerly looked upon them as their
Title bespoke them, as a very Loyal true-hearted sort of Gentlemen, that rather
meant a great deal of good, than hurt to Church and State; and designed to
carry it even betwixt Court and Country, and not to destroy the Prerogative,
and to grasp at all Power, nor to Enclose Sovereignty in the Commons House, and
make the King himself a Duke of Venice, and his Ancient Court and Counsel
insignificant Ciphers. But as things have been lately managed by that sort of
Men you call Countrymen, I must except against them,

1. Because the worst Principled Men in the whole Nation, are the Men that
usurp the Title of Countrymen, and have it bestowed upon them; and the Best and
most Faithful Subjects His Majesty has, and those that have approved
themselves always so, are the persons that only are blackned with that
disgraceful Name of Courtiers, which makes me think there is a Snake in the
Grass; so that I have no reason to think so well of your Countryman, nor so ill
of the Courtiers as you and others do, and would have me. I am inclined to
believe there were some Covetous and Ambitious men at Whitehal, in and about
Sixty, that sought their own Interest more than the King's and Countrey's, and
cast off the best Subjects His Majesty had, because impoverisht; and brought
into Place and Power his worst Enemies, to the manifest discouragement of
Loyalty and good Principles. And this unequal distribution of Preferments and
Places, did no doubt exasperate the Kings suffering Friends. But now, by the
Jesuitical and Fanatic cunning, those private piques are improved to an
universal implacability against the Court, and all that belong to it; and as
they have ordered the business, every person about the King and Court, except
their own Party, must be the object of the peoples Fear and Malice: and though
the complaint against the Court was first the suffering Cavaleers only, and
not the Fanatics, because their Dad's were then uppermost, and ruled the
roast; yet since of late years Counsels have gone somewhat against them, now
it is their complaint chiefly: for this must be observed, that when the Godly
Party are not uppermost, things cannot go well; and they must cry out of Ill
Management, and bad Ministers of State, and evil Counselors, and Address for
their Removal, that so there may be room for themselves: for certain it is,
there is no such grievance under any Government, as for them to be under;
Dominion being Founded in Grace, they have a palpable wrong done them, if they
be not at the Stern; and those Ministers of State that shall dare but advise
the contrary, shall be Enemies to God and Religion, and disaffected to the
Countries Interest; and if possible, be made a Sacrifice to Popular Rage and
Fury: so that I find the worst Principled Men, are the best Countrymen, in the
peoples esteem; and those in the House of Commons that fly most briskly in the
face of the King and his Friends, and do most confront the Court and Bishops,
are the peoples Darlings. And since I have seen, and sufficiently proved, what
kind of men the Opposers of the Court generally are, in the last Country-mans
Parliament, and what they all along aimed at; I desire to be excused from being
concerned in my Vote for a Countryman any more.

2. Because also the Notion is founded upon this most Seditious and Pestilent
Suggestion, That neither the King nor Court are friends to the Country. For if
that be not necessarily supposed in the Distinction of Countryman in
opposition to the Court, how could a man's bare Attendance on the King, and
being his Servant, make him liable immediately to the Peoples Wrath and
Censure, if he did not receive his Malignity to the Country from Him who gave
him his Preferment and Place? For certainly, if a man must be forthwith
accounted an Enemy to the Country (as we see he is) for no other reason, but
because he is a Courtier, and near to the King; He then that is the greatest
Courtier, and made him so, must be supposed to be their Greatest Foe; and no
question but it is the King they mean, if they durst but speak out; for
otherwise, how could it come to pass, (as we see now it does) that all that are
about the King, and those especially that he loves best, be they never so
Honest and Faithful, or Wise or Just, must forthwith be counted Dangerous and
Mischievous men to the people, and all Arts must be used to Remove or Ruin
them; when perhaps just before their Advancement to their Princes Favor, they
stood fair enough in the peoples esteem; and they then Commenced Villains, when
they were preferred. And I pray tell me how could this happen, if the people
did not believe the King to be the Countries Greatest Foe, and the main
Destroyer of their Rights and Freedom. And for this consideration it is, that I
shall forbear to answer your desires, as to your hopeful Burgess. I could wish
you and others would be wise in time, and take heed of being drawn into
Rebellion and Mischief before you are aware. The Government we live under is
Easy and Gentle; and none that I know of have any just cause to complain of
it, or to desire or endeavor a change in it. I profess I do not see what
reason there is, for those common and stale Clamours of Arbitrary Power, and
the Tyranny of King and Court; if any thing looses, and has done for the last
Age, it is the Prerogative; nay, it has scarce enough left to secure it self
from Contempt and Scorn. I cannot observe the least design in the King, or any
about him, to deprive the people of any of their Privileges, but rather the
contrary, to enlarge them, and to make them more and greater; witness that
unparalled and most Gracious Condescension of his the last Session, about
Securing our Religion and Property after his Death, if the next King should
prove a Papist; which had it been accepted of, we and our Posterity might have
been happy; but it did not seem good or Thanks-worthy to your good Countrymen.
--

And why, after this, and a many more Generous and Noble Acts, His Majesty
should be represented amiss to His People, as one that meant them no good, and
yet proffers them so much, is strange; and why the whole Kingdom should so
obstinately choose those Countrymen the second time, that were so backward to
do them good, To secure Religion, and Try the Lords, I cannot see. Therefore
(my Friend) give me leave to be plain with you in this case, that I have seen
so much mischief already, and fear shall see more and more, from that sort of
men you would have my Vote for, and call Countrymen, that I would as soon
bestow it upon the Five Members of the Long Parliament, if they were alive, as
on these, and should look for as much good from them as these. And I hope the
Name of Countryman, as it stands opposed to the King and Court, will be in a
little time as odious to Wise, Loyal, and Good Men, as ever theirs was.

And so you know my mind as to your Burgess, but this shall not keep me from
doing the utmost Service I can for you in any other matter, and from being still

Your Affectioned Friend, G. P.

FINIS.

